THE CIVIL WARS OF FRANCE, DURING THE BLOODY REIGN OF CHARLES the Ninth: Wherein
is showed, The sad and bloody Murders of many thousand Protestants, dying the
streets and Rivers with their blood for thirty days together, whose innocent
blood cries to God for vengeance.

And may stand as a Beacon fired to warn, and a a Landmark to pilot all
Protestant Princes and States to a more secure harbor than peace with Papists.

Faithfully collected out of the most ancient and modern Authors, by a true
Protestant, and Friend to the Commonwealth of England.

London. Printed by H.H. for W. London and are to be sold at the Sun and Bible
near Py-Corner. MDCLV.

To that flourishing Sprig of Virtue, and growing Branch of Honor; the most
ingenuous T. H. of Grays-Inne, Esquire.
SIR,
THese first Fruits with bending humility, stoops to be plucked by your sweet
hand; and tasted by the good relish of your favorable acceptance; and if they
have but the honor to perch on the least branch of your noble mind, it is all
I crave from the seat of your juditious approbation; and though I boldly knit
the thread of my Labor to your noble name, yet the great affections I ow, and
the greater your merits demand; emboldens me to conclude, That as your
incomparable worth is my encourager, so will it as easily pardon as beget this
boldness. Therefore it is, that with strong presumption of your genuine
interpretation, this piece takes Sanctuary under the refreshing shelter of your
noble Patronage, from the scorching heat of malicious censure. May you be
directed to tread the steps of your brave Progenitors, especially to trace the
Renowned walks of the Right Honorable your noble Father; whose valor for his
Country, and immovable constancy to a good cause, may stand as a pattern of
Imitation to future ages, and challenge a Room among the truly worthy: Thus
noble Sir go on, that as in your younger years you have stamped your actions in
the mint of virtue, thereby coining Renown as an inseparable adjunct to your
great parts; so may you by continuance in the same Tract, cut out to your self
a habitation in the hearts of all that love and honor virtue. So sitting in the
lap of Prosperity, it may at last be sanctified in order to eternity. And may
the hopeful promises of your lively and capacious Soul inlaid with Gallantry,
so fructify, that they may struggle with your years for growth, and fill the
longing world with expectation. Now Sir since I have boldly begun, let me
humbly end, ingeniously confessing my self in a great degree unfortunate, in
having no nobler a sacrifice, to offer at the shrine of so much Honor and
Virtue: All I request is, that I may march under the Banner and conduct of your
favor and commands; For I am,

Noble Sir, Your Humble Servant.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 11. for pacings read parings. p. 5. l. 21. f. check hers, r.
check-mate hers. p. 25. l. 26. f. there r. her. p. 63. l. 26. f drawning r.
drowning. p. 70. l. 13. f. had not r. had not tasted. p. 77. l. 8. f. but to a
little belief, r. to enforce a little belief. p. 89. l. 35. f. bis brave
soldiers, r. this brave Soldier. p. 101. l. 21. f. war r. way.

Courteous Reader,
THou art desired to pass by the unavoidable errata's of the Press.

The Epistle to the READER.
THIS following Narrative is a Theme so sadly copious, that if thou art a true
Protestant, thou can not but bewail the sad fate of many thousand innocent
Christians whose sufferings, and their enemies cruelty strove for pre-eminence,
who died not so much like Martyrs, as murdered like sheep; being not overcome
by force, but betrayed by Treachery, and perjury. Who can but from the depth of
sadness turn his sorrow into tears, forcing open the bowels of his compassion,
through the floodgates of his eyes; when we shall consider, so many Lords and
Gallant Commanders breath their last, by an ignominous and base death, not to
be compared for cruelty, perjury and treachery, in any age or History; for
indeed these sad calamities challenge the Tribute of a bleeding heart; so that
if the Readers understanding be not already garrisoned with prejudice, or if
the times be but patient of hearing truth this Book may prove of some use to
this Nation.

The ruins of Truth is often envelloped in the sable clouds of Oblivion. Nimium
altercando amittitur, Truth may be lost in a crowd; therefore my industry to
preserve antiquity, may stand as an argument against calumny; for each Book
pressed into the world, is as a Bark at Sea; the first as subject to censure, as
the last to storms; therefore I cannot but expect a shower of censures; yet, as
Mr. Feltham says, It is the easiest part to censure; and though men think
thereby to be accounted wise, yet (says he) there is nothing discovers a Fool
more; for he that knows least censures most; Ignorance gives disparagement* a
louder tongue than knowledge; like Rats that love to eat Books they cannot
read, and however I may suffer the venom of Asps, which grow on some men's
tongues, yet have I done without crime, what I ought to do in conscience; and
the more impetuous the storms, and rapid torrents of calumny assault and beat
upon my endeavors, the more shall I, like the Traveller in the Fable, hug my
self in the Cloak of my own Innocence and Integrity; that though the success of
my Labor prove abortive to some, yet shall I enjoy the fredom of my own
desire, and reward my self with that content, that the envious World can
neither give, nor take from me.

It is not unknown to the World that something of this nature is extant, yet
may I humbly and truly say, is short of this: for the Original Structures and
composure of this Narrative, fetches his Materials from sundry Authors, both
Modern and Ancient; and being cul'd from the Relics of Antiquity, by a
careful gleaning out of many into one, may therefore challenge the privilege to
say, that all others want somewhat of this; being an exact Epitomy of the most
remarkable passages of the Civil Wars, during this Kings Reign; yet as succinct
as an orderly proceeding can admit. And Courteous Reader, that thou may be
persuaded to go further then the Entrance, I do assure thee, that the body of
this History is collected from the best Writers of both sides, whose tinctures
of reflection according to their Byasses, is so balanced, that the Narrative
stands free from the prejudicate part of either, being as impartial as pen can
collect from the Original of ancient Records; and as well distanced from the
gashes of a partial Pen, as the two Poles from one another, or the Antipodes
from us. For I find what any Protestant writer inserts of the worst part, is no
less published, than known by the Catholics themselves, for they cannot deny
the act, only they excuse the manner. And this advantage will come by this
collection, that whereas it was in large volumes, now it is reduced and fitted
to the time, and purses of those that had no occasion, and less abilities to
accomplish the perusal or purchasing of large Folio's, which I think was the
grand reason of stifling the knowledge hereof to many of this age.

Reader, thou art here presented with the most horrid Rapes, Murders, Perjury,
and Treacherous Cruelty of a Prince and Court, that ever landed on European
shore, for in few days all the Protestant Nobility and Gentry, with Ladies and
innocent Gentlewomen and children to the number of forty thousand, were
inhumanely butchered, and cut off by the Kings special Commandment. Here thou
may see a Prince besmearing himself with the Goar blood of his own Subjects,
and at last wallowing in his own; we shall here see Religious Vows and
Promises, no stronger ties to the King, and Court, than a Rope of sand to a
wild beast; being gone so far in perjury, that the Kings faith was accounted
like the Greeks, whose unfaithfulness to their promises, is become Proverbial,
that when one would express perjury, they termed it Greca fides, for though a
Creditor had ten bonds, and as many Sureties and Seals, yet will he find it
extreme hard to accomplish his debt: so when a Jew is to deal with a Genoa, he
puts his finger in his eye fearing his Treachery. They resolve to have no other
virtue rampant than perjury and cruelty; Abandoning that part of Religion,
which ties to a strict observance of Duty. Omnia Religiosa nunc ridentur; they
will wade no further in Religion than may serve their cruel ends; insomuch,
that in one Town which the Protestants kept, they engraved on the gate this
Motto, Roy sans foy, ville sans peur, the King had no faith, nor they no fear.
And as the Roman Emperor Caligula, said of Seneca's Works, they were Arena sine
calce, sand without lime, having no connection, so was the King of France his
Solemn Oaths, and Promises. It is a Christian accomplishment in Princes to
govern, non per timorem, sed per amorem, as it is said of Octavus Augustus. And
when any judgment befalls this Nation, let them remember, that as they made it
an Acheldema, or Field of Blood, so will God the place of his Plagues, for who
knows not that the Blood of so many thousand souls, cries to heaven for
vengeance, upon the third and fourth Generation; and I could wish that all
Protestant Princes would beware how they shake hands with such faithless People.

Now the right use of these sad and sudden murders should be to learn us the
necessity of being ready prepared for such violent deaths, and that prosperity
is as diet to us, Adversity as Physic, reducing to a right taste of these
mortal enjoyments; How happy will the Torments of cruelty be, when our cyes are
fixed by faith on an Eternal inheritance, linking our selves in that golden
Chain of Salvation, which extends from Eternity to Eternity, Death comes not
unexpected when a soul is interessed in Christ our Savior; how necessary is it
for us to live ready to die. He that too closely hugs transitories, makes a rent
in his constancy, and a greater in his soul. How can a Christians Judgment but
be at nonage, when he values not the true worth of Celestials, but puts them in
the balance with Terrene things; He indeed has found the Philosophers stone,
that can turn all events into a Subjection to Gods Will. It was the gracious
words of Holy Greenham, having food and raiment let us take the rest as an
overplus: these poor Souls had no other warning piece to die than sudden and
violent deaths; that like the flying fish, reported to be in great hazard, by
the Shark and Dolphin in the Sea, yet when advanced into the air to escape, he
is by Birds of prey in no less danger; so were these poor Saints of God; in War
hazardous, in Peace undone; What shall we say of that Religion, which perjury,
cruelty, blood and the greatest cruelties, are reckoned as virtuous Jewels in
the Crown of their Government, they are sweet when seasonable and parallel to
their murtherous Hearts, and it must needs presage ruin to that Nation, that
stands on no other Pillars for their foundation, than bloody and infamous
Plots, and Treachery; who will not conclude that Nation lies level to justice,
and I wish the large field of Liberty allowed the Papists in England to walk
in, may not insensably grow our inavoidable and swift ruin, since it is well
known by all how they wait for our destruction.

But to contract, let me intrea^ (...) my sincere and public intentions,
(which is all I adopt to be mine) and that ex abundanti amoris, out of the
surplusage of Love thou will waft my Endeavors to the Haven of thy kind
embraces, where I cast Anchor and rest.

Reader, these Books following are printed for, and are to be sold by Richard
Tomlins, at the Sun and Bible near Py-Corner.
THe General Practice of Physic, Folio. Drummonds Hist. of 5. Kings of Scotl.
fol. The Fortune Book in fol. English. Pleasant Notes upon Don Quixot, Fol. Mr
Collings Cordials, 1st. 2d. and 3d. part, quarto. His Vindiciae Ministerii,
quarto. His answer to Mr Sheppard, quarto. His answer to Fisher and Hammond,
quarto. His answer to Boatman, Prin, and Humfries, qua. Dr Holdsworths one and
twenty Sermons, quar. Euclides Elements in quarto Eng. History of seven
Champions, quarro. Packet of Letters, quarto. Cupids Messengers, quarto. The
birth of Mankind or Women's book, quar. The perfect Pharisee under Monkish
holiness, qu. The false Jew, quarto. Mr Collings 5 lessons for a Christian to
learn, 8. His Faith and Experience, octavo. Mr Wincolls Poems, octava.
Excellency of Christ, octavo. Erasmus Colloquies, octavo. Wings and Libourns
Urania Practica, octavo. Velitationes Polemicae, octavo. Janua Linguarum,
octavo. Brinsley's Cordelius, octavo. Mr Sidenham's Mystery of Godliness,
octavo. Mr Sidenham's hypocrisy discoved, octavo. Paul Hobson's last book of
Queries, octavo. Watson's untaught Bridegroom, twelves.
Place this fol: i:

Men quartered Alive.


Roasted on a spit


Rauishing woomen


Burning men Alive


Beating men's Brains out


Ripping up woomen with Child


Cutting Throats


300: protestants Murdered in a Church


Stabbing with daggers


Men Cut in pieces


The Civil Wars of France.
CHAP. I.
The Contents.
THe Reign of Charles the ninth, A Parliament called, the Government committed
to the Queen Mother during the Kings minority, the names of Hugonet and Papist
forbid on pain of death, Prince of Conde and King of Navar in discontent
departs the Court, the King of Nevar made Lieutenant General, and jointly
interessed in the Government with the Queen Mother, the Princes desire a
Toleration of Religion for the Protestants, which is privately granted, the
Protestants multiply, and the Princes protect them, demanding the Queens
promise for Toleration, the Protestants that were in Prison for Religion freed
by a Decree of the Council, the Duke of Guise surrenders the Keys of the
Palaces to the King of Navar, the King crowned, the Princes of the Blood, and
Duke of Guise contends at the Coronation about precedence, the King gives it to
the Duke of Guise, the Constable forsakes the Protestants, and cleaves to the
Duke of Guise, the Queen Mother for her own advantage joins with the King of
Navar, and gives some liberty to the Protestants, which so enrages the
Catholic party as presently all former Edicts in behalf of the Protestants
were broken by a contrary Edict that no Religion should be suffered in the
Kingdom but the Romish, the King and Queen Mother subscribes thereunto, the
Protestants at their request have a Conference granted, they meet, and confer
in a hot Dispute, but agree not; the Catholics murder many Protestants in
Paris, the eight Parliaments of France assembles, the Duke of Guise disapproved
of it, and so in a fury departs the Court, and goes for Spain; the Protestants
deluded by the Queen Mother, gives her a List of all their Forces; the King of
Navar turns Catholic; the eight Parliaments meet, and with the consent of the
King and Queen Mother do decree a free and public Toleration of the Protestant
Religion, but speedily a sad and cruel Massacre; the Duke of Guise furiously
assaults the Protestants at a Sermon, and murders two hundred of them; the
Protestants complain to the Prince of Conde of breach of Covenant and Edict;
the Duke of Guise seises on the King, and carries him to Paris; the Queen
Mother writes to the Prince of Conde for aid against the Duke of Guises
Attempt; the Prince in his journey to Court suddenly retires to Orleance, and
possesses it; the first Civil War begins.

The death of King Francis, and Reign of King Charles.
FRancis second King of that name, dying the fourteenth of December, 1560. made
entrance for the Reign of Charles the ninth; and as the first died of a Fever,
so the last reigned in a Frenzy; the legitimate offspring of his
Predecessors disease: whose short Reign was thought too much lengthened, by
the train of all sorts of bloody cruelties, which filled this poor distracted
Nation of France: whose wicked Reign was also attended with the sable clouds of
Flagellum Dei, which swept both Field and City. The beginning of his wicked
Reign had a bloody ending to the poor Kingdom, and himself; for the bodies of
the murdered Protestants was a Prey to the Birds of the Air, and Beasts of the
Fields; the whole Nation wearing the Pensive Weeds of a Ruinous Distraction;
for through the Lords just Judgments on the Nation, they suffer nothing less
than all Roberies, Rapes, and all sorts of Cruelties, with horrid Massacres for
the space of twelve years. And as the Prologue of his Reign was Perjury and
Treachery, so was the Epilogue Bloody to himself, and poor Nation, especially
to the poor innocent Protestants.

A Parliament sits, and the Government committed to the Queen Mother during the
Kings minority.
A Parliament being called, they begin the 23. of December. Now at this time in
the Court of France, was Katherine de Medices, Pope Clements Brothers Daughter,
and this Kings Mother, who being born in Florence a City of Italy, had
conferred upon her the Government of this Kingdom in the Kings minority; for it
is well known that according to the Laws of this Nation, neither the
Administration nor Inheritance thereof, can justly be cast on the shoulders of
a Woman; and yet against this Law, and through the negligence of the King of
Navar, the said Queen Mother was joined with him in the Office of
Protectorship; the confirmation of her Regency being allowed of by the
Chancellor; was afterward confirmed by the Speakers.

Now in this Assembly of Parliament, one John Quintin (a Doctor of the Common
Law at Paris for the Clergy) pleads that none of the Religion Reformed (for so
they called the Protestants) should any more be tolerated or suffered, and
desired that the Laws in that case provided, might be put in speedy execution;
but the day following, that brave Commander and good Christian, Gasper de
Coligni the Admiral of the Protestants, complained to the Queen Mother against
the said Quintin, who presently excuses himself, and in his second Speech
moderates his Plea to the Admirals content.

The Parliament a little enlarges the Protestants privileges.
Now the Estates proceeds in their consultations, making themselves and the
beginning of this year somewhat happy, by some moderation in matters of
Religion, whereby the reproachful names of Papist and Hugenot was forbidden
upon pain of Death: which name Hugenot they fixed in disdain and derision to
the Protestants, and was derived from a Gate House in Tours, called St. Hughs
Gate, where they met in Assemblies.

Many good and necessary Laws were then published, but with more confusiom than
advantage; for Laws though good and many, yet through want of a due execution
by the Magistrates power, makes the good intent thereof to be perverted and
turned into an indirect Channel, giving the people cause to slight such
wholesome Laws, and grow bad under a good Government.

Great contentions and private animosities arose between the Princes of the
Blood (that is, the Prince of Conde and King of Navar, who were Protestants)
and Francis Duke of Guise, who was descended of the House of Lorain, and now
Grand Master of the Kings House; who being a strong Catholic, was no less a
bitter Enemy to the poor Protestants: the Queen Mother in her affections did
secretly incline to the Duke of Guise; yet to secure her own interest and power
in the Kings minority, carried fair to both: The Princes of the Blood being
Protestants in discontent absent from Court.
but the King of Navar and Prince of Conde with the Constable, seeing
themselves justled out of that power and favor in Court, which as due they did
expect, and also foreseeing the event which must necessarily ensure, having
only the pacings of the Duke of Guise; they absent from Court, with all their
Attendants, resolving to right their wrong on the Queen Mothers Regency, and
the Guisans usurpation of their unlimited power. Now the Queen Mother by her
subtle and natural insight to secret affairs, judged so at their Discontent,
that she politickly cast her Cards, that both might have a good hand, yet deald
her self the Trumps; checking their power, that they might not check hers.

The King of Navar by the Queens policy jointly governs with her.
To which purpose she makes a new Agreement with the Navarois, concluding him in
the Government, that taking the Title and Power of Regency to her self, he
should be called [and but called] Lieutenant General to his Majesty. All this
but in Paper and Ink, composed of a double intent: but those that can break
Oaths witnessed by God and all the World, how soon can they swallow and digest
the breach of such Paper-promises; like that good Actor in Smyrna, that cried,
O Terram! yet pointing to the Heaven; and O Coelum! yet pointing to the earth;
which when one of the Spectators saw, in anger he said to the company, This
fellow has made a Solicism, spoken as it were false Greek with his hand. And
indeed here it was so with the Queen Mother, too many Leagues being betwixt her
heart and her mouth, for we shall ere long see these two parties, the Princes
of the Blood, and Duke of Guise and Queen Mother make greater wounds in a short
time, than Ages can afterward cure.

The Prince of Conde we must understand was now at liberty, and freed from the
unjust Sentence against him in the Reign of Francis the second, which was for
some pretended Fact, but indeed was for his Religion sentenced to be executed;
but the Kings death prevented it.

The Protestant Princes desire a Toleration.
The Prince of Conde, and King of Navar, with the Admiral and other principal of
the Protestants, desire of the Queen Mother a Toleration for their Religion;
but the Queen Mother now tottering between these two Factions of the Princes of
the Blood, and Guisans, counted all things below the present danger of either
parties getting power, and so thought it not fit therefore to deny their
request; telling them withal, that it could not yet publckly be granted by her
to the content and satisfaction of all; therefore she would secretly promise
them (her best way of bargaining) that she governing by common consent with the
King of Navar, would by indirect by ways so work under hand upon emergency of
occasions, which might daily occur; that at last it should incensibly, yet
assuredly come to pass to their own desire; which says she suddenly proclaimed,
might render you in danger and my self out of power to help you.

These things the Queen Mother promised, being forced by necessity and
dissembling policy; for her own safety and security; but it is ill making a
fast Bargain with a loose Merchant; nothing by her being less intended than
really promised; for she thought it fit and convenient, for preservation of her
Son's and own interest, not wholly to put under hatches, nor quite to
extinguish the power of the Duke of Guise, who was an apt weight to balance
and counterpoise the Power of the Princes of the Blood; desiring to carry it so
to both that she might displease neither, till she had a sure staff of the one,
and the other no power lest to oppose hers; which at last answered her hellish
Plot; so that reserving many things to the benefit of time and future industry,
she left no stone unrolled to provide for time to come, and to remedy the
present Distractions.

The Protestants increase, and the Princes of the Blood protect them, and
presses the Queen Mother for her promise of Toleration.
Now the goodness of God in converting many to the Protestant Religion, appears
in a great and vast multiplication of the Professors thereof; the King of
Navar and Prince of Conde with the Admiral, protects and defends them; who
earnestly presses the Queen Mother to perform her Promises for a free
Toleration of their Religion; she finds many nice excuses, and well-spun
pretenses to evade the dint of their resolute desires and her absolute promise,
endeavoring by most subtle arts of persuasion, to put off the performance of
her Promise till a seasonable opportunity offered to ripen her Designs. But the
King of Navar daily pressed forward, and grew more and more earnest, for the
speedy effecting of it; and he did so publicly reason their case, that many of
the Kings Council yielded to the force of his Arguments; disbanding their
former Reasons on the contrary; for the King of Navar alleged, that it pitied
his soul to see so many Protestants and the Kings true Subjects scattered from
their peaceable habitations, for fear of death and danger; and did further
profess, it did deeply penetrate his heart with an abhortency, to think of any
more effusion of blood.

Amongst those of the Religion were many of pregnant wit, and Christian
courage, that with small Tracts in Print dispersed, as also with sober
Petitions seasonably presented, did at last help forward their desires to a
speedy Grant.

A Decree for Release of all Protestants that were imprisoned for their
Religion.
The Queen being now forced to yield, gave way by a Decree of the Council at
Fontainbleau the 28. of January 1560. That the Magistrates should release all
such Prisoners as stood committed for matters of Religion to their former
freedom; prohibiting all Reproaches of either party, with Heretic or Papist;
To search no man's house. The Protestants by this being not fully authorized by
a full Toleration and free Exercise of their Religion, yet were somewhat
satisfied by this seeming Inclination thereunto, at least being protected from
the present violence daily threatened: The Queen Mother would not suppress their
power, yet would she depress their growth.

The King of Navar has the Keys of the Palace delivered to him, which his great
Enemy the Duke of Guise kept.
Now the King of Navar falling short of the full Grant of the Queens Promise,
proceeds further to a full Grant, which she had secretly made to him; requiring
that as he was the Kings Lieutenant General the Keys of the Palace might be
assigned to him, which the Duke of Guise as Grand Master always, and at this
day kept. The Queen as she was loath to offend the Duke of Guise and his party,
who with the Duke of Lorain upheld the Catholic Cause and Religion; so was she
as careful to please the King of Navar and Protestant Princes, till time gave
a more secure season to bring about her desires; for her desire was to be
firmly seated betwixt them both, by a plausible carriage to either, and keeping
them both dependents to her power, and both equal in strength, that neither
might have encouragement to murmour. To which purpose she is the more willing
to favor the King of Navar in his request, by reason at this time she finds
the power of the Duke of Guise a Pin higher than the Princes of the Blood, and
invested with more power than jumped with her purposes; she conceived this a
fit opportunity to pull down the Guisans power to an equal balance with the
Princes of the Blood, which suiting with her own interest she willingly
executed; their growth at this time being high and insolent, and at all times
of an aspiring nature, as that they could not be content to fit under the
Pent-house of their present power, but must suddenly aspire to the pitch of
their ambitious aim. So the Queen caused the Keys of the Palace to be delivered
into the custody of the Kings Lieutenant General the King of Navar.

At this the Duke of Guise is highly enraged, whose pride finds no bounds but
reserved and secret revenge, waiting for a fit opportunity to desplay his
envenomed hate, so that he dissembles his inveterate anger and malice he bore
to the Princes of the Blood, and Admiral, so he only makes some show of
discontent for the tacit Toleration granted the Protestants; (which doubtless
was as real as his malice to their persons) for the sad event will too soon and
surely demonstrate; so that now the discords of these great men seemed to be
enveloped in a good satisfaction of their present conditions, all discontent
seeming to be vanished and laid aside in the Grave of obscure forgetfulness.

The King of France crowned.
Now is thought the fittest time to confirm the Kings authority by crowning him
though in his minority, which was ordered to be done according to the usual
Ceremonies accustomed to all the Kings of France in their Coronation; to which
end and purpose the King journeys to Rheims, and there by the Cardinal of
Lorain was solemnly crowned, and conducted to the City of Paris.

The King at the Coronation gives the right of precedence from the Princes of
the Blood to the Duke of Guise.
Now at this time of Coronation the Princes of the Blood and Duke of Guise
contend about precedence; but it was ordered by the King [though against order]
that the Duke of Guise should precede all the rest, which accordingly was
performed; the Duke of Guise hereupon like Tinder to the Spark, took fire of
Ambition, flying high with an exasperated spirit, to the Princes, Admiral, and
principal of the Protestants; and to make his power greater, and to ingraft
himself more firmly to wrestle with opposition, and to strenghthen his
malicious resolution, The Constable turns Catholic.
he and the Constable strikes a League together for the preservation of the
Catholic Religion; and to endeavor the utter extirpation of the Religion
Reformed.

But the Queen Mother hearing of their intended intended purposes, presently
Aprehended her own danger by the Guisans growing greatness; and what tall
Cedars they would grow if this confederacy took root according to their
desires; she also considered that the Princes of Lorain were unsatisfied with
her late proceedings in behalf of the Protestants, and would Assist and endevor
a conjunction with the Guisans faction, to deprive her of her Government, (A
thing she only desired peacable to enjoy,) she Therefore to preserve her own
Interest, enters into a firm union with the King of Navar, the better to
balance the Guisans power and secure her self; so that in this juncture of
time she was well pleased that the King of Navar and his party should have
some power, which she resolves should stand her instead against the Duke of
Guise and his Adherents. Which indeed fitly served for her own ends; It was
therefore commended to all the Parliaments, by new edicts, and Decrees, No
further to molest any of the Religion; and to restore the goods, houses and
possessions, of those that only for the cause of Religion were deprived of them.

The Parliament in Paris with the assistance of King and Q. Mother dashes in
pieces all former Edicts for Toleration, and passes an Edict that no Religion
should be suffered but the Romish, and that all the Protestants should be
expelled the Kingdom.
This gave an ill gust to the Guisans palate; who being enraged with malice set
on foot all their power in a strong opposition of the Government; whereupon the
Cardinal of Lorain took occasion at the Council table, (the King and Queen
Being present) to speak against those of the Religion, and against the
Tolleration, and Edicts lately passed in their behalfs; whereupon it was
resolved with consent of the Council, to summon A Parliament to meet at Paris!
which accordingly appeared at the day appointed, the thirteenth of July and
then and there in a full appearance of Palament they showed to the King their
dislike of the Edict passed the 28. of January, Beseeching his Majesty to force
his subjects to An open profession of the Catholic Appostolik, and Romish
Religion, upon such pains as should he adjudged of in Council. Which Council
brought forth an hellish bratt from the bosoms of their wicked desires, for
now, contrary to all former edicts, they pass an edict; That all Protestant
Ministers should be expelled the Kingdom, no religion to he professed but the
Romish, all Protestant Assemblies forbidden, in all places in the Kingdom; And
thus was the poor Protestants banished their habitations, and condemned to seek
refreshment and abode, else where; and to this edict did the King and Queen
Mother subscribe: whereupon the chief of the Protestants were very much
greived, in regard they knew themselves free from any guilt that might
challenge such hard measure, from the King, and Court of France to such
faithful allegiance; concluding it must needs proceed from some inveterate
malice or deep design; Therefore,

The Protestants desire conference and had it granted.
The Prince of Conde and Admiral being not able to hinder this edict, presently
flies to the Queens promise which she had assuredly given them: but now as
assuredly broke; so that no redress could be, found there; Whereupon they
demand of the King liberty for a conference, between the Ministers of the
Protestants, and the Kings Prelates; To examine the Articles of their Doctrins
before the Kings presence: being not without hopes by this moderate way to
Interpose, that if possible some liberty might be granted. At first it was not
allowed of, but afrer second considerations it was thought meet to answer their
desires and give a hearing.

The Pope hearing of this meeting for a conference, and doubting some liberty
might thereby follow to be granted to the Protestants, and disadvantage of his
Authority: presently speeds away the Cardinal of Ferrara, his Legate, to the
Court of France, withal giving in command, that the cause might be referred to
the Council of Trent, which by him was published.

The Protestant Ministers that were banished by reason of this late edict, and
settled their a bodes in Geneva, now had safe conduct allowed them for there
security in their journey to Poissy; five leagues from Paris, being the place
appointed for the conference. Them that were at this meeting for the Protestants
were Theodora Beza, Theodora Beza. Peter Martyr and others; with the K. Court
and Prelates meet at Poissy but break up and no good done.
Peter Martyr a Florintin, John Virell, Augustine, Virnmelio, Marlorat, and
other Ministers to the Number of twelve, with twenty-two Deputies from the
Protestant churches.

On the Romish side came, (besides the King and Court) the Cardinals of
Lorain, Tournon, Armagnac, Bourbon, Guise, and Chastillon, together with the
Bishops and Prelates; many Doctors of Sorbon also; with many others sent for
from most Cities and Universities in the Kingdom. This meeting began the nineth
day of September in the year 1561. the Relation being at large Recorded I leave
the reader to peruse at his liberty. But this conference proved not such a
salve for the sad distractions of the kingdom as was expected, for the
Catholics resolved to continue in force the late edict against the
Protestants; so that they were in many places forced to stand upon their own
guards against the violent attempts of the Catholics cruelty. This made the
Papists take up courageous resolutions Mutining in diverse places, A mutiny in
Paris and many Protestants stoned and distroyed with fire and sword.
especially at Paris: where the poor Protestants through the violence of cruel
and bloody men, suffered the enemies persecution, with stones, staves, swords,
and in their return they set fire on the Suburbs of St. Marceau. At St. Medard
they Ring the Alarm Bell, they kill and wound many, others they take and hang;
One Gabaston Knight of the warch lost his head for atempting to appease the
people, so suffered some others also! The whole Kingdom being full of broils
and in a civil flame of combustions; that it seemed to all spectators as if the
whole Land was turned upside down; And thus were the poor Protestants at the
merciless cruelty of their malicious Enemies.

Hereupon the Queen Mother fearing this might disquiet and annoy her Regency,
An Assembly of eight Parliaments.
and endanger the tranquillity of the Kingdom, during the Kings Minority.
Especially fearing the Duke of Guise should be too powerful; she therefore
causes to be Issued out orders for calling and assembling of the eight
Parlaments of France, with the Princes of the Blood; Noblemen, and they of the
Privye Council; to consider of the estate of all the Provinces, and to consult
about a way to heal these breaches to her content and lasting peace of the
Kingdom: she knew this was the ready way to enjoy her power which must
necessarily fall, if either party rise; if either party prevailed in a
successive power, they would too soon give a pull at hers.

the Duke of Guise in A Rage departs the Court for Spain.
The Duke of Guise and his confederate Catholics, was so swelled at the heart;
That his breast the Poison of his purposes, could not be contained within the
limits of moderation, But like a rapid Torrent bandies against this course, And
as water cast upon lime burns inwards till it breaks without into a flame; so
this cruel Duke foaming with malice and cherishing those furies that Hell would
cast out, disaproves of this Assembly, and openly enveighs against the King of
Navar, the Prince of Conde, Admiral and chief of the Protestants; and so in
discontent departs the Court for Spain, there to plott for effecting a
tragical and more bloody effusion of Protestant blood, then by his presence
could be effected in the French Court.

Whereupon the Queen Mother still to strengthen her self betwixt these two
factions, dissembles her secret intentions, and gives out publicly an
inclination to cleav to the Protestants, which indeed did astonish all that
heard thereof; Nay she did so hipocritically manage her secrefie, That the
Admiral and all the Chief Protestants could give no other interpretation of
her carriage then Reality; and she the more effectually to penetrate into their
perswations, more to confirm their credulous opinion and perfectly to blind
their eyes, she declares her carriage to he the bottom of her intentions.

the Protestants deluded by the Queens dissembling gives her A list of all
their forces.
So making her impious treachery, turn treason parent. The Protestants believing
all true she said, were so far deluded into a firm belief thereof; That they
gave her a list of two thousand, one hundred and fifty Protestant churches; who
by their Deputies offered their Goods and persons to the King, to withstand the
force of the Guisants: who had invited the Spaniards into France; And thus with
this deep dissimulation covered with fair pretexts, the Protestants were drawn
in to discover their strength which when she collected, her desires were
satisfied with this handsome dissimulation; But none could know it but the
eternal and alseeing eye of God, for she had so carried it, that the very
Catholic party thought all as real, as it was Hypocritical.

At this time the King of Navar being not fully fixed in the firmament of an
established mind, the King of Navar turns Catholic.
The Reverend servant of Christ Theodora Beza, labored much to bring him to a
right understanding of the truth; but he like a carnal pollititian, replies
quod pellago se non ita commissurus esse quin quando libere pedem refer
possit. That he would launch no further into the deeps, then he might with
safety return again. And so he fully declares for the Catholics; which by a
little dispondency of Spirit did weaken the Protestants, and strengthen the
Guisants. But now like lightening before death, we shall see a greater part of
bloody treachery then ever was acted in any Christian Nation. For,

In this year 1561. men's Spirits were so maliciously bent, that they were ready
to receive any fire of commotion: The Protestants have no security nor safety
for lives or goods, there was great danger for these poor Christians that
professed the name of the Lord; yet like palm the more depressed the more they
grew; like trees upon high Mountains, though under the power and in the cie of
the greatest storms and gusts, yet are more firmly rooted then those that grow
in fruitful valies; so these poor Saints of God through their affliction did
increase more and more; whereupon did arise to them great troubles and
persecutions: in regard the late edict against them gave courage to the
Catholics to persecute them by Authority; by which also it did frustrate their
more public meeting; And,

Here it is to be taken notice of; That formerly the custom in France of
pounishing the Protestants was (besides their estates seized on for the Kings
use) their bodies were to be burned, at the Tyrannical request of their Lords
and nobillity: but now God who is rich in mercy, has freed his poor servants
from the unheard of and slavish bondage, and given a little more liberty though
against the will of his and their adversaries. The eight Parliaments meets with
the King and Queen Mother


And now according to the forementioned order of the Queen, the eight
Paliaments of France, meets, where was present with them the King, and Queen
Mother; and thus this great Assembly of Estates, from all the Provinces meets
at St. Germans in Lay, near to the City of Paris, where with the Royal assent
of Charles the ninth, Was that famous and so much celebrated edict brought forth
wherein there was great Liberty to the weary Protestants, that was so tossed up
and down: which indeed had proved more happy then I can express, if they might
have enjoyed the benefit of performance with as much liberty as it promised.

The eight Parliaments with the King and Queen decree A liberty for the
Protestants but speedily a sad and cruel Massacre of 30. thousand Protestants.
The contents of this edict (which did Invest the Protestants with these
privileges) were, A free liberty to enjoy, profess, and exercise their
Religion; To have Assemblies, and public meetings, at sermons: But without the
Towns, and in the Subburbs only. This Edict crossing that which was made in
July last took date the seventh of January (which for the great liberty it
gave; the present freedom from persecution, and hope of peace to all the
Nation) was commonly called by the name of the edict of January; But Alas!
alas! we shall too soon see the sad effects of this edict; for instead of
bringing forth the peaceable fruits of a desired and expected tranquillity; it
brought forth such a sad Perisian Massacre, as it may well be termed a monster
of nature, wherein was such a slaughter of poor Protestants, as for the
horidness of the fact it is not to be parrelled: For before we come to the end
of this sad History, we shall see such a slaughter of Noble gentelmen, Gallant
soldiers, poor Ladies and Gentlewomen, and other innocent souls; as in three
days were no less slain then ten thousand: whereof 500. were Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and Ladies, that were invited to Paris by the Kings dissimulation
and treacherous bayt to their sad ruin; And in other parts of France in ten
days by the Kings own commandment, were Murtherd most inhumanly thirty
thousand Innocent Souls; besides what the wars destroyed: Such were the sad
effects of solemn engagements, as if there were no other way of keeping
Covenant, then by breaking it. Nay this edict of peace was by the Kings
command, and so was the Masacre; Oh! that it may stand as a Pyramide to all
Nations to be ware how they Make a Peace with those that know no way of Lawful
keeping, but unlawful breaking their most sacred and solemn Oaths, promises,
and engagements.

This edict being proclaimed did much trouble and dismay the Principal
Catholics, setting them all on fire with rage and malice; But the greatest
enemies the Protestants had were the Duke of Guise, King of Navar, the
Constable, and Cardinals; the Queen also was a secret enemy and Ianus like
had two faces: One full of the greatest dissemulation that ever was found in a
female sex, taking their parts only with fair words before their faces, yet
had the foulest heart and wicked inventions as could be imagined. And so to
support her own power, between the indifferent state of the Princes of the
blood and the Guisans.

The Queen Mother being now returned to Fontanbleav, Assures the Prince of
Conde by all the protestations of Reality that her intentions was no less
resolute to preserve the Edict of pacification for their good; then it was to
secure her own life: and so likewise protested to the King of Navar and Duke of
Guise that she would never forsake the Catholic party. Now what a wonderful
art of dissimulation was this Queen arrived too, what depth of deceit lay hid
in her breast! which she so ordered by fair pretenses that the Protestants that
had cause, and the Catholics that had no cause of mistrust yet both alik
doutbed of her Reality.

The Duke of Guise aforesaid being at Spain, was absent from this Assembly of
estates, Asad Massacre of the Protestants at Vassay where the Duke of Guise
blaspheming fell on them at a sermon and murdered 200. which was the beginning
of the first Civil war.
and consequently affented not to this famous Edict granted, by the King,
Queen, and eight Parliaments, But he no sooner heard of it, but his wonted
malice begins to work; it is not to be conceived or imagined how full laden he
was which malice and venomous intentions of Injury to the poor Protestants;
and so boiling with incredible sorrow at this decree in their behalfs, he
resolves to wreak his fury on their Innocence: He therefore with the
constable, Cardinal, many Gentlemen of the prime Catholics, and two squadrons
of Lances, advances towads Paris: Now as they march from Ianuile to Vassay (a
little Town in (Campaign) coming near, and understanding the bell was ringing
to Sermon he draws nigher, and whilst the poor Protestants were serving God in
his holy Ordinances in a barn; he furiously sets upon them crying Death of God
kill those Huguenots; Whereupon he murdered to the number of two hundred men
and weomen; some had their heads cleft in two, others their hands and heads
cut off; so that the walls and Galleries of the barn were died with the blood
of the slain; The Duke with his sword drawn stood among them, charging his men
to kill without sparing; The faithful Minister of Gods Word was brought to the
Duke, who cursing called for the Provost, and commands him to be hanged on a
Gibbot, yet through Gods mercy he was released at the request of the Prince of
Portion; this sad murder we shall shortly see will produce sad effects.

The Protestants complain to the Prince of Conde of the Breach of the Edict,
and demands justice of the King.
Those that were the principal of the Protestants were Lewis of Bourbon, of the
Blood Royal, commonly called Prince of Conde, after the name of a certain Town;
which Prince was of great force with the King, in regard of his alliance, so
that when the Duke of Guise attempted the breach of the famous Edict,
endeavoring the utter ruin thereof, especially in his bloody cruelty at
Vassey, which coming to the hearing of the Admiral and his Brother Francis de
Andelot, Captain of the Fantery, and other Princes, Noblemen and Gentlemen, of
the Protestants; they flock daily in heaps with Complaints to the Prince of
Conde, of the outrageous malice, and violent attempt of the Duke of Guise,
against their Brethren the Protestants; demanding also of the King, Justice for
that bloody Breach of his special Edict and Command.

The Duke of Guise to countenance his wicked intentions seizes on the King and
carries him to Paris.
Presently after the Duke of Guise arrives at Paris with his bloody Train, and
thought it not unfit for carrying on of his Design to get the King into his
power, that what afterward he did, might be in the Kings name; well knowing
what great Authority the name of the King would carry in France. Whereupon he,
with the Constable, and Marshall of St. Andres, seizes on the Kings person, and
so carries him from Fontanbleau to Paris; and there fell a defacing and
overthrowing the places where the Protestants used to assemble, which so
encouraged the Romish party, that in every place they abused the Protestants,
as the most cruel barbarous, would blush to act.

The Queen Mother by Letters desires the Prince of Conde's help for the King
and her assistance.
Hereupon the Queen Mother fearing the power and fierce pride of the Guisans,
makes a virtue of necessity, and writes with her own hand to the Prince of
Conde; which Letters were produced by the Prince, (and at the Assembly of the
Princes of Germany at Frankford, holden under Ferdinand the Emperor) were
openly read; the Contents were, Earnestly to entreat his speedy succor, and in
so great danger and distress, not to forsake her, but to account both the
Mother and the children (meaning her self, the King, and his brethren) as
committed to his faith and natural kindness; desiring him that he would with
all careful speed, powerfully to provide for their common safety; assuring
him, that she would imprint his willing care into the Kings mind, that he
should never be a loser by it.

The Prince of Conde possesses Orleans.
The Prince of Conde being on his journey to Court, news was brought him in the
way how things were carried, That they had taken the King and brought him to
Paris. Then presently the Admiral advances toward him, and overtaking him,
they make a stand, and there consulted what to do; whereupon seeing their own
danger, the Duke speedily hasted to Orleans, and possessed it. And this was the
beginning of the first Civil War.

CHAP. II.
The Contents.
THe Prince of Conde publishes a Manifesto, laying down the Reasons of taking
Arms. Burges and Orleans are the Potestants refuge. The King declares against
the Prince. The Armies meet, but engage not. The Prince and Admiral dispose of
their Armies into Garrisons. The Kings Army takes and sacks some Towns; takes
Burges on conditions. The Queen Mother unmasks her self, causing the
Protestants to be proclaimed Rebels. The Prince and Admiral delivers up Roan,
Diep, and Haverdegrace to Queen Elizabeth of England. The Kings Army besieges
Roan, where the King of Navar is slain, and the City stormed and sacked for
three days, together with cruel murdring. De Andelot joynswith the Admiral. The
Prince of Conde and Admiral advances to the City of Paris. The Kings Army
advances for defense of the City: The Protestants march toward Normandy to
receive Queen Elizabeth's supplies. The Kings Army follows them; they join
Battle, where both Generals are taken Prisoners. The Admiral with his Army
marches to Normandy. The Duke of Guise with the Kings Army besieges Orleans;
the Duke slain before it. The Admiral returns from Normandy and enters Orleans.
A Treaty is begun, and Peace concluded at Orleans, with free liberty for
Religion, which is publicly proclaimed.

THe Divisions thus increasing, made way to erect a Theater for a sad Tragedy:
for the Prince of Conde published a Manifesto, and sent Letters also to the
King, Parliament of Paris, Protestant Princes of Germany, and to all other
Christian Princes.

The Prince of Conde prints a Manifesto of the grounds of his proceedings.
The Reasons laid down by the Prince of Conde for his taking Arms. were these,
The defense of the famous Edict of Toleration, which was made by the King,
being the high Road to Peace: if duly observed, which could not but be kept
without horrible breach of faith, and assured ruin of the French Nation; in
regard there were so many of the Nobility, and Gentry of the Nation that were
Protestants, and daily came in to the Religion. And those of Noble birth, that
were in power, dignity or otherwise above others, thought it not meet to suffer
the cruel punishments, and Massacres, daily inflicted on some, and threatened to
others, since God had given them power to help themselves.

And further it was declared, that the Duke of Guise a new-come Foreiner,
translated from the Forests of Lorain, should usurp such power in France, such
dominion and command, as the Princes of the Blood must lose their proper
interests to be his slaves and vassals, against all the Laws of the Nation;
further declaring, That if the King should cause an observation of the Edict
for Religion already signed, and that Arms might be laid down on the Kings
part, they were ready to do the like, and would speedily lay down their Arms;
To this he added the Queen Mothers singular care (as it was reported and as
indeed she did outwardly show) for preservation of peace, and pulling down the
powerful rage of the Guisans; which indeed she so dissembled that on the very
account hereof it is certain, above twenty thousand Catholics joined themselves
to the Protestants in defense of their cause.

Burges and Orleans proves a Sanctuary, and hiding place in time of Gods
These flames being begun could not so easily be extinguished; mauy cruelties
being committed on the bodies of the poor Protestants without mercy, and such
as will no question draw out tears from the eyes of serious Christians being
such sad examples of cruelty as cant be believed should have proceeded from
any that had known that ever Christianity had been in the world; nothing being
drunk more eagerly then the blood of the poor Saints; Yet in this callamity God
provided a place of refuge for such as he pleased in mercy to preserve from
their cruelty: For Bourges, and Orleans, being kept by the Protestants, The
King declares against the prince of Conde.
did greatly administer comfort to many distressed Christians that fled
theither. Hereupon the King at Paris declares against the Edict and the Prince
of Conde.

The Queen Mother now arms those she privately huggs in the bosom of there
affections. The Prince of Conde desires to lay all private interests aside for
preservation of the Public efusion of blood; But the King of Navar, the Duke
of Guise, the Constable, and Marshall of St. Andre, by an Edict, banishes the
Protestants out of Paris, and sudenly advances toward the Prince of Conde with
twelve thousand foot, and three thousand horse; They find the Prince strong
enough to encounter them, contrary to there expectations; and De Andelot and
Boucart, strongly urged to engage the Kings Army. the Queen with subtilty and
treacherous policy beguils the Protestants.
But the Queen Mother abuses them with her subtle treachery, telling them the
hopes of agreement was too near for them to undo all by a too hasty engagement:
in so much that she fed them with hopes till the Catholic Army increased in
strength both with French and foreign forces.

Thus the Queen having delayed and protracted all hopes of Issue by battle, the
Prince of Conde maintains his Army about two months in such peace to the
Country, as was not in the least found to be outrageous, by spoiling or
robbing; such was the Christian and careful discipline of the Prince and
Admiral of the Protestant Army; which in France was the greater wonder, because
whoring robbing and blaspheming was the usual attendants and constant
harbingers to the Catholic camp; which could not be avoided because the King
could not keep to so strickt a discipline as the Prince of Conde and Admiral.

The Prince and Admiral disperse the Army into several Provinces.
The Prince of Conde, and Admiral, wisely and prudently, like valliant and
careful Commanders take all ways to use their present power for future
advantages and ensuing Storms; so they send out to several Provinces, men of
approved fidelity to the Protestant cause, which proved (next to Gods blessing)
a great help to their success, in possessing many strong holds in sundry parts
of France, as Roan, Deip, Angiers, Blois, Vendosme, Tours, Poictiers, Ragency,
Maus, Angoulesme, Chalon upon Soan, Maskon and the most part of Daulphin. The
Kings Army secures what they had, and falls upon several Towns, taking and
miserably sacking them: which shall shortly in particular be related with all
the sad circumstances of their cruelty. The Catholics take Bourges o^
conditions.


Now the Kings Army sits down before Burges, the 10. of August, where they felt
the valor and courage of the Protestants, by many salies even to their
trenches, but in regard they had no time to fortify the place their innate
valor was forced to yield to necessity, whose law has no bounds; and so the
Governor Monseiur D'Yvoy, began to capitulate, and at last on conditions
yielded; but was out of favor ever after; by the Prince of Conde and Admiral.
the Queen discovers her self agrinst Protestants and prcolaims them Robels.


And now the Queen shows her self in her colors; casts of her vizard, and
openly appears what she was inwarly; For the Catholic cause, and against the
Protestants, and so moved by her implacable malice, and inward hatred, she with
the consent, of the King, caused the Principal of the Protestants to be
Proclaimed Rebels; and thus made way for a more open discovery of her most
secret treachery, whose close hypocrisy til now was so hid under hatches by
deceitful slights, that on all hands her deep dissimulation was esteemed real:
But we shall shortly perceive that the copy of men's actions are sooner read
than the copy of their countenances.

The Prince of Conde delivers up Roan, Deip and Haverdegrace to the Queen of
England.
In this mean while the Protestants had delivered up to the Queen of England the
Towns of Roan, Haverdegrace, and Deip, as pledges for her security. And now the
Kings Army marches toward Roan, and on the five and twentieth of September
1562. the whole Army Lodges at Darnettel, two Leagues from the City of Roan;
where the Count Montgommery was Governor for the Protestants, and commander of
the City; The Kings Army Advances to Roan.
having with him for defense thereof, two thousand English, and twelve hundred
French foot; four troops of horse, and an hundred Gentlemen of quallity, whose
valor was well known to the Army of the Kings, that on all times and upon all
occations felt the power of their resolutions; whose strength and provision
failing, together with the Kings taking their principal fort, did much trouble
and hinder their promised success; whereupon they sent to Haverdegrace for such
supplies as could possibly be spared, which in part was effected, although the
Kings Army had planted Cannons along the River: but their great want could not
be supplied with a little; although at one time, from the English, arrived with
great difficulty to their greater necessity, seven hundred men, with monyes,
and ammunition: King of Navar slain.
And here at this seige was remarkably slain the Apostate King of Navar, who
felt the reward thereof from a divine hand of puunishment.

The City taken by storm and for three days nobus cruelties and murders.
The twenty sixth of October the Kings Army storms the City, and with great loss
and valor on both sides takes it, and for the cruelties they used against the
poor Protestants, lying at their mercy for the space of three days, I refer
the Reader to peruse in the Massaces at Roan, which is fully, and shortly
related in the following Chapter. Count Montgomery saved himself through great
danger, in a galley passing to Haverdegrace, and so for England.

The Admirals Brother D'Andelot with 11000. horse and foot joins with the
Prince of Conde and Admiral.
Lewis of Burborn, Duke of Montpenseir, took from the Protestants several
Towns; whose barbarous course of cruelty, and treachery, is also contracted
into a narrow compass which follows in the next chapter. Mean while D'Andelot,
with five thousand foot, and four thousand horse, with great policy, and and
no less danger and toil, marches through the enemies power, and at last
joyfully and seasonably arrives, and joins with the Prince of Conde, and
Admiral, who with great joy, and welcome, embrases him; as much sorrow
presently balances all, for the success in another place was differently
carried, by the like Adventure of a Noble Commander the Baron of Duras: who
having levied five thousand horse and foot in Gascoin and Provinces adjacent;
endeavoring to pass through difficulties, was obstructed by a sharp encounter
by the Kings Horse, under Command of Monsieur de Mouluc, and Bury, and at last
was defeated, yet with good part he escaped to the assistance of the Prince of
Conde and Admiral, The Prince and Admiral advance with their Army to the walls
of Paris.
who now all march against Paris, the Metropolis of the Nation; and in their
March taks in Estampes, Piviers and Dordane, and so marches to Paris, where,
after some skirmishes, beat back their enemies with Terror and Confusion into
the City, putting them all to a stand in their councils, but the Queen by
Treaties and often Messengers, did so with there subtilty treat with the Prince
and Admiral, that by delays the City was strengthened, and their gallant
Enterprise suprized for want of quick execution; but the truth is, the
Protestants at all times were ready to embrace peace in the midst of their
power, and so suffered that convenient opportunity to slip, and fall into the
hands of the Queens policy, which opportunity had the Catholics ever enjoyed,
peace had not gone before their cruelties. But it falls into course here to let
the world take notice of this full demonstration of the Princes and Protestants
Declarations, That they sought only liberty for their Estates and Lives, and
therefore would to their own prejudice, wait an opportunity to effect their
peaceable desires; But alas! it is to be bewailed that ever the Protestants
(downright in their actions and words) should ever have to deal with such an
enemy, whose treachery is their refuge, and cruelty their mercy.

Now when they see their Enemies Designs they begin to remember the loss of
their own; yet falls on the City by a general Assault, shoots many Cannons, at
last face the City to provoke and incite the Enemy to battle, all which not
answering their desires, the Prince and Admiral draw off their Army.

The Kings Army advances to the defense of the City, and the Prince withdraws
and marches toward Normandy.
And now the Kings Army having by this time gathered a great strength from all
parts, advances under the command of the Duke of Guise, and Constable, and so
follows the Princes Army, who now resolves to march into Normandy, to join with
the Forces and Provisions that Queen Elizabeth of England had then, according
to covenant, promised the Protestants; being six thousand men, twenty pieces of
Cannon, much Ammunition, and fifteen thousand Ducats; This March being resolved
on at Beauss, on December 14. they advance by the way of Chartres, and so for
Normandy.

The Kings Army follows the Protestants swiftly, and the Protestant Army being
very weary, and both Armies very near, they were by a manifest necessity
driven, to a Battle. The Kings Army follows, and they join battle.


The Protestant Army under the command of the Prince of Conde, and Admiral,
lodged about Dreux, being a Town twenty six Leagues from Paris, and situated on
the confines of Normandy, in which place, on a Plain the 19. of December they
join Battle; The Kings Army was reckoned to be nineteen thousand foot, and two
thousand Horse. The Prince of Conde's Army consisting of twelve thousand Foot,
and four thousand Horse.

And now the Battle of Dreux begins, where the Admiral of the Protestants with
great courage leading the Van, fell upon the Kings Cavalry, commanded by the
Constable, and at first onset slew Gabriel de Momorancy, and laid dead on the
place Count de Rochefort, the whole cavalry running away, The Constable taken
prisoner.
the Constable himself taken Prisoner; and the Duke of Nevers, Monsieur de
Givry, d'Annebault, La Bross, and his Son, with many other Gentlemen, and
Cavaleirs, slain upon the place, The Duke of Aumaule, Brother to the Duke of
Guise, and Beauvais, were wounded.

Now the Princes forces being in a too eager pursuit of the Enemy, was
furiously set upon by the Duke of Guise, where, after a furious on set, and
doubtful shock on both sides endured, at last the Prince of Conde was taken
Prisoner, Prince of Conde taken prisoner.
and on the Kings side was taken Monsieur d'Anvelle, being sore wounded; which
the Admiral perceiving, rallies and advances, but the former encounter so
wearied and weakened his men, that after a sharp conflict, he was put to the
worst, and so made an honorable retreat. In this encounter was slain on the
Catholic party the Marshal de St. Andre. The same night all the Army of the
Protestants were met together, where the Admiral, by general consent, was
chosen General of the Army instead of the Prince of Conde Prisoner.

Both Armies leave the field, the Duke of Guise, by the speedy advance of night
upon him, was forced to lodge upon the Plain at Blainville, where the Prince of
Conde, and the Duke of Guise (two mortal enemies) both supped, and lay in one
bed together.

The next morning after Battle the Admiral presents himself with his Army in
the field in Battalia. There was in this battle slain seven thousand, whereof
on the Protestants two thousand foot, and one hundred and fifty horse, and
doubtless it was a dubious engagement, for had the Protestants carefully
maintained their first encounter in an orderly station, they had not been so
assailed, and foiled at last, but Victory had crowned their valor without
hazard of doubt; but however, the Battle proved fatal to the Catholics, and
famous to both, in that both Generals were taken Prisoners. And as the Admiral
was chosen General, so for the Catholics was the Duke of Guise General in lieu
of the Constable prisoner. The Duke of Guise hereupon suddenly marches to lay
siege ^o Orleans.

The Admiral proceeds to the Resolution before determined, The Admiral marches
for Normandy.
and keeps his march for Normandy, but before their March, takes Selles in
Bervy, St. Aigna, Sulli upon Loire, and Montrichard, and so leaving the care of
Orleans to his Brother D'Andelot, he advances toward Normandy to meet with
Queen Elizabeth's supplies, and so to come with more strength to annoy the
Catholics, and assist his Friends.

The Duke of Guise with the Kings Army lays siege to Orleans.
On the fifth day of February the Duke of Guise lays siege to Orleans, where the
King and Queen Mother, came in person, D'Andelot was Governor of Orleans, who
was also assisted with Monsieur de St. Cyr, the Sieur de Avaret, Bussay, Duras,
and Bouchavanes, under whose command were fourteen companies of foot,
consisting of Germans, and Gascoins, with five Troops of French Horse, that
were old Soldiers, to whose valor was joined for assistance the unanimous
consent of the Citizens to withstand the enemy, whose harmonious and joint
resolutions for defense of Religion, and Liberty, did strive to out-vy the
Soldiers valor, and thus being resolved to die in pursuit of so good a cause,
they encourage one another to repulse the enemies assaults The Defects of the
Town-walls being supplied with Resolutions, which made weakness impregnable,
and stood as a Rock against the strongest shock of the enemies force.

Now the Duke, with the whole strength of his Army, sets upon a Fauxburg of the
City, and suddenly surprises it the first day, The Duke of Guise threatens to
destroy men, women and children in Orleans, but is himself cut off.
which so encouraged the Catholic party, and especially the hot spirit of the
Duke of Guise, whose inveterate malice could not be contained in the bounds of
moderation or secrecy, but openly delivers it by word of mouth, and writes by
Letters to the King, boasting that twenty four hours should not pass, so sure
as he would in the same compass, force the City to his obedience. And further
declared, The day should be made memorable, by destroying both men, women and
children; sparing none. But behold his hellish rage was confined by a judgment
from Heaven, whose death was not much unlike our late Duke of Buckingham, for
the same night there was a young Gentleman, descended of a noble family, known
by the name of John Poltrat, Sieur de Merebourn; who being mounted on a Spanish
Jennet, and watching his own opportunity did by his proper, and private motion,
shoot the Duke of Guise into the shoulder with a Pistol laden with three
bullets, and so this wretched enemy of God and the poor Protestants dyed the
four and twentieth of February, who by Gods justice, was deprived of his unjust
and bloody intentions; the said Poltrat being afterward taken and executed,
did freely declare at his death, that what he did in destroying the Duke, was
to deliver France, and especially the City of Orleans, from his violent and
bloody threatenings.

The Admiral returns from Normandy, and with his Army enters Orleans.
This accident in the Kings Army stopped their furious assaults, till the
seasonable advance of the Admiral from Normandy with Supplies, which made a
full stop in the siege; who after he had greatly annoied the Catholics in
Normandy, came to Orleans the 17. day of March, and enters the City, where was
Prisoner the Constable, General of the Kings Army taken at the Battle at Dreux;
and in the Kings Army was the Prince of Conde Prisoner.

Now the Kings, Queen Mother, with the Privy Counselors, and Deputies of the
Court of Paris, were about to arraign the Prince of Conde, which being
balanced with a fearful expectation of the like to the Constable, they let
their resolutions fall.

A Treaty begun and finished with the Edict of January for liberty granted.
The Queen Mother at this time, fearing the issue of War, and seeing success
alike to both, doubted her, desired expectation would fall, by reason of the
unexpected and constant supplies the Admiral had on all straits; she therefore
enters on the Old Way, Her only way, making use of that Proverb, Where force
will not prevail, she will piece it with the Foxes tail. And so sets on foot a
Treaty of Peace with the Admiral, and principal of the Protestants, holding an
assembly in the Isle of Oxen, The Constable, though prisoner assists in
Council, and at first vows he will not admit of any peace grounded on the Edict
of January; The Prince of Conde prisoner with the King, desired also to have
liberty to send a messenger to confer with his Council at Orleans; who gives
him to understand, that the Queen nor he can in the least derogate from the
famous Edict of Liberty in January, so solemnly made, and sworn at the instance
of the Estates, and so great assembly of the 8 Parlaments in France. The K. and
Q. Mother, let the Protestants know it should not be altered, but only to
please the Catholics, and that Arms being laid down on both sides, they should
by little, and little, assuredly obtain their free liberty.

So presently the Articles of peace were drawn up in form of an Edict,
containing the Articles of the Edict in January, which was as aforesaid, That
the Protestants should have the free exercise of their Religion, and shauld
have the freedom of the same in certain places, every one to live free in their
conscieuces, from trouble and Molestation, That all Princes, Lords, Gentlemen,
Captains, and Soldiers, should be free from all troubles, for any thing done
in time of the wars and so every one, to be restored to their dignities, goods,
privileges and prerogatives; which Edict, was concluded, The Edict for Liberty
proclaimed by a Trumpet.
signed and confirmed in the Kings Conncil at Amboise, verified in Parliment,
and on the eighteenth day, was proclaimed throughout the Town, Camp and Court,
by sound of Trumpet, and the same day the Prince of Conde and Constable, were
both freed from prison, The Reiters were also conveyed to their Confines, being
paid in full for their services, so returning home to their own habitations.

The many Executions, murders, Rapes, Robberies, Massacres, general and
particular, committed on the persons of the poor Protestants, during this first
Civil War, from April 1562. to this present March 1563. when the peace was
concluded, I have for the benefit of all Christian, sober perusers, abstracted
from large volumes, and here inserted by themselves, that the judicious Reader
may by a Christian simpathy taste the sad afflictions that these poor
Protestants did endure, being so shamefully murdered, as to this day stands as
a stain to the honor of the French Nation, when ever they please to review
their predecessors cruelty, and yet all comes short of what this little book
will tell thee.

CHAP. III.
The Contents.
A Lamentable and sad prospect of the bloody cruelties committed on the
Protestants in France, during the first civil wars, not sparing old, nor young,
virgins, nor women with child; Their cruelties at Paris. At Senlis. Their
murders at Les Bordes. A godly Minister cruelly used; yet providentially
escaped. Three Gentlemen stabbed by their own cosen, and sixteen more killed by
Treachery. Sad slaughters at Nevers. La Charity yielded on conditions, yet all
put to the Sword. Lamentable murders and cruelties. At Amiens Bibles burnt.
The murders at Abeville. Four hundred murdered at Meaux. Virgins abused, and
children dashed against the walls. The cruel murders at Troys, the sad
bloodshed at Bar upon Sein. Cutting off women's breasts, then take their hearts
and eat them. At Sens a hundred of good birth murdered. The cruelties at
Auxere. At Chastillon women murdered, that were ready to be delivered. The
horrible and cruel murders at Maus, at Montagris, at Gyen. A child cut in two
and liver eaten. The murders at Aurilac. Many hanged in Molins. At Angiers,
after promise of life, all murdered. Horrible blasphemy. A Ministers eyes put
out, and body burnt. At Aze a Minister, and thirty Protestants drowned. In
Tours, one hundred and forty massacred, and the River dyed with blood. The
Queen Mothers Incivillity. At Valongre many of Quality massacred, and a
Minister blasphemously and inhumanely slain. A child roasted. Children killed
in the womb. The sad murders at Bloys. One buried alive. The unheard of
massacre at Toulouse, Rivers filled with bodies, and dyed with blood. Three
thousand stand on their guard, are promised life on submission, yet are
massacred. The horriblest blasphemy that ever was heard, and one hundred and
twenty burnt. The Murders at Mont de Marsan, at Carcasson, at Foix, at
Aurenge, where Virgins of six years old are ravished. Ninety killed after
promise of life. Murders at Grenoble. At Bearne. At Revel. At Monpelleir a
Captain quartered alive. One hundred murdered after promise of life. The like
at March Castle. Women with child ripped and buried alive.

THe Protestants during this sharp war had many cruelties, and sad sufferings
done to their persons without any pity, or remorse, the which was not in one
City, but in most parts of France, and with such bloodshed, as will make any
Christian heart to bewail their said sufferings, and may serve to teach us our
habitation is not in this world, and so may encourage us to look out for
another, whose foundation and building is in Jesus Christ, that Rock of ages,
that good and gracious anchor-hold in time of Storms and Tempests; and to let
us a little taste what a happiness it is that when men come with bloody
resolutions to assault our innocence, then for a soul to have his eye fixed on
heaven, by a firm faith of assurance in Gods mercy, that though men's rage be
like the lofty billows, yet our salvation, and our strength is in God, and
thrice happy is that soul that can assuredly say in times of persecution, that
God is my Rock and hiding place in times of Storm. Cruelties at Paris.


The poor Saints of God in Paris were cruelly persecuted by the bloody papists,
who being fully delighted, and set on blood, together with the help of the
Parliament there, did spare none that fell into their bloody hands, either in
the City of Paris, or such as by appeal or summons were brought thither.

The bloody usage of Christians at Senlis.
Many dear and precious Saints of God at Senlis, suffered the fury of bloody and
deceitful men; some murdered in a popular tumult, some beheaded, others
cruelly whipped, imprisoned, and sent to the Galleys, not so much as sparing
women.

There murders at Les Bordes.
At Les Bordes, the Duke of Nevers being Governor of Campagn, his Lieutenant
slew many men, and women, imprisoning others, and spoiling their houses.

Their unheard of cruelty to a Godly Minister of Christ.
At Chaalons, a godly Minister of Gods word, Mr. Fournier was so basely abused,
as the merciless cruelty by his Enemies, and Gods merciful deliverance must
crave leave to have a little remembrance, and indeed is worthy our Christian
perusal and observance.

This Godly servant of Christ, being prisoner was stripped of his clothes, put
into a Cart, and with many abusive jears, taunts and scoffs, was often in
danger of his life by the common people. At Monchon, he was cast in prison,
where a Captain and many Soldiers came and told him he should be cut in
pieces, afterward the Judges came and commanded him to be laden with Irons;
after a while, the Duke of Guise being made Governor, he was cruelly tortured,
by straining his thumbs so hard, till blood issued out, they then bind his
hands behind his back, and tying a Rope to his thumbs, they hoist him up, and
then suddenly twitches him down five or six times, tying also great stones to
his toes, and so let him hang till his vitals failed him almost to death; at
last he was put into prison, and no Chyrurgion allowed to dress his wounds,
although the Cords had made gashes in his flesh to the bones, insomuch that he
underwent great pain, that he could not lift his hand to his mouth, but had
almost lost the use of them, this did this Servant of Christ endure, like a
true Soldier with invincible courage and patience, and by the special
providence of God, news was brought that the Duke of Guise was dead. The very
next day one Bussi had order from the Constable to let him free, which yet
said, Bussi came, and told this faithful Minister of God, with all acquainting
him that he should be let free, but it should be to the peoples rage. But let
us yet see another special providence, A singular token of Gods care of his
faithful Ones.
for at the same time came by the Prince of Portion with his German Horses, who
sent in word to the Town, that if Mr. Fournier was not speedily delivered to
him, and from their cruelties, he would not leave so much as the tokens of a
foundation, but raze it to ruin as a monument of their merciless deserts. Which
message so terrified the enemies of this Godly soul, that immediately he was
safely conveyed to the Prince, he gathers a Congregation and yields his soul
to God.
which faithful servant of the Lord after he had resided a little space at
Ver, and gathered a Congregation, he presently after resigned up his soul to
the Lord that gave it and so put a period to the miserable attendance of this
life, and begun that life of glory.

A Treacherous and base murder of Mounseir de St. Estiene, his two Brothers
and 16. more all stabbed by his own Cosen Germain.
Mounseir de St. Estiene, in his jorney from Orleans, retiring himself with his
two brothers and some others for Refreshment to his own house near Reims, they
were not long there till the house was beset by fifteen hundred men, who being
forced to yield, had liberty on their words, to go forth to speak with the Duke
of Nevers, whom (as they said) desired to see him, and going out was there
basely and treacherously murdered by the Baron Ceruy, his own Cosen German; so
were his two Brethren also, with sixteen others basely and unworthely, stabbed
and distroyed without the least composition; Their wives they spoiled of all
they had, and led away prisoners.

The Catholics of Nevers on the eleventh day of May, The sad slaughters at
Nevers.
1562. summoned into the Town many Gentlemen of the Country, presently shut the
gates, and in three days after fell on them and Murdered them without pity:
The Minister's they cast into prison, one miserably perished by their cruelty;
another miraculously escaped; presently after bloody Fayete arrives, ransacks
their houses, rebaptize their children, and being filled with his desires of
blood, and 50. thousand crowns, returns to his house of Auvergue.

La Charity yielded on Conditions yet all were put to the sword contrary to
Covenant.
The Town of La Charity, being beseiged by cruel Fayete, was to him yielded on
honorable terms by the Governor Issertiux; which Conditions were signed and
sealed the tenth day of June, the Grand prior entering the Town according to
conditions, presently snatched the capitulation out of the Governors hand, and
then fell to spoil, and murder, so that none escaped.

Bibles burnt and the Protestants murdered at Amiens.
At Amiens, all Bibles, Testaments, and psalms, were sought for and openly with
much profanness were burned, the Guisans murdering and killing the poor
Protestants, and casting their dead bodies into the River; shooting some to
death, and hanging others,

Base cruelty.
At Abbevilly; the Lord Harcourt was slain* and many others; one Belliart they
dragged along the Streets with his face on the ground, and then drowned him.

At Meux 400. murdered.
The Protestans at Meaux, being the stronger party, continued the exercise of
their Religion for a while, but at last the Parliament at Paris gave judgment
against them, whereupon a company of soldiers enters the Town, disarms the
Citizens, and unworthyly, and cowardly murdered above four hundred poor
Protestants; and as if it were not enough, as if their blood-thirstiness could
not be quenched, Mounseir De'Boysy enters with soldiers, Virgins a Bused in
the streets children dashed against the walls.
committs unheard of, and inhuman villainies, deflouring virgins in the open
streets, many massacred and drowned, children dashed against the walls, diverse
papist priests murdered some with their own hands. At Troys, Bibles and Books
of divinity were rent and torn in pieces, the Protestants murdered; their
houses sacked, eighteen men hanged like dogs, Cruelties at Troys.
and women dragged through the streets and cast into the River.

The sad murder at Bar upon Sein.
The sad cruelties used to the Protestants at Bar upon Seine are hardly to be
compared in this first civil war, although in the latter part of the book I
shall let the world be accquainted with such cruelties as that the most horrid
murtheres yet extant come not so near them as to bear a shadow of comparison.
They murder women and maids and cut off their breasts and took out their
hearts and eat them.
But to our purpose, this Town the Papists entered, and committed such outrages
and cruelties, especially against women, as it is not fit to be related but
with an utter detestation, for they spared not maids nor poor infants, some of
their breasts they cut off, open their stomachs, cutts out their hearts, and in
a furious manner gnawed them with their teeth; boasting that they had tasted of
an Huguenots heart, and with hellish blasphemies they ravish women, and
virgins. A Popish father murders his Protestant son A just reward.
There was one Mounseir Ralet a young Advocate, and son to the Kings Procter,
who, by his fathers own procurement, was murdered, which was a sad and
prodigious thing, and in January following, about fifty horse of the Garrison
of Antrim surprised the Town at break of day, and took it in for the
Protestants, and with their pistols caused him to expiate the death of his son.
A gallant Gentleman murdered in his own house.


The Peasants committed horrible murders on the poor Saints of God, Monseiur
de Vigney, with his wife and servants, they murdered in his own house.

In Sens, a hundred of good birth and quallity were inhumanly and basely
murdered, 100. of good quality murdered at Sens the murder at Auxere. women
read to be delivered wurthered.
and slain, being thrown into the River naked, one hundred houses spoiled and
their vines pulled up.

At Auxere, one Cossen was barbarously Massacred: they also stabed a fair young
gentlewoman and cast her body into the River, with many other outrages.

In Chastillon upon Loire, they cruelly murdered men and women, young and old,
nay they spared not women with child ready to be delivered.

The sad and horrible murders committed with geat cruelty on the Saints of
Christ in Maus. 50. cast into apond to feed fishes.
At Maus, they spoiled the houses of the protestants both within and without the
Town, for eight legues compass, two hundred were cruely put to death, not
sparing women of quality, and poor innocent children, not having the least
respect to their own kindred, some hanged up, some they beheaded, others being
daily Massacred, they cast into the river half dead, above one hundred and
twenty men and women, and children were murdered in the neighboring Villages,
a Captain most cruely cast fifty of these poor innocent servants of God, into
his fish pond, to feed his pikes: and his Leiutenant fills two trenches with
fifty protestants that were slain, and many were thrown into ditches: a Godly
weaver had his throat cut, ones mouth filled with leaves of the New Testament.
and his mouth stuffed with leaves of a New Testament, which was found about
him: in Villages near and further off about sixscore persons were butchered,
and many fields strewed with the bodies of the slain, whose flesh the birds and
beasts had devoured.

Murders at Montagris.
At Montagris (which was a hiding place for many poor protestant families, and
which was under the command and countenance of the Lady Rene of France,
Daughter to King Lewis the twelfth, and Duchess Dowager of Ferrara) To this
place was sent by order of the Duke of Guise one Mallicorn, a Knight of the
order, who with four companies, enters the Town, and killed an ancient man, and
threw him into the River with others, committing several outrages, but the
virtuous Lady with the protestants was safe in the Castle; this Mallicorn sends
word to the Duches that he would batter down the Castle, if she would not yield
to deliver up the protestants into their hands: But see the Galland reply of
this noble and religious Lady, to this murtherous villain; The Christian and
noble answer of a virtuous Lady to the summons of a bloody murderer.
I charge you to look what you enterprise, for no man in the Realm can command
me but the King only, and if you proceed to the battery, I will stand in the
breach, to try whteher you dare kill the Daughter of a King neither do I want
means or power, to be revenged on your boldness even to the infants of your
rebellious race, this gallant Ladies Answer, overturned the bold attempt of
this fellow to a dishonorable departure.

At Gyen a child cut in two and the liver eaten.
At Gyen, amongst other insolent cruelties and outrages these furies of hell,
and children of the Devils begetting, committed such an horrible cruelty as
common impiety would not foster, for they cut a young child in two pieces
alive, and with a horrible fury they eat his Liver.

Murders at Aurilac.
At Aurilac, Bresons enters the Town, murders eight men, spoils the Town and
Castle, and basely ravishes wives and maidens.

In Molins many hanged without Law.
In Molins, Monsieur de Montare gave his Troops liberty to spoil the protestants
houses, and without any form or shadow of Law, hanged two Artificers and four
others, drowned five more, and suffered the hangman to hang three merchants of
Dauphine; besides many others they murdered.

Near Issoudun, at a village called Lisay^n, thirteen young men of Issoudun,
were beaten down in the water, A sad slaughter.
and at Issoudun it self Sarzay enters, and imprisons the protestants, and most
of them miserably died in prison, being smothered under the ruins of a Tower.

A promise of free liberty, yet presently all murdered.
At Angiers, Puygaillard a Gascoin Captain, sent by the Duke of Montpenseir,
enters the the Town, promising the Protestants a free exercise of their
Religion, but in two days after their houses were spoiled, and the prisons by
his command were filled with men and women, and fourscore of both sexes were
murdered by the cruelty of the Papists, with cruel torments, and inventions of
inhumanity; 80. murdered.
women of all qualities were put into sacks, and dragged through the mire of
the streets, and their bodies thrown into the River, also virgins shamefully
ravished, and they that resisted their lustful Villainies, were presently
stabbed with daggers. And the Edict of the Parliament of Paris, was published
that none should exercise the protestant Religion, whereupon many Gentlemen and
others, about Angiers, lost both life and goods. A guilt Bible they hung upon a
Halbeird, and in a Triumphant and blaspheming way cried, Behold truth hanged,
the truth of the Huguenots, Horrible and unsufferable blasphemy.
the truth of all the Devils, behold the mighty God will speak, behold the
everlasting God will speak, and coming to the bridge, they threw it into the
River, crying louder, Behold the truth of all the Devils drowned. An aged
Gentlewoman beaten to death, dragged through the Town, calling her the Mother
of all the Huguenots. Two young maids ravished before their Fathers face A
valiant Captain after promise of life, yet contrary to faith given, was basely
murdered, Treacherus Cruelty.
breaking his body upon a Cross, and so left him hanging in great misery till
he dyed.

A Ministers eyes put out and his body burned.
At Ligueul, they hanged the poor Protestants, put out a Ministers eyes, and
then burned him, and thus they run up and down roving, and raging, burning both
men, women and children; without any mercy or pity, they flayed a young man
alive.

A Minister at 75. years drowned, and thirty protestants.
The Village of Aze, they burn down, murder thirty Protestants, and drown a
godly Minister, John de Tour, at seventy five years old.

At Paris, in the year fifteen hundred sixty two, a decree was made by the
Parliament of Paris, commanding all Catholics presently to rise in arms, Men
encouraged by the parliament to forsake their trades to murder the protestants.
to sound the bells in every place, to destroy all of the Religion reformed,
without respect of quality, sex, or age, and so to root them out utterly,
whereupon all Rogues, Vagabonds and Rascals, rise in arms, forsaking their
callings, to help forward the murdering the poor protestants, whose rage was
such for their Ruin, that they looked like Tygres and Lions, rather then men.

In Tours, one hundred and forty were destroyed and cast into the River, 140.
murdered in Tours.
and the President being suspected to favor the protestants, he was beaten
with staves, stripped to his shirt and hanged up by one foot, with his head
into the water downwards, and whilst he was living, they ripped his belly, The
height of bloody cruelty and popish malice.
plucked out his guts, threw them into the River, stuck his heart on the top of
a Lance, and carrying it about said, It was the heart of the president of the
Huguenots.

A sad slaughter.
Not long after the Duke of Montpenseir gives order that their should be erected
Gibbets wheels, and stakes, whereupon many especially of the richer sort, were
murdered to the number of some hundreds, and River dyed with their blood.
insomuch that the River was dyed with the blood of the Protestants.

In this City was a godly Matron, who for constancy, joy in tribulation, and
comfortable example may beg leave to stand in this history as a monument of
Gods glory, for she endured their cruel torments, scoffs and jears, with
undaunted and Christian patience, A Christian pattern.
whom at last they basely hanged, the particulars I refer the Reader fully to
peruse in Mr. Clarks Martyrologie, page the 303.

Not long after the City of Roan, was besieged, and two Forts taken, and
without mercy they put all to the Sword; but that which is most to be wondered
at was this, Q. Mothers incivility.
the Q. Mother leads her Son the King, being then young, to show him the naked
bodies of the women, weltring in their own blood, at last the City being taken,
the Soldiers massacred all they could meet withal, many English and Scotch
Soldiers were hanged, the sick and wounded cast into the River, Base cruelty.
Augustine Marlerot the Minister, with three Counselors, were condemn to
death, and so the next day they with five Captains were basely and unworthily
hanged. Many of quality murdered, and a Minister blasphemously and inhumanly
slain.


At Valongre, many of eminent quality, and repute was massacred, among the rest
a Godly Minister of the Gospel they most barbarously murdered, stripped and
dragged him naked up and down his house, and then spurned his body, and with
blasphemous, and reproachful terms, they say, Now pray to thy God, and preach
if thou can, they stuffed his mouth with the leaves of his bible, saying,
preach the truth of thy God, and call upon him to help thee.

A child roasted. Children killed in the womb, 500. hanged.
In Again, two young children were roasted, and many slain.

At Rein, they destroyed children in their mothers womb, keeping some women for
their lust, above five hundred men were hanged upon Gibbets, amongst whom was a
grave Counselor in his Gown and Cap, they mangled one and filled his wounds
with salt.

Murders at Bloies.
At Blois, some women escaping their fury by swimming three times safe to shore,
yet at last were bloodily murdered, many tied to stakes were cast into the
River; Virgins and Wives ravished; Maids ravished.
the Protestants complain to the Duke, whose bloody answer crowns him with
infamy, for says he, There is no Remedy, we have too much people in France, A
wretched Speech of the Duke of Guise.
I will deal so, as victuals shall be good cheap. As if there were no way to
make the ground fruitful, but to water the earth with the blood of the Saints.
One Moluc met a Captain called La Mothe, stabbing him diverse times with a
dagger, thrusting him through, saying, Villain, Horrid blasphemy to be trembled
at by Gods people.
thou shall die in despite of God, yet this poor soul lived after, and this
bloody blasphemer found one of the Devils good scholars.

One Peter Roch was forced to digg his own grave, and then they made him ly
down in it to try if it would fit his body, then they cast earth upon him, and
buried him alive, One buried alive.
oh! Hellish cruelty.

A proclamation to kill all Protestants.
At Toulouse, some Counselors proclaimed that all the Protestants should be
killed, for that the King and Pope had given liberty for the same, this
rejoices the bloody persecutors in ringing the bells. Now this City of Toulouse
was so populous, and full of Protestants, that therein was numbered to be thirty
thousand, 30000. protestants in Toulouse.
whereupon was a cruel and sad Massacre of the poor people of God; when they
put any in prison whom the place could not hold, they knocked them on the heads,
and so killed them at the Prison doors; Rivers filled with dead bodies.
the Rivers were filled with dead bodies, which in heaps were thrown in; many
cast alive out of their windows into the Rivers, and if any save themselves by
swimming they are presently knocked on the heads, like Dogs.

Some of the Protestants being assembled in a body to one part of the Town,
they stood upon their own defense, resolving rather to die like men, than Dogs;
So that the Papists agreed and promised the 16th. day of May, 3500. Protestants
stand on their Guards, are promised life, but basely murdered.
that if they will deliver in their arms to the Townhouse they shall retire
with safety, and their lives should be saved; but oh! they were miserably
destroyed, as if there were no God to revenge covenant-breakers; for they fall
upon them and murder all they lay hold on, to the number of three thousand and
five hundred, who lost their lives by Popish treachery.

In Limoux, the Papists used all manner of cruelties, Virgins defloured.
deflouring women and maids in an abominable manner, the Minister murdered,
two Gentlemen with six more were hanged. A Widow, and loving Mother, redeemed
her daughters virginity with a great sum of money for a ransom, but the
villains that promised, did presently ravish her in her mothers sight and
presence, A sad and perfidious murder.
and then killed both the mother and Daughter; nay after peace was proclaimed,
fourteen coming to Town were presently murdered.

The most sad and horrible blasphemous murder that ever was beard of.
In Nonnay, many sad cruelties were committed, for Monsieur Chaumont having
surprised the place, murdered many poor Protestants, with horrible blasphemies
against God himself; one was commanded to blaspheme God, who refusing it, was
speedily hewed in pieces; for the same cause another was knocked on the head,
with the But end of a musket; Another, because he would not give himself unto
the Devil, was drawn up and down by the Ears, and at last had his brains beat
out with a hammer upon his own Anvil; all manner of cruelties was used,
especially to the principal of the Town, whereof many were thrown down a steep
hill to make sport; some burnt in their own houses, others thrown out at
windows, some stabbed in the streets; women and maids shamefully abused, and
barbarously handled; a young woman that was found hid in a house, with her
husband, was first ravished before her husbands face, A sad murder.
then was she forced to hold a Rapier in her hands, and one thrusting her arms
made her kill her own husband; they send about a Drum to sell Prisoners, and
none coming to buy, they there murdered them, 120 burnt.
there was six score burnt to ashes.

A godly Christian stoned and burned.
These cruel Papists, and bloody Brats of Fury, took a godly Christian, one
Janetta Calvin, and carrying her to the City of Brignole, they shamefully
stripped her, and then whipped her cruelly, they crown her with thorns, then they
stone her, and afterward burned her.

Cruelty at S. Martins
At St. Martins in Castillon, they took the wife of one Andrew Renand, stripped
her naked, and attempted the violating of her chastity, which she resisting was
with great cruelty whipped and wounded with their Swords, at last they shot her
to death.

Some there heads cut off, others buried alive.
In Moni de Marsan, six of the chief men of the Town had their heads cut off,
and others, after diverse ways were executed, one was buried alive; a young
virgin persued by some villains to ravish her, leapt out of a window and so
dyed.

Murders at Carcasson.
At Carcasson, the Protestants were hearing a sermon out of the Town, they
return suspecting nothing, they find the gates shut upon them, the Papists in
Town shot diverse times at them, afterward come out of the Gates and pursue
them, slew many, hurt others, they beat one down to the ground, and then cut
off his Nose, and pulled out his eyes, others they hanged; Many cruelties.
one they beheaded, one they took and made his face, hands and feet black, then
said he had a Devil, then hanged him, and at last threw his body to the Dogs.
Some have arms and legs cut off, and then beheaded. Protestants burned in
Churches.


In Foix, no sooner was the Town taken by the Lord of Pailles, but the
Protestants were cast into prison, some having their arms and legs cut off, and
then beheaded, some burnt, others hanged, others put to the Galleys.

In Aurenge, they destroy, without taking notice of Sex, Age or Quality: some
they stabbed, some they threw up with their Halberds; some hanged; others burnt
in churches; off some they cut their Privy members, sparing neither old nor
bedridden, nor the poor diseased in hospitals; women and maids are killed, others
hanged out at their windows, and shot with Harquebusseirs, sucking children
massacred at their Mothers breasts, Virgins of six years old ravished 90. killed
after promise of life.
virgins of five or six years old ravished and spoiled, the wounds of the dead
were filled with leaves torn out of Bibles; those in the Castle yielding upon
oath and promise of safety, were all stabbed, or thrown over the walls, to the
number of ninety Protestants.

At Grenoble.
At Grenoble, they slew many, throwing them over the bridge into the River.

At Beaun.
At Beaun, the exercise of their Religion was taken from them, all their godly
Ministers put into prison, eight hundred forced out of the Town, the Soldiers
spoil their houses, and all they find in them are slain.

Their madness and horrid cruelty to a faithful Minister of Christ.
In Mascon, the blood-thirsty villains having seized on a learned and Godly
Minister, called Bonnet Bor, whose Godly conversation the more enraged these
wicked bloodhounds of Hell; this Godly Soul had been Minister twenty years,
and in these days of murder and cruelties had been ransomed three times, him
they carried through the Town, with many jears and abusive scoffs, beating him
with their fists, then profanely they made a Proclamation, That whosoever would
hear this holy man preach, they might come to the slaughter-bouse. At which
place again they mocked him, and beat him for two hours together, he entreated
the favor of them, that he might pray to God before his death, then one stepped
out, and cut off half his nose, and one of his ears, saying, Now pray as long
as thou will, and then we will send thee to all the Devils, whereupon the godly
soul kneeled, and so fervently poured out his soul to God, that his Enemies
sighed, and after prayer, directing his Speech to him that cut off his Nose,
said, Friend, I am now ready to suffer what thou have ready to inflict upon me;
but I entreat thee and thy companions to remember the outrages committed by you
upon this poor City, for there is a God in heaven, at whose Tribunal you must
shortly give account of these your cruelties.

In which mean while a Captain going by, cried, send that wretched man to the
Devil, which one of them hearing, took him by the hand, pretending to have him
to the River to wash his blood of, but when he came thither he threw him into
the River, and cast stones at him till he was drowned.

the Murders at Revel.
At Revel, hearing of the confusion and sad slaughters, and of their merciless
cruelties at Toulouse, many saved themselves, flying to Castres, and elsewhere,
but left their families and goods to the mercy of these hell hounds; some
Protestants being apprehended by virtue of a Commission from the Parliament,
were carried to Toulouse, and imprisoned, some condemned to the Galleys, some
fined, and others banished.

At Montdelleir.
In Montpeleir, they yielded on terms of life, but were slain as they came out.

At Millan, about thirty Protestants going under the condduct of one Peigre to
relieve a Protestant Village called Cooper, they were all taken by one Vessin,
and were presently cut in pieces, and their Conductor Peigre was led to
Toulouse, A Captain quartered alive. Breach of promise and 100. killed.
and at the command of the Cardinal Armagnac, he was quartered alive.

At the Castle of Granes, one Savignac delivered up the Castle on terms of life
to all within it, yet they were so base as (in their usual way of keeping
covenant) they break promise, and kill about one hundred Protestants, being all
in the Castle, except six or seven.

Horrible breach of faith.
March Castle, a Castle belonging to the Signeur of Peyre, a Protestant, was in
the beginning of February, besieged by Coffart, who having taken it by Treason,
he kept his Faith as if he had no faith at all, for he murdered all in cold
blood after promise of life.

A special providenc^.
The Baron of La Fare, trying all means to have a maid of excellent beauty at
his wretched pleasure, besieged Florac, the place where she was, but was forced
from it, so as the Gentlewomans virginity and Citizens blood, were both saved.

At Cisteron, the Protestants being fled, the Papists fell bloodily upon the
poor innocent women and children, Women with child ripped and buried alive.
and slew of them to the number of three, or four hundred, some women with
child were ripped up; many buried alive; some their throats cut like sheep, and
others drawn through the streets, and beaten to death with clubs.

These and many more, Christian Reader, were cruelly committed on the poor
Protestants in France, during this Civil War, they are so sad they need no
comment; An unparralled murder.
but indeed that which follows is not to be paralleld for perfidious treachery;
Breach of the faith of a King, and Court, and for hellish and unheard of
cruelties, sad murders in cold blood, upon Lords, Gentlemen, poor Ladies,
Rivers swimming with bodies, and died with blood; Indeed the most sad Tragedy
that ever was yet acted upon the theater of the world, by Turks, Heathens, or
Christians.

CHAP. IV.
The Contents.
THE King and Queen Mother lay siege to Haver de grace, which surrendered on
Henourable terms; The King is declared out of his minority, and swears to
observe the Edict of Pacification, but keeps not his oath nor promise; The
Council of Trent meet; a League is made between the King of France, and King of
Spain called the Holy League; the Cardinal of Lorain, posts to Rome, to desire
the Pope to cause the French to observe the decrees of the Council of Trent;
Great heart-burnings arise; The Protestants daily complain to the King of their
injuries, desiring him to keep to his covenant, but to no purpose; The King and
Queen Mother in progress, rides through the Nation, and secretly confer with
the Popes Messenger, and the King of Spain. They come to Lions, and forbid the
exercise of the Protestant Religion; Many Protestants cruelly and inhumanly
murdered by the Catholics in several places. The King and Queen Mother
treacherously leavie six thousand, Switzers to destroy the Protestants; Letters
are intercepted, which discover a bloody plot against the Prince of Conde, the
Admiral, and all the Protestants. The Prince, Admiral and Principal Protestants
seize on Troys, Lions, and Toulouse. The King and Queen Mother forced to ret
reat to Paris. Th^^ beginning of the second war; the King sends an Herald to
the Prince of Conde and Admiral. Their answer. The Principal of both Parties
treat, but to no purpose; The Prince and Admirals answer to their Demands. The
Protestants never embrace a more sure ruin, then a peace with the King, The
Armies meet and engage; the success. The Prince of Conde, and Admiral, march to
join with Prince Casimir, who had raised twelve thousand men for their aid; The
Duke of Lorrain made General of the Kings Army. Prince Casimirs Noble
Declaration in defense of the Protestants. The Prince of Conde's Gallant speech
to the Army. A gallaut Resolution in a free Contribution through the Princes
Army. Prince of Conde and Admiral join with Prince Casimirs Army. The Prince of
Conde besieges Chartres; The Queen Mothers treachery and speech; a peace
concluded, but full of Treason, Guile and hypocrisy. The Protestants no sooner
dismiss their Armies, and deliver up their Garrisons, but are speedily filled
with Soldiers of the Kings. A bloody Cabinet Council erected by the King. They
plot to cut off the Protestants, but are discovered; The Kings Army suddenly
begirts the chief of the Protestants, but they escape with their families to
Rochel. The Queen of Navar comes to Rochel with horse and foot; Cardinal
Castillon flies to England disguised. The Prince of Conde and Admiral, publish
a manifesto to all Christian Princes; the Queen of Navar declares for the
Protestants. A bloody Edict is published by the King that none should profess
any other Religion but the Romish, the King of France strangely declares to all
the world, That he meant not what he said.

WE concluded the latter part of the second chapter with a Peace concluded at
Orleans, whereupon was publicly proclaimed a free liberty for the Protestants,
according to the Edict of Pacification. Now the King and Queen Mother endeavor
to reduce Haverdegrace, to their obedience, which the Protestant party had
delivered up to the Queen of England, as aforesaid. The Kings Army besieges
Haverdegrace.
To which purpose they lay siege, the Town holds out a good while, till at last
being sore straightened and no hopes left of relief, they come to conditions of
surrenders, but before Hostages were delivered, and English Fleet of sixty
brave Ships appears under sail, fleering directly to the Port, but the Earl of
Warwick, like a true hearted Englishman, (scorning to dishonor his Nation
with such perfidious treachery as most of the French acted) he sends word to
the Admiral of the Fleet, Honorably surrendered.
that the Town was to be surrendered that day, being the seventeenth day of
July, and so performed his Contract to his great Honor, I cannot compare this
noble act to any but that brave Roman Consuls, who being taken by the
Carthaginians in Africa, had liberty given to return to Rome to effect the
release of some Prisoners, and in them his own in exchange, promising to return
prisoner if he could not. Now when he came to the Senate, he persuades them not
^o accept of the conditions, and so according to his promise returned, and was
miserably tormented to death. Oh that it might be said so of our Charles the
Ninth, that he had but been regardful of his Oaths, and covenants, then had not
we been partakers of such a sad spectacle of cruelty, by reading this bloody
Tragedy. The Catholics now after this peace at Orleans feared the greatest
visible power rested in the Prince of Conde; So the Queen Mother treads in her
old paths of deceit, intending by her cunning subtilty to cut off all pretenses
of right to the Government by the Princes of the blood; The King declared out
of his minority, and swears in the presence of God to olserve the Edict of
Pacification.
to which purpose she causes the King (now but fourteen years old) to be
declared King and past his Minority: She carries his Majesty to Roan, and
there the fifteenth day of December 1563. they went Solemnly with all the Lords
of the Court, and Officers of the Crown, to the Parliament; Where in the
presence of the Counselors, he received the usual Ceremonies used in France
at the Coronation, the Parliament publishing the Declaration of his Majority,
the King there publicly protested, and swore in the presence of Almighty God,
That be would for ever after duly observe the Edict of Pacification, threatening
all opposers, for such was his express will and pleasure. Thus all things seem
in a peaceable way; one would now think so much blood, expenses of treasure,
and a consumption of his subjects, would weary any nation, and make any King
rejoice. For a peace is the more sweetened by the effects of a Civil war already
felt, for two extremes illustrate each other.

The peace not kept
But alas this peace succeeds not the hopeful expectation of his peaceable
subjects, in many places it was not observed.

The Council of Trent meets. The King of Spain, and France make a league and
call it the Holy league
And now assembles that Council, known by the name of the Council of Trent; who
meet for the maintenance of the Catholic Religion.

Now the Cardinal of Lorrain, being an active Agent to forward any design that
might put the Protestants backward; the Council to fit his purpose finds this
expedient.

That the King of France and Spain should make a firm and inviolable League,
and that the King of Spain should assist with such forces as might be needful
to the aid and succor for the King of France.

Which League was called the Holy League. And that nothing might be wanting to
break that famous Edict, the Cardinal promises his best aid to assist their
commands, assuring them that the King and Queen Mother stand firmly for what
they decree.

The Cardinal posts to Rome, and endeavors all be can against the protestants.
Now as soon as this Council broke up, the Cardinal posts to Rome, and labors
with Pope Pius Quartus, to send to the King and Queen Mother of France, to
cause publicly the Decree of the Council to be observed throughout the Kingdom
of France, presently they begin to have it put in execution, for the
Ambassadors of Spain, Italy, etc. demand of the French King the Observation of
the Decrees of the Council of Trent, that the Edict should be disannulled, and
Heretics rooted out.

Secret animosities in the hearts of both parties.
Now begin new firebrands to be cast again, all their design from first to last
being to work out the poor Protestants, who would be glad of peace with lives,
and liberty, but could have it granted no ways but in jest, in order to their
more secure ruin in earnest, for they never meant to be in earnest with their
most solemn promises, and protestations: When they cannot overcome by War,
then a Peace most be made, and in that Peace, a damnable plot couched to
destroy them: when by Gods merciful providence the Plot is discovered, and
they Arm for defense of Lives, and Liberty, and by Gods blessing grow too
potent and powerful for their treachery and Arms; then a peace again, and
thus they play fast and loose till they cut the Throats of the two peaceable
Protestants, who were no way to be overcome but by peace, The Protestants
complain to the King of their daily wrongs, desire justice and the performance
of his promises but to no purpose.
Insomuch that we may here insert a paradox in Divinity; that, it had been no
sin in this cause to be unbeleeving, nay they had no other way to be saved but
by unbelief.

And thus the Edict, that should have been the Cord of Peace, was now a
breaking in pieces by all the powers of Hell and Rome; insomuch, that those
that were worse affected to the Edict, and most forward to crush it, cried out;
They could not endure two Religions, which seemed (say they) as prodigious, as
two Sunns.

And now as just Occasion was the cause of complaints, so now the Protestants
sound in the Kings Ears their sad conditions, and how little the Edict was like
to be kept, if such courses were nourish; but the King heard to little purpose,
for it made a noise in his Ear but not in his obdurat heart; for this King
instead of hearing the complaints, and redressing the wrongs, of his to good
subjects; turns his Ears, forsaking the good Example of King Lewis the first
of France, A notable example of Justice.
who used three days in a week publicly in Person to hear the complainnts of
his subjects, and judge their Cause.

A poor woman, desiring the Emperor Adrian, to hear her Complaint, and do her
justice, he answered, that he was not a leisure; the poor woman then replies
boldly, the King and Queen Mother in progress meet the Popes Minister and King
of Spain and secretly confer in person together.
that he ought not to be at leisure to be Emperor; Augustus Caesar,
exceedingly rejoiced to do justice, and hear the causes of his subjects;
insomuch as the night could not allay his vigorous mind to do justice; nay,
when he lay sick, he would order the parties to appear at his bed side.

But this King was so far from following the Command of God, or example of
Heathens; so far from delighting to settle his own Throne in the peace of his
subjects, that he seeks to overthrow his own tranquillity in his subjects ruin.

To which purpose the King and Queen Mother make their progress through many
parts of the Kingdom, and smoothly colored their plots, and conferences with
the Duke of Savoy in Dauphine, with the Popes Minister at Avignon, and with the
King of Spain, on the confines of Guienna; whereby they might better
communicate their secret Counsels without the hazard of revealing their trust
to French men, whom they thought by their Alliance, one way or other, might
reveal their secret, hellish plots, to the Protestants. And it is to be taken
notice of, that now at this time was laid a Plot, which Embasadors nor
Counsels entrusted, must not know.

The King and Q. coms to Lions forbids the exercise of Protestant Religion and
fortifies the place.
In this progress, the King and Q. Mother coming to Lions, they forbid the
Protestants the exercise of their Religion, being one of the Town assigned
them for freedom; the Protestants being numerous in this City, the King orders
a Citadell to be built, not stirring out of the Town till it was finished; Now
this was an Example to other Towns and did very much exasperat and hearten the
Catholics against the Protestants; who with cruel Courage seize on them in
sundry Towns, and shamefully abuse them; So that,

Many Protestants in many places murdered.
In Crevan, in Burgongue, the Catholics fall on the Protestants, and murder
many, being met together for the exercise of their Religion. Curee Governor of
Fendosme a Protestant, was murdered by command of Cavigni Leiutenant* to the
Duke of Montpenseir, at Tours; they fell so furiously upon the poor
Protestants, murdering some, hurting others coming from the Sermon, and with
great rage came into the Town with their bloody swords in their hands, and
being dyed with blood, A gallant Gentleman murdered.
they proceed further, falling on all they meet with, murdering without
destinction of sex, age, or Quality; Drawning, Killing, and distroying, all
they could find: many Protestants of Quality were murdered without any account
given of their death, by justice on the Murderers.

Now the daily threats against the Protestants, put them into a doubt of their
security; The sad massacres at Tours.
for the King and Queen Mother having concluded with the King of Spain;
secretly to assist one another; It now fifthly falls out to discover that
treacherous part which all this while lay hid under the plauseble pretenses of
an Edict of Liberty, which indeed was that part of Hypocrisy, which as a
Cloak, covered all their perfidious Treachery, and breach of promise: That now
what was written on the word of a King, before the Eternal God, was no more
kept or observed, than if it had been only written in sand; the King and Q.
Mother Raises an Army of Switzers pretending to defend the Protestants but was
a plot to cut them of.
His Oaths, being as carfully broken, as solemnly made.

And that which gave the Protestants too sure grounds of fear, least a storm
should fall undiscovered, till unavoydable, was this: When Ferdinando Alvares
de Tolleda Duke of Alva, was marching into the Low Countries with a puissant
Army, to subdue the Protestants there, that embraced the reformed Religion
against the King of Spains will, and desire; the Queen Mother ordered the
raising of six thousand Switzers, and brought them into France, pretending
forsooeh, that they went for guarding the fronteirs of the Kingdom against the
attempts that might be made by the Duke of Alva's Army: But see how the light
of Heaven penetrats into the dark designs of Hell; Letters are intercepted in
their way, from Rome, Letter intercepted and the Plot discovered
and Spain, wherein was discovered a plot for the Protestants, for therein was
found, That it was decreed in a secret Council, to apprehend the Prince, and
Admiral, to destroy the one, and keep the other Prisoner: and therefore if the
Prince, and Admiral, escaped this bloody Tragedy prepared for them, and should
try it by Arms, that then on a sudden, ere they could Arm, or be provided:
those six thousand Switzers were to arrive at Paris, where was to remain two
thousand; as many into Orleans; and the rest into Poictiers; and thus was the
six thousand Switzers pretended to be raised for defense of the Protestants
against the Duke of Alva, that was indeed for their utter ruin: the King and
Queen Mother concluding, that if the head were off, The wickedness of the Duke
of Alva.
the body would fall to the ground; calm the winds and the billows will soon
surcease their rage; Now this bloody Duke of Alva, carried himself against the
Protestants in such an unhuman way, that he permitted his Soldiers to ravish
Virgins; and one time at his Table boasted; the Prince and Admiral and chief
Protestants take Lions, Troys and Toulouse for their defense.
that besides private Massacres, and what the War had destroyed; he had Caused to
be put to death by the Hangman, Eighteen Thousand in six years time.

And now the Protestants seeing so clear a Plot in the midst of Peace; nay that
under pretense of safety lurked ruin, and Treachery; They prepare to defend
themselves by force, and stand on their own ground, for their Lives, and
Estates, because they see peace is the direct road to a murderous death,
resolving rather to die in field like men, and Soldiers, than be cut off by
Plots, (Oh! that they had continued and never embrased Peace may all true
Protestants say ere this History ends) they therefore to the aforesaid
purposes, seize on three principal Towns, Lions, Troyes, and Tholuse; The King
of France as the usual Custom is, was then preparing for Meaux, the King
forced to a disorderly retreat from Meaux to Paris.
to solemnize the day af St. Michaell: the Prince of Conde, with five hundred
Protestants, approach Meaux, the King and Queen Mother hearing thereof, Retire
with great disorder, and fearful have to Pars, with six thousand Switzers and
other Horse; and thus begins the second War, being armed on all sides, and a
general rising in the Land. Now sundry particulars which happened in this
second War, for our better proceeding in this Tragical History, and for our
present purpose must only be touched at, carrying along with us the most
observable deeds, The King sends to the Prince of Conde and Admiral.
for a more clear understanding of the whole business; that we may go on in some
order till we come to the rest.

The second War thus beginning, the King sent an Herald to the Protestants,
whom the Prince and Admiral received in behalf of the rest; to whose message
they return this Answer: That they were resolved to continue the Kings good
subjects, and what they did was for the defense of their religion and liberty,
granted by the Edict, which the King by Oaths, had promised faithfully to keep;
that they desired nothing more then the security of their Lives, and Estates,
in A peaceable enjoyment of the liberty of their Consciences, which might the
better enable them to be the more firmly fixed in obedience to his Majesty's
Command, The heads of both sides meet and treats but to no purpose.
But if they should disband, it were the most compendious way to their assured
Ruin, and a plain laying of their necks to the block, and so offer their
throats be to be cut by their merciless enemies, the Kingdom being full of
Swisses, Flemings, Italians, and Germans.

Hereupon the heads of both parties meet at St. Denis, the Constable desires
the Prince, and Admiral, to rely on the Kings word, of whose performance he
hoped they need not doubt to what ever he promised: ( Oh! that the poor
protestants had found is so, then had not forty thousand Innocent souls been
slain basely and murdered treacherously.

The Prince and Admiralls noble answer to the constalle.
To this, answer was returned, that it was not now time to trust in the Kings
word, which how little it was kept was too visibly to be read, in the bloody
effects of the constant breach thereof.

An Edict being made and sworn to by the King, was by the same King violated,
which was a manifest sign of treachery, and perjurie, and so perfidious, The
Prince and Admiralls noble answer to the Constable.
as few christian Kings would sign to: so that they could no more depend upon
the Kings word which had hitherto been a snare, a sure trap to catch them in:
and truly they that run may read, that all along this sad History, the poor
Protestants were never und on but when they took the Kings word, which indeed
at all times proved but the umbrage, or shadow of a promise, The Protestants,
never embraced their ruin but when they trusted to the Kings word in a peace.
being always made with a resolution never to be kept, which at last proved a
faithful paslage to their utter ruin; so that now this meeting brought nothing
conducing to peace: for it is certain that in such a short tract of time, I
could never yet hear or read of such a constant practice of covenant breaking,
which all along in this Kings reign was so often practiced; as if it had been
reckoned amongst their meritorious works, as if there were not a God to punish
perjurie, or treachery.

And now the Protestants, lay their Army down before P^^is, and shortly after
both Armies meet, and on the tenth of November gave battle; and the Protestants
received the worst by reason de Andelot came not into the Princes assistance
till midnight, The two Armies give Battle.
after the battle; therefore next day they enter the field with their Army,
show themselves in battalia, ready to fight the enemy, and so standing some
houses before the great city of Paris, they bury their dead, the Constable
slain.
cure their wounded, but the Catholics in Paris durst not come out to engage:
in this battle was slain the Constable on the Kings side.

On the fourteenth day the Prince and Admiral with their Army, the Prince of
Conde and Admiral with their Army march to join with the Prince Casimirs Army
of 11. thousand.
marched to Campagn, and so past into the confines of Lorrain, to join with
Prince Caisimir, son to the Prince Palatine of Rhine, Elector to the Sacred
Empire; whose royal worth cannot shine through the description of my pen,
according to the luster of his native, and intrinsic worth: who had now for
the defense of the Protestants, raised an Army of ten or eleven thousand, who
in their march took in some towns; In this mean while the Duke of Lorrain was
created General of the Kings Army, and the Duke of Anjon Lieutenant General,
now Prince Casimir aforesaid, writ to the King, protesting that it was not any
profit, or private interest of his own that prompted his resolutions, Prince
Casimirs noble declaraton in behalf of the protestants.
but only, and really, to assist those that afflicted, and persecuted, for the
same religion, had required his help, And further declared, That if yet the
King would grant them free liberty, according to his promise in the last Edict,
he was ready to retreat. A noble and brave resolution, of a gallant Prince, and
a true friend, such friendship shall never want it is reward in this or another
world. Sincerity in affection, will endure the touch of affliction,

But here succeeds a block that must be removed out of the way, which the
Prince of Conde, out of a tender respect to a conscionable performance of his
promises, did only surmise; which was bravely and courageously performed as
follows.

The Prince of Conde, had promised to the Prince of Casimirs Army at their
approach to the confines, the sum of one hundred thousand crowns: the Prince of
Condes Brave speech to the Army with Christian resolution to keep his
covenants.
the present want of which did much perplex the Prince of Conde: but calling
the Army together, he there soberly and wisely related their present condition,
acquainting them, that their general welfair consisted in their particular
assistance: and that in outward apearance the Prince of Casimir was the
greatest pledge of their hopes, and on whose help did depend their future
hapiness, if God blessed their willing resolutions; and therefore it were
better to hazard their. private estates for a prosperous Issue, then lose
life, liberties, and estates, to a bloody cruel, and perjured enemy. and so
excited them freely, to contribute what they could, and with the price of their
present assistance, to redeem their lawful liberty, Estates, Lives, and
Families.

A gallant and free contribution of the Protestants Army with their noble
resolutions not to be parralleld.
So there were two Ministers appointed to receive their free contribution: now
though nothing could be worse spared, yet nothing was more freely given; for
this brave Comander the Prince of Conde like a pious adventurer, (with a
forward inclination to redeem their liberty, though with loss of estates) sets
them a fair copy to imitate; for he was the first that gave all his moneys,
and plate, yet not contented, gave the very rings off his fingers, and, all the
valuable riches he had: the Admiral cheerfully follows this Christian, and
unparralled example: then as willingly follows the chief officers of the Army,
and so from the gentlemen to the private soldiers, and from them to the footmen
and boys in the Camp. There was such joyful and freewill-offering even to the
value of all they had, by which cheerful contribution, was made up in moneys,
The Armies of P. Casimir and P. Conde join foreces.
Plate, chains of Gold, Rings, and Jewels, to the value of fourscore thousand
Franks: which for the present satisfied Prince Casimir's Army, who doubtless
would not let their resolutions stop in a vigorous prosecution of their
purposes, though they had not had this rare piece of affection, and care of
their prosperity: But it was more the noble prince of Condes care to perform
his promis, then any promptitude in the Princes Army, who were exceedingly
pleased: Now all parties being fully satisfied, on the eleventh of January
1568. they both joined in a harmonious conjunction, Rochell for the Protestants.
both of force and affections. In the mean while the Pope sends aid to the King
of France, being four troops of Italian Horse, six companies of Italian foot,
with two French Regiments, and four thousand Swisses, who were all joined to
the Kings Army under command of the Duke of Anjou.

Whilst these things were agitating, Rochell declared for the Protestants, The
Prote stant sn their march beseiged Charteres.
which proved ever after by the wise and merciful care of God a good sanctuary
for his poor people,

Now the Prince of Conde with Prince Casimir, advance and in their way beseige
Charteres, which place was now as a storehouse for Paris, and the parts
adjacent, for it was a plentifully filled with Corn: Now the Kings Army
encamped before Sein, and was loath to put all to the hazard of a battle, which
did put Charteres to a great strait.

The Queen Mother of France her treacherous Speech.
The Queen Mother perceiving which way the game was like to play, falls to trade
in her old Treacherous policy, the only way for her security (who used to say)
She could make three sheets of paper do more, then the power of a whole Army.

To which purpose, she sets on foot a Peace, which indeed was no less necessary
for the Catholics, then desired by the Protestants, which may admit of one
necessary observation.

The protestants in the height of their power yet always ready to embrace the
least motion of peace.
That when the Protestants had the greatest advantage of the King, yet the least
notice of peace was hearkened too and embraced; though in the full carrier and
pursuit of their unresistable power, and prevalency. Therefore it may safely be
concluded, That if they had had any other intent in taking arms, but for Lives,
Liberties, Estates and Families, they would never have laid down arms to
embrace a peace, which at all times they found as a Snake in their bosoms, and
did expose them to the greatest cruelty an enraged enemy could inflict. So that
now the Catholics disadvantage in power, meeting with a peaceable, though
powerful enemy, A peace with full liberty of conscience, but oh, treason and
deceit is the sad effects.
were the wheels that moved to a conclusion of War, and so to sit down under a
settlement; so that the War having continued about six Months, a Peace was
concluded at Lonianieau, with the same liberty allowed to the Protestants as
was expressed in the Edict of Pacification, granting liberty of Religion, That
they should Really, Fully, and Publicly enjoy the liberty, and free exercise
of the Religion reformed, and that it should be executed according to the
tenure of the Edict, notwithstanding all Restrictions, and Interpretations to
the contrary.

And thus this second war was peaceably ended, by the Protestants, and no less
treacherously intended by the Catholics.

The peace begins and ends in treason by the papists.
Now I shall show you the Treachery thereof, and the sad effects; for alas it is
not to be imagined what treason is hid under this fair vizzard of Peace; To see
what a foul sin they make of such a fair virtue; they pretend nothing more then
a firm, and durable peace, and intend nothing less. But ah! poor Protestants
that you had foreseen this Foxes Snare, this storm of bloody cruelty intended:
but truly their laying wait for innocent blood, could not be descerned nor
penetrated into, unless by the deep wisdom and narrow search of a divine eye:
so dark, and so deeply laid, was there hellish Treason; for a few days
discovered their intentions to be full of deceitful treachery, and that they
put only the name of peace on their most horrid and bloody designs, taking
Gods holy name in vain, by all their promises, void of performances. But the
poor Protestants saw not their intentions. The protestants dismiss their
Armies, and no sooner deliver up their Holds to the K. but they are filled.


So that the Princes and Admiral, dismiss their Armies, and the Strangers are
safely conducted into Lorrain; and all the Towns that the Protestants did
deliver up to the King, were presently by his command, possessed and
strengthened, with Garrison Soldiers, Rochel only excepted, which place
enjoyed the benefit of an ancient condition, granted two hundred years before,
between the King and them, viz. Never to have a Garrison put into the Town
against their desires.

The Protestants had also by the Edict of peace these three under their
command, Mentaubon, Cognac, and La Charity, to be held full two years, and no
more, in the Prince of Conde's name.

The King not trusting to his Court counsel picks a choice crew fit for his
purpose, and calls them a Cabinet Council.
Now the King and Queen Mother not trusting to their present Council (some
whereof being supposed to have too tender consciences to swallow the bloody
plot intended) therefore erect a choice Council, picked on purpose, which his
Majesty calls a Cabinet Council, consisting of such as would contrive, and
carry on, any blo^dy design whatsoever. Insomuch that those which by their
Birth and place might challenge a room in the most privy Councils, were now
utterly excluded, and exempted as men not fit to impart unto the secrets of the
Kings and Q. Mothers Intentions.

A Hellish plot by the Cabinet Council.
And now let us see a little what this Brave Cabinet Council will act, what a
brat of bloody resolutions they can creat out of their hellish Breasts; They at
last conclude, that force of arms is not the direct road to travel in for
subduing of their Enemies, but Macbevil must be called to Council, and his
politics put in practice; resolved they are to try what plots (the attendants
of the Devils Councils, and the Legitimate son of Hellish production) will do;
so at last they conclude, and vote it to be enacted, as that which must be put
in practice, viz. the death of the Prince of Conde and Admiral, and so to cut
off all future fears of their attempts, as also hopes from the Protestants, so
that no troubles for Religion might after arise.

But the fear of God is not before their eyes, they run swiftly to shed blood,
not considering that Gods vengeance can pursue them more swiftly.

This design they commit rather to secrecy than strength, and therefore that
they might have one fit for their designs, they choose one Cavagnes, to whom
they impart the business, who being a man fit for blood and cruelty, was
ordered to take the charge upon him, as one that could drink deep draughts of
innocent blood without any regret, and with full delight, who could be full of
cruelty without the least pity; now all was thought so sure, that if the
Prince and Admiral did not escape, they should inevitably fall into the cruelty
of their adversaries.

The plot discovered to the Prince and Admiral.
Thus the plot being laid, they forgot that God could see, and as the Psalmist
says, He shall redeem their souls from deceit and violence, and precious shall
their blood be in his sight. And so it pleased the Lord of his good grace, and
mercy, to discover their deceit and intentions of Blood for it was no sooner
contrived in dark, but discovered in light, by one that speedily posted to the
Prince and Admiral, and revealed the Plot, yet the Kings Army was so quick that
ere the Prince and Admiral removed from their quarters, They are surrounded,
yet by Gods mercy escape with their families to Rochel.
they were by orders of the King, Queen Mother, and the rest of the Cabinet
Council, surrounded in Noyers, a Town situated on the confines of Burgundy,
which they had so cunningly ordered to avoid suspicion, that lifting and
removing under pretense of fresh quarters, they came at last to quarter at a
small distance from them; and doubtless they had been taken and destroyed, if
GOD had not surrounded them in mercy from the purposes of the Kings treachery.

The Prince and Admiral, knowing the scope and drift of their Serpentine
windings, and turnings, speedily advance toward Rochel, with wives, children,
Servants, and two hundred Horses; where at last they safely, through many
dangers, arrive, and were joyfully entertained by the Rochelois.

The Queen of Navar also comes to this Rendezvous at Rochel, Q. of Navar joins
with the protestants.
accompanied with a considerable number of horse, and foot.

The Cardinal of Chastillon, who lived at Beauvois far remote from Rochel, did
with great hazard travel in a Seamans habit to the Seacoast, The Cardinal of
Chastillon escapes to England.
and so by Gods good Providence embarked, and safely arrived in England; where
in Queen Elizabeth's Court, he was freely welcome, and there he did faithfully
negotiate with the Queen in behalf of his fellow Protestants in France.

The Prince and Admiral with the chief protestants publish a Manifesto to all
Christian Princes.
The Prince and Admiral, seeing their past danger and present safety, solved now
to defend themselves, and secure their Religion, Lives, and liberty, by Power,
which could not be allowed nor obtained by peace. To which purpose they publish
a Manifesto to all Christian Princes in the world, wherein they briefly
declare, That in the integrity of their hearts, and clear witnesses of their
consciences, they had many ways peaceably endeavored to enjoy their liberty,
and lives, under a loyal obedience, and subjection to the Kings commands, and
that the world could not but take notice how little conditions of peace was
observed by the King, that in the midst of Peace, it was not to be recounted
what unsufferable injuries, and cruel murders, were daily heaped and
committed, upon the poor Protestants, even to the loss of the Estates and Lives
of many of their dear friends; which opposition was the greater, being done by
the Kings Liberty, granted contrary to Articles of peace, and Edict of
Pacification, promised by Oaths and Covenants; therefore though they daily
waited, yet now they saw no other way but to arm in their own defense, which
was the least they could do, being tied by the laws of God and Nature, to
preserve their Religion, Lives and Estates of themselves, with their poor
wives, children, and families, that else would be left to the power and rage of
bloody and deceitful men, and that this was their only design of taking arms.
And further did declare, that if they could espy and other way to enjoy their
Estates, Liberty and Lives, they would speedily lay down their arms; yet
notwithstanding they desired and resolved to continue his Majesty's faithful
Subjects in obedience to all lawful commands, wishing a period to their lives,
the same moment their obedience ceased; if they could but herein see security
for enjoyment of their Religion and Lives.

The Q. of Navars noble Declaration in behalf of the protestants.
At the same time the Queen of Navar with some dashes of her illustrious pen,
and a full Testimony of a Christian Resolution, does, by Letters declare, That
she could do no less than join with the Prince of Conde, and Protestants,
which, with the life of her self, and children, as also the miserable Relics
of the Kingdom of Navar, The Cardinal of Lorrain, on the one hand, and
Spaniards on the other, did jointly endeavor by force and policy to destroy,
which was so discernable, that all the world was witness to her injuries.

And indeed this Noble Queen, The Q. of Navars high merits in part described.
would be ecclipsed of her due value by the draught of my rude pen, the highest
Encomiums will but stain her virtues; but to a little belief of her high
deserts, know only this, That her enemies confessed her virtues, and Christian
valor, to exceed the very applause of her Friendly admirers, and therefore her
deserts was concluded as much undeniable to them as unspeakable by her friends.

Thus the very beginning of this pretended peace ends in a third Civil War,
whose effects was as bloody, as sharp, and at last we shall speedily see in a
Tragical Massacre of many thousand Protestants, of all degrees and sexes, so
securely were the Protestants lulled asleep in their too credulous opinion of
the King and Court.

Now in this Cabinet Council of the Kings, was Charles Cardinal of Lorrain, The
King publishes a bloody Edict that no Religion should be exercised but the
Romish on pain of death, which cuts off all former promises and Edicts, as if
they had never been made to be kept.
Brother to the Duke of Guise, a man of a most crafty and terrible nature,
insomuch that at Rome he was no less reputed; for he was a bitter enemy to the
Protestants, and for the cruelty of his nature was termed, the Firebrand of all
Civil Flames, whose hands being deep in the blood of the Protestants, For by
his means, and the willing mind of the King, and bloody Council, was published
an Edict in his Majesty's name, levelling the famous Edict of January, and
enjoining, That none should profess any Religion but the Romish, and that it
was treason to embrace any other, requiring upon pain of death a general
conformity to the Catholic Religion.

Which bloody Edict was accordingly published, whereupon all the Protestant
Ministers were banished all places of the Kingdom which were in the Kings power.

The King declares he meant not what be said, Oh deep deceit.
And that the King may stand amazed at this deep hypocrisy, this following
Sentence was expressed in this Edict printed at Paris, And it was further then
declared, that albeit the King had in many Edicts before that time, permitted
the freedom of Religion, yet his meaning was to retain, and cause to be
retained of all men, the only Romish or Popish Religion within his Realm.

Which Edict and clause being so wonderfully strange to all that heard or saw
it, and because it stained the Kings name with the most horrid spot, of
perjury, and breach of faith, it was therefore in other impressions (afterward
printed) purposely omitted in the Edict.

This Edict was published with an incredible confluence of all sorts of
Catholics, and received with the highest celebrations of joy as can be
imagined, and the rather, because the Catholics much doubted of the Queen
Mothers intentions, in regard of her dissembling carriage to the Protestants;
and now all was put out of doubt by this Edict; Which clearly demonstrates that
the King and Queen Mothers intentions all along was to destroy the Protestants,
root and branch, only took their best opportunity to effect their desires with
the least noise of suspicion, and greatest security to drive the nail home to
the head, and their bloody Swords to the hearts of the most innocent souls.

And thus begins strong preparations for a third Civil War for Religion, the
sad effects whereof we shall peruse in the next chapter.

CHAP. V.
The Contents.
THe Protestants gallant Resolutions; Both parties arm; Queen Elizabeth aids
the Protestants. The protestants take several towns; the Armies face one
another, but engage not; the Battle at Brisac, where the Prince of Conde is
slain; the Prince of Navar, and Prince of Conde, chosen Generals of the
protestant Army; the Admiral and whole Army swears subjection to these two
young Princes; the Queen of Navar coins money to pay the protestant Army; the
Princes and Admiral draw their Army into Garrisons; the Kings army sits down
before Cognac, but are valiantly repulsed; they take Mucidan, put all to the
Sword, but lost Count Brisac; the Duke Deux Pont, with 14. thousand, marches to
join with the Princes, but dies himself by the way. The Pope sends Forces to
aid the King; Both armies engage; the Kings Army retires to Garrisons; the
Princes take in Chastelrault, and Lusignan Town and Castle; they lay siege to
the great City Poictiers; the Kings forces besiege La Charity, but leave it
after the loss of many brave Gentlemen and Commanders; the Duke of Anjou
besieges Chastelrault, but after great loss leaves it; the young Duke of Guise
advances to Court, and his Fathers place at once; the Cabinet Council meets;
the Armies engage in a bloody Battle; the Kings Army besieges Angeli, but
receives a gallant shock of a resolute defense by that brave Commander Monsieur
de Pills, and at last yielded honorably; the Kings Army disbands; the
protestants increase, and are Masters of the field. The King summons his forces
together and gives the command to Marshall de Coss; the King, Queen Mother, and
Cabinet Council, plot to linck a peace, and the Protestants ruin together; the
protestants at all times willing to embrace a peace; the end of the third Civil
War; the K. and Queen Mother speed Messengers to the princes and Admiral to
make way for a peace; they yield to embrace a treaty, the King propounds for
both armies to join against a foreign Enemy; A firm peace concluded with free
liberty of the Edict. Several protestant Princes congratulate the King for his
happy peace; the King subscribes to keep the Edict; the Armies dismissed; the
peace not fully observed; the King with the Council plot destruction; the King
and Court feed the protestants with favors to make them the easier to swallow
their own ruin, and his love together; the King dissembles with the Princes in
showing a dislike to the Catholic party; the prince of Orange, and his Brother
offer the King of France their assistance against the King of Spain, and is
accepted; the Count of Nassaw. disguised goes to the King; the King invites the
Admiral to Court; the Duke of Guise, and Cardinal Lorrain, depart the Court,
the better to allure the Princes and Admiral to their Ruin; the Prince of
Orange takes the Spaniards slips; the King propounds his Sister the Lady
Margaret in marriage with the Prince of Navar; the Popes Ambassador arrives at
the Court; the Kings plot to surprise Rochel; the King pronounces the Admiral
not guilty; many protestants at Roan murdered; the Admiral persuaded of the
Kings Reality by a Letter under his own Hand and Seal.

The protestants noble resolutions.
NOw begins the third bloody War, wherein the Protestants solemnly covenanted
together, so to cleave fast one to another, so to knit themselves firmly
together in their affections and resolutions, as no future transactions should,
with the help of God ever make them to forget, or forsake, the cause of God
concerned in the Protestant Religion, but resolutely to maintain it, to the
loss of their lives, and all that was dear to them.

Both sides prepare for war.
Hereupon the King arms amain, so also the Princes and Admiral, who send out a
fleet of thirty sail for Provision for the Army to supply them for the ensuing
Winter. The Queen of Navar also endeavors all she can for their aid and
assistance.

Q. Eliz. aids the protestants.
Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, sent over to their aid one hundred thousand
Crowns, besides ships of Corn and Ammunition. A thing to be treasured up in the
remembrance of her lasting fame.

The protestants take in many Towns, both armies meet, but fight not.
The Prince and Admiral advance with their Army, and soon levels the force of
many strong Towns to their power, in taking them in, and so become Masters of
the Field. At length both Armies meet, yet no battle, in regard of the cold
season: neither Army would fight, but on advantage, which would be given by
neither.

The Winter being now past, in the year 1569. the Armies engage at Battle at
Brisac the 16. of March, The Battle at Brisac, the prince of Conde slain to his
eternal honor, fighting on his knees to the last.
wherein the Prince of Conde was wounded, and his horse shot under him, yet did
valiantly defend himself on his knees, in the midst of his Enemies, but at last
was slain. On the Kings side was slain the Duke of Monsalez, whom de Andelot
the Admirals Brother, charged so furiously, that with his bridle hand, he
lifted up the Bever of his Helmet, and discharged his Pistol in his face, and
so laid him dead on the ground. Great was the slaughter on both sides, of
Gentry especially, wherein the Protestants were worsted by the Catholics
coming upon part of their Army in full bodies, which unfortunately was
scattered by their too great security, and sudden approach of the Kings, yet
their demeanor in the fight was such, that the Kings Army had reason to bewail
their great loss, and admire their Enemies valor; and undoubtedly in outward
appearance, had the body been entire, and both encountered on equal
advantatages, the day was generally believed would have been otherwise; for the
Horse only was engaged, but the foot never came to any service, but secured
themselves in a body. And thus died that brave Prince of Conde; exceedingly
commended for virtue and valor, and as much bewailed for his loss.

Prince of Navar and prince of Conde Generals for the protestants
After this Battle the Protestants rallie their Forces, and by a General choice
of the Army, Henry Prince of Navar, and Henry Son to the deceased Prince of
Conde, were both elected Generals of the Protestant Army.

The Prince of Navar was of a noble and gallant Spirit, full of Urbanity and
Civil courtesy; The Prince of Navar shows a gallant spirit in a pi^hy speech.
of a Warlike courage, and being naturally given to valourous and heroic
actions, he embraces this courteous invitation, and like a Soldier of a long
standing (being but fifteen or sixteen years old) he lengthned their hopeful
expectations by a short and pithy speech, wherein He promised to protect the
true Religion, and to persevere constantly in defense of the common-cause, till
death or victory proved the Issue.

Now to balance this Royal assent, and Christian magnanimity of so tender a
Sprout of virtue, The Admiral and whole Army profess fidelity and obedience to
the princes of the blood, and the protestant cause.
the Admiral, and Count de la Rochfou-caut, first submitted, and swore
fidelity; then followed the principal Officers, and Soldiers, in joint
Resolutions to order their steps after his Royal commands, and the religious
ends proposed in his Speech. All of the Army protesting fidelity to the Princes
of Bourbon: And thus with a volley of applause was this Gallant young Prince
elected General of the Army, and Protector of the Protestants, whose years were
far younger than his wise conduct of affairs, in whom it was hard to say
whether his resolution, valor and wisdom, or youth was more perspicuous, for he
seemed, as if nature, which accomplishes others by degrees, had finished him in
a trice. He was no sooner come to his Horizon, but his deserts lifted him up to
his Meridian.

The Queen of Navar, mother to this virtuous Prince, approved well of their
choice, and his acceptance; so that she sharpened all their resolutions by her
courageous assistance of the Protestants.

The Religious and Noble Q. of Navar coins money and inserts a christian and
resolute Motto.
She was a religious Queen, in whom resided much virtue and constancy to a good
cause, Wherefore she caused moneys to be coined with her picture on one side,
and the Princes on the other, with these words.

Pax Certa, Victoria Integra, Mors Honesta. A Motto becoming her noble Spirit.
Thus they fall to consultation how to order the Army, with the best prudence;
they resolve to divide and draw into Garrisons, so also does the King.

The Princes Army draws into Garrisons.
So the Princes and Admiral retire to Saint Jean D' Angeli, Brave Monsieur de
Pills defended Xaintes; Montgomery and Puviant take charge of Anglolesm,
Ienlis commands with a strong garrison in Londun, and Monsieur d' Aciere, with
seven thousand foot, and six thousand horse, remains at Cognac, where the late
Battle was fought.

The K. besieges Cognac is forced to leave it. Mucidan taken, and all put to
the Sword.
Hereupon the Kings Army under command of the Duke of Anjou, attempted to sit
down before Cognac, but the continud valor in their often sallies, amazed the
enemy to a retreat. The Army thus forced to leave Cognac, lays siege to
Mucidan, where the Count of Brisac on the Kings side was slain, yet the Town
was taken, and not only Soldiers but all Inhabitants suffered the rage of a
bloody Sword, and inveterate Enemy.

The Noble protestant Duke of Deux-Ponts with fourteen thousand joins with the
Princes Army, be dies in his March.
To the assistance of the Princes and Admiral advances the Duke of Deux-Ponts.
with an Army of fourteen thousand, in which Army my was William of Nassaw,
Prince of Orange, with Lewis and Henry his Brothers; in their march it pleases
God the Duke the General died by the way, and so the Charge of the Army was
committed to the Lieutenant General, Count Volrade of Mansfield, Three days
after the Armies meet with great joy on both sides.

The Pope mean while assists the Catholics with four thousand foot, and eight
hundred horse, The Pope and others aid the K.
commanded by Paulo Sforza; the Duke of Tuscany sent also to their assistance a
thousand foot, and two hundred horse; The Duke of Alva sends three thousand
VValloons and three hundred Flemish; but Gods just judgments followed their
insolent carriages, for such Miseries, wants, and sicknesses followed them,
that by the way abundance died.

On the 23. day of June 2569. both Armies approach near together, The Armies
engage.
and next morning by break of day the Princes fell on Strozzi's quarter, who
was Col General of the Infantry, who were all routed, and he taken Prisoner;
there was slain S. Loup, and Rogucleauz Lieutenants to Strozzi, twenty two
Captains, and 350 of their best Soldiers; on the Protestants side was slain in
all 150.

The Noble Princes of Navar charges in the head of the Army.
The Prince of Navar commanded the other part of the Army, and charged the Enemy
to their quarter, with a great deal of manly courage, beyond expectation,
himself charging in the front of his Army. Which was so much the more
remarkable, in regard danger at first seems most terrible, so that they that
beheld this valor, had their senses lifted up with admination, and the whole
Army puffed up with expectation, that the world would be filled with the renown
of his actions.

The Kings Army draws into Garrisons.
And so after a little skirmishing, they both withdrew. Hereupon the Duke of
Anjou, seeing little hopes of overcoming the Invincible manhood, and great
power of the Protestants, he dismisses the Nobility, and settles most part of
the Army in Garrisons till the first of October, against which time all was
ordered to be in readiness to appear.

The Protestants take in Chastelrault.
The Prince and Admiral advance with their Army, and take in the Town of
Castelrault, and enter in the King of Navars name, by whose authority, as first
Prince of the Blood, all things were dispatched.

The Town and Castle of Lusignan taken.
They speedily advance to Lusignan, and taking the Town, lay siege to the
Castle, which though impregnable for strength, yet could not withstand the
battering assaults of their valor; so was forced to yield on conditions;
marching with flying colors.

The Articles being as faithfully performed as promised, which though according
to Justice, yet contrary to the Catholics constant practice; which was a
great dishonor to their Army, and whole nation.

The Strong City of Poictiers, beseiged but left.
Speedily after they march and lay siege to the Strong City of Poictiers, a City
of the greatest Circuit of any in France, except Paris; being the Head of the
adjoining Provinces, and where all the wealth and treasure of the Catholics
in the Country was brought for security. The Duke of Guise, enters with a party
to defend the City, and after strong assaults, and much loss on both sides, the
Admiral falls sick with continual care and pains to prosecute the siege to a
conquest, so they rise with their Army, and leave the place.

The catholics besiege La Charity, but are forced away with great loss.
Now the Kings forces under the command of Monsieur de Sansat, lay siege to La
Charity, and after a sharp assault, and stout resistance, with the loss of many
gallant Gentlemen, they were forced to leave it, being kept by a resolute and
valiant commander Monsciur de Guerchy, Cornet to the Admirals own company of
Gens d' Arms, whom we shall afterward find basely murdered.

The catholics besiege Castelrault, but leave it
The Duke of Anjou not able to raise the siege of Poictiers, did in the mean
while lay siege to Chastelrault (a place but lately taken by the Protestants)
but finding a stiff resistance by their valor, were forced to tetire with the
loss of Fabiano del Monte, commander of the Tuscan Forces, with two hundred
fifty Soldiers, and many Gentlemen; The Admiral advancing to their relief; the
Duke was forced next day to march away, and lodge his Army at Sello.

The Duke of Guise admitted to his Fathers place and Cabinet Council.
The Duke of Guise about this time goes to Court, and for his faithfulness to
the Catholic cause was admitted to his fathers place, and to the Cabinet
council; this Council now meets again to consult of the affairs of the
Kingdom; at last concludes to draw their forces together, and fight the
Princes Army, which although the Prince was on disadvantage, yet they resolved
unanimously the fight the Catholics.

The Armies engage in a bloody and furious battle.
After sundry skirmishes and sharp encounters, the Armies both meet the
beginning of October, when first the Prince of Navar with ample and Christian
Speeches, recommended to them all the cause of Religion and Liberty; now they
engage first with terrible thundering of Cannons, and much slaughter, but they
presently close and fall on with wonderful fury, the horse and foot being
strangely mixed together in the heat of the Battle, nay such was the heat of
their valor on both sides, that the very common attendants of the Armies, such
as Sucklers, Boys, Pioneers, were deeply engaged for either party; And herein
the Admiral acted so much of his wonted valor, that he showed himself a
valiant Soldier, and courageous Conductor; for with a furious assault and fixed
resolution in the head of his cavalry he charges the Rein-grave, and though the
Admiral had received a shot in the cheek with a Pistol, yet discharged his
Pistol in the Rein-graves face, and there lays him dead on the place, and
fought valiantly, allthough the blood from his wound did fill his Gorget, the
Protestant Army forced to retire.
and run down his male. At last the Protestants Army being worn out with a
tedious march, was forced to retreat, and with the Prince, the Count of Nassaw,
Count Volrade, all which without any disorder meet that night at Partenay.

the K. besieges St. Jean d'Angeli, which brav Pills did keep.
After this bloody Battle, the King, Queen Mother, and Duke of Anjow, sit down
before St. Iean d'Angeli which was kept by that famous and renouned commander
Armand Sieur de Pills, whose same spread it self throughout all France by his
stout resistance of the Kings power, and valorous keeping of the place, for
against the continual assaults of the whole Army, His excesding valor.
his brave Soldiers kept it for two months, and one time in this seige a truce
was made, that if in certain days relief came not, they should yield on
conditions: Relief by a handsome policy.
the day comes, and St. Severin with forty horse deceives by policy the
sentinells, and Kings Army, and as friends pass all to the relief of the
Place. After many bloody assaults and great loss to the Kings Army, the place
not able any longer to continue, did at last deliver up on honorable rearms;
Yields on honorable terms.
To depart with their Goods, Arms, Horses, and ensigns displaied; and for four
months should not carry arms in defense of the Protestant religion. But as
Monseiur de Piles made his seige famous, so the Catholics made themselves
infamous, But dishonourably kept by the King.
by his Majesty's breach of faith given; for as they advance to receive the
articles of the Kings promise, and their own deserts, they are spoiled of
Arms, Apparel, and Moneys, rob their baggage, take away their Horses, and
spoil their Men.

Nay a Regiment quartered at St. Jultan half a League off, under the command
of Sarrien, falls on, Beats, Kills, Murders, and destroys many, They are
murdered.
casts some into the River, and he that can make a safe escape to Angoulesme is
happy, though he have nothing else but his shirt. Whereupon Mounseiur Piles was
freed from his engagement by a nonperformance of the Kings promise. 10000. men
lost at the siege, and five thousand canon shot spent.
The King lost at this seige, Sebastian of Luxembourg, Duke of Martignes, and
governor of Britain; five thousand cannons shot spent, ten thousand men of
War lost, twenty five or thirty Commissaries of the artillery which was slain
in their charge; many crept away from the Army, and such hot service, insomuch
that the Camp decreased eighteen or twenty thousand men.

The K. disbands the Army.
In the year 1570, for many reasons, and after much consultation had, the King
did resolve to disband his army, which accordingly was don.

The Princes Army increases.
Now the Protestants labor to gather Strength, by the Industrious pains of the
most incomparable Prince of Navar, (who passing the expectation of his age)
presently Arms the nobility and others in those parts, on whom his father the
King of Navar had great influence, by reason of their near alliances, and
neighbor hood: whereby the Princes Army was now again got to such a degree of
strength, That they were masters of the field.

The K. Army meets, and Marshall de Cosse General.
The King seeing things go contrary to his desire and expectation, summons his
Army together, and in regard the Duke of Anjou was sick, the charge of the Army
was delivered to Marshall de Cosse; the Armies never came so near as to give
battle, but often skirmishing, and little likelhiood there was for the King to
conquer the Protestants by force; which opinion, as it was grounded on good
reason, so was it increased by news which came to the Court, that Prince
Casimir was raising new forces for aid of the Protestant Princes, which indeed
put the Catholics in a great doubt and fear of any success against them

The K. and Cabinet Council meet, and plot a peace and ruin together.
Now begins the bloody game, for the King, Queen Mother, Duke of Anjon, and
Cardinal of Lorrain, meets privately together, and according to their
disposition, and custom, fall a ploting, holding it the best way (when they
could not mend it) to think of accommodation, and giving liberty to the
Protestants; Who might better have enjoyed it by war than by peace, as the
Issue proved. If it had pleased the Lord to discover the inside of their
treachery, which, though fatal to the poor Protestants, yet so dishonorable to
the King of France, and the French Nation, that it cannot but draw down Gods
just Judgments upon them.

The secret Council thought this way of peace might be the quickest, and safest
way to their designs of destroying the Protestants, better than by War; for if
they could cut off the chief supporters of the Protestant cause, the rest would
follow; and so they aim at an opportunity to gain a peaceable (though bloody)
access to their persons, which in time of War their Sword could not reach; so
by this means, hoping to cut off the Root, the Branches would wither; Indeed it
had been well if it had fallen out that the branches had naturally withered;
but ah! sad and doleful, we shall see a horrid and bloody Tragedy, which will
astonish any heart but flint, to hear and read this sad and miserable story;
and truly it makes my heart bleed to think of the sad cruelties and unparalleld
massacres of Gods people.

And now they discover their Inclinations to peace, which they knew at all
times would gladly be embraced, and acceptably welcome to the Protestants, if
covered with Liberty and Lives, the things they only desired. For if they had
delighted in any thing but Allegiance, or fought for any thing but liberty,
they would not now incline to peace in the midst of their unlimitted power; but
poor souls, they had been far more happy if they had dyed like men in War,
than murdered in their Bods like Dogs.

This third war was sharp, and thought the greatest, in regard of the Kings
unfaithful dealing, in the breach of his promise, that he should give a free
liberty for religion, and engage to keep it, binding himself thereto by Oath,
yet the same King speedily after, breaks all oaths and promises, declaring that
solemn engagement before God to be void, and that what he then promised was not
so meant by him, and therefore proclaims it death, for any man to profess any
Religion but the Romish and Catholic.

Now the Princes and Admiral in the behalf of themselves and Protestanrs, did
declare in the sincerity of their hearts, that they desired nothing more then
the performance of the Kings edict, and socurity to enjoy their Liberties,
Lives, and Families.

Thus having given as succinctly as possibly I can, the most remarkable
passages of this War, we shall now come to the last Tragical part of the most
unheard of treachery, and bloody massacre, that ever I read or heard of, The K.
sends to desire a peace.
to take it in all it is circumstances.

After many battles and much loss of treasure and blood, a treaty was begun by
the King and Q. Mother, who sends messengers to the Princes and Admiral,
signifying, how desirous they were of a firm and inviolable peace.

The Admiral yields to a treaty.
The admiral being so often deceived with fair pretenses of peace, could not be
so ill an observer but to learn something by transactions past, therefore was so
afraid and jealous that he knew not well how to advise, seeing all their fair
pretexts of peace since he could remember, was but a shorter cut to their
invitable ruin: so that the burnt child dreads the fire, yet being desirous of
a peace on good grounds (which proved as a Quagmire to swallow up all their
hopes) he yielded to embrace a treaty.

Now the King, that he might better color and varnish over his treachery,
sends messengers to the Admiral, to signify in his Majesty's name, that the
King himself had now found out a sure way for a lasting peace, which way his
Majesty thought so safe as none could doubt of his integrity therein, which
indeed was a subtle piece of policy as follows.

The subtle and treacherous design of the K. propounding a war against the K.
of Spain as a means to a peace one with another.
That now both Armies which had so long fought against one another in the feirce
flames of a Civil War, might now unanimoufly join against the Duke of Alva, as
a foreign enemy; and one that had been too great an instrument of the late
combustions in France. And that it might appear no French Romance in regard of
the suddeness, and the aid lately received by his Majesty from the Duke of Alva
against the Protestants, as also supplies from the King of Spain his Master,
therefore he further signified, that his Majesty the King of France, had high
cause prompting him to a War with the King of Spain, and among many this was
not the smallest, the Kings pretended reasons of war against the King of Spain.
viz: that the King of Spain, had by violence taken from his Majesty the King
of France, the Island Florida in new foundland, suddenly slaying all the
French Soldiers, as also the Marquesdome of Final, the Inhabitants whereof had
lately surrendered themselves under the command of the King of France. And
therefore he desired in his Majesty's behalf, that the ground of this war might
not be misinterpreted, but taken in a good sense, and that his Majesty's ends
of propounding both Armies to join against the Duke of Alva in the
Low Countries, might be looked upon as a design of his Majesty to unite all
former discords in a firm bond of union, and concord, by cleaving together
against a common enemy: And to set off this business the better, he further
propounds, that it was now a fit opportunity to employ Count Lodovick of
Nassaw, Brother to the Prince of Orange, for management of the business, that
he might easily by the assistance of his Commanders and Soldiers, suddenly
surprise certain Cities which mighe be of great advantage to the future hopes
of success.

the Admiral reasons the case, and could hardly be brought to believe this war
real, and oh that he had never believed it.
Now this penetrated the more into the Admiralls heart, in regard, this Count of
Nassaw was one that had been under his command for two years, who behaved
himself with an exceeding courage, and approved valor and fidelity, in a great
proof to the Admiralls knowledge, and there needed no spur to the Count, being
a man banished out of his own Country for Religion, by the Duke of Alva, and
was a man of much resolution and courage.

The Admiral receiving this message was wonderfully put to understand what to
do or say, for although he seemed not to suspect the Kings fidelity, yet he saw
strong reasons to look about him, for though he valewed not his own life, yet
he drew along with him the welfare of all Protestants, therefore he considered
thus with himself.

The great power of the Cardinal and Guisans in the Kings Court, and was also
too well known to be no less greatly in favor with the King, and Court of
Spain, against whom this war should be: and therefore could not conceive how
this war with Spain could really be carried on, when these men were the prime
managers of the affairs of France, having also several pensions from the King
of Spain, therefore could not but increase and confirm his jealousy to
suspect treason and deceit, when he considered, that these men were dependents
of Spain, who were of the King of France his Cabinet Council, and yet for them
to wage war against the King of Spain. Oh! Treachery.

The Admiral could not but take notice, that at the same time the Ambassador
of the King of Spain, was admitted into the Privy Council of France, (which
to foreign nations seemed utterly incredible) and that also one Brirragio a
Lumbard (reported a traitor to his own Country) being ignorant of the Law, was
for his subtle wit hoysted to the honorable office of Chancellor, in the room
of Michael Hospital displaced, a man well known to be a true Patriot to his
own Country, and also so, learned and able, as the like could never be found in
France.

Thus the Admiral (on whom did hang all the weight of affairs) doubted what to
do in this great strait, The Admiral in a strait what to resolve on.
he therefore considered on the contrary side what his adversaries would say
against him; that they would hereby take occasion to report him backward to
Peace, as one delighting to live in the fuel and fire of blood and civil
wars, not knowing how to live but in troubled waters, not able to endure the
sweet relish of a quiet peace; these reasons, amongst others, did perplex his
wavering mind.

Now the Kings Messenger in behalf, and for defense of his Majesty, The Kings
Messengers reply to the Admiralls Objections.
did an^wer to all the Objections of the Admiral, and said, That the suddenness
of the King of France his resolutions to war with the King of Spain, was. That
he and his Mother the Queen, had been informed by one Albery come lately from
Spain, That for certain King Philip a little before had poisoned his Queen, the
French Kings Sister, and had basely given out through all Spain, that he had
such things against her, as for the credit of many persons of honor were not
fit to be published.

The Admiral persuaded by Count Lodowick to the war with Spain.
Now all this being said, moved not the Admiral so much, as the free and
cheerful resolutions of the Count of Nassaw, whose indefagitable earnestness
was boundless, and persuasions to the Admiral endless till effected. The
Admiral hereby persuaded, lays aside all dishonorable thoughts that might
stain the Kings loyalty, and so stood ready to embrace a peace, to which
purpose was sent Beavois, and Teligni the Admirals Son, and with them Monsieur
de la Chossetire, the Prince of Navars Secretary, and so on the eleventh day of
August 1570. was a peace concluded according to the Edict of Pacification in
January, A peace concluded with free Liberty.
That every one should have free liberty of conscience to use and profess the
Reformed Religion. Rochel and Montauban, was to be held in the Princes name for
the space of two years by the Protestants. The Articles of Peace were
afterward published and Regist^ed in the Parliament.

But alas! we shall see that this Sunshine of Peace (like the poor Traveller
in the sable) sooner makes the Protestants cast off the cloak of their
security, than all the blustering storms of the Kings Warlike forces could. For
by embracing a peace, they hug in their bosoms, and nourish in their hearts
their own calamities and know it not, by reason it is printed and gilded with
the name of peace.

Several Protestant princes sends Ambassadors to congratulate with the King
and his peoples tranquillity in the peace concluded. The King olemnly gives his
faith for ever to observe the Edict.
Not long after this peace thus concluded, several Princes of Germany that had
respect to the Protestant Religion, among whom was the three Electors, the
Palsgrave, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh; all sent their
several Ambassadors to the French King, to congratulate this happy peace, and
to show their joyful resentment of the same; promising, that if any new
commotion should arise, they would assist him to the uttermost against the
Contrivers and authors thereof.

To this Embassage the King replies by words, and afterward, subscribes to a
Book with his own hand, giving his faith by both, That he would for ever, most
sacredly and faithfully observe the late Edict of Pacification. But alas his
heart was too many leagues from his mouth, his promises are no better than if
written in water with ones finger, being too far short of truth, and intention,
which is sad to confider, that the King should have no way to keep his faith,
but to break it, that oaths and promises which should ty devils fast, is the
only way to level all faith and engagements.

For now it is to be taken notice of, that whereas before the Kings age made his
Authority fit only to advise and countenance, now he manages affairs with his
own Council and command, for being now come to the years of 22. he displaies
himself on the Theater of the World in such a splendid equipage, that all might
see him to be of a fierce resolute nature, and above all an absolute
dissembler, as one of the French nation very well observed, and if he did not,
yet this History will sufficiently evidence.

The Armies dismissed, and the Princes and Admiral go to Rochel.
Now this peace being thus concluded, the Armies are dismissed, and the
Strangers retire to their own Country; after which the Princes retired to
Rochel: for now to effect the deep and bloody plot, nothing wanted but the Art
of persuasion to entice the Princes, Q. of Navar, the Admiral, and Principal
Protestants Lords, to come to Paris; nothing more desired, for their the trap
was laid for their destruction; and doubtless this mock-peace had never been
embraced, if it had pleased God to have given them an insight to the bottom of
this unheard of, and unimaginable depth of Treachery, and Deceit; which being
hatched and brought forth in the Hellish Court of the Cabinet Council, we shall
too soon see the speedy and sad effects of it, the Lord knows it will too soon
come to the birth of their bloody hopes, and cruel desires, for as vengeance
persues blood at the heels, so a hideous storm of cruelties succeeds this peace.

The Peace, though fully concluded of, between the King and Protestants, yet
was not fully observed in all places according to the Edict. So that the
Princes and Admiral (to give a reason why they stood at such a distance from
his Majesty) send to Court Theligny, Briquemault, Beauvais, La Nocle, and
Cavannes; They are no sooner come, but the King welcomes them to the Court, and
professes that it is his Royal pleasure, that the full Observation of the Edict
was no less than he really intended, and therefore to scatter all mists of
doubt from the Princes and Admiral, he desired that they would acquaint him of
his real resolutions for their good.

The King and Cabinet Council plots the ruin of the Protestants, being desirous
to get the Princes and Admiral to Paris, and so to cut them off.
And now they begin their Politic Maxim, Parvi sunt Arma foris, nisi sit
consilium domi. That policy is of more force in Military affairs than valor.
They now to the Trade of Politic treachery; the King and his Cabinet Council
meets, and their Result is, With speed and secrecy, by Serpentine Labyrinths,
and enfoldings, to bring the principal Protestants into the Not of destructior;
A Worcester being thought too hazardous, and weak to effect, therefore must the
principle of Machevil take place in their judgments and practice, i. e. To
effect their desires, though they swim through a Sea of blood. For now they
have hopes that their plot might take effect, in regard that their private
actings were now managed by those that were jointly concerned in the effects
of their desires, and hoped to have some share in eheir bloody success.

The King by fair carriages intends to slide into the Protestants affections,
and so draw them to Paris, and cut them all off, which was the plot laid for
them.
To which purpose, a good opinion of the Kings sincere intentions for the
Protestants good, must be fixed in the minds of the Princes of the blood, the
Queen of Navar, and the Admiral, so that all their foul actings might seem so
fair, as no tincture of suspicion should enter into their thoughts, he
penetrates their hearts with shows of love, but his own heart is filled with
deceitful plots and treacherous Resolutions, endeavoring so to insinuate into
their good natures, that he might lodge in their hearts good thoughts of his
bad intents; so that all carriages must be screwed up to the highest pin of
affection and love, as we shall shortly see conferred on them by an outward
confluence of all favors, that the least doubt might not have any footing to
the prejudice of their bloody aims; hoping by this means, to have their desires
and success to lodge under one roof. All their plot being to get them to Paris
(the Theater of this most horrid and cruel Tragedy ensuing) unarmed, and then
by further progress, to put in execution the practical part of their bloody
plot; so marshalling their affairs, that all the Protestants shall be
immediately cut off in the bloodiest war that ever was known.

Now the plot being laid, the Gin being set, they fall to work, laboring to
bring this bloody brat to the Birth; To which purpose the King and Queen Mother
calls to Council the Duke of Anjou, the Cardinal of Lorrain, the Duke of Guise,
and Alberti Conde Count de Retz, and speedily resolve them of their secret
intentions, if by any means it could be effected, they therefore desire their
best aid and assistance, together with their approbation; which needed not be
doubted, for they were men ready enough at all times to act the Kings pleasure.

The King therefore begins, sending out strict orders to all the Provinces of
his Kingdom, Now the King begins to dissemble, strictly commanding an
observation of the Edict, which he intends not should be observed. The King
outwardly carried it harshly to the Catholics to more to work the Protestants
to their lure.
to have a high esteem and regard to the late Edict in behalf of his good
Subjects the Protestants, and that it was his Majesty's express command to have
it strictly observed; and to make their Hearts understand what they heard by
the ear, the King gives Order to have this message proclaimed at Rochel, the
Seat of the Princes and Admiral, assuring them in particular, of the Kings
favorable intentions, to what he had confirmed with his Royal Hand, which
should be kept inviolable from all attempts of the strongest persuasion. And
yet to penetrate more deep, to make one act of dissimulation out-vy another, to
let the world see he was a good proficient in the Art of Treachery and
Bloodshed, he carries himself outwardly very harsh to the Catholics, telling
the Commissioners, that the Power of the Duke of Guise, and Cardinal of
Lorrain, was not to be feared, for that the Government now rested in himself,
and had no dependency on any of their commands, and therefore, though they live
at Court, yet needed not the Princes of the Blood, or Admiral, fear them as
Adversaries, for they lived as Subjects, not as Masters; and that ere long he
hoped all acts of forformer hostility, and enmity, should be by his means
buried in eternal forgetfulness, and that both parties should be reconciled, to
the Kings desire, and their own good. All which did not only pierce the hearts
of the common people, but wonderfully wrought upon the hearts of the Princes
and Admiral, with the chief of the Protestants; who now begun to believe the
Kings intentions real, and that being now weary of the bloody Civil Wars, and
Distractions, and beginning now to govern by himself, and not by his Council,
might at last sincerely desire a firm peace.

But alas they are too short sighted to espy, and too sincere to doubt, that
such unparalleled deceit should lodge in the hearts of devils, much less in a
King, a Christian King, not so much as in his thoughts, much less in his
intentions and practice; but it is the less wonder, seeing it is so, that not
only in public actions of great men, but also in our common intercourse with
things of smaller moment, we all experience that the greatest hatred and
malice, is covered with the greatest love and friendship; and that there is no
greater knavery then that which borrows a cloak of Religion to cover it with:
some men again make use of friendship, as a stepping stone to their own ends;
as the For being environed with a high Wall, and hotly persued by his Enemies,
was put to great straits for his liberty, for he could not leap over the Wall;
at last espying one by the Wall side stooping for a stone to throw at him, he
suddenly leaps on the man's back, and by that step of advantage leaps over.

Little did the poor Princes and Admiral, with the Queen of Navar, and Nobles,
and Gentlemen of the Religion, think their Noble blood to be so near spilling
by such base and unheard of cruelties, covered under so much love; who would
not pity to read that so much valor as was in these brave Commanders should be
murdered, and laid in the bloody grave of a Treacherous death, which shortly
we shall sadly peruse.

The first thing the Admiral embraced by these persuasions was the War against
the King of Spain, which made the way easier to the rest that followed, and yet
he often said to his Sonin-Law Teligny, that he suspected the rolling wit of
the Queen Mother, whom he was afraid would lead them on in this enterprise, and
leave them in the midst.

The Prince of Orange and Count Lodowick his Brother profer their service to
the King in the war of the Low Countries.
The Count of Nassaw, advising with his Brother the Prince of Orange, sends word
to the King, That if it were his Majesty's pleasure to War against the King of
Spain in the Low Countries, they would so order themselves under his commands,
as that by their service therein, his Majesty should find them faithful and
useful; and perceive their affections to him and the cause in hand; to this the
King replies in loving Letters; commending their resolutions, and gave them
hearty thanks for their loving Message, which tended highly to a free
manifestation of their affections to his Service.

The Emperor mediates between the Prince of Orange and the K. of Spain The
King of France encourages the Prince of Orange against the persuasions of the
Emperor.
Now Maximillian the Emperor pretending to pity the Estate of the Prince of
Orange, had obtained by Ambassadors to the King of Spain, that the Prince
should have his goods restored, conditionally that he should not settle his
habitation in the Low Countries, but in some other place, and yet nevertheless
should enjoy freely all his Revenues.

As soon as the French King hears hereof, and doubting it might be a hindrance
to his present design, he speedily posts Messengers to the Prince of Orange, to
persuade him, that what the Emperor had done, was nothing but to hinder their
progress in so good and advantageous a cause, and being only a devise to break
up his leavies that he had begun in Germany, letting him further understand,
that if he will please to give him credit, he should not want assistance
sufficient to regain his Estate from the King of Spain.

These persuasions of the King, being not suspected to come from dissimulation,
and hypocrifie, by the Prince of Orange, so did he firmly believe all to be
real; insomuch as he proceeded in his Musters, resolving a while to bear the
charges thereof, whilst all things else, fitting for the war, were in
readiness; though the charge at that time was very heavy.

Count Lodowick disgrised goes to Court, and treats with the King, and agrees
about the War.
Now Count Lodowick his Brother, being of a resolute disposition, essayed his
own fortunes, and by encouragement from the King he secretly journies from
Rochel, taking with him only two companions, giving out he was going for the
Prince of Orange his Brother; but in a disguised habit he privately departs,
and that night arrives at the Court which then was kept at Bloys; where the
King and Queen Mother, showed great demonstrations of a joyful welcome, and at
this time the King in person himself did treat with the Count without the
assistance of any of his Council, which the rather was done that the Count
might see and report, that now he acted by the Counsel of his own command, that
so the Admiral and Princes might see and understand his promises could not be
hindered or frustrated by the counsels of their adversaries about him at Court;
that so also they might receive the better encouragement to come to Court,
seeing their Enemies was not of his Council.

At this meeteng of Count Lodowick and the King, it was agreed, that the War
should go forward against the King of Spain, The Admiral desired by the K. to
come to Court, and be Captain General in the War.
with all possible speed, and that the Count should go before to prepare; that
the Admiral shall go Captain General, desiring further of the Count that he
would signify as much to the Admiral, and to desire him in his Majesty's name
to come to Court, the better to treat and confer fully thereof; whose advise
should have as great power with the King as could be expected; that he should
have allowed for his Guard fifty persons in Arms at Paris, The K. very earnest
to have the admiral at Court under spetious pretenses of favor.
for safety of his person; or should have any other security, that might put
him out of hazard of his Enemies Attempts, and might also bring him into a good
opinion of the Kings real intentions; Oh! deep dissimulation! This being don
betwixt the Count of Nassaw, and the King, the Count returns to Rochel, who
poor Prince not seeing this depth of Treacherous deceit, used all Rhetorical
Art of persuasions to the Princes, and Admiral, to journey to the Court; and
indeed he was the only Spur to them, and much persuaded them of the Kings real
intentions, and how joyful the King would be of their Company and Counsel in
his affairs.

The King now returns to Paris, and takes his pleasure, that the World might
see he minded only recreation; but, God knows, plotted his poor subjects ruin,
who with the Cabinet Council sits close for effecting their bloody desires in
the plot laid for their destruction.

The Duk^ of Guise and Cardinal of Lorrain feign a discontent, and depart the
Court on purpose to allure the Princes and Admiral to Court by their absence
from it.
To which purpose the Duke of Guise, and Cardinal Lorrain give out (the better
to draw and allure the Protestants to Court in their absence) their high
displeasure against the late proceedings of the King in behalf of the
Protestants by his favors conferred on them, therefore in great disdain and
greater Policy, the Cardinal of Lorrain departs the French Court, and carries
with him Cardinal Pelvey, Duke of Pontmenseir, and the Prince Dauphine,
pretending to go to the Election of a New Pope, but indeed was only to draw the
Princes and Admiral to Court by being encouraged with their adversaries
absence, that they may come to Court with more confidence and less fear, but we
shall shortly see that though they divide in opinion, yet they unite in Counsel
and bloody crueltys.

The Prince of Orange his Fleet takes the Spaniards Ships, and sells them as
Prizes in Rochel, by the Kings permission.
And that this Treachery might still be more completely freed from all
suspicion, and all things seem to be carried on by the Kings mind, his Majesty
gives leave to the Prince of Orange his fleet to hover about Rochel, and by
opportunity to set on the Spaniards Ships and Portugalls, which might happen to
sail along that Coast, taking such as they cold; which they did, and brought
them into the Haven of Rochel, where they openly sold their prizes, which the K
of Spain by his Ambassador often complained of.

But to set the world a fair copy of a Kingly treachery to his poor Subjects;
to lay the Topstone of Dissimulation in the fairest pretenses of affection and
desire of peace, the King ushers in one of the handsomest pieces of Hypocrisy
that ever carried the face of Reality, for although the thing he pretended was
really effected, yet the grounds and ends by him proposed, which was the only
thing pretended by him) was clean contrary to his promise, and what he did in
it was basely to defile his own actions with his ruin. And indeed it put all
out of doubt of the Kings integrity.

The King propounds his Sister the Lady Margarite in marriage with the Prince of
Navar.
The business was this;

The King sends Mounseir de Byron with propositions to the Queen of Navar, that
the Lady Margarite the Kings own Sister, should be given in marriage to her Son,
the Prince of Navar, that the anticut consanguinity, and present peace, might
be more confirmed and established to the liking of all parties: And indeed this
did put on a great confidence in all, especially the Princes, the Queen of
Navar, and Admiral, that the King was now real in what he professed and
propounded. But Oh, the bloody effects it produced, shall at last too sadly be
related.

An Ambassador from Rome arrives in the French Court.
In the midst of these transactions secretly carried on, arrives (in the depth
of a most sharp winter) in the King of France his Court, the Cardinal
Alexandrio, who came from Rome by the advice of Cardinal de Pelve (that went
from the French Court with Cardinal Lorrain) This Pelve was sometimes a Scholar
in the College of Montaigue, and during his study there was a Servant to the
Cardinal of Lorrain, and afterward was grown to be a Scullion, but now being
advanced to the place of Cardinal, was so fitted for any Treason, or act of
cruelty, that nothing, though never so horrid would, stick in his throat, but
he was able to swallow down that which was able to damn a World for the
sinfulness thereof.

Now the Instructions that Cardinal Alexandrio brought along with him from the
Pope, was to persuade the King to enter into the Society of the Council of
Trent, the first and principal Article whereof was, That the Confederation
should join their power, to make war upon the Turks and Heretics, meaning all
Princes that suffered the use of the Protestant Religion.

The Cardinal was honorably received and welcomed to Court, he urged how much
it was against the profession of a Christian King to make peace with Heretics,
and to war against the King of Spain; how it did weaken his Friends and
strengthen his Enemies; treating in Leagues with Foreign Princes, that were
excommunicated by the Apostolic Sea, which negotiation was so managed, as the
result was not published, but it was publicly rumored amongst the Common
people, that he had not the effects of his desire; yet the Cardinal returned
cheerfully to the Pope, and it was reported that he did say, he had such answer
from the King and Queen Mother as was not fit to be published.

The King for a secure mannagement of the Wars against the King of Spain, The
Kings strange plot to surprise Rochel.
gave Commission to Strozzi, and the Baron de li Guard, to rig forth ships from
Burgess and Rochel, and to surprise any Vessels that were going through the
English Seas to the aid of the Duke of Alva, in the Low Countries; the Spanish
Ambassador complains hereof, but these two Captains had secretly and privately
an underhand Commission to seize on Rochel, and by open or secret force, to get
into their power for his Majesty, although all was carried fair on against the
Duke of Alva.

The King also gave command to the Admiral to send Espials into Peru, and
Island in the New found World (which being plentiful of Gold, the Spaniard had
possessed himself thereof) and there to attempt what he could against the King
of Spain; which business, according to his Majesty's command, the Admiral
undertook, committing it to one of his Gentlemen, who with a certain Portugal,
skilful in those navigations he had joined in Commission.

The King heaps unexpressible favors on the Admiral and Friends.
Now the King heaped unexpressable favors on the Admiral, Count Rochfoucault,
and Theligni, with the rest of the principal Protestants, and chief Noblemen of
the Religion; for what ever was taken from any of them in time of the Civil
Wars, was now most lovingly restored by the Kings command; and if any one that
the King could learn was a friend to the Admiral, to him he did show singular
respect, even to the height of an unimaginable dissimulaeion. He commanded one
time to be given to the Admiral one hundred thousand pounds of his own treasury
in recompense of his great losses.

When the Cardinal of Chastillon (formerly fled to England disguised, and
having great Revenues and Wealth) his death being known to the King, he did
give to the Admiral all the fruits of the whole year, with all his rich and
costly Household Stuff: and though all former Admirals in Council, and public
Ceremonies, had ever given place to the Marshall of France, yet for the
Admirals greater honor, it was the Kings will and pleasure that he should sit
next Monseiur de Momorancy, who was the first Marshall, and above all the rest.

The K. desires the Duke of Savoy to favor the Protestants
The King also writes to the Duke of Savoy, that for his sake he would please to
be favorable to the Protestants under his Dominion, and it should ly upon him
as an acceptable favor.

It is not to be thought what kindnesses the King showed to the Protestants,
even to the great amazement of the Catholics, and rejoicing of the
Protestants, The K. so far dissembles, that by his show of respects to the
Protestants the Catholics suspect him.
who poor souls thought all true that he said; but this love proved bitter
hatred, like Judas kiss, nay the King did so carry it, that the Catholics
began to surmise, and say, that the King did not only favor the Protestants,
but would himself turn one shortly.

And in regard there was a mighty enmity betwixt the Duke of Guise, and the
Admiral, by reason of a report fixed on the Admiral, as if he should be an
instrument of his Fathers death; The Admiral and Duke of Guise reconciled, and
the Admiral declared not guilty of the Duke of Guises death.
the King therefore to make up all breaches, and in order to a perfect peace,
he prescribes a perfect form of Reconciliation (the foundations whereof was
laid six years ago in the Town of Molins) where the King summoning the
principal estates of his Kingdom, did on consultation and deliberation; declare
and pronounce the Admiral not guilty of the death of the Duke Guise: a thing
his Majesty was before bound in conscience to do, but now was acted and done
as a piece of good policy; this block being taken away as an advance for the
Admiral to the Court.

But as we said before, the most solemn bond and ty for a secure peace, is the
Lady Margarite, Sister to the King of France, to be given in marriage to the
Prince of Navar, who was Son to the most virtuous Queen of Navar. who also had
all the last civil war been General of the Protestant Cause, and courageously
defended it to his Eternal Praise; which marriage the King did declare, That he
did it for the effecting and establishing a durable peace, and as a signal
testimony of his loyal affections to the Protestants.

And yet in the mean while the Papists in Roan murdered diverse Protestants,
and grievously beat others as they came from a Sermon. Many Protestants
murdered in Roan.


And in regard that it was objected, That the King of France his Sister was of
the Roman Religion, and the Prince of Navar a Protestant, it could not well be
effected to a good purpose; To which the King answered he would free her by a
Dispensation from the Pope, that no Impediment might stand in the way to so
great a good, as a sure peace betwixt him and his Subjects, nothing being more
delightful or desired by him.

As soon as this was spread to the Courts of Foreign Princes, it did amaze the
Popish Party, that ever the King should proceed in behalf of Heretics. But on
the contrary it did exceedingly possess the hearts of the Prince, The K. plot
takes effect
and Admiral, and all foreign Princes of the same Religion, with exceeding joy,
being such a large demonstration of the Kings affection, and as a Seal of
fidelity to all he promised, and did also drive out of their hearts all
jealousies of plots, or secret Contrivances; but the Admiral which had most
reason, and was most backward to believe all real, yet he at this time was now
most forward to believe, and most ready to be confirmed, not only by this, but
also by a Letter which the King sent him by his Son Theligni, The Admiral at
last persuaded and deluded by a Letter from the King.
under the Kings own hand and Seal, assuring the Admiral, That whatever he
should do in the Business of the war in the Low Countries against the King of
Spain, should be by his Majesty allowed of and ratified, as if done by his
special command, such was his alluring baits, and pretenses of good will and
trust to the Admiral.

And thus the poor Protestant Princes are too much persuaded of the Kings
faith, who intended their ruin without remedy; we shall shortly see them come
to Paris, and embrace the mountains of treacherous pretenses of faith and
affection, and so be swallowed up in their Enemies malicious and unparalled
cruelty, for all the huge promises of the Kings stood but as an Earnest till
their plot was ripe, and then they are more swift to shed blood, than real to
what they promise, and truly such a piece of Kingly tteachery is not in any age
to be parrallelled.

CHAP. VI.
The Contents.
THe Queen and Prince of Navar, with the Prince of Conde, comes to Court; the
Articles of the War of the Low Countries put in writing; the Marriage between
the Lady Margarite and Prince of Navar agreed on; the King heaps honors on the
Admiral and friends; the King invites the Admiral to Court, and protests his
own life is envelloped in his; a cross in derision of the Protestants is pulled
down by his Majesty's command; the Plot almost discovered by a lively instance;
the King threatens severe punishment to any that shall affront the Admiral or
Protestants; the Admiral comes to Court, and welcomed; the King allows 50. for
his Guard; the Count Lodowick of Nassaw, enters the Low Countries, and takes in
Montz; A league offensive and defensive with Queen Elizabeth of England, but
proved a deep plot; the Queen of Navar poisoned by the Kings Apothecary, by
whose death the Prince is King of Navar; the joyful and bloody marriage of the
King of Navar, and the Lady Margarite; the Kings plot to take Rochel; the names
of the Protestants in Lions is taken in a bloody Book; sad complaints comes
to the Admiral, and great suspicion of a bloody Massacre at hand, but he
believed it not; the Admiral from a Window shot in both Arms with a
Harquebuzier as he walked in Paris; the King in great rage dissembles his
treachery, but publishes his hypocrisy by a show of grief and discontent; he
that shot the Admiral escapes, having fresh horses waiting for him; the Admiral
shows himself a true Christian, and patient sufferer; the matter examined by
Judges, and the Issue; he that shot the Admiral had commission from the King
for it; the Admiral like to die requests the Kings visit; the King and Queen
Mother with many Attendants perform his request; they profess sorrow, and
dissemble wonderfully; the King and Admiral discourse alone; the Admiral
commits his injuries to the Lord; the King entreats the Admiral to lodge in the
Loure; the Admiral refuses; a great suspicion of Treason by a sudden speech of
the Count de Retz in the Protestants hearing; the Admiral requested a Guard for
his person, which the King grants; the Admiral and Protestants advised of their
ruin, but they depended on the Kings promises, carriages, marriage, and solemn
Oaths for their security and safety.

THe last Chapter concluded with the great favors of the King to the
Protestants, whereby he had so won into their affections, and to persuade them
all he said was true, and to embrace his cruelty for loyalty* now in this
chapter we shall see the effects of his desires accomplished; for we shall
behold all the Nobles of the Protestant Religion, and Princes, with the most of
the Gentry, environed in Paris by the Treacherous baits of the Kings
allurements.

The Queen of Navar with her Son the Prince, and the Prince of Conde, with a
numerous train of the Nobility and Gentry of the Protestants all come to the
Court with many brave Commanders. But Oh! my heart bleeds to think of the
bloody issue.
In the beginning of June, the Queen of Navar, and Connt Lodowick of Nassaw
arrived at the French Court at Paris, the Count came to receive orders about
the War in the Low Countries; the Queen of Navar was courteously invited by the
King to help prepare all things fitting for the Wedding, who to that purpose
came, and was received with a joyful welcome, both of the King and whole Court;
but as now we see their faces smiling with a good aspect, so we shall shortly
see their hearts full of poison.

Two days after arrives the Prince of Navar, the Prince of Conde, accompanied
with the Count de Rochfoucault with all the Trains of the Princes, being the
chief Commanders, Cavalliers and Gentlemen of the Religion; amongst which was
brave Pills, Briquemault, and Pluveault. Colonels and resolute Soldiers, who
in time of the War, through their undaunted and resolute valor for the
Protestant cause, may challenge a right of honor amongst the prime in France;
their courage being such as their Enemies yielded to them much glory and
renown, as well as felt the power thereof. Amongst the rest also, came to Court
that famous Commander the Sicur de Guerchy, that defended the City Sancere,
where all miseries were endured, and their enemies cruel mercy; a place which
was driven to such extreme wants, as no filthy thing was left unfed upon; also
came the Marquess de Revel, the Sieurs de Nove, de Collumbiere; one Lavardin a
famous Commander of Horse; with many Noble Lords, and gallant young Gentlemen,
all Protestants, in the Bud of their years, with a great many more ^f quality
and reputation; but alas we shall see these poor innocent Gentlemen basely
murdered by the Kings command, and so deprived of all that Gallantry, which
their sprightful valor promised to fill the World withal.

Articles of the Low Country war put in writing.
The Count of Nassaw had with the King concluded on Articles for the Low Country
war, which Articles were put in writing: So that we may say the King used the
Count and the Prince of Orange in this War, as the Monky did the Cats foot to
pull the Chessnuts out of the fire.

Articles of the marriage.
And now to the marriage of the Lady Margaret, and Prince of Navar, the agreement
being made, That the Prince of Navar should have with the Lady Margaret four
hundred thousand Ducats, whereof three hundred thousand should be paid by the
King, and security given by the Queen Mother, and the Duke of Anjou; the
marriage to be in the City of Paris; and now Christian Reader the plot begins;
The King advances a Gentleman of the Admirals to high Honor, his name
Cavagnes, a Gentleman of great Worth and really honorable in himself, for
excellent parts, and no less valor, whom the King, The Admiral entreated by
the K. to come to Court.
the better to work his Designs, sends as Messenger to the Admiral, to entreat
his presence at Paris, in order to honor the King and Court in this marriage,
as also to consult about the War against the King of Spain, assuring him, that
the King intends his safety in that City as much as his own; and that although
the Parisians did cordially hate him by reason of their great superstition in
that City, being with seditious preaching of Moncks and Friars daily inflamed
to cruelty, and bloodshed against the Protestants, yet his Majesty would take
such care of his person, as he should be as safe as the watchful eye and
command of a King would make him

A stone Cross pulled down by the K. command at the Admiralls request.
The King finding a stone cross erected in Paris in a reproachful Triumph
against the Protestants in time of the Civil Wars, did at the request of the
Admiral pull it down, in regard it was a public occasion of offense. And thus
the King and his Council were hid with the love-hood of secrecy, that whilst
they could see others, others could not see them. But alas God can easily
discover all their close contrivances when he pleases; but it must be let alone
to the secret will of God, why at this time he was pleased to let his people,
and the Earth be burdened and oppressed with such hellish designs, that one
would think should make Devils afraid to contrive; but however, God suffered
them to act their lustful rage and bloody cruelty, yet he pleased so to unmask
the pretenses of friendship, that in despite of Worldly secrecy, the whole
Universe may perceive the plot of Popish cruelty.

This wonderful and Tragical instance will clearly evince any Impartial Reader,
and if there were no other, yet would it stand alone, as an irrefragable
Argument, that there was a premeditated plot to cut off the Admiral and
Protestants; which story for the strangeness of the Discovery, and the Kings
more strange way of Justice to prevent the further spreading of his plot, take
as follows, and because of its use, I hope may prove no digression.

The secret design of the K. and Council to destroy the Protestants is almost
discovered in this clear and pretty Story.
There was in the Court of France at this came one Monsieur de Lignoroles, a
young Gentleman of a sharp and accute wit, attended also with a high and bold
Spirit, which Gentleman was the Duke of Anjou's great Familiar, which reason,
together with the neerness of affection to each other, the Duke did impart to
him the secret Counsels of the King, with this Plot of cutting off all the
Protestants, by a fair pretense of an alluring carriage, till they were under
his power and mercy.

This young Gentleman by his great intimacy with the Duke, grew also into high
favor with the King and Queen Mother, and for his wit and carriage, drew the
eyes of all the Court toward him; attracting great esteem from King, Queen
Mother, and Court. This unfortunate Gentleman, more happy in the employment,
than wise in the improvement of his parts; who being in the high Road of
Honor, wanted but few steps to a high preferment, which time, and his wise
mannagement would necessarily have courted him with, and conferred on him, This
Gentleman (I say) happened by his great esteem to be admitted to the presence of
the King and Nobles; and once on a time when many Nobles of the Religion were
present with his Majesty, through some occasion of a Treaty for a peaceable
enjoyment of freedom of Religion according to the Edict.

At this time the King was highly moved with the Protestant Nobility; this
young Gentleman, seeing the King angry, presently stepped to the King, and
whether to please the King, or to let his Majesty know he was thought worthy
of counsel, by the great trust some had put him in, or moved by ambition to
appear no stranger to the Kings nearest secresies, which sometimes in young
wits many times runs before a discreet conduct of their advantages; But he (I
say) whispers in the Kings ear, Desiring his Majesty that he would please to
silence his mind, with a patient forbearance of anger, and to smile away their
insolency and folly, for his Majesty well knew that few days would ripen their
destruction, and lay them level to justice, which says he, by a secret policy
of your Majesty's great Wisdom and complete contrivance, was almost brought to
a full conclusion last meeting; and which no doubt in the end will speedily,
and securely, render your Majesty in a full and ample capacity to be avenged on
their haughtiness.

The King at these words startled within himself, being touched at the quick to
have such a secret imparted to one that was not of the conspiracy, whose raw
retention might prove fatal to them all; wondering how, and by what means, he
should come to the knowledge thereof.

Now the King in whom lodged a knowledge beyond his years, dissembled his
understanding at this time, and made no show of any thing that might tend to
the understanding of his speech; but speedily retired to his chamber, with a
mind full of anxity and fury, and presently without any delays examines the
Count de Retz, who denies that ever he revealed any thing to any or to him; he
then charged the Queen Mother, who answered she was not to learn of him to keep
secrets; at last he fell to examine the Duke of Anjou, who confessed it, and
fell to persuade the King, that it was as securely locked from any further
discovery, as in his own breast; and like a Spring lock would shut but not open
of it self; That his Majesty need not fear that any secret imparted to
Ligneroles should ever come nearer his mouth than his heart; the King answers,
No more it shall, and I wish it had never come there, for I shall take order
that he shall not have time to do it.

So the King calls George de Villequier, Vicount of Guerchy (whom his Majesty
knew hated Ligneroles perfectly) and commanded him to use his Discretion for a
speedy removal of Ligneroles out of this world, and to put off the effecting
his desire no longer, and that day to bring to pass his pleasure, and command,
without fear or delay, which with the Assistance of another, was accordingly
done; as soon as the King heard hereof, he was seemingly angry, and commanded
the Vicount, and Count Charles his assistant, to be imprisoned in the Palace,
but in a Months time, by the entreaty of Monsieur de Angolesm, as also by
particular grace and favor, they were set at Liberty.

This Story needs no Comment.

The King charges the Magistrates of Paris, that none in the City should offer
the least affront to the Admiral or Protestants.
After all the Kings favors to the Protestants and pulling down the stone Cross,
erected to their dishonor; the King knowing the extreme inveterate hate the
Parisians bore to the Admiral and Protestants, he wrote a Letter to the Provost
de Marchands, one Marcel, which is one of the highest places of advancement in
Paris, giving out severe threatenings against any that should give occasion of
commotion, or Affront to the Admiral at his coming; So also did the Queen
Mother, and Duke of Anjou write to Marcel, and Magistrates of the City,
insomuch that nothing was now left as a hindrance or objection for the Admirals
coming and safety.

The King sends a Protestant Gentleman to invite the Admiral to Court who comes
and is joyfully welcomed.
Shortly after the King sends a Noble Gentleman of the Protestants, named
Briquemault, to the Admiral, being a faithful assistant of the Admirals, as
also a man of singular virtue, and esteem among the Protestants, and at last
proved a sad, though Christian, Sufferer for the Protestant cause, him the King
sends to the Admiral, to let him know, how greatly his Majesty longed for his
counsel, in so weighty a business as the War, which could not be done without
his assistance, and present aid of his great Wisdom; and therefore was
impatient of his delay. The Admiral at last is now persuaded and resolved to go
to Paris; he comes, and no sooner arrived, but was very honorably and
affectionately embraced, with a courteous and joyful show of welcome, and so
was speedily conducted to the King, who under fair pretenses of friendly ends,
with a mouth full of courtesy; with well pleased words, and a worse tuned
heart; with courteous expressions baited with Treason, he calls the Admiral
Father, protesting, That in all his life he had not enjoyed a day adorned with
more variety of content thad this day was, The Kings unheard of and devilish
dissimulation.
wherein he assures himself than his real desires of peace, and the success
thereof, shall for the time to come, shelter under one Pent-house, and lodge
under the roof of a sweet tranquillity; and that he hopes a period will be put
to all his troubles, not questioning, but all as well as himself, were no less
glad in this expectation; hoping that times to come would reap the future, as
the times now the present benefit, of this blessed day; wherein he wished, and
as much hoped, that all former acts of civil dissentions should new be put in
one grave of oblivion; in remembrance of the sad war past, and Commemoration of
this Sunshine day present.

Now what a wonderful thing it is to consider, that the King should so
perfectly dissemble with one that had so often brought the power of his Crown
and Kingdom to so many doubtful hazards, as to call him Father, and to make the
World think his treachery to be sincerity.

The Queen Mother and her Sons, with the rest of the great Courtiers, received
him with greater demonstrations of joy and love than the Admiral expected.

The King allows the Admiral 50. of his Friends to guard him.
The King also allowed him fifty Gentlemen to be about him in Paris, armed for
the greater security and guard of his person.

Now the King, Queen Mother, and Admiral falls on consultation about the Wars
of the Low Countries.

But however the King was in jest with the King of Spain, yet the Count
Lodowick of Nassaw, was in good earnest; who with a resolution according to his
Manly spirit, he enters the Frontiers of the Low Countries, The Count of Nassaw
enters the Low Countries, and takes in Montz.
taking with him as Partners and assistants, three French Gentlemen, Saucourt,
La Nove, and Genlis, men of great esteem and account with the Admiral, besides
many Gentlemen that they gathered to go along in the Expedition; which the
Admiral hearing, advised the Count not to be too rash, well assuring him that
such strength as was requisite, would take forty days to gather; but the Count,
as banished men are, being enflamed with the sight and desire of his own
Country, and desirous not to depend too much on the Kings changeable mind,
suddenly resolved, and as speedily attempted to take in Valentiennes, but
finding a repulse, speedily hasted to Montz, and though strong by nature and
Art, yet took it, which coming to the ears of the Court of France, and the
whole nation, did the more confirm the Protestants, that the Kings mind was
real.

Now Genlis being from the Count to Paris, related the whole progress of the
War to the King, desiring leave to raise certain bands of footmen and Horsemen,
to strengthen Montz, which being quickly granted, he as speedily raised four
thousand foot, and four hundred horse, but in his Martch was set upon by the
Duke of Alva, and quite overthrown, which was wrought by the treacherous advice
of the Duke of Guise, The treachery of the Duke of Guise.
by private intelligence to the Duke of Alva^, of all that was done, which
thing was very ill resented by the very Catholics themselves, because many of
the Romish religion were flain in the business.

The King of France: is afraid that his war in jest, might make the King of
Spain war in earnest.
These things troubled the King very much, for fear his counsels might be
disclosed to the King of Spain, and so might occasion some quarrel, to the
breaking forth of a War; yet he gave order to the Admiral to assist the Prince
of Orange in Germany with as many horse and foot as he thought fit; which was
done, and because moneys might be had for their pay, the King called for the
Treasurer, and commanded him to deliver the Admiral so much money as he should
desire, commanding him that the receipt should not express the cause, Great
dissimulation by the K.
but should run thus, Paid such a Sum to the Admiral by the Kings Commandment,
which is for certain uses the King commands should not be written; to which the
King subscribes with his own hand; the King wrote a Letter also to Monducet, to
use his best endravour for the release of those taken under the conduct of
Genlis, by the Duke of Alva.

To the full effecting of their desire, A League with Q. Elizabeth of England,
and the first Article was, the observation of the Edict, but it proves a deep
plot against the Protestants, and ties the hands of the English from all
assistance in their greatest need and extremity.
it was thought convenient to enter into League with Queen Elizabeth of
England, which the King committed to the Admiral, which he did so diligently
and industriously handle, that by his elaborate pains, in a speedy time, By
faith given, by Ambassadors sent, and by Oaths it was confirmed, concerning a
further procuring of other Leagues, as might most stand for the Low Country
War, and of those Leagues by the Admirals care, the principal Condition, was,
That the Liberty of Religion should be continued according to the Edict, and
that the King should most solemnly observe, and keep his most sacred Oath and
Promise, so strictly made for Liberty to the Protestants, according to the
Edict of Pacification.

And now, The Religious Q. of Navar poisoned by the K. Apothecary, a sad
presage of further treachery.
Courteous Reader, I must give thee a sad Taste of what follows, like one of
Jobs Messengers, for the Queen of Navar being all this while at Court, thinking
of a joyful Marriage of her hopeful Son, it pleased God to permit a sudden
sickness, and as sudden a death in the forty third year of her age, who being
on too good grounds suspected to be poisoned, was therefore opened by
Physic^ans, but they would find no figures of poison, but by more narrow search
in earnest, and by the advice of one A. P. it was found, That her brain was
poisoned with an invenomed smell of a pair of perfumed Gloves, ordered by one
Renat, an Italian, and the Kings Apothecary, who kept a shop on St. Michaels
bridge in Paris, near to the Palace.

And it is well known that the same Renat, some certain years ago, gave a pair
of poisoned Pomander Gloves to Lewis Prince of Conde, which the Prince leaving
with one La Gross, his Surgeon, was by degrees poisoned and swelled so, that
the wonderfully and narrowly escaped with his life.

But these Gloves that poisoned this virtuous Queen, were ordered in such a
secret sort, and just proportion, that having worn them a while, a violent
Fever seized on her, which ended her life in four days.

And thus died this Noble Queen, bewailed exceedingly by all the Protestants,
for I find her Enemies say, The Queen of Navar in part described.
She was a Lady of a noble Spirit, invincible courage, many degrees above most
of her Sex; qualities besides her Chastity and Magnificence, worthy Eternal
praise.

She was one that dived into the deep Mysteries of Divinity, which raised her
illustrious mind to a high pitch of Christianity; being also very judicious, of
a ready wit, invincible in adversity, absolute in her actions, capable of
Counsel, comprehending things with great vivacity of Spirit, delivering her
mind with an admirable grace, either by word or writing, her comprehension of
deep things was of a treble magnitude above any of her sex; neither can my pen
drop her praise, but her infinite merits, and if it were possible for any pen
to erect Trophies of Honor to the peerless challenges of her immortal praise,
the luster of her incomparable merits would be the truest guide in the darkest
night.

This noble Queens Death gave way to the Prince her Son to be King of Navar,
The Q. death intitles her Son the P. to be K. of Navar.
to whom the Kingdom came.

This unhappy death was looked on by many as very ominous, portending a sure
prognostic of some unfortunate Catastrophe, many bing struck with amazement at
this sudden treochery, and bloody death; concluding it to be a sad Forerunner
of some mischief to come.

But that which made many Protestants cast away all fear, was the Kings loving
carriage to them, insomuch that things at this time looked with a peaceable
countenance throughout the Kingdom of France.

Now the day of marriage between the Lady Margaret, and the King of Navar was
appointed; which was a great day of joyful hopes to all the Protestants, and
made all things seem more serene and calm on their side; in that also the
Guisans, and the rest of the chief Catholics, showed great discontent thereat;
for all good men judged it an assured pledge of the Kings fidelity, and of
peace, in as much as he showed such outward joy, and declared, It was not so
much for the wedding, as that he said it was for a strong knot of Peace, and
would tend to a general satisfaction of peaceable Spirits, and for the Good of
the whole Nation.

August the 17. the King of Navar, The K. of Navar and Lady Margarite married
with great joy on both sides, but greater sorrow succeeds.
and the Lady Margaret, was married with great Solemnity before the great Church
of Paris, on a Scaffold, in sight of all the People; and there was a certain
form of words, so ordered as agreed with both parties, which by the Kings
commandment was pronounced by the Cardinal of Bourbon, the King of Navars
Uncle; and so was this marriage solemnized with the joy of all good men, being
kept with Banquets, dancing and Masks, with a strange mixture of Papists, and
Protestants together.

Thus the poor Protestants thought with joy to welcome their own comforts, but
alas their hopes are frustrate in a contrary success of their expectations, and
the Kings promises.

After this the Bride with great magnificence, accompanied with a great
confluence of Gallants, was led to the Church to hear mass, The Bridegroom
misliking these Ceremonies, did with Henry Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and
other Noblemen of the Protestants, walk, and wait without the Church door for
the Brides return.

The Queen Mother and Dukes of Anjou and Guise plot.
But the Queen Mother, and her bloody Companions, with the Dukes of Anjou and
Guise, consult about the last Tragical act; which was to kill the Admiral, and
to divide the Protestants; thus-like moles, under ground, they drive on their
Hellish designs in Secrecy.

The King, to delude the more, speaks publicly, The K. publicly declares,
that he gives his Sister in Marriage as a ty of Union and peace. The Admiral of
the Kings fleet endeavors to surprise Rochel.
That he gives not his Sister in marriage to the King of Navar only, but as it
were to the whole Church of the Protestants, to join with them in a
undissoluble union; and as a ty to their peace and safety; Oh! painted ruin;
whither at last will the fury of thy bloody Chariots drive thee?

Now while these things proceeded thus at Paris, Strozzi as aforesaid, Admiral
of the Kings Fleet, rides before Rochel, and at select times sends Captains and
Soldiers into the Town, under pretense of buying necessaries for their Fleet,
and sometimes did come ashore himself, but the King had given him Commission to
seize on the City, although, as before it was given out, that he say to entrap
all the supplies going from Spain to the aid of the Duke of Alva in the Low
Countries.

The like Treachery was used in another part of France, by Gonzague Duke of
Nevers, with a party of Horse near to La Charity, where a bridge passes the
River Loyre; which the Protestants then had; The protestants at Lions had their
names put in a bloody Book,
this Gonzague requests Liberty of the Town to muster, showing the K. Letters,
which indeed he had.

The Governor of Lions, commanded: he names of the Protestants to be written
in a Book, which in regard of their Horrid cruelties committed, and devilish
Bucheries committed in this City, was justly called the bloody Book.

The Admiral, The Admiral desires to depart Paris, but the K. desired his stay,
which on some other grounds he did, but sad complaints, and great suspicion of
treason came to his cars, but he believes it not.
after the marriage (being then the time he appointed and desired to return to
his own house) did move the King about his departure; but so great was the
Court revellings, that the Admiral coul not have private access to his Majesty
to deal in State-matters. Rochel at this time was in a manner besieged with
Soldiers, arriving hourly, giving out terrible threats against the Town; which
made the Protestants begin to cry to the Admiral for succor, and relief (for
indeed the Admiral was as a nursing Father to them) in other Towns also was
heard secret murmurings, terrifying the most cleer-sighted Protestants, giving
too sure cause to think a bloody and terrible spectacle would be showed beyond
present conception, which will shortly be seen in a horrible manner.

The Admiral knew not what to answer to all these sad complaints, that
uncessantly flowed in, as one wave on the back of another, and all to get him
from the Court. He answered to all, the King had made us swear before him to be
Friends; the Lady Margaret is given in marriage, and doubtless is a firm pledge
of the Kings fidelity, what can be done more? is not all clear from the least
suspicion of fraud? yet he resolved to depart, only waited for a fit
opportunity to take leave.

But the Deputies that were sent from the Reformed Churches, complained of the
cruelties still committed on the Protestants, and understanding of the Admirals
intentions to depart, they apply themselves with all speed to him, and
delivering him their books and petitions, they earnestly beseech him not to
absent from the Court till he had pleaded the cause of the Churches, and
delivered their petitions to the King and Council. Hereupon he resolves, like a
good Advocate, to stay a while and plead their cause.

But there was another great cause of the Admirals stay; for there was on
arriers to the Ruttiers of Germany great sums of money for their service under
the Admiral during the Wars; in which he labored earnestly to effect. But oh!
I tremble to enter into the ensuing narrative, so full of inhumane and cruel
bloodshed; oh! that I could enough bewail the sad fate of these poor innocent
souls, led as sheep to the slaughter; to consider that so many brave Commanders
that scorned any other death than like Soldiers, must now suffer base
murders, and bloody slaughters; oh! lamentable, and to be pitied of all
Protestants, nay, and of ingenuous Papists, that so many innocent children, and
women, should suffer for they know not what; for we shall shortly see all the
Protestants of France in mourning, and following the Hearse of their own Ruin,
in the Papists unparalleled cruelty.

The Admiral coming from Court: with a: great train of Nobles and Gentlemen is
treacherously shot in both the Arms with a Harqurbuss.
These businesses being the occasions of the Admiralls stay, he did on the 22.
day of August repair to the Kings Privy Council to effect his desire, which day
was the fifth day after the King of Navars marriage, but about noon returning
from the Council with a great number uf Noblemen and Gentlemen, reading a
petition as he went, was shot through both arms with two bullets by a
Harquebuzier out of a Window, who feeling himself shot showed no alteration of
countenance, saying only, through yonder window it came, what kind of treachery
is this?

It was no news to the King to know his will and command was performed.
The Admiral speedily sends to the King a Gentleman of his company to give
notice of it; who being at Tennis with the Duke of Guise, showed such dislike,
as that in a rage he threw away the Racket that he played withal, being
exceedingly and outwardly vexed, and taking with him his Brother in Law the
King of Navar, he retires into the Castle of the Lour; the King swearing and
promising to execute such severe justice upon the offenders, Deep hypocrisy.
that the Admiral and all his Friends should think themselves exceedingly
satisfied.

The King causes the City gates to be shut, pretending lest the Murderer
should escape, but indeed was lest the Protestants should escape their cruelty.
The King therefore to delude the Admiral and Protestants, caused all the Gates
of the City to be shut, except two only, which were pretended to be open for
bringing in provision; yet there was careful watch kept by a strong Guard, with
a color of singular care of his Majesty to find out the Murderer, and that if
he were in the City he might by no means escape, but the truth was, lest any of
the Protestants should escape this cruel plot laid for their blood by getting
out of the City, or net of destruction; the King swearing and blaspheming, that
he would not by any means that they should escape, which had committed such a
horrid act; those that durst presume to commit such a heinous crime, even at
the gates of his Royal Palace. The Queen Mother also seems discontented, for
says she, Who would have thought any ones impudence could arrive so high as
this affront, to the great prejudice of his Majesty, and if ever the King
suffer this to go unpunished, in the end the next attempt will be on his Royal
person.

But alas, alas! for a King, Queen, and Court so to dissemble, as if there were
no God that could see into their hearts, and discover to the World, that this
was done by the Kings special command and commission, as we shall shortly see
it was.

Presently after the Admiral was shot, some Gentlemen of his retinue entered by
force and violence, into the house from whence the shot was; where they find
only the woman of the House, and a Boy, that was his lacquey which did the
deed, finding also a Harquebuss lying upon the Table in the Chamber from whence
it was shot, but the wretched villain they found not, for that he was fled out
of the back Gate, Fresh horses prepared at several gates to speed away the
Murderer with security.
and so mounted on a Spanish Gennet, which was waiting for him, he speedily
posted to St. Anthonies Gate, where another fresh horse assisted his more swift
flight, and if he had gone to Marcelles gate, there was also another waiting for
him.

Now the King to persuade the Princes, Admiral, and all the Protestants, that
he was really sorry, and how much it was against his will (though God knows to
his great satisfaction and inward content) he commands sundry to post out into
all parts to pursue him. Set a thief to catch a thief.


The Admiral shows himself a good Christian and patient sufferer.
Now the Admiral being safely conveyed to his lodging, showed great piety,
according to his Godly soul, filled with grace and prudence, most like a
constant and true Christian, and faithful, holy servant of Christ. The Prince
of Conde, and King of Navar, had thought to have departed Paris; but the Kings
carriage levelled all suspicious thoughts, and so turned their resolutions to a
longer stay at Court.

Three Judges to examine the murder.
At request of the King of Navar and Prince of Conde the King (to dissemble with
more facility) did order three principal men of the Parliament of Paris, Thuan,
Morsant, and Viol, to examine the business, whereupon it was found that the
House belonged to one Villimure a Priest and Cannon of St. Germane, once the
Duke of Guise his Schoolmaster, and now a retainer under him. That the woman
that was in the house, being brought before the Judges, did acknowledge, that a
few days before there came to her one Chally, once a Master de Hostel of the
Duke of Guises house, and now Steward of the Kings household, commanding her to
respect much the man, that had done the deed, and to lodge him in Villumures
own bedchamber, in regard he was his Friend.

Several speeches there was concerning the person that did it; some said it was
one Manrevel, who in the last Civil War traitorously flew his own Captain, a
most valiant Commander, and Noble Gentleman in the Admirals Army, and thereupon
immediately fled to the Kings Camp.

Others said it was Bondot, an Archer of the Kings Guard; Now when this
confession of the Woman of the house aforesaid, was brought to the King, he
commanded Monsieur de Nance Captain of his Guard, to apprehend and bring Chally
before him, but Chally as soon as he heard the stroke of the piece, fled into
the Kings Castle of the Loure, hiding himself in the Duke of Guises chamber,
but as soon as he heard of the Kings command, he fled; Now De Nance, Captain of
the Kings guard, being informed of his escape (and no doubt was himself the
Informer) answered that Chally was a Gentleman of good repute, and no doubt but
on notice given of the Kings mind, would appear before his Majesty or the
Magistrates.

The man that shot the Admiral, had commission from the K. to do it. Ob
horrible! The Admiral in danger of death desires the K. visit.
But not to hold the Reader longer, I find it recorded by the most exact
Narration, that it was Manrevel, one whom the Duke of Guise had at his request
to the King, and by his Commission procured, to kill the Admiral, which at
large is fully related in the Civil wars of France.

The Admiral now wounded, and under the Chirurgians hands, dressing his wounds,
commanded his Son Teligny to go to the King, and humbly to beseech his Majesty
in behalf of his Father to vouchsafe him a visit, for that the wounds lately
received were likely to terminate his life, and put a short period to his
days; desiring therefore to see his Majesty, and deliver something to his care
that might greatly concern his Majesty's safety. The K. Q. Mother, and many
other visit the Admiral.
To which the King in his wonted strain of courtesy answered, He would perform
his request, and so in the afternoon the King goes to visit the Admiral, taking
along with him the Queen Mother, the Duke of Anjou, the Duke of Monpenseir, a
most affectionate Servant to the Church of Rome, the Count de Retz a great
familiar of the Queen Mothers, with Chavigny and Entragny, both chief
Ringleaders in the bloody Butchery following: the King no sooner arrives at the
Admirals lodging, but he lovingly saluted the Admiral, demanding kindly and
courteously some few questions concerning the state and health of his body, to
which the Admiral answered with such a Christian, mild, and sweetly-quieted
countenance with Gods dealing, as all that stood by, admired at his patience.
The King hereupon seemed to be so much moved, that he uttered these words, The
hurt my Admiral is done to thee, but the dishonor to me; and (swearing a great
Oath) says, The K. by a deep oath protests to revenge the Admiralls Hurt,
I swear I will so sharply and severely revenge both this hurt and dishonor,
that justice shall have no cause to complain, nor the World left without
example of my integrity to your deserts.

And so made many Oaths, and Protestations of the Resolutions to punish the
Offender, as also of his great care he had to preserve the Protestants, and the
Admirals life, against all his Enemies; but oh! these pretenses of friendship
will at last prove a smiling harlot, that whilst she kisses is like Judas to
betray.

The King further demanded of the Admiral how he did approve of the Judges, who
had Commission by his appointment to examine the business, who answered, that
he could not dislike of his Majesty's care and choice, yet humbly entreated his
Majesty to let it stand with his good pleasure, that Cavagnes might be in
Council with them; but the wrong he told his Majesty he had committed to God,
yet desired his Majesty would give order for a strict search, and narrow
scrutinie into the fact, which the King again with his usual Protestations,
vowed to do, and to revenge his wrong as much as his own.

The K. and Admiral being alone the Admiral declares much faithfulness to the
King.
The Queen Mother and her two Sons withdrew, and left the Admiral and King
alone; the Admiral began to advise the King to remember, that he had often told
his Majesty of the danger that hovered over his head, by some persons near to
him, and although he was the mark was shot at, yet there was no less hanging
over his Majesty's head, and that long ago there was treason plotted against
his Life, which his Majesty might please to take notice of as friendly advice,
and to beware betimes; And further declared, that now God was pleased to give
large symptoms of the decay of his earthly tabernacle, and he doubted that his
good name would be hoysted up to the pinnacle of envious slander by his Enemies,
and that he often told his Majesty the real Authors of all the late
distractions of the Civil War, faithfully opening the causes thereof, and that
he took God to be his witness of his faithful and cordial heart to the King and
Kingdom, and he never yet knew what was in this world dearer than his
Country, and public safety; all which Discourse the Admiral before his
death, declared to be spoken betwixt him and his Majesty.

The King desires the Admiral to lodge in the Loure for his security, but was
indeed in policy to secure his life, and level it to his bloody will.
To all which the King after such answer as he thought fit, with a high voice
desired the Admiral to take protection in his own Castle of the Loure, wherein
his security should be equally envell oped with his own; and this he wished
might be embraced, for fear some sudden commotion might happen from the rabble
of that mad and tumultuous people; which was a speech preparatory for the plot,
and yet so much were these poor Protestants blinded in their strange belief of
the Kings protestations, and not suspecting what followed, that they never
understood the treacherous intent of these prepared Pills of Hellish
Dissimulation.

The Admiral refused his gilded pretexts of love and care for his ruin. A great
token of of treason.
The Admiral most heartily thanked his Majesty, and excusing his non-acceptance
at present till advice had with his Physicians, which when he received, it was
by them all concluded to be not safe, in regard the least motion would increase
his pain, and so it was resolved not to stir.

The Count de Retz, turned to some of the Admirals Friends in the Chamber,
saying, it were to be wished the Admiral would follow the Kings loving
invitation to lodge in the Loure, for it was to be feared that some sudden
tumult might arise, that the King might not be able to appease; which was no
sooner spoken, but it deeply penetrated the Admiral and all his Friends; and
though they had no proof of reason to fear, yet the Admiral desired the King to
grant him the favor of a Guard.

The King grants the Admiral a Guard, and flatters damnably.
To which the King lovingly answered, He should have as firm a guard for his
person as he desired. Further saying, that in his safety consisted his own, and
that he would defend the Admiral as the hall of his eye, having in admiration
his fortitude and constancy, protesting, he did not believe so much valorous
courage could reside within the brittle walls of mortallity.

Thus the King, Queen Mother, and the rest carried it with great signs of
reality, returning to the Loure, committing the care and custody of the Admiral
to the Duke of Anjou, one of the conspiracy against him.

The Admiral and Protestants advised to take leave of the Court, and their own
ruin, but they trust more to the Kings promise than their Friends advice.
But though the Admiral and Gentlemen about him, saw not the eclipse of the
Kings treachery, through the deep dissimulation of affection, yet the Vidame of
Charteres, a cleer-sighted and wise man, through his foresight of a bloody
Comet, advised the King of Navar, the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral, with
the Nobility, Gentlemen and chief of the Protestants, presently to take leave
of their own ruin in time; which was both too certainly and evidently hanging
over their innocent thoughts, assuring them that blow of the Admirals was but
the prologue to a more bloody tragedy, which could not but speedily ensue.

But the King of Navar, Prince of Conde, the Admiral, with the rest of the
Nobility and Gentry of the Protestants, said, That they could not but trust to
the Kings solemn Oaths, his sacred vows and covenants, as a secure harbor from
all threatening and ensuing storms; besides the late marriage, was an evident
demonstration of the Kings intentions, tying at once, both affinity to the
Protestant King of Navar, and security for his promises.

CHAP. VII.
The Contents.
THe King and Queen Mother by Letters, let the world know how the Admiral was
hurt, to their great grief; They order a Guard for the Admiral, but is such a
one as secured the Admiral, or any of his Friends, from escaping their ruin;
The Gentlemen of the Admirals Friends lodged in the same Street where the
Admiral lodged, which was desired in pretense of their security also, but
proved their secure destruction; The names of the Protestants in Paris, with
their several Lodgings put into a Catalogue; The Nobles and Gentlemen of the
Protestants meet in the Admirals Chamber, and advises to remove for security
from the threatenings of an ensuing storm, yet resolve to rely on the Kings
Oaths, and Promises; The King and Queen Mother assembles to take order for the
manner and time of the Admirals Murder; To color this plot they order that it
must be given out, That the occasion was through the difference betwixt the
house of Guise and Chastillon; On Consultation it was resolved to spare the
King of Navar, and Prince of Conde, if they would turn Papists; The Duke of
Guise, and his bloody Followers force a strong report to be spread throughout
all the City, of their danger by the Admiral and his Adherents, and so
complain to the King, and depart the Court in show of discontent, but privately
lie in Paris to prosecute his hellish Plot, and the Kings command; two thousand
men on Sabbath night are commanded by the King to be in arms; The King sends
word to the Admiral that he needs not fear, for all was done by his command;
Some Protestant Gentlemen profer to watch all night with the Admiral, but were
refused; the Officers of the City Assemble, and are commanded by the King to
destroy the Protestants: The tokens to distinguish the murderers from others
to be a Napkin about their arms, and a cross on their caps: Diverse Lords guard
the King all night: The bloody murderers approach the Admiralls Lodging: The
Admiral is fearful, yet often silenced his suspicion by as often reiterating
the Kings Oaths, Promises, Leagues, Covenants, and Law of Nations, etc. They
enter his Lodging, kill all they meet with: The Admiral rises, goes to prayer,
and commands his Servants to save their lives by flight: They get on the tops
of houses, but are persued and slain: They thrust the Admiral through the
body, beat him on the head, shoot him with a Pistol, and wound him the third
time, whereof he dies, his body thrown out of the window, the Duke of Guise
kicks him on the face with his foot: They cry out Kill, Kill, this is the Kings
command: The Alarm bell rings to a sad and general Massacre: The Admiralls
head cut off and sent to the Pope: All in the Admiralls lodging murdered,
among whom two young children of honorable birth: Brave Count Rochfoucault
basely murdered: The Admiralls Son basely slain, his Lieutenant fights
gallantly for his life, but is slain: many brave Noblemen and Gentlemen basely
murdered: they give the plunder to the Soldiers, crying kill, this is the
Kings command: They spare neither young nor old, but kill women and children,
and women with child, till the very streets are covered with dead bodies:
nothing to be heard but sad cries and groans of the dying, with cruel shouting
of the Murderers: The River dyed with blood: ten thousand slain this day.

WE concluded the last chapter with the great preparations of the King, Queen
Mother, and Councfl, to effect their Plot; and yet how they colored all with a
distembling carriage of love too, and sorrow for the Admirals condition; now in
this chapter we shall see the saddest massacre that ever was acted by any
Prince, or in any Place.

Thus we leave the Admiral, basely, cowardly and bloodily wounded, and knew not
how to have justice; The K. and Q. Mother write Letters testifying their sorrow
for the Admirals hurt, and yet done by the K. command.
and so lay in his wounds expecting death as the inevitable issue of his
Enemies cruelty.

Now we shall further see the Kings dissimulation, and treachery; for the very
same day the Admiral was thus wounded, does the King (the more neatly to color
his own act of treachery, with smooth pretenses) write Letters to Ambassadors
of Foreign Princes, and Letters also to the Governors of all his Provinces,
showing, How sadly he resented the Admirals hurt. how ready he was to execute
justice in the punishment of the Forgetting himself.
Agent, desiring that all the world might know how much How much it rejoiced
his aeart, is no errata.
it did grieve him to the Soul, that any such thing should happen. And yet he
ptesently after declares openly, that he was slain by his Command, for treason
against his person, as by other Letters we shall show in due place.

The Queen Mother did also write letters to the same purpose.

But Christian Reader, when thou perusest the whole story, then will thou be
able to judge of this deep Hypocrisy before ehe face of God, and as it were
against the face of Heaven!

But to proceed,

The King orders a Guard that the Protestants might not escape their Guard,
being their Enemies, an intended for their Ruin.
The Duke of Anjou, the Kings Brother, commanded Cossin Captain of the Kings
Guard to place a band of Soldiers to watch before the Admirals Gate, giving
strict charge that no Catholics should enter.

Now none could be pitched on as the grand Enemy to the Admiral and
Protestants, and friend to the Guisans, than was this Cossin, as we shall see
by the following narrative.

The Admirals friends that lay scattered up and down the City, were desired
under pretense of care and affection to remove their lodging into the same
street with the Admiral, that they might be sure not to escape. Oh! Monstrous
and Hellish Plot, covered with the Kings care.
Now the Duke of Anjou, as an inheriter of his Brothers Dissimulation, strives
also to color his damnable Plot and Treason, in the lovingest and highest
demonstrations and and care of the Admiral and Protestants, and therefore
advises that the Admirals friends that now lodged so far distant from his
person, as the Fauxburgh, might have liberty to have their lodgings nearer to
him; for says he, they being so far assunder, they might on any uproar be
hurt, and no means to prevent it, which being nearer one another, they might
join force to affection, and better afford one another their joint aid. And so
presently commanded the lodgings in that street to be provided.

Now this was a bait that took off all suspicion; for alas who could suspect or
imagine this to be out of any treacherous intent, but rather of care and
respect? but Oh sad and hellish plot under the vizard of friendship! these poor
Noblemen, Gentlemen and brave Commanders that might have escaped from the
calamity, are entangled and allured into a narrow street, as into a fold or
narrow path of destruction; no way to escape the fury of their Enemies rage and
cruelty.

All the names of the Protestants and place of abode is taken into a Catalogue
against the day of their calamity.
The next day the Duke of Anjou and Duke of Guise, commanded the Undermasters of
the streets, vulgarly termed Quartermen, to take a view of all the Inns and
victual-houses, from one house to another, and to take all the names of the
Protestants, and so to bring in an Account of their names, and places of abode,
in writing, and to deliver them to the Duke of Anjou, and Duke of Guise; so
that presently after, the Protestants begun to discover some bloody intentions,
through the prospect of these preparations. Now the King had by this time set a
Guard, of fifty Harquebuzeirs at the Gate of the Admirals Lodging; and great
store of Arms were carried into the Loure, and about the evening all the people
of the City were in arms.

The Protestants meet advice given to remove from Paris, but they still resolve
to depend on the K. vows and promises.
Hereupon the chief Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Protestants, assemble together
again in the Admirals lodging, where amongst the rest was the Vidame of
Charteres, who as before, so now advised speedily to try if by any means the
Admiral might be forthwith carried out of Paris; and that presently the rest
should dislodge; yet all refused this Counsel, resolving to rely on the word of
a King, sealed with so many Vows, Covenants, and Solemn protestations in the
presence of God, and to the clear witness of all Princes and States.

The K. and Q. meet and consult of their bloody cutting off the Protestants in
a merciless cruelty and devilish massacre.
In the afternoon the King and Queen Mother walk forth into a Garden named
Tegliers, accompanied with the Duke of Anjou, Gonzague, Tavignes, and Count de
Retz, which garden being remote from Resort, was thought the fittest place for
secrecy, and a silent place for privacy, and very well fitted for the present
conclusion of their last and bloody consultation; Here in this bloody Council
it was considered of and spoken; That the Princes, Admiral, with the Noblemen,
and Gentlemen of the Religion were now securely entangled in the Fetters of
their own confidence, which was so well wedged into their minds, as prisons
could prove no better instruments to ripen their desires; the Admiral he was
lying bedsick, and could not stir by reason of his wounds; the Prince of Conde
was fast in the Castle of Loure; the City Gates kept shut all night, and
watched all day; those Gentlemen that lodged in the Suburbs, were now lodged in
the same street with the Admiral, and all within the Gates of Paris; the rest
of the principal Protestants in other Towns were all unarmed and unprepared,
besides there was not ten Protestants to a thousand Catholics, that the
Parisians were in arms, and able to make sixty thousand fighting men, and that
in one hour all might be slain, and if these were destroyed they would never
make head again in the Kingdom; but on the contrary, if the Admiral recover,
such an opportunity would never offer; therefore says the Queen Mother this
season must not be lost, but taking time by the Foretop, all our desires will
now come to a period in a success proportionable to all our wishes; if we let
slip time it withers, like a neglected rose on a stalk with a languished head;
if we shake hands with this golden opportunity, our designs will grow under the
Sunshine of our desires; Thus they lie perdue under the shelter of an
unmercifull and bloody Balcony; all being resolved to be so swift in execution
of the Kings pleasure, that no time shall be delayed between his commands and
the execution but the moment of performance, for now they resolve to take
journey from contemplation to action, they have learned the Theory of
Treachery, perjury and cruelty, now they come to the practical part of this sad
Tragedy.

But this being a gross and downright murtherous way, and no handsome Apology
provided to cast over the eyes of peoples understandings; it was thought fit to
frame some smooth pretext, They study a smooth pretext for their bloody cruelty
to cosen the vulgar conceptions, and honest interpretations: But oh! who can
hide the greatest secrets from Gods searching eye?
to take off the force and dint of vulgar reports; and so to divert the natural
current of this tragedy, into the illegitimate name of convenient necessity;
whereupon they order that the common vogue of the peoples tongues should be
tipped with this specious pretense, that the Duke of Guise and Admirals enmity
was the cause of this Massacre.

They resolve to spare the K. of Navar and Prince of Conde if they will turn
Papists
Now in this bloody Assembly it was moved whether the King of Navar, and Prince
of Conde, should be destroyed in this Massacre, or whether saved; the King of
Navar in regard of his affinity, was concluded to be saved; but for the Prince
of Conde, it was doubtfully carred; they considered first, whether for his age
it were best to spare him, or secondly whether to put him to death in revenge
of his Fathers protection of the Protestant cause, as also in a hatred of his
Fathers name; the Duke of Guise urged with a pressing forwardness to have both
the Prince of Navar, and the Prince of Conde to die amongst the rest, but all
thought that too abominable (if any thing could be so indeed to such
bloodthirsty wretches) that two young Princes, in the flower of their age, of
the Royal Family, the one in the embraces of his dear Spowse, under the
protection of such near friends, and late conjunction by marriage, that they
should be so miserably destroyed; so that the opinion of Gonzague was
prevalent, who pleaded, that with fear of death, and torment, they should be
violently turned to the Catholic Religion. The plot is committed to the Duke
of Guise to put in execution next day.
And so this Hellish vaux-like Council broke up with firm and fixed
Resolutions, to act their several parts; and so it was appointed, that next
morning about three or four a cloak, it should be put in execution, and that
all things should be committed to the mannagement and care of the Duke of Guise.

On Saturday morning it is bruited and noised throughout all the City of Paris,
A report is spread that the Duke of Guise was in danger of the Admiral and
friends.
that the House of G^ise was in danger of the Admiral and rest of the
Protestants, by their great threatenings; The Dukes of Guise and Aumale speed
to the King, and complain of their danger, and insolent threatenings of the
Admiral and Adherents against their lives, protesting sorrow to his Majesty
that their services were not accepted, but their persons slighted, and so
desired leave of his Majesty to absent from Court, and retire to their houses,
The Kings horrible dissembling
for they were ready to depart; the King with a frowning countenance, says, Go
where you please, I will have you at all times if you be found guilty of the
Admirals Hurt. So with a show of discontent they mount their Horses, and bloody
resolutions at once, but instead of going home they ly in Paris all night.
Bloody treachery. The King sends the Duke of Guise to provide 2000 men in arms
on Sabbath day at night.


All things being resolved on, the 24. day of August, being Sabbath day, at
twilight the Duke of Guise, with orders from the King comes to President
Charron, Provost des Marchands, the chief head of the People of Paris, giving
him to understand, that by the Kings command he was fotthwith to provide and
order in readiness two thousand armed men, which accordingly was done.

The Admiral having word brought thim, that there was great noise of armor,
The Admiral at the noise of armor fears danger, and sends to the King. Oh!
bloody and cruel command of a King. They refuse to let any Protestant Gentlemen
to watch with the Admiral. The Officers assemble and are commanded by the King
to destroy the Protestants whom he calls Rebels.
and great threatenings heard in all parts of the City, and preparations of all
things in order for a tumult that night; presently he sends word to the King,
who gave answer, that the Admiral needed not fear, for all was done by his
command, and that he had appointed in certain places of the City, a number of
men in arms for fear of any tumult.

This evening some Protestant Gentlemen profer to watch with the Admiral, but
poor Gentlemen they were refused: A sad presage of Treachery, my heart relents
and bleeds to write the rest.

When the Duke of Guise saw all things ready, he called to him one Marcel,
charging him a little after midnight to assemble together the Masters of the
Streets (commonly called Diziners) into the Town House, for he was to declare
from his Majesty, and by his command, several things; they assemble according
to the appointed time, Charron the Provost des Marchands guarded with Entrague,
Puygailart, and certain other Guisans, did there declare, that the King had
given him in command to destroy all the Rebels (meaning the Protestants) to
cut off root and branch of that Rebellious race, letting them understand, that
the business was so managed to their hands, that now with great facility his
Majesty's desire might be accomplished; for the Admiral, and all the chief were
securely under their power, being lodged within the walls of the City; that it
was first intended they should begin with the Admiral, and the principal
Protestants lodged in that street, and then with speedy alacrity to follow on,
and to cut off the rest in the City, and Suburbs, and that the like should be
done to the Protestants in all parts of the Kingdom, which was in the Kings
power; for his Majesty would take order that it should be speedily effected.
The token given to be ringing the great Bell, and the murderers to be
distinguished with a Napkin on their arms, and a cross on their caps, and to
begin at the Admirals lodging first. Orders given to be courageous in shedding
blood. Diverse Lords guard the King. The bloody Murders assaults the Admiralls
lodging.


Now for better order in this bloody undertaking, the token given should be
with ringing the great Bell of the Palace, called Tocksein, at break of day,
which said bell was only rung on great and emergent occasions, and that the
distinguishing marks should be a white cross on their caps, that candles should
be lighted at every window, that without confusion or disorder they might
proceed from house to house to the exact execution of the Kings command.

Now the Duke of Guise, the better to prepare all things, acquaints the Captain
of the Kings Guard, consisting of Gascoins, French and Switzers, that they
would be in readiness to go on with a bold courage, exhorting them to be speedy
in bloody executions: So at midnight the Provost, Sheriffs and Captains of each
ward in the City had the same commission given them.

The Duke of Montpenseir and Duke of Nevers, with many other Lords of the
Court, take arms, and being accompanied with their Friends, guard the Kings
person, all the Guards being in Arms at the Gates of the Lour.

At the Prefixed hour the Duke of Guise, the Duke of Aumale. and Monsieur de
Angoulesm, Grand Prior of France, the Kings bastard Brother, with other
Commanders to the number of three hundred, went to the Admirals house. where
they found by the Duke of Anjou's order, Cossins company with lighted maches
placed for a Guard before it, and on both sides the Streets; Some of the
Gentlemen and Commanders of the Protestants that was lodged in this Street,
awaken with the noise of men running up and down in arms, and lighted Torches;
they presently got up to enquire what was the matter, but alas poor Gentlemen
it was now too late they were all dead men, no way to escape.

The Admiral is still persuaded of the K. fidelity, and repeated his Oaths,
Promises, Leagues, Public Faith, sacred respect to the Law of Nations, and
credit with other Princes.
By this time the Admiral understood of the noise, and though he had but ten
persons in his house able to bear arms, and in his own chamber but two
Chirurgians, one Minister, and two Servitors; yet was he so confident of the K.
promise, as he could not be made afraid, trusting (as he often did repeat) upon
the Kings good will to him, testified by so many and ample proofs of assurance.
having like confidence, that if the Parisians did but once know the Kings mind
to be against this tumult, they would soon cease, but especially when they saw
Cossin the Kings own Captain waching at the gates for his defense.

But alas he did little think who they were, and by whose command, or to what
intent, all was don; these reasons were the Admirals Remora's, to stop the
passage of any belief of treason hid in the Kings heart: and it is commonly
found that most suffer Shipwreck on the rocks of crudelity; and as one says,
it is no heresy to affirm, That many have been saved by their infidelity.

The Admiral recounted the Oath and Edict of Pacification, so openly and so
often sworn, recorded by the King, Queen Mother and the rest. The late League
with Queen Elizabeth of England. The Articles covenanted with the Prince of
Orange. His faith given to the Princes of Germany. The marriage of the Lady
Margaret, his own Sister with the King of Navar; being done on no other account
as the King publicly declared, but to keep his faith, and to declare his
integrity to all he professed; which solemn act was but six days old, and which
doubrless he would not suffer to be defiled with innocent blood; Lastly, it
would stain the glory of the Nation with Foreign Princes and States; and of
posterity never to be believed more; besides the great shame, as also honor
and constancy of a Prince, all which the Admiral said, he could not believe
would ever be forgot by the King, or buried in the grave of cruelty and blood.
And thus he persuaded himself with the Kings faithfulness to keep his promises,
and oaths. He breathed in no other air than that which might gently fill his
Sayls with belief of the Kings integrity; setting say I toward the cape of
good hope, but alas, alas! he sails by this cape to his own ruin,

They enter the Admirals lodging, kill all they meet
As soon as the Duke of Guise, and bloody Noblemen drew near the Admirals
lodging, Cossin knocked at the Gate, which he was to keep (a goodly guard for
the wolf to keep the Sheep) he that opened the Gate was presently stabbed, as
soon as they enter with a number of armed men they kill all they find within
the porch. which were a few of the King of Navars Harquebuzeirs; only one
escaped to the Admirals Chamber; crying, Sir the Lord calls us to him; when the
Admiral understood it, he caused those that were in his Chamber to lift him out
of his bed, and casting a nightgown upon him, he arose on his feet, and with
his Minister, Mr. Merlin, in short ejaculations did commend their souls to God;
He rises, goes to prayer, commands his Friends and servants to shift for their
lives.
the Admiral commands all his Friends and Servants to save their lives by
flight if possible, and take no more care for him, For that he was willing and
ready to surrender his Soul to the Lord, calling for his Spirits, which for a
time was lent for his use, saying, this violent and unexpected cruelty was not
only intended for his destruction alone, but for the dishonor of Christ, and
the bloody persecution of so many poor Saints and Servants of God; which at the
Petition of all the Godly Protestants, and the Lord good Grace he had his heart
drawn out to the faithful defense of the Protestant Cause, through many hazards
and dangers, The sincerity whereof he left to the Lord to Judge, and that he
had no other end.

Then Mr. Merlin the Minister with the rest, got up to the top of the House,
creeping out of the Windows to the Gutters to hide themselves, but alas, most
of them were sought out and slain in the next house; yet through Gods mercy the
Minister wounderfully escaped; as you may at large see in the reverend Author
Mr. Clark his Examples, a Book worth the perusal of every Christian.

Presently ascends up the stairs a Germain, named Benvese, who married the
Cardinal of Lorrains Daughter, with him also Cossin the Gascoin, Attin, a
Piccard, a Familiar and Depender on the Duke of Aumale, (one that not long
before sought to murder de Andelot by Treason) as also Hamfort an Avernois;
These bloody Murderers break into the Admirals chamber, and blaspheming God,
thrust him through, knock him on the head shoot him with a Pistol, wound him
again and so he dies.
all being prepared and armed with Swords, Targets, and Shirts of male. These
break into the Admirals Chamber, who being no so sooner entered, but Benvese
advances toward him, and bending his drawn Sword at his Breast, said, Art thou
the Admiral? who with a Christian countenance full of constancy and quiet
satisfaction in Gods good pleasure, answered, I am so called, and withal said,
young man thou ought to consider my age, and the weak case I am now in, but
do what thou will, for thou can shorten my life but a very little. But he
blaspheming God thrust him through the Breast, and after struck him on the
head; then Attin shot him with a pistol in the breast; the Admiral was not with
these wounds quite dead therefore Benvese gave him the third wound upon the
thigh, and he presently fell for dead, so lying gasping; death freeing him from
misery, wafting him with speed to the Haven of rest and happiness, where all
tears are wiped from his eyes.

His body thrown out of the window, the D. of Guise with his foot kicks him on
the face.
Now the Duke of Guise and rest of the Noblemen, stayed below in the Court to
hear how things went; the Duke of Guise with a loud voice cried, Have thou done
Benvese? who replied, I have done, the Duke replied our Chevalier (the Kings
bestard Brother) will not believe it, unless he see it, throw him out of the
Window; So Benvese with the help of the rest did lift his body to the window,
who yet breathing laid hold with his hand on the window, but these butcherly
bloodhounds and cruel Murderers (whom a hundred at once durst not in his life
venture to face in the field) violently thrust him out of the window into the
Court; the Duke of Guise presently draws nigh, and because his face was bloody
and dirty he kneeled down the berter to know him, and with a napkin wiped his
face, saying, now I know it is him, and so kicked him on the face with his
Feet, whom all the Murderers in France feared so much when he was alive.

They proceed, crying kill, this is che K. command, this is the K. command.
Presently the Duke of Guise and his ignoble Train of Nobles, goes out of the
Court, crying, Armor, Armor, we have had good success, and a happy beginning,
let us now proceed to the rest, for it is the Kings Commandment; which words he
repeated often, This is the Kings command, This is his commandment, this is his
Will, this is his express Pleasure.

The Alarm bell rings to a general Massacre.
Then was caused to ring the bloody token for a General Alarm, being the great
Bell of the Palace, and instantly it was bruted and published as the cause of
this Murder, That the Protestants had conspired against the King, Queen, and
Court; and were about to put this design into practice, being armed to that
purpose.

The Admirals body cruelly abused, his head cut off and sont to the Pope by the
King.
Then a certain Italian of Gonzagues band, cut off the Admirals head, which was
sent to the King and Queen Mother, and by them preserved with spices, and so
sent to the Pope, and Cardinal of Lorrain at Rome, as a rich Present; Others
cut off his hands, others his secret parts, then the common rascally rabble for
three days together dragged his dead body (which was mangled and besmered with
blood and filth) through the streets, and afterward drew it out of Town to the
common Gallows, and so with a rope left his body hanging by the feet at
Montfaucon. These cruelties were the badges of the Kings commands, and these
bloody Hell Hounds wore their Masters Livery.

All they find in the Admirals lodging are basely murdered, among whom 2
children of honorable birth.
Now the Nobles and their cruel Murderers brake into the rest of the Admirals
chambers, and those they found in their beds, or hidden in any corners, they
mangled with many bloody-wounds, and so cruelly destroyed them, amongst which
number thus slain, was two young innocent babes, Pages of an honorable birth
and extract; which indeed seemed to all that heard it to be too great an act of
cruelty; but what was bad enough to be done was their best deeds, whereby they
hoped with the help of the Popes Bulls to prove not only pardonable, but also
meritorious.

Count Rochfoucault, a brave and noble Commander basely slain and extremely
pitied.
There was basely murdered the Count Rochfoucault, which for his great wisdom,
pleasant wit, and exeeding valor, was highly esteemed of by King Henry, and
for the same cause this King showed the like favor; This brave Commander,
Statesman and Nobleman de Naunce was commanded to kill, but for the true worth
he knew was lodged in the heart of this brave Worthy, and for the old
acquaintance he had with him, he utterly abominated it in an absolute refusal,
but one Laberge an Avernois, and Limb of Hell; one that was willing to sell his
Soul for a little profit, one that would receive a reward, though it were from
the Devils hands; one that would enter upon any bloody service, though his pay
was damnation; Deuteronomy. 27.25. Cursed is he that takes are-ward to slay an
innocent person, and all the people shall say Amen. The Admirals Son, a noble
and valiant Gentleman basely slain his brave speech.
This bloody unworthy fellow offered himself to the King to murder this brave
nobleman, if his Majesty would grant him the Count's Captainship of Horse; and
thus was this gallant Count basely murdered by men, not to be spoken of for
men, when the Count will be remembered, and named with respect in the Court of
honor.

At the same time also, and in the same place, the Admirals Son Teligny was
slain; he was a young Gentleman of great accomplishments both of wit and valor,
insomuch that the King by his respects and affections showed to him, did do
homage to his great deserts, even to exalting him to the highest strain of
Adulation; this gallant young Gentleman, I say, being designed to such a
cowardly death, and base murder, cried out, That now he saw it was even
grievous for him to live, in that he was the cause of his Fathers confidence of
the Kings Love, in that he had often commended the Kings faithfulness to him;
and so this brave Gentleman refused not this death offered him, yielding his
life as a sacrifice to their wrath and cruelty, and thus was this poor
Gentleman miserably butchered.

His Lieutenant shows great valor, and fights stoutly, but is murdered.
But his Lieutenant, a resolute and brave young Gentleman, having the advantage
of his arms, lengthened out his life in a stiff and stout resistance, showing
that he would do what he could not, who like a valiant Soldier, wrapping his
cloak about his arm he fought for his life to the feeling and applause of his
bloody and merciless enemies, but at last overpowred with number and strength,
was as unworthily slain as highly applauded.

Many brave Noblemen and Gentlemen basely bloodily and inhumanly murdered in
their chambers and streets
At this time also was murdered Colonel Montaumar, and Rouray Son to the Baron
Des Adretts, with all the rest of the Gentlemen that had relation to the
Admiral; amongst whom were many flourishing young Noblemen, and Gentlemen, all
being basely and cruelly murdered, and butchered in the prime of their youth,
and so cut off from all future hopes of high attempts; who as they were the
cream of the Protestnt Gallantry, so were they the But of their Enemies
cruelty. And thus fell these Noble Gentlemen, that at all times carried so much
intrinsic worth as purchased immortal praise.

After this, Cossins Soldiers with the Noblemens bands, The Soldiers encoraged
to blood by having the plunder free for their reward. Men, Women and children
murdered, and children taken out of the womb alive and murdered, the street
strewed with dead bodies
went ransacking from House to house, tearing all away that was worth carriage,
and in such a manner as is commonly done at taking a Town by storm; and so many
grew rich by others poverty; For the Duke of Guise, Duke of Montpenscir, the
Cavalleir King Henry's bastard, Gonzague, Tavignes, and other Principal Lords,
encouraged the Soldiers to proceed to blood with promise of all the booty free
for their pains, still crying out, This is the Kings commandment.

So all the day from Morning to evening, the skum of the City, the gleanings of
all villains, did run up and down with their bloody Swords raging and glorying
in their bloody Massacres, and unheard of murders; for they spared not the
aged, nor the women with child, nor the poor innocent babes, some whereof being
taken alive out of their Mothers wombs, without pity they cruelly and
presently destroyed, and in a Triumphant joy they threw the slain bodies out of
the Windows, insomuch that there was scarce a lane that was not strewed with
the dead bodies of the poor Protestants.

Nothing to be heard but the doleful cries and groans of the dying, and terrible
noise of the murderers
And as the City felt the rage of these Tigers, so the Suburbs also, where was
nothing but murdering, and all sorts of cruelties committed, men, women and
children, rich and poor, old and young, nothing to be heard in Paris, and the
Subburbs, but a horrible and terrible noise of arms, horses, and harquebuziers,
with a doleful, sad, and lamentable howling, and crying of poor souls going to
the slaughter, and knew not wherefore; a piteous complaint of such as cried to
the villains for mercy; together with the merciless and cruel shouts of
murderers, and bloody Hell Hounds, crying kill, destroy, for the King commands
it, mixed with the sad groans of the dying; that it seemed as if heaven and
earth had met together, as if the Heavens would have rent with thunder.

Oh! sad, Oh! wretched King, to stain thy honor with such perfidious breach of
promise, to water thy Kingdom with the blood of Gods people, and so to
dissemble with the world, as if dissembling were further from thy thoughts than
thy heart from reality.

Streets and Rivers dyed with blood.
The Pavement, Market place, and Rivers, were died with blood, and it was heard
say, by the murderers, that they had put an end to that quarrel, that neither
pen, paper, decrees of Justice, nor open War could accomplish in twelve years.
10000. protestants murdered, in one day by the K. command.


About ten thousand souls makes this Lords day famous for ever, with effusion
of their precious and innocent blood, such as no age or time can parallel; for
there was at this time in Paris, sixty thousand men, with Pistols, Pikes,
Poinyards, Curtelaces, Knives, and such other bloody Instruments, who run up
and down swearing and blaspeming the sacred Majesty of God; cruelly massacring
all they meet, the streets being covered with mangled bodies, Gates and doors
defiled with blood; And yet we see but in part what cruelties were committed,
if we compare what we have read, and what we shall read together.

For now having given thee a sight of such Treachery, Poisonings, perjuries,
Cruelties, and damnable dissimulations, with the many murders committed on the
Admiral and Friends in Paris, I shall endeavor in the next chapter, to give a
taste of such sad Massacres, and cruelties, as will affright and astonish the
heart of any true Protestant; and if thou have any grain of true Christianity
in thee, thou can not but be touched with a fellow-feeling of these sad and
unheard of murders and crueltys.

CHAP. VIII.
The Contents.
THe King labors to turn the King of Navar, and Prince of Conde, to the
Catholic Religion, by threatening of death, and promises of Life; Their
answers; Many Gallant and Peerless Commanders, hewn in pieces at the Loure,
crying out to the Kings Oaths and Promises in the Kings hearing; That brave and
unparalleled Commander Monsieur de Piles basely slain, crying out aloud to the
King, protesting against his treacherous cruelty and perjury; Two hundred
gallant Gentlemen slain; Count de Montgomery, and Vidame of Charteres escape to
England; A Plot against Rochel, but prevented; La Charity surprised, and all
the Protestants cut off; The murder at Paris renewed next day; the bodies of
the dead thrown into the River Sein; In two days above ten thousand slain,
whereof five hundred of Noble blood, Gentlemen, with many Ladies and
Gentlewomen, that came to the marriage; The King sends by Post to command all
the Protestants to be cut off, following the example of Paris; Three Noble
Gentlemen in the Court murdered; The strange, sad and cruel death of a brave
Gentleman Monsieur de la Place; Peter Ramus, that famous Professor of Logic
basely slain; A sad yet comfortable death of a Godly young Christian; A
terrible and unheard of cruelty committed on a Gentlewoman with child;
Merciless cruelty committed on a poor child; The most Cruel, Horrid and unheard
of butchery at Lions, not to be paralleled in any age, the blood running
through the streets reeking hot, to the terror of the Catholics themselves;
The Bloody Massacre at Meaux; The like sad Massacre at Troys; The bloody
Murders at Orleans; The cruel butcheries at Toulouse: The cruel slaughters and
bloody murdering of six thousand Protestants at Roan. The Murders at Angiers;
A Godly Minister that had laid the first foundation of a Church in Paris, is
murdered by the Kings command.

WHilst these sad cruelties were executed at the Admirals Lodging, and in the
City and Suburbs of Paris, Let us now behold with pity a number of brave
Commanders murdered in the Kings Castle of the Loure, by the Kings
commandment, and in his sight. For the King of Navar and Prince of Conde did
lodge in the Loure, with many other brave Commanders, which came to accompany
the King of Navar and Prince of Conde.

The K. promises pardon to the King of Navar, and Prince of Conde, if they will
turn Papists.
The first thing the King falls on after his bloody Butchery in Paris, was to
deal with the King of Navar and Prince of Conde, to whom he gave command to be
brought into his presence.

The King told them all that was done, that he had now cut off all the
instruments of the late Civil Wars, and he hoped would prove a prevention of
future troubles; for by his command the Admiral was slain with his Train, and
that no less was done in other Cities to all the Protestants; but says he, by
reason of your young and tender years, and near alliance in consanguinity and
marriage, therefore it is I desire you should be pardoned; but we shall see it
on sad terms to these poor tender hearts, ready to break with grief at their
friends death, and their own too sad and rigid fate. Poor Princes betrayed by
the cruelty of a perfidious merciless King; The King tells them their Lives
depended on the reforming their Judgments, and turning to the Catholic
Religion, for he is resolved never to have any more than one Religion in his
Kingdom; and if they embraced not this Snake in their bosom, they must be
stung with his bloody Sword, as the deserts of their obstinacy.

The K. of Navars answer to the K. of France.
The King of Navar humbly beseeched his Majesty to remember his Promises,
Engagements, and now the near alliance by marriage, lately contracted, and not
to force him in those things, which only he must be accountable to God alone
for: that he would please rather to imprison his body, than his soul, and not
to force him to make shipwreck of a good conscience by a violent assault.

Now the Prince of Conde like a resolved Christian also, The P. of Conde's
zealom answer to the King.
did with much zeal answer the King in this manner, That he having given his
Oaths, and promlses in solemn and public Protestations to all of the Religion,
would not, he hoped, forget the great ty of performance, which all men are
bound to observe, under pain of Gods heavy Judgments, and therefore he
wondered his Majesty should so soon be persuaded to break his most Solemn Vows
and Protestations, which by the Law of God and Nations he was bound to keep,
but know (says this noble Prince) that for my Religion it is so closely
enshrined in a fixed resolution to preserve with my soul, that it is beyond the
reach of Mortality, and I hope by Gods grace, am so resolved, that loss of life
shall not shake my steady soul to batter my conscience. And though your great
threatenings pierce my understanding, yet shall they not make me lose my hold of
that Religion, which by Gods grace is planted, and by your promises, and oaths
freely granted to me the free exercise of, and as for my body and goods you may
use as you please, but my unspotted soul is in the hands of God.

Many Nobles and brave Commanders, that waited on the K. of Navar, and Prince
of Conde, by the K. order, and in his fight are cut in pieces, crying out to
his Oaths and Promises. Brave Monsieur de Piles his sad death lamented and
pitied by his enemies yet basely murdered in the K. fight
This notable answer of this tender young Prince, did so move his raging
cruelty, that letting loose the reins of his furious indignation, he calls him
Rebel, and the Son of a Rebellious person, with horrible threatenings that he
should lose his life, if within three days he did not obey his command, and
without any more ado, he assaults him with a furious countenance, issuing out
these terrible words Mass, Death, or Bastile.

But now their poor Friends that waited upon them, being many gallant
Gentlemen, as also their Servitors in their chambers, their Schoolmasters, and
those that had the bringing them up, were thrust out one, by one, among the
crowd of Murderers, being the K. Guard of Switzers, that stood in two ranks,
prepared for blood and cruelty: These Gentlemen crying out to the Kings Oaths,
Promises, and fidelity, were nevertheless by the K. command, and in his own
sight, unmercifully hewn and cut in pieces.

There did die of note amongst these in the Loure, the Marquess de Rennet, with
several others of noble blood, as also many brave Gentlemen, but no man's death
was so much bemoaned of many both friends and enemies as brave Monsieur de
Piles, whose valor, though great, yet could not be victor over his Religious
and Godly zeal, whose great courage and greater Christianity, fought for
Mastery: for he had defended (as aforesaid) the little Town of St. Jean de
Angeli, against the K. great Army for forty days, who at last yielded not so
much to their valor as their number.

There this brave Commander got such Renown, that of his Enemies who felt his
valor he was highly honored, and was thought to be beloved, and much esteemed
of by the King. This brave de Piles, I say, with Leranne, Odou's Son, were both
lodged (by the Kings command) all night in a Wardrope next the King of Navars
own chamber; but this command of the Kings was looked on by the poor Gallant
Gentlemen rather to be an act of special favor, then base treachery; these
noble Commanders, a little before day, hearing a great noise of running of men
in Armor, with doleful cryings, and howlings of the slain for mercy, wondered
what should be the matter, and so arose; who were no sooner up, but de Naunce
approaches their chamber; and tells them, it was the Kings Commandment that
they should come down into the Court, leaving their weapons behind them, and so
to depart out of the Castle.

He disclaims against the Kings treachery Proclaiming his Traiterous infidelity
and cruelty in the Kings hearing.
Now when this brave Monsieur de Piles saw himself disarmed, and thrust out
amongst the murdering Soldiers, who stood ready to kill him, and viewing the
sad spectacles of so many of so many of Gods people already slain, he cries out
with a loud voice to the peircing of the Kings ear; protesting against the
Traiterous infidelity of his bloody cruelty; that Covenants nor Oaths could not
bind his loose hands and cruel heart, no more than fetters can ty the raging
Ocean; but who is deaser than he that will not hear, for his words peirced the
air, but not this Tyrants heart. So having a rich Cloak, he takes it off, and
gives it an acquaintance, Saying, Take here this token of Piles, and let
posterity know poor Piles most shamefully, cowardly and unworthily slain, by
the perfidious command of a perjured King; Oh! my good and noble Monsieur de
Piles, replied he, I am none of them, I thank you for your Cloak, but I will
not receive it on that condition, He is thrust out amongst the Murderers, and
slain.
so immediately Monsieur de Piles was thrust through the body with a Partisan
by one of the Kings Guard, and so was there basely murdered and slain.

And thus died this most noble and valiant Gentleman, pittyed by his Enemies
that knew him to be a valiant Commander; thus was he haled to a cowardly death,
that never knew what compulsion meant, but when his virtues and valor, incited
him to good actions; so his body was thrown into the quarry with the rest, the
beholders crying out, these are the Traitors that plotted our destruction, and
would have killed our King.

Now it pleased God to dispose of Leranne otherwise, who being thrust through
the Body with a sword escaped by running into the Queen of Navars chamber who
preserved him from their cruelty and presently obtained his pardon: and also by
the assistance of her own Doctor of Physic, he recovered and lived.

200 Gallant Noblemen and Gentlemen basely slain by the K. command.
Amongst these Gentlemen, and at the same time, was also murdered, Pontbreton,
Pluviault, Bandine, Francourt, Chancellor to the King of Navar, Pardillan,
Lavardin, and other chief Commanders Gentlemen to the number of two hundred,
whose cries no more peirced the Kings cruel heart, than an arrow can an
Adamantine Rock.

Count De Montgomery, and the Vidam of Charteres with some others escape to
England.
Now it fell out by Gods good providence otherwise with those of the Protestants
that lodged in the Fauxburg, At St. Germain beyond the Sein, amongst whom was
the Count de Montgomery, and the Vidame of Charteres; who presaging some
intended mischief, having a clear foresight of this Tempest, provided for an
escape, and so would by no means be drawn to lodge with the Admiral; who now
hearing the noise and understanding the matter instantly fled, but were quickly
persued by their grand enemy the Duke of Guise, who as soon as the day had
relieved the night, passed the water with many horse and foot, and overtaking
the Protestants in their flight found some without shoes, some without arms,
others without Saddles, some without bridles, all equally unable to make
resistance, and so were without mercy scattered and cut off, the Count De
Montgomery and Vidame of Charteres with about ten in company by the good mercy
of God saved themselves, and after many dangers and difficulties got to the Sea
side, and so escaped over to England, bringing sad news in their dejected
countenances for the loss of their dear and precious Friends; who were also as
kindly welcomed by our good Queen Elizabeth as safely escaped from the cruelty
of their treacherous and perjured King.

Whilst these bloody and unheard of crueltys were committed in Paris, A bloody
plot against Rochel, but prevented.
Strozzi the Kings Admirals lay hovering at Rochel, endeavoring to surprise
it, under pretense of a Banquet to be made for his Friends of the Castle of La
Cheine, but being discovered he retreated without the effects of his desire, or
performance of the Kings command.

The Protestants murdered at La Charity. The murders at Paris is renewed next
day.
But the poor Protestants of La Charity as aforesaid was entraped by the Italian
horse, and were now put to the Sword.

But to return to the bloody City of Paris, the next day the slaughter was
renewed, for all that was found hidden in corners or private places of the City
were all sought out, brought forth, and murdered, insomuch that the day
before, and this day were massacred in Paris, above ten thousand Protestants of
all degrees and sexes, the very common Laborers, Porters, and the most
rascally and desperate villains of the City, did this day abuse the dead bodies
by pulling off their clothes, and throwing them naked into the River of Sein.
The places of preferment which now lay empty by reason of this horrid massacre,
were now by the King given to whom he pleased. The Admirals office he gave to
the Marquess de Villars etc. And so like a true Tyrant leaves nothing his poor
Subjects can call their own but their miseries.

In this butcherly Massacre at Paris were sacked above four thousand houses,
and above five hundred Barons, Knights, and Gentlemen, who had held the
chiefest employments in the War, with many noble and gallant young Ladies and
Gentlewomen that had now purposly met together from all parts, to rejoice in
honor of the King of Navars marriage with the L. Margaret, who poor Noblemen,
Gentlemen and Ladies thought of nothing more then of jollity and pleasures, but
now suffer the Tyrannical rage of a furious King, and bloody death to be
pitied by all that shall hear this sad story; for poor Ladies they expected no
such tragical welcome from a Royal King, contrary to his Oaths, and their
spotless innocence: and it must needs stick as the greatest badge of inhumanity
and cowardice, nay a true character of a bad cause, To murder like Devils, not
fight like men.

Immediately after these unheard of murders were acted in Paris, the King not
yet glutted with blood, sends Messengers by post to all parts of the Kingdom
(often shifting horses for more speed) with express command to all other
Cities, to follow the example of Paris, commanding all Protestants which were
amongst them to be slain; and yet at the same time the same King writes other
Letters, wherein he laid the fault of the Murders upon the Admiral and the
Duke of Guise. Now this command of the King to cut off all the Protestants in
all Towns and Cities under his command, it cannot he expressed how cheerfully,
willingly and readily they were obeyed by the greatest part of the Cities in
France, for on the receipt of his Majesty Letters they fell on the Protestants
at Meaux, Troys, Orleans, and other parts, murdering them without all pity.

And now let us a little read with melting hearts the sad affliction of Gods
Church, let us bring the sad ruins of a good cause to our near view, by a
spiritual improvement, as a prospect draws the object nearer; for we must now
relate the sad catastrophe of many thousands of poor Christians, who fell under
the cruel and bloody command of the King to all his Magistrates, which indeed
is not to be expressed, what sad cruelties were committed to the wonderful
astonishment of all that hears or reads it; for no sooner does the King let
loose his cruel commands, but speedily the bloody Papists break out with horrid
Massacres, more like Devils than men.

For now in Paris the Prisons that had any Protestants (by which reason they
escaped for a time) were now brought forth, and basely slain by the multitude
of murderers, in which were three gallant Gentlemen of great reputation, viz.
Captain Monius, a very valourous and stout Gentleman; next Lomen, Secretary to
the King, and greatly honored and esteemed for his faithful service in his
place; and lastly Chappes, an ancient Lawyer of fourscore years. And was also
of great renown and fame in the Court of Paris, all three were basely murdered
as cannot be expressed.

Amongst the rest must be set forth that unparalled bloody and treacherous
death of Monsieur de la Place, President of the Court of Wards; which must I
say for the strangness of the murder beg leave to have place in this history.

Their comes a Captain armed to the Gentleman's house and acquaints him that the
D. of Guise had slain the Admiral by the Kings commandment, and also many other
Protestants, but out of his deserts, he desired to protect him from their fury;
with all desiring to see his Gold, which he might as well bestow on him for
saving him, as on others for destroying him; the Lord de la Place admires at
the Captains audatious and petulant demeanor, and so confidently required of
him whether he thought there were a King or no; the Captain blaspheming desired
him to go to the K. to know his pleasure, the Lord De la Place thinking danger
too near, absented from him to a place of better secutity; the Captain hereupon
plunders his house, This poor Gentleman, seeking shelter in three houses for
his life, was refused, and so at last was forced to return to his own house
again, where finding his wife very pensive and sad, he rebuked, and exhorted
her not to be so full of dispondency of spirit, for death was the utmost, and
heaven the crown of their afflictions and sufferings; and so spoke fully and
sweetly of the promises of God; which jointly knit their hearts together in
comfort, and so calling together his Family he sweetly exhorted them,
expounding out of a chapter to them; then went again to prayer, and so resolved
with the assistance of Christ to suffer all Torments of death, rather than
dishonor God in the least drawing back, presently after comes the Provost
Marshal to his house with many Archers. with a pretense to secure him, and
conduct him to the King; who answered, that he freely desired to continue his
obedience to the King, but could not see how to escape the fury of the present
danger by continual massacres.

Presently after comes the Provost des Marchands, with order to bring him to
the King, but he excused it as before, but he would not have any delay or
excuse, so that this Noble Lord resolves to meet death by a Christian
preparation; and so embracing his wife, he desires her never to forsake the
true faith, but to continue steadfast in the fear of God; and so willingly and
Christianly advanced, like a true martyr of Christ; and indeed it fell out so
as this Godly soul expected, for in the way the murderers waited with open
mouth and bloody hearts, with their daggers, that he did no sooner approach but
they stabbed him, that he fell down dead; they pillaged him, cast his body into
a Stable, covering his face over with dung, and so the next day threw his body
into the River.

And thus died this blessed Servant of Christ in the height of their cruelty,
and his Spirit full of Christian magnanimity.

Amongst these many murders in Paris was Peter Ramus slain; a man famous for
learning, being the Kings Professor in Logic, the bloody Murderers breaking
into the College of Priests, they basely massacred him, then cast him out of
the chamber window, that his bowels with the fall, issued out on the ground, to
a sad view of all tender hearted Spectators, then was his body dragged through
the streets, and by certain young Scholars whipped, being commanded to do it by
their Popish Tutors.

On the Lords day a Godly young man walking abroad in the morning, and hearing
that the Admiral and the rest were destroyed, and seeing little hopes of life,
he presently returned home, and with a Son-like care to his loving Mother, told
her of the danger, and so speedily secured her in a place of great secrecy,
and so shut himself up in his study, and pouring out his Soul before the Lord
in prayer, and preparation for strength to suffer for his name; presently the
Murderers ascend, and with Battleaxes, and other bloody Instruments, brake
into his study, and so knocked him down, this poor Soul receiving the blood in
his own hands, his body they threw into the River.

Thus dyed this young man and old Christian, and may stand as a pattern for our
Imitation.

Two Ministers belonging to the King of Navar were also murdered, and thrown
into the River; but all the rest of the Ministers of Gods word, were by a
singular and special hand of Gods Providence preserved and kept from the rage
of these bloody Tygars.

There was in this City a Gentleman, whom the Murderers found a bed with his
Wife, who was then nigh her time of delivery, they no sooner knock, but poor
Gentlewoman she opens the door to these bloud-hounds, they presently stab her
husband in his bed; now the Midwife seeing them bent on blood, earnestly
entreated them to spare her, at least till the Child was born, this being the
twentieth child that God had given her, but their bloody minds admitted of no
mercy, but presently trust a dagger up to the Hilt into her fundament, this
poor soul feeling her self mortally wounded, fled into a Corn loft to see if
God would please to bring the fruit of her womb to a birth, but these villains
persued her and stabbed her in the belly, whereof she presently dyed, then they
threw her body out of the window into the Streets, which fall forced the child
out of her body, with the head foremost, gaping and yawning for life, in a sad,
doleful and lamentable manner, and so it died.

One of these villains snatching up a Little child in his arms, the child began
to play with his beard, but instead of compassion this base murderer had such
a flinty heart, that he wounded it with his dagger, and so cast it in a goar
blood into the River.

But this bloody Massacre at Lions cannot be paralleled by any age, the bare
narrative will cloy and Reader at first view; Oxen and sheep could not be
destroyed with less pity and more cruelty, than those poor Protestants of all
sexes and degrees, from the Cradle to the Bedrid: Indeed its the most
astonishing and horrible murder that ever Christian heard or read of. For

No sooner arrived the Kings commandment to Mandelot Governor of Lions,
certifying of the Massacre at Paris, and commanding to destroy all the
Protestants, but Mandelot ordered the Gates of the City to be shut, declaring
it to be death for any Protestant to come out of his house, and then by a
crier, and afterward by sound of Trumpet he proclaimed that all the
Protestants should speedily repair before him, they quickly obey and come, he
then sends them to Prison, they poor souls submit, and so followed the officers
that was appointed to lead them, but by reason of the great multitude of them,
they are dispersed into several prisons; Mandelot, the bloody Governor,
Commanded the common Executioner to take aid to him, and destroy them all; but
he, having his conscience smit with pity, replied, He was an Executioner of
the Law, but not to put to death without law; he put to death all such as the
world was witness to their public condemnation, and so desired Mandelot to
seek some that might better dispense with a bloody conscience.

This cruel Governor having his desire frustrate by an honest refusal,
commands the Soldiers that were garrisoned in the Castle to murder them; they
reply it consisted not with their honor to destroy men in cold blood, and too
cowardly to cut the throats of those that had not wherewith to defend, being a
thing too far off from valor, or the part of a true Soldier to destroy men at
mercy, lying supplyant before them, nor saw they any cause why death should be
inflicted upon poor innocent souls.

Dear Lord, what Protestant heart can contain to read this sad and lamentable
murder without thought of revenge, who has a spark of Christianity that can
read, and not wish himself able to revenge their cause, only God is the Avenger
of the cause of the innocent, and doubtless God has a Scourge for this Nation.

The Governor being refused by a conscientious Hangman, and honorable
Soldiers, more fit for Alexander and Caesar than this bloody and cruel Tyrant;
he I say rather than let the command of a King ly dead, gathers together the
scum of wicked men, and spawn of the Devil, the legitimate offspring of a
Hellish brood, the Watermen, and bloody Butchers, who being let into prison
with their bloody Knives and instruments, (oh unmerciful wretches!) such as
they find prostrate at their feet, holding forth their petitions in their sad
requests in a bleating Oratory, crying to Gods mercy and man's pity.

These Butchers of innocent souls, instead of pity, for sport cut of their
fingers, and tops of their noses, and then fell a murdering; throughout the
City was such doleful noise of the dying, and lamentable howling of women and
children, that all those that were zealous in the Romish Religion, abhorred
their cruelties, and had their hearts so peirced with the sad groans of the
dying, that they thought they were devils that only had human shape, or that
they were Indian Tygars, or wild beasts only had assumed the shape of men; nay
many women of the Popish Religion that were with child, and now nigh their time
of Delivery, were so affrighted with these sad cruelties, that they parted with
child; The murders and massacre was so great that out of one of the prisons
called the Archbishops house, the blood of the slain was seen running down the
streets in the day time, in great abundance to the astonishment and horror of
all the Beholders, for it run warm and smoking hot through the streets and so
into the River.

Amongst them that were butchered in this Prison, was an ancient man, named
Francis de Bossu, a Merchant that had to his Sons two Religious young men, whom
he had carefully trained up in the fear of the Lord: As soon as the Murderers
approached with their Axes, he exhorted his Sons, Not to fear death, for it was
but a quick passage to their Fathers house, for that through many tribulations
we must enter into the Kingdom of God; for it has always been, and will be to
the end of the World, the lot of all Gods people to be as sheep among wolves;
if we suffer with Christ we shall also reign with him, this short cut of ours
will be, but as a Bridge for our more speedy passage to eternal life; let us
joyfully follow this company that is gone before us; and so the old Christian
and aged Father embraced his two young Sons, and they him, with mutual
embraces, and held so fast together, that with the Murderers blows they fell
all flat to the ground together, crying to the mercy of God, and thus with many
wounds was the godly Soul, and his two Sons cruelly murdered, by these bloody
Butchers, and which is not to be forgotten, These three bodies along time after
were wonderfully knit together, which afforded a sad sight to the Spectators.

After all these cruelties were done, Mandelot the Governonr commanded to be
proclaimed, that no man should commit any more murders, and that if any one
would discover any of the actors of such horrid villainyes, they should be
rewarded with a hundred Crowns for their information; but alas, this was in a
base, scornful and disdainful way, for from that time they ceased not to kill
and murder all they knew had escaped the common destiny, and on Sabbath day
morning those poor Protestants that had escaped their fury, was now by order of
this base and bloody Mandelot, destroyed and hewn in pieces.

These bloody Villains passing through the Streets with their bloody
Instruments, boasted that they had died their white Doublets with the blood of
the Protestants, one bragging that he had killed an hundred, some more, some
less: On the first of September their dead bodies were ordered to be thrown
into the River, but a great part of them Mandelot ordered to be boated over to
the other side of the River, and laid on a green bank, near to an Abbey named
Esne; and there the people came and abused their bodies: and one thing (for the
like was never heard of) is not here to be omitted; The Apothecaries viewing
the bodies said, they used to make medicines of men's grease; and being there
were many fat bodies, there might be moneys got, and so wished the Butchers to
procure them their grease, and they should be rewarded, the bloody fellows
speedily choose out the fattest, launched them with their bloody Knives, and
sold their fat for three shillings a pound. So at last their bodies were some
thrown into a great pit, the rest into the River.

The people inhabiting on the borders of the River, admired to see so many dead
carcasses come down, having their bodies basely mangled, some with eyes out,
others their noses, hands and ears cut off, and stabbed in every part of their
bodies.

Not long after the Popes Legate arrived at Lions, who coming out of the great
Church from Mass, the bloody Murderers of so many innocent Christians kneel
down before him for absolution, and as soon as the Legate was told who they
were, and for what they kneeled down, he made the sign of the cross, and
absolved them of their sins whether they repented or no, and doubtless these
bloody Devils were canonized at Rome for Saints.

The Kings Letters and commands coming to Cosset the Kings Attorney at Meaux;
he forthwith ordered those of his bloody crew to come to him, who accordingly
at seven a clock at night came, and received Orders to shut up the City Gates;
at which time also they went through the Town doing nothing all that night but
murder, kill and distroy the poor Protetestants; in the morning they
apprehended two hundred, and committed them to prisons; Cosset comes to them,
and having a Catalogue of their names, he calls them out one by one, and basely
murders as many as they could, being aweary they went to supper, and after a
little refreshment they returned again, and now they brought quicker
Instruments of death, being Axes, and so fell again to call them out by their
names, and butchered them most cruelly, amongst whom was a godly Elder of a
Church, who praying for his Enemies, they reviled him, and having on a buff
Coat, they fearing it should be spoiled with blood, did open it before and
stabbed him in the breast, whereof he died. Amongst these also thus slain was
an ancient Gentleman Sheriff of the City, whom they cruelly handled, for first
they cut off his nose, and privy members, then thrust him often into the body,
tossing him up and down, that at last he fell down dead, crying out to God for
mercy.

As soon as the speedy post with the Kings Letters came to Troyes, the poor
Protestants were quickly imprisoned, the Bailiff Summons the Keeper of the
Prison, who being sick sent one Martin to know his pleasure, the Bailiff told
him all their Prisoners must be slain; and so commanded a pit to be dug in
the Prison that the blood might not run down the Streets, now the Jailer and
his bloody associates going to murder these poor innocent souls, no sooner saw
them, but their consciences gave back, standing amazed at the horridness of
their task, and so return, but the Bailiff got them, and filled them so full of
wine and strong drink, that without any fear or danger they came again, and
called them forth by their names, he that came out first had a cheerful
countenance, and calling on the name of the Lord he opened his Breast and was
killed presently; the next that came, being several times wounded with a
Halberd, and not killed, did at last cheerfully take the Halberd by the point,
and put it to his breast, saying, Here bloody Murderer, here, right at the
heart, right at the heart, and so was thrust through and died. All the rest
were cruelly murdered, and cast into a great pit on the back of the Prison;
and although some were not quite dead, yet they cast them in, one of these poor
Souls having more life than the rest, rose up in the pit above his Fellows, but
was presently smothered with Earth, and although there was a pit dug in the
Prison to save the blood, yet such was the effusion of Christian blood, that it
run out of prison streaming down the Gutters of the streets, to the amazement
of the Popish Inhabitants.

But now at Orleance, the place of the last Treaty of peace, and the place
where it was solemnly proclaimed with full command for Observation of the
Edict. At this place, I say, the Kings Letters came, commanding to murder all,
and happened to come the same day that three hundred were met together at a
Sermon, whereupon the Mayor and Officers commanded the Companies in arms to
fall on, and to execute speedily the Kings command, oh Tyrant, and bloody
command! One of the Murderers went to a noble man's house inviting himself, and
his bloody followers to Supper, where they were made welcome with good cheer,
no sooner was Supper ended, but they blaspheming murdered him, and all his
family, and then plundered his house.

There were many that lived on the outside of the Town, amongst whom was heard
such sad murtherings, and cruelties, that all night long was heard nothing but
howlings and cryings of men, women and children massacred, shooting off of
Guns, and Pistols, breaking doors, and rumbling of Carts that conveyed away the
dead bodies, all which were mixed with the cries of the bloody Murderers,
crying Kill, Kill them all, and then take the Spoil; and thus they continued
all the week in these sad and bloody murders, and plundering, blasphemously
singing in scorn, where is now their God.

On Tuesday they came to a Doctor of the Civil Law, who being found in earnest
prayer to God, they had not the power to kill him, only took a little plunder
with them, next day they came again, and views his Library, what books they
demanded he gave them, they told him he must be killed, he therefore goes to
prayer again, and afterward desired of them that if he must die to murder him
there, which they refused, they take him and lead him through the Streets, and
coming to the Schools he desired them to kill him where he taught so many; but
they led him a little further, and so knocked him on the head. One that was
forced by hunger out of a secret place where he hid himself, was presently
slain. Such as for fear revolted, they forced to kill their friends or were
killed themselves.

As soon as the Kings bloody Message came to the City of Toulouse, the Gates
were presently shut, but it pleased the Lord of his good grace and Providence
so to order it, that the Protestants were gone that morning out of the Ciry to
a Sermon, and as soon as the noise of the Massacre came to their ears, many
returned not again to the City! But others would venture so far as to go to
order their affairs for a Return, but poor souls they never returned back, for
as soon as they came to the Gates they were suffered to enter, leaving their
swords at the Gates, amongst whom was many of great account, and on wednesday
morning all the poor Protestants were imprisoned, with command that none should
on pain of death hide any of them.

Amongst these were six Counselors; which like good Christians encouraged the
rest: at last they were all brought into one place, and so the bloody
Murderers being ready with axes and knives they were one by one destroyed,
their bodies stripped naked, and lay for two days; The six Counselors being
hung up in their long Gowns upon Elm Trees in the Palace yard; which would move
any one to compassion there being in this City three hundred thus murdered.

In Roan as soon as the Kings command came, there was an infinite number slain
in few days, six thousand men besides women, whom they used as cruelly as can
be imagined, their bodies were stripped and carried out in carts, being put into
the pits in great heaps.

At Bourdeaux, as soon as the news of the Massacre at Paris arrived, and
command from the King to follow their Example. The Protestants were boating
over the River to a Sermon, but orders followed them that they should be
apprehended, whereupon the Gates of the City were shut, yet the Ministers
through Gods good mercy and grace escaped, and safely landed in England. The
Governor was somewhat timorous to act the Kings command in such a bloody
subjection to cruelty, but the Lord Monpessat assured him, how acceptable it
would be to his Majesty, and for their better encouragement he enters the house
of the Lord of Obiers, and basely murdered him in his own Court.

And then presently the froath and Scum of the Town, assembled and murdered
all the rest, amongst whom was a Minister that came out of the adjacent
Country, Also there was a reverend old Deacon of a church whom they dragged
out of his sick bed through the Streets, and so basely and inhumanly murdered.

As soon as the bloody Message of the Kings cruel command arrives at Angiers,
they fell on all the Protestants without mercy or pity, to sex or age, for no
sooner were the Massacres begun at Paris, but one Monsorel a bloody and cruel
Papist, posted and soon arrived with orders from the K. to destroy all; he no
sooner arrives but desires a speedy conduct to one Masson de Rivers, who was a
Godly and zealous Pastor of a Church; a very able and elaborate Disspenser of
the Mysteries of the Gospel; and one excelling in wisdom, knowledge and
learning; He it was that laid the foundation stone of the first Church of
Christ in Paris: This bloody Monsorel meets Mr. Masson's wife at the Door, and
kindly saluted her, demanding where her Husband was, she answered in the
Garden, whither she conducted him, who as soon as he comes to him, embraces
him kindly, saying do thou know my message, and the busmess I come to thee
about, it is (said this villain) to kill thee presently, for the King commands
it; and so presents a Pistol to his Breast, Master Masson replied, I know not
wherein I have given his Majesty such cause; but one thing Sir I humbly beg at
your hands, to give me so much space as to commend my soul to God by prayer;
which as soon as he had ended, this cruel and merciless Tiger pistoled him.

And so this faithful Servant of Christ fell dead at his feet.

Not long after, arrives another bloody Harbinger from Paris by the Kings
Order, who drowned many, amongst the rest, was the virtuous wife of this Godly
Minister of Christ Mr. Masson: a Christian getting into an obscure place of a
Rock, the entrance being narrow, was, after he got in, covered with a Spiders
web; the bloody Persecutors passing by, some of them said it was a fit place
for an escape from danger, others said, can any be here and this Spiders web
whole, whereupon they departed, which may very well be remarkably observed as a
special Providence of God.

CHAP. IX.
The Contents.
THe King prolaims pardon to all those that had escaped in Woods, and Rocks,
who no sooner comes home, but treacherously destroys them all, in a most cruel
manner. For thirty days nothing but killing of poor innocent Protestants. The
Copy of the Kings letters, laying the fault of the Admirals death and the
murders on the D. of Guise; yet the same day sends Letters to command it to be
done, and caused all the murders to be done by his command, both in Paris, and
all over France. The King in Parliament opens his design, and acknowledges all
to be done by his own command. The Kings Speech in Parliament. The true Copy of
the K. Declaration, printed at Paris. The President of Parliament congratulates
the King for his bloody success. The Advocate advises the King to cease the
murders, and to color his crueltits with the name of Justice. A Parliament is
called, and Proclamation is made that all murders should cease. Many goes to
view the body of the Admiral hanging on the common Gallows. The King and Queen
Mother goes also; but his body over night was secretly taken away and buried:
so they lost their journey. Judges picked out to condemn the innocent with the
pretense of Justice. The Admiral dishonored by a man of straw, and Libels
printed. The King sends to surprise the Admiralls wife, but she was fled to
Geneva. The Admiral a little described. Brave Caviagnes and Briquemault
tortured to confess themselves and the Admiral Traitors, they show much
Christianity, the Judges refuse to sit in judgment against them, new Judges
are chosen, they are condemned and led to the Gallows, their Speech, they are
hanged in sight of King, Q. Mother, Prince and Nobles with many thousand
Spectators. The Man of Straw for the Admiral, hanged with them. Some Letters
collected according to the Original, which gives much light to the History, and
discovers how Queen Elizabeth of England resented the Murder, with the General
pity and Dislike of the whole English Court. These cruelties spotted the
French Nation with a great Odium among Foreign Princes. The Duke of Guise his
Letter to his Wife intercepted, and the Plot discovered. The King
notwithstanding his former Edicts granted, and Oaths to keep his Promises, does
now proclaim, that none should exercise any Religion on pain of Death, but the
Romish. A form of Abjuration sent to those that would come in, and forsake the
Protestant Religion; and when they did, they were murdered contrary to the
Kings proclamation: A true Copy of the Remembrances of the King to all his
Lieutenants, and Governors of his Provinces, with a Copy also for Abjuration.

NOw when all was murdered that could very well be laid hands on, and the King
understanding that diverse Protestants, had in many parts of the Kingdom fled,
and left their Habitations for security of their Lives; He acts the second and
worst part of his Devilish Treachery and cruelty; for after many sweet baits of
enticing and alluring promises for them to come in, he at last published
Letters, and sent Messengers;

Wherein he showed, The great grief it was to him that so much blood should be
spilt in the Nation, contrary to his will, promising to punish the Actors of
such horrid villainies, with as much cruelty as Justice could inflict, and
they deserve. And that if the Admiral, and his Associates. deserved the death
inflicted for their treasonable practices, yet was it no reason so many
innocents should bear part of this punishment, that had no hand in the Plot.

Now many poor Protestants that had left all, and fled into the woods, being
encouraged by these enticing and fair pretexts, returned home, especially they
that had fled from Diep, Roan, and Toulouse; now we shall see the King like a
Thorny Bush to the poor sheep, that in a storm they run to shelter, and instead
thereof are entangled, and their wool pulled off their backs. But oh wretched
Tyrant, and worse King! whose furious and bloody mind, like an impetuous
Whirlewind, or Hiricane, could not be kept in bounds, but ere two days past he
imprisons them all, and appoints base fellows to murder them, with cruel
Torments.

And thus for thirty days together was nothing but horrible slaughter
throughout the Kingdom of France; insomuch that there were about a hundred
thousand little Babes, Widows and children wel-born that fatherless and
Motherless, lived long in wandering, and beggary.

And truly that reverend and faithful Servant of Christ, did not miss the Mark
of the Kings treachery and perfidious dealing, when he made this Anagram on his
name;

CHARLES VALOIS, Anagram, Chasseur desloyall, i. e. Perfidious Hunter or
Persecutor.

In this calamity many that would have saved their lives among their own
friends, could not have the favor, nay their own parents refused them, others
betrayed by their friends, and yet it pleased God to move the hearts of some of
their Enemies, by their high detesting these cruelties, and villainies,
insomuch as they hazarded their own lives to save some of the Protestants.

Was ever such unheard of cruelties permitted and commanded by any Christian
King, and Court with such delight of shedding Protestant blood; We may say of
the French nation (as the case here stood) as the poor. Indian said of the
Spaniards.

The story stands recorded thus.

A Prince of the Indians being so far wrought upon as to receive baptism at the
hands of a Friar, he first questioned, whether the souls of such as were
baptized went? Answer was returned, To Heaven; then says he, whether must they
go too that are not baptized; They answer, To Hell; but he further demanded, To
which of these two places the Spaniards went? Answer is returned, To heaven,
then said the Indian, Let me go to Hell if the Spaniards go to Heaven; for I
cannot believe heaven to be a good place, that is a reward for such bloody
Butchers; and Masters of such unheard of cruelties. May we not say so of this
sad Massacre of France? but I leave the application to the judicial reader.

The King now fearing the Dishonor of falsehood, treachery, and perjury, and
that it might not fix any reproachful blot, or stain on the Kings name; This
King at the same time that he sends Letters through France, giving in command
to cut off and destroy the Protestants, the same King with the same hand, and
at the same time, sends Letters to the Governors of his Provinces; wherein he
lets the world know that the late mischief in Paris, had to his great sorrow
happened by means of the Duke of Guise, who having raised the people, they
tumultuously broke through the Guard, which he had appointed for the Admirals
safety, and with great Fury killed the Admiral and his Friends, and that he
with the Queen Mother and Brethren, were through the danger of a furious
multitude, forced to retreat for safety to the Lour, all which he said was
against his mind and will, and therefore he desired the Edict of Pacification
to be kept inviolable.

The like Letters he writ to England, Switzerland and Germany; which because
they bear one tenure, and penned after one manner, I have to avoid prolixity,
incerted only this following Letter.

The true Copy of the Kings letter to the Governor of Burgundy.
Cousin,
YOu have perceived what I wrote unto you Yesterday, concerning my Cousin the
Admirals wounding, and how ready I was to do my endeavor to search out the
truth of the deed, and to punish it, wherein nothing was left undone or
forgottou. But it happened since, that they of the house of Guise, and other
Lords and Gentlemen their Adherents, (whereof there be no small number in this
City) when they certainly knew, that the Admirals friends would proceed to the
revenge of his hurt, and because they were suspected to be the Authors thereof,
were so stirred up this last night, that a great and lamentable sedition arose
thereof, insomuch that the Guard by me appointed for his defense about his
House, was set upon, and he himself with certain of his Gentlemen slain, and
havoc of others made in diverse places of the City, which was handled with such
rage, that I could not use the remedy I would, but had much ado to employ my
Guards, and other Defense, for the safety of my self, and my brethren in the
Castle of the Loure, to give order hereafter for the appeasing of this
Sedition, which is at this hour well appeased, thanks be to God, and came to
pass by a particular and private quarrel of long time fostering betwixt these
two houses. Whereof when I foresaw that there would succeed; some mischievous
purpose, I did what I could possibly to appease it, as all men know, and yet
hereby the Edict of Pacification is not broken, which I will to be kept as
straightly as ever it was, as I have given to understand in all places throughout
my Realm, and because it is greatly to be feared that such an execution might
stir up my Subjects, one against another, and cause great murders through the
Cities of my Realm, whereby I should be greatly grieved, I pray you cause to be
published and understood in all places of your Government that every person
abide and continue in the safeguard of his own house, and to take no weapons in
hand, nor one to hurt another upon pain of death; commanding them to keep and
diligently to observe our Edict of Pacification, and to make the Offenders and
Resisters, and such as would disobey and break our will, to be punished. You
shall assemble out of hand as great force as you can, as well of your friends
as of them that be appointed by me and others, advertising the Captains of
Castles and Cities in your Government, to take heed to the safeguard and
preservation of the said places, so that no fault ensue on their behalf,
advertising me also as soon as you can, what order you have given herein, and
how all things have passed within the circuit of your Government. Hereupon I
pray God to keep you, Cousin, in his Holy safeguard.

At Paris August 24. signed Charles,
and underneath BRULAND.


Now at the same time, were Orders given out by the King, for all Towns and
Provinces within his Power, to follow the example of Paris, and to murder and
put to death all of the Religion, and the very next month he wholly abolishes
that famous Edict, giving command to root out all the Protestants both from
Estates and Places, and at last as we shall see, causes a Form of Abjuration to
be made, and causing it to de proclaimed, That no Religion should be exercised
in the Kingdom but the Romish.

Now we see by these Letters that the King would fain lay the blot of this foul
cruelty to the ancient Quarrel of the houses of Guise and Chastillon,
therefore the Guisans foreseeing the foulness of the fact, strove as much to
evade the dint of the Dishonor, as the King did, though the Guisans were the
Plotters and chief Agents in the practical part of this cruel Tragedy;
whereupon they handled the matter so, that the King was forced to acknowledge,
and avow publicly this horrid act, and indeed none more fit than the King that
commanded it. And truly the sad effects of these unheard of cruelties, would
make any one disown it, and gladly would the King don so, for he loved the
effects, and now could neither evade the dishonor, nor Gods just Judgments.
But he is not yet ripe for them; although in these many massacres he had not
spared, but basely caused to be butchered, an infinite number of gallant
Noblemen, and Young Ladies, with abundance of learned men, many reverend old
men, many young Gentlewomen and Virgins, many honorable Matrons of good
account, women with child, and little infants at their mothers breasts.

Now the King being forced, to let the world know his perjury, and cruelty, he
labors to set a good face on his cruel heart, so that the King that had the
four and twentieth day of August, 1572. declared by Letters to all the
Provinces and several Princes abroad, that the tumult in Paris, arose betwixt
the two parties of the Guisan and Admiral; now but two days after, being the
twenty sixth of the same mouth, This most mighty King (and by consent of all
nations commonly called) the most Christian King, comes into the Parliament,
with a great Train of his Brethren, and other Princes and Lords of his Court
attending him, where in a full Assembly of his Council, he ascends the Throne,
and sitting thereon, he directs his Speech to this great Assembly in manner
following,

The Kings Speech in Parliament
That having been informed, that the Admiral with certain of his confederates,
notwithstanding all his favors, and gracious pardons granted to their former
Rebellions, yet have now plotted against my person, with my mother and
Brethren, to our utter perdition, which being discovered, I was forced to
prevent my own ruin, by Justice to procure theirs, and by a speedy course, have
heaped on their own heads what they would have heaped on mine. For this cause
therefore it was, that by my command the Admiral and his Accomplices, are
deservedly cut off, hoping thereby, that a period is not only put to their
Treason against my self, and Nobles, but also to future troubles, which would
have fallen on this poor Nation, to an utter ruin thereof.

Now although at first, he had both by words and Letters, laid the whole
Business on the fury of a popular tumult, headed by the faction of the Guisans,
yet now at this time, unmasking his Design, he discovers himself like his
actions, and now laid down his Reasons and grounds of this manner of proceeding
against these Rebels, as he calls them; and so further declared,

That he thought it not altogether unfit to make his Magistrates acquainted
with it, That what was done at Paris in the late Slaughters, was by his own
commandment, for the safety of his own life, and national tranquillity, and
also that they might proceed with the like severity, against such Traitors, and
Rebels of such a wicked Conspiracy, and that it was a sudden thing, and not
premeditated (a deep reach to take off the edge of suspicion) happening in a
manner, says he, by chance, and not by any plotted contrivance.

This Speech of the Kings, was by himself, and the Parliament commanded to be
written, and entered into the Records of Parliament, proclaimed by Heralds,
and published in print, a Book also was published by the Kings commandment
(which because it is within four days of the same date of that Letter, wherein
he lays the blame of the Admirals death, etc. on the Duke of Guise, and here
takes it to himself) therefore I say I thought fit to insert that printed Book
by way of Declaration, which is as follows.

A Declaration of the King, concerning the occasion of the Admirals death, and
his Adherents and Accomplices, happened in the City of Paris, August 24. 1572.
By the King.

HIs Majesty desiring to have all Seigniours, Gentlemen, and other Subjects
understand the cause of the Murder of the Admiral and his Adherents and
Accomplices, which lately happened in the City of Paris, the four and twentieth
day of this present month of August, lest the said deed should be otherwise
disguised and reported than it was indeed, His Majesty therefore declares,
that which was done was by his express commandment, and for no cause of
Religion, nor breaking his Edicts of Pacification, which he always intended
and still minds and intends to observe and keep, yea it was rather done to
withstand and prevent a most detestable and cursed conspiracy, begun by the
said Admiral, the chief Captain thereof, and his said Adherents, and Accomplices,
against the Kings person, his Estate, the Q. his Mother, and the Princes his
Brethren, the King of Navar, and other Lords about him, wherefore his Majesty
by this Declaration and Ordinance, gives to understand to all Gentlemen, and
others of the Religion, which they pretend Reformed, that he minds and
purposes that they live under his Protection, with their wives and children in
their houses, in as much safeguard as they did before, following the benefit of
the former Edicts of Pacification, most expressly commanding and ordaining, that
all Governors, and Lieutenants General, in every of his Countries and
Provinces, and other Justices and Officers to whom it appertains, do not
attempt, nor suffer to be attempted, any thing in what sort soever upon the
persons and goods of them of the Religion, their wives, children and families,
on pain of death to be inflicted on those that shall be found faulty, and
culpable in this behalf. And nevertheless to withstand the troubles, slanders,
suspicions and defiances, that may come by Sermons and Assemblies, as well in
the houses of the said Gentlemen, as in other places, as it is suffered by the
said Edicts of Pacification, it is expressly forbidden, and inhibited by his
Majesty to all Gentlemen and others of the said Religion, to have no
assemblies, for any cause at all till his Majesty has provided and appointed
otherwise for the Tranquillity of his Realm, upon pain of disobedience and
confiscation of body and goods. It is also expressly forbidden under the pain
aforesaid, that for the aforesaid accasions none shall take or retain any
Prisoners, or take ransom of them, and that incontinently they certify the
Governors of every Province, and the Lieutenant General, of the name and
quality of every such Prisoner, whom his Majesty has appointed shall be
released and set at liberty, except they be of the late Conspiracy, or such as
have made some practice or device for them, or had intelligence of, and they
shall advertise his Majesty of such to know his further pleasure. It is also
ordained, that from henceforth none shall take or arrest any Prisoner for that
cause, without his Majesty's commandment, or his Officers, nor that none be
suffered to roave abroad in the Fields, to take up Dogs, Cattle, Beefs, Kine,
or other Beasts, Goods, Fruits, Grain, or any thing else, nor to hurt the
Laborers by word or deed, but to let them alone about their work or calling in
peace and safety.

At Paris August 28. 1572. signed Charles,
and underneath Fizes.
Imprinted at Paris by John Dalleir, Stationer, dwelling on Saints Michaels
Bridge at the sign of the White Rose, by the Kings License.



There was Letters also writ by the King to the Officers of Burghs, also
remembrances sent to the General Lieutenant of Burgundy, which being to the
same purpose, is omitted for brevity.

The Kings Oration, in the great Assembly aforesaid, being ended; before this
Assembly broke up, one Christopher Thuane, the President of this Assembly in
Parliament, being one of a high Spirit, and subject to admire his own parts and
actions, ready to wonder what a fool he could make of Solomon, being a man
reported to be notable for his light brain and cruel heart, who trusting more
to a slipery tongue, than a sound cause, congratulated the King for his wise
Policy and good success in a speedy conquest over his Enemies.

But alas! how did he conquer? Only by wearing the vest of the Innocent, to
conceal and cover the deformed ugliness of his perfidious perjury.

But the Advocate of the Finanees succinctly delivered his mind to this purpose.

That though his Majesty had just cause to punish Delinquents, yet it were more
becoming the justice of a Prince, to proceed according to the Laws by himself
decreed and established, and so more fit for his Majesty to command a speedy
cessation of such violent slaughters, and to enter upon a judicial proceeding,
according to the Laws, which was well known to be the proper and peaceable
establishment of Empires and Kingdoms.

This advice takes well, for now the King begins to do unjustly in the name of
Justice; so he proceeds to dissemble a Legality for all his future Butcheries,
unwilling to murder any more without a statute, and pretense of Justice for it.

This being a brave principle of a Tyrant; and that whereas the Laws at first
were known to be the legitimate daughter of judgment, it must now be made the
adopted daughter of Tyranny.

Now is an arrest of Parliament, with his Royal assent, so that immediately
Heralds went about the City, and an Edict was proclaimed in the Kings name,
That all murders should cease; but those that he intended more immediately to
have a hand in himself, by sitting in judgment and quallifying his cruelty,
and bloodshed, with the name of Justice.

And first let us see a little of this new Justice of the Kings, which now must
be exercised on the dead Admiral, which being as aforesaid, hung by the heels
on the common gallows of Paris, the people by flocks and multitudes gathered to
see it.

The Queen Mother, to delight her self with that sad v^ew of her Sons and her
own bloody cruelty, she takes the King and his Brethren, and so advances
toward this sad sight, but his body was in the night conveyed away by two of
the Marshall de Momorancies Servants, and was secretly buried at Chantilly,
whose faithfulness and adventure is beyond a terrene Reward.

And now the King begins to put in execution the advice of the Advocate; being
also persuaded to it by Morvilleir, a wicked fellow, and the first that brought
the Priests into the Kingdom of France, now it was thought fit to bring to
public Justice, those that were taken flying and hiding themselves, and so
after the usual manner of Judicial proceedings, should be examined by chosen
Judges culled on purpose, and so by Sentence condemned, that in view of all the
world, they might receive their execution as the effects of justice, and reward
of there Treasonous practices.

The Judges thus appointed, was Birage, Thuan, Limege and Belleuxe; who
presently gave order for a man of Hay made in shape of a man's body, and so to
personate the Admiral, whom they had murdered; and so it was dragged through
the streets by the Boreau, his memory was condemned and razed out of
remembrance, his arms and Ensigns of Honor and Chivalry demolished, his
Castles and Farms razed to the ground, his Children pronounced infamous, and
unnoble, and all the trees in his woods to the growth of six foot to be cut
down.

And now to make way abroad in the World, in the Court of Foreign Princes and
Nations for a more neat excuse to their unheard of baseness; They disperse
Libells full of dishonor to the Admiral, and his Adherents, and stuffed with the
Defamation of their memories, and that their Actions might not run in a Line
Antartick to their words, The King dispatches his Grand Provost with all
diligence to seize upon the Admirals wife, and Mounseir de la Vall the Son of
Andelot deceased, who by Gods good Providence were already fled to Genova, and
the better to escape further danger, went to live among the Switzers in the
Canton of Bearn, the younger Children both male and female were condemned to
death in their tender years.

They give also new charges to their Ambassadors, negotiating in Germany,
Poland, England, Switzerland, and other Foreign Countries, to justify the
actions of the King and Catholics, tending also to the Public reproach and
shame of the Admiral and his Friends.

But God used these things afterward as a further mean to discover their
treachery, and so proved against their expected advantage.

For had the King and Court of France declared at first that they designed to
cut of their Enemies, as the exuberous branches of the Kings indulgency, and
now grown his Enemies hy their plotted treachery, this would have excused them
from perjury and treason, but to pretend that they intended not what they
really resolved to do, and nothing less than what they did, This I say was the
height of dishonor to the Crown of France.

And thus died that famous, Religious, and Noble Commander Gasper de Colligny
Admiral to the Protestant Army and cause, for the space of twelve years; whose
deserved Fame lived with great renown in the hearts of all the Godly, and with
no less terror and amazement often filled the Kingdom of France, whose valor
purchased great merit from his Enemies; He that made the King and Court afraid,
in a hasty and disorderly retreat from Meaux to Paris. And that I may add one
mite to the Treasure of his true worth, this is he that many praised and all
admired, that through a wise conduct of his affairs, terrified his boisterous
Enemies, to a submissive calm of subjection; A man so inspired with great
courage, and constancy, that to take a Description by any pen, would be the
highest road to lay his merits in the grave of obscurity, being a man full of
the sail of valor and sound judgment, a star of the greatest magnitude in the
affairs of highest importance, shining for ever in the lowest obscurity of
discords, sudden dangers, and insurrections. One that cannot be enough admired,
commended or honored, being above all a man of profound judgment in point of
reality. This being the least part of honor that is paid to his eternal worth
by all that knew him. He, he it was that basely suffered, the unresistable
shock of a perfidious, and treacherous death, cowardly murdered by those that
durst never draw a Sword with a Resolution of valor against this Champion, but
trembled at his Remembrance and Presence, who was never overcome by valor but
by cowardice.

Amongst the rest that were brought to a Legal murder. was one named Caviagnes
Master of the Requests to the King, and one named Briquemault, both inward
friends to the Admiral, and in great reputation in the Court of honor and Camp
of Chivalry.

Now this brave Commander and old Soldier Briquemault, having great renown by
his service under King Francis, and King Henry, was therefore honored by all
but such as love no Rivals, nor valued any cruelty if they could but out shine
others loyalty, by their own treachery. This brave Gentleman was about
fourscore and ten years old, and poor Gentleman had gone through too much proof
of fidelity, now to end his life under the command and protection of such a
cruel Tyrant.

Now these gallant Commanders aged with experience, and filled with innocent
integrity, were like Lambs before Wolves, threatened to be torn in pieces
unless without delay, they would with their own hands subscribe that they were
of the Admirals Council, to cut off the King, by an untimely death; together
with the Queen his Mother and his Brethren, and promising pardon, if they would
accept of it; These innocent Gentlemen cried out, That they were ready to
suffer the Torments of their merciless cruelty upon their bodies, rather than
pull down vengeance upon their spotless souls, so humbly beseeched the King to
spare his torments, seeing none could pierce so far as force themselves to a
false accusation, yet if his Majesty pleased to totment their bodies, they
hoped God would so in his mercy order it, as to lessen the pain thereof by his
gracious presence in their souls; in whose goodness they hoped to depend for
aid, rather than perjure their own Souls by a false accusation of themselves,
and others, being as full of innocence and integrity as they of cruelty and
perjury; they were resolved never to accuse murdered innocence, wherein they
never were guilty, nor commit such an execrable crime as the King requested;
and (say they) though the King values the tranquillity of his Realm before the
blood of Christians; yet we hope to embrace a peaceable conscience, in
trampling underfoot the high esteem of a transitory possession; for what will
it gain us to gain our lives and lose our immortal souls?

The Judges having some remorse of conscience, began to deny the embracement of
that infamy, The Judges touched in conscience do refuse to fit in Judgment.
which must justly fall on their unjust Sentence; for indeed their reasons were
unrefistable; and these Judges understood the intent of the King by the
Defendants Pleas, so they refused any more to hear, or determine, much less to
give Sentence, whereupon were new Judges appointed in their room, and to them
was joined a Tormenter, and Notary, as might suit with them, so at last these
eminent and brave Cammanders and Gentlemen, were by a shadow of Law, and
illegal Legality, condemned to die, and so the 22. of October 1572. in the fight
of the King, Queen, Mother, her Sons, with many thousand gazing on them, they
were led to the gallows, seated in the prime street of the City, but before
execution, as Briquemault ascended the Ladder, came to him the under Provost of
the Town, whom the King had commanded to insinuate into him and to profer
pardon for life, if he would confess what was laid to his charge, saying
further, that his Majesty being of an easy nature, and courteous affability,
would as speedily grant pardon, as he ask it, but he, like one truer to his own
soul, then the K. to his promise, replied, That it was the K. duty to ask
pardon of God, if the day of Gods mercy had not past upon his cruelty and
perjury, and so was far from asking forgiveness for that, whereof God and his
soul were witnesses of his innocence, yet to prove himself as good a Christian
as the King a ernel Tyrant, he cordially desired God of his great mercy to
forgive the King. And so lifting up his eyes to heaven, he uttered these Words,
Oh my God, upon whose Tribunal seat I stand, and whose face I hope shortly to
see, thou know well that I know nothing, nor did not so much as once think
of any Conspiracy against the King, nor against his Estate; though I stand
charged with the same in my process, but I beseech God to pardon the King, and
all those that have been the cause of this my unjust death, even as I desire
pardon at thy hands for my sins, and offenses committed against thy Divine
Majesty; so ascending another step of the Ladder, he only said, I have somewhat
to utter to the King, which I would be glad to communicate unto him, but (says
he) I see that I may not; and so shrunk up his shouldiers, forbearing to use
any further speech; so these two brave Gentlement were at last with halters
about their necks, most basely, unjustly and dishonorably thrown off the Ladder
by the Hangman; whose deaths ere this are accounted for; and as Briquemaults
constancy was much commended, so was his death much bewailed by many
Catholics, that were spectators of this sad cruelty.

Two things was very ill spoken of by the Catholics and Protestants; first the
presence of the King, as a thing unworthy the Head of Justice, to see the
Execution; Secondly, That Briquemault being a Gentleman of Good descent, was
basely hanged, being a thing rare in France, but especially now in regard he
was reputed of his Enemies to be free from the charge for which he died; about
an hour after this unheard of Justice and execution the bloody Catholics of
Paris, drew their bodies through the Streets, thrust their dead bodies through
with daggers, shooting of dags at them, cutting off their ears, and omitted no
other kind of cruelty, and barbarous villainy that could be imagined.

And thus the Noble Gantlemen, by their Christian Moderation and composedness
of mind, reared Trophies of Honor out of the Ruins of their own misfortunes,
Et Miserias infularum loco habuere, wore their disasters like holy vestments as
robes of honor, They let the world know they could not only do but suffer, and
that passive fortitude is as good as active valor, Et facere and pati fortia,
hoc Romanum est, L. Flo.

And now to perfect all, they likewise with these two famous Gentlemen, cause
to be hanged a man of straw made for a shadow of the Admiral.

These barbarous cruelties, strange Treachery, and unheard of perjury in these
bloody proceedings against the poor Protestants of France, brought an odium and
bred a Hatred from Stranger Princes, but especially in Poland; likewise did
much frustrate the French Negotiations in behalf of the Duke of Anjou.

And Courteous Reader, since the first beginning of publishing this sad
Tragedy, there came in the interim a book to my hand; wherein is somewhat
discoverd of this History, but specially the resentment and judgment of Sir F.
Walsing ham then Ambassador in France for Q. Eliz. of blessed memory, as also
some orher Letters, the matter contained therein I have shortly collected for
the public good, which though abstracted here, yet may more at large be read
in the Author.

In a Letter to Sir Tho. Smith, page 245.
-- And therefore I hope her Majesty will stand upon her Guard, and strengthen
her self with the Amity of the Protestant Princes of Germany, who (as I hear)
are awake, and marvelously stomach this late cruelty, and do think that the
danger thereof will reach to themselves, if they do not seek to prevent it. One
Roulart a Catholic and Canon of Nostre Dame and also a Counselor in the
Parliament, uttering certain Speeches in misliking this lawless kind of
proceeding without Justice, was apprehended and committed to Prison, and in
prison murdered as disorderly as any of the Rest; wherewith diverse of the
Catholics themselves were offended. This manner of proceeding breeds General
distrust in them of the Nobility, and every man fears Gods vengeance.

Paris, 16. Sept. 1572. F. Walsingham.


In a Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham, page 246.
-- The Ambassador proceeded, showing also outwardly, a mavelous inward
grief of mind for this shameful fact, professing himself ashamed to be
accounted a French man. -- Although indeed the same informations had been true,
yet the manner of the cruelty used cannot be allowed in any kingdom or
Government, and least in that place where the King might by order of Justice
have done due execution, both to the Admiral, and all others that should have
proved offenders: for it cannot be denied, that the same forces that murdered
so many, might have more easily attached them all, or the principals, and
brought them to answer to Justice when the King would, etc. -- whose age and
knowledge ought in such case to have foreseen how Offenders ought to be
justified with the Sword of the Prince, and not with the bloody Swords of
Murderers, being also the mortal enemies of the party murdered, etc. -- And
as for the Admiral, she confesses, that she was very sorry for his death, as
for one whom she thought a good Minister to continue Amity betwixt their two
Majesty's, and she had cause to bewall the rest of the Noblemen for the like
cause etc. -- Her Majesty did greatly lament their death, and does surely
persuade her self, that if the King shall not use his power to make some amends
for so much blood so horribly shed, God, who sees the hearts of all, as well
Princes as others, will show his Justice in time and place, when his honor
shall therein be glorified, as the Author of all Justice, and the Revenger of
all bloodshedding of the innocents, etc.

Woodstock, Sept. 9. 1572. W. Burleigh, F. Knowles, Rob Leicester, T. Smith,
James Croft.



In a Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham, folio 250.
SIR,
I See the Devil is suffered by the Almighty God for our sins, to be strong in
following the persecution of Christ's Members; and therefore we are not only
vigilant of our own defense against such traiterous attempts as lately have
been put in ure there in France, but also to call our selves to repentance, etc.

-- I desire to have the knowledge of as many principals as were slain, and what
Protestants did escape, we are much perplexed with variety of Reports, etc.

Woodstock 19. Sept. 1572. W. Burleigh.


In a Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham, page 251.
THe Lamentable Tragedy that has been there used of late does make all
Christians look for a just revenge again at Gods hand, as it has pleased him
to fear us, and so pinch us in the mean time, with the scourge of Correction by
the sufferance of his people thus to be murdered, etc. -- That we may see as
well the fall of his and our Enemies, as the blood of his Saints to be so
innocently spilt, even for his mercies let him turn it ten fold upon their
heads, etc. -- If he continue in confirming the fact, then must he be a Prince
detested of all honest men, what Religion soever they have, for as his fact was
ugly, so was it inhumane, for whom should a man trust if not his Princes Word?
and these men whom he has put to slaughter not only had his word, but his
writing, and not private but public, with open Proclamations, and all other
manner of Declarations, which could be devised for their safety, which now
being violated and broken, who can believe or trust him?

Sept. 11. 1572. Rob. Leicester.


In a Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham, page 252.
SIR,
THis sad accident in France seems to us so strange, and beyond all
expectation, that we cannot tell what to say to it, the matter appears all
manner of ways so lamentable, The King so suddenly, and in one day to have
dispoiled himself, and his Realm, of so many notable Captains, so many brave
Soldiers, so wise and so valiant men -- You would not think how much we are
desirous to hear what end these troubles will have, whether it rangeth further
into all France, or die, or will cease here at Paris, our Merchants are afraid
to go now into France, and who can blame them? who would where such liberty is
given to Soldiers, and where nec Pietas, nec Justitia, does refrain and keep
back the unruly malice of the raging popular?

Woodstock Sep. 12. 1572. Tho. Smith.


In a Letter to the Right Honorable his very Good Lords, the Lords of Her
Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, page 253.
-- That she was not a little astonished, and perplexed, upon the hearing of
the late miserable and most lamentable accident in such sort, as she knew
neither what to say or Judge of the matter, seeing those murdered without
pity and compassion, without regard had either of sex or age, without ordinary
form of Justice, who upon assurance of the Kings word, laying all suspicion
aside, did misdoubt nothing less than that which happened unto them; who
thought their lives then in most safety when by proof it appeared they were in
most danger etc. -- That though she was much astonished at the first report
made of the great slaughter, and horrible murder, without regard had either to
sex or age of those of the Religion, who laying aside all distrust, and
reposing themselves upon his words, did most confidently throw themselves into
the arms of his Protection, etc. -- And as for the cruelty (says he) exercised
both here in my Town of Paris, and elsewhere, it is a thing that has happened
against my will to my great grief; of late (says he) the like disorder has
hapenned at Roan, for the which I am very sorry; and therefore for the redress
thereof I have all this morning been devising with my counsel for exemplary
Justice to be done upon those which shall be found to be offenders, etc. -- The
Marshall de Cosse, has Commission sent him, as I am informed, to execute as
many of the Religion, within his Charge, as have been known in these late wars
to have served the Princes, and born charges; If the Marshall Montmorency had
been in this Town at the day of execution, both he with all his Brethren, the
Duke de Bulloin, and Marshall, had been slain, as I am credibly informed.

Paris 24. Sept. 1572.

In a Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham page 262.
-- The cruel Murders at Roan is now long ago written unto us, when we thought
all had been done, and by the same Letters was written unto us that Deip was
kept close, and the same execution of the true Christians looked for there, but
as then not executed, howbeit Sigoigne did warrant all our Englishmen to be out
of danger, and not to be afraid; but what warrant can the French make, now
Seals and words of Princes being traps to catch innocents, and bring them to
the butcheries? if the Admiral and all those murdered on that bloody
Bartholomew day, were guilty, why were they not apprehended; imprisoned,
interrogated, and judged, but so much made of as might be, within two hours of
the assumation, is that the manner to handle men either culpable or suspected?
So is the Journeyer slain by the Robber, so is the Hen of the Fox, so the Hind
of the Lion, so Abel of Cain, so the innocent of the wicked, so Abner of Joab:
but grant they were guilty, they dreamt Treason that night in their sleep; what
did the innocent men, women and children at Lions? what did the sucking
children, and their Mothers at Roan deserve at Cane? at Rochel? what is done
yet, we have not heard, but I think shortly we shall hear; will God, think you,
sleep still? will not their blood ask vengeance? shall not the Earth be
accursed that has sucked up the innocent blood poured out like water upon it,
etc. -- I wish you were out of the Country, so contaminate with innocent
blood, that the sun cannot look upon it, but to prognosticate the wrath and
vengeance of God. The ruin and desolation of Jerusalem could not come till all
Christians were either killed there, or expelled thence.

Reading 26. Sept. 1572.

In a Letter by Sir Thomas Smith, Secretary to her Majesty, p. 263.
-- The Best is we stand I thank God, upon our Guard, nor I trust shall be
taken and killed asleep, as the Admiral was, etc. -- It does me good to see the
Princely compassion that her Majesty does take on the poor Vidame who is
escaped by good fortune into England; her Majesty has written for him to the
King. The Copy I send you, you shall do well to press the Answer, and bring it
with you; I dare say, it will do you good if you can do it, Haec est
vicissitudo rerum humanarum, haec est communis casus hominum. All that be not
bloody and Antichristian must needs condole, and lament the misery and
inhumanity of this time, God make it short, and send his Kingdom amongst us.

Sept. 27. Tho. Smith.


In a Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham, page 264.
-- We have understood by report from Roan, that on Thursday was seven-night,
there was a general slaughter made of all that could be imagined Protestants,
so as the very Channels of the Streets did run with blood.

Sept. 25. 1572. W. Burleigh.


In a Letter to the Lord of Burleigh page 269.
-- Does well enough discern that he late cruelty here executed is void of all
manner of Just defense, and therefore in Gods just judgment is like to receive
just punishment; and if the same do not happen so soon as we desire, our sins
is the let. They here are so far imbrued in blood, as there is no end of their
cruelty; for no Town escapes where any of the Religion are found, with General
murdering and sacking of them, and yet they protest all this to be done
against their Will, though it be evidently known it is done by their
Commandment. This manner of proceeding seems to all men so strange, as no man
can tell what to judge of it, openly no man dare but commend it, privately few
are found that do not utterly detest it.

Paris 8. Octo. 1572. F. Walsingham.


In a Letter to the Earl of Liecester, page 282.
-- Generally all men do cry out and say, That the Liberty of France is lost,
yea and some the most vehement Catholics do wish both themselves, and that
they have, out of this Country, etc. -- What will be the issue of these
Tragical doings here, God only knows, but generally every man fears that
all will go to ruin.

Paris 1. of Nov. 1572. F. Walsingham.


In a Letter of Sir Francis Walsingham, page 304.
-- I further showed him the redoubling of her Majesty's grief, as well to see
such as by no means could be privy to any conspiracy given up even to the vile
and base people; whose execution was without respect of age or sex in a most
barbarous sort; as also to see those that are alive forced by Edicts lately set
forth, either to abjure their Religion, to fly, or else to be murdered, a kind
of proceeding which shows, that his meaning is to root out all the Professors
of the Gospel within his Realm.

Paris 25. of December. 1572. F. Walsingham.


Now we may see how things were resented by blessed Queen Elizabeth, how at
first the King by his Ambassador would persuade her to believe, that he had
reason for what he did, although he desired to excuse it by necessity. Many
other things of high concernment is couch't in those excellent Letters, worthy
serious perusal at large.

Now although the King did declare it to the world, that he intended not to
break the Edict of Pacification, but that liberty should be granted to their
Persons, yet the all-seeing God discovered their deeds of darkness, in the
daylight, and that the King only deceived the World with his wonted
Hypocrisy, which will plainly appear by the tenure of a Letter intercepted
from the Duke of Guise, at the Court in Council, being written from Paris to
his Wife, the same day that noble Briquemault was ignobly hanged; the words
were these,

The King has decreed in Council, utterly to root out this seditious vermin of
the New Religion.

And thus this King and Court, washed their bloody, and crimson hands in the
blood of the Protestants.

And that the World might see that effected, which he so often publicly
proclaimed was never intended, his heart and his tongue being not Confederates,
showing himselt now perjured to purpose, he causes to be proclaimed, That those
that had any charge in the Nation, should for sake their Religion and their
Places; insomuch that there was no small village, but the poor Protestants were
compelled to hear Mass, or speedily perish by the Sword, and yet so basely
bloody, and murtherous did the French Nation show themselves at this time, that
even those that through a sudden fear embraced by temptation, a sad Apostasy,
abjuring the Protestant Religion, yet were presently murdered.

The Remembrances of the King sent to all Governors of Provinces, and also the
form of Abjuration, I have here inserted, according to the Original Copy, that
the world may see the perjury of a faithless King.

Remembrances sent by the King, to all Governors, and Lieutenants of his
Provinces, to put out, and remove all those of the RELIGION from their Estates,
and Charges, although they would abjure the same; saving such as have but small
Estates and Offices, to whom his Majesty permitted continuance, on condition
that they abjure the said Religion, according to the Form of Abjuration sent
for that purpose.
THe King, considering how much his Officers, and Majestrates of Justice, and
such as have the Administration and dealing of his fines and payments which be
of the New Religion, are suspect and hated, and put his Catholic Subjects in
great mistrust, if they should presently exercise their Offices after these
fresh commotions: Therefore least the people should thereby be brought to a new
occasion of stir, and they of the new Religion be in danger and hazard of their
own persons, although they would abjure their said new Religion, and profess
the Holy faith and Catholic Religion of Rome; His Majesty desiring to avoid
the new mischiefs and troubles which may come, has advised to discharge the
said Officers, from the exercise of the said Offices, until he shall otherwise
appoint. And yet nevertheless in the mean while, if the said Officers be
obedient unto his will, and live quietly in their Houses, without attempting,
practicing, or taking any thing in hand against his Service, they shall receive
their wages, and they that will resign their said Offices to Catholic persons,
and come to his Majesty, shall be honorably provided for. And as touching
other small Offices without wages, which cannot be troublesome, as Notaries,
Sergeants, and such, where the Officers have none Authority, which cannot be so
odious nor mistrustful to the people as the other; His Majesty is advised, that
such small Officers which will abjure the said New Religion, and confess the
faith Catholic, Apostolic and Romish, and therein live continually hereafter,
shall continue in the exercise and enjoying of their estates: but they that
will continue in their new opinion, shall depart from their Offices until his
Majesty have otherwise provided. And this is for the great mischief and
inconvenience that may betide them, if they should exercise their said Estates,
because of the great mistrust and suspicion which the Catholics have conceived
of them of the new Religion. Nevertheless his Majesty well considering, that
the most part of the said Officers have none other way to live, but the
exercise of their said Offices, wills that they shall be in choice to resign
to Catholic and capable persons, and then to come to him for that effect, and
he will grant them the greatest favor and moderation of his Treasury that is
possible. The which resolution and pleasure of his Majesty, he wills to be
declared to the said Officers of the new pretended Opinion, as well by
Governors, and Lieutenant Generals of his Provinces, as by them of his Courts
of Parliament, of the Chamber of his Accounts, of the Court of his aids, them
of his great Council, of the Treasury of France, the Generals of his fines, His
Bailiffs, Seneshals, Provosts, Judges, or their Lieutenants, and every one of
them as shall appertain; and to this intent his Majesty wills and intends,
that every one of them in their calling shall send particularly and apart for
every of the said Officers of the new Religion, which be of their
incorporation, charge and jurisdiction, and shall admonish them in this behalf,
to conform themselves to his Majesty's mind, and if any of them in Authority,
because of their said Estates, will return to the bosom of the Catholic and
Romish Church, it shall be said to them, that his Majesty likes very well of
it, and that he takes a great and singular affection therein, and that it
shall give him the greater assurance and credit of their good will, and that
his Majesty will not bar them from his service hereafter, but will provide for
them as their behavior shall deserve; and notwithstanding for the reasons
above said, he wills that they shall cease from the exercise of their
Estates, and Offices, until he otherwise appoints. And because that in many
places of the Realm, they have proceeded by way of seizing the Goods of them of
the new Religion, which be dead or absent, or hid themselves, and sometimes of
those, which be in their own Houses, although his Majesty gave to understand by
his Declaration of the 28. of August last, that he would, and intended that
they of the new Religion should enjoy their Goods, nevertheless to the intent
there should be no doubt of his purpose, and that no mistrust might arise
thereupon, he declares, wills, and intends again, that according to the
Declaration of the 28. of August, they of the New Religion, which be living,
whether they be present or absent, and be not culpable or charged with the last
Conspiration, or to have attempted against his Majesty, or his Estate, since
his Edict of Pacification, shall be restored to their Houses, and put in
possession of all and singular their goods moveable and immovable, And that
the Widows and Heirs of them that be dead, may and shall succeed them, and
apprehend all and singular their goods, and that they shall be maintained in
them, and kept under the protection and safeguard of his Majesty, so that no
hurt shall be done or said unto them, in any manner of ways and sort. Willing
for this purpose that all necessary surety shall be given them, and that all
Officers, Magistrates, Majors, and others, which have public charge, shall
maintain them in all safety, forbidding all persons of what estate, quality, or
condition soever they be, not to hurt them in person or goods upon pain of
death; and nevertheless his Majesty wills that they of the New Opinion shall
submit themselves, and promise upon pain to be declared Rebels and Traitors to
his Majesty, that they shall hereafter live under his Obedience, without
attempting any thing to the contrary, or taking their parts that do attempt
against his Majesty, and estate, or things against his Ordinances, and to
acknowledge none but his Majesty, or such as he shall appoint under him, to
have authority to command them, and if they know any that shall enterprise
against his Majesty, and service, to reveal them incontinent to him and his
Officers, as good and faithful Subjects; and to take away all doubt and
suspicion as well from the Nobility as others, because that in the Declaration
of the twenty fourth of the last month these words are contained (except they
be of the chief, which had commandment for those of the new opinion, or those
which made practices or devises for them, or those which might have had
intelligence of the said Conspiracy) his Majesty declares that he means not
of things done and past, during the troubles which were before the Edict of
Pacification in August 1570. and that their shall be no Inquisition thereof,
and none shall be troubled in goods or person therefore (but for that respect
they shall enjoy the benefit of the Edict of Pacification) but that the said
Words extend only to those which be found to be guilty, or accessory to the
late conspiracy, done against his Majesty and Estate, and that others which are
imprisoned, shall be set at liberty; and as touching them which will make
profession of their faith, and return to the Catholic Religion, his Majesty
desires that his Governors and Officers shall excite and comfort them as much
as they can, to that effect, and execution of that good will; and that their
friends and kinsfolks should also be exhorted to do the like for their part,
and if any should hurt them in goods or body, his Majesty wills ready and
speedy execution to be done on them; and to the intent that they may follow the
form which has been kept in professing the faith, which they do make that
return to the Apostolic and Romish Church; there is sent herewith a memory
thereof.

From Paris the 22. day of September, 1572 signed Charles,
and beneath Pinart.

The form of Abjuration of Heresy, and Confession of Faith, which they which
have swarved from the faith, and pretend to be received into the Church, ought
to make.
FIrst, they which have swarved from the Faith, and desire to return into the
compass of our Holy Mother Church, ought to present themselves to their Curates
or Vicars to be instructed of that which they ought to do; that done, they
shall be sent unto the Reverend Bishop of the Diocese, or his Chancellor or
Official, to make the said Abjuration and confession in Manner and Form
following.

I. N. born at etc. in the Diocese of etc. Acknowledging by the grace of God,
the true faith Catholic and Apostolic from the which I have through my fault
gone astray, and separated my self since, etc. and desirous to return to the
flock of Christ's sheepfold, which is the Catholic, Apostolic and Romish
Church, confess to have abjured and cursed all the Errors and Heresy of the
Lutherans, Calvinists, and Huguenots, and all other Heresy whatsoever,
wherewith I have heretofore been defamed or touched. And I agree to the faith
of our Holy Mother the Church, and desire you in the name of God, of his Son
Jesus Christ, and of the glorious Virgin his Mother Mary, and of all the Saints
of Paradise, That it would please you to receive me the Flock and Sheepfold of
Gods people, which live under the obedience of the Pope, Ordained by our
Savior Jesus Christ, Vicar in the said Church, submitting my self patiently to
abide, and willing to do, the penance which it shall please you to enjoin me
for the absolution of my faults committed whilst I was in the aforesaid Sects,
whereof I ask and require pardon of God, and of his said Church, and of you
(that are appointed my Pastors by God the Creator) absolution, with such
penance as you shall judge to be wholesome for the satisfaction of my sins, and
to the intent you should know, that I have and do make this abjuration from my
heart, I confess moreover before God and you, That I believe that which is
contained in the Symbol or Creed of the Apostles, and Athanasius, and other
Confessions of faith made and approved by the whole Councils of the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Romish Church, that is, I believe in one only God, The Father
Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all things visible and invisible;
and in one Lord, our Lord Jesus Christ, The only Son engendered by God the
Father before the Constitution of the World, God of God, Light of Light, true
God of true God, engendered not created, Consubstantial with the Father, by whom
all things were made, who for us men, and for our Salvation, descended from
Heaven etc. as in the belief of morning prayer; I believe likewise, acknowledge
and confess all that which is contained in the books as well of the Old as of
the New Testament, approved by the said Holy and Apostolic Church of Rome,
according to the sense and interpretation of the holy Doctors received by the
same, rejecting all other interpretation as false and erroneous. I acknowledge
the seven Sacraments of the said Catholic, Apostolic and Romish Church, that
they were instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and that they be necessary for
the salvation of mankind, although that all of them are not of necessity to be
confererd on all, that is to say, I confess that the said seven Sacraments are
these, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, which is the Sacrament of the Altar,
Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, and Marriage. And that the said Sacraments
confer grace, and that of them Baptism, Confirmation, and Order cannot be
reiterated without Sacrilege. That the said Sacraments have the effect which
the said Church teaches, and that the form and usage wherewith they be
ministered to Christians is holy and necessary. I acknowledge also that the holy
Mass is a Sacrifice and Oblation of the very Body and Blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ, under the form of bread and Wine mingled with water, which
substances of Bread and Wine under the said Forms (are in the Mass by the words
which serve for consecration, said and pronounced by the Priest)
transubstantiated, and transformed into the Substance of the said body and
blood of Jesus Christ. Notwithstanding that the Qualities and Accidents remain
in the said Forms, after the said Consecration, and that the Mass is wholesome
and profitable, as well for the quick as the dead; I acknowledge the
concomitance, that is to say, that in receiving the body of Jesus Christ, under
the form of Bread alone, I likewise receive the blood of Jesus Christ. I
confess that prayer and intercession for saints, for the quick and the dead is
Holy, good and Helthful for Christians, and is not contrary (for any respect)
to the glory of God; That Prayers made in the Church for the faithful which
are dead do profit them for the remission of their sins, and lessening of their
pains incurred for the same. That there is a Purgatory, where the Souls
abiding, are succored by the prayers of the faithful. I confess that we must
honor and call upon the Saints which reign with Jesus Christ, and that they
make intercession for us to God, and that their Relics are to be worshipped.
That the Commandments and Traditions, of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Romish
Church, as well they which pertain to the form and ceremonies of Divine
service, and to assist the same, which I think are to draw Christian People to
Piety, and turning to their God, as Fasting, abstaining from meats, observation
of Holy Days, and Ecclesiastical Policy, according to the tradition of the
Apostles and Holy Fathers continued since the Primitive Church till this time,
and afterward brought into the Church by the Ordinances of Councils received
in the same of long and Ancient time, or of late, be good and holy, to the
which I will and ought to obey, as prescribed and appointed by the Holy Ghost,
that the Author and Director of that which serves for the keeping of Christian
Religion, and of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church. I believe also and
accept all the Articles of original sin, and of Justification. I affirm
assuredly that we ought to have and keep the Images of Jesus Christ, of his
holy Mother, and all other Saints, and do honor and reverence unto them; I
confess the power of Indulgence and pardons to be left in the Church by Jesus
Christ, and the use of them to be very healthful, as also I acknowledge and
confess the Church of Rome to be the Mother and Chief of all Churches; and
conducted by the Holy Ghost, and that other pretended particular inspirations
against the same, come of the suggestion of the Devil, the Prince of
Dissension, which would separate the Union of the Mystical body of the Savior
of the World. Finally, I promise straightly to keep all that was ordained at
the last General Council of Trent, and promise to God and you never more to
depart from the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church, and if I do (which God
forbid) I submit my self to the penalties of the Canons of the said Church
made, Ordained, and appointed against them which fall into Apostasy. The which
abjuration and confession I have subscribed.

And now as the Sun shines with a glorious Splendour by its beautiful rays to
all the world, so this bloody Kings. Cruelty with a Horrible Infamy, was
erected to all the world; Who at the first hurt of the Admital showed an
unquestionable resolution to revenge his wrong, and yet done by his special
commandment.

Then when so many thousand Protestants were cruelly murdered in Paris, with
the Admiral and Nobles, Ladies, and young Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, he
presently lays the sad accident to a sudden eruption, by the difference of the
Guisans and House of Chastillon, and so sends Letters abroad to all his
Provinces, and to foreign Nations to that purpose; yet the same day sends
Letters to cut off all the Protestants according to the example of Paris, and
that what was done to the Admirals, and his Adherents, was by his special
command for treason plotted and intended by the Admiral and his Accomplices.

Then those poor souls that were fled into Woods, Rocks and Mountains to hide
themselves from his bloody Fury, he allured into a Net of Destruction by a
Proclamation of Liberty, Estates and Lives, and they were not come home above
two days but by his command basely and unworthily murdered.

And whereas he publicly declared, and proclaimed liberty to the Protestants,
according to the Edict of Pacification, now we see he publicly decrees no
Religion to be exercised but the Romish Religion, on pain of death.

Making as we also see a Form of Abjuration, yet those that were tempted by
Satan to forsake the good way of the Lord, were notwithstanding murdered.

So that whatsoever this King promised, was as soon, and with as much ease
broke as made.

Let us now gather together a few Observations on the most remarkable passages,
and also give some notable examples of Gods Justice and Severity, to such
Covenant-Breakers and perfidious Tyrants, and then proceed to the end of his
Reign, and the beginning of Gods Just Judgments on him, and his Adherents, in
a visible and wonderful demonstration thereof to all the world.

CHAP. X.
The Contents.
SOme few Remarks on the perfidious Treachery in this sad Massacre; Forty
thousand poor Protestants cut off in few days. The most ingenuous Papists
whispered of this perjury and treachery of the Kings; Compared with other
cruelties, but holds no Comparison with the vildest; These poor Protestants cut
off by the Oaths and Promises of a King, enough one would think for the
strongest ty of security. Examples of the like cruel Treachery and perjury,
condemned by the light of Nature, and several Examples of Heathens, worth the
study and perusal. The great and high esteem of an Oath amongst the Heathens in
a few Examples; So few Examples of Gods just Judgments on several Princes, and
others, that have broke Truce, Engagements, Promises and Oaths, which are
collected out of Scripture and History. The Brave Examples of Heathens, worthy
our Imitation in this Sunshine time of the Gospel; though they had but the
Light of Nature, yet they soared above the present practice of many Christian
Kings, nay beyond the Practice of many Professors in these latter Days. The
Duties of Kings and Powers of the World, which is not inconsistent with prudent
Policy and sound Christianity. The many inconveniences of Cruelty and
Oppression; The little ground of suspicion of the Admirals Plots from sundry
strong Arguments.

LEt me a little comment on this sad History, and draw out some Christian
Considerations on this Tragedy, to show what judgments God justly inflicts on
such villainies, and treachery, being such heavy sins as pull down Gods
vengeance, not only on themselves, but the place, even to the third and fourth
Generarion. And now let this sad, doleful, and unparalled Massacre be erected
in view of all the World, let it not be forgot by any tract of time; Let it
stand on a hill as A beacon on fire, to all true Protestants, to take heed of
peace with such faithless men, that have no way to enslave their Enemies, but a
treacherous and deceitful peace. Disdain it not that it is old, I could wish
every age would renew it, That it may be set as a Land mark to avoid the
Distraction of such Treacherous and perjured Princes and Nations, as know no
sincerity, but what is lodged in the outward behavior, and not able to keep
that neither; such as know not what is the meaning of sincerity of heart,
unless it be courtesy and civility, and know not that neither, such as have no
hearts but their Tongues, which they tip with peace, but intend Treason in
their act^ons.

To what can we parallel this unheard of Massacre, had it been amongst
Heathens, Barbarians, Turks, it had been the less to be wondered at; Bellum
Tartaricum.
I have read of many cruelties committed by the Tartars; The King once for one
man's fault destroyed a whole street and killed, even men, women and children,
not sparing women with child. Cruel Tyranny, yet short of the French.
Another time there was a whole Legion of men cut off for one man's fault; for
another man's fault he caused twenty thousand to be killed. Half his Army
revolting, the rest retired to him, like Jobs Messengers with the News, and
tells him the reason why they went not on in a successful progress to the
performance of the Design he sent them about; yet this Tyrant causes his Army
to cut them all off to the number of fourteen thousand; he tied six hundred
thousand by their hands and feet together, and caused them to be cut off. Now
all these cruelties were not to be tainted with either perjury, or breach of
promise, and if it had, it was by a Heathen; but our cruelty and bloodshed is
by a Christian King, to his own Subjects, in a base Treacherous way, contrary
to Oaths, and Covenants before the Eternal God, by a King and Nation that had
so much of the Heathenish darkness dispersed that we cannot say but they were
Christians according to profession, though not according to practice.

Nay had their cruelty and murders reached no further than to those they say
had plotted against them, and so deserved it, then had it been better
excusable, but why ten thousand Innocents in one day, and thirty thousand
afterward, all as ignorant of Treason, as the King and Nation guilty of blood
and perjury; why so many poor Innocent Noblemen, Gentlemen, poor Ladies and
Gentlewomen, Students, aged persons, sick, children, innocent of actual sin,
all must die to quench the blood-thirstiness of this King, Oh! sade and doleful
to consider.

Nay further, had it been in a sudden, unresistable and mad outrage, of a
popular Tumult, guided by the fury of their own fancies; But it was by the
Kings special command, they had no other light to guide their bloody zeal, but
the Kings Authority, which they so often mentioned, as the Echo reached
Heaven, but could not pierce their pity, and done by plots and Contrivances,
premeditated and resolved to be done.

And lastly, had it been in a time of War, to cut off so many poor innocent
Souls, it might also been somewhat pardonable, a raging Sword, sometimes knowing
no bounds, especially when in bloody Hands. But all was done in cold blood, not
in a storm, or heat of blood, nay the only time was in peace, and nothing to be
seen but favors, and acts of Grace; poor Protestants they were catched in no
net, but pretenses of Peace, and the fullest demonstrations of affections, that
might be, nay it was done also contrary to Promises, Covenants and Contracts,
making a Marriage to defile it with blood, no other intent being wrapped up in
that wedding but a plot for blood.

These sad and lamentable Spectacles of man's wrath, and the Devils policy, how
can it but pierce the very hearts and Souls of all Godly Christians, nay I dare
say of ingenuous Papists, who cannot but abhor the thoughts, and mourn to see
such a bloody Tragedy acted upon the Theater of a Christian Kingdom by the
Treacherous plot, unheard of perjury, and downright command of a Christian
King?

When we shall consider the sad slaughters of so many of Noble blood, many
gallant young Gentlemen, with many young Ladies, that came to attend and
complete so seeming and promising a harmony of Reconciliation betwixt both
parties, in the marriage of the Lady Margaret, and King of Navar; to consider
also how many poor innocent infants, and silly souls, were basely murdered by
the hand of abject and forlorn fellows; That its credibly written by good
Authors, that there could not be so few as forty thousand souls cut off in few
days by this sad cruelty and Massacre.

I find it also recorded by good Authors, that many men of quality, who were
both Religious, and the most ingenuous Papists, whispered of this cruelty and
falsehood, so clearly acted by the King in his special commandment. Histories
cannot be produced to parallel this cruelty; The bloody command of King
Mithridates, who with a Letter and Messenger put to death one hundred and fifty
thousand Roman Citizens that were all scattered in sundry parts about their
Merchandise. This I say cannot reach this Kings Treachery, for the reasons
aforesaid.

The Tragical Histories of the K. of Spains Murders in Hispaniola, though they
transcend in number, yet not in the nature of the offense; although it is
recorded, that in seventeen years, he destroyed six Millions of poor Indians,
roasting some, throwing others alive to be devoured of wild Beasts, yet cannot
it come near to our sad story.

We may compare it to Silla, who by a base Proscription, in one City cast out
four thousand and seven hundred Citizens, whereof one hundred and forty were
Senators; and not long after, the Triumvirs proscribed three hundred
Senators, and two thousand Roman Knights, and many other crueltyes. And as Q.
Catulus said of these cruelties, so may I well apply it to these sad disasters,
Cum quibus tandem victuri sumus, in bello armatos, in pace^ inermes occidimus?
with whom at last shall we inhabit, if in war we cut off armed men, and in
peace disarmed? The same Silla after he had given his Faith, for the
preservation of four Legions of his Enemies, for all they implored his
merciless treachery for favor and pity, yet he commanded them all to be cut
off.

Peter of Arragon which destroyed eight thousand French in the Island of
Sicily, is but a flea-bit to this cruelty.

Many other examples of cruelty might be ushered in upon the Stage of
Observation, but what should we do with any more, unless we could bring one to
parallel it? which by the narrowest search into all History I think cannot be
done.

Indeed none of these I have named can fix on the borders of this Cruelty; they
did it against their Enemies, some of them against a foreign Nation, but this
King Charles against his own Subjects, and under the peaceable protection of a
Loving King, as they thought. Those Tyrants owned their bloody acts, and gave
reasons for it; but our King Charles hid his cruelties in the bosom of his
Councils, and varnisht them so with fine-spun pretenses; that all he did looked
not like what he said, till God would not let it be hid, but forced him to
confess it to all the world.

The Protestants never could be got to yield to his Power, but his faith and
promises; which they depended upon, as a sure staff, and prop to lean upon in
all times of disturbance and tumults; else would their force and valor never
have stooped to his rotten faith, and withered promises; we see his promises
and Oaths were linked together like Ropes of sand; he intended not to ty
himself by the most solemn Oaths, and Engagements, but Others must be tied to
their Ruin by them.

What unworthy ways and means this King took (unbecoming the Majesty of a
King) to feed his cruel and bloody heart, making use of the marriage of his own
Sister, as a bait to this horrid villainy; and so abused the marriage bed with a
bloody Tragedy, besprinkling her wedding Robes with blood; which indignity and
dishonor, no Nation under the Sun, either of former, or of the ages since, can
forget or parallel.

It is a piece of such base Treachery, as we shall see condemned by the
practice of heathens that had only the light of nature; it is such a sin as God
often times repaies with his Judgments.

The Story of Camillus.
Camillus with the Roman Army, having besieged the Falerians, a Schoolmaster
of the City one day betrayed all his poor Scholars, to the Roman Army, by
leading them out to play, at last brought them into the Enemies Camp, so was
carried to Camillus, and then said,

Sir, I have here brought you all the Children of the City, and delivered them
up into your hands, that so you may have the City on your own terms.

But Noble and brave Camillus, scornfully and Christianly answered,

That a Noble General should seek Victory rather by valor, than the Assistance
of such base Treachery.

And so worthily abhorring this base perfidiousness, he commanded the
Schoolmaster to be stripped, and then to be whipped back to the City by his
own Scholars; which as soon as the Citizens from off the Walls perceived, they
were so taken with this Noble Act, that they presently made peace with the
Romans.

Thus is Treachery and Gallantry rewarded at once.

When the Sabines besieged the Castle of Rome, the Governors daughter of the
Castle betrayed it to the Sabines, on condition to have all the braslets of
gold; which being promised she secretly led them in at gate in the night; and
afterward, Tacius the General bid all the Soldiers follow this Example, to
perform his promise, who threw his Braselet and Buckler, also that he wore on
his Arm; The Soldiers doing the like she was presently for her Treachery
rewarded with death.

Ariftomenes, King of the Messenians being expelled his own Kingdom by the
Lacedaemonians, was forced to retire in flight to the King of Arcadia for
succor, but being of a resolute nature, resolved to be revenged upon Sparta,
whilst his own Country was spoiled by the Lacedaemonians; but the King of
Arcadia most treacherously discovered it to the Lacedaemonians; for which
perfidiousness his own subjests stoned him, cast him into an abject place, and
set up a Pillar with this inscription.

Difficile est hominem perjurum fallere Divos.

Here was an exemplary punishment of an unworthy King; it is said, that the
bloody and Deecitful man shall not live out half his days; which was seen by
our cruel and bloody King, for few of them that had a hand in the Massacre in
France, but by a Divine hand of Providence, they were selected out to their
just punishment, and were deservedly slain at the siege of Sancere and Rochel.

And the King himself died miserably at the age of five and twentieth years,
his blood issuing out in all parts of his Body. Oh! the Heavy Judgments that
follow breach of promise are many from the Scriptures; The Dishonor that
accrews to such an Action in a King is great; and is condemned by these two or
three examples not unworthy our serious perusal.

The famous story of Attilius Regulus.
Attilius Regulus, General of the Romans, being overcome and taken Prisoner by
the Carthagenians, was afterward upon his word admitted to journey to Rome with
conditions of peace; which he thinking dishonorable, advised the Citizens not
to accept thereof, and though he knew death would ensue, yet he to keep his
Oath and promise turned back, and many others that came with him, though much
entreated by wife, Parents and children, yet returned with him to their
Enemies, according to their Oath; though they were sure of death. Now it happened
that two of these returned not, and kept not their promises, but they were
branded with such infamy, that at last they slew themselves.

Darius Junior, accounted nothing more sacred than keeping his Oaths and
Covenants.

Fabius Maximus.
Fabius Maximus, having contracted with Hannibal for Redemption of the Roman
Captives, sent to Rome for the moneys, which the Senate refused; yet Fabius
rather than break his promise, sold his Estate, and discharged his Covenant.

Lovangus King of China.
Lovangu King of China being besieged in the City of Hangcheu by the Tartarian
Army, he kneeled on the Walls, and desired that his life might satisfy for
theirs of the City, in these words, Spare not me, for I will willingly be my
Subjects victime. Oh rare Love of a King to his Subjects! there wanted Brave
Alexander or Caesar to crown this illustrious testimony of Love to a people, by
saving his willing offer of life, which the Tartars spared not.

I shall only lay down remarkable judgments of God from Scripture, and Examples
Historical, upon perjury, breach of promise and covenants, which are odious
before God, good men and Heathens.

Philip of Macedon.
It is left to posterity on record, that Philip of Macedon left such infamy
behind him, through the light esteem and low reverence of a Solemn Oath, and
his faith given in Leagues, that his posterity suffered great and heavy
Judgments from God, as a just reward of such a great sin, himself at the age
of forty six years was slain, and his family quite rooted out; his Son was
killed by his Wife Olympias; another Son which he had by Cleopatra was
tormented to death in a brazen Bull; the rest of his Sons died the like death;
and his great son Alexander died miserably, and suspected to be poisoned.

In the 34. chap. of Jeremiah, there is a lively instance of Gods Just
Judgment threatened for breach of promise, read from the tenth verse to the
end of the Chapter. God will not be mocked.

In the 17. of Ezckiel ver. 18, 19, 20. and 21. are these words; Seeing he
despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant, (when lo, he had given his hand)
and has done all these things, he shall not escape. Therefore thus says the
Lord God, as I live, surely mine Oath that he has broken, even it will I
recompense upon his own head, etc.

In the 2. of Samuel 21. ver. 1, 2. there is Gods Judgments also against
Covenant-breakers, a famine, year after year, for three years together, and
why? but because Saul had shed the blood of the Gibeonites, against Gods
Commandment, and his own Engagement; and Gods wrath could not be appeased till
seven of Saul's Sons were hanged. Oh! the Just and heavy Judgments of the Lord
against this sin. it is a scarful thing to fall into the hands of the living God;
for God is a consuming fire, and with God is terrible Majesty.

Many are the Judgments of the Lord against this Sin, both in Princes and
people; I shall only give a few more from History, and proceed to the latter
part of this Tragical Massacre.

King of Sparta.
Lisander King of Sparta used to say, Boys were deceived with dice and Cockles,
but men with Oaths; for he made no conscience of them: But God punished him
accordingly, for he was slain at the Walls of the Thebans, and this was him
that first said, If force will not prevail, we will piece it with the Foxes Tail.

King of Jerusalem.
Almerick King of Jerusalem, making a League with the Calyph of Egypt, did by
Oath bind himself to the performance; but contrary to his promise, warring
against them, was miserably wasted, and as miserably ended his days.

The Egyptians punished Perjury by death.

Valdislaus King if Hungaria.
Valdislaus King of Hungaria, concluded and confirmed a Peace by Solemn Oath,
with the great Turk Amurath; but the King of Hungaria, by the Popes persuasion,
breaks his Solemn Oath, and wars against the Emperor of the Turks, and
proceeding to Battle, the whole day was carried dubious on both sides; But
presently the great Turk Amurath takes out of his bosom the Articles agreed
on, and covenanted too by Oaths, and holding up in his hand, lifting up his
eyes to Heaven, uttered these words; Oh Jesus Christ! If thou art a God as
these Christians say, Revenge this wrong done to thy name and me, and punish
these Covenant-Breakers; which words were hardly spoken, but God showed his
powerful Judgments on the King of Hungaria, and his whole Army; For presently
the King Valdislaus amidst his Enemies was slain, and his whole Army routed,
few escaping.

Agesilaus, General of the Spartan Army, marching in Asia Minor, made Truce
with Tissaphernes Lieutenant to the King of Persia, till he had sent to the
King his Master to know his Pleasure; but instead of sending to the King for
aid in advise and Counsel, he contrary to his Oath, sends for a Great Army to
surprise the General of the Spartan Army; But Gods Judgments followed at the
Heels of this perjury; for the Army was quite overthrown, according to the
prophecy of the Spartan General, who said, the Gods were angry, and no doubt
would be revenged on his perjury.

The Romans in ancient times highly reverenced faith and Oaths in case of
public affairs between Prince and People, or between King and King; and to
that purpose they had a Temple erected, and dedicated, where constantly they
used to repair, and there solemnly promise, and swear to all the conditions of
peace and Truces, and so cursed those that went about to break them first, and
therefore for greater and more strict confirmation thereof, they offered
Sacrifices to the Image of Faith, for the greater Testimony of the Intentions,
and love to keep their Oaths, most solemnly made: How will our King Charles the
Ninth be ashamed by these poor Heathens.

The Psalmist says, A man ought not to break covenant, but stand to it though
to his great hurt, yet such a bold wickedness has possessed several Popes,
that they undertake to discharge any that shall break their oaths with
Heretics as they say.

This audacious and impious practice of confronting Gods command, calls for
vengeance from Heaven.

That any man should be so boldly blasphemous, as to say they will pardon this
sin, which God has denounced such fearful Judgments against.

There was in ancient time, a people in Italy called Aequi, their Memory only
now remaining. These people made League with the Romans, and give Oath to keep
it; but not long after they raised an Army, and spoiled the Romans, falling on
them, contrary to Covenant; the Romans send three Ambassadors to complain; but
their Captain General slighted them, and bid them deliver their Ambassy to an
Oak-tree standing by; One of the three Ambassadors spoke to the Oak-Tree, in
these words; Thou hallowed Oak, and what ever else in this place belongs to the
Gods, hear and bear witness of this Disloyal perjury, and breach of Covenant,
and favor our just complaints, that we may at last by the help of the Gods, be
revenged on this perjured people.

So they returned home, and presently raised an Army, set on this perjured
people, and by the just Judgments of God utterly destroy them off the face of
the earth.

To omit many other Examples of this Nature, take but this one more.

King of Lacedemonia.
The King of Lacedemonia, and the Argives being at War, Cleomenes the
Lacedemonian King, made Truce for seven days; and the third night following
fell on them, and made a great slaughter; and with this excuse thought to evade
the dint of the shame, and Gods justice: for says he, It is true I made Truce
for seven days, but I did not mention nights.

Yet God followed this perjured King with these Judgments. The Wives of the
slain Argives arm under the command of Tolesilla their Captainess; enter the
City, and puts to the Sword and flight the power and forces of the perjured
King Cleomenes; afterward he was banished into Egypt, where he miserably died
a desperate death, being his own Executioner.

Thus we see what heavy Judgments God has made, and does execute, upon all
such as are contemners and breakers of this holy Edict, and Law of God; The
Lord is to be feared and obeyed, for in all his Judgments none greater
threatened, nor heavyer and surer falls on, than on bloody and perjured men. A
thing abhorred and hated by Heathens, before ever they were so far enlightened
as to know the Law of God was above the Law of Nature; for though they had but
the light of Nature, yet they held it a sin unpardonable, and no Punishment
accounted enough, as they could invent.

There were some that recorded these cruelties and treacherys of the Kings, and
instanced the Law of the twelve Tables. Si patronus clienti fraudem facit sacer
esto, if the Sovereign cheat his Subjects, let them be out of safety or
Protection.

He that in ancient time despised the keeping of Oaths, was no more to be
called a King. The Right hand was called a Pledge of Faith; The Throne is
established by Justice, and it is an Abomination for Kings to do wickedness:
The Throne is upheld by mercy says Solomon, But this King by his Treachery,
Perjury, and Cruelty, degraded himself of his peoples affections, for he valued
not the lives of many thousand, so his bloody cruelty could be satisfied.

Scipio accounted it an honorable thing to save one Citizen, rather than to
kill a thousand Enemies. There was no power and authority so great as the
Dictators at Rome, it was such an Assembly which met together, as had the power
of War and Peace, nay they had the command of life and death at their will, and
that without any Appeal; and yet it was not lawful for them to execute a
Citizen, unless his cause was publicly and justly heard, and he legally
committed and condemned.

But indeed it is the manner of Murderers to bereave of life without Law, or
cause of death. Nay had this horrid Massaere been a bare downright murder, it
had been the less; but it was covered with fraud and deceit. The King and Court
must personate a Religious habit, and pretense of a Religious vow, making Gods
holy Ordinance stoop to his deceitful and tteacherous intention.

The Duties of Kings and Powers of the World, which is not inconsistent with
prudent Policy, and sound Christianity.
A King ought by his Christian demeanor to have a rich storehouse and
exchequer of Affection, and allegiance in his peoples hearts; and he, who takes
care therein to lay such provision of love, as that it may be as a firm Rock,
as a strong foundation, what is there then that he may not command, which is in
their power to perform, then the arms of the peoples affections open, and are
spread to embrace any command; this is the way to have the key of their hearts,
and to open that treasury of respect; which by the wise mannagement of his
power (received from them) he has ready laid up.

Loving Subjects are most uniting in a harmonious consent of obedience to all
his Commands; love to a Prince created by himself, will make cowards valourous,
even to defend him from the shock of his Enemies assaults: And it is seen with
greatest luster, and to his best advantage in his Straights, when he has made
all his Subjects on the least notice, ready to be volunteers in the greatest
dangers, and hottest attempts for the Honor of their own Prince.

But when Kings spend too much on the stock of his Peoples willing minds of
Subjection, and prodigally trade away that stock of Love treasured up in his
people, what does he but expose himself to all assaults of fury and cruelty,
without pity? as it has been the end of many Princes; nay when love is abused
and turned to hatred, in what a tottering Throne does he sit?

But whatsoever the Theory of an absolute Monarchy be, yet a Good King loves
the practical part of Justice, his Power being more safe in his Laws than his
Will. Though his power and his Command may claim a strong Authority to do as he
pleases; yet he will not make his Power arbitrary, nor beyond the limit of
equal justice to all.

Now for Oppression, Tyranny, Cruelty, and perjury, to be seated in the heart
of a King, and he in the heart of his Kingdom, Oh! how it levells his peoples
affections, and stems the tide and current of their allegiance, razes the very
foundation of his own security, and is the most compendious way to his own
utter ruin.

It does by a strange instinct, raise tumults, and vicissitudes, that like a
rapid Torrent of confusion, falls upon his own head, as the reward of his
vicious merits. What foundation can such a King have, when it is builded on a
Quagmire, seated on the terrible aspect of the peoples hatred, accrewing by his
Treacherous Tyranny?

An ingenuous people can no more brook oppression, than the River Danube, can
mix with the muddy streams of Sava.

But this King to establish his Throne of Cruelty, and Tyranny; Peaceable like,
betroaths his People and Himself, in an indissoluble bond of Peace, never to be
broke on his part, yet no sooner made before the view of heaven, and in the
sight and presence of God, but he registers his falsehood, cruelty and perjury,
in a sudden breach, with the blood of his own Subjects, taking the advantage
of their punctual observance, to disarm them, and take their Towns, which on
the peace granted were delivered; and so erects his bloody Engines of deceit
upon the ruins of his own promise.

Now Christian Reader let us a little see the small probability that the
Admiral should attempt what they pretend; which reasons, for general
satisfaction, I shall gather together; because it is declared by the King, that
it was for a Plot against him and the Court, although it is clear, that it was
resolved on by the King, Queen Mother, and Cabinet Council, to destroy the
Admiral and his Friends; which by the Kings Commandment is lamentably, and
woefully effected, to the great dishonor of the King, and the whole French
Nation, and cannot but ly as a blot to after ages; and a time there must be to
satisfy God and the World for it.

Now who can imagine, that the Admiral should think with a few Gentlemen
allowed for his Guard, to attempt any thing against the King, within Paris,
there being in the Court constant watch, and at the entrance to the Castle, a
strong Guard of Scots, Switzers, and Gaseoins, and was then more strictly kept
in regard of the number of Lords, Noblemen, and Gentlemen, met to solemnize
the marriage of the King of Navar, and the Lady Margaret, and that it is well
known that in three hours space, may be ready at command, sixty thousand men in
arms.

Besides all these Reasons, the young Noblemen and Gentlemen that came with the
King of Navar and Prince of Conde, had no other arms than their Swords and
Innocence; which latter in the greatest danger would defend them best.

And yet further to clear all doubts, the Princes and Noblemen of the
Protestants, for a Pledge, and Testimony for a Solemn Engagement of their
innocence, they brought with them, their Wives, Sisters, Children and
Kinswomen, having no thoughts of any thing but Triumph and Recreation; The
Nobles and Gentlemen intending to show their expert skill at the Tilt and
Tourney.

Now if it be said it was after the Admirals Hurt, that he studied to be
revenged.

It is answered, With what probability can any sober mind, imagine or conceive
that the Admiral lying wounded on both arms, tied up, and hourly waiting when
one Arm should be cut off by the Doctors advise, that the Admiral, I say, being
Guarded by the Kings own Guard, should attempt with three hundred Gentlemen of
his Guard, to surprise the King, etc. being so sick as few days was expected
to pass over, till God would call him to himself, that any should think three
hundred so resolute as to set upon a City wherein was sixty thousond in Arms
by the first Alarm?

But doubtless had such a thing been known or suspected, he would have been
secured by Cossin and his men, who had by the Kings commandment environed and
beset him; how soon might the sick Admiral been apprehended as well as
murdered?

There was never any thing laid to his charge which could be proved by the
least witness, nor what they laid to his charge, had the least mention of time,
place, adherents, means, or witness; so that if it had been proved or
suspected, the King should have proceeded according to Law and Justice, which
are well known to be the props and Pillars on which a Kingdoms happiness stands
secure.

But suppose we that all these things had been really true, and that the manner
of the Admirals death and his Accomplices had been allowable by all nations, yet
let us consider a little, and demand a reason of the insolent cruelty, infamous
barbarism, and unheard of bloodshed, of those, that were thought by themselves
altogether innocent of any plot, being ancient Matrons, many Noble young
Ladies, and Gentlewomen in the flour of their Age, cut off so basely and
barbarously, a number of women great with child, against the Law of nature were
cast into Rivers before the time of their Delivery; many aged persons also
which lay sick in Bed, Many Counselors, Advocates, Proctors, Physicians, etc.
that consulted only with their books, and the rest sequestered from the
conference of any Counsel, by the Sex and degrees; Why was there also so many
learned Teachers and Professors of the Arts and Sciences; amongst whom was
Peter Ramus, that famous man for learning through out the world, who stands in
the memory of the truly learned, as really, as these bloody actours render
France infamous? How many young Students, without hearing or pleading their
cause, were here destroyed by this sad Decree of the King and Council?

Lastly, what Armor was found, what weapons was found in any of the
Protestants houses, by which means suspicion might grow to proof? Or why was
the Kings Letters sent to command the like murders at Meaux, Lions, Troys,
Toulouse, and all over his Dominions, such slaughters were committed till the
very blood of Gods saints made the Rivers swell, and streamed through the
streets reaking hot, that at least 40000. were slain by his bloody command.

Thus has this King and Court imbrewed their hands in the blood of so many
thousand innocent souls, even to the great expectation of some vengeance, which
in Gods due time must needs break out on that land, to the third and fourth
Generation; if a General repentance do not expiate this deserved punishment.

Now Christian Reader, to bring this Kings reign to a close, I shall only
abstract the most notable passages together, which happened after this sad
Massacre.

CHAP. XI.
The Contents.
THe Protestants that escaped this sad Massacre, fled to many Places; Some set
forth Books of this perjury and bloody cruelty; Others fly to diverse Towns and
Cities, and fortify them; Rochel strongly fortified; Forty seven Ministers
fly to Rochel, and escape; The King and Court keep a day of Thanksgiving for
this Victory; The Rochelois refuse a Garrison sent by the King; The French King
lets the King of Spain know the War against him was in jest, as well as his
Oaths and Promises. The Counts Army routed and spoiled by Treachery. Monsieur
de la Nove turns to the Protestants; The unparalled Siege of Sancerre, yet
yielded on honorable terms; The unheard of siege of Rochel; Yet had honorable
Conditions granted. The Protestants fortifye and resolve to sell their Lives at
a Dear Rate. The King takes Villars and performs not Covenant; The Protestants
take in sundry Towns; The King besieges Sommiers, and with great loss leaves
it, and they besiege it again, and take it on terms; The King besieges
Caussade, and with great loss retires, the Protestants are encouraged by their
good Success; They Protest against the Kings last Edict contrary to the Edict
of Pacification; Their Noble and gallant Declaration: Their demands of the
King, and desire of Peace; The King terrified with their Resolutions; The King
recovers of a desperate sickness. A Parliament called, and the Protestant
Deputies resolve to meee them, but no good done; A new Plot discoverod, Count
Montgomery with his Fleet from England, is besieged at St. Lo; he escapes in
person, and is besieged at Danfront; he yields on terms of life, but the King
breaks Engagement, and basely beheaded him in Paris. The Conclusion of this sad
History. The King dies wallowing and rolling himself in his own blood; The Duke
of Anjou succeeds to the Crown, but is justly murdered. The Duke of Guise is
murdered. The Queen Mother broke her Heart and died.

AFter this sad and lamentable Butchery and bloodshed, the poor Protestants
that were escaped, fled with all speed to the several Sanctuaries, which God in
his mercy had decreed for their preservation. Those that inhabited upon the
coast of Bretaign, Picardy, and Normandy, which were Provinces lying on the Sea
over against England. They fled to Queen Elizabeth's Protection, and if occasion
offered, to fight under the command of Count Montgomery, who then was in the
Queens Court.

The poor distressed remnant of Protestants in Dauphine, Provence and Lyonois,
fled into Swisserland, amongst whom was the Admirals sons and Andelots, who by
the fame of their Fathers Authority, and the tenderness of their years, were
joyfully welcomed from such a Land flowing with blood and vengeance.

Some employ their time and Talents in setting forth to the World in Writing
this horrid Treachery and Massacre acted in France, and to let all the
Protestants in other parts of the World beware by their sad example: letting
the World know the stratagem that the French Court use, is to destroy by Peace,
and that to shake hands in a peace with Papists, is the ready way to
destruction; the instance whereof was so fresh in their minds, that they needed
no grand Jury of examples to enforce belief; their own late woeful experience
being sufficient to testify this for a truth.

The Protestants of Burgundy and Campagn fled to the Cities of Germany.

The Protestants in the heart of the Kingdom, and toward Rochel, flocked to
some strong Towns, which it pleased God of his goodness to reserve for their
safety, which places they fortified with all the strength they could; They that
inhabited in the Isle of France, Nivernois, and Beausse, were possessed of
Sancerre. Those that lived in the Provinces of Languedoc and Gascoiny, placed
themselves in Nismes and Montaubon. And the Protestants in Guienne, Poictou,
Zaintonge, and Anjou, fled to Rochel; which proved a safe harbor from the
cruel Birds of Prey; Henry Jaques, Mayor of the City, had the Civil government
thereof. To this City also resorted three thousand five hundred men, and came
from sundry parts, which had been Soldiers in the Wars, and men of approved
valor; also to their assistance came fifty Gentlemen of good quality from the
adjoining parts about the City; there came thither also fifty seven Ministers
of Gods Word, which by Gods mercy were preserved in this sad blow; and for
Ammunition and other Provision, there wanted none to supply their necessity of
a strong and lasting siege.

Now at last the King, Queen Mother, with his Brethren and Court, orders a Day
of extraordinary thanksgiving, to be returned for the good Success against the
Protestants. Thus they reared up Castles of Triumph to their Eternal dishonor,
which practice is condemned by a Turk, Sultan Orchan second, King of the Turks,
when he had overcome the Christians in Battle, word being brought to him,
advise was demanded what should be done to those Prisoners that yet alive
remained in their mercy, whether they should be killed or not? who more like a
Christian than a Turk replied, Oh no, it is not the part of a Soldier to drown
Mercy in Cruelty, for says this brave Sultan, Mercy is the Alms of Victory, a
noble saying of a Heathen.

Now the King sends Monsieur de Byron to Rochell, to place a Garrison, the
Protestants refuse it; being a privilege granted them by the King to receive
no Garrisons; whereupon Byron proclaims a War against them. Poor souls, they
had sadly felt the smart of the K. perfidiousness, by their too credulous
opinion of these fair pretenses; and therefore now thought good to preserve
their lives from Treachery, or die with honor.

And now to let the World know what little reality is sometimes found in
Princes; the King of France declares to the King of Spain, that the war which
he seemingly countenanced under command of Count Lodowick of Nassaw, was only a
plot to bring about his ends; which as it could not be seen by all, so could it
not but be believed by the King of Spain; so that the undertakers under Count
Lodowick, were sharply persecuted by them that afterward got power over them.

Thus were these poor Soldiers betrayed out of the Kings own Treachery. Only
Monsieur de la Nove was preserved secretly; who being safely conducted to the
Kings Court, his Majesty commands him to Rochel, to solicit the City to a
Composition, Brave Monsieur de la Nove, stoutly, and like a Christian, answers
the King, That it was against his Conscience to advise his fellow Protestants,
to lay their throats open to them that would too readily cut them; But the King
commands, and together with his secret desire to see Rochel spurs him on, so
having came to Monsieur de Byron, who was at St. Jean de Angeli, and after a
visit to him, delivering the Kings Message, he enters Rochel; who by a joint
Consent of all the City was chosen their Captain General, who willingly
accepted of it, and gave a good proof of his faithful adherence to the
Protestant cause.

In January, by the Kings Commandment, Monsieur de la Chastre with six thousand
men, besieges Sancere; where finding a furious and resolute Enemy, which would
not yield to their Summons, after the expenses of great toil and labor,
discharging in two months about six thousand Cannon shot, they made an
assault, but were bravely repulsed to the Eternal praise of the Sancerrois
valor and Resolution. The 18. of March by a second battery on all sides, they
at last made a great breach, and so assault and attempt to scale, but the
besieged (who questionless had many friends slain in the bloody Massacre) had
some sparks of their Friends blood in their minds, which then showed it self in
their resolutions; that they fall on the Enemy by a strong defense, and made
not only a Halt in the Catholics proceedings, but made them retreat with the
loss of sixty of their best Soldiers dead in the ditch, two hundred mortally
wounded, and two hundred utterly lamed; all with the loss of seventeen men of
the Protestants; which piece of valor so cooled the courage of the Kings Army,
that they resolved no more attempts to be made again such impregnable
defendants. So they begirt them close on all sides, no relief being able to
come to them; which did so extremely streighten the besieged, that they were
forced to eat their Asses, Mules, Horses, Cats, Dogs, Mice, Moles, Leather, and
at last to eat parchment, and trappings of Horses, horns, wild roots, Girdles,
making bread of the seeds of flax, and herbs mixed with Bran, and of straw and
Nutshels, they made use of slates, Grease, Tallow, and Ointments served for
pottage, frying therewith the Excrements of Horses and Men; nay the very filth
in the streets also; such as went out to seek relief, were either killed by the
Enemy, or lived on Sprigs of Vines, herbs, red Snails and Blackberries; they
endured all miseries till famine had imprinted old age on the Visages of
Children, so that the youths appeared like the Ghosts of the deceased.

Eighty persons died by the Sword, but the famine destroyed five hundred. Some
Soldiers and Townsmen, choosing to cast themselves upon the Enemy, than die by
famine, adventured out; whereof some were killed, some imprisoned, and others
executed: The King having sworn that he would make them devour one another, was
disappointed by a special hand of Providence, and a thing no ways expected by
the besieged Protestants, who indeed looked for a general Massacre according to
the K. threats; who was resolved to bring their houses of a threatening height
as low as their foundation, and their aspiring resolute minds, lower than them,
resolving to raze the City into a solitude, and to bury his Resolution in their
Ruin: but it pleased God that the Duke of Anjou, this Kings Brother, being
chosen K: of Poland, Ambassadors were coming for him, and by the way hearing
of this siege, they earnestly solicit the Bishop of Valence to perform his
promise, for the Bishop had sworn in the name of the King his Master that all
Towns molested for Religion should be free. So the poor Town was saved from the
fury of a bloody and cruel Enemy, and yielded on condition to depart with their
arms, bag and baggage, those that stayed to be free from any further question
for what was past, with a promise to preserve the Honor of women and maids.

The King, with an Army of fifty thousand men, and sixty pieces of Artillery,
besieges Rochel both by Sea and Land. The Town was fortified strongly, nothing
wanting to annoy the Enemy, and encourage valor among themselves. In one Months
time was shot no less than thirteen thousand cannon, and many assauls: But alas
the Catholics were too weak to encounter with the Protestants strength and
Courage. Till at length having endured some Months, the King, Queen Mother,
Duke of Arjou, all the Nobles, with the Cavalry and all the Infantry both Swiss
and French, arrive to this famous siege the beginning of February 1572. of the
French Nobility, there was the Duke of Alancon, third Brother to the King, the
Duke of Montpenseir; the Duke of Aumale, the Duke of Guise and Mayen, his
Brother, The Duke of Nevers, Bouillon, D' Uqes, and the Duke of Longueville,
the Prince Dauphine, the Count of Manlevrier, Marshal de Cosse, the Bastard, De
Angoulesm, the Count de Retz, Monsieur de Moluc, and all the Catholic
Commanders in the Civil Wars and Massacre.

In Rochel there was a great number of Horsemen, and Gentlemen, eight Companies
of Inhabitants, nine companies of Strangers, one Company of the Mayers, one
Company of Volentiers, consisting of twenty Musketeers, twenty five armed with
Costlets of Proof, and thirty Harquebuzeirs; Two thirds whereof were Gentlemen
and such as had command in the late wars.

The siege continued with great valor on both sides, and great loss to the
Kings Army; which in the assaults made, and often sallies, lost the Duke of
Aumale, and Cossin Field-Marshal, who was the first that entered the Admirals
lodging; an infinite number of Gentlemen and Officers, with twenty thousand
Soldiers, and the Duke of Anjou wounded in the Neck, side and left hand by a
Harquebuzeir: but six thousand fresh Switzers coming to the siege, did much
straiten the Rochellers, that at last having no hope of Relief, they grew in
great want of Victuals, yet in their straits the hand of good was wonderfully
seen; for in the midst of their wants, when all other provision failed, there
came before the Haven an infinite number of small fishes, which proved a great
Supply in their needs. Which wonderful sign of Gods goodness amazed them the
more, because it was never before, nor since that ever the like was seen.

During this sharp siege, the same occasion happened now, as did at Sancerre;
for the Ambassadors of Poland being come for the Duke of Anjou, proved a
relief for the Rochelois, when they expected none. So Articles were agreed on
both sides, That there should be a free exercise of Religion in Rochel,
Montauban and Nismes, and to other Towns to be in their houses without search,
That Baptism and Matrimony should be freely administered, not above ten persons
meeting together: and that those that had a mind to sell their estates might do
it, and live where they pleased.

Thus ended the two famous sieges of Rochel and Sancerre. Let us now observe a
little the Transactions of both parties during these Sieges.

Whilst these sieges continued, the other Provinces which the Protestants had
in their power, they fortify. The Baron of Serignac, a discreet and virtuous
Protestant, and no less valourous, did with some others fortify Montauban, and
afterward they advance into the Field with their Troops, and garrison Terride,
assault Buzet upon Tar, and many other Places, and strongly fortifies the Towns
that they had kept during the Civil Wars; so at an Assembly held at Realmont in
Albigeois, they consent to separate to their several charges apart.

A part of Quercy toward Cadenac was the lot of the Vicount of Gourdon; the
Count of Serignac, governed toward Montauban and Gasconie.

The Viscount of Paulin had the command of Lauragais: And the County of Foix,
and the Mountain Country was under the command of Vicount Cau^^ont. These
Commanders resolve to defend their several charges, to secure themselves, as
well as God would enable them; retiring all to their several Commands.

The Earl of Villars, Admiral and Lieutenant to the King, gathers forces
against the Protestants, takes in St. Geniz, and contrary to Articles carries
the Lord of the Place away Prisoner.

The Protestants to balance this loss, takes in Foreze, Montesquian, and other
places.

Against the Protestants does the Marshall de Anville appear in arms, claps
siege to Sommiens, the Earl of Candale brother to the Marshall arrives to his
Assistance, and strengthens the Siege, who now with a resolute charge assault
the Town, but meeting with a sharp encounter, were forced to as nimble a
retreat, and that not without the loss of 300. of their most resolute
Soldiers. After a months time, and five thousand Cannon shot spent, the
Marshal by his Brothers persuasions to revenge the loss of his Captains and
Soldiers, set on a fresh assault, and having before his eyes lost many of his
men, fell on himself, but was as gallantly repulsed as assaulted. The Town now
being straightened, and their walls beaten down, yielded on honorable terms; after
which the Marshall seeing and considering the Protestants resolutions there,
and elsewhere, concludes it best for him to disband, which being done, he made
seizure and sale of the estates of those Protestants, which lay within the
power of his merciless cruelty.

The King besieges Caussade, and meeting with resolution amongst the
Protestants, who did so wast his Army, that the Kings Admiral drew off, and
persued by the Vicount of Gourdon, in their March to the siege at Rochel.

Wherepon the Protestants assemble in many places, and settle the County of
Montauban, ordering that City to be their Principal seat, and in that County
the Vicount of Paulin being chosen Governor of Nismes, it was made the
principal seat in the County of Languedoc, which lay under the Government of
St. Romain.

These preparations and resolutions thus taken, strikes an arrow in the Kings
heart, who now too late saw that all the blood he and his Council had shed,
proved not as he expected; and now the horror of so much blood fell upon his
bloody and guilty conscience, insomuch as he knew not which way to turn, once
he was resolved to fall on those that had persuaded him, that the cutting off
the Protestants would terminate his Troubles in a quiet calm and enjoyment of
one Religion, and that putting a period to the Protestant power would estate
him in the throne of his full desires. Another while he would stop his brother
the King of Poland, and not suffer his absence in such a pinch of occasions.

But God will not now let blood go long unavenged, even on the prime instrument
of such wicked cruelty, thus straightened on all sides, he is ready to be
oppressed with anger and vexation, stranger Princes openly reproach him, for
the irreparable injuries done to the poor innocent Protestants, and his too
loyal Subjects, for a King, which should be a Protector of his people, to prove
a Tyrant, a cruel murderer, and Butcher of his own Subjects. The King with
anxity of mind falls into a desperate sickness at Vitry in Campagn, as he was
setting forward his brother toward Poland, but he recovers again: in the midst
of these actings, the Protestants of Languedoc fortify themselves. Now the King
to give some hopes to grant the Protestants their desires, summons a Parliament
to meet at Campagn; the Protestants in several Provinces prepare their Deputies
with instructions, and had it given them in Commission, to speak home, against
the Authors of the late unheard of cruelties, and murders; the Q. Mother, and
the rest are afraid of the Touch, and so at first labor to pacify the
Protestant Commissioners with fair words, but that will not do, the Protestants
must not play away their lives in an equal stake of fair words, the late woeful
experience of their murdered friends frighted them from putting too much trust
in these words; whereupon not receiving content to their just and honest
demands; they withdraw to their several charges, and endeavor their own
security and safety.

In the mean time the Count Montgomery arrived with his fleet from England in a
part of France, called Le Pays de Constantine, a part of the Province of
Normandy, who being safe landed had assistance from several Protestants, and
seized on several Towns, as Danfront, Carentane, St. Lo, and Valognes, but the
Protestants had better success in all parts than in this Province of Normandy.

The Kings Army under the command of the Field Marshall lay siege to St. Lo,
wherein was the Count Montgomery, and all his ships lying under the command of
the Town; the Count secreatly escaped from the danger of so weak a place, but
Jaques Sieur de Martignon, with Villers and St. Columb, leave St. Lo, besieged
with a party under command of Fervagues, and Malicorn, and so they pursue the
Count with two Regiments of foot, six hundred horse, and four small field
pieces, and ere they were a ware begirts them close in a small Town called
Danfront, which though a weak Town, yet the Castle was well seated, insomuch
that they resolved to stand, and die like Soldiers, with Swords in their hands
at a breach, than be shamefully murdered, or die on a Scaffold. At this siege
by the valor of the Count, and Friends, the Catholics lost St. Colomb, and a
great many Gentlemen Volunteers, and two hundred of their most valiant men; but
at last no longer able to continue, they yield to Martignan, with these terms,
viz. to have their lives, carry away their arms; and yet it was so as they were
to remain sometime in the power of Martignan and Vassey, with security for the
Counts life. But was it ever read of in such a small History, and in Wars of so
short time that ever there was such a common breach of faith and promise when
signed and sealed for a strict observance, as a good Author says, he that is a
base so, is constantly false in friendship. The Count being in his Enemies
custody, yielded to too much cruelty, on terms of mercy; who I dare say, had
rather died a thousand deaths like a true Soldier, then be so basely dealt
withal, for in the night he was guarded away Prisoner to Paris, and there
basely executed in the sight of the King, and Q. Mother, who received much joy
at his death; but the just God saw all these treacheries, and justly rewarded
some according to their bloody deserts.

And now to conclude this sad and doleful reign of a bloody Tyrant; let us see
after his blood reign and flatigious life, a sad and suitable death, a
spectacle of Gods anger, and an emblem of his bloody dealing; who falling sick
in the prime of his years, being forced to his Bed, he was sore tormented and
handled with a great effusion of blood, which issued out of all parts of his
body; and that which very much astonished many, he did once roll himself in hit
own blood, vomiting blood through all the Conduits of his body; that it may be
said as of Tiberius Caesar, Lutum Sanguine Maceratum, a lump of clay soaked in
blood. So this King by the just judgment of God expired his last, the 24. year
of his age, and in the year of our Lord God 1574. Julius Caesar sacrificing to
the Gods, found a Beast without a heart, which was looked upon as very ominous;
and surely may we not infer from this Kings bloody reign, that he Had no heart,
a bloody Heart, or, A Heart, and a Heart.

Thus this King, having lived in other men's blood, dyed in his own; which as it
was the issue of his own deserts, so it was an immediate hand of Gods justice.

And it cannot but be taken notice of that the rest of the chief Agents of this
bloody Tragedy were strangly and justly cut off. The Duke of Anjou, being then
King of Poland, succeeds this King Charles, by being called from Poland to the
Crown of France. Yet God follows him, for by the means of a young Jacobine
Monck, named Friar Jaques Clement, the said King was stabbed in the same
Chamber where he held Council for the acting the late Tragedies.

The just hand of God persued the Duke of Guise, who was murdered in the Kings
own Chamber, five and forty waiting with Rapiers and Poinyards to do it.

The Queen Mother with grief broke her heart, and died the first of January
after.

To conclude, it has been observed by a good Author, that since the year of
God, 1560. that of a thousand murderers which remained unpunished by men,
there was not ten escaped the Divine hand of God, but came to deserved and
wretched ends, suitable to their bloody and butcherly lives.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

