SOME Seasonable and Serious QUERIES Upon the late Act against Conventicles.
Tending to discover How much it is against the express Word of GOD, the
positive Law of the Nation, the Law and Light of Nature, and Principles of
Prudence and Policy. And therefore adjudged by the Law of the Land to be Void
and Null. Viz.

Finch p. 3. That no Act of Parliament, or Law repugnant to the Law of God, is
of any force.

28 H. 8. That no man of what estate, degree, or condition whatsoever, has
power to dispense with Gods Law.

Doct. and Stud. That against Scripture Law, Prescription, Statute, nor Custom
may avail; and if any be brought in against it, they be void, and against
Justice.

42 Ed. 3. It is assented and accorded, That the Great Charter be holden and
kept in all points, and that if any Statute be made to the contrary, it shall
be held for none.

By a Friend to Truth and Peace.

Mat. 24.48, 49. And if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My Lord
delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat
and drink with the drunken, etc.

Acts 9.5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick
against the pricks.

Psalm. 9.16. The wicked is snared in the work of his own hands etc.

Printed in the year 1670.

Some Sober Queries upon the ACT against CONVENTICLES.
WHether upon a due and serious search, this late Law does not appear to
contradict the three Great Laws, viz. The Law of God, the Law of the Nation,
and the Law of Nature; and is not contrary to the Rules of Prudence and Policy,
and tending to promote some private and corrupt interest?

First, As to the Law of God:
1. Whether in the particulars following, relating to Preachers and Hearers,
the Law of God is not manifestly contradicted and impugned?

1. Does not Gods Law require all men that hear, learn, and keep it, having a
Gift from Christ, of what Rank, Condition, or Quality soever, (high or low)
should be Teachers and Publishers of it? Mat. 5.19. 1 Pet. 4.10. 2 Timothy 4.2.
And accordingly have we not had, of high degree, preaching Kings, Princes,
Judges, and Levites, Psalm. 40.9. Eccles. 1.1. and 12.10. 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9.
And of low degree, mechanic Carpenters, Herdsmen, Fishermen, Tentmakers, that
have preached and published his Word and Law? Mark 6.3. Amos 1.1. Mark 1.16,
17. Acts 18.2.

And does not this Law forbid any, high or low, to preach and publish Gods Law,
but such as conform to the Traditions and Commands of men, viz. By Reading the
Common Prayer, Renouncing the Covenant, submitting to humane Services,
Ceremonies, and Inventions, Mark 7.7, 8, 9. however otherways fitted by Christ,
with never such Ministerial Gifts and Seize?

2. Does not Gods Law say, You may all prophecy (or preach, 1 Cor. 14.1, 2.)
one by one? 1 Cor. 14.31.

And does not this Law say, You shall not so prophecy, no not one?

3. Does not Gods Law pronounce woe to his Preachers, if they preach not the
Gospel? 1 Cor. 9.16.

And does not this Law pronounce woe to them, if they do?

4. Does not Gods Law give promised Rewards and Blessings to those that teach
it to others? Mat. 10.41. and 25.21. and 5.19. Ja. 5.20.

And does not this Law threaten a 20 l. and 40 l. Curse, yea, utter ruin to
those that do?

5. Does not Gods Law admit of preaching in Houses, Streets, and Fields, to
great Multitudes, with promised mercies to the Owners so receiving his People
and Preachers? Acts 20.20. and 28.31. Luke 13.26. Mat. 3 1. and 10.40, 41.42.

And does not this Law forbid such preaching, with threatened ruin to Owners
and Hearers, as well as Preachers?

6. Does not Gods Law denounce cursing and wrath to the uttermost to those that
reject and forbid, and that mis-use and abuse his Preachers, and beat their
fellow servants? 1 These. 2.16. Mat. 24.48, 49, 50.

And does not this declare promised Blessings and Rewards to those that shall
be most active in pursuing and persecuting the Preacher, and prosecuting and
vexing the Hearers?

7. Does not Gods Law enjoin men frequently and steadfastly to assemble
together, and to maintain and keep up their Fellowships and Meetings? Heb.
10.25. and 3.13. Acts 2.42. Mal. 3.14, 16.

And does not this Law not only forbid, but tear and break up such Meetings
and Assemblies, loading them with heavy Mulcts and Penalties Toties Quoties, as
often as they so meet?

8. Does not Gods Law admit of Popular Meetings, the assembling of great
numbers to worship him, and attend his Ordinances, five thousand and eight
thousand at a time? Joh. 6.10. Act. 4.4. and 2.41. yea, the more the better,
without any limitation, or scandal of sedititon in so doing.

But does not this Law limit those that must so worship and hear the Word, to
four persons only, beside the Family, unless they will be reputed seditious,
and dealt with accordingly?

Q. II. Whether if it appears that indeed this New Law, and Word of Man, does
contradict the Old Law, and Word of God; the People of God ought any more to
regard it now, than the three Children and Daniel did the Persian Law in like
Case ( Dan. 3.16, 17. and 6.10.) in those days; or the Disciples ( Acts 4.) did
the Edicts, Threatenings, and Prohibitions of the Council then? And whether, if
God be God, he ought not to be followed and obeyed rather than man, though
Goods be spoiled, Liberties infringed, and Lives-hazarded in so doing?

Q. III. Whether in case the Maxims of our English Laws in favor of the Word
and Law of God, be of force, this Law is not to be deemed void and null? Which
do assert for good Law, sound Doctrine, Reason, and truth, That no Act of
Parliament, or Law, repugnant to the Law of God, is of any force, Finch, p. 3.
And that no man, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition whatsoever, has power to
dispense with Gods Law, as all the Clergy of the Realm, and most of the
Vniversittes of Christendom, and we also affirm, 28 H. 8. And that against
Scripture Law, Prescription, Statute, nor Custom may avail; and if any be
brought in against it, they be void, and against Justice. Doct. and Stud.

Secondly, As to the Law of the Land.
I. Whether the said Act is not expressly contrary to the known, ancient,
fundamental Laws of this Nation, especially that of Magna Charta; which, as the
great Bulwark of the English Liberty, has been confirmed by about forty
Parliaments?

For does not that Great Charter assure and confirm, That no Freeman shall be
taken, or imprisoned, or dis-seised of his Freehold, or Liberties, or free
Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any otherways destroyed, or passed upon,
or condemned, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or Viz. By due process
of the Common (or old) Law of England. See 2d part Cooks Inst. chapter 29. fo. 50.
so explained also by 37 E. 3. chapter 8.
Law of the Land: And that Justice shall neither be sold, denied, or deferred?

And does not this Act in contradiction thereto, both seiz upon men's, Liberties
and Estates, without any such legal Process or Judgment?

For is not the Justice empowered hereby, by foce, Civil or Military, to seiz;
take, and keep in custody the peaceable free People of the Nation ( Six
Remedies to relieve any that are so imprisoned or disseized of their free
liberties, contrary to Magna Charta. 2d part Cooks's Inst. chapter 29 f. 55.
dis-seizing them thereby of their Liberties) being Advocate, Jury, and
Witness, and sole Judge both of Law and Fact, as well as of the ability of the
Offender? And is he not authorized also, according as he (in malice, favor, or
affection) shall judge meet, to Convict, Sentence and Execute, by making
Distress and Sale of Goods, how and upon whom he pleases, without returning
any thing again to the Owners, (which may be one hundred or two hundred pounds,
for ten or twenty pounds) and therewith to reward the Informer, or who else he
shall judge most active, be it his Clerk, Son, or Himself? (And is not this
seizing Freehold is Goods and Chattels as well as Lands and Tenements. Cook's
Instit. c. 29. p. 46.
Freehold too, with a witness?) And all without any legal Judgment and
Process? And is not the bribing the Informer (that principal Trustee in the
Act) or Justice himself, with so great a Reward, a setting Justice to sale with
a vengeance? And what can more violate that fundamental Law, both as to Person
and Estate? Notwithstanding by the 42 of Ed. 3. this Great Charter is commanded
to be kept in all points; and that whatever Law is made against it, is null and
void: Polton 182. The words of the Statute are these: At the Parliament of our
Lord the King at Westminster, the first day of May, the 42 year of his Reign,
It is asserted and recorded, That the Great CHARTER, and the Charter of the
Forest be holden and kept in all Points; and if any STATUTE be made to the
contrary, it shall be holden for none.

II. Whether it is not dangerous by the Laws and Customs of the Nation, for any
to infringe and violate this Great Charter, under color or pretense of any Law
or Statute whatsoever? Witness that famous Example, and eminent Instance in 1
H. 8. in the Impeachment and Execution of the two Justices of the Peace, viz.
Sir Richard Empson Knight, and Edmond Dudley Esquire; for their putting in
execution the Statute made 11 H. 7. so contrary to Magna Charta, concerning
which for better Information take my Lord Cooks own words in his Instit L. 2.
C. 29. f. 15. Viz.

Against this Ancient and Fundamental Law, and in the face thereof, (having
recited that Clause of Magna Charta before mentoned) I find (says he) an Act
of Parliament made, That as well Justices of Assize, as Justices of Peace,
(without any finding or Presentment by the Verdict of twelve men) upon a bare
Information for the King before them made, should have full Power and Authority
by their Discretions to hear and determine all Offenses and Contempts committed
or done by any person or persons against the Form, Ordinance and effect of any
Statute made and not repealed. By color of which Act, shaking this Fundamental
Law, it is not credible what horrible Oppressions and Exactions, to the undoing
of infinite numbers of people, were committed by Sir Richard Empson Knight, and
Edmond Dudley Esquire; being Justices of the Peace throughout England: And upon
this Unjust and Injurious Act (as commonly in like Cases it falls out) a new
Office was created, and they made Masters of the Kings Forfeitures.

But at a Parliament holden in the 1 H. 8. this Act of 11 H. 7. is recited, and
made void, and repealed; and the reason thereof is yielded, For that by force
of the said Act, it was manifestly known that many sinister and crafty feigned
and forged Informations had been pursued against diverse of the Kings Subjects,
to their great damage, and wrongful vexation. And the success hereof, and the
fearful ends of these two Oppressors, should deter others from committing the
like; and should admonish Parliaments, that instead of this ordinary and
precious Trial per Legem Tetrae, the known ancient Laws, they bring not in
absolute and partial Trials by Discretion. The said two Justices were to the
joy of all People executed the beginning of H. 8.

Speed Chr. 983. Not to mention the impeachment and dethroning the two Kings,
Edward the second, and Richard the second, for having perverted the due course
of Law, Justice and Right; and that they destroyed men by Informations, and
without Legal Examination and Trials; and that they had declared that the Laws
of the Kingdom were in their own Breasts: As in their Articles of Impeachment
does more at large appear.

Nor the Impeachment of the Lord Chief Justice Trysillian, and his Brother
Judges, Fulthorp, Belknap, Carey, Hott, Burge, and Locton, and others of the
then Privy Council, and then Lord Mayor of London, who had set their hands to
Judgments in subverting the Laws of the Land, and advancing the Kings Will and
Commands above the known Laws of the Kingdom: For which the Lord Chief Justice
and others of them were hanged at Tybourn. The Impeachment also of Judge Thorp,
Ed. 3: and Cardinal Woolsey, H. 8. for advising the King to subvert the Laws.
Not forgetting the late worthy Act of Chief Justice Keeling, in imprisoning and
fining the London-Justices, for acting against the known Laws.

Qu. III. Whether it does not concern all persons called to be active herein,
whether Officers Civil, Military, or others, to be well advised what they do,
lest instead of promoting the Peace and Welfare of the Nation, (the great end
of all wholesome Laws) they not only infringe the just Liberties thereof,
inslave themselves and Posterities, but render themselves liable to such
infamy, misery and mischief that the miscreants beforementioned have done. And
whether it will not be a good plea for any that may be vexed, persecuted or
prosecuted hereupon, why they conform not thereto, either by answering
ensnaring questions to accuse themselves about Meetings, telling of Names, or
places of abode, or payment of Moneys, that it is all against Magna Charta and
the known Laws of the Land, which declare, that no man shall be put to answer
without Presentment, or matter of Record, or by due Process, and Original Writ,
according to Law; as by several Statutes, viz. 5. Ed. 3.9. and 25 Ed. 3.4. 28
Ed. 3.3. 27 Ed. 3.18. 42 Ed. 3.33. Petit. of Right, 3 Car. 1.1. 17 Car. 1.14.

Qu. IV. Whether the pretended Salvo, [That you may, if you find your self
aggrieved hereby, make your Appeal, and take your Trial by a Jury] may acquit
this Law from infringing and violating Magna Charta and the known Laws of the
Land: Because, first, is not the Law violated, by seizing and taking both
Person and Estate without any such Process and Judgment? And secondly, that
the Appeal must not lie in any other Court, but only before the Parties
themselves complained of to do the wrong; who seem hereby to be made sole
Judges in their own Cases; the Juries being to be empannelled by themselves,
the Sheriffs being Parties with them; contrary to express Law, forbidding any
to be Judge in his own Case. 8 H. 6. fol. 21. El. Dier 220. and Doctor Bonham's
Case, 8 part Cooks Reports.

Thirdly, As to the Law of Nature.
1. Whether the said Law is not also contrary to the Law of Nature, viz. That
Great Magna Charta laid down by our Savior, Mat. 7.12. Whatever ye would that
men should do unto you, do ye even the same unto them: for this is the Law and
the Prophets?

For if the chiefest of the Persecutors, and who had the greatest hand in
making this Act, were solemnly appealed to, Whether they, being men of
Conscience, would think it equal either by Papists or Phanatiques, to be so
dealt withal? Viz. In their solemn Worship to be so hared and disturbed by a
Tumult and Rabble; to be tore and haled from their places and Assemblies, and
imprisoned by Officers and armed men; to be pulled from their Ministers, and
their Ministers from them, and so severely and ruinously fined from time to
time for the same; and that nothing must satisfy but coming to Mass, or to be
dipped and joined to Anabaptistical Meetings, though against Conscience; and all
this for no other Crime but peaceable Meeting and Worshipping God according to
Conscience? Will any of them assert and give it under their hands, they judge
all this but fair, just and equal dealing, and that they would be content to be
dealt just so with, as they deal with others? Or further, If their Parish
Churches were burnt by the Papists, and yet be fined, buffeted, and rendered
seditious, and dealt with accordingly, for not coming at them, or meeting to
worship in Houses or elsewhere in the interim; would it be judged fair and
equal? Or not rather much at that rate as Pharaoh dealt with the Israelites,
when he required them to make Brick without Straw, and beat them too if they
brought not the full tale?

Qu. II. Whether upon the same ground the Common-Prayer-Book-Worship is to be
imposed and submitted to, to day, viz. because a Law is got for it; the Mass,
upon the like Argument, is to be conformed to, to morrow; the Turkish Alcoran
the next day, and the Jewish Talmud the next?

Qu. III. Whether it is not unnatural for Protestants, pretending to own one
Head, the Lord Jesus; and one Law of his, the holy Scripture, which also is to
interpret it self; agreeing also in the Doctrinal part of their Religion, as by
the Thirty Nine Articles appear; should for Differences in the Ceremonial part,
thus rent, tear, and devour each other; whilst Turks, Papists, and other
Religions, can live peaceably, and bear with each other under greater
differences? And whether they that bite and devour each other, should not take
heed lest they be devoured one of another, Gal. 5.15. And that what measure
they mete to others, the same be not measured to themselves also? Mat. 7.2.

Qu. IV. Whether fince by this Act Protestants only are enjoined, hired, and
frighted thus to vex, disturb, prosecute, and ruin one another, for
worshipping God in their way; and the Papists hereby in the mean time left to
enjoy their Idolatrous Mass in peace and quiet, without the least disturbance,
and that as often as they please, and in as great numbers as they think good:
Tends not too much to confirm the fears of many, that that cursed Interest
(that so lately murdered so many hundred thousands in our Neighbor Countries,
and (as supposed) burnt the City) may be getting into the Saddle again, which
they do and have so long gaped for; and hereby not only teach them afresh to
deal with Protestants, but to justify all their bloody Cruelties of old, that
upon the account of Conscience they have exercised toward them? Therefore does
it not well become every considerate Protestant to ponder well what he is
doing, whilst he is cutting down the Bough he stands on?

Qu. V. Whether in point of Appeal, to make Parties themselves Judges in their
own Case, is a usual thing? Or that the Lawmakers themselves use to practice
it in their own Concerns? Or how well comporting with this Golden Rule
aforesaid, To do to others as we would they should do to us?

Qu. VI. Whether in all these respects, this Law ought not to be esteemed Null
and Void; and altogether disregarded, as if there was no such thing in the
Nation.

Fourthly, As to the Rules of Prudence and Policy.
Qu. I. Whether it is not greatly imprudent to rise up against so considerable
a part of the Nation as the Phanatique Interest certainly is; who for Sobriety,
Counsel, and Conduct, have so great a Witness in the hearts of their greatest
Enemies? And for the Trading part, whether Foreign or Domestic, (which the
simple Commonwealths that flourish in the World judge so much the Interest and
Honor of Prince and People) they have not so considerable a sway in every
bodies eye, which if doubted (by the violent prosecution of the Act) too sudden
(and it may be too dear-bought) Experience (notwithstanding Mr. Parker's
Politics) may evince? And for their quiet and peaceable demeanor, and that as
well under great sufferings and provocations, as under probable opportunities;
To wit, the Dutch Innvasion, and Scottish Insurrection.
not only to have given disturbance, but to have freed themselves from
Persecution, may not ten years Experience give the undeniable demonstration?
And will any wise State judge it according to the principles of Wisdom and
Policy, by threatened ruin and destruction to irritate such a People, having
heretofore also tasted the ill consequence of such like provocations? Solomon
says, Oppression makes a wise man mad; and the French have a Proverb, Ne
Reveille pas chat qui dort; Do not kindle the fire that was near quenched.

Qu. II. Whether the same Argument that is used against Popular great Meetings
(and upon which the Act seems to be grounded, viz. That they tend to contrive
Sedition and Rebellion) is not upon Principles of Reason and Experience found
to be quite contrary? For what of Sedition and Rebellion is like to be
contrived in a Public Meeting, where the Doors are open, and all sorts of
People come; and over which the Magistrate may have such Inspection, and
whereof he must rationally have such speedy knowledge? And are there not Laws
and Executioners of all sorts, both Civil and Military, sufficiently to punish
and chastize the same, whenever made good against any? Whereas if great
Meetings through Persecution be dispersed, then a Meeting of a thousand being
driven into twenty or thirty parts, and constrained thereby to meet in private,
what Opportunities may there be then, where no inspection can be had, to
consult and plot?

Qu III. Whether it is not against all Rules of Prudence and Policy, to
exercise such severity upon our selves, that must necessarily wound and weaken,
if not destroy the Trade of the Nation? Cannot the Bankers, Clothiers,
Silk-men, Bailders, Farmers, etc. tell you what a sad influence the rumor of
this Act has already had? What then will the Execution of it produce? It may
be when you see the Shops shut up, the great Traders, and the ingenious Heads
and Hands removed with their Stocks to your Neighbor Countries, (proffering
them already the liberty of their Consciences) the many thousand ruined
Conformable Families (depending upon the Nonconformists) at you Doors for
Bread, and confusion in your Streets, and a Foreigner (invited by your
distractions) in your Gate, you may be better convinced, and find it may be,
when it is too late, the direful Consequences of such evil Counsels and
precipitate Actings?

Qu. IV. Whether it does not bespeak much imprudence to be making fresh
attempts in fruitless Undertakings, that neither have had, nor rationally may
have a tendency to accomplish promised ends? Phanatiques must be persecuted,
vexed, fined, rendered Sectaries, Seditious, Rebellious, and threatened with utter
ruin; and wherefore? Viz. To discourage, weaken, divide, to deliver them from
their Heresies, and reduce them to Canonical Obedience: But is this a rational
way to effect it? No, by no means; for has not Experience (that Mistress of
Fools) taught us the quite contrary? For not to mention what happened in other
Nations and former Generations; Let it but be remembered, Whether the Bishops
cruel Courts, Impositions, Suspensions, the high Commissions, Pillories,
Imprisonments, Finings, Banishments, etc. Backing the Common Prayer with
Armies; Convinced, weakened, divided, destroyed the Puritanical Faction, and
rooted, confirmed, and advanced Episcopacy, and preserved the public Peace and
Safety in those days? And whether the several attempts the ten years last past,
(no whit inferior to former times) have had, or are like to have any better
success than theirs? Or not much like Pharaoh's of old, who the better to
reduce his Phanatique Subjects from their gadding giddy humors about Worship,
sets cruel Taskmasters over them, to humble and chastize them; But to what
effect, the Text informs us, Exodus 1.11. That the more they were afflicted, the
more they multiplied and grew. And so may it not be said, That for one
Phanatick ten years since, by the virtue of Persecution and Imposition, there
is now ten, if not twenty, in these Nations? The only way to make an interest
considerable, is to persecute and oppress it. For what so riveted
Protestantism, and rooted out Popery in these Nations, but such cruel Mediums
the Papists took to establish themselves, and destroy the Nonconforming
Phanaticks of the day, even to the rendering that Interest an Abomination,
Stink, and Loathing to this day? And are others like to fare better, walking in
their steps? But would it not be a better way to appoint some learned sober men
to deal with these men of Conscience in a conscientious way, and speedily apply
to answer those learned unanswered Treatises about Indulgence and Liberty of
Conscience; that so by sound Doctrine, and the force of Reason, they may stop
the mouths of gainsayers, and reduce them to obedience; as the more hopeful
way to effect it, rather than by Fines and Imprisonments?

Qu. V. Whether it had not been more prudential, and better becoming the Wisdom
and Gravity of the State, and the true Ordinance of Magistracy, that bears not
the Sword in vain, to have made some vigorous Act to have enforced that first
wholesome Proclamation to suppress Health Drinking, swinish Drunkenness,
profane Swearing, and abominable Whoredoms, that so fearfully abound, and are
winked at, tolerated, and encouraged in the Land; and to suppress Stage Plays,
those Nurseries of all manner of Vice and Wickedness, so numberless, and to
which there are such great assembling and flocking of all sorts? A good Ruler
scatters wickedness with his Eyes, Prove. 20.8, 26. Draws the Sword against the
evil, not the well-doer, Romans 13.4, 5. And whether a due enquiry into the
illegal Pluralities, Non-Residents, and Simonists, the sordid Ignorance, Vide
Ichabod's Complaint; a son of the Church.
Pride, Sloth, Debauchery and Covetousness of the Clergy, (as one great ground
why their Public Assemblies are so quitted, and the Conventicles so numerously
frequented) which foresaid Crimes in the Clergy, the Overseers of the Church
(the Bishops) so wink at, and tolerate; might not have been a more successful
Remedy?

Qu. VI. Whether for a Parent that has Children of different Judgments, yet
(by his fatherly Eye) keeps peace in the Family; for him to join with the most
ambitious and malicious, to force and club the rest of them into a Unity and
Conformity, to the disturbing the quiet of the Family, and the hazarding his
own perpetual peace and comfort, can be without great imprudence, if not
Solomon's just censure? Prove. 14.1. and 11.29.

Qu. VII. Whether there can be greater imprudence than to slight or disregard
the Voice of Gods Judgments, by persisting in ways that have met with often and
eminent Rebukes from him? And whether it is not an undeniable great Truth, That
upon all the great Persecutions that have of late years been stirred up in
these Nations, they have not been met with either by War, Plague, Fire,
Invasion, Insurrection, Poverty, or Discontent? And whether upon relaxing the
same by Indulgence, greater Peace, Quiet, and Blessing has not visibly
attended? And was there ever any that hardened themselves against God, and
prospered? Job 9.4. Prove. 29.1. Isa. 46.10. And whether it is not for our
better instruction, that those Nations are most prosperous, and under greatest
Blessings, that give Liberty of Conscience; and those Kingdoms most declining,
that abound in Persecution? Witness that of Spain, now so low, that they can
neither defend themselves, nor succor their Allies.

Qu. VIII. Whether it is not expressly against the Kings printed Declarations
and Promises for Indulgence, as well as his private frequent Conferences;
wherein he has so freely and fully expressed how much it is agreeable to his
Conscience, Reason, and Resolution, to indulge Tender Consciences; as most
conducing to the peace and quiet of these Nations, and suitable to the Rules of
Honesty and Prudence? And therefore whether it must not be rationally
concluded, That He is as well imposed upon hereby, and his Honor impaired, as
the Laws broken, and the Peoples Ruin threatened?

Fifthly, As for advancing some private corrupt Interest hereby.
Qu. I. Whether it is not manifest that this Law was merely contrived and
brought forth to serve some private corrupt Interest, and not for public good
and advantage?

1. Because it is in it self so opposite to the Laws of God and Man, as well as
to the Public Promises and Declarations.

2. By its undue forming and bringing forth, carried on by such a heady violent
Faction, by strength of Vote, against all the force of Unanswered Reason, given
them both within doors, and without; the Votes of the House (as observed
therein) going one way, and the Reason of the House another: Highly bespeaking
influence and design.

3. Because it intrusts none but those that are esteemed the vilest persons in
the Nation ( viz. the Informers) to manage it; an persons being at their mercy.

4. From the undue Methods to enforce it: Whereas good Laws need no other
incitation to their execution, but their own moral Equity and Righteousness;
But this, contrary to all other Mediums, (knowing how much it would be against
the hair, grain, and interest of the Nation) does hire, fright and force all
sorts to its execution.

5. From the mischievousness of it, being calculated directly to set all at
variance, and every man's hand against his Neighbor, Friend, and Relation.

Qu. II. Whether it is not obvious to every eye, that this monstrous Act was
not eminently contrived, driven on, and spirited by the Bishops and their
corrupt interest?

1. Because of their former old Rage, Envy, and Malice, testified herein; who
will neither enter into the Kingdom of Heaven themselves, nor suffer those that
would to enter in; like their Fathers of old, Mat. 23.13.

2. Because it is no other than the practical improvement of the mischievous
Doctrine they have so plentifully given us by their profane atheistical
Chaplains, Parker and his fellows.

3. From their indefatigable industry (all other Laws and means failing to
accomplish their mischievous purposes) by hook or crook firmly to engage a
Party in the House to their Devotion herein: Witness (as said) the 300 Letters
in the Interval to the Members, the high Caresses and Treats to the Blades, and
the large Bribes to the Gentlemen of the long Robe, their violent and
passionate Concern in their own persons; though (as must be owned) with the
worthy dissent of some of Themselves in the House.

4. From their unwearied Activities to promote the violent prosecution thereof,
both in City and Country: Witness that late inciting and provoking Sermon upon
this occasion, by one of Themselves, from Ezra 7.26. And whosoever will not do
the Law of God, and the Law of the King, let judgment be executed speedily
upon him, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of
goods, or to imprisonment: Excellently urged and applied, as they use to apply
Texts! This being a Law of the King agreeable to the Word and Law of God, for
the good of his People, and building of his House; And theirs a Law of the King
in express contradiction to the Law of God, (as before) to the destruction of
his House, and ruin of his People.

Qu. III. Whether if so, the Prelatical Interest has not thoroughly discovered
it self to the Nation and all men, That thus merely to satisfy and maintain
their Lust, Sloth, Avarice, Pomp and Pride, can be content at once (with their
Fathers Who began the former Wars, called Bellum Episcopale?
, nay worse) to sacrifice the Laws of God, Nature and Nations, and hazard the
public Peace and Safety? And whether it may not comfortably be hoped their
folly is hereby so plainly made manifest, that they shall be able to proceed no
further? As 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. Job 5.12, 13. Psalm. 9.16.

Qu. IV. Whether to put all out of doubt, it might not conduce much to the
Honor of the King, Safety, Satisfaction, and Security of the People, and the
Justice of the Law, That such evil Counselors, whether in Parliament or
Council, should be discovered, (as the late Chancellor was, for his traiterous
mischievous Advice in Council, against the fundamental Laws of the Land, and
Safety of the People) that should thus dare, against the Laws of God, Nature,
and Nations, so much against the Kings Honor, the Interest, Peace, Safety, and
Good of the People, so contrary to all Rules of Prudence, Policy, and
Ingenuity, so much conducing to introduce Popery and all Confusion; That they
may be esteemed the Empson's and Dudley's of the Day, the Incendiaries and
Firebrarnds of the Age: And that all those good Patriots that have witnessed
and entered their Protests against this cursed Law, might be also known, and
respected accordingly.

Qu. V. Whether the malicious Persecutors, persisting in their Rage and
Madness, may expect to fare better than their Brother Persecutors of old, in
the like spirit, have done? Exodus 15.9, 10. Est. 7.9, 10. Dan. 6.24. To the
fulfilling Psalm. 7.14.15, 16. Rev. 18.6, 7, 8. Isa. 10.24, 25.

Qu. VI. Whether (in due consideration hereof) any but men of debauched
Principles, Consciences, and Lives, void of the fear of God and his Laws, and
reverence to men and theirs, and wholly regardless of either Bodies, Souls,
Estates, and Posterities for future, will venture to do this drudgery for the
Bishops, (or Devil rather) in betraying and so violently and injuriously
oppressing their Neighbors; nay, so foolhardy to be thereby engaging against
God and Christ himself, so much concerned herein? As Psalm. 83.5. Act. 9.5. Mat.
25.45.

Qu. VII. Whether the good People of the Nation ought not (having the Command
and Authority of the King of Kings) to go on in their express Duty, in keeping
up his Commands in their respective Meetings and Assemblings to Worship him,
though so expressly against the Law and Command of the King, as they did, Dan.
3.16, 17, 18. and 6.10. Acts 4.17, 18, 19, 20. and 5.28, 29. And in case any
suffer upon this account, whether they can suffer in a better Cause, than thus
to assert the Interest, Word, and Ways of Christ, their just Liberties, both
Natural, Civil, and Christian, against such violent and unreasonable opposition
of all? And whether Christ is not able and faithful to make up, reward, and
recompense any hazard, loss, or shame that may so redound upon his account, and
his Gospel? Mat. 19.29. Heb. 10.34. and 11.25, 26. Rev. 2.10.

Qu. VIII. Whether it does not concern the whole Phanatick Party, in
consideration of all this unnatural and unreasonable Rage and Severity, to lay
to heart, and consider, That however they may be persecuted from men for their
virtue, they having no evil thing justly to lay to their charge, as Psalm.
35.19.20. and 59.3. and 69.4. John 10.32. though put into Bears Skins, and
great matters alleged against them, as Ezra 4.15. Est. 3.8. Mat. 10.25. Act.
17.6, 7, 8. yet as coming from God, which is to be eyed, Job 5.6. Isa. 42.24.
and as not being without cause, Ezekiel. 14.23. Therefore to be humbled under his
mighty hand, 1 Pet. 5.6. to search out the provocation, Lam. 3.40, 41. Josh.
7.12 13. Stone the Achan, Josh. 7.25. Crying mightily to the Lord, as Israel
did under the like affliction, Exodus 2.23. And it may be God may see the
Affliction, and hear the Cry, and Deliver: As Exodus 3.7, 8. Joel 2.12, 13, 14.

IX. Whether it does not manifestly appear, that this unnatural severity tends
either to deter from known duty (in attending the Worship of God according to
his Word) Or from the Extremity, to provoke to Sedition, Tumult or Rebellion;
necessitating thereby a falling either into the hands of God or Man: Therefore
whether all concerned therein are not obliged to put forth utmost diligence and
circumspection, as to answer a good Conscience in cleaving unto the Lord and
his Laws, giving a Testimony to this evil Generation that they are Purse as
well as Prison proof, having better learned and received Christ than to sell or
part with him upon such mean terms: So on the other hand, to be keeping on in
that meekness and patience of Christ that they have been led and prospered in,
as the approved promised way of overcoming, Rev 3.10. and 12.11. Whereby may
they not still comfortably expect, in spite of Hell and the gates thereof, the
Gospel's progress, in sinners conversion and Saints confirmation, the
establishment of Christ's, and downfall of Antichrists Kingdom, (and thereby the
cutting off occasion from them that seek it, to the shame and confusion of
their faces) and their own everlasting peace and comfort?


