Februar. 18. 1642.
WHEREAS the Lords and Commons of both Houses of Parliament, made request at a
Common Council holden this day in the afternoon, for the loan of three score
thousand pounds to be paid by the Citizens on monday next, into the Treasury at
the Guild hall, for the present supply of the great wants and payment of the
Army (under the Command of his Excellency Robert Earl of Essex) which is very
much in arreare in their pay. The Common Council considering the present
necessity and urgent occasion, did condescend to do their utmost endeavors to
promote the advancement of the said money. And the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Councell-men then present, did freely declare what sum of money they
will then bring in, toward the same. And for the more speedy advancement of
the remainder of the said 60000. pounds. It was conceived requisite that the
Minister of every Parish Church, shall to morrow publish this unto his
Parishioners, and effectually move them freely to advance some good sum,
toward the raising of the remainder of the said money, And the Common Council
men and Churchwardens of every Parish, with such others as the Common Council
men shall think fit, are desired to repair to every Inhabitant and Lodger
within their several Parishes, and earnestly persuade them to this good work;
And set down all their names and surnames, and the sums of money they shall
respectively lend, and the particular answers of such able men as refuse to
lend. And the said Common Council men and Churchwardens, are desired to
Collect the said moneys so to be lent, and pay the same into the Treasury at
the Guild hall, and to give Receipts for what they shall collect, and upon
their payment thereof to take a Receipt from the Treasurers. All which Moneys
so to be lent, the Lords and Commons Declared, shall be re-payed unto the
several lenders, out of the first moneys that shall be received out of the
weekly payments of money, agreed upon by an Ordinance in Parliament this day
made, to be raised for the maintaining of the Army: And the Lords and Commons
likewise declared that they hoped that this will be the last moneys that they
shall require from the City in this kind.

And at the request, and by the directions of the said Common Council, I do
hereby desire the Minister, Common Council men, and Churchwardens of every
Parish, to do their utmost endeavors for the speedy and effectual promoting
of this business, and to do therein as is before mentioned.

Saturday this eighteenth day of February, 1642. ISAAC PENNINGTON Mayor*


