blazon or coat of arms of the City of London Com' Concil' tent' in Camera
Guihald' Civitat' LONDON, die Veeris Vicesimo sexto die Octobr', Anno Regni
Iomini and Dominae Nostrorum, WILLIELMI and MARIAE, nunc Regis and Reginae,
Angiae, etc. Sexto: Coram Willielmo Ashhurst Mil' Major'; Thoma Lane Mil',
Major' Elect'; Roberto Cayton Mil', Patienc' Ward Mil'. Thoma Stamp Mi^*
Solathiel Lovell Mil'. Servien' ad Legem ac ^ecordat' dictae Civitat';
Humphrido Edwyn Mil, Richardo Levit Mil', Jacobo^ Houblon Mil', Thoma Abney
Mil', and Willielmo Hedges Mil' and Alderman'; Necnon Major' part Commuiar'
dictae Civitat' in eodem Com' Concil' tunc and ibidem Assemblat'.
An ACT for Licensing Carts, to be used by the Freemen, Woodmongers or Traders
in Fuel, that Inhabit within this City and Liberties thereof
WHEREAS there was formerly assigned, allowed and approp^iated, by the Mayor
and Comminalty, an^ Citizens of the City of LONDON, unto the Woodmongers or
Traders in Fuel, inhabiting within the said City and the Liberties thereof, a
certain Number of CARTS, for carrying of Sea-coals and other Fuel' which have
been part o^ the Number of Four hundred and twenty CARS or CARTS allowed,
marked and appointed for the General Service of this CITY: But of late years
the Number of Inhabitants being greatly i^creased, and by reason thereof the
necessary use of Street-Cars or Carts is much increased also; and t^erefore all
the said Four hundred and Twenty Cars have been used only for Street-Cars and
Carts, whereby the Woodmongers and Traders in FUEL, w^^hin this City and the
Liberties thereof, are in (...) great measure Disabled to Manage and Carry o^
their said Trade and Employments; the which ^hey have Humbly represented unto
this COURT (...) Common Council, and prayed Relief therein.

And this COUNT having taken the same into Serious Considerati^n, do find it
necessary to Increase the said Numb^^ of Four hundred and twenty Cars and
Carts, so all^wed and appointed as aforesaid, so far forth as ^ay be necessary
for the said Woodmongers or Deaers in Fuel, only for the Management and
Carry^ng on their said Trades and Employments; and ^so for Enabling them to
furnish the Citizens and other Inhabitants of this City and Liberties with
^OALS and other Fuel, at as cheap and easy Rates and Prices, as They or any
Others may or can.

Be it Enacted therefore by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Al^^rmen and
Commons in Common Council assemble^, and by the Authority of the same, that
there shall be allowed, marked and appointed, to and for the sole Use and
Employment of the WOODMONGERS or Traders in FUEL, (being Freemen, and
Inhabiting within the City of London and the Liberties thereof, and no other) a
fitting and convenient Number of CARS and CARTS, not exceeding One ^undred and
twenty, other than and besides the a^oresaid Number of Four hundred and twenty
CARS and CARTS, now used as Street Cars an^ Carts, as aforesaid:

The which Cars and Carts so t^ be allowed, marked and appointed, shall be
appropriate unto them the said Woodmongers or Traders in FU^L, for the sole
Use, Management and Carrying on the said Trade or Employment of Woodmongers ^o
Dealers in Fuel only; and shall be divided and distribted to and amongst them
from time to time, as may be most convenient for them, and least to the
^nnoyance and Obstruction of the Public Streets and Passages of this City and
the Liberties thereof; ^^ny Act of Common Council, or other Law, V^a^ or Custom
of this City, now in being and in force, (...) the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted b^ the Authority aforesaid. That the said CARS ^^d
CARTS so to be allowed, marked and appoin^^ by virtue of this Act, shall not
be, nor taken o^ esteemed to be Appurtenant to the several and respective Wharf
or Wharfs, to which the same or any of them are or shall be so allowed or
appoin^^d; nor shall be sold or disposed of by such or a^y other the
Woodmongers or Traders in FU^L, in any manner howsoever.

And that the Cars and Cart so to be allowed and appointed to the said
Wood^ongers or Traders in Fuel, shall be burnt with a ^aggot-mark on both the
outsides thereof, and shall have also thereupon a piece of Brass, with the true
Number of such Cars or Carts; and the Raves thereon shall be higher than the
Raves of the Street Cars or Carts, to keep the Fuel the safer from falling off
and hurting the People in the Str^ets, and also the better to distinguish them
from the said other CARS and CARTS.

And that the said Wharf-Carts nor Cars, nor any of them, shall Wo^k in the
Streets in any other Work than only in Carrying of Coals and other Fuel, to and
from ^e respective Wharfs, belonging to such Persons t^ whom the said Cars or
Carts shall be respectively ^llowed; upon pain, That for every time such
Wha^f-Car or Cart shall Work, or be otherwise Implo^ed for Wages, Hire or
Reward, the Owner of ^he said Car or Cart shall Forfeit and pay for every ^^ch
Offense the Sum of Five Pounds.

And all and ever the LICENSES that shall be given to any ^^ch Woodmonger and
Trader in FUEL, whose Cart or Cars shall be so Hired and Employed, contrary t^
the true Intent and Meaning of this present Act, shall ^^om thence be suspended
till such respective Penalty or ^enalties shall be paid and satisfied: And
every Pe^^t so offending, shall (till the said respective Sums be said) be
Disabl^d to Work any of his said Cars or Ca^ts, notwithstanding any License or
Licenses to such Person or Persons, granted by virtue of this Act.

And for the better putting this ACT in due Execution, and for the more equal
and impartial Distribution of the sa^d Wharf-Cars or Carts, to and amongst the
said Woo^mongers or Traders in FUEL, with due respect to the^^ several and
respective Wants and Decasions in t^^ said respective Trades: Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Right Honorable ^ir Thomas Lane
Knight, Lord Mayor Elect, Sir Thomas Stamp Knight, Sir James Houblon and Sir
Francis Child, Knights and A^derme^ of this City; and Mr. Caddon, Mr. Deputy
Air, Mr. Richier, Mr. Dorvill, M. Houlton, Mr. Harvey, Mr. Deputy Tooly and
Mr. Deputy Collet, Commoners, or any Five of them whereof an Alderman to be
One, are by this COURT of Common Council made and appointe^ a Committee, with
Directions, full Power and ^uthority, by virtue of this ACT, to take Care of
^he Marking, Allowing and Appointing fit and conv^nient Wharf-Cars and Carts,
and to Divide, Dist^^^ute and Appoint the same to and amongst all and ^ery the
Woodmongers and Dealers in Fuel, as aforesa^^, within the City and Liberties
thereof, desiring the some, by them to be Employed and used in, and for carr^ng
out and bringing in their FUEL, according to the intent and meaning of this
present Act: And also ^o take due Care from time to time, that the Coals ^^d
Fuel by such Woodmongers and Dealers in Fuel, ^old and Delivered to all and
every Person and Pe^^ons within this City and Liberties thereof, shall c^^tain
the Full and Due Measure, Weight, Size and ^ale, and that the same be Sold and
Delivered at reasonable Rates and Prices from time to time; And also to prevent
all Frauds and Deceits in the Sale and Delivery thereof; and all Abuses,
Nus^ces and Obstructions by such Cars or Carts in the Streets and public
Passages, in this City and L^berties thereof; And to appoint such Person and
Persons as to them shall appear necessary to Inspe^^ and Oversee, that the said
Wharf-Carts be duly ^arked and Employed to the Uses aforesaid; and that no
Fraud or Deceit be done or committed, contr^ry to the true intent and meaning
of this Act: Which said COMMITTEE shall and may continue until the 25th Day of
December now next ensuing, or un^il a New Committee shall be Chosen; and so
from Year to Year, and every Year afterward.

And for the more ce^tain avoiding of such Deceit hereafter, as diverse Persons
have heretofore practiced in the Sale and M^^sure of their COALS: Be it further
Enacte^ by the Authority aforesaid, That all Sea-coals here^fter to be Sold and
Uttered by Retail, by any person or persons whatsoever, shall be filled and
brought some to the Buyers in the Seacoal-Meeters Sacks, and such other Sacks
as contain the full Measure of t^^ Seacoal-Meeters Sacks; and are and shall be
Mark^^ by the Keeper of the Guild Hall for the time being, according to an
ORDER of the Court of Aldermen made the 25th of October, in the time of the
Majealty of Sir Thomas Cambell Knight, deceased.

And that all person and persons Vending or Uttering Sea-coals by R^tail* and
every Carman, his Servant or Agent; shall hereafter from time to time, and at
all times when they Carry or Send abroad any Coals ^^in this City of London or
Liberties thereof, ca^^ along in their Carts or Cars, together with their
Seacoals, a good and lawful Bushel Sealed, according to be Bushel in the
Guild Hall allowed for Measuring (...) Sea-coals, which agrees with the Fatt,
anciently used ^or Measuring of Sea-coals.

And if any person and persons shall bring Home in his or their Cart or C^^^ to
any Buyer, any Coals in any other Sack or Sacks, and without such Bushel, as
are before mentioned and appointed; such persons so Offending, shall for^et and
pay Twenty shillings for the first, and every oth^^ Offense respectively.

And that it may the better appear what Number of Wharf-Cars or Carts shall be
appointed and allowed for Wharf-service, as ^foresaid, and to whom the said
Committee, now or h^^eafter to be appointed, or any Five of them (whereof one
to be an Alderman) shall Yearly, in the Month of May, present unto the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen of this City (if thereunto required,) a true
Catalogue and List fairly written, under their Hands, expressing ho^^* when and
to whom such Wharf-Carts are disposed of some time to time.

And be it farther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any such
Woodmongers o^ Traders in FUEL, as aforesaid, shall at any time a^er the First
Day of December next ensuing, presume (...) Work any Cart or Carts within the
said City and Li^erties, by Himself or Servant, not being duly all^wed, marked
and appointed, as aforesaid; such pe^^on or persons, for every time so
offending, sha^^ for^e and pay the Sum of Five pounds, to be recovere^ and
obtained as is hereafter mentioned.

And that every of the said Wodmongers or Traders in FUEL, keeping and working
any such Wharf Cart or Carts, so to be allowed, mark^^ and appointed, as
aforesaid, by virtue of this pre^^t Act; shall from time to time duly observe
all and very such reasonable Orders and Rules as shall be d^^ected and
appointed by this COURT, or such Committee so chosen and appointed, as
aforesaid.

And forasmuch as great Dis^r^^s and Disturbances have happened and arisen
amongst ^he Common Carmen, who Work the aforesaid Four hundred and twenty
Street-Cars about their Turns, in Carriage of Merchandise and other Goods,
(viz) Which of them shall have Priority, and take up and load the first and
next Load of Goods after or before ^ach other; whereof several Merchants and
others have made Complaint to this COURT, and that the^ have been Sufferers
thereby: Therefore for Remed^ thereof for the future, Be it Enacted by the
Authorit^ aforesaid, That all Merchants and other Tradesme^ having any Occasion
for any Street Cart or Cars, shall and may use and employ which and such of
them as he or they shall think fit, and choose, for carrying of every such
first, next, or other Load or Loads, as he or they shall from time to time upon
such Occasion direct or appoint; any Law or Usage to the contr^ry thereof
notwithstanding.

And, Lastly, it i^ hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority afores^id,
That all Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, in and b^ this Act limited and
appointed, shall and may be re^overed by Action of Debt, Bill or Information,
in the Name of the Chamberlain of this City, for the time ^eing, in Their
Majesty's Court, holden before the lord Mayor and Aldermen of the said City, in
the Ou^ward Chamber of the Guild Hall; and upon Recovery of the same, one
Moiety thereof, after all Charges ex^ended in such Recovery, shall by the
Chamberlain be said to the Informer or Prosecutor of such Suit, and ^^e other
Moiety to the use of the Mayor and Commina^y, and Citizens of this City.

In all which Suit^ to be brought by virtue of this Act, the Chamber^^^n shall
(in case he do recover) be allowed his Ordinary Costs and Charges, expended in
and about the same. And if Judgment shall happen to be given against (...)
Plaintiff in any such Suit, or such Suits shall be ^iscontinued, then the
Defendant shall also Recover (...) Costs.

Goodfellow.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of London. 1694.


