GOOD News from Scotland: Being A TRUE RELATION Of the present condition of the
ARMY under the Command of Lieut. Genesis CRUMWEL;

And of the Marquess of Arguile's taking a Ship coming from Denmark laden with
ten thousand Arms: With the ARTICLES about the Surrender of BARWICK; and the
Disbanding of the Forces under the Lord Lanerick and Monro:

As it was sent in a LETTER from Lieut. General Crumwels Quarters near Berwick,
to a Friend in LONDON.

8ber ye 4th

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the black Spread-Eagle at the West end of
Paul's, 1648.

News from Scotland: As it was sent in a LETTER from Lieut: General Cromwels
Quarters, to a Friend in London.
My dear Friend,
I Have much wondered, that having so frequently written unto you, I could never
receive as much as one Letter from you: Whatever the reason was, Charity wishes
me to imagine it to be either your not receiving my Letters, or else your not
knowing how yours might be conveyed unto me. I invite you once more by this, to
hold a constant Correspondence; which if you do, I shall give you a weekly
Account of our proceedings in these Northern parts. We have now drawn the most
considerable part of our Army into Scotland, the Van quarters this night within
ten miles of Edinburgh: there is part of the Army left behind to block up
Berwick; two Regiments of Foot, and the Lieut. Generals Regiment of Horse block
it up on the English side, we have others that keep strong Guards on Scotland
side. The Lieut. General, and the Commanders and Officers, express very great
tenderness to that Kingdom, in being very careful that the Soldiers give no
offense justly to the Inhabitants, by Plundring, or being other-ways uncivil.
Upon our first entrance into Scotland, a Regiment lately raised in the
Bishopric of Durham behaved themselves rudely; which as soon as the Lieut:
General had notice of, he caused it to Rend^zvouz upon Tweed Banks, and the
Scottish people having challenged several Horses taken from them by that
Regiment, which the Lieut: General caused to be restored back, and the
Plunderers to be cashiered; a Lieutenant that countenanced such deeds, was
del^vered into the Marshal hands, and the Colonel himself conniving at them,
and not doing Justice upon the Offenders when C^mplaints were brought to him,
was taken from the head of his Regiment, and suspended from executing his
Place, until he had answered at a Council of War for his negligence in the
performance of his Duty. This notable and impartial piece of Justice did very
much take with the people, and the Regiment is ordered back into
Northumberland. Friday last 22 of Septem. the Marquis of Argyle, the Lord
Elcoe, Sir John Scot, and others, came as Commissioners from the honest Party
in Scotland, to the Lord of Mordingtons house at Mordington, to the Lieut:
Generals quarters two miles from Berwick within Scotland; we went all to meet
him four miles from the house: That night my Lord sent in a Trumpet to Berwick,
for a safe Conduct for the said Lord Elcoe, and the rest of the Commissioners;
which being granted by the Governor, they were Conducted in the next morning:
Little or nothing could be done by them to the gaining of the Town. The Lords
day my Lord sent in to desire the Governor himself to come forth, which he
accordingly did: After much Debate he was brought to this, To desire to send
two Gentlemen to Lanerick and Monro, to know their pleasure concerning the
surrender of that Garrison. Monday morning the Gentlemen went, having the
Lieutenant Generals Pass, and a Letter from the Lord Marquis. We fall to
our-business in order to our taking the Town; and the Lords day at night
Colonel Pride possessed himself of Tweed mouth, and the Bridge foot on the
English side, and the next night he blew up the house of Guard which they had
built upon the Bridge: We are very near them by the Scottish side, having
driven away many of their Sheep from under the wall. Monday in the forenoon
there came an Express from General Leven and Lieut. Genesis David Lesley,
certifying my Lord Marquis, that they were very like to agree upon the old
Treaty, which was to hold no longer then that night: The Conditions, in case
they do agree, will be these.

1. That both the Armies, that under the Lord Marquess Arguile, and that under
Lanerick, with all Forces in any of the Garrisons in the Kingdom of Scotland,
together with Berwick and Carlisle be disbanded.

2. That the securing and settling Religion at home, and promoting the work of
Reformation abroad, both in England and Ireland be referred to the
determination of the General Assembly or their Commissioners, and that all
questions and civil differences whatsoever be referred to the determination of
a Parliament speedily to be called.

3 That to prevent the ruin of Religion and breacd with England, no party that
were in the late engagement against England, may be of the new Parliament or
general Assembly.

From Cockermouth briefly thus; It has been a long time besieged by 500
Countrymen. The Lieutenant General ordered the Lancashire forces under Colonel
Ashton, with Colonel Brigs his horse, together with Colonel Hacker and Colonel
Whites Regiments of Horse, from Pontefract to march up to their relief; they
might have been there three weeks ago, but are not yet come up. The honest
Governor Lieutenant Bird hot^s out gallantly; he has a fortnights provision
yet. The Enemy had mined very near the wall, he sallyed out, killed and took
them all that were at work, and brought away their Tools, and burnt the barn
that sheltered them. He can hold out one part of the Castle, though they should
take the other, but I hope he will be releived suddenly, for that I hear there
are Forces upon their march toward them. The Marquess of Arguile took seven
days ago a ship with ten thousand Arms that came from Denmark, intended for
Duke Hamilton; they came to Leith, where they were seized upon. There are about
eighty Officers armed that ran away from Duke Hamiltons Army; now lurking about
Cheviot Hills, we have sent one hundred and twenty Horse of the Lieutenant
Generals Regiment, and forty Dragoons toward them, which we hope will be able
to give a good account of that business.

SIR, Scotland seem to be very sensible of the benefit they have lately reaped
by the victory God gave to our Army, and say they hope never to forget those
Instruments which the Lord chose to work their deliverance; and check
themselves for the hard thoughts they formerly had of this Army: And its very
observeable, That this Army which the honest Party in Scotland looked upon as a
Bundle of Sectaries, not fit to be continued, and did many ways unjustly
reproach, should now, under God, be the only authors of their Deliverance.
Some of the most eminent and honorable in Scotland have ingenuously confessed
to me their error and rashness in charging the Army last year with Rebellion
unjustly, seeing now there is a necessity put upon them to tread in that very
path: Nay, they acted now against a clearer Authority, where was the
concurrence of the three States, King, Lords and Commons, I am much persuaded
that the Lord has a glorious work in Scotland as well as in England. The
Interest of the godly people in Scotland, as to the Civil, was once different
from that of the godly people in England, or at least acted as it had been
different; but now the Lord has been pleased so to order the Affairs of that
Kingdom, as that the Interest of the godly people there, is become the same
with ours in England, and they and we must act upon the same Grounds and
Principles: And I am persuaded, that so much of their Power as the Princes of
the Earth have lent to the support of that Man of Sin, God has and will
suddenly utterly break and destroy. I have no more at present, but that I am

Mordington in Scotland, Sept. 27. 1648. Your most affectionate Friend, J: L.

FINIS.

