At a Court of Sewers held at the Guild Hall, Sewers London.
London; on Saturday the fifth of February in the year of our Lord 1652. before
us Commissioners of Sewers for the City of London the Suburbs of the same and
elsewhere in all places within the limits of two miles of and from the said
City, whose names hereafter ensue, whereof three or more are of the Quorum, to
wit,
The Lord Major of the City of London. Mr. Alderman Kendrick. Mr. Alderman
Pack. Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower. Mr. Web. Mr. Swallow. Mr. Cole. Mr.
Holloway. Mr. Normington. Mr. Bellomy. Mr. Nash. Mr. Benson. Mr. Argent. Mr.
Archer. Mr. Clark.
IT was amongst other things ordered and decreed as follows, to wit, Whereas
in the due execution of a commission of Sewers for the limits aforesaid under
the great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the 30 day of July in
the year of our Lord 1651. to us and others directed, it appears as well by
view as by the oaths of good and lawful men as well of the west part of the
said City as of the County of Middlesex, that the common Dich or Sewer commonly
called Fleet-Ditch and the River-Wells, also Tremel-Brook from the River of
Thames at Bridewell Dock London to Hockley in the hole in the County of
Middlesex having bin anciently passable with Boats, Ballingers, Lighters, and
other vessels is now by many encroachments thereupon made by keeping of Hogs
and Swine therein and elsewhere near to the said Sewer, the throwing in of
Offals and other Garbage by Butchers, Soucemen and others, and by reason of
many houses of office erected built and standing upon and over the said Sewer
and otherwise not only stopped, choked up and become unpassable with boats and
other vessels as heretofore, but also become very stinking and noisome to the
great prejudice and annoyance not only of the neighborhood and inhabitants
thereabout, but to the said City of London and County of Middlesex, and the
Commonwealth in general, and contratry to the good and whole some Laws and
Statutes of this Commonwealth in that case made and provided. And whereas all
or most of the offenders in any the kinds a foresaid stand presented before us
for their several encroachments, houses of office erected and other annoyances
and misdemeanors by them severally made and committed in and upon the said
Ditch or Sewer, some whereof have appeared submitted them selves and been fined
and others, though summoned, have not appeared, but stand in contempt, and yet
the said encroachments, erections and nusances are still continued unredressed.

Now we the said Commissioners minding a through reformation of all the said
abuses by scouring and cleansing the said Ditch or Sewer to make it passable
again with boats and other vessels for the benefit of the inhabitants and
others as formerly, and being desirous that all the said encroachments nusances
and other obstructions may be redressed and removed with as much ease and
little trouble to the inhabitants as may be, do therefore think fit to order
and decree, and it is hereby ordered and decreed, That as well all and every
person and persons as stand presented before us as others not yet presented for
any encroachments, stops, lets, houses of office or annoyances in or upon the
said ditch or Sewer shall abate, pull down, reform and amend the same by the 12
day of March next coming upon such pain as shall by the said Commissioners by
virtue of the said Commission, and the authority thereof according to the Laws
and Statutes of this Commonwealth in that case made and provided, be inflicted
upon them in case of there neglect herein.

Clerks to the Commissioners.
Benjamine Web Edward Moreton


London printed by Hen. Hills for John Bellinger in Clifford's Inne-lane.


