blazon or coat of armsBy the Mayor. blazon or coat of arms
To the Alderman of the Ward of (...)
WHereas oftentimes heretofore, especially toward Winter the Evenings growing
dark, many loose and vagrant persons have been found to wander about the
streets and lanes and to lurk in corners within this City and Liberties
thereof, and under color of begging in the day time, have practiced how to
break into Houses, Shops, and other places in the night season, and in the
mornings after the Watches are broken up, and thereby diverse burglaries,
robberies, fellonies, and outrages are committed to the breach of the Peace of
the Commonwealth, and to the slander of the Government of this City; for the
avoiding of which inconveniences and many others within this City and Liberties
thereof. These are in the name of his Highness the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland and the dominions thereunto
belonging, straightly to charge and command you, that from henceforth you cause
a good and substantial Watch to be kept nightly within your Ward, to begin
this winter season at nine of the clock in the Evening, and to continue until
six of the clock in the Morning; And that once every week or oftener as shall be
needful, and in as private manner as may be, you cause diligent search to be
made in all Innes, Alehouses, Victualling-houses, houses of lodging and all
other suspected places wherein your Ward, for any idle, loose, lewd and
suspicious persons, and that they be brought before me or some other Justice of
the Peace within this City to be examined and dealt withal as to Justice shall
appertain. And that you cause the Beadle of your Ward from henceforth every
night during the time appointed in that behalf, to give warning to the
Inhabitants within your Ward for Lanthorn and Candle light, to be by them set,
and hanged forth in convenient places according to the ancient usage and order
in that behalf. And that the same be duly continued until the first day of
March next; And that I be certified from time to time, of the name, sirnames,
and welling places of all such as shall nake default therein, to the intent
that due punishment may be inflicted upon such as shall fail in the doing of
what is required. And further that you take order that the Lanthorn and Candle
light, which is appointed for every Precinct be duly put forth and continued as
by order is directed; And also that your Beadle and the Constables within your
Ward make diligent search and inquiry from time to time, and that you certify
me in writing of the names and dwelling places of all such Inmates or
undersitters as now are or hereafter shall be received or harbored within your
Ward; And likewise the names and sirnames of such as shall receive or harbor
them to the end they may be proceeded against according to Law, And further
that you give present order to the Beadle of your Ward, to warn all the
Inhabitants of the same to amend their Pavements where they are defective, and
that the streets before their doors, shops and houses, be daily from time to
time at their perils clean swept, pared and kept clean, and that no persons
presume to lay their Sea-coal ashes in the streets, but that they bring the
same in Baskets to the Raker, under the penalties in the several Acts of
Common Council of this City mentioned; And that I may be certified of such
Constables, Scavengers, Yeomen of the Channel, and other persons as shall make
default in the performance of their several duties in the premises; And also
that you cause certificate to be made unto me, to (...) such persons as shall
presume to keep Alehouses without License, and of such as shall suffer
disorders in their houses being licensed: In all which you are to take
especial care, that so thereby such order may be taken for reforming the
several abuses within this City, as may be for the well governing and the
quiet, peace, and safety of the same. And lastly, that you cause your Wardmote
Inquest to meet once in every month, to oversee that all Weights, and Measures
used in buying and selling be sealed, and according to the Standard: And that
the Bakers, Brewers, and Typlers do keep the assize according to the Law, And
that Butchers, and Victuallers do put to sail no other Victual but such as
shall be good and wholesome for man's body; And that they observe and do all
other things, which according to their charge, and the duty of their places
they are to do and perform. And that you take an account of your Beadle, and
the Constab^es and other Officers within your Ward once every month at the
least, or oftener as you see cause how they have performed their several duties
herein: And that you take especial care that the orders aforesaid may be
observed. And hereof not to fail as you tender the welfare and good government
of this City.

Dated this (...) of November. 1654.

