By the Major.
To the Alderman of the Ward of (...)
WHereas the City of London, and the Liberties thereof, is exceedingly pestered
with Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, as well Men as Women, which wander
abroad about the Streets and Lanes thereof, to the dishonor of the City, and
grievance of the good Inhabitants of the same: These are therefore at the
instance of the Corporation for setting the Poor on work within this City,
straightly to charge and command you, in the name of the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, by Authority of Parliament; That forthwith upon sight
hereof, you call before you your Deputy, and all the Constables within your
Ward, and give straight charge unto the said Constables, that from henceforth
from time to time they do apprehend and take all manner of Rogues, Vagabonds
and Sturdy Beggars, both Men and Women whatsoever, which shall be found begging
or wandering idly abroad in any part of your Ward, and them from time to time
either to punish at the Whipping-post according to the Law, and so send them
away by Pass to such place as the Law does require; or otherwise to carry and
convey them and every of them to Bridewell, where order is already taken for
their employment and setting on work: And that all and every the said
Constables be from time to time assistant unto the Marshalls of this City and
their men, and every of them, for the conveying to Bridewell of all such
Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, as they or any of them shall find or take
up in any the Streets or Lanes of this City, or the Liberties thereof, as
aforesaid. Whereof see you fail not, as you will answer the neglect of your
Duty therein, and the contempt of this Precept, at the Sessions to be holden
for the City.

Dated at the Guildhall London, this 22th of March, 1649. Sadler.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1649*


