THE Lord's Day TO BE KEPT HOLY. Asserted in a Familiar Conference BETWIXT TWO
FRIENDS About the Unlawfulness of Exercising their Trades or Ordinary Callings
on that Day. Published for the Use of Ignorant People, to prevent the
Profanation of that Holy Day.

LICENSED,

July 19. 1694. Edward Cook.



LONDON: Printed for William Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-street. 1694.

THE Lord's Day TO BE KEPT HOLY, etc.
^ SIR, A good Morning to you, How do you do to day? I have made bold to visit
you this Morning, hoping I have not broke the ^ds of our Friendship in my
Reproof last Night, ^he exercising of your Trade on the Lord's Day. ^ed I was a
little concerned our Dispute happened so (...) last Night, that we could not come
to a Conclu^, which occasions my coming this Morning.


^ Mr. B. I am glad to see you this Morning with ^y heart, and, for my part, I
am so far from break^e Bonds of Friendship with you, that I heartily (...) you
for your mild Reproof, though I cannot be ^our mind, nor think it so great a
Sin as you (...) of; for was I convinced it is a Sin, I would (...) exercising
my Trade on that day for the ^e.


^ Truly Mr. S. I think our heavenly Father has ^ough to convince you and I
that it is a Sin, in these words, Remember thou keep Holy the Sabbat^ Because
it was commanded by God to Adam i^ Innocence; and if it was necessary for our
fir^ rents to have and keep a Sabbath day to serve G^ their state of
Perfection, much more need their ^sterity to keep the Lord's Day in this state
of Co^tion. And seeing that God himself keeps this (...) Holy, How can that Man
be Holy, that does w^ profane it, by following his ordinary Calli^ Trade on
that day? Besides, You see that God (...) placed this Commandment in the middle
of the (...) Tables, with a watchword of solemn preparation it, Remember that
thou keep Holy the Sabbath Day if this was to be kept above all the rest,
because (...) keeping of it is the best help to the keeping a^ rest.


S. Mr. B. In all this you say very well, but l^ tell you, That Christ is Lord
of the Sabbath, and (...) remitted the rigor of Moses's Law; for it is said
(...) Sabbath was made for Man.


B. In this Mr. S. you make for me, and no^ your self; it is true indeed, The
Sabbath was m^ Man: But not to follow his Trade, or spen^ time in Tippling at
Alehouses or Taverns. It (...) made for Man to buy the Bread of Heaven, and
(...) Water of Life; it is a Market day for our Soul, (...) we may buy the Food
of Angels, the Wine o^ Sacrament, and the Milk of the Word of Go^ feed our
Souls, which is to be had without (...) and without price. And as you say
Christ is Lo^ the Sabbath, which ought to make us admire the ^derful work of
our Redemption, he being Lo^ ^ Day, we ought to spend our Time in his Service*
^d keep the Day to him, who rose on this Day from ^e Dead, that we may raise
our Minds and Souls to ^wness of Life, and make all our Works spiritual; (...)
says the Lord by the Prophet, Isa. 58. the 13th ^d 14th verses, And call the
Sabbath a delight, the ^y of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not
(...) thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, (...) speaking thine own
words: Then shall thou delight (...) self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to
ride ^on the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the ^ritage of Jacob
thy father: for the mouth of the ^rd has spoken it.

And I think I may say God has writ it over and ^ver again with his own
Fingers in Tables of Stone, ^o signify his Authority and Perpetuity of it; for
all ^at God wrote were moral and perpetual Command^nts, and these are reckoned
Ten in number; if this ^ere taken away by Christ, or was now but an abro^ed
Ceremony, then there would be but Nine Com^andments: But to end this
Controversy, Christ pro^esseth in Matthew. 5.17. That he came not to destroy the
^oral Law; but, as the Learned Dr. Hammond para^aseth upon it, to repair and
make up whatsoever ^s any ways wanting: insomuch that our Savior (...) again
in the 19th verse, Whosoever therefore (...) break one of these least
Commandments, and shall (...) men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of ^ven: Or be despised and rejected by God in ^e day of Judgment,
according to the said Para^rase.


S. Indeed Mr B. you have almost convinced me; ^ut if I should leave off
Trading on this day, others ^ill not, and so I shall lose my Customers, it
being so much practiced, or else I would leave off for future.


B. I am glad Mr. S. to hear this ingenuous C^fession from you, but am sorry
you should mistr^ God's Providence, when it is in him we live and mo^ and have
all our Being; for let me tell you plain^ that this will avail but little in
the last day: we m^ not answer there, when God calls us to account for the
breach of this day, that we feared losing o^ Trade, or did it to get a
Livelihood, this will not ^cuse the breaking of the Commandments. And (...)
others will do it, that will be no Excuse for me; (...) if Ten thousand break a
Commandment, that w^ not give me a Dispensation, and make me guiltles^ others
doing of it is no Argument that it is no S^ therefore that must not be my Rule
to go by, w^ am obliged by my Baptismal Vow to fight again^ the World, and all
appearance of Evil. Where Go^ commands, it is my Duty to obey, and not fear w^
the world will say, or the losing my Trade; b^ do my Duty to him, and leave the
Event to h^ Providence, as Abraham did in the offering (...) his Son; and I
think it will not be amiss to she^ you an Instance of God's Providence in such
a Case a^ yours is.

It was to a Friend of mine some time since, I think it not proper to mention
his Name, he was a Baker by Trade, but ever thought it unlawful to heat his
Oven on the Lord's Day, so that he did not do it; and being importuned by
several to heat it, he would not yield, but went to some pious and learned
Divines, to know whether it was Lawful or no, they told him it was not, except
in Cases of Necessity* but neither he nor they thought it needful for him or
his Servants to work on that day to bake Puddings or Bread, since it was so
plain a Breach of the Fourth Commandment.

The Baker, being a good Man, did not raise these silly Objections, of losing
his Trade, which you and other Men seem to do; he loved to discharge his Duty
to God, and in so doing, left the Event to his Providence. And tho some of his
Customers left him, because he would not bake Puddings, or sell Bread on the
Lord's Day, that did not move the good Man, or make him mistrust God's
Providence. And as God loves to reward his Servants in a visible manner, so in
this Case, to let the besotted world see what happiness they miss, in not
serving him; for the Scene here soon altered, and, in a little time, his
Customers began to come again in greater numbers than they went away; and he
had so great a Trade on the weekdays, that himself said he desired no greater
so long as he lived. I might have given a fuller Account of this good Man, but
it would take up too much of our time at present.


S. Truly Mr. B. I wish there were more such Men as this you speak of, for
indeed he had a better Faith than I have.


B. Truly your Wish is good, but wishing will not do the work of God, therefore
strive to make your self what you desire others to be, and in this degenerate
Age show your self an Example to others; for God delights in a Free Will
Offering, and expects his Servants should wait upon him in the midst of
Difficulties. If we will give ourselves time to consider, his wages are
infinitely beyond our labor; our Task is short, but our Rest will be long; and
the reward of Obedience will be great, though the besotted world will not see
it.


S. It Is something strange, if it is so great a Sin as you speak of, that so
many hundreds of Alehouses, Taverns and Coffee-houses should be so much
frequented, and they not see the greatness of this Sin, though some of them are
counted honest Men.


B. It is strange, as you say, that so many should do it, and not see the
greatness of the Sin, though I am apt to believe they do, but their Interest
keeps them from believing in good earnest; however if they cannot, or will not
see their Sin, that is no Example for you and I, as I told you before, though
Ten thousand do it, that does not take off the Sin. You see some hundreds will
cozen and swear, and be drunk, yet all this while the Sin is great; for it is
said, They shall not inhabit the new Jerusalem.

And so here the Commandment is plain; for on the Lord's Day, Thou shall not do
any manner of Work (except Works of Necessity, Mercy or Charity) neither thou,
and thy Son, and thy Daughter, thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant, and thy
Cattle, and the Stranger that is within thy Gates: For, let me tell you, the
Sin is greater, and aggravating so much the more, in being done by a multitude,
which we are not to follow to do Evil. And though you think some of them Honest
Men that do so, yet they may be Carnal; and if so, the Apostle tells us, The
Carnal Man cannot conceive the things of the Spirit of God, neither does he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. You will find all good Men
in every Age have looked upon it as a Sin, and some Hundreds have writ against
it, also the Laws of the Land are levelled against it, but I wish they were put
more in execution against all those Men that profane the Sabbath.

It is not long since our Gracious QUEEN did send a Letter to the Justices of
Middlesex, I believe you may remember it, to put the Laws in execution against
profaning the Lord's Day, and other Sins; And in the Order which the Justices
put out, They were to punish all Persons that frequented either Alehouses,
Taverns or Coffee-houses, as well out of Divine Service as in; And that none
should expose their Goods to Sale on the Lord's Day. This put me in mind of a
Friend of mine who was walking along the Streets at that time, and seeing a
Woman exposing her Fruit and Herbs to Sale, he spoke to her of the ill
Consequence of it, and told her, She ought to go to Church, and serve God. The
Woman replied, She took more Money on the Lord's Day than any day of the week,
and she could not live if she did not do it.

My Friend, said he to the good woman, if you would but keep the Lord's Day as
you ought, and not sell your things on that day, but shut up your Cellar, and
go to Church, and serve God; and when you come home, spend your time in reading
the Word of God, using Prayer, and rendering Praises to him for all his Mercies.
In so doing, you need not doubt but God will be infinitely kind, and send a
blessing upon your Labor the rest of the Week, which you cannot expect while
you make a Market Day of his Sabbath.

The woman accepted of his Counsel, took in her things, shut up her doors, and
went to Church. My Friend called upon the poor woman some time after, and she
was glad to see him, and thanked him for his good Advice, saying, She had found
his words true; for ever since she had kept the Sabbath Day, she sold more
things on Mondays and Tuesdays, than before she used to do all the week.


S. Your Friend I think did very well, I wish others would do the same; for
this Story of yours puts me in mind of a Book that I have of Sir Matthew
Hales's, where he says something to this effect if I am not mistaken: If you
please I Will fetch the Book, and read that Passage to you.


B. I Pray do, if it be not too great a trouble for you.


S. "The Passage is this, it is in a Letter to his Children: Because I have by
long and sound Experience found that the due observance of this Day, [meaning
the Lord's-day] and the Duties of it, have been of singular Comfort and
Advantage to me, and I doubt not but it will prove so to you. God Almighty is
Lord of our Time, and lends it to us, and it is but just we should consecrate
this part of that Time to him; so I have found by a strict and diligent
Observation, that a due Observation of this Day, has ever had joined to it a
Blessing upon the rest of my Time, and the week that has so begun has been
blessed and prosperous to me. "On the other side, when I have been negligent of
the Duties of this Day, the rest of the week has been unsuccessful and unhappy
to my own secular Employment; so that I could easily make an Estimate of my
Successes in my own secular Employments the week following, by the manner of my
passing of this day, and this I do not write lightly or inconsiderably, but
upon a long and sound Observation and Experience, because I find in the world
much Looseness and Apostasy from their Duty. People begin to be Cold and
Careless in it, allowing themselves Sports and Recreations, and Secular
Employments in it, without any necessity, which is a sad Spectacle, and an ill
presage. It concerns me therefore (that am your Father) as much as I may to
rescue you from that Sin which the Examples of others, and the Inclinations,
and Inconsiderateness of Youth is otherwise apt to lead you into."



I will read no further at this time to you, by reason I would have some more
Discourse with you, since you have been so kind to come and spend this time
with me.


B. I think what you have read to me is much to the purpose of what I came to
you about; I am glad to see you have so good a Book, I hope you will read it a
little oftener than I fear you have done, pray pardon my course Complement, for
I fear you have not much minded it heretofore; for I find here is further
Directions in this Book, for he says, It is not a necessity to do a work upon
this Day, when it might be done upon another Day; this makes me more admire at
you, having so good a Book, and in it so good Reasons against the exercising of
your Trade on the Lord's Day; for shame be of another mind, and leave off for
the future.


S. Alas! I have a great many good Books, though with shame I may say it, I
have not minded them: I have the Practice of Piety, and the Duty of Man,
besides the Holy Bible, and other good Books; I hope God will forgive me for
the neglect of them. Indeed I was never so much convinced as I am at this time
by your Discourse; that for the future, through the Grace of God, I will be
more careful.


B. I pray God you may; I would fain recommend to you that Passage in the
Practice of Piety about keeping the Lord's Day, since you say you have the
Book; and when you read it, apply it to your self, and consider well the truth
of what is said; do not read it carelessly, but consider your Soul lies at
stake, and it is worth your taking care of: I pray you pardon me for being so
earnest with you, for I desire no other thing than the good of your Soul.


S. I thank you heartily for taking so much pains with me, I am satisfied you
do it for my good; and my own Conscience tells me I ought to take your advice,
only I am afraid of losing my Trade, except others would leave off as well as
me, and I could do it cheerfully.


B. Alas, This is a Childish reasoning; for if other men will poison
themselves, why should you; if other men be never so bad, that is no Example for
you to follow; if they are unreasonable, why should you lose your Wits; do but
look upon your Soul as worth more than all the Riches of the World; And if
other men will venture the hazard of their Souls by profaning this Day of the
Lord's, why should you; if they drink, cheat and abuse themselves, must you do
so too; How can you be afraid of want, when you do not see a Bird starve or die
for want of food? and if we cannot live so high as we have done before, yet you
will find more content; for how can want be so grievous, when we consider the
Author and Captain of our Salvation was in want, and his Followers were so too,
and yet did live in Heaven; therefore if thy Calling is an occasion of sinning,
away with it, and turn Plowman or Servant, rather than live in a breach of a
known Command, or Sin; Seek first the Kingdom of heaven, and its righteousness,
and look after the Concerns of your Soul; and then as for Necessaries, thy God
will not suffer thee to want them.


S. I am convinced, and through the Grace of God I will leave off exercising my
Trade on the Lord's Day for the future.


B. I must confess you make my heart rejoice to hear this Answer from you; I
pray God keep you always in the same mind; and I do not doubt but you will find
a great deal of comfort in it, and more than at present you can expect; and
this put me in mind of a certain Friend of mine that kept a Coffee-house, and
he would not sell any Coffee on the Lord's Day; some of his Customers began to
leave him; and though he was so strict as they call it, because he would not
open his Doors on that day to let in men to drink a Dish of Coffee, they told
him that they thought there was no harm in it; but, said he, that will not
excuse me who think it is harm; for if I may follow my Calling, you may as well
follow yours; and since you think it is a sin for you to open your Shop, and
keep your Servants at work; Why should I keep mine, since making and selling of
Coffee is work to my Servants. I think they ought not to do it, nor my self
neither, for I never did, nor I hope never shall.

The Man was as good as his word, and certainly he lost nothing by it, for he
is now become a rich Man, and I hope you will follow his Example. For I think
it is a great shame to see so many keep their Servants at home to draw drink,
and others to sell things when they should be at Church, or in Reading the Word
of God, or in some other Exercise suitable for the day, for it is counted a
Persecution when we are forced from the Church and Public Worship. If then
there can be a Persecution, I think he that denies himself, and his Servants,
the Opportunity of coming to the Public Worship of God on the Lord's Day, is
his own Persecutor. So that I am afraid it does too evidently appear in many
places, that God is more dishonored, and the Devil better served on that day,
than all the Days of the Week besides; and for ought I know, the Judgments we
now lie under, may be owing to the Prophaner of the Lord's Day; for when we
consider how much Righteousness exalts a Nation, so Sin is a Reproach to any
People. We have reason to bewail this National Sin, and do all that lies in our
Power to Remedy it; and I think we have reason to pray for these Magistrates,
that put the Law in Execution against those that profane the Lord's Day.


S. I have no more to say against what you have said, only this, I wish that
your Discourse with me at this time, was all Written or Printed, That I might
communicate it to some of my Brother-Traders, in hopes that it might convince
some of them, as now it has done me, blessed be God for it.


B. I am willing to do all the good I can, and if you think this Discourse may
be of any use to the Public Good, I will recollect my mind, and write it out
for you.


S. In so doing, you will very much oblige me, and I hope it will convince some
others also, as well as my self.


B. Dear Friend, having performed my promise, so far as I can remember, I have
written our dispute; but I must recommend it to you with a little Advice, it
being written in such a homely Dress that when you communicate it to your
Friends, you would desire them to consider the good Intention, and the truth of
what is said, and in that nature apply it to themselves; and in so doing, to
read it over and over again, not as School boys do their Lessons but as one
that is in danger of his Soul by living in the Sin it treats of For since I had
this Discourse with you, I met with an honest Man that has kept an Alehouse
for Twenty or Thirty years; and I telling him some part of our Discourse, he
told me, That so long as he had kept an Alehouse, he never let any Company
come into his House to drink on the Lord's Day. And he thought he had a better
Trade by so doing; and said further to our Discourse, That he could wish all
Men would do the same, for he believes they would live better without a
Sunday-trade, than with it. Having these words from a good Man that has felt
the Comfort and Benefit of serving God on this day, I write them down that
others may take Example by him, for I do assure you of the truth of it, as well
as I do of all the rest.

So praying that it may do good to your Friends, as well to your self. I must
desire once more they would apply it to their own Souls, it being purely
designed for God's Glory, and their Good.


Which shall be the hearty Prayer of your ever Loving Friend and Brother in
Christ Jesus to serve you, B.

Judgments upon Sabbath breakers and other wickednesses, Read these Scriptures
following, Exodus 31.14. and Exodus 35.2. Numb. 15. from 30. v. to 37. Ezekiel.
20.12,13, etc. Read 22. and 23. Chapters, of Ezekiel. Jer. 17.27. Nehemiah chapter 13.
15. v. to the 23. Lev. 26.14. etc.

Promises Annexed to the Keeping of the Sabbath, Leviticus 26.2,3,4. and Isa
56.2. Isa. 58.13,14. Jer. 17.24,25. Isa. 56.2, etc.

FINIS.
Books sold by William Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street.
Meditations and Discourses concerning the Glory of Christ; Applied unto
unconverted Sinners and Saints, under spiritual decays, by Dr. Owen, price
bound 1 s. where you may be supplied with most of Dr. Owen's Writings, and Mr.
Beverly's.

