THE French King's DECLARATION, Enjoining the EXECUTION Of His Edict in October.
1685.

For the REVOCATION of the EDICT of NANTS, etc.

Given at Versailles the 13th of Dec. School. And Registered in PARLIAMENT.

Faithfully Translated from the Original Printed at Paris, School.

Published by John Nutt near Stationers' Hall. MDCXCVIII.

THE French King's DECLARATION FOR Putting in Execution his Edict in October
1685, for the Revocation of the Edict of Nants, etc.
I.
LEWIS by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre: To all to whom these
Presents shall come, Greeting. Our Desire of an Union of all Our Subjects in
the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion, Established and so Religiously
observed in our Kingdom during so many Ages, having obliged Us to repeal by Our
Edict in the Month of October 1685, those by which the Kings Our Predecessors,
and particularly King Henry the Fourth of glorious Memory, (being obliged
thereto by the Disorders which happened during their Reigns) have Tolerated the
pretended Reformed Religion; We have with great Satisfaction seen the greatest
part of Our Subjects that were engaged in it, return into the Communion of the
Church from which their Fathers had separated themselves during the last Age;
But notwithstanding that the addition of Care and Labor which has lain upon Us
during the late War, has not diminished in Us a continual Application for the
perfecting of so great a Work; Yet the Persons who are entrusted with the
Execution of Our Commands throughout the several Provinces of Our Kingdom,
being hindered by the many different Affairs that We have been obliged to employ
them in for some years past, from performing their Parts with the same
vigilance, We have to Our great Dissatisfaction understood, that some of the
pretended Reformed Ministers, who have formerly resided in the Kingdom, and
even some of Our said Subjects hardened in their Errors, taking advantage in
this Juncture of the Weakness and Levity of others, have flattered them with
vain Hopes, whereby some have been enticed to fall back from their former good
Dispositions; And as We desire nothing more earnestly than to see a Design
brought to its full Perfection, which We have undertaken for the Glory of God,
and the Salvation of so great a number of Our Subjects, We thought Our selves
obliged to renew Our Care herein, at this time that it has pleased God to grant
Peace to Europe; thereby to undeceive Our said Subjects from the false Reports
which some have endeavored to delude them with; and to use the most Effectual
Means to bring them back sincerely and truly into the Bosom of the Catholic
Church, out of which they cannot expect to be saved. Therefore We have Said and
Declared, and by these Presents, Signed with Our Hand, do Say and Declare, We
Will, and it is Our Pleasure, That Our Edict in the Month of October 1685,
repealing the Edict of Nantes, and others made in pursuance thereof, be
Executed. We do again forbid all Our Subjects to Exercise the pretended
Reformed Religion within the whole extent of Our Kingdom, to meet together in
any Place on this account, in any Number, or under any Pretense whatsoever; To
Harbor any Ministers, and Directly or Indirectly to hold any Correspondence
with them; Which We again in most express manner forbid them to do upon the
Penalties expressed in the Edicts and Declarations we have already made on this
Account, it being Our Will, that they be Executed according to their Form and
Tenor. We Require all Our Attorneys General and their Substitutes, and all
other Our Officers, to be Aiding and Assisting, and to inform us carefully of
all Proceedings herein, as Occasion shall occur.

II.
We Admonish, and also Enjoin all Archbishops and Bishops of our Kingdom, that
they continue residing within their Bishoprics according to the Constitutions
of the Holy Canons and Our Ordinances, to employ their utmost Zeal and
Application in the Instruction and Salvation of Our Subjects, whom it has
pleased God to entrust to their Spiritual Authority; and to provide with a more
particular Care for the Instruction of such of Our Subjects who are reunited
to the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion, as shall happen to be within
their Diocese.

III.
We likewise Admonish, and Enjoin all Archbishops and Bishops, to employ all
that Authority which it has pleased God to add to their Character, in infusing
the like Sentiments into the Clergy, and particularly the Curates who under
their Authority have the chief Care of the Souls of our Subjects in their
several Parishes; that they may with a particular Application instruct them in
the Mysteries of Our Holy Religion, and the Rules of Christian Morality; that
to this Effect they may at least on Sundays and Holidays read Instructions and
Catechisms at certain Hours, in such manner as shall be prescribed them by the
said Archbishops and Bishops, and may take Care that the Preachers Teach these
Truths to Our said Subjects in their Sermons.

IV.
We Admonish and Enjoin the said Archbishops and Bishops, that they appoint
such Clergy men as they shall think fit to give the said Instructions, during
the time they shall judge proper, when they shall not find the Curates of some
certain Places where there are many Persons who have lately reunited themselves
to the Catholic Religion, able to do it with success; and we are willing to
provide out of our own Treasure, for the subsistence of the said Clergymen,
according to the Accounts we shall receive from the said Prelates, of the
Necessity of doing it.

V.
We recommend it to all Our Subjects, and especially to those who are Lords of
Manors, and other the most Considerable Persons, together with such as have
lately reunited themselves to the Church; to assist with all possible Exactness
at Divine Service, that they may bring down those Blessings which God grants to
such as join their private Prayers to those of his Church; We command them that
they always behave themselves therein with Reverence, especially during, the
time of the Celebrating the Holy Mass, and adore on their Knees the most Holy
Sacrament on the Altar: As likewise, that they observe the Commands of the
Church as to Fasts, Abstinency from Flesh, and Rest from all manner of Work,
and take Care that their Children and Servants do exactly perform the same.

VI.
We likewise Command all Our said Subjects that they pay all due Honor and
Respect to all that relates to the Religion within and without the Churches, by
their Actions and by their Words, that they Honor the Persons of the Clergy,
and particularly the Archbishops and Bishops, and the Curates of their
Parishes, and that they receive with deference the Advice they shall give them
in Matters of Religion, and concerning their Spiritual Conduct: The whole on
Pain of Exemplary Punishment to such as shall fail therein.

VII.
We Command all Our said Subjects reunited to the Church, That they observe in
the Marriages they shall be willing to Contract, the Solemnities prescribed by
the Holy Canons, and especially those made by the last Council, and Confirmed
by our Our Ordinances, reserving to Our Selves the Power to Determine all Civil
Disputes that might arise concerning those Marriages, that may have been
Contracted by them since the First Day of November, in the Year 1685. when We
shall have been more particularly informed of the Nature and Circumstances of
each particular Case.

VIII.
We Command all Our Subjects, and particularly those who have lately reunited
themselves to the Church, That they cause their Children to be Baptized in the
Churches belonging to the Parishes in which they live, within Twenty four Hours
after their Birth; unless it shall be that upon some weighty Considerations,
they may have obtained leave of the Archbishop or Bishop in whose Bishoprics
they shall reside, to put off for some time the Ceremony of their Baptism. We
Command the Midwives and other Persons who assist Women in Labor, that they
give Notice to the Curate of the Place, of the Birth of such Children, and to
Our Officers and the Lords of Manors that have High Jurisdiction, to be aiding
and assisting herein, and to punish the Offenders by Fine, or even by greater
Penalties, as the Nature of the Case shall require.

IX.
Our Will is, that, inasmuch as is possible, there be Established in all
Parishes, where the same is nor already done, Masters, and Mistresses that
shall Instruct Children, and particularly those whose Fathers and Mothers have
professed the Pretended Reformed Religion, in the Catechism, and such Prayers
as are necessary for their direction at Mass on Weekdays; and to give them the
Instruction they shall need on this account, and to take care, during the time
they shall go to the said School, that they assist at all Divine Services on
Sundays and Holy Days; as also to Learn those to Read and even to Write, who
shall have occasion for it: The whole in the Manner prescribed by the 25th
Article of Our Edict, in the Month of April 1695. concerning Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and as shall be ordered by the Archbishops and Bishops; and that
in Places where no other Provision shall have been made, the necessary Sums for
their Subsistence be Levied on the Inhabitants, not exceeding 150 Livres a Year
for the Masters, and 100 Livres for the Mistresses; and that the necessary
Letters to Authorize them herein be dispatched without any Charge to them,
according to the Informations which the Archbishops and Bishops of the
respective Dioceses, and the Commissioners established in Our Provinces for
Executing Our Orders, shall give us.

X.
We Enjoin all Parents, Guardians, and others, who are Entrusted with the
Education of Children, and particularly of such whose Fathers and Mothers have
professed the Pretended Reformed Religion, that they send them to the Schools
and Catechisings aforesaid, till they are Fourteen years Old, unless their
Condition be such as that they may and ought to have them Instructed at home by
Tutors well Learned in Religion, and of Good Manners, or to send them to
Colleges; We Enjoin all Curates to attend with particular Care the Instruction
of the said Children in their Parishes, even of those who shall not go to the
abovesaid Schools: We Admonish and also Enjoin all Archbishops and Bishops,
that they make it the Object of their Care and Enquiry. We command all Fathers
and Mothers who are charged with their Education, and especially all Persons
more considerable by their Birth and Employments, that they produce to them,
the said Archbishop and Bishop, the Children they shall have at Home, when
they shall require it in the Course of their Visitations, that they may give
them an account of the Instruction they shall have received concerning
Religion; And also to our Judges, Attorneys, and to such Gentlemen as are Lords
of Manors, aforesaid, to use all Diligence, Requisitions and Ordinances, as
shall be necessary for the Execution of this Our Will and Pleasure, and to
Punish all those who shall neglect it, or who shall presume to act any ways
contrary thereto, by inflicting on them such Fines or greater Penalties, as the
Nature of the Case shall require.

XI.
We Enjoin all Relations, when they appoint Guardians or Persons to take care
of the Education of Minor Children, to choose such as are of a good Life and
Conversation, and who exactly discharge all the Duties of the Catholic
Religion.

XII.
We Enjoin all Physicians, and in their absence all Apothecaries and
Surgeons, who shall be called to Visit Sick Persons, that they give Notice
thereof to the Curates of the Parishes in which they shall dwell, so soon as
they shall judge that their Patient is in danger, unless they see they have
been otherwise sent for, that the Sick Person, and particularly Our said
Subjects newly Reunited to the Church, may from them receive the Spiritual
Advice and Consolation they shall stand in need of, as also the Benefit of the
Sacraments when they shall find them in a Condition to receive them: We Command
the Relations, Servants, and other Persons who are near the said Sick Persons,
to introduce them, the said Curates, and to receive them with the Respect
suitable to their Character. And it is Our Will, That such Physicians,
Apothecaries and Surgeons as shall neglect to Execute Our Orders to them in
this behalf, shall be punished by Fines; and in case of a second Default, by
suspending them from their Practice, as the Nature of the Case shall require.

XIII.
Our Pleasure is, That according to the Ancient Ordinances of the Kings, Our
Predecessors, and the Custom observed, no Person shall be admitted into any
Office of Judicature in any of our Courts of Justice, in the Courts of the
Lords of the Manors, or in Places belonging to our Cities held by Our
Authority, or into the Employments of Town Clerks, Attorneys, Notaries, and
Bailiffs, unless they have an Attestation from the Curate of the Parish in
which they dwell, or their Vicars, certifying their good Life and Manners, and
also their exercising the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion.

XIV.
Our Pleasure is, That no Licenses or Degrees be for the future granted in the
Universities of Our Kingdom, to such as have studied Law or Physic, unless
they have the like Attestation from their Curates, which shall be exhited to
such as have Power to grant the said Degrees.

XV.
Our Will moreover is, That Our said Subjects do peaceably Enjoy their Estates
and Exercise their Commerce as others do, on condition that they cause
themselves to be Instructed and Confirmed in the Catholic, Apostolic and
Roman Religion; That they suffer and even cause their Children to be Instructed
therein; That they exactly observe all our Edicts and Declarations; and that
they behave themselves on all occasions as Our Good and Faithful Subjects ought
to do. And We Command all Our Beloved and Trusty Counselors holding our Court
of Parliament at Paris, That they cause these Presents to be Read, Published,
Registered, and the Contents of them to be kept and observed according to their
Form and Tenor; For such is Our Pleasure. In Witness whereof We have affixed
Our Seal to these Presents; Given at Versailles the 13th Day of December, School,
and of Our Reign the 50th. Signed Louis; and underneath, By the King
Phelypeaux: and Sealed with the Broad Seal in Yellow Wax.

Registered and Heard at the Request of the King's Attorney General, to be
executed according to their Form and Tenor, and true Copies thereof sent to the
Baylywicks and Seneschalsies of the District, to be there Read, Published, and
Registered. Injunctions giv^n to the Substitutes of the King's Attorney General
to be Aiding and Assisting therein, and to C^rtifie the Court thereof within a
Month, according to the Order of this Day.

At Paris in Parliament the 20th of December, School. Signed, Du Jardin.

FINIS.

