DIANEA: AN EXCELLENT NEW ROMANCE.

Written in ITALIAN BY GIO. FRANCISCO LOREDANO A Noble VENETIAN.

In FOUR BOOKS.

Translated into ENGLISH BY Sir ASTON COKAINE.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Mosel^y at the sign of the Prince's Arms in St
Paul's Churchyard, 1654

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY MARY COKAINE, Vice-Countess CULLEN.
MADAM,
THis Princess of Cyprus, in Gratitude for the Honor you did her, whilst she
was Dressing in her English Apparel, (For you were pleased to grace her
History with the acceptance of my prime Intention and promise that her Loves
and Misfortunes should visit our tumultuous World under the serene Auspice of
your Protection) now implores the Security of that Glory; That (whilst she
makes her Progress through this Land) she may triumph in such a Favor to an
utter Stranger; who hereafter (in recompense for your pious Hospitality) will
report your Worths to the Italian Ladies, and consecrate eternal Pyramids to
your meritorions Memory, when she returns into her own Kingdom. I must also
(Madam) give you Thanks for your too kind Approbation of my poor Endeavor to
do her service: But the Favor lies in your own unparalleld Goodness, whose
excellent Spirit is replete with as many of the sublimest virtues as your
beautiful body is composed of Regal and noble Bloods, derived to you from
illustrious Families of England and Ireland. My best of Friends, Colonel
Edward Stamford, gave me the Author, and entreated me to teach him our
Language; The Dedication was therefore due to him: but he is Owner of so much
Courtship, as (without offense) to give place to a Lady. So beseeching you
(Madam) to accept graciously this small testimony of my Thankfulness for your
Civilities to this Cyprian Princess, whom I have waited on into England; and
kissing your Hand for your Courtesy to me, who present her to remain under the
Palace of your Tuition; I subscribe my self from my Hand and Heart

(MADAM) Your humble Servant, ASTON COKAINE.

The Authors Epistle To the most Illustrious and most excellent Signior, my
most honored Signior; the Signior DOMINICO da MOLINO, GIO. FRANCESCO LOREDANO.
I Have thought never to interest any in the Protection of my Writings. Diverse
times when my Genius has carried me to the Press, I have always slighted
Dedication either as rash, or as superfluous. Great Things are Defenses to
themselves; nor should Jove be invited to be Patron to a Pigmie. But the Merit
of your Excellency, that can excuse the Ambition of any Wit that is covetous
his Labors should visit the Light under such an Ascendant of Felicity, has
persuaded me to glorify my Name, by subscribing it to that of your Excellency;
whom I believe the World is too poor of Encomiums to celebrate sufficiently.
Behold therefore recommended to the favor of your Excellency, the Princess
DIANEA, who ambitiously runs to humble her self to those Greatnesses, which
provoke Observances even from Princesses themselves. I (in the History of her)
have been desirous to try if the Opinion of Philoxenus, that neither Flesh to
Flesh, nor Fish to Fish gave a precedence, has also the same effect in Fable
to Fable. May your Excellency please to receive in the poverty of the gift; the
desire of that Hand, that would erect to you Statues of Mountains, and make you
Pictures of the Heavens. Lastly, I most humbly bow to you.

From VENICE the 25 of October, 1635.
The First Book of DIANEA.
THe Moon was not as yet worshipped in the East, neither yet had the Empire of
Asia received command from the Tyranny of one alone, where in an Island of the
Carpatian Sea a gallant Galley came to shore; It was furnished with all those
Ornaments that could render Majesty and Strength. To escape the Anger of
Heaven, which with building Mountains of waves threatened Precipices to those
within, it was retired into this Island: where between two mighty Rocks that
made a Creek it promised it self all security. The Rowers having cast Anchors,
made a ladder, and suddenly there was seen to come forth of it a most
beautiful Lady, which tormented (I know not whether more) by the incommodities
of the Sea, or the passions of the heart, could hardly be sustained by the arm
of a Knight that accompanied her. Her Majesty and Apparel showed her of great
birth; The honor that was done to her by all made her known to be Lady of them
all. Tears and sighs did not prejudice that Beauty, which being infinite could
not be subject to the accidents of sorrow. The Knight, not to be disturbed by
the confused noise of those in the Galley, led her aside into a Thicket of
Trees, where it appeared that Nature had emulated, and outgone it self; Here
sending back those who followed him, accompanying and interrupting his words
with their complaints, he thus began to entreat her: How long (Princess) shall
the rigours of your disdain continue? How long will you keep that hate which
renders you incapable of my affections? That which I can pretend to, by the
right of War, by the merit of justice, by the obligement of correspondency, I
would find it in your gift, and I beseech it as a grace; Princess, disdain
not that heart which so much the more deserves affection, because it seeks that
by favor which is its own by justice. If at other times you have refused me,
because I was your vassal, you cannot now do so, being become subject to me.
Accommodate the greatness of your mind to the encounters of a new Fortune, for
I pretend to no more but your Love; you ought to comfort your self, that among
so many lost you have gained one to make you, not only to preserve you a
Queen. I will not say I love you, because with women that ordinarily cannot
love, or do not credit it, an enamoured heart finds no recompense. Past things
may be desired, not recovered. Tears and afflictions never open Sepulchers, or
make the dead rise. There is no grief that can move pity in the Destinies; You
have to an excess satisfied the Obligations you owed to nature, you are now
engaged to pay those of Interest, and Reason. Any patience but a Lovers (such
as I am) would have been changed into fury. I hope to dissuade you from your
obstinacy, because I cannot persuade my self that you had rather fall into the
precipices of my disdain, than exalt your self over the affection of my
heart. The Princess, full of the sense of passion and disdain, not able
longer to endure these words, that wounded her soul, replied thus.

I would not answer you (Duke) the words of a Traitor, deserving none: But
that you may perceive your hopes desperate in my resolutions, I protest before
all the Deities of Heaven, that rather then be thine I would encounter death a
thousand times. Treacherous man, have thou polluted thy hands with the blood of
thy Prince* does yet those massacred unburied bodies proclaim to heaven thy
disloyalty, and attempts thee to possess me! I complain of nature, that
making me a woman has denied me the use of weapons to chastise thy
perfidiousnesse; but yet I assure my self, that the Justice of the Gods will
not leave unpunished so execrable a Patricide. I hope to see thee (Traitor)
betrayed by thy self, to fall in thy own Treacheries; She proceeded, but he
interrupting her said, Princess I have not affection for her that despises me;
nether can I love where I am hated; you may well enough vent the injustices of
your passions without injuring me; wrong not my hands to betray my heart,
neither urge me to a necessity to correct the errors of your tongue. I fear
(thou wicked man) replied the Princess, thy love much more than thy hatred.
Thy furies have no power over the Decree of Heaven, which has rendered thee a
slave to me. In these treacheries of thine I triumph over thy perfidiousnesse,
neither do I bewail me of thy cruelty, traitors being always so. Affection
could no longer keep the fomentations of Anger within the Dukes breast, being
so much the more insupportable by reason they struck home to his Conscience;
Patience offended by just reproofs has no bridle that can curb it. He showed
by the palenesse of his Face, the lightning of his eyes, with the striking of
his hands, that love and disdain combated in his heart. He was ready to rush
into some excess of revenge, when he was suspended by some confused voices,
which being lost among the multitude of those Trees, struck his ears with an
unknown murmur. The remoteness of the place he was in afforded him not
distinction to discern from whence they came. His Imagination being
transported upon variety of things, not knowing what to persuade himself, or
resolve, he perceived one of his Knights, who much troubled ran to seek him.
Scarce could the Duke ask the novelty of this noise, but he understood his
Galley was assaulted by Pirates, and in danger to be lost without his help. He
would hear no more, but committing the care of the Princess to that Knight,
ran with all speed to their relief.

The Princess at this recovered spirit, hoping they were her Subjects coming
to fight for her and redeem her; when she understood that for a certain they
were Pirates, she consulted with Celardo (for so the Knight was named) to
secure her self from the tyranny of the Duke, or the cruelty of the Pirates;
The hands of both of them execrable and dangerous. They soon resolved to walk
toward the top of some little Mount to search for a place of refuge. They were
scarce got up one, but they discovered, as well as sight could discern, a most
fair City, which for the quantity of Buildings, the multiplicity of Gardens,
the highness of the Walls, made them imagine it one of the greatest, of the
strongest, and the most delitious of the World. They also perceived, not very
far from them, a most majestic Palace, which rather buried than hid with the
thickness of the trees, afforded not liberty to the eye to see the beauties of
it; They went toward it, but losing their way they stood still, weary, and
daunted. Disasters, hunger, and the voyage, had so afflicted the Princess,
that she acknowledged her self unable to move a step further. Celardo
beseeched her to repose her self at the foot of that Hill in a Plain till he
had gone to speak with some body, and should bring her some hope of a Lodging,
and some comfort to her weariness. The Palace they had discovered, of
necessity could not be very far off, and that it agreed not with possibility,
that a Country so rich and fertile should not be infinite full of people. The
Princess consented, and laying her down upon the grass, blamed Love and
Fortune that had dealt so unhappily with her, that now she hoped for no greater
consolation than to lose her life. Ever and anon she breathed out most hot
sighs, which accompanied with an abundancy of tears would have awakened the
sense of pity in the fierceness of Tigers, and in the hardness of Rocks.
Whiles her Passions transported her heart into a thousand thoughts, she
perceived from afar her self to be called with reiterated voices; She arose
not without fear, and casting her eyes to that part where she heard her name
so redoubled, she saw it was the Duke, who in all haste descended the
Mountain; she accounted her self a dead woman. There was not a Deity in
heaven which she did not implore. She would have fled, but oppressed either
with weariness, or fear, she was constrained, to keep her from falling, to
lean to a stone, which butted out from all the other of the Mountain; she
hardly touched it but it stirred of it self, as if stones had that pity which
she could not find in men; She thrust it a little back, and perceived that it
damm'd up the entrance of a very large Cave, as might be guessed at the first
sight. It was there with such Art hung upon Hinges, that very easily it closed
up, and opened the Passage. Without, the greatness of it appeared much less,
and in such wise it was situated, that it seemed Nature had produced it, and
that it was not a Fabric of Art. It opened inwardly, and when it was secured
with the Bolt all the force of the World could not suffice to stir it. The
Princess remained a while doubtful; she conceited she dreamed, or else
persuaded her self, that the Gods, moved to pity by her tears, had discovered
this place of shelter, which could only preserve her honesty, and life. It
appeared strange to her to be buried by her self in a Cave; But the present
fear of falling again into the Dukes hands made her careless of considering
future dangers. Being entered into the Grott, and fearing to be pursued, she
secured the Mouth of it with some small Bar, which stood by for that purpose.
Then she went hastily toward where she saw a great light, and came into a
Court, which being adorned with most beautiful Pillars, and of the finest
Marble, appeared rather to be a receptacle of the Gods than a Sepulcher of men,
as she had imagined. It had in the midst of it a most large Fountain, which
from seven Statues of the best polished Alabaster sent forth fair and
cristalline waters: Here the Princess stayed, and her thirst allaied,
occasioned by fear and labor, doubtful in her self what she should hope for
in these extremes of her misery; she was over-taken by a sweet sleep, the
effect either of her weariness, or the murmur of those waters.

The Duke in the mean while, who had never lost sight of her while he
descended the Hill, arrived at the Rock where he supposed her hid. He stood
astonished when he saw no place for such a purpose, and that she could not have
escaped his eyes, if she were not transformed into those Rocks. Nevertheless he
forbore not to search with his hands if it were possible to discover any
Entrance. Whiles he remained in this anxious solicitude, that he could neither
credit his sight nor touch, he heard himself railed at by a voice not known to
him. Turning himself speedily, he perceived it was a Knight with a naked sword
in his hand, that uttered those words, and now defied him to the Battle,
menacing death to him. The Duke retiring backwards some few paces, suddenly
drew his sword, and said: Thou art come hither at this time to satiate the
justice of my Anger. I will, that thou give me an account of that Princess
who can be no bodies but mine; That Knight hearing the name of Princess,
encountered him with such a fury, that notwithstanding any defense the Duke
could make, he began to treat him so foully, that he rather seemed to defend his
life than offend his enemy; Yet not showing the least sign of baseness, his
foot slipping, he fell down in a sownd, ready to dye, I know not whether by
reason of his wounds, or fall; Although the Knight was even blinded with
passion, and his wrath he conceived it unagreeing to his generous spirit to be
cruel to a Carcass; not being able to imagine who he should be by the
lineaments of his face, though he had a very great desire to have received some
information, supposing him dead he departed, though himself was in danger of
his life, not so much of the wounds he received of the Duke, which were only
two, and of small consideration, as for grief he found within himself. He
would not go toward the City, resolving to withdraw himself into some place,
where far from those Objects that might increase the torments of his mind, he
might pass over the wretched remnant of those years which Fortune promised him.

Celardo in the interim having followed that Path which appeared most beaten,
after a long compass having found no body that could inform him of any house,
or the state of the Country, he came where he heard a noise of weapons. He saw
an old man, that with an admirable dexterity and strength defended himself
from the blows of four Knights, who with no ordinary valor assaulted him for
his life. His back he secured by a great Tree, and with such a readiness
managed his sword, that in that unequal fight he left not his enemies hope of
their lives, much less of victory. He had nevertheless received three wounds,
two in the thigh, and one in the head, which though not mortal, yet bleeding
extremely began to make him faint. Celardo, although he preferred his return
to the Princess, could not curb the bravery of his spirit, and undauntedness
which he had from his birth: He persuaded himself that at two blows he should
free himself from those, who showing themselves traitors, could not be but
cowards. First, he began with his voice, and after with his hands to encourage
the mind of the old Knight, who now looked to nothing but to ward himself. At
the first blow he stroke down one, who to show himself the valiantest would
precede his Companions in death. Another of them, bleeding infinitely,
despairing of life, hardly able to sustain himself on his legs, uniting all
the forces of his last strength, threw his sword, half whereof only remained
in his hands. It hit the old man on the Face, who astonished with it, dropped
down, whiles the other ready to dye fell by him. Celardo in very short time
killed the other two, having received two hurts, one in his left arm, and the
other in the right shoulder. He ran hastily to the old Knight, who now arose
from the ground, and came to thank him, he having preserved his life. He asked
him, how he found himself of his wounds, perceiving him bloody, and rejoiced
much when he understood they were of little moment, whilst he hoped his own
were not mortal. He invited him to be cured in a house of his not far off
thence, where he had a desire to express some sign of his gratitude; saying,
it was not his custom to be altogether overcome by benefits, and that he would
correspond to the Obligation with those services that his present Fortune
afforded him. Celardo, thanking the Knight, replied, That a Lady that depended
on his protection, to whom (by his own choice) he had engaged his heart, and
that now by destiny called on him to exercise the Functions of his Debt,
remained not far off expecting him, where he would much rather leave his life
than to be wanting in any thing she could look for from him, both for the
satisfaction of his promise, and the obligation of his faith; That teaching him
the way he should receive lodging as a singular courtesy, being himself a
stranger in strange Countries. The old Knight seemed satisfied: but by any
means he would accompany him to guide him after back to his own house. They
proceeded not far in these Complements, more courteous than necessary to the
business of their wounds, which swelled and smarted so that they could hardly
stand, much less undertake a journey. Celardo enflamed with anger against
himself, that he could not suffer an ill of so little value was ready to run
mad, when galloping at full speed a most beautiful Virgin arrived there,
attended on by eight Squires all armed, and on horseback, to the aid of the old
Knight. She rejoiced infinitely, finding him alive, and in a state of health,
being come thither with an opinion that she should rather revenge than succor
him. She ran hastily with tears of joy to embrace him, and with a certain
balsame she had purposely brought thither, she anointed his wounds, which
although not mortal, were for all that very considerable by the loss of much
blood. Before she attempted to cure that on his head, to the great amazement of
Celardo, she took off that beard, and thatvery long hair which was false, and
made him seem much ancienter than he was. Having bound up the wounds of the
Knight, now restored to youth again, she did the same to Celardo, who was much
more hurt than he imagined. Being mounted on horseback, by the help of the
Squires, they all went to look the Princess, although with a civil violence
Celardo had beseeched them to return home, leaving a Squire with him to serve
him as a Guide. They arrived at the Plain, where Celardo, not finding the
Princess, had died for grief, if Oleandro and Arnalta, for so was the Knight
and Damsel called, had not comforted him, and overcome him with persuasions,
and prayers, that he should not be cruel to himself: Nor had he been won to
have departed from that Mountain, if conquered by the violence of passion he
had not lost his senses. Oleandro with all speed commanded a chair to be made
of the boughs of those trees, and as well as he could made him be carried to
his house, which was not above three miles off. It was situated in the midst
of a Plain, which with the length and breadth of it took up the space of ten
miles. About it ran a very deep River, which rendered the situation of it no
less fair than strong. There were some engines to overflow all the ground
with, to the height of a man, which at the same time both made the earth
fertile, and secured it from treacheries.

Here Celardo was laid, they procuring all means for him, either useful to
end the cure of of his Body, or trouble of his mind. Six days he remained in
danger of his life, and if Arnulta with her diligences, or at least with her
beauty had not brought him some remedy, he had been in danger to have fallen
into the hands of death. Many times she had told him, That to despair was the
last of evils; That if the Lady, whom with so great a feeling of sorrow he
bemoaned, were dead, tears were superfluous, if alive, not necessary. That
living he might find out some means to content his affections, but so
unhandsomly to give over himself to dye, besides the sign of a courage less
than ordinary, it deprived that Lady of a Protector, and himself of any hope
ever to satisfy those Obligations he professed so great to her. What cannot
reasons effect, proceeding from a mouth that knows to persuade even without
words! Celardo with a silent answer acknowledged himself convinced, and
attended nothing but the recovery of his health. Nevertheless sometimes he
could not be so alienate from himself by his pain, as not to fix his memory
on the Princess. He accused his negligence in leaving a Lady of so high
descent, in a Country not known, and in a Wood to the mercy of Beasts, and not
men only; He blamed Fortune, that having delivered her into his power was a
Tyrant to him, making him lose her before he had well got her. Lastly, he was
angry with the stars, that had not suffered him to be borne, but to see him
always miserable.

One day, that he by himself was thinking on his misfortunes, he was surprised
by Oleandro, who was now cured, and came, as he was accustomed, to visit him.
He blushed to see himself so taken, endeavoring to conceal those tears that
apace fell from him. He would not communicate his sorrows to any but himself,
esteeming complaints unbeseeming a Knight, being only allowed to the weakness
of women. Oleandro suffering him to give a stop to his grief, began thus to
speak to him. If I had not these eyes witnesses of your virtue, I should form
some sinister opinion of your courage. I cannot bethink me, how a mind that is
greater than Fortune, and has means in its own power to raise Glories to it
self, can submit to the violence of sorrow, so much the more unseasonable,
because it has no foundation above opinion and fear. I speak freely, because
the acquaintance that is between us, and the Obligation that I have professed to
you, will not permit I should belly the thoughts of my heart. To lament too much
is to betray ones self. It was not fit those should be borne and live that
will not be aimed at by the stroke of destiny. We are all equally made liable
to infortunities. And this humane condition of ours has no greater certainty
than to be engaged to all Accidents; with this law we came into the World, and
between terms so unhappily has Nature placed us, as to have no sense of it on
one side, is a sign of stupidity: so to despair at it is altogether the
effect of weakeness. The body will sometimes exercise those functions to which
it is inclined by the corruption of its beginning, yet notwithstanding, it is
necessary that the mind which has the soveraignity of power over it, should
calm those motions that may depress the virtue of the Intellect. Sense ought
never to overcome reason, but in those who have no other reason but sense.

He would have proceeded farther, but Celardo prevented him, saying, These
opinions were true yet to be wished for. Every Physician knows how to forbid
that to another which he will not deny to himself. That there is nothing less
easy than to give Counsel: and that the tongue is easier to be moved than the
heart. Oleandro replied, he spoke not at random, but could authenticate his
Maxims by examples. And that if it would not be troublesome for him to hear,
he would let him know all the circumstances of his Fortune, which always would
have enthralled him to sorrow, but that he with a generous sufferance made
himself thought one of the happiest men in the World. Celardo showing a great
curiosity to know, professing he had been silent of his own desires, for fear
he might offend him, constreined him with a kind of affectionate violence to
the discourse of his misfortunes.

The History of Oleandro.
I, said Oleandro, in despite of Fate, that could deprive me of a Kingdom,
but not of the Character of a Prince; am King of Morocco: My Father, in one
years space, lamented the death of his Queen, the Rape of his Daughter, the
loss of his Kingdom, and the ruin of his House: Seeing that Fortune had
torn her sail, and bound up her hair, not to transport elsewhere, the
effects of her inconstancy, and the bitterness of her griefs, he abandoned
the wretched remnants, which the insatiate covetousness of his enemies had not
plundered from him. But before his departure, he recommended to Felido Count of
Olano, a Prince of the blood, of an experimented virtue, the protection of me
and my life. He was not deceived in his Election: In his private fortune he had
his Education from the Prince. There was not any thing which could awaken, or
molest my design, which I did not attain to. Virtue was my employment,
exercise on horseback my profession, and hunting my pastime. He, when he
perceived the nobleness of my Genius, seeing me also sixteen years of Age, he
persuaded me to the recovery of my Fathers Kingdom: That sloth was the worst
of evils; and that these years should not be slighted which so speedily pass
away. That old men's courages very hardly provoke the commonaltie to an
innovation of Government: As much as he delays his Claim, so much he loses of
his Cause; with three Maxims likewise he tied the affections of the chief
that were obliged to the memory of my Father, the news of his death after his
departure, being every where verified. He finds them most ready who hate the
Tyrants, compassionate my misfortunes; they see in my Person, the Spirits of my
Progenitors flourish, and cannot away with that new Model of Government, which
being unjust, cannot be but cruel. They prepare Arms and Soldiers, and excite
those affectionated to the Crown, and persuade the neighbor Princes with all
possible secrecy; when the enemies advertised, either from jealousy, the
protector of Estates, or fear, the discoverer of dangers, or from the reports
of Fame, which cannot even conceal the Dreams of Princes, glutted themselves
with all barbarism with the lives of those that maintained my Title. The Count
seeing in the night time, the principallest of his Forts betrayed by the
infidelity of his, not by the Valor of the Enemy; regarding more my safety
then his own, let me out at a private Gate, disguised in poor cloths, while he
put on mine, and made himself taken by a deceit, that my escape being known, I
should not be pursued.

Death will be the least of his evils; for besides the envy of his Emulatours,
he had the hate of the Tyrants, who infinitely often at any price had requested
my life of him; my disguise carried me safe from every danger, nor mist I any
thing that offended me: I departed from Morocco, deploring my misfortune, that
would not permit me an occasion to exercise the undauntednesse of my heart, or
the strength of my sword. I embarked for Numidia, to tug, if Fortune would
change by the alteration of Climes. The injuries of Tempests, of Heaven, of
Lightnings, accompanied me in my Voyage. When one is once made the scope of the
miseries of fate, he only knows what it is to be unhappy.

I came ashore in Dana, a Region of Numidia, because destiny there had provided
for me greater miseries. Afoot I walked toward Tesset, the Metropolis of the
Kingdom, accompanied by the sorrow of those thoughts which had almost made me
beyond my self; the Heaven served for my Canopy, and my grief for a
Centinell, which admitted me not to have the multiplicity of wild Beasts, which
Afric breeds: I was four miles short of Tesset, when I felt my ears struck
with schreekes and lamentations of a fair woman. She fled from Death, which
the treachery of four privy Murderers menaced her with. Her cloths were
extremely rich, which showed her to be a Lady of no ordinary descent. Her
embroideries, pearl, and gold, were out-vide by the comeliness of her Face,
and the beauty of her hair, which stirred up and down by the wind and
raining; it seems they were moved toward Heaven, to contend for splendor with
that of Ariadne, her beauty not at all diminished by fear, made me admire how
it did not stir up aid in the cruelty of those hearts. She scarce saw me,
but both with her love and by signs, she implored my aid. Her entreaties
were delivered with such an inbred stateliness, that they seemed rather
commands then prayers. I suddenly laid hand on my sword, and justice favoring
me in despite of my ill fortune, they all there lost their lives. She ran
to render me thanks, having seen vengeance taken of her enemies, without hurt
to my self. After some few short complements, she told me the danger her
Father was in; showing me the way to him, I went to him with all speed, and
saved his life, who was encompassed with most eminent dangers. Their kind
embraces, and the honors they did me, amazed me. These were the King of
Numidia, and his daughter, that tracing a Stag, had lost themselves, and were
assaulted by those Arabians, who with their Nurses milk, suck in hatred to
that Crown. I rendered thanks to the gods, and Fortune, who now grew weary to
afflict me with an infelicity of successes. I accounted my self blessed, only
for preserving from Death so great a King, and so fair a Princess. No body
can be thought happy or miserable, who has not tried all accidents: The
fairness of a day is not despaired of for the Clouds, which are seen before
Sunne-rising. Our wounds were hardly bound up, but the Courtiers came upon us,
who with abundance of care, poured forth their vows for their Princes safety.
They conducted us into Tesset, where we were encountered with those applauses,
wherewith Subjects manifest their affections. At the foot of the Palace stairs
was the Queen accompanied with a daughter, attended by a multitude of Ladies.
They rained from their eyes, two most lively showers of tears, which issue not
always from the fountain of sorrow; whom they had lamented for dead, with his
daughter, they cannot yet be satisfied to see alive and embrace. Thank, (said
the King) this Knight pointing to me, from whose Valor next to the gods, I
acknowledge my safety and life; I profess my self in so high a manner
beholding to him, that should I give him my Crown, I should not in part have
paid what I owe him; for it is his, and I received it from him, both through
his good fortune and courtesy. The modest conceit I had of my self forced me
with blushes to answer his good opinion of me. I was made his companion in the
Palace, and a while after, one of his Royal Council; and by many that
flattered their own hopes in my greatness, I was almost reverenced, as the
Heir and successor of the Kingdom. My mind exalted by the beginning of these
felicities lost within a few days, the remembrance of its misfortunes. The
thoughts of regaining my Fathers Kingdom, and to ease my subjects of their
miseries, the love that I took to the Infanta Ariama, at that time I freed her
from the ravenousnesse of the Arabians, drove out of my mind. The benignity of
her favors, the comeliness of her countenance, the continuation of seeing her,
would have subdued the obdurateness of any heart, not only mine, easy to
receive any impression through the weakness of youth and in experience.
Dissemblings some few days concealed my fire, which presently after becoming
insupportable, made me subject to a most dangerous sickness. The King,
careful for my recovery, assisted at my bed, comforted me in my undiscovered
sorrows, and bemoaned me as if it were his own disease. The Physicians
despairing to find out the cause, refused to visit me, having no hope at all
left them of my life.

I did receive no other comfort, but from the Presence of my fair Infanta. Not
only my recovery, but life depended on the sight of her. One day the Queen and
the Princess, attentive at the consultation of the Physicians, or because she
saw in the sadness of my countenance, the bitterness of my sorrows, or
because she read in my eyes, the indeleble Characters of my affection, with
much ado refraining from tears, she said to me. Then (O Knight) shall your
obstinacy deprive us of your Person! Is it possible, that dissimulation is
more prevalent over your will, then my entreaties! If you deny this, not to
receive redress for your Malady, confess it to comfort me. I love you Sir,
for the debt of gratitude I owe you, and by the election of my will; without
you I cannot, neither will I live. Discover then your griefs, either that they
may meet with remedy, or to comfort them with the company of my tears. I that
was troubled with no other grief, but with doubtful thoughts of her
affection, and the poorness of my Fortune, although borne a Prince, and whom
fear of repulse had made rather choose death then her disdain; at the sound
of these words, felt my spirits recovered, and believed my self well. Not
containing my self for joy, I thus answered; Fair Infanta, my griefs have
had original from your beauty, I have concealed in the cinders of
dissimulation those fires that turn my heart into ashes: My poor merit
compared to your real greatness, rendered the desires of my affection
impossible. I rather preferred to encounter death, then occasion your
displeasure. Now that the excesses of your benignity have emboldened me with
these words, I will lay open before you my most inward wounds, and I attend
from the favors of your munificence that help which the knowledge of my
condition denies me. If the care of your malady (replied the Infanta) depend
upon my will, rise, for you are well. The honesty of your desires shall have
their end, and correspondencie in my affection. Do not deceive me to flatter
my hopes, for you know what love can do in the breast of a woman, that will
and knows to love.

The arrival of the Mother and the Princess, with Physicians, broke off the
continuance of this discourse, who found in me extraordinary signs of an
unexpected health. They were amazed at so sudden an alteration, and blamed the
imperfection of their Art, that (founding the reasons of it upon an experience
altered by the diversity of complexions) astonished them at my amendment, as if
they were altogether ignorant of my disease; Yet there was among them, some
that made a doubt of my life. They were fixd upon a rule, though common,
fallacious; that in a body extenuated by fastings, grieved by infirmity, and
streitned of remedies, Nature would not be wanting of a sudden to receive
extraordinary helps; And these they said were the last strengths of it.
Experience contradicted their reasons: They soon saw my amendment, being
durable, had real foundations. The strength of my body they increased with
most precious meats, but with regard to the quantity, which at first they
denied me, lest the digestion interrupted or suffocated, should bring me into a
more dangerous sickness afterward. Plenty of Physic, and the visits of the
Physicians, and the affection of the most beautiful Infanta, recovered me.
Those few days I kept my bed in. I endeavored to contrive how we might enjoy
the pleasures of our desire, as a sign of her affection, she had bestowed
kindly a kiss on me, I having formerly told her my birth, and given her my
faith. She obliged her self, when I was healed to bring me into her lodgings,
my desire made me well before my time, neither did she deceive me in her
promise. She trusted her thoughts and affections to the Duchess of Corona,
beseeching her assistance. She to dissuade her, made use of all reasons and
entreaties, but in vain: Love has not reason, nor receives persuasion
contrary to the will of them that love. Fear represented to her prodigies of
my ruin: Whereupon she doubted whether she had best reveal it to the King.
But the good will she bore the Princess, and high opinion she had of me,
witheld her. She aided us to the fruition of our, loves impossible, but by her
means.

The severeness of this happiness, continued but for a very little while: In
the which I had consulted with the Infanta, of requesting of her Father, Arms
and Money, for the regaining of my Kingdom; when Fortune, that till now had
made truce with my griefs, united all the forces of her strength to ruin me.
This short calm served to no other purpose but to make me trust to her,
intending to make me drink of a Sea of misery. The Princess Arelida became
enamored of me, who with diverse and extraordinary favors forced her self to
discover her affections. At Dancings she would always dance with me; at
Huntings, be even with me, and at Torneaments, give me constantly her Favor to
wear: whence she would have me take notice, that excessive honors proceeded
not from an ordinary affection; I counterfeited with such cunning to take no
notice of it, that she found her self prevented and hopeless. But because the
power of Love receives no hinderance from modesty; one day faining her self
indisposed, she made me be called to her, and after some courteous Complements
past, she thus spoke to me.

Is it possible ( Oleandro) that I should be so little skilled in the
practiques of Love, and you so knowing of his Favors! Some few days ago, I
know not what provoked me to discover my flame. Your modesty, or my ill luck
blinded you. I am desirous to restore your sight, finding my heart too narrow
for so overflowing excesses of Love. Dear friend Oleandro, I love you; if you
believe not my tongue, the interpreter of my mind, and faithful revealer of my
intentions, give credit to these tears, true signs of an extraordinary
affection, and blood of my heart. The Nobleness of your conditions, the
honesty of your actions, the sublimity of your mind, and the comeliness of
your countenance, tyrannize over the freeness of my will, the greatness of my
Birth, the modesty of my conditions, and the blushes of my face. I should have
feared rather to have gained by this boldness your indignation, then
affection, if I knew not your worth so great, that it would excuse even the
errors of Princesses. She offends not, that bestows her affection on a
deserving object. The gods rejoice to be beloved by all. The Laws of Cupid
punish the ungrateful that love not, not those that do: Nor is there any such
thing, that honesty is contrary to affection; For I love you with a desire to
live with you as a wife, not to enjoy you as a servant, my birth is not capable
of so base thoughts; my desires have no meaning that may blemish the
candidnesse of their ends. If you be a Prince, as I shall not believe you if
you deny it, you have no reason to refuse my Nuptials; I hoping both by the
Law of Nature, and right of succession, to be a Queen: If you be not of so high
a condition, you ought then to embrace this occasion that invites you to the
possession of me, and thereby of the Kingdom. If you discern any want in any
of these Motives, my affection ought to have power over the hardness of your
thoughts, to win you to afford me your consent. The World has not treasure
enough to recompense the affection of a Princess: Correspondence alone is the
only reward of love. Love me then, and with an obstinate resolution disdain
not the benignity of Fortune, which proffers you the possession of a beauty,
esteemed singular by many that have desired it, and the sovereignty over so
great a people, that would even weary the ambition of an Alexander!

With these words the Princess set a period to her speech, attending with
great alterations of mind (giving signs thereof, with various colors in her
face, and with submisse entreaties of her eyes) my answer. A while I stood
silent; after I reflected, that to make a Princess hopeless of her love,
would prove a Precipice to my affections: That women are not accustomed to
receive denials in those things, which for the most part are proffered them
before hand. That blush that inflames the countenance of a Princess to gain
the Love of her beloved, if refused, is converted into scorn, to take from her
eyes the memory of her rejection. Therefore after some Complements, thanking
her noble disposition, that (without any regard of my condition) had enriched
me with the graces of her affection, I beseeched her to remember the greatness
of her Birth, the pooreness of my state, and the frowns of his Majesty, the
indignation of his subjects; and lasty, that her love having no foundation of
Merit, was likely in short time to decay, and leave me in danger of my life;
and that her self (with it converted into dislike) to glorify her desires,
and conceal her blushes, would procure me harm with such like reasons; some
days I entertained the enamored Princess, who deceived by an appearance, of
these excuses, did not conceive me so far from consenting to her desires.
Lastly; one day while I was walking in a Garden, she came and took me by the
hand, and led me under an Arbor, where any bodies curiosities could not
discover us, and earnestly beseech'd me, either to consent to her desires, or
to disclose mine. That my excuses were apparent; That the satisfaction of a
Princess ought not to be offended, though the doubts of misfortune were near.
Whereupon, not enduring any longer the importunity of her Prayers, seeing the
mischief brought to such a pass, that Lenitives were no longer necessary, I
took upon me a resolution to undeceive her; for I had agreed to do so with my
Infanta, who, forth of jealousy, had had a falling out with me. She had told
me, that wantonizings were the baits of Love, and that my body loved not any,
who had not confidence to be beloved; because coy hearts never take the minds
of women.

I replied therefore; Princess, it would be a greater impiety to conceal my
affections from you, then strive to give you a recompense. That would be a
crime of my will, this is a fault of destiny, the more excusable, because it is
not in my power. A thousand praises, a thousand gracious signs testify your
love, with confusion to my self, I acknowledge it, being in a condition unable
to requite you. I have had no other desert in me for so many favors, but the
Nobleness of your affection: To which though I am denied correspondencie, I am
so much the worthier of pardon, that seeing I have committed so manifest an
error, it yet ought to be imputed to the violence of the Stars, and not to
any defect in my will. The feeling that my soul receives in not being able to
serve your commands, should in part free you from the passions of your heart.
Release your self from loving me, with the consideration that I am unworthy to
be beloved by you, because I cannot return affection, Princess, I cannot,
neither will I love you. My thoughts are fixed, my promise made, my heart
engaged. A Princess of so much merit, to whom, even the affections of the Gods
are due, ought not to procure the leavings of that heart, that knows not which
way, and cannot love her.

Her ears had hardly received these last words, but with a generous disdain,
throwing away my hands which were between hers, and rising up in a fury, she
parted thence without answering me. I feared lest that mind, provoked by the
stings of revenge, should contrive some plot against my life. All things are
easy to the disdain of a Lady in Love. The authority of a Princess, provoked
by affection and fury, finds no impossibility that can appoint it limits: But
she freed me from suspicion, by seeing her not a jot altered by these
successes; with the same gentleness as formerly, she continued with all
freedom her favors to me. Yet, although I was delivered from my fears, I
resolved to remove that object that might offend her memory by her eyes. I
resolved to entreat aid of his Majesty for the reconquering of my Kingdom;
the Infanta consenting to it, rather not to offend my deliberations, then for
any hope she yet had of good success by it: One evening, when I had not been
brought to her Chamber by the Duchess of Corana, being abed, and thinking of
the conquests of a new Kingdom, until after midnight, I heard I knew not who,
making a little noise with a low voice pronounce my name. I hastily roused up
my self, laying hand on my sword, when I saw one that I knew not, who with a
little Candle came to me, delivering me a note. Having received it, he suddenly
departed, none of my servants perceiving him, or hearing of him. With a great
alteration which I found in my self, I opened it, and knew the Character, for
it was the hand of the Infanta: It said thus;

Friend, we are discovered, I am a Prisoner, and you will be betrayed if you
fly not. You shall find at the Golden Gate, the signet Royal, Arms, Money, and
a guide; delay not, for the danger is great; Preserve your life, and follow
your guide. I was of a sudden assaulted with variety of thoughts: It appeared
to me an act of baseness, to confess my self by my flight guilty of a greater
fault, then perhaps I was. To leave the Infanta a prey to the fury of the King,
seemed unsupportable. But considering that delay could not be but dangerous,
and that also the Reasons of my own Innocence, with less peril would be
treated on, being far from the Judge, and with more reputation: That my stay
would be unprofitable to the Princess, who with tears would prosecute the
mercy of a Father so affectionate; and that lastly, the hopes of the Kingdom
of Morocco should not be shut up in a Prison, I made no stay, having put up
some Jewels, and the Picture of the Infanta, without speaking a word to any of
mine, I went to the Gate, I found there what was promised me. The Guide was a
Knight richly apparelled, with two Squires who waited for me with Arms. I
being armed, the Knight sen^ away the Squires, and we travailed toward the
Dukedom of Riano, making all haste, without speaking a word. We came into the
amidst of a thick wood: I cautious of the truth of the business, between
anxieties of a thousand Passions, beseeched the Knight to make the tediousness
of the way cheerful with Discourse, and with his Relations to withdraw my
mind from apprehension of evil; that to fix ones Intellect upon Adversity,
was more hurtful then Misfortunes themselves. He staying a while in suspense,
after some interrupted sighs began thus to speak to me:

Oleandro, our own common obstinacy has brought us hither to lose Reputation,
and life. Behold the Princess Arelida despised and scorned, brought into this
Habit by a violent affection. When you revealed your thoughts to me, I knew of
your favor with the Infanta: I dissembled a while, the better to break them
off. Finally, imitating her hand, I have deceived you for deceiving me. I
rejoice that I shall punish with Honor and with blood, your ingratitude, and
my folly. The unquietness of your mind will give rest to my soul: I shall
carry to my Tomb this satisfaction, that my Rival shall be deprived of your
Embraces, you my Enemy defamed in Reputation, an Exile from your own content;
and that I a Tyrant to my own Felicity, shall receive that reward which my
Dissoluteness merited. Do not believe that I am covetous of the leaving of
your love, I abhor the memory of it, as much as I have desired the obtaining
of it: And to lose all remembrance of it, I care not to have my life. So
saying, whilst I was studying Reasons to dissuade her, and a resolution how to
carry my self, she mortally wounded her self with a Dagger between the
joints of her Armor, I having no time to prevent her. I remained so confused
at these Accidents, that I doubted I dreamed, or that my eyes deceived me. But
recovering my sense, I forced my self to content her. I told her what an
unworthiness it was to be so cruel against her self. I remembered her of her
birth, and of the reproaches of infamy; and that to be murdered by her self
was no other but an act of weakness, unbeseeming to have harbor in those
breasts which by Heaven are selected to command. Having taken off her Arms, I
would have bound up her wound, (although she with all her strength denied that
that body should receive a Salve whose mind was incurable) when I found my
self set on by a Troop of Arabians, such as murdered by the highway. I had
scarce time to leap on horseback, when they fell upon me to have slain me. I
defended my self with so good Fortune, that I killed the most of them; the
rest giving themselves over to fear, thought their safety lay in their flight.
I that was hot upon Revenge, and desperate in my miseries, suffered my self to
be transported to the Mountains, where killing three of them, I lost my horse,
being wounded by one of them in the Breast. Afterward in vain I sought a path
to find the Princess by; but the Trees were very thick, the Rocks inaccessible,
the Descent difficult, and the way (through my haste) not observed. Whereupon,
having compassed and recompass'd much ground to no purpose, until the dawning
of the day, being overcome by passion and weariness, I laid me down to rest
me. I fell into an interrupted sleep, acompanyed with illusions so horrible,
that they extremely disturbed my Repose. Me thoughts I saw the Infanta (being
slain by her Father) to reprove me of weakness that I should leave her to be
so vilely murdered, without affording her any help. Sometimes me thoughts the
Princess Ghost with so lively fears laid her hand on my heart, that in the
vanity of a Dream, I felt my self to dye in earnest.

Awaking a little after Sunne-rising, hopeless of finding the Princess
again, I took that path which I thought led to the Sea shore. My imagination
deceived me not: There was a Galley of Pirates brought thither by necessity, to
take in provision of water: They willingly received me, I offering my self a
Companion in their Labors, and to be ready upon all occasions. They had
Experience of me in the taking a Galley. They cruelly wounded, and retired to
be dressed, I alone sustained the violence of weapons, and behaved my self so,
that in a manner they all perished, save some Ladies, with the greatest part of
the Riches they brought with them. It was of little defense, and came rather to
boast the Pomp of it then to fight. After having given necessary Orders for the
Cure of the wounded, I comforted those Ladies, who with storms of tears
deplored their misfortunes. They all fell at my feet: The chief of them
distinguished, and known by the reverence that the others showed her, not
having in the loss of her liberty, nor in the fear of Death, lost a whit of
that beauty which made her singular from the rest; with a respectfull but
generous earnestness she entreated me to spare her honor and life. I giving
her my word promised her also her Liberty, when it was not in my power to
preserve it: I felt my self then in a manner so struck to the heart, that my
words stuck in my mouth: I perceived within me an alteration, proceeding from
an unknown cause, that I was astonished at my self. Those Tears froze up my
spirit: Those Words moved my soul: Those Sobs tormented my senses, so that
becoming without motion, by a strange stupidity, I found my self alienated
from my self. At length adding force to my weakness, I asked her her birth,
her name, and the cause of their voyage. My name, she replied, is Arnalta; my
Country the world: Being but two years of Age I was stole from my Parents, I
was presented to the King of Fracia, who having no issue, adopted me for his
Daughter, living in a great desire to know my Origin, I Embarked with the Kings
consent for the Fortunate Islands, where Fame reported, an Oracle gave Answer
unto all Questions.

While with these words, (delivered with so much sweetness that she ravished
my heart through my ears) she satisfied my request, I observed a Medall of
Gold that hung about her neck, that had an Hydra slain by a Hercules, the
Impress of our House engraven upon it. I broke off her Discourse, beseeching
her how she came by it. She answered, that with it she was stolen, and given to
the King. I that from my Father had understood the secret of this Medall; that
it was a stone that stopped bleeding, that preserved and freed from poison,
though never so mortal, when I read inserted in it my Mothers name, I was even
ready to run mad for joy. I took her by the hand (observing not to be seen)
and briefly related to her all my miseries, and discovered my self to be her
Brother: I desired her to dissemble what had past, and to comfort her self in
her Misfortunes, which had given her notice of her Birth. Then I went to visit
the wounded Pirates, to whom giving all the rich prize, I only requested, and
obtained Arnalta for my share of it.

We sailed some days through those Seas without any Adventure of Moment. One
evening as I was going to bed, a soldier came in to advertize me, that the
Pirates were at Consultation about my death. I drew near to a chink of their
Chamber, and heard one of them, who was named Magorre, say to Ferrardo his
brother; that to kill me armed would be a violent Remedy. The greatest part of
the soldiers were afraid of my valor, that all the slaves were obliged to my
kindness: And that those Medicines which heal without offending are the most
to be desired. Poison might easily, and with their security deprive me of
life. The more successful their intention would prove, because I did not so
much as suspect any shadow of treason. I presently communicated this unto some
Soldiers, of whom I had received extraordinary signs of affection. These
readily interesting themselves in my dangers, set some slaves at liberty:
Having armed them with a promise also of Freedom, they placed them in diverse
parts of the Galley, to be more ready upon all occasions. I resolute with my
sword drawn my in hand, violently rushed into the Room where they were
plotting my destruction. Magorre in a rage rose to strike me, when I, ere he
was well up, with two wounds deprived him both of defense and life. Ferrardo in
this while lanched out, and crying he was betrayed, and upbraiding the
soldiers of Cowardice, that without defending him would suffer him to perish,
he fortified himself with a good part of the Soldiers in the Castle of Prora,
which either for necessity or love undertook his defense. With their Bows they
shot at those that durst approach any whit near, and the death of four
rendered the rest more fearful and cautious of their Lives. There was not any
means which I did not assay. I went notwithstanding with a kind of
reservation, not willing to make use of fire, lest it might offend Arnalta, and
the Damzels that stood in a Tent under the Castle.

They were a Fortification to themselves; and not knowing the cause of the
Tumult, and being certain of nothing but fear, with their lamentations and
schreekes they implored my aid; not knowing what to resolve, grief almost
made me mad. Scarce there was a thought entered into my mind, but refuting it I
suddenly fell into new designs, which not perfected I also rejected.

It was about daybreak when the schreeks of Arnalta distinctly came to my
ears, who invoked all the Deities of Heaven. A little while afterward I
plainly found she was thrown into the water; Although anger and sorrow took
away my senses, I endeavored nevertheless, with the power of prayers, and
promise of rich gifts, to procure her life. Three without delay leapt into the
sea; many got into the Cock-boat; others cast in Beams of wood, and Tables.
All was in vain; the skies were cloudy, the waves big, so that with difficulty
we recovered them that had gone out. If a desire of revenge had not something
counterpoised my fury I had flung my self into the sea. But finally I resolved
to try my last endeavor: I made an Engine of boards stuffed with some packs of
wool, to secure us from their flings and Cross-bows; And so some of mine that
hoped for their liberty, and that found an opportunity to pull down some of
their Rampires, made an approach, and shot at the Pirates, who soon finding
themselves in an ill condition, aimed at nothing but to defend themselves.
Ferrardo, while he was railing at, and upbraiding my men, was shot with an
Arrow, which wounding him in the mouth, took from him I know not first whether
his tongue or life. His men now grown heartless, threw down their Arms,
craving mercy, which had not been given them if the return of those Ladies had
not pacified my wrath. For seeing Arnalta, whom I imagined drowned, I ran to
embrace her afresh, as if I had only known her now. I understood that Ferrardo,
having forced the Tent, and requiring Arnalta by name (who for fear, and at
the horrible sight of that Pyrate) was fallen in a swoone upon a Bed, one of her
Damsels answered him. He being deceived by a voice he knew not, thinking to
throw Arnalta into the sea, flung in another, who either for fear or affection
assumed her name.

I made them cast the dead into the water, and then thought of repairing my
Galley, which being brought into an ill plight made me resolve to put in at the
next Port. Coming thither, and dividing our booty among my Companions,
counterfeiting my name and birth, with that beard which you saw me in first, I
procured from the King Vassileo a retiring Place, and security, and obtained my
desire. He being about to sell this Palace, (fallen to him by Confiscation,
belonging formerly to the Duke of Mesimoran, either through envy or desert
proclaimed Traitor, and who upon an infamous Theater had terminated the
Glories of his Life and Fame) I at any price got my self into the possession
of it.

Then Celardo with a great curiosity desired to know some more particulars of
the Life of that Duke.

Oleandro replied: That the Actions of a Prince so great could not be
penetrated into but with a thousand uncertainties, agreeing to the opinion of
him that should deliver them. That some discourse (though we be not concerned
in it) is dangerous. That great men would have the remembrance of those things
buried that might render them over, either to the pity or scorn of others.
That they suffer not themselves to be talked of, either not to be liable to the
censure of common discoursers, or that a reverence is due to him whose power is
unlimited. To talk of Princes is not without danger: because ordinarily truth
is hateful in great men's ears. I that live remote from State Affairs can but
guess at uncertainties, which have no other foundation but the opinion of the
Vulgar, who often argue of that they understand the least. That judgment cannot
be right given but by the effects. The wisdom and the justice of so great a
King pretends to no other end but the safety of his own Life, the defense of
his State, and the preservation of his Honor. Curiosity the more increased
upon Celardo, by reason he heard these things so far from his knowledge; but
being satisfied by Oleandro's promise, that at his better leisure he should
participate of all he knew in it; he hearkened to the end of the former
Relation. He therefore proceeded.

Here I lived enjoying the deliciousness of the situation, the fertility of
the fields, the wholsomness of the Air, and accounted at a great shelter to my
misfortunes after so many years of miseries once again to enjoy my self in
despite of Destiny. The ambitions for my Kingdom, spent in the course of so
many infelicities, had lost their appetite in tormenting me. Accomodating my
mind to my present Fortune, far from me I cast all those imaginations that
might molest me. A Kingdom, although so desired by all, renders Princes as
unhappy, as servitude is often unsupportable to Subjects. The fruition of
Liberty depends not in ruling over others, but in commanding our selves. The
regulating our own affections is that which can only make a man happy. My
Sister Arnalta had been able to have altered my deliberations, if, weary with
the afflictions of the world, she had not accommodated her heart to my
resolutions. I now thought my self truly hid from the eyes of Fate, far from
the negotiations of Court, and from those ambitions that are accustomed to
provoke furies. Deceiving my self with this shadow of Felicity, I was
certified that some had laid snares to entrap my life. If the duty I owed to my
birth, and the generousness of my heart had been capable of Cowardice, I swear
to you Celardo by the Obligements I owe you, I had by my own death sacrificed
my self to their hatred who desired it. I cannot imagine to my understanding a
greater misfortune than to live in a continual fear of enemies and not know
them.

One day I discovere their Plots, and knew the Traitors; They were sent by the
usurpers of my Kingdom, with promises of great reward if they could make me
away. They did not think their Reign sure while I lived; and feared me,
although they understood that I had not an intention to offend them. I remained
astonished that these impious men had not satiated their barbarous Natures in
the usurpation of my Kingdom, but that they also desired with my blood to
secure their tyranny. Being grown therefore jealous of my self, I was always
afraid of being betrayed, whereupon I could not enjoy that quiet my heart
desired. To mock sometimes, either my own fear, or their treasons, I make use
of that counterfeit hair, which conceales me even from those that daily see
me. I do not this because I fear to die, but that my enemies should not
triumph in my death. I hold him unworthy to live who knows not how to value and
defend his life. He had not here made an end of his Discourse, but that he was
advertized the Count of Salinera had Commission to speak with him by his
Majesty's appointment; with some alteration he arose from his seat, and said to
Celardo, That this was another wheel of Fortune, and that his heart foretold
him some evil. That he was not used to receive such visits, the rather because
the Count was one of the chief of his Majesty's Privy Council. Having
therefore took his leave, he went to meet him, leaving Celardo troubled with
his ordinary Passions.

The sleep of the Princess was short, because her mind, oppressed and
disquieted by so many miseries, would not allow her body to make any truce with
repose. As she opened her eyes she spied an extreme handsome Lady, that stood
in an amaze, either at her habit, her beauty, or her unexpected arrival
there, and that could not be satisfied with thinking of her. The Princess,
supposing her to be some Goddess, would have cast her self at her feet,
beseeching her pardon for entering into that Temple. She said, there was no Law
that prescribed rules to fear, and that necessity excuses any boldness. The
Courtesies of that Lady, which strove in her Rock to equalize her beauty,
consented not that she should touch the ground with her knee, neither to
proceed in Apologies, but said, I was, fair Lady, about preventing your
Adoration with mine, because I could not imagine such beauties were in
Goddesses, neither to any but the Gods the entrance of this Cave known. I am a
woman, and so much the more ascertained of it, because I am daily subjected to
those passions which have no jurisdiction but in humane breasts. The comeliness
of your face, the strangeness of your habit, and to see you in a place where
the light comes not but by stealth, make me more curious than I ought. I
beseech you therefore inform me what Fortune has made me worthy of so great a
Guest, and what terms I am to use (your merit being known) to serve you. I
(replied the Princess) implore from your gentleness nothing but some mean
shelter to my miseries. The which at present to relate to you would but
increase your trouble, because they cannot be represented but with horror,
being so tragical. And although your benignity should vouchsafe me attention,
weariness and hunger so much oppress me, that I cannot think my self fit to
discourse. The Lady suffered her not to go on, but retiring aside gave some
orders, and returned speedily to the Princess; from whom (not longer able to
contain those passions that tormented her heart) she desired to know of whom
she had learned the Entrance into the Grott. She scarce understood she had
light upon it by chance, and had after shut it up again very fast with the
bolt, but as a presage of some ill toward her, losing her color, at the same
instant, both her voice and spirits failed her. At last enforcing her self,
and willing to suppress that grief which oppressed her mind, she said to the
Princess, That our first motions are within us without our understanding; that
not a little to yield to the violences of Passion, is the effect either of
stupiditie, or folly. And that our humane nature is too frail.

On the other side, the Princess, ignorant altogether of the cause of that
alteration, run over all her thoughts, and could not imagine what to resolve,
when by an earnest courtesy she was led into one of those Chambers which make
a Crown to the Court. It was adorned with most rich Furniture, beseeming their
Greatness that frequented the place. There was Gold so seen as not wasted
profusely, but contemned. The Roof was all chequered with the costliest
jewels, which to the life represented the stories of fabulous Antiquity. The
Pavement was also of the same work, composed of some stones, that like
Looking-Glasses reflected the Image of whosoever looked on it. The Princess
was full of wonder at two things: That this habitation being under ground was
so lightsome, and that moisture and time had not decayed those Pictures, nor
perished those Arches, which seemed all as fresh as if the Artificer had newly
finished them.

Here being invited both by Necessity and Entreaties, she was constrained to
strengthen her self with most delicate meats, and most precious Wines, that
in a Moment were prepared by a venerable Matron: She afterward laid her down
on a very costly bed, which for beauty and price yielded nothing to the other
Wonders, that there were seen to be infinite. In bidding farewell to that
woman, she said to the Princess, To morrow will be a fitter time to trouble
you, I being very desirous to know your condition, and to meet with any
occasion to serve you. Some talk will be necessary to deliberate about your
satisfaction. Here you cannot stay long but with an incommoditie to your self,
and danger to me: I this night will lie with you in stead of the Duchess of
Belprato, if you will promise I may do it without any peril to my self, or
making him jealous who is my servant. The Princess answered her with as much
Courtesy, adding: That not for any thing in the world she would occasion her
trouble, much less her danger, and that as a Law she will always receive her
Commands. Having leave in this manner, and being alone with the Duchess,
after some complements of Excuse and affection, she entreated her, that until
their eyes called them to repose, (to withdraw her mind from her miserable
apprehensions, that were ready not only to deprive her of sleep, but take away
her life) to declare to her, whither Fortune had guided her, and who she was
that knew to oblige her before she knew her, with all other particulars that
might satisfy her Curiosity. The Duchess was now laid down in another bed,
near that of the Princess, where after a little suspense, she thus answered:

If I had not seen you Lady in this Cave, where the Sun communicating his
light, yet dares not shine upon you, and if I did not know the heart of the
Princess my Mistress, that stealing her affections, she durst commit her
safety into your hands, your Curiosity and Entreaties, which I should
reverence in other matters as Commands, should not prevail with me to speak a
word: Who cannot tell how to hold their peace, is unfit to serve Princes. The
principal duty of Faith, is to conceal those Actions which Kings breathing
forth, scarce trust themselves with: I, though a Woman, have evermore observed
this Axiom, the Duty I owe others, and the regard I have to my own safety
inciting me. Great secrets are not revealed but with great danger; and
ordinarily, who ever betraies is betrayed: You may please to take notice, that
this Island is the amorous Kingdom of Cyprus. Fame gives out, that this Cave
was made by the command of Venus to conceal her Amors in; or by the first
Kings, here to secure themselves from Treacheries: It has seven Mouths, that
all reach to the Sea; so far distant one from another as a man can see. I
suppose that under a pretense of Religion, Tillage is prohibited in this part
of the Isle, to take away occasion from the Inhabitants of discovering these
retiring places, or observing of any that should come into them. All the
Continent is sacred, and to kill a wild beast, or cut down a Tree, a Capital
offense. After a long Circuit, the Entrance growing narrow, determines in a
place called the secret Palace: The common people believe that it took name
from a Fountain, which one drinking of, it represents in a dream to their
imaginations things to come; or, as I persuade my self, by these private
withdrawing places under ground, known only to his Majesty and his Daughter,
who for the most part here keeps his Court, by reason it is the most strong and
delicious part of this Island. In the remotest Chamber his Highness Treasure is
kept, but in a place the least observed, the Entrance being stopped with some
boards, in such wise does close, that they deceive both the eye and feeling.
The easiness of removing them can be only discovered by those who see them
taken away. But I will not with tedious Circumstances rob you of the Hours of
your Repose:

I will abbreviate my Discourse, and only declare those things which are most
worthy of your curiosity. I beseech you added the Princess (I being newly
arrived in these parts, and knowing a full Relation will come the welcommest to
me, and my desires, my sorrows not permitting me overmuch sleep) do not so.

The History of Dianea, Diaspe, etc.
THe Duchess went on. The handsomest here are chosen Kings, and they have
power to continue the Kingdom in their Line, whether Males or Females. Of the
which if there be a fail, the chief of the Island meet about a new Election,
which always lights on him whom Venus is prodigal of her favors to. In King
Vassileo, who now reigns, in whom the virtue of his mind contends with the
comeliness of his person, all our hopes are accomplished. The Acclamations and
the Joys of the people were not any whit defrauded by the proofs of his merit,
and the goodness of his Government, being of a complying disposition to all,
but inexorable to wicked men, with a Majestic Pleasantness, he has gained
himself the good will of his enemies, and not only the hearts of his
Subjects. He was feared by his neighbor Princes, beloved by the Remote, and in
brief adored by all. The Devotions of the people were unanimous in
supplications to the mercy of the Gods, to eternize a stock so every way
worthy.

By two wives he had no issue but one daughter, the Princess Dianea my
Mistress, so called after her mothers name, who died in Childbed of her. The
more she increased in years, the handsomer she grew. This Sun, although but
rising, ravished the desires of all eyes, and awaked in the most frozen minds,
and in the cruellest bosoms a tender affection: An eye cannot behold her
without parting with an heart. I should say more, if so noble conditions could
be exposed, and if you when you had seen her should not believe her one of the
most beautiful Ladies of the world. A thousand have aimed at her affection,
and infinite is the number of them who have fallen in love with her. This
Paradise of perfection has been desired and beseeched for of all worthy men.
What cannot a beauty more then great, accompanied with a vast Kingdom, for
her Dowry do? They that knew not how to love any thing but themselves, and
their proper Interests, expressed themselves most ambitious of her. Those
insensible ones, that could not be conquered by her Beauty, were inthral'd by
the power of their own Ambition. The wisdom of his Majesty, which would get
him a Sonne-in-law, and not an enemy, neither entertained, nor refused their
offers. He inclined not to Kings, because he would not dismember Cyprus: And
with his Subjects he disdained, as a diminution of the Royal greatness: His
neighbor Princes were not to his satisfaction; because being blemished with a
thousand vices, he would not at the same time endanger his Kingdom, his
Daughter, and himself. And of Remote matches he abhorred the thought, as they
that would carry the Princess with them, which would be a separating of his
Soul from his Body.

Finally, his Majesty's mind fixed on the Duke of Araone, the youngest Son of
the King of Armenia, a Knight, (but for the deformity of his face) the most
worthy of his times. His abode was then in the Court, and with the proofs of
his valor he had to won upon the Kings affections, that him he chose to ally
so near to him as to make him his Son. There was no doubt that he should
dismember the Crown, or remove the Princess into a Remote Country, being the
last of a numerous Issue, and having the disposing of nothing in his hands but
his Horse and Arms. The King acquainted the Princess with his Resolution, who
was ready to die of sorrow when she heard it. The reverence sheow'd her Father,
and the modesty of her Sex, were not sufficient to cloth her with so much
wisdom as to conceal the passions of her mind. To oppose her self to the
desires of her Father, was not the custom of her will or heart: And how should
she contradict him, who commanded as a Father, and would be obeyed as a King!
But recovering her self, she beseeched his Majesty to give her some time,
that she might be able to dispose of her self according to his Commands: She
said, that great Resolutions should not be prosecuted without premeditation;
that seeing she was to oblige her self to so unequal a matrimony, it was but
reason that she first should persuade her mind to it: That marriages
compelled, either by the Authority of those that treat of them, or by their
power that make them, are for the most part unhappy. She added other Reasons;
whereupon her Father allowed her six months time, not only for her
deliberation, but the consummation of the Nuptials. How then the Princess
remained confused, they may imagine, whose Destiny it was ever to be
constrained to love.

The Prince of Creet, under a feigned name, at this time was entertained at the
Court; in whom it appeared that Nature and Fortune had Epitomized all the
wonders of the World. In Arms he was invincible, singular for handsomnesse, and
in virtue without equals. It seemed that Jove, Mars, and Love in that face had
finished their Greatnesses. Whoever once beheld him, could never after forget
him, he fixing indelibly such rarities in his mind that observed him. He was
Honored and beloved by the King, and his principal Lords, who in him alone
admired at those perfections, which are to be wished for in all others. The
Princess in particular Conquered by so many wonders, affecting him above any
other, preferred him above her self. She had not run precipitally in these
Resolutions: for twice Diaspe (for so he gave out his name) had saved her life:
Once in the Lake Chiti, whither she was carried by the unrulinesse of her
Horses: Another time at a coursing with Grayhounds; for a Tigre rushing out of
some Wood, that terrified and over-threw all the rest a (with an admirable
undauntednesse) was slain by him. To these Obligations the Affection he
professed he bore her was adjoined. For one day (after he had a thousand times
discovered his heart to me) he had the fortune to meet the Princess alone in a
Garden, where he had opportunity to tell her his Passions, to reveal his
Bosom, and discover his Birth. He found her so disposed, that the greatest
difficulty was to invent a means whereby to obtain the Ends of their Amors.

He would have stolen her away, but the Princess consented not to it, doubting
she might offend her Father, the Kingdom, and her self. Such Examples were
for her Restraint, the free opinion of the world having condemned them: and
those marriages to be unhappy which begin with the dishonor of the people, and
the grief of ones Parents. To obtain her by request for his wife, was
impossible, because of the inveterate hatred between the two Crowns. A Father
so repleat with tenderness, ought not to deliver his only one daughter into
the hands of one of his greatest Enemies. To subject the Crown to a Prince,
who should not make his abode in Cyprus, was to reduce that Kingdom into a
Province, an insupportable thing to this People. Notwithstanding to continue
themselves entangled in these fears, became a great molestation to them both:
because with Lovers those things cannot be long endured, that retard the
Achievement of their desires. Diaspe grew almost wild at the Kings
Resolutions. He would destroy Armenia, and kill this new Pretender. Sometimes
he reproved the Princess of her little love, because she had submitted her
self to a simple command of her Fathers. That there was nothing more
unconquerable than love, who knows not to deny, knows not how to affect. A
Father ought to be obeyed in all things, saving those that directly were
opposite to ones own heart.

Sometimes he accused himself of negligence, that with a powerful Army should
have prevented the designs and hopes of all. Princes would not be regulated
but by a present fear. And in their Consultations any Resolution would be
overcome that was besieged by a multitude of Soldiers. Sometimes he complained
of the King, that with an obstinate Command would make desperate his Daughters
affections, so much the more because. she was his only one, and heir of such a
Kingdom. They proceed with little discretion that by their odd humors
enforce maids to desperation; Princesses (says he) ought then in their
Marriages to prefer their Fathers before their own satisfaction! That which
is not denied to the basest woman of the world shall not be permitted them who
are borne to rule! If your Father to please himself cares not to displease
you, why will you encounter death rather than contradict the Commands of your
Father? Is there perchance an Equality between Greece and Armenia! Between the
power of a King and that of a private person: who takes you, not so much to
enjoy you as a wife, but because he sees you a Queen. The Princess answered
not but with tears, and reposed all her defenses, and all her reasons in
lamentations. Finally they concluded, that in great Evils violent Remedies are
the safest; That too much zeal, and too much modesty were as prejudicial as
an excess of fear, or a rash resolution. That he therefore should send into
Creete to his Father to raise speedily a very strong Army, that he might be
enabled to defend his pretentions by the Sword. That supposing the will of
heaven was interposed to these Negotiations, that the Princess should escape
thorough this Cave to the sea side, where before her flight was discovered they
might be far cuough from the jurisdiction of Cyprus. Diaspe the better to
have prosecuted this business would have returned thither in person, but the
Princess would not suffer him, foreseeing as it were in her self some
mischief. I being present, the Faith of Matrimony they plighted between them,
invoking all the Imprecations of the Gods upon the Failers, vowing to meet
death a thousand times before they would bestow their affections upon others.
Many days before then the Promise of Marriage had passed between them, but now
only authenticated by my being by, and solemnized by the testimony of the Gods.

In the mean while all the City was a preparing to entertain the new Prince,
who was gone into Armenia to his Father, to desire Ambassadors and Attendants
that should assist with state at his Nuptials. Arches were erected, Colossuses
raised, representing the Glories of Cyprus and Armenia. All were a preparing
Arms and Horses to flatter the Genius of the Princes, and not to show
themselves inferior to others. The Count of Cittera, a young man of a very
great valor, and an extraordinary expectation, was Admiral of the Sea. He had
in him an infinite number of faults, but he so well knew how to disguise them,
that if they were not acknowledged for virtues, they were not believed as
vices. The King had raised him to this degree of honor for his Fathers
deserts, who was the chief of his Council of State. He managed it well
enough, because, aspiring to high things, he would not show himself unworthy.
Perceiving the favor of the People, the affection of the Soldiers, and the
Kingdom without a succession of Males, he imagined by marrying with the
Princess to advance himself to the Royal Throne, he durst not open his mouth
of it to his Father; for knowing him of an incontaminated goodness, he would
not have prevented him with chastisement, at least have hindered him in his
ways. He assayed the mind of the Princess with signs of an affection not
ordinary; but perceiving himself despised, he turned his thoughts upon new
designs. He endeavored to procure to himself the good wills of the Great Ones
with feasts and banquets; He obliged the Militia with liberty and gifts. The
Vulgar were captivated with a plenty of all things that he provided them, and
with nourishing them in their vices. In brief, he did not neglect any of those
Arts which might facilitate his tyranny. The Nuptials of the Princess with the
Armenian interposed the course of his pretentions, whereupon he applied his
mind to a wickedness more execrable. In conclusion, when a perfidious mind is
disposed to mischief, all the stops in the world are not availeable
sufficiently to stay it.

The Count had been twice in Thracia, the first time with his Father about
State Affairs. The other time alone, to congratulate the comings of the new
King to the Crown of his Ancestors. Amuritte (for so the King was called) had
many times been in Cyprus when his Fathers Palace was infested by the malice of
his Domestics. He appeared to the Count as an excellent instrument to
perfectionate his hopes. He advertized the Thracian, by a Messenger dispached
on purpose, That the Kingdom of Cyprus at the least beck of his Majesty was
ready to fall into his hands; That the People were ill contented with King
Vassileo's Government, the Commonalty grown Cowards, the Forts without defense,
the Soldiers under him, the Arms in his Command, the Seas and Ports in his
Custody. That he was not provoked to this by any other end, but that he would
not obey a King who was a stranger, deformed in mind and in body. That seeing
the Kingdom must be altered, he did rather choose to make gift of it to his
Majesty, a Prince of whose greatness he had made experiment, as also of his
virtues, then to give obedience to a Man who came to the Throne before he had
learnt the Rules to govern by. That if his Majesty was pleased with the
offer, and this resolution of his heart, he would request nothing for his
service but the Princess to wife, with the Kingdom in dowry; and that he and
his Successors would hold it of the Thracians, and pay them homage with a very
great tribute. He added, that to raise a great Army, would, without any benefit
to himself, beget suspicion in his confining Princes. That in the suddenness
of this consisted the accomplishment of the enterprise, he now needing but to
steal it, and not to fight for it. That only two Galleys would be more than
enough, they being certain to find no resistance. That he might disguise the
cause of his Arrival, with a pretense either of friendship, or of chance. He
omitted not other particulars, and other instructions, which might render him
the more easy to consent to him. Ill men never want means to give effect to
their wickedness.

One Morning with two Galleys, becoming the merit of his Greatness, the King
of the Thracians appeared in the Port of Arsinoe. The King Vassileo, with some
amazement received news of the Arrival of this Prince, although the design
never fell within his thoughts. Order was given to the Admiral (as one best
known to the Thracian) to receive him. Their meetings (though on a sudden) was
most magnificent, the Horse innumerable, and the Train infinite. The King came
to Land with but fifty of the most Noble, and the most courageous youths of
Thace; with a great deal of affection he welcomed those that came to him by
the appointment of his Majesty, to whom he returned thanks for the honors he
received of them. His Entertainment was at the Charges of the Republic. But
after three days he would not permit it, saying, he had given way to that as a
sign of his liberty, which was prepared for his Honor. The day after he was
waited on to the King Vassileo, who received him at the foot of the Stairs.
There he used such words, and expressed such things as would have beguiled
Providence it self. Among other things he said, He was come to adore that Sun,
that not scorning his misfortunes (by a benign influence of it) had blessed
him with prosperity; That he rejoiced at the Matrimony of the Princess with
the Prince of Armenia; adding, that he could not contain himself for joy in
seeing the Age of so worthy a King extended (by it) to eternity; but (said he)
it was never subject to years, he (for his wisdom) being never young. That he
was above Fortune, who in despite of it knew to choose himself so deserving a
Son. That the principal cause of his coming was to serve his Majesty in those
Feasts, which Fame (and not without good reason) had spread through the
greatest part of the world. And that he came not as a King, but as an
Adventurer; the merits of the two Princes being such as would compel any body
to any disguise to do them service. He omitted not other particulars, expressed
with so much Affection, that Adulation, and Dissembling won him Affection, and
an high welcome. After some return of thanks, King Vassileo answered him, That
he the rather desired to be eternized in those Nuptials of his Daughter,
because they would report to his Posterity the Obligations which he owed to the
Love of so great a King. That he received the honor of this visit, as an Act
proper to the King of the Thracians: For he knew nothing in himself worthy to
deserve such Graces but the ardent affection he bore him.

These Complements being past, they went both of them to the Princess. And it
was observed, that the Thracian stood in amaze at her beauty, not believed such
by him before, having seen her only when she was a Child. There after some
expressions how welcome he was, he told her his coming was to wait on her at
her Wedding, and then jested with her at the stay of the Armenian, offering
himself to be her Knight until his return. The Princess replied to all with
so much expression of kindness and gentleness, that her words (conquering his
resistance) betrayed his heart. Finally, after they were parted, the Thracian
remained no less satisfied at the Kings entertainment, than he was astonished
at the Beauties of his Daughter. From day to day they continued to oblige
themselves with so high expressions, that their Subjects flatterers of their
Princes disposition feasted them perpetually now in the City now upon the
Galleys, nor neglected any thing that might be a sign of their friendship and
good will.

The Admiral in the mean while prosecuted his plot with such circumspection,
that there was not any body that suspected him. One day (while the Thracian
understanding the Armcuian Princes arrival with four Galleys was near;)
fearing some stop should fall between him and his hopes, he gave the last
assay unto his wickedness. He invited King Vassileo, the Princess, and some of
the Court to a Fishing, which he appointed to be made according to the Custom
of his Country. He had been other times on the Sea with his Majesty, whereupon
there was not any that doubted of his Faith; And the rather, because he had
disposed for this business but one only Galley, leaving his other in the Port,
and having with a specious Appearance divided his men into small Barks, brought
from our Arsenall. His Majesty accepted of the invitation, and one morning
betimes went aboard the Galley, accompanied with some few of his Council, and
the Princess Dianea, that came against her will (her feigning her self
indisposed prevailing not) with six Damsels, and he who never abandoned her.
There would also have come many Knights belonging to the Court, but the
Thracian dissembling, and saying all places were filled, would not suffer any
to enter but a few, and they all either Friends, or of the Counts Conspiracy.

We were gone ten miles into the Sea, when he began the Fishing. It was truly
a Pastime of much wonder, and worthy to be observed. Some Barques went from us
about a mile, the which after a long Compass, returned with such whoopings,
that it seemed they would deafen the Seas. They made that all the Fish was
drawn together to the Poop of the Galley, where it was often taken by Nets
ordered for that purpose. Without doubt the sight was singular, the Fishes
being infinite for number, and of an extraordinary bigness. There were some
seen, that to escape the Nets, leaped up so high, as if they had wings. Other
by crooked windings endeavored to have loosed themselves out of the Nets: Many
bold of their own greatness tried to break the snares that imprisoned them:
many leapt into the Barks, and finally all, either fearing to be took, or
death, scudding about after a thousand manner of ways, very much pleased the
eyes of the Beholders. Dianea only, and I, could take no pleasure in these
pastimes, either for grief of these Nuptials, or that our hearts presaged to
us the ill that was at hand. The Thracian bestowed a most sumptuous Banquet on
us, because returning to Dinner should not break off the Fishing.

Two hours before night, the other Galley came in sight, rowing softly upon
the Sea. It was scarce perceived, where the Thracian sending away the Barks,
departed from us, as if he would give order it should return. In the mean
while many armed Knights enter upon the upper Deck of ours, and before any body
could lay hand to his sword, we were all made Prisoners. King Vassileo finding
they were betrayed, more grieved at his Daughters Captivity then his own
Misfortune, was ready to dye for sorrow: Covering notwithstanding his grief
with that wisdom which rendered him singular among Princes, he neither spoke,
nor did things unbecomming his greatness. He told those Knights, that it
displeased him that the Glories of Thracia should be contaminated with
Robberies and Treasons; and that a Prison could not bring him so much trouble
as to see in so great a King a mind so vile, and baseness so execrable. He
comforted the Princess, who was oppressed with so violent a passion, that she
seemed stupifyed with sorrow. I and the other Ladies filled heaven without
cries, and with so many Imprecations against the Thracians, that I wonder how
they had the patience to despise them. By this time Amuritto came to visit us,
and showing that he took great displeasure at our sadness, he said to his
Majesty:

King Vassileo, it pierces my soul to have done any thing that might occasion
your Sorrow: I had not condescended to this for any thing, but for the
Affection I bear to the Reputation of your person, and to the good of your
Kingdom. This that has an appearance of ill, shall not determine but in well,
if your Majesty will have a regard to the End and not the Beginning. Do not
believe that the Thracians would rob from their Victories, nor that Amuritte
intends to blemish his glories with Treason, which in a little while I hope to
see you undeceived; and though yet the Remedy has appeared sharp to you, for
all that, many times it is necessary to make use of fire, and from mortal
Instruments to recover our health. I beseech your Majesty to suspend your
Answer and Complaints until after Supper; And so taking him by the hand, he
enforced him with a courteous violence to come to the Tables, which were now
made ready. He did the same to the Princess, comforting her with words full of
courtesy and affection. We Ladies followed them, with all those that belonged
to the King; Being soon come upon the Deck, we saw our Admiral, the Count of
Cithera. Not knowing his Treason we remained full of admiration, especially the
King, who knew he had left him in the Arsenell, with Commission to have a
Galley in readiness, more for State Policy then suspicion of any Treason.

The Purification, according to the Custom of the Thracians, being a
preparing, places were appointed for all: With a most soft Scarf they
hood-winked the eyes of all; and after covered the heads of all that were
invited with very fine cloth of gold, while one of their Priests muttered some
prayers, there was brought every body a a Basin to purify their hands in. This
being past, the Feast began. Their eyes were all scarce unbound, when they saw
the Count of Cithera strangled, and laid at length on the floor. The Father of
the Count who sat near his Majesty, could not bridle in the violences of Love
and Anger, which tormented his heart: Whilst the rest astonished knew not what
to do, but gaze on one another, he (arising from his seat, not being able to
refrain from tears, which whether he would or not, agreed with his tongue to
ease his grief) said to Amuritte:

Truly so execrable Suppers where blood is mixed, Wine can belong to none but
the Thracians. If cruel man thou did only desire my sons Death, why do
thou kill the Father with so mortal an Object, who has no other fault in thy
hatred, but thy own Fury? I implore the benignity of the Gods, that they let
not pass unpunished, Hospitality violated, Virgins stolen, so cursed an
Ingratitude, and so unjust Murders. The excesses of his Passion had not stopped
here, if the violence of his grief had not buried his words in his mouth. Good
old man, replied Amuritte, for the respect I bear to the Majesty of King
Vassileo, and to the Affection of a Father, I pardon the Errors of your
tongue. If your Senses tyrannized not over your Reason, I would make you learn
what it is to offend the Justice of Kings. So having said, he produced the
Counts Letters, (and the Messenger he had sent him coming in, whom in Cyprus
he had entertained) he made the Treason appear plainly to them all. Afterward
turning to King Vassileo, he added: For two things I may be blamed; The first,
that I have made the punishment precede the Discovery of the fault; The other,
that I took on me to do that Justice that properly belonged to you: yet I have
done them both with a great Foundation of Reason. First, to terrify Traitors
from attempting upon the person of their own Princes; and secondly, to free
you from the hatred of the dead man's kindred, more especially his Father, who
being innocent, with much difficulty believed his Son guilty. But old friend
be satisfied, that I could not offer up to the gods a greater Sacrifice then
the punishment of this wicked man, who for his Ambition of Rule, has in his
Treason to others betrayed himself. The other Accessaries, which are of some
number, I remit them to your Justice. Give me leave only to put your in mind,
that forgiveness is a noble property of Kings: And that the taking away the
heads of a Conspiracy ought to be attributed to the gods as a great Favor, and
accounted to a Kingdom as a great Felicity. For what remains, when the wind
will permit, I will conduct your Majesty into Arsinoe, where I will pretend to
no other reward then the love and thanks of so great a King.

Here he stayed, fixing his eyes upon his Majesty, who after a little
Recollection said thus: King Amuritte, Those things which Fortune to day has
presented unto me, have in a manner so amazed me, that I know not whether I
live or dream. The zeal of your affection, (with which preventing my
Interests, has made you condescend to so great Deliberations) shall be always
reverenced by me, according to the multitude of my obligations. I will
acknowledge from the candor of your friendship, the generousness of your
Spirit, the worthiness of your Mind, and the nobleness of your Birth; The
Conservation of my Kingdom, the Honor of my Daughter, and preservation of my
Self. His Majesty had not stopped here, if the Father of the Admiral had not
interrupted him with saying: Pardon me (O King) that if for the grief I feel
I cannot contain my self within the Duties I owe to the Eminencies of your
Merit, and the humbleness of my condition. The Faults of the Count of Cithera,
(whom I will not call Son, to increase my sorrow) if they are such as they
are reported, deserve your anger even to all his kindred. If the gods had
permitted, that they had been the slanders of his Enemies, to precipitate him
from the favors of your Majesty, I should have become a Supplicant to you for
Justice, although I should not have obtained it. It will be an Adjunct to your
glories, (Magnanimous King) to exercise your piety upon the Ashes of the dead,
and that your humanity be moved with Carcasses in their Sepulchers. In these
Doubts of my Sons loyalty, and my Princes favor I cannot live. I will not
allow Fortune so much power over me: If ever (Sir) the candidness of my
thoughts, the goodness of my actions, the ingenuity of my fashion, and the
freedom of my Consults have aimed at any thing then the Reputation of your
Majesty, the Preservation of your Posterity, the honor of your Crown, and the
welfare of your Kingdom, I invoke all the Gods, that the storms of their
indignation may fall upon my head, and that they never grant Repose to my soul
in the Elizian happy fields.

These last words were scarce understood, when stabbing himself twice in the
breast, he dyed before he could be succored. The Thracian suddenly commanded
the dead bodies should be removed, which was done with so great a resentment to
all, that the least expression was Tears. It was impossible that any body
should eat, wherefore the Tables being took away, he accompanied us into the
Keel; for now a Tempest so suddenly came on us, that it gave us not time to
know our danger. It was repleat with darkness so, that it seemed the Gods had
deprived us of the Beams of the Celestial Luminaries, that the waters might
swallow us. It sceemed that heaven would smother the sea, and that it would
make war against the Stars. The Winds concurring with the Waves, raised
mountains and Precipices, Thunder, and Lightning, dazzling our sight, and
taking away our hearing, took away all Command and Obedience. The cries of the
Mariners and Pilots to keep the Rowers to their Duty, they heard so
imperfectly, that instead of remedying the Danger, they produced more
Confusion, and augmented fear. The Oars being too weak to contend with the
violence of the Waves, were shivered into a thousand pieces; so also were their
Cords and Tacklings. The Thracians Diligences, who with a brave undauntedness
now exhorted, now promised, now threatened, showing at one time both the Office
of a Mariner, and a King, delayed our being cast away, which every moment we
expected.

By one of his Priests he was advertized, that the Sea-gods were offended, when
dead bodies are carried aboard; the Genius of the Waters not enduring it: That
this Piety might be exercised upon the shore, collecting their Ghosts into one
place by devout Funerals. The Thracian durst not oppose this superstition or
Religion of the Mariners: Therefore the bodies of the Admiral and his Father,
being thrown among the Waves, the fury of the Tempest was suddenly appeased,
we being driven far from Cyprus, upon the shores of Africa. He gave command to
his, that the Damages of their past Fortune should be repaired with all
diligence; that with their more security they might make their return to Cyprus.

Afterward he came to King Vassileo, and (some talk of the past danger being
ended) he said. There is not any thing Father, and Friend that more alters our
deliberations than the Accidents of Fortune. All our proposals, designs, and
all our promises, are lost, vanished, and retracted, when the reasons that
first occasioned them are removed or altered; you promised the Princess Dianea
to the youngest Son of the King of Armenia when others were not Suitors for her,
and when your own Interests in your State were not so as they are at present.
Now when I have delivered you from an enemy, the more formidable, because hard
to be discovered, and that all things of your Kingdom are altered, why may you
not with honor release your self from your promise? I will not insist upon
(to persuade you) the greatness of my States, the strength of my Armies, the
valor of my People, because King Vassileo's mind cannot be tempted by hopes.
So having spoke he did not manifest by any sign that he had him in his power,
to demonstrate that with all candidnesse he treated of this Match, or else with
a cunningness, seeming to slight it, to raise a greater opinion of him in the
King.

His Majesty, having a regard to his present condition, made use of such words
as were convenient, expressing that he had a great desire to please him. He
added afterward, you propound to me friend a match to be wished for, when it
was in my power to effect it, who would not (though with much trouble) procure
an alliance with Amuritte, and Thracia? Who would not endeavor to renew
himself, in a young man so valiant, and in a King so great? Yet know that to
retract my word given to a King with the Consent of my Council, and to the
satisfaction of my Subjects is not in my power. I propose not here the case of
my reputation, and the honor of my promises. All that is lawful which
pleases Amuritte; I reflect only upon the impossibility of a remedy, and upon
the dangers that may succeed it. The King of Armenia, who is so near to my
Dominions, would without doubt perceive himself injured by this offense. How
will my Subjects suffer my excuses, when they find themselves wronged by them?
But if I could do it, neither my people, Council, nor the King of Armenia
against it, my Daughters consent is to be got, whom I have ever left to her
own choice in these Affairs of Matrimony. Minds are not born Subjects, nor
should they be joined by violence. If this is observed among private persons,
how much rather ought it with Kings, and those that are to succeed in Kingdoms?

He proceeded, when Amuritte was advertized that four Galleys drew near them,
carried thither by the late Tempest. And that, by as much as could be discerned
at such a distance, the Colors belonged to the Armenians. The Thracian
rejoiced at this encounter, wherein he should have occasion to kill his enemy;
and presently gave command to all his to arm with all diligence, making
provision of burning lime, pitch, and other artificial fires to damage his
enemies with. The Galleys approaching, while the Armenians, who were more in
number, demanded the obedience accustomary to the Sea; the Thracian took hold
of this occasion, and charged them before they thought they could be assaulted.
In this first encounter it was easy for him to surprise and rout two Galleys,
yet torn and shaken by the Sea, and not suspecting such a matter. But he found
greater resistance in the other two, the Infant being there with the most part
of the Nobility of Armenia, coming to wait on the Prince, allured by the
Applauses of these Nuptials. They grapled together, and began one of the
fiercest fights that to the memory of man was ever seen on those Seas. The
slain were many, the drowned infinite, and the wounded without number. The
Archers shot not an Arrow in vain, and many times slew their friends when they
aimed at their enemies. The Thracian, who now grew doubtful of the victory,
having selected a brave company of his valiantest men, by plain force entered
the Armenians Admirals Galley. There, although he was wounded by a thousand
strokes, and lost blood from as many wounds, he singled out the Infant, who
with a great courage defended himself. They collected all their strength in
this fight, their men also becoming obstinate in the defense of their Princes.
The Thracian, though he closed with the Armenian, the other for a while equally
withstood him. At last they both fell; The Thracian had the better Fortune in
the fall, for being uppermost he had time to strike the Armenian in the Groine
with a Dagger, and in the Face with two mortal wounds. Afterward, all
besmeared with blood, in despite of his enemies, well defended by his own, more
ready in fight, and better prepared for it, to the astonishment of all that saw
him, he leapt into his own Galley. Then he made many fire-bals to be thrown
among them, so speedily, that the Armenians losing all courage with the
Infante's death, and terrified with their own danger, suffered them to burn.
This in a moment increased so fast, fomented by the wind, that if the Thracians
had been slow in getting far enough off, they had proved what they intended
only for others, and had easily been destroyed by their own fires.

The Armenian Galleys were consumed in a moment, notwithstanding any command or
diligence the chief Knights could use to prevent it. Those that blessed their
good fortune, for having leapt into the Sea without their Arms were seen
miserably to perish either by smoke, or to be drowned in the water. The groans
of those that languished between their wounds, the waves, and the fire,
provoked no pity in the cruelty of the Thracian, who feeling the smart of his
own hurts was assisting to the utter destruction of the Armenians. Of whom
there was not any that escaped from the fire or sea to carry the report of so
great a loss. Many that by swiming came close to our Galley were most
barbarously shot, at one time dying (unhappy as they were) two deaths.

The Thracian joyful of this victory, believing now there could not be any
thing to hinder his marriage with the Princess, or should prevent him of the
Crown of Cyprus, felt not the pain of his wounds, although very considerable.
Being requested by his to be dressed, he retired, making us partakers of his
success. King Vassileo, though he received much sorrow at it, dissembled,
enquiring of his health, expressing himself sollicitous for it. Attestations
of great men are ordinarily disguised according to their proper interests. The
Princess and I had by it a mortified consolation, both their lives being
equally hateful to us. Dianea then complained of Fortune, that ever and anon
prepared dangers for her. But our sorrow continued not long, for we were told
that a Galley pursued us, rowed at full speed. Amuritte understanding that it
was only one Galley, seemed to slight it. On the sudden we imagined any thing
but the truth; because being but one it delayed us sometimes in doubt. But
because the mind easily thinks what it desires, we were of opinion they were
more in number, and that this, either to discover the Sea, or to get some
advantage, had separated from the others.

Diaspe the Prince of Creete was in it, who having been invited to the Fishing,
feigned himself sick, either because his mind presaged some evil, or that he
would not mix in an action with the greatest enemy he had. This day he had not
stirred abroad, but that the hour being come that they should necessarily
return, he went to the Port to meet them. There not finding the Admiral nor
any of his servants, and understanding that the Thracians that were divided
into little Vessels were all also gone, he suddenly apprehended that there was
some Treachery Enquiring of many his opinion was greatly confirmed, when he was
ascertained that the Admiral went thence with the Thracians. He stood not long
resolving, but took into the Admiral Galley the ablest Rowers out of the
others, and five hundred of the valiantest, and the most trusty Soldiers,
publishing the Treason, and with the chief of the Courtiers then put to Sea.
He likewise left order that the other Galleys should follow him with more
Forces, and with all speed that was possible.

He was scarce got out of the Channel of Gavata, and left Cyprus on this side,
when he was assaulted by a Tempest. But he received little harmeby it, His
Galley being an extreme good one, well furnished with Slaves and Martiners, so
that despite of the waves and the winds they followed their Voyage. In coasting
the Promontorie of Acerauno he was advertised they discovered two Galleys,
which if they lay not at Anchor they made then no haste. Glad of this, he gave
command, the Ghinge, and Soldiers should eat, putting themselves into Arms.
He came upon the Thracians who had not time to prepare themselves for fight,
slighting it, because it was but one, or not suspecting it for an enemy.

Their Admiral was presently charged, for their other would make no defense,
being hardly able to swim, much less to fight. The Thracians making weak
resistance, Diaspe entered the Galley, making that slanghter which their
perfidiousnesse deserved. Amuritte, being certified his Galley was taken, ran
to the succor of his, despite of the Physicians, who protested against his
life. He encouraged the Thracians, and for a while heartned them to fight. But
they being unable to resist so great a multitude, fell down all either dead, or
to render themselves Prisoners. He only obstinate in fight, after having shown
many signs of an extraordinary valor, fell breathing out his soul from a
mighty wound Diaspe had given him in the Breast. Such was the end of Amuritte
the King of the Thracians, worthy truly for his many virtues of a more
honorable death, if his dishonesty and ambition had not transported him upon
such a Precipice.

Diaspe came to kiss King Vassileo's hand, who received him with such a
welcome as they deserve who save the lives of Kings. Dianea apparelling her
affection in the habit of Gratitude, could not satisfy her self in honoring
him. We returned to Cyprus, where the Consolations and Applauses of the Court
were infinite: For upon such occasions also those that hate are obliged to
demonstrate a joyfulness, lest they show their perfidiousness. All the Kindred
of the Count of Cithera absented themselves, that his Majesty should take no
other revenge of them, and to remove any suspicion of intending mischief. The
Thracian Galleys with the body of Amuritte were sent to Nicepolis with a true
relation of what had passed. But I know not for all that, whether his mother
and brother gave credit to the truth; who believes he is offended, cares not
for the cause. Diaspe would not ask the Princess in marriage until the
arrival of his, whom he shortly expected. He knew the ill inclination of the
Court, who envying and hating his valor could not but with mortification
behold the King and Princess to honor him. They supposed that stolen from
themselves which his Majesty conferred upon others, either for thankfulness or
munificence.

The Duchess would have proceeded in a discourse of those, who either by
power, or riches had rendered themselves formidable, even to King Vassileo
himself; who (because he durst not punish them) dissembled their faults; but
perceiving that the Princess gave signs of weariness, and that she difficultly
kept her eyes open that combated with sleep, she broke off her Rclation, both
of them betaking themselves to a most sweet repose.

The End of the First Book.
DIANEA.
The Second Book.
THE Sun was hardly to be discerned upon the Tops of the Mountains,
spreading abroad some stars of Light, as Forerunners of his Arrival, when
Dianea arose, weary of her bed, which that night had brought more trouble then
repose to her. She apparrelled her self with such Vestments as beseemed her
greatness; not accustoming her self to the superfluity of those Ornaments
wherewith the Ladies of these days, following the vanity of their Genius,
unprofitably waste their times and lives. Her face was without Art, the colors
not affected. Her hair curling by Nature, was gathered up, and bound under a
very thin veil, all beset with Jewels. A shame to those of our age, who to
seem beautiful, when they are not, care not to appear rather Pictures than
women; and to rob Sepulchers of their spoils, to deceive the eyes and
judgments of those that look on them.

When she was ready, she commanded her Damsels to withdraw, feigning her wonted
Devotions. Being left alone, she entered into the Cave, just as the Princess
had done dressing of her. There, after some courteous salutations, she asked
her how she had passed that night in a place so below her Desert, whiles she
disturbed with a thousand Passions her self, had not for one minutes time,
given her eyes any repose. The Princess answered she had never taken better
rest, having cast wholly from her memory her former miseries, finding her
self to have so large a part in the affections of so great a Princess; That
now, if she was oppressed with any thought, it proceeded from doubt that she
had been troublesome to her, and that she had nothing to express her self how
grateful she was for the Honors she had received.

They passed forward into diverse Complements, repleat with love and gentleness,
when Dianea said: That having given some Truce to her own particular Passions,
she had worn away a great part of the night in thinking of her; That to be (as
it were) buried in Troubles and Dangers, the Discoverte of it would find some
advise to facilitate it with satisfaction. And that therefore she entreated her
to relate to her the Condition of her Fortune, and the Accidents of her life.
From whence with better Counsel, and more mature Deliberation, they might lay
hold on more proper and necessary Remedies.

The Princess replied, that she had an ambition to recount to her the
Encounters of her miseries, who would commiserate and assist her. That in
misfortunes there is found no greater Consolation then in the pity we
perceive in others. Many times their Tears bless Infelicity, that
compassionate it. Here for a while she made a stop, as if she would take
breath, or as if she waited for new commands. But not being interrupted, she
thus began her discourse, while Dianea attentive hung at her lips.

The History of the Princess Florides, and Prodito.
THE Island of Negropont, for the greatness, and the nobleness of it, is Queen
of the Archipelagus. It is separated from Paeotia by a long Channel, which
joins it with the firm Land. There I was borne King Dinanderto's Daughter,
that then to the comfort of his Subjects, and admiration of his Neighbors,
governed the Scepter. Among his many conditions that rendered him to Adoration,
his Goodness was one, through which many times he did not only forget injuries
received, but with an unbelieved courtesy, loved those that hated him.

In the first years of his Reign, he enlarged the Confines of his Empire so
prosperously, that it seemed Fortune in a Dream had subjugated Provinces to
him. All that confined to him, he had made his Tributaries, and had borne so
successful Arms, that his Conquests crowded one another, where also many
times his own soldiers found Sepulchers of glory. He after fixed his mind
upon higher Attempts, designing perhaps the recovery of that, which either by
Fortune of war, or other alienation had been usurped from the Crown of
Negropont. But on the sudden he was constrained to call back his Forces, to
the defense of his own State, invaded by most powerful Armies of Lodaso, King
of Vesati, the most warlike that ever was borne of that Nation, the fiercest,
and most formidable in the world.

The Reasons that moved this man to invade us were supposed many: But the
principal wa^; Some of my Fathers Subjects, who aspired under new Princes to
mend their Fortunes, or who by their valor rendered necessary to the State,
should be recompensed by his Majesty with bestowing me on them to wife. The War
being denounced, and we overcome, we began to feel all those discommodities
and miseries which they receive who are seen unjustly dispoyled, and robbed of
what they have, without any means to prevent it. Our principal Cities, either
through fear, or treachery, set open their Gates to the Enemy, so that the
greatest part of his Dominions being lost, we had nothing remaining but what
this Island contained in it.

My Father, who in many Battles had found Fortune contrary to him, having
gathered together the last Forces he was able to raise, Commanded the Duke of
Lovastine, who from a private Knight, by the Kings favor, with the envy of
all, was advanced to this degree to Adventure his uttermost hopes on a set
Field. The Duke readily obeyed the Commands of his Majesty, and under Zenilp
offered the Enemy battle, who more then willingly encountered him. This was
one of the most obstinate and bloody fights they had: Even my memory I confess
has lost the remembrance of so cruel assaults. It began two hours after
Sunrise, and continued till Noon, without the least advantage to be perceived
on either side. Lodato, that for valor would yield to none, ran through every
thing, leaving it hard to be distinguished, whether he was General, or a
private Soldier. At last Victory inclining to his side, and evident signs of
having the better appearing; the Duke of Lovastine, all hope of overcomming
being lost, with a select party of his best men charged that part where
Lodato's Prowetle performed wonders. He alone aimed at him, and having unhorsed
him, they wounded him mortally. His men, who obeyed him as a King, and adored
him as a God, seeing him fall to the ground, ran thither, making such a
slaughter of our men, that there almost all our Officers of note were slain,
the Duke of Lovastine being sorely wounded. The Vesats had the victory, though
losing their King: it was believed they had the worst. He being brought off to
his Pavillion, with so much undauntednesse exhorted his to prosecute the war,
as if he had commanded over death. He recommended the Government of the Army to
the Duke of Vimana, entreating his to continue without faction; because they
could not be overcome, if they were not disunited. And desired his friends to
dry their eyes; for he could not have received a greater benefit from the Gods
than to dye at the top of his glories, with his Arms in his hands; He had
lived long enough he said, who had the Fortune to point them out the way of
liberty. With these words he ended his life, with so great a sorrow to his that
many would not survive him. His Exequies were not yet accomplished, but the
Bier many days carried about the Army, with such a sadness of the soldiers,
that they (esteeming Tears too ordinary a way to expesse their Passion and
Affection) bathed it daily with blood.

News of this being brought to the Court, it was entertained according to
several affections. The friends to the Crown rejoiced at it, as if this only
blow had occasioned our security and the safety of the State. But those that
expected to build their hopes upon our Precipices, received it with an
extraordinary sorrow, and expressed it with attempting to bring the Duke of
into disgrace with my Father, who being of an incredible goodness, did not
believe himself deceived, nor that others would deceive him. His Majesty for
all this continued to reward him according to the merit of his valor,
enriching him daily with Lordships, money, and privileges, so that he had not
in the Kingdom neither a Superior nor Equal. He being advertized of the
Treacheries his Enemies intended him, writ to my Father: That having served him
so many years, careless of his life, he desired now some repose, not to
absent himself from dangers, or to withdraw himself from his service, but to
cure himself of some Evils which rendered him an old and an unable man before
his time. That the charge of an Army was overgreat a Burden for the shoulders
of an old man, that had spent more blood in the Service of the Crown, then he
had left for the preservation of himself. That the Interests of his Majesty
required, that others should be employed in the Wars, to supply his
weaknesses. Other Resolute, but very Respectfull things he urged, which
compelled Dinanderto to send to him expressly that he should continue his
command, adding other particulars of honor, the more to oblige him to him.

The Duke for some time, to his very great applause, prosecuted his charge; but
understanding that his Enemies proceeded in multiplying crimes upon him, which
never entered into his mind, that they treated about Articles of peace, without
once mentioning him in them, and that the King of the Gauls sent the Duke of
Riat with a Command equal to his own, having but an ill opinion of the
Princes of Catanosa, who were volunteers in the Army; he began to think of
some security for his own safety. He set some Prisoners at liberty, without
taking any thing from them, but a simple Testimony of honor. He negotiated
effects of friendship with the Monarch of the Belgi, of the Aquitans, and the
Celta; and lastly, so ordered the business, that the greater part of the
Heads, the Colonels, and the Captains of the Army subscribed to a writing, in
the which they obliged themselves to serve him in all encounters, and never to
abandon him while they lived.

My Father had Notice speedily given him of all this; but not crediting these
Relations, although proceeding from reasons well affected and uninterested, he
would understand the truth with more certainty; he made the Duke of Lassimano,
Nephew to Lovastine, to be brought into his presence, unto whom he made a
Discourse of the Merits, of the Virtue, and of the Victories of the General,
and that he had resolved to send him to him, to comfort him, and assure him,
that sinister informations could not alienate his heart from that man, whom he
loved equal to himself. That he knew the wickedness of Courts, where the
most worthy are the soonest exposed to the injuries of malignity and envy. Upon
this occasion, he made one of his Counselors of State to accompany him, giving
him private Commission to spy into the actions of the Duke of Lovastine,
forcing himself to penetrate even into his thoughts, his operations, and his
ends. The Counselor being come to the Army was informed of the Rebellion of
the General, of his Treaties with the Enemies, and of a thousand other
particulars, which rendered him guilty. He gave his Majesty notice of this,
while some of the chief who had subscribed to the Paper, came and signified it
in his presence.

My Father remained astonished at an attempt so execrable. Considering that the
sum of the businesses consisted in the speedy dispatch of them, he declared
the Duke of Lovastines Commission for General to be void, that he was a Rebel
to the Crown, and an enemy to his Prince, commanding all the Provinces that
they should not obey him, and promised high rewards to such as should deliver
him into his hands. He committed the charge of his crimes to Colateral
Picomeni, and to the Count of Lagasso, Subjects of an experimented worth. Thus
he commanded that he should entertain the enemy, and that he charged to take
the Duke before he should have time to defend or save himself.

Lovastine was in a walled Town in the Confines of Baeotia when he understood
the deliberations of his Majesty. Here, although he could have defended
himself, having Soldiers and Ammunition enough, perceiving the Colors of the
Count of Lagasso, that intended to surprise him under the appearance of a
friend, he fled thence with two Troops of Horse, and four Colonells joined to
him by friendship and kindred. He retired into a Castle, the strongest of
Baeetia, with hope there to defend himself from all the Forces of the world.
The situation rendered it inexpugnable by Nature and Art. The Soldiers were of
a tried fidelity, and the Governor his Creature, by him elected to that
Command, a stranger by birth, for the most part valerous, the most worthy, and
the most faithful. The Advises of Lagasso were brought thither before the
arrival of the Duke; whereupon the Governor (after he had received him into
the Castle, and had saluted him with welcome belonging to a Subject, and a
Subject obliged with benefits) he resolved to secure him. He shut the Duke up
in a Chamber, molested with thoughts, or indispositions of health, and without
taking any meat, gave order he should be left to his repose. The rest, being
invited by the Governor, went with him to supper, where almost all that were
acquainted with his purpose came among them, and a certain sign being given,
they were slain with little or no resistance. Being surprised, they had scarce
time to lay hold on their Swords, two of them being killed before they could
rise from their seats. From thence, presently after, they went to the Chamber
where the Duke was, and breaking down the door they rushed violently in. He
starting up, ran to a window, either to leap forth, or to call out for help.
Perceiving the height mortal, to escape impossible, and his Guard out of the
way, he leapt upon a soldier to take his Halbert from him. They with so much
cunning prosecuted their business, that the Duke unwittingly wounded himself
mortally upon it. He after spoke many words, protesting his innocence. That he
fled from the anger of his Majesty without any other meaning but to secure
himself; That if he had had any intention upon the Kings life, or on the
Kingdom, he could not have wanted ways more secure and execrable; That he
appealed to his Majesty when he would cast aside the ill impression he had
received from his ill-willers, and desired him with all severity to weigh his
Actions. He aggravated the misery of those who are necessitated to serve the
Grandees of the world, that can do what they will.

The standers by suffered him to speak till he breathed out his soul, either
for the reverence they bore him, who many times had commanded even the King
himself, or else because, perceiving him a dying, they esteemed it an impiety
to be cruel to a Carcass. My Father at the report of these things could not
refrain from tears; he commanded sacrifices should be offered to the Gods for
the good of his soul. Although many had a hand in this Conspiracy, he
contented himself only with the imprisonment of two. Accounting it an high
revenge if he made others see, that if he had a mind he had power to punish
offenders.

These extremes of his goodness gave leave to some wicked men to aggravate
the Innocence of the Duke of Lovastine in so free discourses, that my Father
was in a very great fear of himself. They said, the services he had done to
the Crown merited not a death so much the more miserable, because it was
infamous. That that should not be denied to the greatest man of the world,
which is not refused to the least. That Dinanderto learnt ingratitude of other
Princes, which was a blameable fault in all, but a cursed one in his Majesty,
that would have his own goodness and piety believed greater than the deserts
of the other. That the Kingdom had felt the damage of such a loss. And that
the Enemy had never had a compleater victory than now by the death of so great
a Commander.

Only the Duke of Lassimano, Lovastines Nephew, aggravating the Crimes of his
Uncle, accused my Father of too much gentleness in being contented, that the
life of only one should be sacrificed for his safety and fears; That had he
been guilty of no other faults but his intelligence with the Enemies of the
Crown, that was sufficient to render him worthy of any Punishment. These
aggravations in a manner so won upon the goodness of my Father, who (not
considering that injuries are never forgot, and that being writ indelebly in
the heart, they dye not but with the heart it self) conferred all possible
honors upon him; and lastly recommended to him the defense of himself. His
Majesty remained confident of the affection of this man, he performing one deed
that made him imagined very faithful. My Father, being gone an hunting with
almost all the Court, was surprised with a sudden shower, accompanied with
hail, thunders, and wind, that it seemed it would devour the world. He got
into a Cave to shelter himself from the fury of Heaven. Scarce was he entered
within it, but broken, I know not whether by time or destiny, with an
unexpected ruin it began to tumble down. All overcome with amazement preferred
their own safety before the Kings, flying thence whither their fear carried
them. The Duke, either out of bravery contemning death, or to authenticate his
infidelity, supporting with his back what was ready to fall, with no small
danger to himself, gave leisure to my Father to escape forth, who afterward
sent others in to bring him off, who had remained there in great danger to have
sunk under the weight.

His Majesty believing that these deeds could not be counterfeit, and that it
was not possible that one should hazard life for him he loved not, kept him
always near him, and according to his liking were all Counsels determined,
and all deliberations regulated. The perfidious man, growing proud of the
prosperity of his Fortune, feigued himself enamoured of me, with so much
cunning, that it seemed he was willing to dye for love. I that could not endure
to look on him, not so much because he was Nephew to a Traitor, but because
formerly I had obliged my heart to the Duke of Filena, one of the most worthy
and consciousest Princes that belonged to the service of the Crown. My Father
did not oppose my desires, and if the Interesses of the War had not diverted,
that thought had effectuated them. It was easy for Prodirto (for so was the
Duke of Lassimano called) perceiving himself excluded, and flighted by me, to
penetrate into my ends. Our practices were apparent to all; for I supposing my
self, as it were, as good as married to him, there was not any thing that I
omitted to make him believe me so. Prodirto studied to free himself of a
Rival, and did it under the species of honor, according to his usual cunning.

Instead of the Prince my brother, a General of the Army was to be chosen, who
not being yet sixteen years of Age could not undergo the troubles of War. He
served himself with this occasion to send the Duke of Filena far off. He
proposed this to the Council of State, applauding the greatness of his mind,
and the merits of his person, with so much eloquence, that he prevailed for his
departure, and notwithstanding a thousand oppositions, and infinite pretenses,
he was there chosen by the greater part of the Votes. The Duke of Filena being
gone to his Charge, Prodirto applied his mind to the accomplishment of his
wickednesses.

My Father was given to love much more then was befitting a Prince; There was
no other blemish upon his honors, but this of natural inclination, reputed
blameable in the opinion of all men: for although it be common to all, yet it
is not so convenient for all. The Age of my Father, which was now declining,
and two Children, which made him seem older than he was, could not stop him in
the pursuit of his pleasures. He had received, presented to him, a Greek of so
singular beauties, that they would have overcome the continency of a thousand
Xenocrates's. The beauty of Venus, being subjected to comparison, would have
found in the face of her, at least emulation, if not envy. To this my Father
engaged all his affections; All the hours that he could steal from public
business he spent in the fruition, or adoration of that Object, of which many
times he had confessed himself unworthy. He had kept her in his own Lodgings,
if mine and my brothers years had not persuaded him to the contrary. At the
farther end of the Garden there were some Lodgings, with Pictures embellished,
and Sculptures of the chief of their profession. Pornia here was laid, for so
was the name of that Greek, with so much care of my Father, who not only would
conceal her from the eyes of heaven, but many times became jealous even of his
own self. Prodirto prevailing upon this occasion, feigned some business of
very great consequence with my Father. He told him, that Pornia weary of the
cold embraces of an old man, with a scorn to his Majesty, almost every night
enjoyed a young man belonging to the Court of a very low condition. It was no
difficult thing that this lie should suddenly find credit with my Father: For
some Lovers believe impossible things true. He showed so lively feelings of
grief, that it appeared his heart, presaging his evil, did not without reason
oblige him to sorrow. After various Consultations, he resolved (being so
persuaded by Prodirto) to go with him alone in the darkest time of the night to
punish that Prometheus, who durst presume to steal his fire.

The Duke being gone, joyful at this Resolution, went to find the Prince my
brother: with whom it was no hard thing to work a greater Art than that which
he had used with his Majesty. He represented to him (after a feigned relation
of the deed) that injuries done to the Father directly wounded the reputation
of the Son, who ought the more to resent them, because he had the more strength
to revenge them. That his Majesty could not receive a greater comfort than to
see his Son so ardent in chastening injuries committed against his Father. That
to publish it was scandalous, dangerous, and unhandsome. That though,
peradventure, it should be false when it should chance to be reported to his
Majesty, he would receive it with an high opinion of him, and if that it were
true, there could not be an easier and worthier revenge imagined than by his
own hands. That it was an high great privilege to Princes to have power to
punish injuries without danger to their friends. He also added the easiness of
the task, not to have to do with more then one man without Arms, and who
being set on on the sudden, may be imagined soon killed. To be brief, he did
not omit any Motive that he thought might persuade him. All Considerations were
superfluous, for the Prince was resolved upon the knowledge of the Deed. He
loved Pornia with no ordinary affection, and conceited this Offense done
against himself. If he could, he would have got her before she fell into the
hands of his Father: afterward, either for duty or fear he seemed not to care
for her; although his desires increased, by reason, he concealed them.

The night came so furnished with darkness, (even palpable) that it could not
be more obscure. The unfortunate Father and Son believed Heaven was propitious
to their Designs, being able amid'st these Honors to observe, without being
observed, which it meant to cover, or prevent so cruel an action. The Stars
also vanished all out of sight, peradventure not to be called guilty of that
Tragedy, the malignity of their Influencea, ordinarily being accused for that
which depends absolutely on our Wills. Or else they hid their heads to make
their deaths appear more miserable, in that they could not implore and see the
Celestial Luminaries.

My Father giving himself over to be directed in all the business, by the
will of Prodirto descended into the Garden, that very moment the Prince came
thither. They encounter near Pornia's Lodgings; each of them did imagine at
whom they expected, and began to wound one another. They struck but two blows
a piece, and none in vain: The Prince received an hurt in his head, which
broke his skull, and was run in his breast through his body. My Father also
had a wound which came out at his shoulder, but being in a fleshy place, though
it was dangerous, it was not mortal. The other, although no very great one,
was in his throat, which hindered his breathing, and voice. Hearing the Prince
fall, he said he was alive, and called Prodirto, that he should aid him. The
Traitor suspecting these words, might awaken the Soldiers, or the Court,
although hardly heard by himself, came against him, murdering him with many
stabs of a Dagger, which he carried to that purpose.

Floridea here stayed, her tears interrupted her words. You cannot deny (said
she) unto the unhappy Memory of my Father those Rights of Amuritte, which being
known in all, are more though then natural in women. Suppressing
notwithstanding her grief with a generous suflerance, she proceeded.

Prodirto being gone out of the Garden, through a private door, called
together the greatest part of his Kindred, who being certified of the deed,
without any resistance took possession of the City, They that were more
honest, being astonished at this chance, perceiving to declare for my Right,
were to precipitate themselves into danger of their lives, gave way to Fortune,
rather then Tyranny.

Whilst these strange Changes were in acting, I enjoyed a most sweet
Retirement. I mocked at Destiny, which being evermore ready to vex me, now
decived me with (as it were) a brave pleasant sleep. I was then for my
Recreation in a Castle upon the Sea shore, and to obey the will of my Father,
who much against his mind looked upon those that could reprove him of his
Amors, although with silence. I was awakened out of it by the Guard, and
Pornia was presented to me, who more by her tears then by her words assured me
of my evil. The grief I received at it was so great, that becoming an
altered woman, I deceived the opinion of others, not being able to deceive my
own sorrow. They thought to have seen me run mad, overcome with Passion, which
being grown to the height, suffered not any external actions to disburthen my
heart. That grief is ordinary which is raised by weeping, and that can
evaporate it self by shreeks and lamentation. Those Diseases are mortal which
take away the life before they show their Malignitie. Truly, I know not
whether I was so estranged from my self by the greatness of my sorrow, or for
fear of my self, which (from my Imagination) represented to me a great deal
more then the loss of my Father and brother.

I was about doubling the Guards, and to fortify the Castle just as the
Traitor sent to surprise it. When he understood his Attempt was frustrated, for
anger he made him to be beheaded, to whom he had given the Command. Many times
Traitors exercise Justice, not because they are just, but because Heaven will
be served by their impieties to punish wicked men. He besieged me in the
Castle, having before made use of all affectionate words to gain me without
violence. Although I could have resisted all the Armies of the Kingdom, I
could not, notwithstanding fight against Necessity, there being Ammunition but
for a Month. Their fidelity that preferred my safety above their own could
not be cemented against Famine, which without combating can Conquer Armies.

Whereupon I resolved to send two of my trusty servants to the Duke of Filena
to implore his succor. I gave him an account of the viclence of Prodirto, and
the dangers of my Virginity and life. Although Lovers have no need of Spurs, I
used all those means that had power to persuade even the mind of an Enemy. I
remembered him that the Kingdom of Negrepont, expected from his Valor, a
release from Tyranny, that coming to my aid, he brought a Defense for his
own Affairs. I added that I would have sent him my heart, if a thing so dear
that bore his Image on it would have been separated by the Treacheries of
Enemies, or the faith of a servant. I gave him notice also, that if he could
not come with his Army, he should with one Galley, the Sea being free then,
the Foe having no vessels of consideration, so that all other Remedies failing,
I might fly thence with him to preserve alive my Title to the Kingdom, and to
escape from the hands of a Traitor.

In ten days an Answer returned, but not the messenger, being deceived by a
counterfeit Character, I attended the Duke of Filena's coming, with that
Anxiety a Lover can wish for, as it was promised me by the Letter, darker then
usual, by the obscurenesse of the Treason they prepared. The appointed night
being come, believing I opened to the Duke of Filena, I found me between the
Arms of Prodirto, who having secured my messengers by counterfeiting the Dukes
hand, deceived me, he having neither ingenuity nor virtue to imitate the other
in but only his Characters. He had much ado to hold my hand, which would
preserve my liberty in despite of the treacheries of Enemies. But protesting
all respect to me, and promising me I should receive no harm, he pacified me.

Although daily he frequented my Company, he yet never forgot he was my
Subject. His words were so courteous, his expressions so affectionate, his
Promises so great, that they very much lessened my hatred, though it was
impossible for me to love him. Every day he had the Soldiers in a readiness.
The Commonalty he obliged with Gifts, kept his friends together, entreated his
kindred, and neglected no means that might assure the Crown to him. All the
principal Cities had sworn obedience to him; some being overcome by a desire
of Novelty, others by force, and all by cunning. He had an Army more numerous
than strong: the poor he banished; and the Male content followed the Standards
of that impious man, who ought not to have been followed but by as wicked as
he. When he saw himself freed from his fears, either by the flatteries of
those that know not how to speak to Princes, but of Felicity: or by a mighty
quantity of Halberdiers that waited on him, he began to lay aside that
courtesy he had formerly used to me. Coming one day to talk with me, he said:

Princess, If with my blood I could restore the life of your Father and
Brother, I would do it with that eagerness which beseems a Subject, who loves
his Princess equal to himself. After their Decease I am put to the stern of
this Ship, beat upon by the fury of Fortune, not to steal it from your
greatness and merits, but not to suffer it to be endangered among the Rocks of
Ambition, and not to abandon it to the Incursions of the most Barbarous, and
most perfidious. Notwithstanding this zeal of mine would show little respect
to the Acts of your Progenitors, and to the Establishment of your Happiness,
if I should not procure to protect your youth from the intentions of many, with
joining you in marriage to a person who is able to defend your Kingdom for
you. Having reflected upon Princes, that parallel you in Dominions, I have
found more oppositions then equalities: Many either deformed in mind, or
countenance: Others incapable, or insupportable in the Kingdom. Lastly, all
either so full of those Tenants, or of those vices detested by others, but
insupportable to the people of Negropont. After many considerations I have
resolved, that you cannot find out a more secure stay, nor more to be
authorized then my self. I am persuaded no body will disdain to serve him who
has the Queen to his wife, and has many times commanded the King himself. I
do not believe I am unworthy of you, not so much because I exceedingly love
you, but by reason I demand that, which by the right of War ought to be mine.
You ought not to resuse me, if you have regard to the Danger your person is in,
the security of your State, and to the quiet of your Subjects.

He omitted not other Particulars, and other Maxims, accompanied with so much
craft, that they would have deceived those that had not known him. I thought
it not best to contradict him, whose hands were no less wicked then his heart.
I believed that nothing else could save me, but making use of his Appatences to
deceive Art by Art. I answered him: That this was not the first expression of
his Affection, nor these the first Obligations that the Crown of Negropont
owed him: That if the Gods vonchsafed me to reign, he should find no
ungrateful effects in it; that he should have no occasion to envy the felicity
of any, nor to desire an higher greatness. That I would establish him in such
a condition, that he should find his troubles abundantly rewarded, and his
zeal requited. That concerning marriage, I neither refused, nor received him.
That when peace and quietness had secured the Crown, and confirmed the
Scepter to me, I would follow the advice of the Council of State, the will of
my friends, and of him in particular. That I conceived it very necessary to
have the opinion of the Duke of Filena, as one who at present was the Patron of
the Armies near the Kingdom: and that it was expedient to demand his advice,
to express I espected him, although I should displease him.

To these words he replied, that he commended my Discourse, as having its
foundation upon safety, and reason: But that I ought to take notice, that
weighty businesses, if they were not prosecuted with speed, encountered with a
thousand hindrances which retarded them, and many times confounds them. That it
was an effect of weakness to depend upon the desires and the wills of others
that aim for the most part at their own proper Interests, not to the
Greatness or Reputation of Princes. That Kings sometimes admitted of Council
to hear the applauses and approbations of their own opinions, not to be
brought to theirs. What should Princes be if they must depend on the Consults,
and be regulated by the odd humors of others. That at the beginning of her
Reign she should not prejudicate her own authority. Subjects too often
entrench upon Jurisdiction, and endeavor to prescribe Law to their King.
Especially, that choosing a Prince for her Husband, not unworthy of her self,
she was not obliged to depend upon the will, no not of her Father himself.

I contradicting these opinions with many reasons, and he enforcing himself to
confute the same, after many replies grew angry with me in his talk, and being
cruel by nature, began to lay hands on me, saying; That he had power to
persuade me even without speaking. I endeavored to have killed my self, but
it availed not. For he, fearing my resolutions, gave me not leisure to lay hold
on any thing. I gave way to my tears to try, if with the most lively blood of
my soul, I might purchse my honesty. This thought of mine took not effect, for
there is no blood that can mollify an heart that is harder than Diamond. The
perfidious man attempted to accomplish his designs now. My defenses served me
to no other end, but to weaken my self, and exasperate him the more. I that
much rather desired death than the loss of mine honor, although I should see
my body but not my mind forced, troubled him with repulses, with bitings, with
my nails, not omitting schreekes and tears, that I know not how the stones
escaped to be moved to Rescue. Pornia, full of an incredible boldness, ran in
at this noise, took a dagger, which by chance lay there, and seeing the
violence he offered me, gave him such a blow, that had it hit full, he had
never more made use of force. Perceiving himself struck, he came against
Pornia, who but weakly defending her self, ready to dye with many wounds, fell
down. I ran into another Chamber, wherein there was nothing; but I employed to
secure the door. He made not any use of his strength against it: whereupon I
being assured by those that waited on me of Prodirto's departure, came forth
not to defraud Pornias Funeral of my tears.

There was in the Castle a little Temple consecrated to Pallas. Hardly was I
arrived there to make ready the Hearse, when Prodirto entered, so changed in his
countenance, that I believed him certainly come to murder me. He commanded some
of his by maine force to seize on me, making me to be carried into a Galley,
which he had in readiness near the Castle. Then he made them fall to their
Oars exhorting them by his own voice, and hasting them by the whip. It was
necessary for him to be gone, because the Duke of Filena, with all his Army was
come to take him Prisoner. The Soldiery had suddenly revolted, and all the
Cities had set their Gates open to him, and offered him their Keys, the which
in my name he received from all. We were not forty Leagues from the Island but
the Gods made Prodirto know how much they hated Traitors. At an instant the
Sun was seen to be obscured, the Air darkened, and the Sea grown rough.
Thunders and Lightnings strove together to deprive the Mariners of their sight
and hearing. Many times it seemed, when we were mounted up by the Waves, that
the Heavens opened to receive us, to strike us with Lightning near hand, as if
the Thunderbolts could not reach us further off. The Stern was broken, the
Mast split, the Tacklings unfit for use, the Anchors lost, the Sails torn,
the Mariners amazed,, and the Slaves weary, when, defended only by the
goodness of our Vessel, with a most prosperous presage we came to shore in
your Kingdom, in that port of the Island, which out of a respect to religion
continues inhabitable.

She would have related how, being led aside by the Duke to ease himself after
the weariness of the sea, she had the opportunity to escape from him, if she
had not been prevented by the Duchess of Bell Prato, who put a letter into
Dianeas hands; Knowing the hand, she received it with such a feeling as falls
into that mind which fears, and hopes. Before she read it she said to
Floridea; Friend, and Sister, for by these names I will ever call you, it is
fit that I discover to your gentle disposition all the seerets of my heart.
This Letter comes from Diaspe the Prince of Creete; the Character does not
deceive me; But whether as from an enemy or friend I know not; because your
Arrival here had disturbed our appointments, and prevented our designs. Just
when I first saw you, the Prince attended; you having barred up the Entrance,
and I not in time giving him notice of it has made him depart hence toward
Creete. All my diligence hitherto to find him has proved fruitless. Now he
writes to me. I cannot but imagine he is angry. Heaven grant it be not
implacable: Though I know that such fits in Lovers are fomentations to
affection. This said, she read the Letter; The Contents of which were these.

Princess,
I do not write to reprove the Blushes for your Infidelity: For who cannot love
cannot blush. That fire which could not kindle your heart, I very well know
cannot spread it self in your Face. I write to justify my Resolutions, and to
confound your disloyalty. The retiring Places of the Grott have not been able
to bury your Amors. That God, whom so extremely you worship, should advertise
you, that he goes naked, because it is impossible to conceal him; and that
dissimulations are not Garments that can cover him. To my own happiness I have
discovered thus much. That I should not be hers who will not be mine, unless
in the same time she might bestow her self upon others. Heaven be praised that
you came not to be the destruction of my Kingdom. Dissolute women too much have
afflicted Grecia. I have satisfied the tears of my sorrow with the blood of
him that came to enjoy you. This Passion which cannot bring you my full Anger,
will doubtless present you with this Advertisement. If the others Soul be in
the body that loves, I have punished at one time your perfidiousnesse, and
satisfied the justice of my indignation. Live then with grief to have lost at
once two Lovers; the one scorned, and the other slain, and perpetually fear
to hear the Reproaches of a sinister Fame. I go from hence to Creete, where I
shall find beauties more worthy, because they will prove more modest.

Diaspe.


She had scarce read these last words, but her hands would make amends for the
Offenses given her eyes, tearing that Letter into a thousand pieces, which
designed her to a continual lamentation. Her tongue also ran for the succor
of her heart, uttering those things which might vent out her grief and lessen
her passion. Faithless man, said she, did thou want other means less
impious to satiate thy barbarismes? Could thou with ways more cruel
disdain my Affections? With wickeder stratagems could thou triumph over my
simplicity? Could thou with more disguised Fictions betray my Innocence? Is
this thy faith! these thy promises! these thy oaths! O Dianea, only unhappy
because thou have loved. Gods, why preserved you me from the hands of the
Thracian, who could only have deprived me of my life, to leave me a prey to a
wicked one, who at once takes from me my Kingdomee, Life, and Honor? Wherefore
preserved you me safe from the furies of the sea, to let me be swallowed up in
an Occan of Infamy? Cruel one, are they Arguments that I can love others,
because I have loved thee? Thou should not therefore have doubted of it,
being I cannot love my self. If I had, I should not have disposed my honor
and fortune into the hands of a man, to whom inconstancy is as proper as motion
to the Heavens. Thou have reason to suppose me unfaithful, because I have
betrayed my self. But where are those testimonies that make my Innocence seem
guilty? How can thou convince my heart of disloyalty, that out of an
abundance of affection to thee grew jealous of it self? Ought I then to be
convicted for a simple suspicion? Doubts then must serve for proofs against
her, who to be be thine has been willing to endanger her life, displease her
Subjects, and deceive her Father. Wicked man, I know thy perfidiousnesse.
Because thou can not love, thou feignest things for true which cannot fall
under Imagination, much less sense. Suspicions are not nourished but in
unfaithful bosoms: as Thunderbolts are not made but in the coldest Regions
of the Air.

Dianea no sooner had finished these Complaints, but Floridea would have tried
all means to have comforted her, if she had not been assured by the Duchess,
that her Father who came to visit her was not far off. At notice of this she
stopped the Torrent of those tears, which ran with her tongue to exaggerate
her sorrows. She forced her self to disguise her passions, and to conceal
those signs that might make the wariness of a King jealous, whom Age had not
deprived of his judgment. Having taken leave of Floridea, she went to meet her
Father, who was already entered into the Palace. She presently gave sign, by
the palenesse of her face, and by the gastlinesse of her eyes, of the motions
of her mind, and the alteration of her heart. Yet for the most part she
satisfied the fears of her Father, suspicious at it; she told him the cause,
laying the blame on the night past, wherein she had neither slept, nor taken
any repose; you had need therefore (replied Vassileo) choose you such a
Companion that should provoke you to rest, and taking her by the hand retired
into the Garden, and said to her:

Daughter, since the unfortunate success of the Infant of Armenia, I have had
no greater thought than about your Marriage. You cannot remain as you are,
without danger to your self, and me. They that envy the happiness of my
State, and aspire to the Possession of the Kingdom, under the pretense of
wedding you, cover either their infidelity, or ambition. The example of the
Count of Cithera should teach Princes not to promote, with hopes, the wicked
affections of their Subjects, and strangers. There is not any who will not
acknowledge himself enamoured on your person, and your Kingdom. But should
other Motives be wanting, that of posterity makes me desirous; I wish to see my
self renewed in my Grandchildren, which I would not leave in their Nonage in
a Kingdom so great and powerful, but yet not without enemies. Provinces and
Kingdoms, the richer they are the more are they envied. Many make but slight
esteem of that victory, which enricheth not the Conqueror, and great dangers
stay not some from great pretensions; your Nuptials will allay these suspicions
which deprive me of all consolation. To these therefore I desire your assent,
which I believe cannot be contrary to my desires and my entreaties.

Dianea dissembling those afflictions that oppressed her soul, after a little
pause to recover her spirits, answered; Becks from your Majesty ought by all to
be received as Commands, not only by your Daughter, who has learnt no other
thing but obedience, and can serve you in nothing but obeying you. The King
replied, another answer he could not look for from her discretion and
affection: The Duke of Filena shall be your Husband, a young man to whom
nothing is wanting to render him superior to all, but a Kingdom, which you
shall bring him in dowry. In peace he has not his Equal, and in war none
above him. The Kingdom of Negropont, which has been the Theater, whereon he
has acted the wonders of his valor, bewailes his absence. He has quieted the
seditious, extinguished the Rebels, returned liberty to the people, and not
being else able to resist the entreaties of those who would have had him their
King, he is hither retired into our Kingdom. Prepare you then, for I will
remove all stops that may delay this Marriage. This said, he parted from her,
because perceiving Dianea in a great perplexity of mind he would not trouble
her farther, retiring joyful to the Court, in that he had opened the
business, on which he conceived all his happiness depended.

Dianea, after her Fathers departure, finding her heart a narrow Vessel for an
Excess of an overflowing Love, exhaled her Passion in words, sighs, and
tears. Now she called Heaven to be witness of her Innocence. Now blamed
Cupid, that ingenerated in the hearts of Lovers suspicions so far from Truth.
Now she accused Diaspe of injustice, who had concluded her guilty without
hearing her defenses. Now she complained of Fortune, who (between her
perpetual motions of inconstancy) was a continual affliction to her. Now she
reproved her self of her errors, for so easily yielding to the Affections of
that man which determine in the fruition of the Object. But when she fixed upon
the consideration of having promised her Father to entertain the marriage with
the Duke of Filena, and to be deprived even of the hope of having Diaspe,
forgetting altogether the reservednesse becoming a Princess; it appeared by
her, that she would not, or could not live any longer. She beat the earth with
her feet, because she having been believed a Heaven of Beauty, peradventure
persuaded her self that the Vapors of her Passions could have no original,
but from the Earth. She struck her face with her hands, as if she meant to
punish the beauty there, as Author of her Infelicity. She knocked her Breast,
and it seemed she would chase thence that Image which against her will
tyrannized in her heart. Lastly, she tore her hair, making them guilty of
Diaspe's far away absence, because they had not the power to stay and entangle
him. The sense of her sorrow ceased not to torment her: And these Rages which
came as Natures under-Assistants for the consolation of her mind, augmented
the oppressions of it. Finally, overcome and cast down by the Assault of of
many passions, she was constrained, by a violent Fever, to betake her self to
her Bed, whilst her griefs presaged nothing but her Death.

The Duchess used all means to comfort her, representing to her infinite
expectations; very well knowing, that hope, although remote, is the true
nourishment of Love, and the only Consolation of Lovers. When she perceived
her tired, with a Conquering sorrow, and that it seemed that her eyes which
were even drained with weeping, desired Repose, despite of grief, which
wished to see her engaged to a perpetual Lamentation, she went from her to
Floridea in the Cave. To whom she recounted the ill-fortune of the Princess,
and the Resolution she had taken to disoblige her heart from Diaspe, obeying
her Father, and marrying the Duke of Filena. The Duchess had understood from
Dianea, King Vassileo's Intention, but knew nothing of the Love that had passed
between Floridea, and the Duke of Filena.

When Floridea heard the Duke named, with a great alteration, she beseeched,
who was that Duke of Filena, who was accounted worthy of such a Princess. The
Duchess answered her, he was the most celebrated King at that time Fame
reported, and that enoblized the Glories of his blood, by the wonders of his
Virtue, by which he had conquered envy it self. That King Vassileo, even when
he was a great way hence, had elected him for his son, and that not many
days since he arrived here to solemnize these Nuptials, which most
sumptuously are a preparing. Floridea had scarce heard the sense of these last
words, but being surprised with a trembling of the heart, she beseeched the
Duchess to leave her, until she had passed over that fit, which she conceived
of little moment, being accustomed formerly to have greater. Being alone, she
gave liberty to her tongue, that accompanying her eyes, they might celebrate
the Funeral of her hopes.

Unfortunate (cried she) are they that found their Desires upon the
inconstancies of Fortune. I grew proud in holding her by the hair, and
persuaded my self, I might with all security res^ me in the amidst of her
wheel, having been sheltered from the Barbarismes of Traitors, preserved from
the Furies of the Sea, and to have found so large a share in the affections of
so great a Princess; and now I see my self a new reduced to that condition,
that Death would be the least of my miseries. How uncertain are our Thoughts!
How vain our Designs! How beguiled our Hopes! and how betrayed our opinions!
I imagined that this Grot, that had hid me from the cruelty of mine enemies,
would have also preserved me from the cruellest blows of Destiny. I believed
it had not been able to penetrate into this Cave which the Sun dares not
disclose. Ah me unhappy! what Remedy shall I look for? I have found the ill,
and Death has mocked me with an appearance of Recoverie. I am like those
Flies, which burn themselves in that fire, which they believed would have
cherished them. But to whom profits it me to complain, since it is in the power
of this hand to release me from all the molestations of the world? That woman
is too much miserable that has no other means to ease her of her misery, but
her tears. But I have a Courage to dye when I will, and that envies not the
constancy of those breasts, that being of a less frail Sex, are judged
therefore the more generous. But whither does my grief transport my tongue,
and my reason make me wander? For the present, I ought not, nor can I dye: For
being the Duke of Filena's, I should not relinquish his Commands. I ought to
depend upon his will, and to hear my self his Resolutions. Others reports for
the most part, are either interested or careless. In the affairs of Love, the
circumstances give, and take away life: When thou shall say, (O Duke of Filena)
thou will not be mine; When thou shall refuse that Sacrifice thou have of my
heart, then I can dispose of my self according to my pleasure. At the present
my thought could not be innocent, if it should violate thy right. If thou will
have Dianea, I will not oppose thee. For I should love thee but a little, if
for my proper Interest I should deprive thee of so grateful a thing.
Nevertheless, I know, that I offend thee, making that faith dubious, which I
have always served with so much loyalty.

Thus complaining without attending the Return of the Duchess, as if she
hated those Rooms, fearing no longer Prodirto, nor the Encounters of Fortune,
she went forth of the Cave, with the greatest anxiety that could be, taking
that path which to her judgment might lead her whither her heart designed her.
By the way she devised how she should appear to the Duke of Filena. She
prepared words premeditated, conceits which were by her self now accused as
too humble, and now rejected as over-rigorous. She contrived, if she found
her self despised, how she should amplify her sorrows. And meditated if
accepted of, by what ways she should conceal her joy.

Whilst she agitated by these Passions, rendered the Incommodities of her
travail more supportable, Diaspe, who had resolved to abandon the world, and
to live amidst solitudes without the disturbance of those thoughts which make
us abhor life, condemning his opinion for base, had hired a great Bark to
transport him to Creet. He thought with himself; The Affections to ones
Country and Father to exceed all others. All sorrows are comforted under that
Heaven where all Influences are Prosperity. He was scarce descried a good way
from the Port, but that he told the Mariners they should presently receive him.
Constancy may have residency in all things but the minds of Lovers. He feigned
some business that he had, and commanded them to pass away the time till his
return. He walked toward the Grott, carried, I believe, more by his heart
than his feet. Arrived there, finding the entrance open, he boldly entered,
imagining, peradventure, to find Dianea in some error.

Being come into the Court, he saw that Knight whom he had left for dead
resting himself upon a stone. He resolved no more to be deceived by the
infidelity of her that introduced others into those Chambers, into the which he
had persuaded himself that he only was admitted. But having left him on the
earth breathless, and seeing him at the present in a very good state of health,
he imagined them phantasmes of sleep, or delusions of Enchantments. He
undeceived himself with his sword, assailing him, who, after the manner of
Anteus, arose more vigorous by his falls. Offenses and defenses were at the
same time. Blows were given and returned equally; victory was independent,
neither did the Palm bow toward either of them. The fight continued about an
hour, maintained more by their anger than strengths. Each of them blamed the
edge of his sword, and the weakness of his Arm that struck not down and
vanquished his enemy. They were both of them all soyled with blood, and it
seemed death would have the Triumph of the fight, and of their lives. They
could not any longer keep them on their feet, when after a long wrestling they
fell down both together, leaving life in his hands who should dye the last.
Their wounds truly were not mortal, but those also being again opened which
they had received before, they were so weakened by the much blood they lost,
that there appeared no sign that might make them thought alive.

At this very instant Dianea, who had taken truce from her sorrow, descended
into the Cave to make Floridea acquainted with their both concerning miseries.
At first sight she grew astonished, seeing two Carcasses to be the Object of
her eyes. She presently received it as a Reincounter of that wretchedness
which Fortune prepared for her. Suspicious, and doubtful, willing to be
satisfied who they were that were come to solemnize (by dying) their Funerals
in those retiring places; she saw Diaspe's face, that all overspread with
palenesse, it seemed they besought her aid, his tongue being unable to implore
it; she schreeked not out, because her heart oppressed by a violent passion,
hindered her voice, so that she could not speak; she ran to embrace him, as
if she would bury him in her self, believing that she could not give a
Sepulcher more worthy to a Carkasle so much beloved. As soon as she perceived
there was yet some hope of life, with impatiency she tore what came next to her
hands to bind up his wounds, having yet before with a Jasper stone, which she
had in a Ring, stanched his blood.

Whiles Dianea held him in her arms, he being a little returned to himself,
breathing out a languishing sigh, opened his eyes, which met with those of
hers, whom he loved and hated at the same instant. He presently closed them
again, supposing his heart attempted to deceive his sight with those
phantasmes; and that the strength of imagination made unpresent Objects seem
visible. Whereupon with a weeping voice he said: Have not thou (O Fortune) yet
perchance satiated the cruelty of thy desires, that thou representest to me
that Image that is more tormentfull to me than that death which I know
approaches. Thou believe (may be) these wounds are not sufficient to kill
me, without striking me with an Object so dismal; or rather, I having no part
of my body but mine eyes which can be offended, thou have tormented them with a
Ghost, with a Phantasme so noyous, so detestfull.

Dianea could return no answer to these words, but with her tears, which
abundantly gushing from her eyes, made Diaspe understand he was in the arms of
her, I know not whether more beloved than hated. Many times he endeavored to
have risen, but being withheld by force, he added; What pity (perfidious one)
is thine, who, having murdered me alive, now would lament me dead? Complain
the Testimonies of thy disloyalty. O Lovers, give you credit to the doubleness
of that heart that can bemoane whom it has betrayed! Reserve these tears,
Dianea, to contrive treasons against the simplicity of some body that knows
thee not.

Dianea, being unable to endure these words, which cast a shadow on her
loyalty, interrupting him, answered: Dear Diaspe, if you had loved me you
could not have doubted of the certainty of my faith. Suspicions are not begot
but where there is little love. I neither will, nor can affect others besides
you. I have but one heart which can entertain the impression of but one alone
Object. Would to heaven, replied Diaspe, that I could beguile my heart to
believe thee innocent. I would dye a thousand times rather than see you
miserable. And I answered, Dianea would encounter death so many times more not
to be such. If you afford belief to my tears and oaths, credit these hands,
which offer to subscribe my innocence with my blood. So having said, she took
Diaspe's Dagger to strike her self. He adding strength to his weakness, with
held her, and said to her: And who is this Knight? What motives has provoked
him? Or by whom is he persuaded to betray my life, and spy out these retiring
places? I see him new enlivened to renew my miseries. I left him dead at the
entrance of the Grott, and to day Destiny has made me find him more stout than
ever. I know not how, replied Dianea presently to give you a greater account of
these Accidents than that which you may conceive of your self. These
Adventures are as strange to me as your disdain came unimagined. I beseech
heaven this Knight may live, that I may recover health from that hand which
wounded me.

But these Discourses bring with them no salve for your hurts. Dianea is yours,
and cannot be another. You much trouble her when you suspect her such. But
rather you injure your self, manifesting demerits, which vex and toil the
Affections of a Princess. Hereupon rising she would have led him into one of
those Chambers, but he would not consent till he had seen if the Duke were in a
condition likely to live. They found he was very far spent with the loss of
much blood; a sign that gave them little hope of life. There were two beds, by
the assistance of the Duchess, presently prepared, where they wounded were
laid. Dianea attended to their Cure, being very well instructed in Surgery;
not in that the Princesses of those times were skillful in all the Sciences,
and in this in particular, as most necessary in the Palaces of Princes, who
will not trust their healths to the infidelity of others hands, but because
from her childhood her Genius had inclined her to it.

Oleandro in this while, with an impetuous beating of the heart, met with the
Count of Silinera, to whom he had given knowledge of his Arrival. Diverse
Complements passed, which always abound in the mouths of Great men. Sitting
down in a Chamber of the Palace, and dismissing his Attendants, who for the
most part use to spy into the Actions of their Patrons, the Count of Salinera
spoke thus: Prince Oleandro, it transfixes my soul, that the first day in
which I have had the fortune to reverence you should be funeralized with things
most molestfull to him who is to execute them, and with sorrow to him that
commands them. But I having to talk with a Prince, who counterpoiseth all
actions with reason, and treating of the reason of State, which is the soul
that quickens the body public, you will receive those Offices in good part,
which though they appear unpleasant are nevertheless necessary. I will not
remember you of the miseries of this Kingdom, which at the present enjoyes no
other quiet, nor other felicity than that which an ideall, and an imaginary
hope can promise us. It is known to all, and I suppose to you in particular,
that being borne to command, you are obliged to observe the Customs of people,
and the misfortunes of Princes more than any other. Laws are here either
neglected, or abused. Justice set to sale has rendered interessed Rewards and
Punishments. The Nobility are become Tyrants over the Commonalty. The people
fomentated by the Chances of Fortune, have forgot their Obedience. Honors are
dispensed at random. Desert and Virtue are suppressed by favor and riches.
The power of King Vassileo in a manner is restrained, so that he is scarce the
Mastor of himself. Some that have gained the chief Offices, keep his ears as
it were so besieged, that he suspects not ill though he prove it. And yet he
has been advised by many, who have not feared to ruin themselves to save the
Prince. This Advertisement has been, if not too late, at least untimely; so
that to apply a Remedy was to increase, not to remove the Evil. The successes
in the Kingdom have constrained his Majesty to suffer the wicked, because
they should not grow worse. He that for Wisdom knows neither a Superior nor
equal, has been unwilling to stir those humors, which before they can be
dissolved will destroy the Body. The Death of the Count of Cithera, a young
man, that by his Liberalities had won the Affections of all, have so alienated
them from the King, that the most seditious now attend but for a new occasion
to disguise the Impiety of their Designs.

To our Domestic miseries, external are joined. The King of Thacia and
Armenia unite their Armies to invade us; the one to revenge the death of his
Brother, and the other that of a son, as if King Vassileo himself had been the
Author of them. The Chance (although it was of pure Fortune) is (without
reason) ascribed to his Majesty: but to those that have an intention to wage
war, all Appearances become Causes. Kings, that have innumerable men and
money, make that lawful which they will, and under a mantle of Justice
conceal their Ambition and Cruelty. In sum, this Commotion has put his
Majesty into grave deliberations; for he shall at once be combated with enemies
he knows not; and have occasion to fear his own as much as he does the
Armenians and Thracians.

To withdraw himself from so imminent dangers, he has procured to make
friendship with Princes his Neighbors, and those farther off. Some of them he
has awakened with this universal Maxim: That the greatness of the Armenians
and Thracians cannot be but with peril to them. To give way that the forces of
others should exceed their own, endangers their Liberty to the discretion of
an insolent; for such are Conquerours. Many he has persuaded by the ties of
blood, and others he has put in mind of injuries received from these two
Kingdoms: Some also he has remembered of the Services he done them. In
brief, he has not omitted any occasion nor notice to gain him the hearts of
those, who though they cannot aid him, at least shall do him no harm.

In Africa he has sounded the Affections of all, and has there found such a
forwardness, that the King of Egypt, with his Cousin the new King of Morocco,
have offered themselves to fall upon the Kingdom of Thracia to divert him, or
take from him the occasion to invade us; knowing their State-Tenents not to
maintain two wars at one time. This fell out grateful to his Majesty,
because the only forces of Armenia could not daunt ours, to whom for a long
continuance of years they have always yielded obedience so much the more,
being under the command of a King who never had combated with other but wild
Beasts.

But this joy of King Vassileo's was mortified by notice given him that the
King of Morocco dispatched Embasladours to have your Person delivered him;
imagining himself whilst you lived, neither secure nor King. His injustices
are so detestable to his Subjects, that they daily pray Heaven for your
Return. If the present state of things did not necessitate my master to any
agreement, though unjust (for the Laws of necessity are without Law; and it is
allowable to do every thing rather then fall) you should have no cause to
fear any, and he with as much Resolution would undertake your defense, as now
it grieves him to desire your Departure. He has committed to my charge to
inform you of the state of things, and that he himself not being safe, can
much less secure others. He knows that daily there are Treacheries woven
against you, and knows that not long since you were dangerously wounded: He
heard it with as much sorrow as can be imagined in a just Prince, constrained
to support injustices.

He entreats you therefore with the greatest privacy possible, to go hence,
that he be not compelled to do wrong either to you or himself. He for fear
of having it discovered, conceiving it dangerous to appoint you Vessels for
your Transportation, as a Present has sent you these Jewels, inferior to your
merit, but perhaps needful in the Encounters of your new fortune. Though you
were resolved to have continued here, his Majesty desires you to go, and
assures you, you shall do it with safety: and will maintain that faith which
he promised you, when first he knew his condition and birth. He is confident
your wisdom will apprehend this Counsel, as the securest for the safety and
reputation of you both. Cyprus is not worthy to possess such a Prince. You may
with security promise to your self, that these fears of War being ceased,
this Kingdom shall serve you as a Sanctuary, and that King Vassileo above all
others will interest himself to favor you in the regaining you your Crown.
He loves Justice more then others, and cannot endure that the wicked should
triumph over innocence. The rather by reason the cause is common to all, Kings
oughting not to suffer Usurpation of States in others, lest they find the
experience of it in their own.

Here the Count of Salinera held his peace. Whereupon Oleandro replied: I
ascribe it (my Lord) to my great fortune, that the Majesty of King Vassileo so
much interests himself in my Calamities. I shall not always remain unhappy,
being protected by such a Prince. I will be gone because he desires it, and go
willingly: Because Misfortunes ever attend me, I would not disquiet the safety
of his Kingdom. I will take along with me these Jewels, which he has pleased
to honor me with, not that I have need of them, but to have daily before mine
eyes Testimonies of his Magnanimity, Greatness, and my obligations. I should
thank him for what he has done, and for what he has promised to do for me,
if these Duties were not common in all tongues. So great Engagements claim a
reverent Acknowledgement, which is ordinarily more expressed by silence then
the tongue. The reasons you have alleged were useless to persuade me. It
suffices that I see the Interests of the King or Kingdom to move me.

This Discourse being finished, the Count of Salinera bad him farewell, with a
resentment more lively and true then those that are practiced in Courts.
Oleandro complaining on the infiniteness of his miseries, prepared himself
with Arnalta for their Departure. Their Habits were poor, his face he
disfigured with a thousand blemishes. So Fortune knows how to jest even with
Princes. They that knew how to disguise themselves so, knew not how they should
have known themselves. Celardo used all means to have borne them Company, But
being overcome by reasons and prayers, was enforced to move it no farther,
remaining in the possession of the Palace.

These two Princes departed before the Appearance of the Sun could discover
their departure. When they came to the Sea side, they were so weary they could
hardly stand. Necessity may trouble, but never can discourage worthy minds.
Finding a Vessel, they went aboard it, which set sail that very night. The
most noble Island of Cyprus was out of sight when they were (rowsed on a
sudden by the swellings of the Sea) assaulted by the winds, the Mariners were
constrained to fall to land on a Rock, where by the help of swimming and
Planks, they escaped from the water. The Country being unknown, they put
themselves to walk afoot at adventure, whilst the other wearied themselves to
recover the ship-wrackt goods, which it seemed were spewed up by the Sea with a
great fury upon those shores. After one hour and more of travailing they came
to some Shepherds Cabbins, from whom they received meat and lodging the next
night. These People, although they could not understand them, nor were
understood, with a thousand signs of courtesy could not weary themselves with
doing them honor. In minds base by birth many times are found gentleness,
which great Ones either know not how to use, or will not. Morning being come,
they departed by break of day, to find out some City where they might at
leisure deliberate of what they should do.

They walked till that time of the day that the body requires the natural
tribute of meats. They rested them near a Fountain, and after their Repast
gave themselves over to sleep, willing with a most pleasing repose to slight
that fortune which only aimed to disquiet them. Whilst they lay in this
fashion a Knight came upon them, for so he appeared by his Arms, and his
Apparel. He cast his eyes upon Arnalta, and praising much that beauty, he
fixed his look upon Oleandro. He presently knew him, though so unlike to
himself. There is not any thing that can be concealed from the eyes of a
Lover, His Travels, Misfortunes, Calamities had not so transformed him, that he
could not be known for Oleandro by her that loved him.

Being assured that he was the very same, she trembled, swet, grew cold, became
unmovable. She was doubtful whether she ought first to assault him with
injuries or kisses. Before she would have been content that he had been
another, so that she might have seen him: Now she rather wishes him dead,
than by the effects to discover certainly his perfidiousness, imagining with
her self that he weary and satiated with the Amors of her Sister, this with
him was a new Mistress. Finally, recollecting the reasons of her displeasure,
unsheathing his dagger, she said: Oleandro, now is the time thou shall pay for
injuries committed against my faith and the honor of my Family. It is
unreasonable that I should endure that hateful look which so many times I have
found guilty. I ought not to let that man live, who with his only look can
reprove me of my follies, and provoke blushes in that face he has been able to
slight. Thou (O wicked man) shall prove what disdain in the breast of a loving
woman can do. Oh God! how foolish I am. How I yet love this impious man, that
with this dagger, and death, know not but that I may make him happy. Would not
he be fortunate if he might be freed from my indignation, and enter into a
place where my hatred could not arrive. Impious and sacrilegious persons, whose
hearts are replenished with all barbarismes, cannot for all that abide to look
upon the Testimonies of their wickednesses. Thou shall receive more vexation
with seeing me, and hearing me aggravate thy perfidiousness, than if I killed
thee a thousand times. These Arms are too worthy for the breast of a Traitor.
I will not honor nor immortallize thy death with these hands, which would even
raze thy name out of the book of Oblivion it self. But I know very well how
to torment thee. I will kill her here, whom I doubt not but if thou love,
thou will receive that punishment I wish thee.

So saying, she drew near to Arnalta, and furiously lifting up the Dagger held
it in the air, saying to her self: In what has this unfortunate one offended
me, that I should thus miserably deprive her of life? I should not be angry
with her for loving him, for I also have been in the same error. Minds cannot
be so compelled, that they should not desire the fruition of what seems good.
And if she deserves any chastisement, what greater punishment can I give her
than the company of so faithless a man, that promising her all felicity will
make her miserable. He deserves punishment, and to him I should give it;
whereupon turning toward Oleandro to strike him, she was again withheld with
an amazement at her self. Is not this the man, she considered with her self,
that has had the loveraignty over my heart? Do not I love him, perchance, more
than my soul? It Is true, he is unworthy to be beloved; it is true, he loves not
me, and it is true, he is a Traitor: But how can my affection be assuredlier
fixed than in his alienations? To love being beloved is an Obligation. I ought
to affect Oleandro through Gratitude, and to comply with my heart. The
affections of one beloved should be won by obsequiousness, and not steel.
Cruelty is altogether an adversary to Love. If I kill him, I can never hope to
enjoy him, who living may become sensible of his error, and re-affect me. And
more, if I love him, I should accommodate my self to his desires. I should
only love my own satisfaction if I should not affect him, but because he loved
me again. The Obligation of any that loves in earnest is to be transformed
into the Genius of the beloved. It is nevertheless good reason that I take
from my eyes what may alienate him from my love, and molest me. She is a fool
that can have the patience to endure a Rival.

Having made these considerations, she came again to Arnalta, and again
stayed her hand that was ready to strike her. If I desire (said she) the
affection of Oleandro, why offend I him with killing one who is his Companion?
If he truly affect her, and intends to prefer her before me, seeing her
murdered by my hands, he will much more hate me. If I would enjoy the
Affection of Oleandro, it is necessary that I procure it by parelling this,
whom I suppose his Mistress. When in her presence he shall profess he loves me,
I shall not be deceived. What pleasure would it be to me if he should love me
out necessity, not having where to divert his affections? How can one rejoice
in that love which cannot be cimented by a Paragon. Ah fool, that I am!
presume I yet in the love of this wicked one, in this sacrilegious, in this
unfaithful man. He has deceived one sister, and the other is betrayed, or
slain: And ought I to have hope on the instability of that heart that is
inconstant in inconstancy it self. No, no, to retard vengeance is to render
him worse. Their Errors are to be pardoned who are in a state to do better;
not them to whom forgiveness serves as a fomentation to worse. This impious
man therefore I sacrifice to the justice of my disdain.

Hereupon resolved to kill him, she moved her arm and directed the dagger
toward his heart, as if she meant to punish that part first, by which first
she supposed her self injured. The arrival of a Knight, who having observed
something of these Discourses, hindered this resolution, who just came in time
to hold her hand. Blush you not (he said) to defile your self in the blood of
these, who by their habits cannot but be imagined base? Art thou of so mean a
spirit, that thou will make war against persons that are overcome by sleep: Or
throw away those arms, or truly perform things that may be worthy of those
Arms? If thou knew'st, answered the other, the Causes of my Anger thou would
applaud my resolution, and be thy self the Author of their deaths. To take
these wicked ones out of the world is to do a benefit to the public. Persons
so wicked may also be wickedly punished. Against those that are unarmed,
replied the other, and those that are asleep, there is no reason that
prevails. It is not lawful to do amiss to chastise an error. Besides, from
so mean persons an injury is not received. They are not so presently onward
the first as the rusticity of their Gaments figures them to you. He is a
Prince, yet unworthy of such a name, and goes peradventure in these counterfeit
habits to deceive some other as he has done me. So saying, she pulled off her
Helm, adding: I am not a man, as perhaps you thought me. To give a mass to my
Infelicity, which must always accompany me, Nature made me a woman. I gave to
this wicked one my love, my honor. Being grown weary of me, with the very
same Arts which he had woven snares with, to beguile my simplicity, he betrayed
the heart of a sister of mine, who, forsaking the Kingdom, and her Father,
would follow him. Satiated also with this he has either abandoned, or slain
her, for I see him with another woman, and not her, whom he took with him.

Have not I then reason to be cruel against the softness of my sex in the
iniquity of this impious man. No, Infanta Ariama, said Oleandro, who being
wakened at their talk, had in some part observed her Complaints, and knew her;
The absent should never be condemned. Though I appear guilty, I am not for all
that such. If the benignity of that Infanta, who could give me her heart, would
please to listen to my words, she should see that I am not to be blamed, as the
world may believe I am; you should not fix your self in the appearance of
things. Even Jove sends forth his Lightnings when the Heaven is serene, and the
Sun makes a glorious show of himself sometimes when a shower falls.

Wicked man, answered the Infanta, how skillful thou art to mascherate thy
excuses! Thy perfidiousnesse might move me, if I had not proved the damages of
thy disloyalty. Tell me, tell me, perfidious man, how thou can color thy
flight? What can thou say for the betraying of my sister? What moved thee to
leave me with a pledge in my belly of thy unfaithfulness? Why did thou not
take me with thee instead of my sister? Fair Infanta replied Oleandro: One
cannot persuade one that will not be persuaded. If I have ever deceived you, if
this heart has ever produced desires which are not proper to my faith, and my
obligations, if my mind be estranged from you, even in the vanity of very
dreams, I beseech Jove that he come against me with all his Lightnings; that
Pluto make me subject to all the torments of his Kingdom; that the Earth may
bring forth no other for me but wild beasts, brambles, and peysons; that the
sea reserve for my sufferings all his Abysses, and finally, that the air,
uniting all the worst influences of it, instead of affording me breath, may
stifle me.

Believe Oaths, presently replied the Infanta! He that has an heart so impious
that it can betray an Innocent, will also have that confidence to deny his
treason. Wicked man, thy deceits are too sensible, which thou have contrived to
deceive me anew. But I will confound thee. I will that thy temerity shall be
lost amidst thy own Answers. What have thou done with my Sister? Why wentst
thou with her? Why have thou cousened her? Infanta (answered Oleandro) I know
not what thing Deceit is. The Princess your Sister, betraying her self, has
deceived me, and that very same day just that she made me part from Tesset, I
by an accident parted from her.

Here he related point by point the counterfeit Letter, his departure, the
company of an unknown Knight, how he came to know her, the words that passed,
the wound the Princess gave her self, and diverse other particulars: Which
being heard with a disdainefull laughter of the Infanta, she said to him:
Oleandro, dreams and fables find no belefe in the mind of a Lover, who hardly
can credit her eyes. Are you not satisfied to have tormented my innocence with
your works, that anew you would with words entice my soul from me? See how
perfidious, and how cruel thou art. Thou proposest things to me so far distant
from being and possibility, that I can never enforce my heart to believe them.
How? Thou receive a Letter and not distinguish the Characters! A Messenger
wakened you and you observed him not. A Knight accompanied you, and you knew
him not. The wounds, the thieves and thy other imaginations raise in me that
effect which the fragours of the waves of Nylus make, which deafen. Thou art
ungrateful, thou art a Traitor, thou art a wicked man, and therefore no
wonder thou should be a Liar. Besides, who is this that goes along with you a
Partaker of your misfortunes? What confidence, what engagement, what means
rendered thee a Companion so interessed, that she has a boldness, as it were,
to repose her self in thy bosom, and now, assured of thy protection, has
given her self over a prey to sleep?

This, replied Oleandro, is my Sister, and I would that you should understand
it from her very mouth. So speaking, he awakened Arnalta, saying to her: Come
Sister and reverence this Lady, whom my heart has elected for its Queen. Is
perhaps this, replied Arnalta, the Infanta of Numidia? Understanding it was the
same, she ran to kiss her hands. The Infanta drew them back to her, saying,
Excuse me, if Love and Jealousy take from me those actions of Courtesy, which
are owing to your merit. To day I should rejoice to be deceived, because I
might beguile my fear. I have business of some consequence with this, whom
you affirm to be your brother. I can neither answer, nor live if I see not the
end of this. Turning her self then to Oleandro, she said to him: I cannot deny
but that thy Lies carry a face of truth: But this time they shall not find
credit; I will yield to your assertion, that this is your Sister; But how will
you prove that performed which you have fabled of me? Innocence, readily
replied Oleandro, has not need of many proofs. Behold the Letter which the
Princess Arelida, your Sister, made use of to deceive me. Take notice of your
own Characters so well imitated, that I believe you your self would remain in
doubt that your hand had fashioned them unknown to your eyes and heart. Then
said the Infanta, Is Oleandro faithful? Then is he mine. O Gods, what thanks
can I ever render you, having restored me my Lover on better conditions then I
could desire or imagine?

She ran after to embrace him: neither the presence of Arnalta, nor that of
the other Knight could contain her in those tendernesses which are practiced
only among Lovers. Their kisses were centuplicated. Their Arms which as it
were strove with their hearts in expressing Affection, were not weary with
Embracing, as much as might be they endeavored to unite their bodies.

The heart not being able for joy to contain it self in the breast, issued out
of it in words kisses and tears. In sum, there was not a sense in them which
rejoiced not. These first violences of Affection being over-passed, they
excused themselves, he with the Knight, and she with Arnalta; they resolved
presently to depart thence, not to be over-taken by the night. The Knight told
them, that not far off there was an house where they need not desire welcome.
They took their way toward it. Olsandro entreated the Infanta to make the
tediousness and troubles of their journey, pleasant with some Relation, he
being desirous of the news that fell out in the Court after his departure with
the Princess. The Infanta with an eagerness encountering this occasion, thus
began her Story.

The History of the Infanta Ariama.
IT was two hours day when the Damsels of the Princess my Sister perceived,
that she was missing. More by their tears then words they acquainted my
father with it. At the notice of it, he became speechless. He afterward sent
without delay to the Ports, to learn whither she took her voyage, dispatching
every way soldiers on Horseback to stay her. He imagined she was gone with
you, the Guards of the Golden gate reporting your Departure with one Companion,
who by the Description they made could not but be my sister. When I knew it, I
was willing to die for grief, I said and did things which would have provoked
sense of Pity, even in things insensible. My Father hearing no tidings of her
could not be comforted, and removed some Months without sufferring himself to
be seen in public.

In that time the Prince his Brother returned from war, maintained always at
great charges abroad, because being cruel of nature, and a Lover of
innovation, my Father very willingly saw him not in the Kingdom. He was
scarce come, but he desired leave to depart for Cyprus, by Fame enflamed with
love to the Princess Dianea, who for Beauty was esteemed a new Venus. My Father
whom these Amors pleased not for Reasons of State, would not consent to him:
for many times their Offspring engage Parents to great Matters, and it is small
security to a Prince that many may pretend to the Government. My Uncle showed
himself not to care for this denial, especially because a few days before
the Nuptials of Dianea with the King of Armenia's youngest Son were there
published, He fixed his mind and thought on new objects. He esteemed the
Duchess of Corana worthy his affections. There he applied himself with such a
Passion, that he made all the Court admire him, seeing a Prince a Rival to
Mars, become suddenly a Tributary to Cupid. Many times an alteration into the
Extremes is Easy. My Father neither allowed of, nor withstood these Amors,
feigning himself blind in things perspicuous to all. The Duchess, (although
Ambition, and a desire to be beloved be connaturals to women) seemed strange
altogether and coy at it.

She had formerly engaged her heart to Doarte the Count of Nasace, a Knight,
who by the gentleness of his behavior, and the valor of his sword, had gained
himself the Affections of all. She truly had never applied her mind
thither, if my interest had not induced her. The seeing me so near to render
account to Nature of the pleasures I had stole from my marriage, made her fall
into a Resolution far from her opinion and genius. We two only could not
conceal, nor mature the birth with safety. There was need of many shadows to
darken so many eyes. The Count was made acquainted with my secrets; the
Duchess veiling the Necessity under an appearance of trust. He that was repleat
with good Nature and kindness, offered himself to serve me in all that which
was known to be able to exercise his devotion, and make trial of his heart.

These Motives enforced the Duchess to slight the Affections of the Prince. He
that took more fire out of these strangenesses, left not any means unattempted
to win her: Entreaties, Messengers, Letters and Presents came daily from him.
She neither with refusing, nor accepting all, endeavored to conquer
obstination with obstination. He continually besieged our lodgings, and the
Duchess was many times constrained to talk to him with affection in despite
of her will, to keep him at distance from us. He often times having required my
assistance, I evermore with greater earnestness dissuaded him from it. I made
him see how much he deceived himself, that pretended love from her that loved
not, or from her that would not love. That there was no force that had power to
bow our affections: The divinity of our mind not to be liable to violence; The
heart of a Woman to be moved like the Primum Mobile, only by it self, with a
Motion contrary to others. The Merit of that man to be undervalued which
deserving to be beloved without love, loves without being beloved. That Prayers
and Submissions beget not love, but foment Ambition in Women, who disdain the
poorness of that spirit which cannot despise, being despised. They account
him unworthy of affection, that cannot resent injuries.

These notwithstanding were considerations which made him despair, but eased
him not of his love. Constant in his Resolutions he tried all ways. To this
end he employed all the Damsels of the Court, which he daily by entreaties and
gifts won him. They were all engaged to serve him, gained by so many
kindnesses, that they durst not contradict him. The hope of the Princess
Favor prevails much more in them, (and the greater part of servants are so)
then the duty of their place and faith. In particular, he had obtained the good
will of Therasia, of blood less then ordinary, a Damsel belonging to the
Duchess: but one that had gained by the Merits of a singular beauty, and with
an assiduous applying her self to her Ladies service that place. This in such
a wise possessed the mind of the Duchess, that she held her worthy to know
my secrets, neglecting all others that waited on me. She would first have
believed the heavens corruptible, then this heart, to which without doubt she
had given more trust then she did to her own.

To this the Prince applied his mind; foreseeing that to tempt her those
ways, whereby he prevailed upon others, would be in vain, he won her with a
new stratagem. With so much cunning he feigned himself in love with her, that
she so easily believed him in it, that he needed not enforce himself farther
to make her understand it. The Title of fair, that was attributed by all, made
her grow proud, and presage she should cast her Lady out of the Princes
affection, more especially because she knew she was engaged in another love,
and would not, nor could not please him. The Prince one day espying her in the
Garden, when she was alone, took hold of the oceasion, and thus began to speak
to her.

Fair Lady, I should not deserve your affection by showing my self
inconstant. But I should be neither a Man, nor Prince, if I knew not how to
slight, where I am despised. Your Beauty were ordinary if it had not the power
to subject to you the glories of others. I have loved the Duchess, I confess
it, nor can I deny it, you may have reason to suspect me false in my second
loves, when you have found me inconstant in my first. Now I so excessively
affect you, that I believe I should lose my self, imagining me to be without
you. Argue then what the ardour of that heart must be which knew how to love
even one that did not deserve love. He that can burn in Frost, what will he do
in fire? You have not reason to refuse me. I am a Prince, and brother to the
King. Although these hands sway not the Scepter, they deserve it: and it is the
glory of virtue to be undervalued by Fortune. You cannot aspire to an higher
greatness: nor your beauty receive a larger Adoration, then that of an heart
that knows it self superior to all things. The Dutchesses Refusals ought not
to provoke yours. The Sun is not in fault, though some blaspheme and despise
it, much less does it lose the splendour of its Beams, because Batts and
Howlets abhor the light of it. The Gods peradventure will punish some Crime
of hers, by rendering her a Contemner of the favors of Destiny. They corrupt
the judgments of those, for whom they prepare punishment. I should say more,
if the Divinity of your Beauties could receive a Commotion from words. It
suffices, that you know I love you. A soul as fair as your face knows as
well to correspond to affection, as it to make it self beloved. I add no
more, because I desire you may love my Affection, not my Voice; Who entreats
either demerits or Distrusts. But your gentleness secures me both from the one
and the other.

Here the Prince my Uncle stopped, fixing his eyes on her, who had loved him
before then, if she had not accused so ambitious an Affection of rashness, or
if he before had discovered to her the least sign of his. Therasia, imitating
the usual Customs of women, to cloth their Desires with Dissimulation,
altering her countenance with a feigned blush, conterfeiting a mixture of joy
and sorrow, after a short silence, thus answered:

Prince, I cannot deny but that I believe you love me: For notwithstanding that
there are not in me conditions to deserve your Affection, I have for all that
an ambition to wish it. Impossibility has not a difficulty for those that
earnestly covet it. I can much less say I love you not, since in my
countenance you may read the Affections of my heart. It is our duty to love our
Princes; and it is a stupidity not to correspond to those that love us. But for
all that, that I infinitely love you, I cannot but put you in mind of those
things in the which the affection I bear you, obliges me, although they may
prejudice me. You are Prince, and if the Laws of desert were not regulated by
those of Fortune should be King. To submit then to Nuptials so inferior to
your birth, I know not what it may be thought on by the world, or how endured
by your self. As I have Moderation to content my self with my own Fortune, I
should not so have patience for the Precipices of your forsaking me. If you
love me Prince, do not with exalting me expose me more to the Lightnings. It
serves for a glory to deserve Entreaties from him, who should not know how to
beseech meriting by the slightest signs from him to be obeyed. Now I will
believe the adulations of Lovers true, since my beauties, though something
less then ordinary, have been privileged by your election and commendation.
But may it please your Highness to know, I have no will, that shall not be
subordinate to your Commands. And that I fear not infelicity, so it may be
accompanied by your desires, and by your appointments. Therasia sealed up her
answer with a deep courtsey. The Prince receiving heat from these repulses that
invited him, after some Reply he promised her marriage, and expressed a great
earnestness to get out of her the causes which had occasioned the Duchess
refusals. Therasia, willing to gain her self an higher place in the Princes
affection, made use of infidelity to authenticate her faith; She recounted to
him the Amors of the Duchess with the Count of Nasaos, with all those
particulars that might render true her design; Yet she made no mention of me,
persuaded, I know not, whether by fear or by affection. The Prince, joyful to
have accomplished his ends, with diverse gifts (among others a Jewel of pearl,
in the which all the Gods were wrought) dismissed her. My Uncle persuaded
himself he could not easier beguile the heart of Therasia than by enterposing
the duties to her. He thought she could take no suspicion of treachery whilst
she had the Gods witnesses.

She returned in that time to our Lodgings, when I was half dead, oppressed by
the pains of Childbirth. When I had remained about an hour in the hands of
death, I was delivered of a daughter, which increased my afflictions. It was so
like you, that to deny it yours were to strive against the judgment of all
eyes. I had scarce time to look on it but it was taken from me, the Duchess
fearing the crying of it would discover my errors. I had no power to oppose my
self, for being overcome by weakness, I had no force left me but in
lamentation. It was took away by a Gentleman of the Court, believing it a child
of one of my Damsels. The Count not being willing, in a business of such
consequence, to trust to the faith of any other. My Father and the Physicians
were deceived in the knowledge of my disease, whereupon there were not any that
suspected. In a few days I mended, filling the Court with comfort that sighed
for my recovery.

In the mean while the Prince my Uncle visiting daily the retirings of
Therasia, though he yet counterfeited with the Duchess, put me into some
fear. But on the other side he had the praises which Therasia bestowed upon
the merits of the Prince, though she had formerly been wont to blame his
insolency. The signs of her mind to perceive her cold in her service to her
Lady, and full of disdain and pride to other Ladies of the Court confirmed me.
All motives that enforced me to observe her when she was alone in her Chamber.
One day I perceived that she talked to a Picture all beset with Jewels; Her
words were all of affection, although they arrived not all distinctly to my
ear, and the Effigies of the Picture was suddenly known by me to be the
Princes my Uncles.

Upon that, with a violence forcing the doors, I came upon her before she had
time to lay by the Picture. Injuries accompanied the hastinesses of my
disdain, so much the more furious by how much the more reasonable. I snatched
it out of her hand with speeches as severe as could proceed from a mouth which
invenomed the words to render them more offensive. Her excuses were abundant,
attended on by so many tears, that in my doubts they made me more consused.
For she insisted always with invocating all the Deities of heaven, that she
had not told any thing of me. She said, she had done amiss not to do amiss.
That she could not help her Lady without injuring her self. Being elected by
the Prince for his Spouse, she could notbut obey him. Diverse things she said,
and if I would have permitted her had spoke of more. I found not a greater
alteration in my life. To be silent with hope that others will be so, is
difficult and dangerous. Therasia offended by my rebukes, and always under the
shadow of my anger, was not to be contained within her duty. I could not repose
trust in her whom I had injured, and in whose heart the favors of the
Duchess could find no fidelity. What chastisement ought not I to fear from
the King my Father, since (though mine were concealed) I had given assistance
and assent to the Amors of the Duchess.

My Father would not that the Riches of the Duchess should foment the spirits
of any to aspire to the disturbance of the Kingdom. He had many times
expressed himself to me, he would feign penetrate into the thought of the
Duchess, to know whither her heart aimed. He knew her of a Family that had
ever made the Kings jealous. Her Father for this purpose, under the species of
honor, was maintained out of the Kingdom, and mine accounted not himself
safe till he had heard news of his death. These considerations in such wise
possessed my mind, that a great part of the night was spent before I came out
of Therasia's Chamber. In this while the Duchess came in, and with a great
deal of alteration related to me, that the Prince, meeting with the Count,
that came to visit her, intending to assault him, was slain by him, with many
wounds in his breast, not giving him leave to use any imaginable defense, for
fear others should stir in his assistance.

The Prince informed by Therasia of the Counts walks, had waited many times to
murder him. I having been weak retarded this desire in him: for keeping my
bed, the Duchess with other Ladies, were necessitated to attend me. But I
being recovered he resolved to effect it, and it had succeeded if he had made
use of his hands before his tongue. The Count had hardly suffered the Prince to
call him Traitor, but knowing him by his voice he stuck his Iron in his
breast. My Uncle would have said I am slain, but the effects preceded his
words, for he said nothing but I am. The Count came presently to acquaint the
Duchess with this, and persuaded her to make ready to be gone, whilst he
would expect her until day at the shore in one of the strongest Vessels, not
having any thing to be his hinderance, the Ports and the Guards of the Sea
being committed to his custody.

This new Accident I perfected in my thoughts to make me maddish I gave my
self over to the aggravation of my miseries with so much senss, that I
imagined I felt all my past evils. Then (said I) shall I evermore be
tyrannized over by Fortune? Then to satiate the appetites of my sense, shall I
every day be unhappy? Then those many favors that I have received from chance,
in being a Princess of such a Kingdom, have done nothing but molest me!
Duchess, I will dye; with great reason it was said, that our felicity remains
in our hands, since by killing our selves we may make our selves happy. And
what hope can longer entertain me in life? A Lover, to whom I have given the
liberty of my heart, abandons me. A Sister, whom I loved equal to my self,
has betrayed me. A Father, in the tenderness of whose affections I can have
no desire but it will obtain its end, has been wronged by me in his
reputation and honor; and shall I live! Who counsels me to it loves me not;
who deserves to be tormented then may live. All things are determined with
life; and who lives not cannot at all languish.

The Duchess, although in a worse condition than I, did not leave to comfort
me. She told me despair was the last of evils, and that to do so was undecent
in all, but most blameable in them that should have greater hearts than
misfortunes; who will triumph over Fortune (she said) must let it run how it
please. Those ways are too base for a Princess that are even practiced by
Slaves. The greatness of your spirit should not submit to such ordinary
Paragons, which consists in sustaining ill encounters, not in flying them; show
the bravery of your mind in living in despite of Chance, A Lover has forsaken
you, because he was unworthy of you; You will find a thousand others of them
that will sigh for the favor of your looks; you ought to comfort your self,
thanking the Gods that an immodest sister has got from you an unfaithful
Lover. She could not do you a greater service than to remove far from you those
dangers which accompany a heart that deceives. Besides, you could not have
wished her a greater punishment than the fellowship of so perfidious a servant.
If you have trangressed against the satisfactions of your Father, the fault is
Loves, which easily renders all errors excusable. Will you then after you have
offended him in opinion (for Reputation, Honor, and Fame are for all things)
offend him also in sense, deprive him of a great part of himself, by being your
own murderer? You lament that you have offended him in an imaginary thing, and
will you redouble the injury, making him mad by killing your self? To go for
some time far from hence will be the best, now too when we have an honorable
invitation; We may retire our selves to your Aunt in Egypt, where with greater
security we may make our defenses. To trust to an angered Prince, though he be a
Father, is not a safe determination.

She added so many other reasons, and so many entreaties, that I, rather
overcome than persuaded, made ready for a departure. Therasia hearing of the
Princes death, and my resolution, seeing that to despair was the only remedy
for her miseries, stuck her self two or three times into the breast with a
Stiletto, without any body being able to prevent her. The Duchess, that knew
not the cause, had become distracted, but that I, briefly informing her, of
what was past, made her cast aside that pity, which truly so unhappy a chance
deserved. Opening Therasias Chamber door, I retired into my Lodgings, where
taking those Jewels which were of least weight and greatest price, arming me to
counterfeit my Sex, and the Duchess being apparelled like a Page, we went to
the Seaside; For there was nothing that hindered us.

There finding the Count, that stayed for us, we went aboard the best Galley of
the Kingdom, and doubling the Slaves we put the Oars to the water: whiles it
seemed that the sea with an un-before-seene tranquillity emulated the heaven. We
directed our voyage in the Atlanticks toward Egypt to the Queen my Aunt. Our
desire failed us, for being willing to shun a fleet of two hundred sail, we
went far into the sea, so that being surprised by a Tempest, it was not
possible for us to reach Land. Being tossed a fortnight by the waves and winds,
we were always in danger to be cast away. But the goodness of the Vessel,
and the strength of the Rowers brought us at last to shore in an Island
unknown, even to the Mariners themselves. We were in that state we could not
have continued longer, not only all things necessary for life, but also for a
voyage being spent. Our have to depart allowed us not time to make that
provision, which the Navigation of a sea inexorable to all things required.

Being disbarqued in the Island, whilst the Rowers made provision of Wood and
Water, we walked a little forward to seek out lodging. The incommodities of
our voyage made us desire to find an house to repose us in without trouble and
fear. In ascending a little hill we discovered some buildings, which, made in
form of a Palace, served also for a Fortress. We presently went thitherward,
where we were received with very great kindness. Two Ladies of a venerable Age
came to meet us, and with so many welcomes offered us Lodging, that we wanted
words to express so great Obligations. They were waited on by many Damzels, one
of the which supposing me a man, began to look on me with so much affection,
that I took no ordinary pleasure at it, telling the Count and Duchess of it
that they might hold their tongues; I applied my self to her with so much
love, that I persuaded my self she would grow mad. But afterward I repented
me of it, remembering me that I was not in the condition to cure her malady.
Though we endeavored to understand the quality and the name of the Island, we
could get no answer to purpose.

Supper time being come, my Favorite the Damsel found opportunity to say to
me: Fair Knight, these wicked women lay snares for your lives. Within a few
hours you will either be slain, or made a Prisoner. I that take compassion on
the beauty of your face, and the tenderness of your years, have thought it
expedient with danger to my self to release you from yours. They intend to set
before you meats mingled with Opium to seize on you with the more security. But
being retired to your appointed Lodgings, make use of this Preservative, which
shall preserve you from their treacheries. So saying, she gave me a little pot
full of a certain Antidote against sleepy poisons; Afterward added, Since I
adventure my life to do you this favor, I desire no other reward but your
love, which I would enjoy flying with you hence from places so impious. I then
grown extremely fearful promised her more than I could perform; protesting
an Obligation to her, not to be circumscribed by Ages. The meat came up, of
which I tasted so sparingly, that I even did nothing but talk. The Tables
being removed our Quarters were assigned us. We feigning our selves weary
presently bad goodnight to those that waited on us, and I revealed to the
Count and Duchess the Damzels secret; we took the Preservative with so much
fear of being surprised, that every little noise made us believe it was
Soldiers that should assault us. All the soporiferous poisons of the world
would not then have had the power to have made us sleep in that fear.

Half the night being past the Damzell came to call us, we followed her with
all possible secrecy, who through a private gate led us forth of the Palace.
There mounting upon four horses which were provided by the Damzell for that
purpose, we began our journey, riding apace: We would have taken the way to the
sea, but our Guide permitted us not, saying, that were to encounter dangers
instead of flying them: For all those shores were preyed upon by the owners of
that house, so impious and so cruel, that they rejoiced not in their Booties
unless they were defiled with blood. The remnant of that night, and almost all
the day after, we prosecuted our journey, perpetually molested by that Damzell
with so much earnestness as if she had perceived Enemies following us at hand.

I being no longer able to endure the weariness of riding, the night
approaching, would stay in a Village; the rather because the people there told
us the way was dangerous in the night time, especially being frequented by wild
beasts and thieves. Having rested me there a little, I entreated the Damzell
with much vehemence to recount to us the cruelty of that house, which (her
gentleness assisting) we had avoided. She after such a blush (as if her modesty
came forth with it, or rather as if with the purple of her face she meant to
cover the blackness of her heart) thus answered:

Sirs, If to excuse errors under the Pretext of love was not usual to all,
especially women; I should call that tongue rash, which should assume the
boldness to to mascherate the Dotages of the mind. But acknowledging my self
a Lover, I deserve all pardon. Love is pictured blind, because he makes
blind: And the falls of a blind body are to be borne withal, and
compassionated. I hardly fastened mine eyes on your Countenance (fair Knight)
but they felt the Chastisement for their rashness; it being not lawful,
without prejudice to the heart to penetrate into the Paradise of your Beauty.
Becoming a Lover, and knowing the unequalness of my Descent, I despaired of
the end. I betook me to Deceit, which triumphs many times over all things. To
persuade your departure, I feigned those things I said, the which contain no
other truth but that of my flames.

If you have ever had experience of the violences of affection, I hope you may
well bear with me. But if you have never felt the damages of it, believe me,
until your own experience shall bring you a certainty of it, I am persuaded
that this in your good disposition, will not be imputed as a fault to me;
because every thing is lawful to those that love. Besides, if there be any
due, it is your beauty that deserves punishment, which has been able to
compel the simplicity of my heart to deceit.

I was moved at one time by these words to Compassion and Anger. It vexed me to
have departed upon so uncivil terms from that house, where there was nothing
but Honors prepared for me. But this Damsels so very extreme affection, that
it merited pardon, pacified me: whereupon I thus answered her:

Lady, Whosoever has been a Lover can do no other but compassionate you. I
that have been in love, know how to excuse you: For the first thing that
pardons Lovers, is the intellect, and reason. It much afflicts me, that to
beguile us you have deceived your self, in bestowing your Affections on a
Person who can exchange nothing with you but affection. I would to heaven I
were in as good a Condition to correspond with you, as I am willing to pity
you. I am a Woman as you are, but more unhappy then you, because I have not
loved so as you. If I had inclined my thought to love a woman, I had escaped
the Assaults of Fortune. Comfort your self; for you may receive profit, if not
delight from your affection.

The Damsel recovered not at these words; for sorrow having deprived her of
her senses, rendered her insensible even to sorrow it self. After a while
coming to her self, she feigned she was well satisfied: whereupon I left her
in bed, whilst wanting rest, I desired with a little Repose to ease me after
these passed troubles. At our awaking in the Morning, we found that the Damsel
was gone. Being hopeless at the impossibility of her Affections, she will
have recourse to some new Resolution, of whom hitherto I have had no tidings.
We blaming the Deceits of so foolish a Wench went toward the Sea, to find out
our Galley. After much Travailes we were aflaulted by four Thieves. One of
them suddenly seized on the Duchess, carrying her so swiftly up some
certain Crages of the Mountains, that it was impossible for me to accompany
her with my sight. The others came and assaulted us, not thinking to find much
resistance in us, they being more in number. The Count unable to endure that
his eyes should assist to the loss of his heart, with three blows slew two of
them, and wounded the third, in such manner, that he could no longer defend
himself. Without delay, he went in search of his soul, stolen away by that
thief from him. I gave the wounded one his life, on condition he would guide
me to the Duchess. He promised me; but being mounted on Horseback, I having no
time to hinder him, precipitously betook himself to flight.

Remaining alone in some Passion, because the Night already had covered the
Heaven with extreme Darkness, I tired my voice in reiterating the names of
the Duchess and Count. The Caves moved to pity at my Callings, to case me of
labor, replied in many places, or rather the Air so many times struck wearied
with hearing me, to make me hold my peace, iterated often times what I said. I
had the chance to meet with some Shepherds, who with courtesies not frequently
practiced by great ones, made me envy their Genius, if not their Fortune. Four
days I continued among them with hope to hear News of the Count and
Duchess. One morning I departed from those Cottages, with an intent to go to
the Sea, and so to be transported into Egypt. I easily missed the way taught me
by the Shepherds, and have therefore wandered many days up and down these
Fields in danger of my life. Fortunate Errors, happy dangers, since they have
guided me to you, who are the End, whither my Troubles and my Travailes do
aspire.

Thus said, the Infanta Ariama, when they discovered the Palace where they
meant to sty. It was situated in a Plain, and ravished the eyes of Passengers,
no less by the Majesty then the beauty of it. The Architecture was Dorick, and
the outsides of fine Marble. It was encompassed round by an infinite number of
Cypressetrees, set in so good order, and so proportionately distant one from
another, that looked upon either directly or traversely, they could not
beiscerned in the least irregular. They of the Palace scarce perceived they
were come, but two Damsels in mourning habit, brought them a welcome from the
Lady of the House. They easily disposed themselves to receive it, when
necessity could not afford them other lodging, neither more near, nor more
commodious. With a large expression they thanked the Gallantry of that Lady,
who was willing to oblige them before she knew them, and followed the Damsels
unto the gates of the Court.

In their Entrance, at the first sight they were terrified: In the midst of it
was placed a Statue of Revenge. Yet was it not believed a Statue but by those
that could offend it without being offended. It was figured in the likeness of
an armed Woman, with a flame of fire upon her Helmet. In her right hand she
held a Dagger, and at her feet a Lion. It spoke not, withheld peradventure by
Scorn that kept her words in; or rather bindred by biting a finger of her left
hand. On the sides of the Hall all the most infelicious Loves of the world were
delineated. There was seen Pyramus and Thisbe, pierced with the same sword,
breathe out their souls; and the feigned blood which they shed, had the virtue
to beget true tears. Leander and Hero, the one destroyed by the waters of the
Sea, and the other by those of her eyes, in such wise deceived Oleandro and his
Companions, as if only then by chance they had been destinated to death. There
was also Medea, through Jasons inconstancy, grown so cruel to kill her
Children, having first, enforced by love, slain her brother. The poor Ariadne
complained on a Rock, tearing her hair, and beating her breast. Her
Lamentations arrived not to the ears of the beholders, carried far away by
the winds, or dispersed by the Waves: or rather by long exclaiming become
hoarse, she had not the strength left to make her self heard.

In brief, a thousand were the Objects which entertained in suspense the
strangers, when entreated by the Damsels, they ascended the stairs. At the top
of which, they were met by a Lady, who for being all attired in black, could
not be imagined any thing but night, with a black veil she held her eyes
covered, for being desirous to be thought night, she would not permit those two
Suns to be seen, which she carried in her eyes. After she had received and
answered their salutation, she said: I am sorry, O Sirs, you are come to
funerallize your selves in the miseries of this House. The Necessity that
constraines you to stay here, pleads it self my Excuse. I wish only I knew
your first Fortunes, that I might serve you conformably to the Merit of your
presence.

Here taking Ariama and Arnalta by the hand, she led them into other Chambers,
requesting from them the Information of the State of those Knights of their
condition, and of their births. Although the Infanta Ariama concealed her self
she was well known by the Lady of the House, who leaving her to rest her
self, went from her to command preparations for Supper. The time being come,
they were called to it. The entertainment was handsome, but not stately. The
strangers eat little, or weary of travailing, or sadded by the continual
lamentation of that Lady, who seasoned the meats with her tears.

When Supper was ended, at a sign she gave, the Damsels brought forth some
glass Bottles, with a certain Drink in them, which she said. would enlighten
the heart. All of them tasted of them. Oleandro in particular drank more of it
then the others, adding; That those sadnesses had much need of Preservatives.
Afterward turning to the Lady of the house, he said, Madam, the Gods have made
contraries to be to all things. There are Antidotes, and the poisons: Bees have
stings, and honey; whereupon there is not any thing in the world, but by the
reason of Contraries has a Remedy. Such I hope your Evil may be. If the
Affection of an heart, and the strength of a sword can prevail with you, to
lay aside this sorrow; be merry, for I offer my self to serve you. That
Countenance which is a Heaven of Beauty, deserves not a perpetual night.
Tears should not be permitted to those eyes, which can make happy with their
looks. Here Oleandro was silet, and the Lady thus answered:

Knight, I would to Heaven I had never spoke. From the tongue and heart, my
infelicities have had Original. But now there is no longer need to conceal
them Infanta Ariama, and you Prince Oleandro, you are dead, having drunk poison
in the last Bottle. I grieve I was not able to sacrifice you with a swod to
Revenge. I rejoice, notwithstanding that Fortune has delivered you together
into my hands. I can no longer suppose my self unhappy, since I have had this
part of felicity, to see I am revenged before I dye. You shall not depart
triumphant from the miseries of the Princess Arelida. I am the very same, who
lived till now, only to kill you. Oleandro, although he began to feel the
effects of the drink, provoked by the out-ragies, which are begot in a breast,
offended more for the harms of others, then his own Danger, said to her:

Guilty woman, Then because I would not condescend to the dishonest of your
Desires, have thou condemned me to death? Then will thou take away my life,
because I have preserved thy Reputation and Honor. From so malign a mind
could not proceed but execrable Effects. Who is impudent is cruel: and who
betraies their honesty to please their sense, will much less pardon the
innocence of those that will not be blemished with uncleanenesses. Did it not
satisfy thee (perfidious one) to have with thy deceits, contrived Miseries
against my happiness, that also thou have intended to heap thy Barbarismes on
this body, a miserable Remains of the Inconstancies of Fortune. Perfidious,
wicked, Sacrilegious, what Reward, what Hope, what Madness, makes thee
covetous of my blood; the more undeserving the Furies of thy wickedness, by
reason it has no faults which can convince it of realty? But if this life
ought to be sacrificed to the satisfactions of thy Scorn, why do you not
pardon those who in the very Fantasmes of night have not thought to offend you.
In what has your Sister trespassed, and mine, with this poor Knight, who is
designed to die, only because he is my Companion. Poor Oleandro! so
surrounded with unhappinesses, that even the guiltless suffer with me. My
Miseries are contagious, since they trench on those that keep me company. The
Gods be praised, that hereafter my life cannot infelicitate any. People of
Morocco here your hopes determine: your Prince is compelled to dye; and so much
the more discontented, by reason he falls by the hand of a woman, and she
immodest.

The Knight, that until now was unknown, at these words cried out; Oh Gods!
What allow you me to see in the last day of my life! I should say I dyed
happily, dying in the presence of my Prince, if he then might have continued
living. What Marvailes, what Portents does Destiny represent me? It Is true,
the sight of a Prince so much beloved, deserved not to be gained without the
loss of my life. But wherefore fortune have thou been willing to funerallize
to me these sweetnesses, I seeing him dye before I can sufficiently embrace
him. So saying, he made himself known to Oleandro to be Felide, the Count of
Olano his Subject; he that with imminent hazard to his own life, had delivered
him from the Treacheries of those who had usurped his Crown.

This interview redoubled their afflictions, so that in despite of the bravery
of their hearts, the tears ran from their eyes: which would not defraud
Death of sorrows owed to so worthy Personages. Oleandro's virtue remaining
hitherto invincible against all Accidents, had not sufferance against the force
of Destiny, which to render death more noisome to him, multiplied those Objects
that were able to disquiet him. There was nothing heard but sighs, weepings
and sobs. Not an Object to be looked on, but presented sorrow. All was horror,
and every body carried fear and death in their Countenances. There was not a
face but it was spread with a paleness, so mortal, that it augmented
Affliction in the eyes of all. Oleandro at length in despite of grief, said
to the Count;

Friend, it pierces my soul, that it was Fortunes Will to communicate to you
my miseries, becaused see you too much interessed in them through your
Affection to me. The Gods reward you for it. I am so unhappy that I cannot as
much as suffer for you. The Horrors of Death increase upon me, seeing I must
die, without being able to recompense the attestations of your Faith. If the
Laws of Friendship and Obligation preserve their authority even among Spirits,
I hope you shall not have occasion to repent your self for having loved me.

He would have added more, but perceiving the Infanta began to show signs of
the venomnesse of the poison, he ran to embrace her, enstrengthening himself
to receive that soul which by the right of Love he supposed belonged to him.
He was scarce come to her, when he saw, she had lost her senses, become cold
and immovable as a stone, by the violence of the poison. No longer retaining
patience to resist the sense of such a loss, he began to cry out in such a
manner, as if his soul remained only in his Voice. Peradventure by those
Exclamations he persuaded himself he should the easilies move the Fates to
pity: or rather requiring a present Remedy to the Malignity of the ill that
could not permit of delay, it was imagined he exalted his voice the looner to
make the Gods know the Necessity of their succor. Perceiving that Vows,
Prayers, and Lamentations, brought nothing but an augmentation to his sorrow,
and that the last gasp of his life was afflicted by the Death of her, without
whom he should be unwilling to live, in some part to disburt^en his passion, he
said: Most unhappy Oleandro! who have undergone Death a thousand times before
thou could die. Ariama, I follow thee; I follow thee Ariama. It is not just
that thou should go alone among the Ghosts, without thy beloved Oleandro for
thy gaide. I will take order that the sword shall prevent the malignity of the
Poison: but it is not fitting that those Arms which were prepared for thy
Defense should offend me. But I should not at least deprive thy Exequies of my
Tears. Thou would be too unhappy, dying without being mourned for by him
that loves thee.

His Tongue could no longer obey his Heart, when the Drink exercising its
force, prevailed upon all his senses. Yet with his Eyes he celebrated his last
Duties to her, who found Death in nothing so painful, as by seeing him near
to overtake her. He continually held his eyes open, as if he would not permit
that her Funerals should be solemnized without Lights. Lastly, they both showed
Signs that they were arrived to that point, which by Nature is made common to
all.

This Spectacle had hardly given notice to the Damsells of this Tragedy, but
they were heard to strike the Air with an infinity of shreeks. With sighs
and Lamentations they contended to pay Tribut to the Death of their Lady. They
knew not how to Honor so unexpected Exequies, but with sudden Commotions of
the heart. It seemed that with an affectionate Emulation they agreed by turns
to shower forth Tears. Many fearing they might by others be exceeded in
weeping, tore their Hairs. Others, accusing their hearts of an over-hardnesse
at so miserable a chance, struck their Breasts, as if they meant to break them;
peradventure, believing their Hands had more power then their Eyes. They had
given no intermission to these so pitiful, and so unprofitable duties to the
Dead, if the presence of some Knights, (who at these so sorrowful outcries ran
in) had not interrupted their Lamentations. These having received Information
of what was befalne, drew near to exercise that Piety to the Carcasses, that
was not allowed them to practice with the living.

The End of the Second Book.
DIANEA.
The Third Book.
AT the beginning of the new year some strange signs were seen in Cyprus,
which made them suspect, if not fear, the approaching evil. A blazing star,
which was discovered in heaven an hour before the Sun, astonished the eyes,
and the Judgments of all. The simpler sort believed it a Prodigy that
foretold the ruin of the Kingdom. The Religious called it a tongue of the
Gods, with which they advertised men to forsake their Crimes. The Soldiers
said it could foretell nothing but blood and slaughter. The Courtiers which
flatter the Genius of Princes even in things impossible, affirmed it declared
the death of the Enemies to the Crown. The impious and malignant figuring for
truth what they desired, believed it portended the destruction of the Prince,
and mutation of the Empire.

King Vassileo, that knew it was unfit altogether to slight these Characters of
heaven, looked upon it with some fear, although with his tongue he expressed
contrary opinions of it He very well knew that the fear of remote dangers in a
Prince serves as a fomentation to the wicked. He said it was a condense vapor
of the earth, upon which the Sun had employed the utmost of his force. That he
gloried that with new lights the heaven applanded the felicity of his State:
and that if it came to foretell any thing of Grandeur he could not deny it,
seeing Dianeas Nuptials grew near. Thus he endeavored to deceive the minds of
others, whilst his own heart presaged the misfortunes which hung over his
Kingdom. The sudden falling of his Statue without being touched increased his
terror. It remained nevertheless entire, though being placed on high, it was
imagined it could not have fallen without being broken into a thousand pieces.
There were many heads of dead people found in his Garden, it is not to be
guessed whence they should be brought. The Statue of the first King of Cyprus
was seen to sweat and tremble, as if it meant to depart from the place where
it stood.

King Vassileo affrighted by these sad Omens, although he feigned to dissemble
it, with an incessant diligence notwithstanding he endeavored to procure all
means of defense for his Kingdom. He surveyed all the Fortifications, added
new soldiers to increase their strength, received strangers into pay, recalled
all that were banished under the penalty of losing a certain contribution; and
lastly omitted not any diligence to avoid those dangers which the Arms of his
enemies threatened him with. All this verily was done with much ease, because
the public Treasury was grown infinitely rich by the peace of many years.
And now to spend it was esteemed more than necessary, since money cannot be
laid forth more worthily than for the defense of the Country, and liberty.

To the Duke of Cerine he committed his seaforces, a man of a known fidelity,
and of no ordinary valor, of Customs so severe, and of so proud a behavior,
that he had rendered himself odious to the Court. The King loved him, either
because he knew he was obliged to him by trialls of his experience, or through
some unknown violence of his Genius. All the ill offices of the Baron of
Salandra, who enjoyed a prime place in the affections of his Majesty, were not
sufficient to retard him from that honor. The Land-Militia recerved command
from the Duke of Filena So the King would, although all the Council showed
some dislike of it; not for his valor, which was above comparison, but because
they imagined that lost to their pretentions, which was bestowed upon the
merits of others. The wisdom of his Majesty who would not confide so much in
those subjects in whom he knew the defects of ambition, and inexperience fixed
upon him, whose alliance he loved no less than his virtue. He delayed the
Nuptials he had designed for Dianea until suspicions and jealousies had
rendered him master of himself. He would not add pretenses to those that hated
him, and he would by his Daughter keep alive the affections of those that loved
him, out of hope only to attain her in marriage.

Ere he suffered him to depart to his Charge, after Commissions which contained
an authority absolute above all the Kingdom, he said to him: Duke, we have
committed the Kingdom of Cyprus to the valor of your sword, ascertained to
see in your virtue our defense, and your glory. To attempt to speak any thing
to inanimate, you were to do injury to my election, and your merit. Know only
that our interests are common, and that yours shall be the Palms of victory,
and the spoils of the enemy. The Duke of Filena bowed himself in a most
humble reverence, preparing to answer, which was not consented to by the King,
whilst others of the Council coming in they fell into a Consultation of War.

All things necessary being provided the Duke went into the field; being
unwilling that the City should be troubled with Soldiers, or that they should
be effeminated by the ease of the City. He quartered his Army into all the
Ports of the Island the most exposed to invasion, reserving only a great number
of it to aid those that should be distressed, when an enemy should attempt to
land. He used all diligence to secure the weakest places, with so much
follicitude, as if he were the most obliged to obey; when darkness dismissed
the Pioneers and Soldiers from work, he (under the species of walking)
observed all the Sentinels, and took notice of all advantages that might secure
him from the surprises of his enemies. One Evening, being remote from his Tent,
whilst he was viewing the shore, he perceived himself called upon by a voice
not well distinguished by him. Suddenly turning himself, suspecting a spectre,
he discovered at his feet (by the favor of the light of the moon, which
peradventure more than usual was prodigal of her beams, as inquisitive after
those wonders) the Princess of Nigrepont, whom he many times had bemoaned as
dead.

Are you (said the Duke) the Princess of Nigrepont my Lady, or some aereal
spirit that would deceive me under a counterfeit likeness? I am neither a
spirit, nor your Lady, replied Floridea, who although the unfortunate Princess
of Nigrepont, and abandoned by all assistances of Fortune, have been unwilling
to dye without seeing you. The Duke without the least delay ran with open Arms
to embrace her: But she putting him back, said: Viralto (for so the Duke of
Filena was called) I ought not to receive these Civilities before I have
assurance you are mine. You are the designed Husband for Dianea, and successor
to the Crown of Cyprus, as Fame gives forth. If this be true I will not oppose
your desires. I should love you but a little, if for my simple satisfaction I
should attempt to retard your greatness. From you I beseech no more but that I
may not be deceived. If Destiny will not you shall be mine, I will accommodate
my mind to serve you, as I have formerly applied my heart to love you.

Neither Cyprus, nor Dianea (replied the Duke) have beauties, or greatnesses
that can alienate me from my self. I was borne yours, and so I choose to dye.
I beseech you (O Princess) mortisie not the content that I receive by seeing
you restored to the world, and to the estimation of all, since ever in my heart
and thought I have preserved you alive. A Lover should not give credit to Fame,
which is but an Echo of the most vulgar untruths. There is no accident that
can stir the constancy of that mind which can easier be broken than bowed.

If this be true (replied Floridea) let us fly this Heaven which nourishes so
malignant influences. I cannot believe you mine whilst I see you so near
those Objects which (though they cannot conquer your constancy) torment me
nevertheless with a jealousy. To interpose a delay will but be to augment my
diffidence, or to accuse you of inconstancy. Viralto added; Princess, I shall
be ready to serve you when I shall have command over my own will. King Vassileo
has committed these Armies to my trust. To abandon them without an occasion
would cast upon me a note of infamy, and name of a Traitor. You shall ever
have sovereignty over all things that depend on me. For the present my word is
given, and I have obliged my self. If the fear I had of infamy withheld me
not, I should have first preferred that supplication. Know therefore that I
have no greater desire, and that I would eagerly endeavor (my Reputation
safe) to break all delays. Concerning your fears, they shall be secured by
the testimony of your own eyes, which shall be witnesses of all my Actions.
Floridea changed color, and after a short silence answered: You deceive me,
and doubly deceive me, since you deny to do so. Love is a pretense that
overcomes all things. Excuses become Reasons when they are attired under the
mantle of Affection. But how can I imagine you mine when you confess your
self obliged to others? If that engagement be prevalent, whoever has bound
you to it may as well oblige you not to love me. What can you answer me to
this? But that Obligation is not valuable, because affecting me, all your
employments have dependency upon my will, so that it was not in your power to
engage your self to the service of another, being mine. But pretenses are not
wanting to justify your departure; your Kingdom of Nigrepont (for so it ought
to be called) groans for your absence; your own Interests ought to be
preferred to those of others. A Princess disinheritated implores your aid;
this by the Obligation of Knighthood you should not refuse me. Besides, what
does King Vassileo lose by your departure? The enemy is far off, and
peradventure but imaginary. The Militia has other Chiefetaines, and near the
Metropolis, who may every moment receive assistance from his Majesty. Our
danger contrary wise would be great: The King has designed you the Husband to
Dianea; if you refuse behold the hatred of a Prince, which is always mortal.
Kings institute Laws of their wills, and will what they will. He that attempts
to oppose their desires, may also endeavor to fix the motion of the Heavens.
Much more how will his Daughter endure you slighting her, whom she affects more
than her self? What hindrances soever you excuse your self on, you very well
know how to remove. An impossibility has not prescription in the mind of
Grandees which prosecutes the execution of that which falls not under reason.
You will be enforced to accept of her, and I to dye perceiving my self
deceived. But I very well foresee my misery. That affection is weak which
suffers it self to be overcome by ambition, and a conceit of what others may
judge of it. That (in Princes) is united with honor which meets with their
satisfaction. He loves not that is too scrupulous. You care not for me, and
perhaps upon my ruins you have raised your hopes. You are willing to abide in
Cyprus to have occasion to be compelled to betray me.

Here Floridea ended, giving way to her tears, which fell in such abundance
that a lesser virtue than that of Viralto had suffered it self to be overcome.
He not withstanding enforced himself to persuade her, saying; You make me
(Princess) suspicious of your affection whilst you seem careless of my
honor. And what will you find to love in me, when by all tongues you shall
hear me reported infamous? Is it possible for you so to humble your mind as to
look upon me, endure me, and love me for a Traitor? If you do this to assure
my loyalty, you have no reason for it, having received continually proofs of
my fidelity. How can you satisfy your self that I should affect you, if I
know not how to love my Prince? You would have good occasion to suspect
inconstancy in my heart, seeing me treacherous to him who has trusted me with
a Kingdom? Who deceives his Prince that is able by force to punish his
falseness, may much more easily abuse the innocence of a maid, who has nothing
but tears to repulse her injuries. He that loves without reason makes no
estimation of his honor: Contrariwise, he that has placed his affections on a
Princess ought (above others) to be zealous of his Reputation, by reason
honor is more necessary in a Prince than others. What avails it me that King
Vassileo loses nothing, if I by my departure endanger my all? Whoever pretends
that love serves as a shield against all things, has perhaps an intention to
counterfeit himself enamoured only to endeavor unworthy things. Excuse me
(Princess) whilst my Reputation is treated of, I ought not love you, nor obey
you, you shall perceive in the residue of all my undertakings, that neither the
authority of the King, nor all the force of the world shall have power to
oblige me to any other affection but yours. When I am free from his Majestles
employments I will be yours. Exercise your experimented gentleness of your
affections in loving me for this once in excusing me.

These reasons did not at all appease the passions of Floridea, who rather
casting her self at the Dukes feet aggravated the perpetuity of her miseries,
making use of all those Arts affection could administer. She said: Obstinate
Fortune, that do impoverish me in conquests, and seasonest the felicities
with so much bitterness, that thou daily compellest me to desire to be more
unhappy. To see you and behold you so near me was my highest desire, now that
possession and sight becomes my greater torment. Cruel One, is it possible, is
it possible that these prayers should not persuade you, these sighs move you,
that these tears should not mollify you? Unfortunate Florsdea! unable to
prevail; no, not with weeping! She said more, but was constrained to silence
the Dukes Guard approaching, who brought him Orders from his Majesty to draw up
to the Port of Cethina with the Army to receive Dorcene King of the Thracians,
who as a Friend came to King Vassileo. He was astonished at this news, knowing
the perfidiousness of that Nation; wherefore making the Princess to retire into
a secure place, who forbore not her tears and lamentations, he applied
himself to the ordering of the Militia to make a pompous show of the Forces of
the Kingdom, and to be ready for defense if the Thracians should attempt any
novelty.

This while Diaspe reposing between the Arms of Dianea, in a short time
recovered his health. There is not a more profitable medicine for Lovers, than
the presence of the beloved Object. He resolved to depart thence with Prodirto,
who was also cured; Dianea being called thence by her Father against the
arrival of the Thracian. One morning betimes, ere the Sun could look upon
their Action, they issued out of the Grott, with an intention to come to the
Court at the same time as the King of Thrace. Diaspe could not think of his
Arrival without the oppression of his heart. His memory represented to him
those unhappy objects which had formerly reduced him near to desperation. He
knew the Thracians impious in their actions and name; and King Vassileo too
easy to believe all things. To divert himself from these thoughts, he
beseeched the Duke to disclose to him his birth, and to relate some part of his
adventures to him; what fortune had brought him into that Kingdom, and what
accident had guided him into those Recesses, which he imagined concealed from
the eyes of heaven it self.

I have (replied Prodirto) so obscure a name, and am of so mean a birth, that
it will not concern you to know, and I blush to relate. My Genius enclining to
Arms, made me inquisitive after the greatest Wars in the World, I have been
one in them with little benefit to my self, although with much danger. All
Victories were referred to the Commanders in chief, and the valor of a poor
Soldier, that hazards his life a thousand times, can hardly arrive to such a
stipend as will serve to maintain life with. I have endeavored to merit the
favor of the chief, with exposing my self to all dangers, but it succeeded
not. Grown void of hope I have many times been ready to despair. If Valor
has not the protection of favor or Gold, it wants the mark of desert.
Promised rewards serve to no other end but to promote Envy. My most flourishing
years being spent, despairing to attain an higher preferment, I assayed with
a friend of mine to steal away the Princess of Colchos. The Enterprise
succeeded fortunately. Figuring (with this Prize) great Conquests in my
imagination. I imbarqued for the Baleares Islands, where I promised my self a
secure Retreat. My ill Fortune, that accompanied me in the same Vessel, made
me cast ashore by a tempest at sea in this Island, where the Princess was
stolen from me by my friend, with whom I had trusted her. Whilst with
curiosity I sought after their flight, I saw her hid among these Rocks, where
you first challenged me to the combat. The Fall I then had cast me into so
great a swoon, that (coming to my self) if my blood had not assured me of it,
I should have thought my self deceived by adreame. I found my self in so ill
a condition (thanks to your Valor) that if I had not been succored by the
Piety of some Mariners, I had been without any hope of my life. As soon as my
wounds allowed me any motion, I fixed my mind upon finding the Princess,
without whom my poverty gave me not leisure to live in quiet. I came to the
foot of the Mountain, where finding that Entrance, I presently conceited that
there my traitorous Friend concealed his Theft. I was scarce entered into the
Court, but you pressing on me, that befell me which you know. This in substance
is the whole of my life. I beseech your generousnesse, that has so much
respected the recovery of my health, to discover to me to whose hands I am
obliged for my life. They cannot surely but be royal ones, because only noble
minds know how to oblige enemies (though I am not such) with benefits.

The History of Diaspe and his Brother.
I (replied Diaspe) am Prince of Creet, though in this Kingdom not known but
for a Knight belonging to King Vassileo. Three years since I returned from
Foreign Wars to the Court to comfort the age of my Father, who bemoaned my
absence. Thither three Palestine Merchants chanced to come with three Pictures
of the most beautiful Princesses of this Age. They were the Princess of
Nigrepont, her of Fea^ia, and she of Cyprus. Come to Court, they presented them
(in gift) to my mother, who caused them to be exposed to the sight of all. They
were laden with the commendations of the beholders, and the envy of all the
women. Particularly Dianea could not be beheld but with a prejudice to the
Fairest. All hearts at that sight rebelled from the Vassalage to any other
beauty. It provoked flames even in the most cold breasts, in whom Age had
consumed heat.

My Brother and I at the first sight gave up our Souls to her. We stood
unremoved, contemplating it with that anxiety as Northern Nations gaze upon the
Sun after a most long night. We continued diverse days to sacrifice to it our
eyes, and sighs; as if that Picture had been the Idol of our Pleasures. We
remained always fixed looking upon it; but when we were interrupted by others,
who came to feed their eyes upon those marvelous Beauties, which though but
counterfeit had the power to torment minds. I regan to look upon my brother
with some disdain, not being able to endure Rivalls in a Picture. He who had a
Genius not to be subjected to fear, finding an opportunity took down the
Picture of Dianea to carry it to his Lodgings. I came accidentally just upon
the time as he delivered it to one of his. I grew suddenly changed, and
(inflamed by Love) injured him in so high a manner that he was enforced to lay
hand on his sword. I that perceived so much boldness in a younger brother, my
anger preventing all discourse, tried my utmost force to have slain him. He
defended himself with so great courage, that I was sometimes in danger to be
killed.

The noise and confusion carried the voices to the King and Queen, who both
running forth at this uproare, made us cast away our Arms, and embrace,
although neither of us laid aside his anger. The occasion of this contention
being understood, the King reprehended me with so severe a fashion, that I had
not the confidence to look him on the face. Dianea's Picture remained in my
mothers hands, who professed she would never part with it to any body.

I passed away some days with so much impatiency, that I thought my self
unable to live them. I should have flowne to have seen the Original of that
Picture which afflicted my memory, if the fear of my Father, the season
contrary, and the enmity between the Crowns had not been interposed to my
desires. The same anxietie tortured the heart of my brother, who as the younger
could much less withstand amorous assaults which work with the greater
violence where they find more heat. I avoided the occasion of meeting him,
because my eyes could not endure him. Brethrens enmities are ever mortal. He,
fomented by the Adulation of those that served him, flung forth some words of
slighting, which agmented my disdain. My Fathers Age, which inclined to the
Grave, nevertheless permitted me not that I should precipitate my hopes. And
although I percived my mother ready to provoke him, either for seeing me
disobedient, or that it is a property of that Sex to love the worse, I cared
not for it. Finally, women are women; as prone to hatreds as they are to Love.

My brothers servants were frustrated of hopes, looking on me as Successor to
the Crown. There is none that dares thunder against heaven which can retort
thunder. They certified me from time to time of all his actions, whereupon he
could hardly find secrecy in his own thoughts. By these I was one morning
advertized that he with Dianea's Picture was departed from Creete. I followed
him with an evil intent, conceiting that my mother had given it him, or that
he had stolen it. Two miles out of the City I overtooke him. He having eyes
impatient of not beholding that Object which felicitated his heart, made a
Favorite of his to carry the Picture. I presently accused him of sawciness,
whilst in despite of one whom he should reverence as Heir to the Kingdom he
bore from him that Jewel. I added other words of slighting him and disdain;
calling him many times unworthy to fix a look on that Picture, which ought not
to be viewed by a rash man, by one disobedient to his Father, his Prince, and
his Brother.

I stayed for no answer, but stretched forth my hand to lay hold on the
Picture. He who carried it, who was the Count of Sfour, intending by that act
to merit superlativelie the affection of my Brother, would not let me take it.
I drew my sword, and with two blows made him see that I knew how to make my
self obeyed more by my hands than my tongue. My brother, who saw the Count
wounded, and the Picture lost, said to me: Prince, If you would that I should
reverence you, tyrannize not so over me. To offend him so without cause who
serves me, and to deprive me of that which I justly possessed, are things that
would take away patience even from Marbles. He that aims to deprive me of that
Picture must first take my life. Having spoke this, he drew his sword and
struck at me, whilst I did the same. Our blows were so thick, and
accompanied with so much anger, that those that followed us had not the courage
to interpose themselves. At last, perceiving us both wounded, and that my
intention was that my brothers life should satisfy for the blood I shed, they
drew their Swords, and threw themselves between us, with danger to some of
them, who were recompensed with some wounds.

My brother being retired, whilst I would not be pacified, I saw him fall down
in a swoone, I know not whether for the pain of his wounds, or the loss of the
Picture. I supposing him dead had not the heart to undergo the justice of my
Father, severe to all, but inexorable against those of his house; I withdrew my
self into a Castle nigh to the Sea, where, being cured of my hurts, I spent
all my hours in Contemplation of that Object, which I used to call the
Compendium of my Felicities. All my ends, all my desires, all my hopes
determined in those lines, and those colors. One day by craft being tempted
forth of the Castle, the Picture was stolen from my eyes, not heart. Not being
able to appease my mind for grief at such a loss, I unknown imbarqued me for
Cyprus. The time of the year was contrary, but gaining the Owner of one with a
good sum of Gold, I promised my self a secure voyage, confident in the
goodness of the Vessel.

I landed in Cyprus: And would have no other company but that of my thoughts.
After much Travel I stayed at a Fountain, which they call the amorous
Fountain: And there being surprised by night, I took up my rest. My thoughts
had scarce given place to sleep, but I was seized upon by diverse phantasmes. Me
thought I saw Dianea assaulted by two most fierce Dragons, and that the one
strove with the other which should drink her blood. I heard her reprove me of
cowardice in this danger, that I did not aid her, whom I affected more than my
self. She her self implored with redoubled entreaties my assistance. She
said: Prince of Creete, why are you come to visit me if you will not succor
me? Does not then my presence merit the protection of your sword? Have you
passed the sea only to see me dye? A shadow of my beauties have had the power
to bow your heart, and shall not Dianea her self persuade you to defend her?
Friend, I am yours, afford me your help. The Gods have made you arrive in this
Kingdom for my defense, it being but reason that you should come to guard her
who expects it from you, At this I awakened, oppressed with so much sorrow,
that I know not whether the verity of the success could have been able to have
tormented me more.

I afterward fell asleep again for awhile, but being again awakened by the
same Illusions, I began to complain of my Fortune, which disquieted me even in
the Reposes of Night. I imagined my self the worst of all Creatures; for
Beasts at least by night have a Truce from the Miseries of day. Amidst these
thoughts I heard some voices, which arrived at my ears, no otherwise then a
Whisper. I approached nearer, and heard the name of Dianea redoubled, being
unable to understand the rest, I resolved to chastise those that durst profane
that name. A curiosity to understand the end, stayed my hand. I presently then
heard that Dianea was to come suddenly to the Fountain; for so it was
appointed: with other words which gave me not leave to conceive the End,
because I had not understood the beginning.

I felt the greatest alteration in the world, in hearing that within a while I
should see her, who had made me abandon our Kingdom, and Country. I received
it as a most auspicious Omen, that she whom I adored should come to meet me at
my arrival in Cyprus. I counted the Moments, and many times blamed the Sun,
that not hastening his course, retarded my joys.

Aurora now was come forth, and the Birds deafned the Air with their Songs,
when Dianea made a Scene of her beauties to my eyes. I pardoned the slownesse
of the Suns Approach, for it was reason he should give place to her. I blamed
the boldness of Art that durst endeavor with pencils to emulate so fair a
Work, that surpassed all Ideas. The Image of the Picture was like the true, as
a shadow the Light. I had time to behold her at my pleasure. And it was
perchance to bless my eyes which could never be wearied with looking on her.
Two Moors followed her, I know not whether to make more shine forth the
splendor of her Beauty, or that they had assumed that Color to approach the
nearer to her eyes. As soon as she came, she put her hands into those waters,
which ran with a strife to kiss them. And it seemed, that grown Ambitious
they swelled more then usual to touch her face, as if they desired to be
changed into that lively color, which impurpled the Cheeks of Dianea.

In this while four Assassins appear, which ran suddenly to Dianea; I that was
unable to see her injured, whom I accounted part of my self, came against them
with so much Courage, that with two blows three lost their lives. At the
presence of an Object which I esteemed Divine, I could not but show a valor
miraculous. The fourth attempted his safety by flight, but in vain, for I
quickly overtaking him, immediately killed him, although Dianea cried out, that
I should let him live; She would know the original of these treasons, who had
plotted them, who had any hand in them, that they might receive punishment
accordingly: Of all which hitherto she had not received the least knowledge. I
would needs kiss her hand, beseeching her to pardon me, if the desire to see
her avenged had not allowed me to grant life to that Murderer; for which there
was much reason, for I being come to do Sacrifice to her Beauties, I could not
but at the least offer up the lives of those so unmannerly people; she thanked
me with a Garb so repleat with gentleness, that every word seemed a Dart which
transfixed my soul.

She solicitously enquired my name, in which I did not satisfy her, adding;
That I was not to be known, until I had some merit to render me worthy to be
known. That I had passed the Sea to no other end, but to serve her, enamoured
by Fame, which I had found infinitely inferior to truth. With such Discourses
I waited on her to the Palace, which is even that which stands adjoining to
the Cave. There I received most signal Honors; and this success being
published in the Court, King Vassileo used me with a demonstration of so much
affection, that I envyed not the highest.

He would have added, how being transported with the favors of the Princess,
he assumed the confidence to reveal his affection, and how meeting there with
a correspondency, he attempted to attain her for his wife; But he broke off
his Relation, being interrupted with the Acclamations of the Souldierie that
attended the King of the Thracians. He was met in a splendid pomp by the Duke
of Filena. The Soldiers were placed in a decent posture, Squadrons of Horse
and Foot so interwoven in so delightful an order, that the Thracian could not
satisfy himself in beholding them. He was accompanied but only by an hundred
of his Thracian youth of the noblest birth. Their Apparel was wondrous rich.
The Chains and Jewels they wore exceeded Estimation. Yet the strangeness of
their Habit was more admirable then the costliness of it.

He upon a Courser all covered with Velvet, made an excellent show of his
dexterity. He took pleasure to make that Horse curvet, as if he were also
ambitious to make himself obeyed even by Beasts. He submitted to the Bridle
with so much readiness, that it well appeared his Genius instructed him, that
he was not to be handled by Grandees, but with his Obedience. Though Horses
know not Adulation, this seemed that with his motion, and neighings, he
intended no other but to flatter him. The Thracian had the Duke of Eilena on
his left hand, with whom he discoursed of Military Armies. Each other of his
Court was attended on by a great Field-Officer. And in this state they
approached Arsinoe. At the Gates he was waited for by all the Council; And
come to the Palace, King Vassileo met him without the Gates of the great Hall.
The Welcomes and Complements were redoubled on both sides, with so high an
expression of affection, as if nature had obliged them to love one another.
They both sat them down under a cloth of State, which covered two most rich
Chaires. Vassileo took the right hand, though he feigned himself willing to
have resigned it to Dorcone.

Here those keeping silence, that were come to be present at this first
Audience, The Thracian in his own Language said: That he was come in person to
confirm that peace which had ever been preserved inviolate by his
Predecessors: That Accidents never had the power to alter that disposition
which had always rendered his heart obliged to love King Vassileo as a Father.
That the Reports that he had raised men against the Kingdom of Cyprus had
extremely afflicted him; so that his Affection could not suffer him, that the
security of that Kingdom should grow jealous at his preparations for war:
That he had built a Fleet to make show of his power, not to usurp upon the
States of others, or disturb his friends. He spoke long upon this matter, and
with so much eagerness, that it was impossible to conceive whether those Words
were the Daughters of Truth, or of Dissimulation.

King Vassileo answered, that he ascribed to his greatest Fortune, in seeing
himself honored by the visit of such a King, that it grieved him he was not
young, that he might have prevented him: but yet that this was an Adjunct of
Glory to the Thracian, that he would yield to one who was inferior to him in
merit, and that he would oblige without a hope of correspondency. That he
thanked him for the trouble he had took, and the peace confirmed, he having
not greater desire in his so declining years then to enjoy quietness. He
plied him with so many expressions of Affection, that he enforced the Thracian
to an humiliation.

Rising, they were led to the Princess Lodgings, who hearing of it, came to
receive them. The Thracian stood still, fixing his eyes upon the Face of
Dianea, with such an Alteration, that it was easily observed by all. Dorcone
first bowing to her, said; Fair Princess, it is a greater felicity to be borne
slaves in Cyprus, to enjoy the sight of such a Beauty, then a King in Thracia.
I that have brought peace to this Kingdom, cannot vouchsafe it to my heart,
which will ever be assaulted by so divine Rarities. I beseech you disdain not
that I should love you; that I might express my ambition to serve a Princess,
who to enrich the world it was necessary she should receive Trophies from all
the Beauties of Heaven.

Dianea, that with a discontented mind heard of the Arrival of the Thracian,
not only for being ravished from the Embracements of Diaspe, but also for the
hatred she bore that Nation, could not but with a disdain afford her ear to
these words: Nevertheless, with that dissimulation which is borne in the
mouths of great Personages, She answered: She besought him to moderate those
commendations, that he might not put himself into a danger to undertake the
Defense of an unjust Thing, that in her there was no desers that might move the
Affection of a King, in whom Nature and Fortune were met to render him
superior to the greatest.

Amidst such Complements Dorcone parted from Dianea, leaving nevertheless his
soul in pawn for the usurie of the Delight of his eyes.

King Vassileo would wait on him down stairs, although the Thracian by all
means possible refused it. They were on the last steps ready to part, when
they were both stayed by a noise of Arms, which made them both suspicious of
Treason. Dorcone saying to King Vassileo: Friend, are we secure of our Lives?
King Vassileo made no reply; but with a great deal of danger to his own
person, he quieted the Tumult, and passing through the crowd, went where it
received original.

Diaspe, who had met the Thracian, was resolved to follow, accompanying him to
the Court. In this while Celardo incited by report of the coming of so great a
Prince, was also arrived there to see those meetings, which seldom happen, and
also to satisfy the curiosity of a Knight, who some days before was become
his Guest. He was presently taken notice of by Diaspe, who remembering his
ancient Contempts, and imagining him come into that place, (in a Rivalship) for
the love he bore Dianea; unable to contain himself, he said: Rash man! Have
thou yet the Confidence to approach him whom thou have so often offended? If
the Majesty of King Vassileo deserved not all Reverence, you should soon
find, I know well how to chastise the fond folly of those that depart from
their Duty. Celardo not accustomed to receive Injuries, answered him, with
advancing his hand to strike him on the face, without delay unsheathing his
sword. Diaspe avoiding the box on the Ear, drew likewise his forth. They that
were near them, were not slow to take Arms, crying out they should cease that
Tumult. The Soldiers that were far off, supposing themselves betrayed by the
Thracians, began to deal blows with so great an insolency, that though King
Vassileo was a great way off, it was an inconvenience of consequence for him to
go thither.

His Majesty all this while holding Dorcone by the hand, made every one draw
back, and received a distinct Relation of the occasion of this business.
Understanding Diaspe was the Author, he drew near to him, and with a
countenance enflamed with anger, said: Diaspe, That honor that was done you in
my Palace, merited not that I should receive so ill a recompense. If I bore
not in my mind how much you have done for the Crown, your head should pay for
the displeasure you have done me. But now content your self to depart hence
without delay, that I may not have occasion to punish your disobedience, having
in an high manner pardoned your Rashness.

Diaspe replied not, for King Vassileo turning to Dorcone, who was going away,
afforded him not leisure to answer. He retired to his Lodgings, which was a
Palace suitable to his birth and the liberality of the King whom he served.
Many of the Barons, and the principal of the Court came to condole with him
his ill fortune, who having performed so many services to the King, his
Daughter, and Kingdom, received the reward of Banishment for his pains. But
that yet he ought something to dispense with the Kings Anger, who knew not
otherwise how to secure the diffidences of the Thracian, but with a severitie
that exceeded his nature. That these first motions-being over, he would without
doubt be restored to his former respect.

Diaspe answered, he had formerly learnt the Customs of Courts and Princes:
That he complained not of King Vassileo, who followed but the example of
others, that they recompensed great benefits with as great ingratitudes, and
that therefore one day he hoped he should reprove him of a resolution so
precipitate. That he would be no more seen in Cyprus, but greater, or an
equal to King Vassileo. Afterward, being licensed by them, he wrote to the
King, and Duchess of Belprato. Leaving these Letters with full directions,
with two Squires only he departed to embarque himself. Finding a Vessel in
the Harbor he went aboard, promising great matters to the Rowers if within a
few days they arrived at Creet.

Whilst the Vessel driven forward by the Waves, and the Rowers flew upon the
sea, he fixed in the constancy of his thoughts, knew not what to do but bemoane
his misery. He repented his departure without leave from his Lady the Princess,
having left her in a time of so much danger without attending for her Commands;
whereon he thus reasoned with himself.

How is it possible that this heart should be moved with any affections but
those of love? Can then the Command of King Vassileo prevail more than my
Duty to my Obligations? Shall Fear then win upon this mind which never yet
knew what it was? Unhappy that I am! since all things conspire to my
wretchedness. Dianea, what imaginations will thou have of thy Astidamo, who
parted without bidding thee farewell? What Arguments will thou find to
consolate thy passion? Amidst these thoughts he betook himself to rest,
designing to himself a speedy return, with such an Army that King Vassileo
should repent himself for having offended him, and whereby he should securely
accomplish his marriage with Dianea.

In the interim the Letters were presented by a Squire to King Vassileo. He
read them with a great alteration, whereof these were the Contents.

To the Majesty of Vassileo, King of Cyprus, Astidamo Prince of Creete.
IT grieves me that the ingratitudes I have foundin your Kingdom compel me to
remember them unwillingly: One who had saved your life deserved not an infamous
Exile for using his sword in his own defense. I shall not live if I do not
guard my self, nor must I do so without displeasing you. But past things admit
not of advise: Neither pretend I to excuse my self. Yet assure your self,
that I am one that with my Arms will repay the injuries of my Superiors, and
I cast away my counterfeit name of Diaspe, that I may have no remembrance that
I have served you.


These Letters in the Council of State occasioned a great Commotion, whereupon
Ambassadors were made choice of, that they might carry King Vassileo's Reasons
into Creete. That he was not engaged to know those that would not be known.
That the Majesty of a King ought to be reverenced by all, and much rather in
the presence of another King. The danger into which all were run in that
Tumult, that they scarce took notice of, or spared the life of their natural
Prince. Those were attended on by a different effect, which the Squire
privately presented to the Duchess of Belprato. Diaspe would not (changed to
Astidamo) write to the Princess, foreseeing the inconveniences that might arise
thence, if they should happen to be discovered. He writ to the Duchess.

Friend,
I am necessitated to depart upon a Command which admits not of a name; The
cause will be known to you: For it fell out in public. I go hence into Creete
to return armed; not willing to be any more subjected to injuries. The sorrow
that I have of parting without seeing you shall be an instigation to me to
hasten my return. I beseech you to preserve me alive in that state of Grace
wherein Fortune and Love established me. Astidamo is undisguised. I trust not
too much to this Letter, both because honor, and the Kings Command hastens me,
and because I will not recommend all my thoughts to Fortune.

The Prince of Creete.


In this while Celardo having withdrawn himself (persuaded so to do by the
other Knight) out of danger, he returned to his house so confused, and so
offended at his own unhappiness, that it was in vain to comfort him. He would
suddenly leave Cyprus not accounting himself secure from the hatred of his
Brother. He was accompanied by that Knight: And so they imbarqued in a Vessel
of war which intended a voyage to Egypt. While their sails filled with a
favorable south wind carried the Ship so swiftly that it beguiled sight, that
Knight entreated Celardo to relate the Original of the Conflict he had at the
Court with that Knight whom he heard him call Diaspe.

The History of Celardo.
CElardo answered, I know not who Diaspe is. I know only that the Knight you
spoke of, is my brother by blood, though my Enemy by his Actions. We are both
of us Sons to the King of Creete, though he for being the eldest has attained
the name of Prince, and next succession to the Crown. But of this I care not
to complain of Fortune, because she works blindly, and knows not how to
favor desert. Becoming both enamoured of the Picture of Dianea we fell to
blows; Anger easily reigning between brothers unequal. To withdraw me from
his fury, and not to add afflictions to the declining age of my Father, I
resolved for some time on a departure from Creete. My Mother, that had not
patience to look on my departure, accompanied me with so many tears, that
from them I took an unhappy presage. She bestowed upon me the Picture of Dianea
which she had kept by her by my Fathers command. My brother being certified of
this by those who by betraying me hoped to merit his favor, and pursuing me
with many Attendants, by force bereaved me of the Picture, and had done so of
my life also, if I, not basely defending my self, had not given occasion to
many to interpose themselves to their own danger.

My Brother, although wounded, would not return to the Court, but retired
himself unknown into a house near the sea in the Confines of the Kingdom,
fearing (by as much as I can imagine) the displeasure of my Father. I did also
the same, but with a design not to live without that Picture, which although
impressed on my heart, I desired to have before my eyes. All passions that
proceed from humane affections are supportable, except those of Love. I tried
all means to recover the Picture, but all my diligence was in vain, for he
kept it always by him, nor did he trust it to any but himself. Perceiving
that force was not the way to get it from him, I applied my mind to deceit,
which is ever without blame when it is used to overcome, and when violence is
needless. I appointed a day when he, (his being absent) as he was accustomed,
remained alone to vent forth with sighs and lamentations the passions of his
soul without the untrusty testimony of any Attendant.

I made a young maid appear at his feet, who tearing her hair, and beating
her breast, would have awakened the sense of pity in cruelty it self. After
she had with her counterfeit tears won credit for her Tale, which Cretan women
are very prone to; she said to him, That being walked with her sister to the
shore to take the air, they were followed by one who pretended himself a
servant to my sister; will not this wicked man, said the Girl, make use of
violence, since he may find our voices cannot awaken pity in the seas. And that
the dryness of these sands are not capable to commiserate our tears. He
presently gave us notice of his ill meaning, making use of force to deprive
her of her honor. She perceiving that her schreekes were lost, and although
the winds, moved to pity, carried them far off, and that the sea replied unto
them, there being none that could hear them, betook her self to the ordinary
weapons of women, which are teeth and nails. She will certainly be overcome
in this unequal contention, without succor from your valor and goodness.

The Prince attended not that she should proceed, but laying hold on his sword,
said, That she should teach him the way that he might give punishment to that
unmannerlie man. She feigning she was unable to stir afoot, showed him
whereabouts he should find her sister. The Prince leaving her ran hastily to
the shore. The Maid in the mean while took the Picture of Dianea, of which
there was no doubt but that it would have been known even by those that have
not seen the Sun. I having received it, without delay imbarqued with an
intention for Cyprus, to see if the pencill had flattered or copied those
beauties. I withal was not without hope of attaining Dianea for wife. In
Creete there was no hope for my life, much less for the Kingdom.

Whilst transported with these thoughts I erected me a Fortune fastened to my
desires, she that used to laugh at the vanity of my designs made me see with
how little wisdom he works that raises hopes upon the instability of humane
accidents. The sea grew so disturbed, that I had neither eyes nor heart that
could slight that danger; The remembrance of it yet is horrible. It seemed all
the Elements had conspired our shipwreck. Heaven refused us the light of it, to
deprive us of the sight of it. The air assaulted with winds deafned the ears
of the Mariners, so that they could not obey the directions of the Pilots. The
Seas foaming whirlepooles of waves from time to time threatened to swallow us.
The Land made us afraid in the waters, we expecting no other but some Rock to
split us. The Cock-boat, which is usually the sacred Anchor of those that are
shipwracked, was forced from us by the winds, after our Sails were rent, our
Masts broke, and tacklings all torn.

Amidst these miseries, I preferred my vows and prayers to that Image, which if
it had had sense would have been moved to laughter at my follies: I was so bold
as to reprehend the winds, and blame the waves, as if they had had some
knowledge of that beauty; or, as if the Picture of Dianea had been one of Jove.
When I perceived that the water (our Vessel being shattered in many places)
flowed in to drown us, taking hold of Dianeas Picture, by the assistance of
which I promised my self safety, with a plank I threw my self into the sea,
suffering my self to be carried by chance, while the darkness of the night
permitted me not to discern Rocks, or the shore. I broke the waves for about
an hour, keeping my self aloft with my hands and feet to break them: But the
Tempest not ceasing, weary of my pains and troubles, I altogether abandoned my
self; And I believe I lost my senses, although my hands, assisted by nature,
never forsook their hold of the Planke.

I cannot tell how long I continued in this danger, nor who took me out of the
water, but that opening my eyes, although languishing, imagining I had past
into the other Life for a certain, an old man presented himself before me,
whom I supposing to be Charon by the Descriptions I had heard from Poets; I
said to him, Pardon me (good old man) that I have not brought along with me
your reward, for the sea has devoured all that I had. But lest you should
refuse to ferry me over to the other shore without payment, I have a Picture
with me, for which you may receive any money, if that beauty be valued in the
Abysses; I know it will provoke envy in Proserpina, and peradventure incite
Pluto to steal her from above to felicitate these shades.

The old man laughed at these words, and reaching me his hand, assured me I was
alive, and that the Gods had taken pity of my youth. He brought me into a
Cabin more commodious than rich: And there omitted nothing that might do me
good. Having made me go to bed to dry my self, and that those moist and
malignant vapors which I got in the water might be forced out of me; he said:
Son, here I live secure from the Tempests of the Sea, and the Lightnings of
Heaven, I live to my own satisfaction in a quietude and happiness; Ambition
and Envy not entering under the Humilities of this roof. The Bow and
Angling-rod from day to day procure me food; and perhaps the greatest Monarchs
of the world, amidst their Feasts and Purples, enjoy not near so much of
felicity. These Books are my companions, which beside the Delight they afford,
enrich the mind with most worthy Knowledges. This said, he comforted me with
some precious Wines, adding; And these are also brought me by the Sea, without
my diligence: Being recovered, he left me to my rest, going forth to provide
something for Supper.

My sleep was but for a moment; for being perpetually interrupted by Dreams, I
could take no Repose in my bed. I arose and displayed Dianea's Picture, and
found the water had done it no harm. I conceived the Sea had done reverence to
it, believing it one of Venus: As if (I know not how) every extraordinary
beauty should receive an augmentation from the Waters. I began a Discourse to
it with so eager an earnestness, as if it had had not only a power to listen
to me, but also to afford me an Answer. My implorations were attended on by an
infinity of sighs and tears, ever upbraiding my self with my own
unhappiness. I had season enough to account my self miserable, supplicating
mercy from a Picture. I was surprised by the old man, before I could sound a
Retreat to my thoughts, my mind was so diverted from all other things. He
snatched the Picture from me, with such a fury as if he meant to have torn it:
And I think he would have done so, if my Entreaties had not overruled him. I
beseeched him to pardon that which had remained uninjured by the Fury of the
Sea: That if he meant to destroy it, lest he should become enamoured of it,
those eyes ought to be banished which were presumptuous to behold it: Not the
Picture which was immovable, and being insensible, tempted no body to love. He
taking more disgust at these words, answered me:

Son! Is it possible that Sense so tyrannizes over your reason! Is it
possible, that a piece of Art, so much the more vile, by how much the more
common, should torment the Affections of an heart that is greater then Art or
Nature. I blame not the Picture, which is a Science, derived to us from the
Gods, which has power to eternize those which would not live else but by the
Memory of our eyes. I find fault with the intemperance of our pleasures, the
madness of our thoughts, the blindness of our understanding, which receives
an alteration from imaginary Phantasmes, feigned Apparitions, or Likenesses,
imitated or flattered. What would you say, if this Picture should not be a Copy
of Life, but the conceited invention of a Pencill, which without looker on, had
imitated the Ideas of Beauty? Is it handsome then for a man to languish for the
Extravagancies of a hand, which more frequently imitates fancy then sense? Is
it fit then to submit the sovereignty of our minds to a thing insensible,
which too often we deny to the Powers of heaven it self? Son, to be in love,
is a continual unhappiness, because Love covets, subjects, and renders vile;
And because it compares a man to a Carkasle losing the soul, which flies to
establish it self in the object beloved. To dote on a Picture is the worst of
Mischiefs: There is no correspondencie: The delight is fixed only in the Eyes,
and if we be affected, it is either with that which is not; or if there be any
such, it may be so adulterated, that it would rather occasion Repentance then
Love. But to be enamoured of Pictures, though it be a misery to one, to you in
particular it is portentous. This which you so highly esteem, has exposed you
twice into danger of your life, and will occasion you to lose it, if you
resolve not to relinquish it. Dianea must not be yours, for so the supreme Will
has decreed, which smiles at the ignorance of our Desires. The Characters
which I perceive in your forehead, of the like whereof I have had a long
experience by my knowledge in the Science, agreeing with the course of the
Heavens, deny you the Possession of her. It will be a wisdom suitable to your
birth, which I know to be great, if you would abandon this humor which is
displeasing to the Gods. Your peril at Sea has proved your happiness. The
Divine Will knows how to select Antidotes out of poisons: So, forth of your
own Dangers do you take notice of the power of the Stars.

The Venerable old man spoke these and other things with so great a gravity,
and so much Eloquence, that he was able even to have persuaded Rocks. I, who
had not the heart to hear him proceed, beseeched him to conclude,
acknowledging my self convicted; and gave him the Picture of Dianea, not to
bear about me the Incendiary of my Evil. Within my self I remained
astonished at the vanity of humane Affections, alterable in all things; but in
Loves lighter then fire, and more inconstant then Motion. That Portraiture of
Dianea which I had defended against the force of a world, and the Powers of a
God, for which I had incensed my Brother, forsaken my Father, and undertaken a
voluntary Exile from my Country, I left in the hands of an old man, even with
him who had had a resolution to have torn it.

I abode with him some few days, which I only esteem of as my life, being
spent without any molestation. He was a Prince of great descent, who unwilling
to suffer the miseries of humane kind, or the times, was retired into those
woods to enjoy himself. If he would have accepted of my Company, and had not
persuaded me to the contrary, demonstrating to me the injuries I should commit
against my hopes, and those who stood in need of my assistance; Doubtless I
should have continued there, to have enjoyed the contentments of that place,
wherein a man in spite of Fortune and Envy might have been Patron of his
Genius.

I departed thence with as much grief as could proceed from an heart obliged.
I imbarqued in a Vessel bound for Negrepont, when Armies and Soldiers made a
Pomp of death, slaughter, and cruelty. The grief of my departure was allayed
by the desire I had to be an Actor in those Wars, accounted the greatest of
the world. I came to the Court, where getting leave to serve as an Adventurer,
I fell under the Command of the Duke of Lovastine, who was General of King
Dinarderto's Forces, against the warlike King of the Vesati. Having there
behaved my self not unworthy of my blood, and particularly in the Battle of
Zenilp, and returning afterward to Court, I was Elected by Prodirto for his
Companion, who after the Death of his Uncle altogether possessed the heart of
his Majesty; insomuch, that he solely had the Command of all things. There I
became enamoured of the Princess Floridea, whom although I knew not to be
superior to Dianea in perfections, is nevertheless owner of so much beauty,
that I was compelled to prefer her to all, Dedicating my soul to her, which
I offered up daily to her in beholding her.

Truly, I had never any more opportunity of disclosing my affection to the
Princess then by my eyes; she being instructed by Nature (as I imagine)
returned me a correspondency in such manner, that I (who had but been
accustomed to love Pictures) conceited my self to be called to the possession
of all the favors of love. My felicity had the quality of the Day-flies: For
the Death of King Dinanderto ensuing, and those Revolutions in the Kingdom
(which cannot but be known to you) I could not enjoy my Loves, no not in an
hope. When Prodirto attempted the stealing away of the Princess, I became an
Agent in that business, assenting to it, having neither forces nor means to
divert him.

He would have related how they arrived in Cyprus, and how he having got her,
lost her, but was interrupted by the Pilot, who came to inform them, that they
were pursued by a Pirates Ship, and that if it belonged to Mariscapi, it was the
lesser evil to die then to be took; That he suspected it the day before; for
pretending to steer another way, that Vessel did likewise the same; That
while the wind continued, he made no words of it, by reason that secured them
from danger: but perceiving it to cease, within a few hours they should be
overtooke. Celardo, and the other Knight, endeavored to allay the Pilots
tears, with saying, That the strength of their Ship, so well provided for a
fight, had no reason to be in fear of the power of one only vessel. But he
in more terror then before, because the wind fell still, answered:

Sirs, if you were skillful in Navigation, you would not certainly have have so
great a confidence. That without doubt which follows us, is Mariscapi's the
most brave one that was ever beheld on these Seas; not so much for the
goodness of it, and the strength, as for the valor of the men that are within
it. Simple people imagine it was built by Enchantment: For within the compass
of a few Months, this most cruel man has achieved by force such great
matters, that his name is become a terror to all that use these Seas. Celardo,
and the other Knight, grew curious to know who this Mariscapi was. The Pilot
after he had given directions fitting for their Defense, with those
preparations, which are used in time of Fight, said;

Sirs, Between Sicilia and the Coast of Barbary, lies the Island of Melito.
Some Command there (under an obligation) to destroy the Pirates of these Seas,
more infested then others, by reason they are of an easier passage, and richer
then other, by reason of a continual Navigation. One of these is Mariscapi, so
named as I believe, that whoever would be secure from his Treacheries, should
avoid the Sea: He being covetous of Riches, and not content in that Degree
where Fortune had placed him, and of Birth less then ordinary, follows such a
course of life, as he himself will not permit to Pirates. He is much worse then
they, for they remain satisfied with Prizes; whilst he also puts to death, for
fear of being discovered. When he knows he cannot conquer, he counterfeits
himself a friend, and afterward observing his Times and Occasions, equally
betraies all. Many times he has been taken Prisoner, but has ever had
pretenses to defend and enlarge himself, and returned after with greater
pride, and an higher boldness to ransack these Islands.

Whilst he reported this, they saw the Vessel of Mariscapi come so nigh them,
that the Shouts (carried by the wind) arrived to their ears, though confused.
It was but of an ordinary bigness, but so well built and furnished, that a
whole Fleet would have found it a difficulty to have taken it. With so strange
a speed it plowed the Sea, that it could not be discerned, whether it moved the
Winds, or was moved by them. It came to assault the ship, but with little
hurt: although it made a Breach. The fight was unequal: for the ship in height
surpassed the Vessel: But yet the valor and cunning of Mariscapi and his
Soldiers was so great, that without the assistance of Celardo and that other
Knight the ship had doubtless been lost. They fought smartly, having for their
Object, the one their safety, and the others the booty. The Sea became red, and
seemed as it were that it blushed at the shamefulnesses of those men that came
so wickedly to throw away way their lives. Mariscapi's Men made many Thundrings
from their Balista's upon the ship, which by reason it was the higher, there
was not a blow which did not great harm. On the other side, those in the
Vessel with their Arrows, and their wild-fires, made a slaughter of their
enemies.

The fight had not been determined without the death of all, if the Wind, that
til now had been quiet at this spectacle, had not finished the Contention. The
Waves swelled, and the Clouds gathered: they began to blow so violently, that
those that fought were compelled by maine force to retire. The ship that was
the less able to resist the violences of Heavens Anger, persuaded the Pilot to
come ashore in a Rock, which was the beginning of an Island. Celardo, and that
other knight, unwilling to adventure themselves more to the inconstancy of the
Sea, resolved to travail by Land, until some Accident should prescribe them
what to do. Whilst they passed onward into the Island, without meeting any
body who could acquaint them with what they desired; Celardo beseeched the
Knight to make him partaker of his Adventures, he having not refused to do
the same to him.

The History of Ossirdo.
I Refuse not (Sir Prince) the Knight replied to serve you, and so much the
rather, because my infelicities have received original from the Princess
Dianea, who has been also the occasion of yours. Island is my Country, an
Island situated under the Artick Pole, between Auster and Boreas, near the
frozen Sea: in former times (for the remoteness of it) having been called the
lost Island. Aspane, who there governes the Scepter, is my Father. My name is
Offirdo, his only son, beloved of the King, and reverenced by the Kingdom,
as successor to the Crown. Having attained to that age, wherein Idleness is
wont to beget Repentance, I resolved to forsake the Easinesses of my Country,
to acquire some applause from the voices of Fame. Island, for the remoteness of
it is ignorant of the Ambition of those Monarchs, who out of a Desire to
enlarge their Dominions, have a Courage to raise War against the stars.

My Design being laid, without further delay I put it in Execution, making a
Voyage to Norway, where unknown I came ashore, although that King was near to
my Father, both by blood and affection. Continuing there some certain days in
Court, I fixed my thoughts upon the Princess Doricia, an owner of so singular
Beauties, that (save only in whiteness) she yielded not to Dianea, Nature
peradventure was willing to declare, that she can exercise her wonders in all
colors: And that in many Objects shadows are not at all inferior to Lights.
Doricia being assured of my Affection, was prodigal to me of all those favors
which belong to a Princess. It was an envy to those of the Court to see
themselves out-stripped by one, who the last of all became her servant.

The Duke of Gotlandia not enduring to see himself excluded, or to suffer me
his Rival, attempted any Treachery to deprive me of my life. But I knew with
so good fortune to defend my self, that almost always he was in petill to
lose his own. One day, with all the Court, we were returned from Hunting. I
before any others, although the Duke endeavored it, took hold of Doricia's
Bridle. The Duke could not refrain saying to me; Knight, yours is a great
rashness, who come to ravish those places of honor, to which those durst
hardly aspire, who would scorn to be served by you. Duke, (I answered him) I
pardon you this boldness, for the reverence I bear to the Princess my Lady. At
another time this sword shall show you the disequality that is between your
merit and mine. The Duke advanced his hand to have stricken me, but I escaping
it, by stepping a foot backward, at the first blow ran him across into the
Bosom. This Encounter displeased the King, who upon it was necessitated to
forbid me the Court; from which also I got speedily far away, until
Ambassadors should be come from my Father, who arrived presently after.

His Majesty lamented that I had not revealed my self sooner; and granting the
Princess to me for wife, preparations for those shows were begun, which they
designed to have most sumptuous. All Artificers were employed, neither was
there any Knight, though but of a mean condition, who prepared not himself
against the Glories of those Feasts. Irons and Marbles sweat to exalt to
eternity joys of such greatness. In this while, the Fame of Dianea's Beauties
were divulged. In Court they were discoursed of at large, with an infinity of
Encomiums. Sometimes I replied unto them with no other conceits but such as the
universal Report did administer. One day when I was in my lodgings, a Letter
was presented to me, and importunity expressed for an Answer. I read it with
some alteration, perceiving Dianea subscribed. These were the Contents of it.

Prince of Island,
THe Reports which brought either the Fame, or the Glory of your Name, and of
your Virtue, arriving at Cyprus, were received with such applauses, that so
singular conditions have obliged me to them: It Is well known that you have
neither a superior nor equal; and that the justice of your merit is more
offended, by tearming you a man, then the Majesty of the Gods is prejudieated
by attributing divine Titles to you. I that by an universal Approbation have
been glorified for a Beauty above natural, aim to make a sublime union by
engra^^ng your valor to my comeliness: I commend my self, that you might
consider of what estimation that beauty is, which is constrained (unsatisfied
with the Applauses of others, to praise it self. Conceive not dislikes
(Prince) from the favors of Fortune, if you will not deceive the Opinions of
those, who believe you the Offspring of all Gentility. If I shall perceive my
self neglected, I shall recompense the blushes of my face with the blood of my
soul, casting reproaches upon the air, that through my ear came to betray my
heart. Suffer not your Affection to diminish for being sued to for love by a
Lady against the Rules of our sexes Modesty: Argue from this, the greatness
of your Desert, which ravisheth supplication from her, who has not hitherto
been accustomed to hear, much less to entreat. The ordinary Statutes of
Nature and Custom ought not to be observed by them, who infinitely transcend
the limits of Nature and Custom. The Kingdom of Cyprus sighs for your
Resolution to be graced by the protection of so great a Prince; And my heart
attends for that relief, which can be only derived from that mind, which is
greater then all things, since it is also able to subject those against whom it
had no design. I should say I kissed your hand, but must not do it, of first
I receive not the honor of your affection; to the which, to preserve her alive
the Princess of Cyprus aspires.

Dianea.


Having read the Letter, Ire. sined so overcome with amazement, and so deprived
of sense, that I know not whether the shield of Medusa had so much virtue.
Presently diverse thoughts began to assault my heart. To displease Dianea with a
flight Answer was unbeseeming a Knight of honor: To entertain her with
general re^^mes of small satisfaction, was an unhandsome proceeding; It being
an injustice to deceive a Princess with hopes. To plead Excuses very indecent;
A Letter so repleat with affection, not deserving Exenses. An impossiblility to
promise her, I being engaged to Doricia, and our Nuptials so near that I could
not retract them, but with dishonor, and peril. Thereupon I considered the
inconstancy of our Loves, and the miseries of a mind, evermore unhappy in new
Appetites. My Marriage with Dianea, which was the Center where all my thoughts
determined, of which I had got a complete allowance, was now become even a
trouble to me, not permmitting me the enjoyment of Dianea's affections; I spoke
with the servant that delivered me the Letter, and found him as ignorant as I
was irresolute. My mind confirmed, I took Pen, and answered thus:

Princess of Cyprus.
I Wish I had the Merit to receive the Honors your Highness is pleased to
confer on me, as I have the mind to desire them: And then I should not
remain ashamed in the excesses of your Graces, nor your heart entertain a
Repentance for having so humbled it self; I should say those Characters which
I have received, are fuel which cover the Flames that burn me, if that Fame,
with one of her Pens had not engraven your name in the most inward part of my
breast. I love you (most Beautiful Princess) and if you would not have
condemned the boldness of Affections so ambitious, I should not have suffered
your Letters to have preceded mine. But also by that your glories may be
apprehended, who are pleased to desire those who dare not supplicate you. I
know not how to be thankful to your benignity, for imparting such graces to
me, because I am even unworthy to return you thanks. He may thank who
presumes to deserve. I that in my Honors can acknowledge no other Motive, but
your Highness Will, in silence bow to you. I will come to Cyprus as soon as my
Fortune shall permit me. I should prolong the time not to lose that good
opinion you are pleased to conceive of me at this distance, which keeps you
from discerning my imperfections: but it is most necessary for me to make
haste, lest I eternize the torment which the Desires I have to wait on you
personally inflicts upon me. I most humbly kiss that hand which has been able
with a few lines to imprison the mind of the Prince of Island.

Ossirdo.


Recommending my Letter to the Messenger, I retired into my Lodgings full, I
know not whether of confusion or repentance. I thought it a foul unworthiness
to betray under my hand the affections of Dianea. And I could not but conceive
it an ingratitude to refuse her a corresponcy, at least by Letters. But when my
thoughts were fixed upon my engagements to the beauties of Doricia, I tormented
my self with resentments, so lively, that sighs and tears were the least
signs of my affection. I accused Love, who to disquiet the reposes of my
felicity had enforced the mind of Dianea to affect me. I cursed Fortune, who to
disturb my desires had presented Treasures to me which I might not obtain.
Finally, I blamed the vanity of my thoughts, the inconstancy of my affections,
which could not fix upon that object which by the obligement of
correspondency, the rules of fidelity, the merit of beauty ought to be
preferred to any other.

To ease me of my grief I entered into Doricias Lodgings; A heart receiving no
greater refreshment than from the survey of an excellent Countenance. I found
her in bed, as it were dying, encompassed round by her Ladies, who lamented
over her as dead. Her face was overcast with a mortal color, by it to
demonstrate the sadness of her heart. Her eyes were shut, neither did she open
them but to vent forth her tears. Her tongue could not deliver a plain word,
prevented, I believe, by her sighs which buried them in her mouth. Her lips,
having lost their scarlet and purple, appeared as if they were overspread with
ashes by those most ardent exhalations which proceeded from her heart. Her
hands rebelling against the rest of her body continually attempted to tear her
hair and do injuries against her face: or rather they struck her breast, as to
break it open, that evaporating the fire she might be molested with a lesser
torment. At so funebrous a spectacle I could not refrain from grief, which
then is not counterfeit when it is provoled by pity and affection. Taking her
by the hand I beseeched of her the occasion of her malady. Fixing her eyes on
my countenance, after breathing forth some sighs, as harbingers of her passion,
she said:

Perfidious man, do thou also endeavor by a dissembling pity to deceive me?
Do thou show a resentment of that evil which thou only have procured?
Wherein has the unfortunate Doricia demerited thy affections? What error have
I committed worthy of a punishment so tormentfull? What motive persuaded thee
to come and disturb the quiet of my heart, whilst thou intendest to betray
me? Lament despised beauties the funeral of your ambition, since you have been
desired, and courted, not to be enjoyed but slighted; unhappy Dorieia! to whom
have thou engaged thy mind? Even to one who knows not how to love himself, and
was borne under that heaven where the seas are frozen. Her tears stopped her
words; whereupon I protesting my affection, by an Imprecation of all the Gods,
and my loyalty: I beseeched het not so much to wrong her self by declaring me
guilty before the cause was known: That the examples of the seas are not to be
compared with those of the heart, much rather because the mountains of Island,
although covered with a perpetual snow, give nourishment also to a continual
fire within. Lastly, I added it was a property of those to betray who were too
fearful to be deceived, and who are free from love cannot be persuaded of the
affections of others.

At these words she being no longer able to contain her self, calling me many
times by the name of perfidious and traitor, showed me the Letter I had writ
to Dianea; adding, With what excuses (O wicked man) can thou disguise thy
Treachery? Would thou have other testimonies to convince thee then those from
thy own hand, and from thy own very Characters? I then perceiving my fault to
reprove me, which afflicted my conscience, wished my self rather confronted by
a thousand Soldiers with any peril to my life. I endeavored to appease her
with entreaties, with promises, and with invoking the testimony of the Gods,
That in the dictating of that Letter I had had no other feeling but that of my
hand. All my attestations proved fruitless; whereupon despairing, seeing her
so estranged, I laid hold of my Poynard to have slain my self. I would have
done it, so great was the repentance I received from her Reprovings, and her
tears, She her self withheld me; saying:

I will that you should know the superiority that I have above you in loving;
That although these be feigned expressions I will believe them, and prevent
them as if true. But yet I deserved not so great a mortification loving you to
an excess. Having survayed your praises of Dianea with such a partiality sung
from your mouth, I have had an experience of your infidelity, but with so grand
a passion, that I had rather have dyed than endured it. The Letter that came to
you under Dianea's name was dictated by me to make trial of your Loyalty. The
Gods for my happiness put this in my thoughts, that I might not undergo a
Tyranny in the inconstancy of your affections.

I suffered her not to proceed in these complaints, but said, That to tempt the
fidelity of a man approved faithful was an offense to the Gods, That my Letter
was a token of my gratitude, not a witness of my affection. That she her self
would not have writ otherwise to any great Prince, that toward her had used
terms so courteous. To these, and many other reasons, I added such signs of
humility, that in a great measure I calmed her disdain: And there is not truly
any thing more powerful over the heart of a woman. Time that affords remedies
to the most desperate evils exalted me into my former condition, although in
some kind she forbore not to tax me. A jealous Lady is a torment so much the
more, if she has reasons sufficient to convince by.

Our Nuptials were celebrated with that sumptuousness as is fully proper to
the Greatness of a King. The Justs, the Tournaments, and the Feasts were
infinite; honored by the presence and assistance of such Knights and Princes,
that all acknowledged there were never seen richer in the Kingdom of Norway.
Two days only remaining dedicated to the solemnity of my Espousals, when
Fortune (troubled with an envy at my contentment) brought a Knight to the
Court, who entreated public audience: And being brought in, he so spoke in the
presence of the King.

I am Hydraspe Prince of Hibernia, an Island of the Ocean Sea. Whilst I
remained enjoying the quietness of my Country, and the felicity of command,
Love came to disturb me. He made use of a Portraiture of Dianea, which
happening into Ireland obtained more hearts, which gave up their Liberties to
it, than it met with eyes that unconquerably could behold it. It was
accompanied with two other Pictures, which peradventure might have been
accounted more than handsome, if I had not looked upon a Paragon so exceeding
them. Dianea then being made the Idol of my pleasures, in such manner
possessed my mind, that the reposes of the night, and all the hours of the day
were bestowed in my Adoration of that beauty. My mother fuller of pity than
discretion, hoping to take that from my heart which disturbed my sight, made it
be stolen from me at such a time as I could not prevent her. Being offended at
my mother, and and angry at my self, I departed with an intention to go to
Cyprus and get her for my wife; The death of the Infanta of Armenia being also
divulged with us. But being to appear before the Idea of beauty, I resolved to
apparel my self under habiliments of desert, by bearing to Dianea some
testimonies of my valor. In all Courts wheresoever I have yet arrived, I have
defended against all Knights that affirm the contrary, That Dianea is the
Queen of beauty, and that to mention her an equal was to maintain the
wrong, and defraud from justice. Our weapons shall be according to the pleasure
of the Knights; The conquered shall leave their names with those of the Ladies
whom they serve.

Thus spoke the Prince of Hibernia with an amazement to all the Court, which
laughed at the folly of a man, who ran his life into hazard to defend a thing,
which not only was not in his power, but whom to attain he could scarcely
reach at by hope. He was suddenly welcomed by his Majesty, who appointed him
a very rich Pavillion in the most conspicuous place of the Grand Piazza. He
raising up there a little Column affixed upon it this Inscription.

Dianea the Princess of Cyprus is Queen of beauty. She surpasses in favor all
other Ladies, as Venus is the most comely among all the Goddesses. She would
contend for priority with the Sun it self, if he by a perpetual motion did
not avoid the Comparison. Whoever to their own misfortune will not credit this,
he shall find it made good by the Arms of a Knight, the Prince of Hibernia.
Glory shall be the reward of the Conquerours; and the punishment of the
overcome shall be to leave his own name, and that of his Mistrisse.

All that day there was not any body that appeared to Just, every one attending
to put themselves into order to chastise an enterprise, imagined the most rash
that could be undertaken by a Knight. The Sun had hardly participated of his
light to our Hemisphere, but many appeared to combat the Knight: I will omit
the particulars of the Turnament, not to trouble you with a relation so
superfluous. Not so, replied Celardo, I have a very great curiosity for it, and
the rather because our travel is sweetened by such discourses. With your
History we have advanced a great way without any tediousness: And truly, being
ravished with the pleasure of your discourse, and the variety of your Chances,
I have not felt any imaginable weariness. Behold I am ready, answered Ossirdo,
to satisfy you: And I do it so much the willinger, because those things are so
imprinted in my memory that I figure them as present.

The first that entered into the Lists was the Duke of Scandia, a young man,
who, if he had had as much valor as he had wealth, would have been invincible.
He bore an Icarus in his Shield, which he imitated by falling at the first
encounter, and grieved that he could not do it in all things by reason he found
the earth too hard, and would much rather have been buried in the sea, than
have received so great a disgrace in the presence of so many Princes. He left
the name of Arcea the Duchess of Cimbria.

The Count of Lupponia presently supplied his place, who ever hitherto from all
Giosts came off with honor. The Emprefle of his shield was one disguised with
this Motto, Feigned, I feign. At the first encounter with their Lances he in a
manner equalled the Prince; at the second they both hit upon the breast,
although with some disadvantage to the Count who was a little disordered.
Taking new Spears they came to the third, angry at themselves that they had
not been able to overcome, The Prince was a little wounded in his arm, because
the Lance glancing from his shield unbroken stuck in his vantbrace. The Count
was cast forth of his saddle with so great a fall, that all thought him dead.
He was constrained to leave the name of Cresia, a Damzell of the Queens, who
received more sorrow to see her Knight so handled, than she did for the loss of
the quarrel for her beauty.

That day the Prince would fight no more, both by reason it was late, and also
because the wound on his arm pained him. The morning following he appeared
armed whilst many expected and requested the battle. In little more than two
hours he unhorsed fix at the first encounter, with so much facility, that he
astonished all the Court, because they were Knights of estimation. The Dukes of
Filtra and of Nidrosia: The Counts of Finmarca, and of Berge: And the Barons of
Nagardia, and of Hanima; they left the names of Gelasia, Andrena, Filarta,
Eusina, Polimena, Floralta, even all Damzels belonging unto the Queen.

After dinner there appeared a Knight in the Lists in black Armor with studs
of Gold, who was unknown to all. He bore for his sign a Sun Dyall: which
showed it is life and motion. The Prince taking his Lance ran to meet him with
so violent a force, that he made him bow strangely whilst he lost one of his
stirrups. Being both enflamed with indignation they took second Lances,
running as swift as their Horses could. The unknown Knight with so much courage
struck the Prince, that he was compelled (to avoid falling) to embrace his
horses neck, whilst the Prince with such a fury hit him on the Helmet, that he
struck it from his head. All stood amazed at this encounter, and the rather
because that Knight was Known to be a Sarmatian Lady, who a long time had
waited on her Majesty. She clothed her countenance with a fierce beauty, and
manifested that strength might reign in that Sex (which upon a false
presupposition) was supposed the more weak. She, not acknowledging her self
overcome, laid hand to her sword, adding; Knight, although I have lost my
Arms, I have not also my understanding, which obliges me to defend the
beauties of the Ladies of this Court. The advantage you have over me will more
perspicuously demonstrate the injustice of your Cause. The Prince, blushing to
have found so much strength in a woman, answered: Fair Lady, I ought not to
combat with you, for my quarrel extends no farther than against man: And
besides, if I ought, I would not fight, you having the advantage by having your
face uncovered, which has a power to conquer me equal to your hands.

Upon this there entered into the place the Baron of Macina, the proudest Knight
that I had ever seen. His original was from the Vulgar, although he daily
vaunted of Nobility. He scorned all, and both in Letters and Arms conceited
himself without an equal. He ran to his service, whosoever sought to him, and
for any vile hopes slighted the Laws of honor and obligation. He rode upon a
horse all black save his forehead, which was marked with four stars, which
even compelled all eyes to suppose them silver. His Arms were most rich, but
gained by deceit and rapine. For his Impresse he bore a Leopard, which said, If
I overcome not, I do not follow. The two first Encounters were equal, no
advantage appearing. In the third, as the Prince passed on without receiving
the least damage, the Baron fell, his horse falling down dead under him. He
suddenly drew his sword, and said, I ought not to receive blame for the faults
of my horse; with my sword I will maintain the Prerogatives of the beauty that
I adore Alight therefore if you would not that I should commit a crime not
usual between Knights. The Prince lighted, answering him, Although there is no
reason that should compel me to combat with you having unhorsed you: yet I
will remove from you any pretense that you may not excuse the injustice you
maintain. So saying, he struck such a blow upon his helm, that if it had not
been of a finer temper than ordinary, that had determined the Quarrel. He for
all that, not losing a jot of his vigor, gave the Prince such a thrust, that
his Armor being broke with it, he wounded him in the Flank, conceived
considerable for the blood that ran from it. The Prince, after many blows given
and received, foreseeing that the victory consisted in the celerity, feigning
to strike him on the head, whilst he held advanced his Shield and Sword, ran
him through the body. The Baron dying fell down, so that the Prince had not
time to receive the name of the beauty that he defended. His death was only
distastefull to the Ladies, for they were in hope he might have been the
Victor. There were none else in the Court that felt any resentment at his
death, for his pride had rendered him hateful, even to those who had made him
great.

The Prince went out of the field to dress his wounds, which for fifteen
days enforced him to keep his bed. Being recovered, there was not any body
that would adventure themselves; the example of the Baron having admonished the
most undaunted not to endanger themselves in a matter where the reward did not
parallel the peril. Two days he had remained idle, when on the third a Knight
appeared who demanded to Just, imagined of great Nobility by the attendance of
his Servants, and the richness of his Arms. He wore an upper-garment all
studded with gold and pearl. The Impresse in his Shield was a death which held
an Olive in his hands. They took the field, and ran the Course at the full
speed of their horses. The Knight smote the Prince on the Helmet with so
impetuous a violence, that bowing himself first on the right side, then on the
left, he was enforced to fall: On the other side he was struck by the Prince
on the Shield, which being of the purest steel, making the Spear to glide to
his breast, and that (with a Coat of Maile, not having sufficient resistance
against the assault of an hand rendered by Destiny more cruel than ordinary)
was pierced from one side to the other, exhaling his soul with his blood. The
sorrow of all was very great, but more especially when they knew him to be Lord
of the Island of Tarpasia. He was taken forth of the field by his, who by their
lamentations would have moved pity in the Air, and with their tears have
violated even breasts of brass.

Two days after, the Prince perceiving that none answered to his challenge,
appointed his departure. He made his resolution to be published by sound of
Trumpet, with a grand resentment to the Ladies of the Court, who accounted as
stolen from their merit as much of glory as was added to Dianea's name. One
Evening finding Doricia even drowned in a grievous sorrow, I enquired what
might be the cause of her sadness. Before she would answer me, she made that
her sighs and tears should captivate the benevolence of my heart, the more
easily to persuade it. Afterward (I know not whether speaking or weeping) she
said to me:

I bemoane not these despised beauties as too poor to have Champions: For that
deserves not tears which is not worthy of defense. But I lament at my little
fortune that has rendered me subject to one who has an heart to look upon me
as slighted. How (I beseech you) can you love me, if with a silent allowance
you suffer injuries which are directly aimed at me? Slightings are solely
admitted against those things which should be slighted. And how should I affect
you that endure me to be neglected before my eyes? He deserves not love who
demonstrates not his affection by the Effects. Let your memory present to it
self, when with adulterate leasings of above humane Titles you attempted to
beguile the simplicity of my Genius. Then the power of a world would have been
too weak against the strength of your arm. At the present, now possession
has cooled or cloyed your desire, one only man is sufficient to beget fears
in that mind which could not have been terrified. I condemn your Judgment
that have not the boldness to defend her, to whom you have engaged your soul
to love her. Whilst you courted me for a Wife you would have moved a rock, and
now to maintain my honor you languish in Idleness. It Is true, that the
beauties of Dianea (augmented perchance by an Hyperbolicall Fame) exceed the
comparison of mine, tormented by a slighting: but you not withstanding are
obliged to defend them against a Venus. Having elected them, wherefore refuse
you to protect them; you scare peradventure to combat against what is just,
you deceive your self. Beauty has no other reason but that of the eyes: nor
can he be accused of injustice who defends that he loves. I will not tax you
of Cowardice, as fearing a Knight who has been almost vanquished by a woman,
although to me your actions declare you such, not to do a wrong to my choice. I
only supplicate you, that you permit not one sole man to depart hence
vaineglorious by a reputation from the Ladies of this Court. But you perhaps
affecting Dianea, would for her merit that our Disgraces should add glories to
her Triumphs. The more I reflect on your thought, so much the more it confirms
me. He knows not how to love me who knows not how to guard me from injuries. If
this be true, wherefore would you betray me? Aim not to carry me into Island,
for I cannot be secure of my life with him who would not deliver me from
scorns.

She would have spoke more, if tears and sighs accompanying her words to vent
her passion, had not destroyed them as soon as they were borne. I remained so
repleat with affliction, that if the temembrance of my State had not stopped my
tears, they would have fallen in an abundance. I know not by what Fatality I
was withheld from fighting against the Prince of Hibernia. I believe that since
I had had the Fortune to be your Companion, you have not perceived in me any
signs of a base mind, and yet then I had not the courage to lay hand on my
sword. I know not if the imagination that Dianea's beauty was superiout to that
of Doricia occasioned that aversion in me; or rather that some Devil diverted
me from that fight. Nevertheless I enforced my self to convince Doricia with
words, not having the heart to give her satisfaction by my actions, I said to
her:

Doricia, you mortify my affection, whilst being engaged in marriage, you
have an ambition to entice eyes with your beauties, and whilst you have a
desire that they should be published. The face of a wife should not pretend to
more than to meet the satisfaction of her husband. She is not more comely but
by that heart by which she has been judged and chosen for the most handsome;
your beauty henceforth is not to be submitted to opinion nor censure. If I
should maintain it against the follies of the Prince of Hibernia, the danger
will be greater than the profit. If I should conquer, I should gain nothing
but a confirmation of my own thought, which has made choice of you as the most
beautiful of this Age. If Fortune should rob from me the Palm of victory,
what a grief would mine be? I should be accused of imprudency, for being more
willing to give credit to the force of my sword, then to the undeceivable
judgment of my eyes. I should imagine my self worthy of reproaches from all
mouths whilst I should defend the beauty of those things which are mine. Give
way to others to speak your praises: The Encomiums of those that are
interessed render merit suspected. Woe be to that husband who desires that the
Piazza should be the Theater of his wives beauty, and would that an universal
Fame should servefor an Echo to the Glories of her Countenance. He loves that
beauty little, who publishing it makes it more coveted and subject to Rapine.
He is very poor of desert, who thinks not himself alone sufficient to
comprehend the beauties of his wife. Who so publishes the comeliness of her
whom he loves, or would have Companions, or is distrustful of himself, or his
own opinion, had need of testimony from others. That Face wants not proofs,
nor defenses, which can receive no greater prejudice than to see it self
exposed to doubt. If I should maintain your beauty against the Prince of
Hibernia, I should render you equal to Dianea, whilst by all others you would
be accounted much her superior. I affect not so little the Delicacies of
Doricia, as I would gain them Paragons, nor adventure them in a battle, which
for the most part is overruled by Fortune. Those things are vile which are
hazarded to the Arbitrements of Conquerours. If you be wise, argue my affection
from hence, who not to put your beauty into a doubt am content in your opinion
to be reckoned for a Coward.

With these, and such like conceits I endeavored to satisfy her. She had no
mind to answer me, being doubly afflicted, both with her grief, and my words:
And stuck in an opinion that I affected Dianea, and could not find any means
to undeceive her. After he had staid six days in a vain expectation of
Combatants, the Prince of Hibernia departed. And soon after I likewise
determined upon going. Doricia went with me in obedience to the Laws of
Matrimony, and the Commands of her Father. She would rather have died than
departed thence, if she had not scared the Censure of the World. Being arrived
in Island, there was not any thing I omitted whereby I might rejoice her, and
free her from her so vain suspicions.

She was even convinced, and thenceforward, laying aside the sadnesses of her
mind, she was pleased with the expressions of my affection attending her abroad
a Fishing, of which our Island abounds above all other things. To this she
would come with much content, we lying purposelie for some days upon the
shore. Then also she took pleasure to view the wonders of the Island, which
even puzzle Faith, and render the relation of them suspicious.

All the Crows there are milke-white, and the Jay's utter an humane voice.
Island has there high hills, on the tops of which lies a perpetual snow, and
the bottomes give nourishment to a continual fire. There are likewise four
Fountains, a stones cast distance one from the other, all of contrary
qualities. The water of one is hotter than fire: And of another so cold that it
cannot be endured. The third is pleasant to the taste, and physical; and the
fourth rank poison. But all these Marvels, of which Nature may glory, yield to
a voraginous place, about the banks of which those men appear that have
perished by a violent death.

One morning (but against my will) Doricia stayed there, looking on a Damsel,
who with a loud voice called brother. He suddenly appeared, and had not been
thought a Ghost if she had not embraced him. He was demanded by her the cause
of his death: And answered, that to perform an acceptable service to Prince
Ossirdo, he with some friends went to the Kingdom of Cyprus to steal Dianea
thence. That they having got notice she was to repair to a Fountain, there
waited to have taken her. The performance had crowned the Design, if the
unexpected coming in of a Knight had not deprived them all of their lives.

Doricia, her old jealousies being awakened, at these words (perhaps persuading
her self, that this man by my appointment went into Cyprus) began to provoke
me with injuries so perspicuous, that I could not abstain from cursing my
Fortune, which I found daily in a readiness to molest my Reposes. I often
offered to interrupt her, and plead my excuses, but her outcries gave not an
opportunity to my reasons. Finally, the unhappy Doricia, not longer able to
endure her sorrow, ran (for what ever I could do) to the Fountain of poison,
and taking a draught of it fell presently down dead. I (although it be a
species of Felicity to be rid of a jealous wife) took so great a discontent at
it, that I fell into a sickness that endangered my life.

These news being brought into the King of Norway's Court, he was so offended,
that (for all my Ambassadors could say) raising a powerful Army, he came to
the harrowing of our Island. I having in the first battle found Fortune
averse, fled away disguised, esteeming it as a folly to tempt again that
Destiny who had evermore declared her self my enemy. My Father yielded,
having not Forces to resist. The Conqueror mollified by his tears, or rather
assured of my innocence, confirmed his Kingdom to him, reserving to himself
the Homage for it. I had no mind afterward to return into Island: but travel
up and down the world with an hope to see the malignitie of those influences
changed, which have hitherto continually designed me to misery.

Whilst Ossirdo made this Relation of his adventures, they heard some voices,
which, broken between those Trees, allowed not a distinction whether they were
the effects of joy or sorrow. Mending their Pace, they descried a Palace,
which being shone on by the second Luminary of heaven, to their eyes appeared
majesticall. They heard plainly Lamentations, whereupon persuading themselves
some violence was acted, they desired to be admitted in. They were scarce up
stairs, but entered into a Room where they saw five so near dying, that with
good reason they might be termed Carcasses.

Oleandro and Arnalta were soon known by them. After they had suffered those
tears to fall which so miserable an Accident deserved, they enquired of the
Damsels what was the occasion of so much evil. Understanding it to be poison,
Celardo remembering he had about him the Medal against poison, which Arnalta in
her haste at parting had sorgotten, took it, and laying it upon the breast of
Oleandro, he speedily recovered his senses. He nevertheless immediately
continued his Lamentations against Fortune, which preserved him in life that he
might be eternally miserable. Oppressed with sorrow, he had not so much
understanding as to know Celardo. He believed Nature had made resistance
against the poison, and esteemed it an addition to his wretchedness, that he
could not dye. But this affliction was soon passed over; for the Medal, which
was a stone, called by the Arabians Bezoardica, made the same effect upon all
the rest, freeing them out of the hands of death.

The joys and embracings cannot be expressed. Tired with so many doubled and
centuplicated signs of consolation and affection, they gave thanks to
Celardo, and Ossirdo, acknowledging themselves obliged to them for their lives.
Here renewing their thanks, they knew one another. Only Arelida accusing the
stars, and the Gods as Authors of her infelicitie, provoked a pity with her
moanes, even in those that ought to have hated her. She said:

Is it possible (O Fortune) that thou have dressed thy head, and rent thy sails
not to transport elsewhere the woeful effects of thy malignitie. Is it possible
that I should find also the Destinies inexorable against my death? Is it
possible that death, who satiates not his desires with Mountains of Carcasses,
declares himself nauseous to my life? I am so miserable, that even Hell
refuses me. Unhappy Arelida, for an adjunct to whose miseries the World,
Heavens, and the Gods have changed Nature. Love has rendered thee odious, Iron
cannot kill thee, Thieves fly from thee, the Sea vomits thee up, Poison works
not to effect thy revenge, nor to withdraw thee from the scorns of thy
enemies. O Knights, what wicked Acts have you pitifully exercised against me!
If with divine remedies you can animate the dead, you should not therefore
disquiet those that only in death suppose their security. I have not an heart
that can live oppressed with so many infelicities. But presently you shall see
the effects of your pity. Oleandro, Ariama, why delay you to run me through?
Why delay you to revenge your selves? Behold the hated, behold the abandoned
Arelida, who lived till now only to see you die. The hate which my unhappiness
necessitates me to bear you is that which hitherto has kept me alive. I have
not lived to live, I have lived to hate you. To what end then stay you; Kill
me, kill me. Behold my breast, behold my heart, which for their dotages merit
justice from your hands, and with reason cruelty from your swords. Since my
follies deserve not the honorable punishment of your disdain, afford me your
swords, which very well know how to deliver me from the Tyranny of Destiny.
It does not agree with your Fortune to permit me to live who cannot but hate
you.

Here she was silent, I believe to give leisure to her eyes, that they also
might present the sadness of her soul. Oleandro with that gentleness which is
proper to a native Prince, with his tears compassionated the miseries of such
a Princess. Not enduring that with so desperate conceits she should speak of
her self, he said to her:

Princess Arelida, it is time to calm your mind, accommodating it to the will
of heaven, which many times instructs us by an appearance of evil. The
remembrance of past things shall be buried in oblivion, whilst Ariama and I
will have no other memory but of an Obligation to serve you. It is not
convenient that revenge should reign in that breast where the Graces inhabit.
If Fortune has been willing to contrary you, show that your constancy can
triumph over the malignity of Fortune, and that out of Iron and fire you have
recovered health. The Kingdom of Numidia deplores your absence. The declining
age of your Father beseeches you not to abandon him, desirous to felicitate the
horrors of death with your presence. But if these reasons are not prevalent to
dry away your tears; if revenge overcomes your reason, if your sadnesses
cannot admit of comfort but by the determination of my life; if lastly the
hatred you bear me will give no leisure to the remembrance of the love which
you have borne me, behold my sword, behold my head, satiate your self, kill
me, cut me to pieces. I had rather die than live hated by you. It is against my
duty that I should permit that a Princess should hate me without being able
to vent it. So saying, he gave her his sword, and kneeling laid his head on her
Lap.

She fetching a deep sigh, and throwing away the sword raised him up, saying to
him: Oleandro, with how many sorts of weapons do you know to overcome your
enemies. I acknowledge my self vanquished, and from henceforth will change the
Altar of Revenge into that of Oblivion. I will meditate occasions to serve you,
as I have formerly studied ways to destroy you. I receive Ariama for my
sister, and beseech both of you to pardon the follies of an enamoured soul,
which until now had not any knowledge by reason. I commend my Kingdom to you
two, being unwilling to forsake this house, which has proved the cause that I
can compose my mind to live in quiet. I have no ambition for a Kingdom, which
finally will do nothing but disturb me and impoverish me. There is no happier
reigning than over ones own affections. These hence forward shall with all my
power be kept under to prevent me from encountering errors, which till now have
prepared precipices for me.

So saying, she embraced Ariama with such an Affection, that it gave not, no
not a sign to have received at any time any imaginable displeasure. Turning
afterward to Celardo and the others, she said to them: Pardon me (Sirs) that
till now, oppressed with my passions, I have neglected that entertainment which
is due to all, but in particular to those who have conferred benefits. I will
endeavor to supply it with so much the more affection. Then she made some
meats to be got ready, the Sun being advanced far in his course. Four days
this most noble Company continued with the Princess Arelida, without being
able to persuade her to return to her Kingdom of Numidia. Toward which
Oleandro, Ariama, Arnalta, and the Count of Olano parted. Celardo and Ossirdo
took their way toward the City of Fessa, which gives name to the Region and
Kingdom, and is the Metropolis of all Mauritania.

Arelida, utterly forgetting all those sorrows which would violently have
obliged her to Lamentations, enjoyed the delights of that solitude, which is a
Paradise to those hearts that know how to enjoy it. She threw to the earth the
Statue of revenge, raising in the place of it that of oblivion. It was an old
woman crowned with Mandrakes. With her right hand she held a Lynx bound, and
with her left a bow of Juniper. She trod upon a winged boy, who had his eyes
covered with Poppy. She changed afterward those black colors into others more
cheerful to the eye, and more agreeable to the life she intended. She
abolished those Pictures which excited resentments of sorrow, setting such in
their room as would rejoice the sight, Hares, Bucks, Birds, and Fish rendered
not there unemployed the heart or hand.

One day returning from hunting, got something afar off from hers, she espied a
Knight, that sighing with a continual complaint expressed signs of a very great
Passion. He was all armed but his head, having taken off his Helmet to take
air, or to give leave to the wind to carry those signs into her face whom he
loved. He bore in his Shield for his Empress some Roses, with a Motto which
said, Life and death from the Sun. She came upon him before he was aware, so
immovable was he become by his passions. He had not so much as perceived her,
if Arelida had not said to him, Knight, it were fit you dressed your self in my
clothes, since with such Lamentations you parallel the weakness of women. Tears
misbecome all, and especially a Knight, who should not know how to complain.
What can be looked for from him, who, to defend himself from sorrow, can make
use of no other Arms but those which fall from the eyes, put in practice by
every the weakest woman. The Knight blushed at these words, but with a gracious
behavior answered her:

Fair Lady, Lamentations are not prohibited to Lovers. Love exacts no other
tribute but of tears, and with them cannot be satiated. There is not any
strength of mind that can make resistance against that force which overthrows
the mind. Love is an oppression of the heart, which receives no ease but from
sighs and complaints. Rather he that loves is without himself, living in the
Object beloved, whereupon it is no marvel that the eyes should shed tears for
the damage of such a loss. I conclude (fair Lady) that he cannot love that
cannot lament; and that the kindness of the eyes is an Index of the facility
of the heart.

I confess my self convinced by your reasons, replied Arelida, and entreat
your pardon for my boldness in disturbing you, and for reprehending you for a
thing, of which I had never any feeling. I earnestly beseech you, for a
punishment for my error, to go to my house not far from hence, where I will
endeavor to serve you as much (as jesting) I have offended you. The Knight
refused not the invitation, and the rather by reason night was stolen much upon
them. Being asked by Arelida of the Amors that caused him to be so sad; in
this manner the Knight began to unfold them.

The History of the Stranger-Knight.
I (Lady) in little less than six Lustrums made love to many. My Genius and
opportunity have made me many times fall upon objects which were unworthy of
affection. The first was worse than base, my inclination being unable any
longer to abide the provocations of sense. The weakness of my age, and the
reverence of my Superiors allowed me not therefore occasion and design to
employ my self more worthily. In this I continued but a while, being
interrupted by one who with a severe censure watched over the dotages of my
heart.

I passed to the second, so much exceeding the former, as I found there beauty
above her, who out of her own choice betrayed that faith she owed to another.
Some years I continued in this affection, both because I could not enjoy her
but by stealth, and because expressing for me a great kindness, I conceited my
self eternally obliged to love her; I was diverted by an accident of Fortune,
which in amorous encounters discovered me to those eyes, who could not look
upon me but with scorn from them, and danger to me. Her tongue and authority
employed all their power, so that she recovered his favor whom she had
deceived, but upon condition to betray him no more. This she observed
inviolably, whence turning sensuality into friendship, I proceeded to new
complacencies. I met with two so singular beauties, that I should imagined them
from heaven if their infidelity had not discovered their Deceits to me. One,
that had a breast more barbarous than her name, betrayed me at the beginning of
my love, for conceiting her beauty of the quality of the Sun, she would
communicate it to all. The other, whose name was Aura, was of a mind so
covetous, that all the Treasures of the world were not sufficient to satiate
the Abyss of her Appetites. In Gold only remained the Ciments of her faith.
She knew no other Idol, and adored no other Deity; I took occasion to part
with them both in d^slike, being able neither to endure Rivalship, nor
mercinarinesse in love.

I was grievously fearful to apply again my mind to other Loves, not that my
sense was not assenting, but not to hazard my self under torments for so
undeserving objects. I exalted my mind upon greater subjects, and bestowed my
heart upon those beauties, which not to be termed of the world, I persuaded my
self were divine. And I should never have thought otherwise of them, whilst
they themselves made me account them Celestial. In these pursuites I employed
a whole Lustrum with so much the greater foolishness as hopes are more
doubtful, delights more dangerous, passions more vehement, and the fruit for
the most part fallen before it be ripe. They were not superior to others,
neither in loyalty, nor goodness, though they made profession of them:
peradventure worse, but (Mistrisses in the Arts of dissimulation) counterfeited
those qualities they had not. It is true that a prohibition renders the delight
the greater, and that it is an instinct of our humane kind to desire greatly
those things we are forbidden; because Consolations are embittered so by
direful accidents, that the dangers and changes do exceed the delights which
may be gathered from them. The examples of others directed me to get out of the
way; whereupon I had the Fortune to be secure with damage to those that were
endangered by it. The counsels of my friends (in a high manner) encouraged me
to that resolution which was scarce believed by those that saw it. In this
while I enjoyed many Mistrisses, imitating the custom of the Dogs of Egypt, to
drink and fly; more to vent the incitements of nature, than by the settled
contentment of my heart. These violences of sense being passed over, I was ever
penitent; the sensuality of pleasures being a torment to that mind which loves
that delight only by accident.

I had taken up a resolution to live free, all loves being loose and equally
engaged to cost and danger, when a pure chance of Fortune made me fall between
the Arms of a Beauty, which in despite of time, who had wronged her with some
years, had in her a -- I know not what conformable to my Genius. With this for
some days I proved all those allurements, and all those sweetnesses, which are
prodigally bestowed by the most dissolute, and the most free. She would move at
my very signs, and encountered my satisfaction before I knew how to request, or
desire them. She took that part of my Presents which was of the least value.
Truly, in her I could not discover any thing, but an ardent desire to serve
me, aloof from all those Interests which render the delights of Love to be
despised.

I confess that these tricks won such a possession in my heart, that although
I did not affect her, she pleased me so, that I knew not where to pretend to
more. One day by Fortune I discovered how I was inveigled. Finally, I perceived
she was not better then others of the like profession, but yet very much
cunninger than others. That which Age had stole from her Face, she added to
her wit. Pride and Covetousness strove for precedence in that mind, the most
perfidious, the most dissembling, the most base of the world. It was no
difficulty for me to leave her, my eye abhorring her no less then my heart.

I believe I lived but few hours free, because I gave way to my self to be
overcome by opportunity, or rather because it is the nature of a young man not to
live without love. By chance I became spectator of a Beauty so deserving, that
it was an injury to the judgment to imagine her subject to a parallel. I
suddenly gave her up the dominion over my self; it being an effect rather of
stupidity then discretion not to love her. I had the Fortune to serve her to my
Contentment, our practice not suspected, but to those that envied my Felicities
Conversation, made the flame greater, which so much the more increased, as a
suppressed Fire burns the violenter. For a great while I had not the Confidence
to declare my self. She with so great a wisdom concealed her Affections,
that she gave not me the opportunity to discover my love. If at any time in
Discourse I let a word fall to my purpose, she either seemed not to understand
it, or returned me an Answer contrary to my meaning.

Six times the Moon had made a Pomp of her Inconstancies, when being grown
impatient of my timorous secretnesse, feigning an Affection equal to that I
bore her, I asked her Advice: If it were better to discover ones flames to a
Mistress by Letters, word of mouth, or by the Intercession of others. She
readily answered me, that the Decision of that question depended upon the
convenience of the Lover. If he could come to speak to her (she said) at his
pleasure, it was not wisdom to make use of the trust of any in so jealous a
matter. That the Messengers of such Loves as are not prostitute, if they be
base, may be corrupted by others, as they be bribed by you. If they be of a
Condition above ordinary, the danger is greater then the profit. Many from
Messengers become Lovers, and of Substitutes Principals.

That a Letter is a dangerous thing, subject to a thousand Accidents, all
uncertain; and the rather, because he that writes Love Letters endeavors much
more to express himself eloquent then enamoured. They insert in them
Hyperboles, sometimes so far from truth and possibility, as the tongue durst
not be so impudent as speak them without blushing. Contrariwise, who speaks to
his Mistress himself, acquires the merit of secrecy, which is a most
necessary part of Love; being unwilling to trust with any other then his own
heart a business of such consequence. He shows himself bold also, which is
the Index of a noble mind, whilst fear ordinarily reigns in breasts repleat
with baseness. He acts his own Reasons with the greater Power; Eloquence never
failing that Tongue which pleads its own Interests: He persuades most lively,
who uses such means, that his Countenance accompanies his words, and whose
tears and sighs precede them. If a Lover with a bold Oratorie pleads the
Reasons of his Cause, he need not despair of victory: There being no mind
that yields sooner to Periwasions then that of Women: particularly treating of
Love, and rendering themselves easy to believe that which they desire,
frequently deceived by their own Opinion, which establishes them (by a
treacherous Consultation with a Looking-glass) in a state of Desert, worthy of
the obsequiousness of all hearts.

If one be enamoured, although a timorous respect dares hardly proffer what one
desires, there is no mind but may be inveigled, no oosome but may be enflamed.
A Woman shows a great merit in her self, if she has the valor to terrify
her servant. She is persuaded she has some Attribute of Divinity, when she
perceives such Veneration in those that love her. One ought so be fearful but
of great things; And a Woman cannot deny love to those, who loving her profess
so great estimation of her. Other things also there are which cannot be
expressed, nor brought to effect by Letters, nor by Messengers.

Thus she answered me. Whereupon I thus added; Then will I take your Counsel,
which without doubt will lead my heart forth of those errors, which those
encounter which take no advise but from themselves. So I revealed my Affection:
She remained without motion of my Proposal, and all her color flying from her
face, she neither denied me, nor afforded me a correspondency: I would have
added other new Importunities, but being interrupted by those that waited on
her, I left my Enterprise imperfect. The day afterward I found her languishing
in bed of a Malady not inferior to mine, for she perceived her heart wounded
with an impression. I attended on her, procuring her all those Remedies, which
by the ability of Physicians, or by the power of Art were imagined necessary.
In a short time she was freed from her sickness, driven away (I know not
whether) by my vows or tears.

But yet she kept her bed, to invigorate, especially her mind. when I afresh
represented her with my love. She thanked me for it, acknowledged her self
beholding, and promised me all correspondency, so they might not derogate from
the Laws of her honesty. I anew redoubled my Entreaties and Supplications;
whereupon, on the day (according to the Custom of the Country) when all gave
Presents, shea vouchsafed me a kiss. This so happy beginning gave me occasion
and heart to beseech more, and ravish more from her. It was an easy matter for
me, for she with expressions of Affection used to reach to me.

I attended the accomplishment of these Desires, which are not extinguished
with a kiss, when Fortune would infelicitate me with happinesses themselves. I
was chosen Commissarie to the Souldierie of the Castle of Lomapa by the
Council of State. My departure thence was with that resentment, as if my soul
were separated from my body. A thousand doubts combat upon the fear of my
mind, having abandoned her who can only reconsolate the sadnesses of my heart.
My greatest ease is to walk sometimes, wandering up and down these Fields,
participating my passion with them. You will not therefore hereafter have
reason to chide me, having understood the justice of my tears.

I suffer with you (Sir Knight) replied Arelida, and compassionate you; and so
much the more, because I have reason to do so. And now being come near the
Palace, they were met by the Squires, who having already covered the Tables,
waited the return of their Lady. Arelida and the Knight presently sat them
down. Where, after a supper of the most delicate meats, they proceeded into
diverse discourses, until being told by them that waited, that the night was
very far spent, they retired to their rests: although the grief the Knight
felt (for the great distance of his beloved Object) did not afford him, but one
short sleep disquieted by a thousand Phantasmes.

All this while Dorcone, the King of the Thracians, remained in Cyprus,
honored by King Vassileo, with an Affection above his Genius, by reason of his
new Enmity with the Prince of Creet. The day was spent either in Tournements or
Huntings and a great part of the nights in Plays and Dances. At all times the
Thracian would wait upon Dianea, who although she was full of sorrow for the
remote absence of Astidamo, feigned her self to accept him gratefully, though
she seriously hated him.

He repleat with confidence, through the Affection of King Vassileo, one day
taking him aside, requested the marriage with Dianea, demonstrating that these
Nuptials only could secure the safety of Cyprus, insidiated by the Kings of
Armenia, of Egypt, of Creet, and of all those that envied or feared the
greatness of him: That the wisdom of men consisted in preventing dangers. But
if these Motives should even prove useless, he hoped to obtain her, because he
could not bestow his daughter on a dearer friend, and a son more interested
to his Majesty. King Vassileo thanking the Thracian for his excellent
disposition, through which he was willing to change Friendship into Alliance,
replied; That in a business of such consequence, he would acquaint his Council
with it, to conclude the marriage, with the greater reputation to them both.
That he had designed to bestow Dianea on the Duke of Filena, to whom he had
imparted some of his Resolution with the Assent of the same Council, that if
it should be in his power to retract his word, he would do it more then
willingly, there being no comparison between the greatness of the Thracian,
and the poor Fortunes of a Duke. That Princes nevertheless in some business
were not Patrons of themselves. Leaving him then in this Commotion of heart,
he demanded the Opinion of his Council of State.

Only two raised Opinions. The Baron of Ovarta, a young man of great wit, who
preposed by Favors from the Thracian, maintained for him: And the Count of
Salinera, the greatest among the chief opposed him.

The Baron said, that the motions of a Kingdom had need of great stays. That
all foreign Princes were ill-affected, and all their Neighbors Enemies. If
that Thracia should not be interested in the defense of the Kingdom, they had
no other hope. That the modesty of the Duke of Filena would pretend no
Resentment to yield up that to a King, which had been promised to him. That he
would assent to it, having not an Ambition after so great things, and the
sooner, because that Promise had not exceeded the Kings desire, and the
Approbation of the Council. That Accidents alter the Deliberations of Princes,
who would not have a jurisdiction superior to others, if they might not alter
at their pleasures. He concluded; it was but reason to give a Queen to Thracia,
having slain them a King.

The Count of Salinera on the other side, having no other Affections but those
of the Public Interest, spoke with more lively Reasons.

Then (said he) shall the Kingdom of Cyprus seek for Kings from Thracia. Then
shall our Greatness be prostituted to the command of Barbarians. I know not how
such conceits become not rejected before they be spoken. What Motives should
invite us! Perhaps the greatness of the King of Thracia. Has then the Kingdom
of Cyprus need of Greatness. To join it to Thracia, is to destroy it, not to
make it greater. The Kingdom will be changed into a Province, and we shall all
be subjects to Thracia. The fear of our Enemies is not so much as to make us
deliver our selves into the hands of our very Enemies. I much more fear the
friendship of the King of Thracia, then the hatred of the King of Egypt, of
Armenia, Creet, and all the World. Then shall a remote Fear without other
Foundations then those of Opinion persuade the Counsel of Cyprus to
subjection. These same Kings which are asserted for Enemies would become united
to defend us: The reason of State not permitting the Augmentation of another.
His Majesty should lay to heart, if not his Word, at the least his Interests.
The Arms, and Armies are under the Dukes Command. To render him discontented,
in my opinion were to provoke him to the prejudice of the State: He has a
heart that cannot bear an affront. He added other Reasons, but nevertheless
the greater party gave Vote to that of the Baron of Ovarta, both because they
perceived the Kings mind inclined that way, and because they envied at the
Choice made of the Duke of Filena. So much Adulation and Envy can prevail in
Counselors.

The Consult ended; the King went to Dianea's Lodgings, and taking her by the
hand, led her aside; saying to her: You may see (through your own
understanding) our dangers and those of the Kingdom. All Princes aim at my
oppression, and if I prevent not their Malignity with some Defense, I must
only wait to become a prey to the Ambition of those who would raise war
even against Jove. This cannot be done without joining you in marriage to some
great Prince, who interesting himself in our Affairs, will be of power to
protect us.

There could not have been a worthier Election then that of the Duke of Filena,
while new Accidents had not presented to us new Resolutions. To alter an
opinion is convenient to all, but particularly to Princes; who fear not
censure, nor punishment for their inconstancy. The Interests of our security
have made me change the Duke of Filena into the King of Thracia, so much the
more deserving you, as you merit no less Personage for your Husband then a
King. You will evermore receive Commendations, following the Opinion of the
Council of State, and the command of your Father.

Dianea suffered not these words without displeasure: Yet she was unwilling
that any external signs should appear to her Father, desiring no^ to oppose
her Discontents though very reasonable. For a while she deferred her Answer, as
if she premeditated words, or rather because she was to declare an Opinion
remote from that of her Father, she was willing to prolong as much as was
possible her angring him. Lastly, the Ensigns, I know not whether of Shame or
Discontent, unfolded in her Countenance, she thus answered him;

Sir, in some things I supposed my self not obliged to obey your Majesty,
above once you commanded me that I should respect the Duke of Filena as my
Husband, and (in despite of my heart) I assented, which perchance was very
unwilling to submit to Matrimony. Now I would humble my self to your
resolutions if I could do it, or if it lay within my power to do it. I find my
self engaged to the Duke of Filena, and am not in a condition to receive
affections, nor to love another. Let the tenderness of a Father commiserate
the weakness of his Daughter, who with the losing of my self have been
willing to obey my Father. I do not call to your memory the infelicious
remembrances of the Thracians infidelity, because this ought to be a
consideration of discretion which some should propose to me. I have not an
ambition for the multitude of Kingdoms. This of Cyprus is sufficient to
satiate the vastitie of these thoughts, which peradventure would not be wooed
into a content with the Dominion of a World. The valor of the Duke of Filena
allows us not an oceasion to dread the hostility of enemies. The Kingdom of
Negrepont speaks too much otherwise of his virtue. I know not who would resist
a ship when he should assist at the stern.

She would have added other reasons, but was interrupted by King Vassileo, who
said to her: Dianea, I am not come to dispute with you, but only to acquaint
you with my resolvs. As a daughter you should reverence them, as disercet
commend them. The interests of the State and Kingdom appertain not to your
Age, nor to your Sex. It concerns me to make you obey, and acknowledge the
Obligation you owe to the Gods, and to a Father so affectionate, and so
indulgent.

Dianea, perceiving him full of anger, threw her self at his feet, and there
speaking and lamenting, united her tears and supplications to persuade him,
and overcome him at the same time. All was in vain, for with a rigorous
severitie he determined the Nuptials should be solemnized without delay.
Whereupon Dianea despaiting altogether of her life, would not any longer
conceal her affections. Prostrating her self again at his feet, with sobs,
and sighs, and all her cunning, she said to him:

Father, Behold the unhappy Dianea compelled languishing at your feet to
confess the errors and follies of her heart. I deny not to deserve the most
severe rigours of your indignation, not for any fault I can discern in my
Election, but for having made it without the approbation of your Majesty. But
now torments and crosses are prepared, for I cannot assent to a new Marriage,
having given my Faith to Astidamo Prince of Creete. Let not your Majesty think
that I will justify the demerit of my disobedience, for I will have no reason
against a Father who has been pleased to love me to such an excess: Much
less can I beseech you for pardon, because my mind cannot imagine an offense,
having made choice of a Prince so great, and so worthy; nor can I admit of
repentance for having elected him.

King Vassileo in a moment changed color a thousand times. That countenance,
which through age was nothing but palenesse, he apparelled with so many flames,
that it well preclaimed the fire which he nourished in his breast. He would
have thrust Dianea from him, who held him, embracing his Knees, if a sudden
fear had not brought a trembling both into his feet and hands.

Recovering in some measure his strength, and growing into a fury, he gave
command for the imprisonment of Dianea. There was not any that durst contradict
him, nor enquire of him the cause; showing himself so highly displeased, that
it was not with security of life to speak to him. About an hour after,
dissembling the flames of his perturbation, he sent for the Thracian, to whom
he related his miseries, with resentments so lively, that Dorcone himself was
enforced to accompany him in weeping. After wards, breaking the silence, he
was compelled to by grief, he began to say:

O what prodigies are these that reward me with inventions of impossibility,
only to render me miserable. Father you have slain me. How can it be, that
Dianea, who bears bashfulnesse and simplicity in her countenance, should be
disobedient to her Father? Can she be immodest? Your Majesty must excuse me if
I believe it not: For my affection would not receive an impression on of things
which might prejudice the honor of Dianea. But yet let it be how it will; I
beseech your Majesty to bestow her on me, because my affection is not capable
of any thing but the possession of her. I hope by serving her I shall dispoyle
her of all those loves which have rendered her engaged to another.

King Vassileo, setting aside the interests of his Kingdom, answered: Friend,
I am unwilling she should be another who would not be mine. She shall receive
from me double punishment, as from a Judge, and as from a Father. Having abused
the effects of my love she shall prove those of my indignation. The Thracian
replied, suggesting to him; That he could not more worthily supply the
Interests of her honor than by placing her in marriage; That otherwise she
would ever live with that blemish of shame on her Reputation. King Vassileo
becoming impatient by the provocations of sorrow, unable to suffer that others
should appoint him Rules to his Affairs, returned him a sharp answer: which
Dorcone taking great exception at parted from him repleat with anger. The
voices of the people increased it upon him, who always ignorant in their
Furies, supposing him the author of Dianea's miseries, followed him through the
streets with a thousand reproaches. The Thracian was become odious to all the
Court, his vices being discovered, appearing the greater, because for a time he
had dissembled them. Many times he held himself but little assured of his
life, perceiving the clamours multiplied in such a manner, that they expressed
evidences of an insurrection.

Dorcone resolved upon his departure, unwilling to render himself liable to the
Precipices of the Vulgar, always blind in their Judgments, and ever rash in
their Resolutions. He scarce arrived at the Port, when he saw the burning of
his two Galleys, consumed with fire before the Mariners could provide any
remedy. A few by swimming escaped the danger, the fire at one and the same time
having deprived them both of preventions, and an escape. It was an
impossibility to penetrate into the original, though the simpler sort imagined
it fire fallen from heaven. This accident nevertheless made him not at all
retard his departure; for Dorcone, hiring a small Vessel, went aboard with all
his.

Before he was got far from the Port, he was certified of the death of Dianea.
He with much ado suppressing his tears, began to vent a thousand imprecations
against that Father who had violated Nature, and thrown into oblivion the name
and affection of a Father. Before he would hasten the Mariners to fly from
that heaven, so impious, that it rendered a Father an Executioner to his own
Children, he would understand better the particulars of Dianea's death.

The Count of Vafraro, who had a great Acquaintance in the Court, and who (to
that purpose) was left behind by Dorcone, thus gave him an account of it:

After the departure of your Majesty, King Vassileo convoked his privy
Council, whom he made acquainted with the Amors of Dianea, proposing what
punishment a Daughter deserved that had disobeyed her Father, defamed the
Kingdom, and betrayed her honesty. By the Council there was two ways
demonstrated to him: The one of the Laws of the Kingdom, which appointed her
to punishment, and that of the affection of his Majesty which might render her
worthy of grace and pardon: Both just, though that of the Fathers forgiveness
more proper. For if he pardoned through the effects of his clemency those he
did not love; why ought he not to pardon her whom he should love more than
himself? Afterward he was beseeched by all the Council to impose upon the
inconsideration of youth that punishment which the error of the Princess
merited. That a Father neither ought to be a King or Judge against his
Children. That the old age of his Majesty required not such an affliction;
neither the Kingdom such a loss.

To these reasons King Vassileo answered, that he could not distinguish between
the person of a Father, and that of a King. That he had loved Dianea,
accounting her a support to his age, a reputation to his house, an honor to
the Kingdom, and a benefit to his People. But she proving otherwise, he was
obliged to hate her. That, that ill which impunity might bring forth, or the
dissembling of his Daughters errors enforced him to condemn her; else he
should always be held culpable of the miseries his Clemency would produce That
it was more profitable for the Kingdom to have no Heirs, than to have them
unworthy. That he should immortalize himself more by punishing her, than by
seeing her a mother of many Children. It being an higher reputation in a just
Judge, to take away the lives of his Children, than to abide them culpable.
This said, he made the Sentence of her death to be signed, which she had
incurred by the Laws of the Kingdom, having disobeyed her Father, married a
Stranger, and made an oblation of her self before the Nuptials were
solemnized. With a strange undauntednesse he subscribed it, whence many judged
him without love, or that he was insensible of compassion at the miseries of
his Daughter.

Dianea, when she heard the certainty of her death, and that the revocation of
it depended upon the cruelty of him who was inexorable, said: Is it possible
that an only Princess should not obtain a jot of pity in a Father to give her
the courtesy of her life? Not a jot of favor in the Council to excuse her?
No whit of wisdom in her Friends to bear with her, who was reverenced a
little while since as the Kingdoms Heir? Then by Picture were presented to
her many forms of death. She would not look on them; saying, That all deaths
were equally cruel, and so much the more commanded from a Father. She made a
little aggravation upon the infelicity of her Fortune, on the inhumanity of her
Father, and on the cruelty of the Council. Although these words flowed forth
from the Ardours of her mind, she had nevertheless so great a moderation in
her sorrow, that she prevaricated not into imprecations, which are proper to
those who look upon death approaching. She desired she might be allowed to
write to her Father, and it not being denied her, she signed a Folio with these
ensuing Characters.

I know not, if I should write to my Father, or the King, both of them proving
void of commiseration to sacrifice me to ignominy, dispoyled altogether of that
pity which resides in Regal minds, and in Paternall breasts. I will write only
to a Father, to acconsolate the horrors of an infelicious death with that name
which has had at all times the power to make me happy. I shall not be so
sensible (Father) of that hand which shall sacrifice me to death, as the sense
of the sorrow is insupportable to me, which has constrained you to condemn me
in my life and honor. I feel in me a more dolorous compassion that I have of
your heart, which is enforced to command the slaughter of a Daughter, than I
shall in the torment of the punishment for my transgression of the Laws. I had
rather dye a thousand times than imagine the Agonies which the errors of
Dianea have brought upon you. For knowing with what an excess of affection you
have been pleased to love me, I know that you have (in the defect of a
Daughter) condemned your own Innocence. O just heaven! O most upright Gods! You
that make you a mirror of the hearts of men reveal with some resentment,
justify with some realty, whether I have injured my Father, my Country, or my
self, I love a Prince then whom hitherto Fortune has not been able with all
her Favors to form one more great: who has delivered my Country from
Traitors, my Father from death, and his Daughter from infamy. I desire not
(Father) to provoke your tenderness to become pitiful by my supplication: I
only beseech you to consider, that I have loved one whom I am not able to hate
without the brand of infamy; I will use no more of justification. I would not,
pretending to be innocent, make the justice of my Father (for the death of his
daughter) appear wicked; All that is just which a Father commands. I implore
only a full indulgency to my Ashes, that under the displeasure of my Father I
may not descend also unhappy to my Tomb. Father, dry away your tears: For she
deserves not compassion that has incensed a Father. Consolate your self, that
my misery as well brought forth the punishment as the wickedness. Adien dear
Father: Adieu beloved Father. Forget in the Remnant of your days this unhappy
Dianea, who in the period of her death shall not have an imagination more
dirfull than the Remembrance of having offended you.

Dianea.


Having ended the Letter, she left it unsealed: And casting her self upon a
bed, she commanded the Duchess of Belprato she should suffer the sentence to
be executed. Two Salves entered the Lodgings, and putting an halter of silk
about her Neck they strangled her. The which was also suddenly done to them
before they were suffered to go thence. The Duchess of Belprate got leave to
continue a year by the Ashes of Dianea, whilst the other Damsel that waited
on her accompanied her in death. The City is full of sadness, and the bolder
sort exclame about the Palace of the King; Give us Dianea, give us the
Princess.

At this Relation Dorcone began to cry out with such a violence, that there was
none but thought he was struck to death. Repleat with fury and anger, he
called an Herald to him, whom he commanded to proclaim war against King
Vassileo, and without delay making them give their Sails to the wind, he took
his voyage toward Thracia.

The Herald attired in an habit of black Velvet, all embossed with Moons of
Gold, expressed an importunity to be brought into the presence of his Majesty.
Not being able to procure Audience, the People being assembled in the public
Piazza, he said with an high voice: Because King Vassileo has been so bold to
lay his hands unjustly upon his Daughter, the destinated Spouse of the King of
Tracia; And because King Vassileo, has always slighted the Name of the Kings
of Thracia, and has been an enemy, and a sheddet of their blood; Therefore I
in the name of the King and People of Thracia, who by Arms will repair such
injuries, proclaim and denounce War. So saying, he threw about some Papers,
which contained the same he had said; Afterward from time to time he
brandished in solemn manner some small Spears toward where the People were
the thickest. This done he went out of the City, and retiring to the Sea
entered into a little Barque, which attended him to transport him to Thracia.

The End of the Third Book.
DIANEA.
The Fourth Book.
FAme, that mixing Truth with Falsehood, renders the one and the other equally
mendacious, brought into Eno, the Metropolis of Thracia, the Death of Dorcone,
slain in Cyprus by King Vassileo, who had not formerly spared the life of
Amuritte. Darimena, who was elected by Destiny, the mother to these two Kings;
at these Reports, suppressing her Tears, proper to that Sex, made the forty
Rectors that assisted at the Negotiations of State be convocated. Discovering
to them the miseries of the Kingdom, and the afflictions of a Mother; she
provoked them by the Resentment of that Injury, which ought to be esteemed the
greater, depriving her of Sons, and them of Kings.

Then (said she) shall Cyprus become a Tem to all the Kings of Thracia? Then
shall the generosity and the greatness of the Thracians permit, that their
Glories shall be buried in Cyprus? To Arms, to Arms, your nation ought not to
be so vilely despised, which has disdained to vouchsafe a pardon to
Alexanders. If I did not know the braverie of your hearts, I should take upon
me to entreat you to revenge the slaughter of your Kings and my Sons. But it
is unfit that the words of a woman should serve as spurs to awaken your
Courages. To exhort you, were to prejudicate your hearts, which need no other
Motive, but that which they take from themselves. I know that my importunities
cannot add provocations to that virtue which eagerly aims at the service of
your Prince, and the honor of your Country. I only commend speed to you,
that delay may not show signs of dullness, nor add boldness to the Enemy:
Celerity is the Mother of Victories: He that is backward to revenge, animates
Foes to double their injuries. Who suddenly shows not a Resentment at
Offenses, seems to have deserved them.

These words were applauded by all the Council; whereupon the Fleet they
reinforced with such a multitude of men, that they seemed now to have
conquered two Worlds. The superintendency was given to the Duke of Nicopolis, a
subject of so worthy conditions, that there was not any that envied him that
honor. Many Princes that were then in Court, enamoured on the Princess
Dercilinda, accompanied the Fleet with the greatest possible strength of their
Soldiery. There was the Infant of Armenia, a young man whose strength
exceeded the tenderness of his years. The King of Scythia foolishly cruel,
who was unacquainted with any other reasons, but those of the sword. The Prince
of Missia, who, if he had had Valor equal to his Pride, had been without
equals. He was acute in his discourse, but always Satyricall, and therefore
odious even to his friends. The Prince of Epirus advanced into years, and
repleat with Wisdom; yet little skillful in matters of love: And the Infant
of Macedonia, who vaunting himself to be heir of Mars, omitted no occasion to
make him supposed such.

Of the Subjects of Thracia, among others, the most conspicuous were four
Dukes, of Pereno, of Scitone, of Redcsto, and of Selimbria. Six Counts; of
Finopolis, of Perontieo, of Tinia, of Patia, of Marcorico, and of Marcnia. Two
Barons, that of Cardia, so repleat with Wisdom and Valor, that his Pen and
his Sword rendered him equally glorious: And that of Achialo, perhaps richer
then the King, but of so unworthy a behavior, that (with good reason) he was
abhorred by all.

Whilst the Fleet proceeded toward Cyprus, Dorcone was carried by contrary
winds into the Sea of Saturn, within a little distance of the Isle of Melena.
There staying some time to mend the damages they had received by the late
Tempest, he made the Vessel to be directed toward Thracia; whilst with an
anxiety of Thought he accused Heaven, Winds, and Destiny; that even flyingly
they transported him not where his mind desired to be; at the same time he
took notice that the Mariners struck sail; and throwing forth the Cock-boat,
they did an obedience to a Gally. Full of indignation, he commanded the
Captain of the Vessel into his presence, of whom he demanded the cause of his
delay, who if they even flew would not have been altogether satisfied with it.

The Mariners History.
HE was answered by the Mariner, that being on the Sea, belonging to the free
Princes, he was obliged in duty to acknowledge their Dominion, which was not
doubted of by any. Then applied the Thracian, the Liberty of the Sea is also
put into contention by tyrannical Ambition. Can Navigation, which Nature has
rendered common to all, be usurped by any? The Mariner answered; That the
sailing on the Sea was common to all: It remained not therefore, that the
superintendency belonged not to some. That Nature her self had produced all
things for all: yet nevertheless the custom of Nations made every one the
Patron of their own Properties: That it was necessary that some should have
the predominancy of the Sea to defend it from the Rapacity of Pirates.

The Thracian replied, somewhat pacified in his fury; and why does this
Sovereignty of the Sea belong to the free Princes, and to no other Prince who
has his Kingdoms near to the same Sea?

It is no difficult business, added the Mariner, to prove it: There being two
foundations upon which the most just command of the free Princes over the Sea
is raised. The one is, having occupied it, as a thing altogether abandoned by
the first, and legitimate possessors; The other is, having defended it through
so many ages, against all the strength of Arms, and envy of all their Enemies
in the world. It is a thing without the jurisdiction of Doubt or Dispute, that
those things which have no Patron, or because they never had, or because the
lawful Lord slighted the Possession, belong to those that first seize them,
and defend them: and such an one has a just Title, and a Legitimate Command to
be accounted the true Owner. By the very same right the free Princes have made
themselves Masters of the Lakes, in the which they founded their City, believed
by all the Miracle of Nations, and a Model of that of Heaven. For the first
Founders, which were the most noble of the most noble Cities, retiting
themselves to avoid the cruelty of Barbarians, and finding them unoccupied, and
abandoned by the Owners, as a thing of small moment, gave the beginning to the
glorious Foundation of their City, not finding any that had the boldness to
oppose, they became Lords of the place, as of a thing that ought to be his, who
came the first to possess it. VVhereupon the Emperors of the East, and West,
dividing between them the Empire, declared; That the City of the free Princes
should remain free, and that it should be understood to belong to neither of
them.

The very same just Title then that the free Princes have of their City, they
have also over this Sea. This Sea of Saturn, which is enclosed by Istria,
Albania, Pulia, and Abruzzo, and Romania, did formerly appertain to the
Emperor of the East. The vicissitude of things which never suffers greatnesses
to continue in their heights, debilitated in such wise the Emperors Maritimate
Forces, that being unable to defend this Sea, he left it exposed to the
Incursions of all those which would infest it. The Narentines, a people
accustomed to Thefts and Rapines, becoming potent by molesting it daily,
imposed a tribute upon the Navigation, as absolute Patrons. The Emperor never
suppressed so great a presumption, although the tears of his Subjects, who were
robbed by these Pirates, acquainted him with the Losses they received by it.

The free Princes perceiving the Emperor had abandoned and neglected the
possession of this Sea, leaving it in prey to Pirates, who arrogated to
themselves the Dominion of it, and made themselves Lords of it, took Arms, and
by the space of an hundred and seventy years, fought continually against the
Narentines. These made such a resistance, favored and succored by the King of
Croatia, that in the end they were overcome, and constrained to sue for peace.
The free Princes gave it them, but with a condition, that leaving their
Piracies, they should never more demand any Tribute for Navigation: And so they
became Lords of this Sea, the Emperors of the East themselves assenting to it,
although Malignity, Envy, or Force should deprive them of it. In the
maintaining of which, the Gold and Blood which they have spent, would buy and
replenish a world.

I could say, that the prescription of time, which is of many entire ages,
admits not of putting to doubt a verity rendered so indubitable by years. I
could say, that a thousand, and a thousand Historians, not obliged to their
Interest, but to the duty of truth, affirm this lawful possession, and that
for above three hundred years, without ever being contradicted, they have
received Tribute for Navigation. I could add, that the greatest Princes of the
world are witnesses to this, who confirming this most just possession, have
upon many occasions by public writing confessed this truth. Neither have they
ever had the boldness to pass with their Fleets before they have got leave,
which has many times been denied them, and many times granted, according to
their Interests. I could adjoyne many other Reasons that vindicate this verity
above suspicion: but speaking to a Prince that understands all things, I have
peradventure trespassed too far in saying so much.

It is very true, that I cannot conceal (with pardon from your benignity) an
annual Ceremony, no less great then ancient, which these Princes use in sign
of Sovereignty ever the Sea. One day of the most solemn in the year, the Duke
and Senate of the free Princes, with the Ambassadors of the greatest Kings
with that State which is agreeable to their greatness go to espouse the Sea;
the Prince throwing in a rich Ring, saying; We wed thee (O Sea) in sign of a
true and perpetual Command. Can your Majesty desire more true, or Reasons more
satisfactory? VVonder not then, if I (conforming my self to Custom, and so
good cause for it) have done the Obedience that was due.

The Thracian seemed to be satisfied, saying; These Reasons bear a great
strength: but how come so great Interests known to you, accustomed only to
plow the waves, and know the winds? how grew you acquainted with the
Jurisdictions of these people? Your Majesty may please to know (the Mariner
answered) that I am not such as my Habit and Profession show. I am not a
Mariner, but through pure necessity, Fortune that blindfoldly dispenses her
Inconstancies, has made me rather trust to the Infidelity of a Sea then that
of a Prince.

I was borne in Catalonia the only son of a Duke, who for his virtues might
have pretended to the greatest matters, although he had not an Ambition to
desire them. My King knowing me an emulator of my Fathers example; suspected he
should neither keep his Life nor Kingdom, if I should have Children, or should
come into a way to have any: I was compelled to rebel against my Genius, and
to put on an habit different from my heart. This did not satisfy to secure the
fears of my King, who perhaps was suspicious of punishment for his own
violences. Comforted with hope, I undertook a voluntary Exile. I went into the
Kingdom of Fortune, and even into that City which is accustomed to allure
every one by the Name of Love, although in the effects it returns death.

There I had the occasion to detest Covetousness and Ambition, that triumph in
that Court. Adulation is there in an excess, every one endeavoring to advance
himself in some Degree of Favor with his Patron, for his own advantage. The
pillage and sale of Places, sacred to the gods, is not reputed a Crime, because
it is practiced by the greatest. Cruelty there keeps residency, they not
knowing Love, who know nothing but to destroy Nature. Gold becomes a recompense
to the most vile, and the most ignoble. Holiness, Innocence, and goodness
professed in words, but by deeds altogether trodden under foot. All there is
vendible, and many there sell themselves at the low price of a Mercenary hope,
so much the more uncertain, in that it depends on a life for the most part
consumed of Physic and Years. The Kings there are Elective, whereupon they
attempt all means to enrich themselves, though to the prejudice of the
Kingdom, and their Subjects. Rewards and Punishments are be-bestowed at
random. Bribes overcome all difficulties: nor is there a greater Desert then
that of Riches. Justice in that Kingdom has eyes and hands. There is no
Religion but in habit, and that for the most part so lascivious, that it
equals those of the most public Courtezans. Virtue, which usually in that
Kingdom attained to the Crown, is reduced into such a Contempt, that either
it is not known, or if known, despised. Hypocrisy possesses a great part of
those that desire to deceive the people. They endeavor the suppression of
truth, and there prohibit Pens and Pensils. They forbid to others those things
which they would enjoy alone, and with the greatest severity punish those
faults which they themselves are guilty of. In brief, the most execrable
Crimes, and the most detestable by the Laws of Nature, and the World, are in
this Court become naturalized.

Upon good Reason I can affirm so much, having to my own peril had trial of
them all. To please the insatiability of those, who deprived me of mine own,
promising me what belonged to others; in a short time, I found my self made a
scorn to the Covetousness of those impious ones, who so extremely hate
Poverty, that they cannot as much as endure it in others. I was constrained to
depart thence, food failing me to sustain life withal: The promises of my King
vanishing, together with that allowance which he owed me upon all Obligations.
But there is no reason that is prevalent with the powerful. I retired into the
Island of Roses, where betaking my self to Navigation, altogether clearing my
mind of those hopes which were able to disquiet me, I pass away my years in
felicity.

They were in this while advanced a great way in their voyage, and entered into
the Archipelago, when they discovered a Fleet, which made them put a period to
their Discourses. They that stood Sentinel, gave notice that they disoovered a
number of Sails so great, that a greater had never been seen upon those Seas,
and that by their Streamers they appeared to be of Thracia. Dorcone troubled at
this News, proceeded on in such an anxiety, that he knew nor what to imagine:
but this change continued not loog; For two Galleyes putting forth to know the
Vessel, and hardly understanding their King was aboard it; but sign being
given of it to the Navy, there was not any demonstration of joy omitted. The
Duke of Nicopol is, with all the other Knights came to receive him; whereupon
entering upon the Admiral, he enquired the cause of their sailing. When he
understood it, he began to thank the Gods that had exceeded him in his desires.
He acquainted them with his Thoughts, and so without any delay they went on
toward the Kingdom of Cyprus. They sailed six days, and there wanted not
two hours of determining the night of the seventh when the Fleet entered into
the Port of Cromia, distant from the City of Cury half a League, situated on
the top of the Cape toward the West. Although the Soldiers were prepared for
battle they found no impediment that might prohibit their Landing.

King Vassileo being ascertained of this evil that was near him by the
preparations of so powerful an enemy, his sorrows for the death of Draned,
being for the most part past over, (a new hurt frequently occasioning the
forgetting of the pain of others) betook himself to the defense of his
Kingdom. He confirmed Viralto the Duke of Filena in the Generals place,
although he urged to it by Floridea had attempted all means possible to be
dispensed with. The King would have the opinion of his Council about the state
of this War, so much the crueller by how much the unjuster. There were diverse
opinions, and many not without Interests. Those that had possessions, the
nearest to the enemies violence, eagerly maintained that they ought to impedite
his Landing. These were their reasons:

That it was not fitting at the beginning of a War to show any sign of fear,
shutting themselves up within Walls, erected only for the weakness of those
minds that dare not make a wall of their own breasts against the courage of
their enemies. That keeping the Thracians by strength some days at sea, they
might be constrained to suffer those discommodities that peradventure might
have the power to persuade them into new deliberations. That they ought not to
abandon without blood a thing so dear to them as the Port: neither was it
reasonable to lose it without danger. Perhaps the Thracians having experimented
our Force will repent them of the Enterprise. There is not any thing that
alters minds more than peril. To concede ones own to an enemy without blows
is to increase his pride by the cowardice of our own Soldiers. That the
Thracian, being kept aloof at Sea, will suffer the incommodities of hunger,
which being permitted to Land he will make us undergo. These reasons, though
they were lively prevented by those to whom their own interests added the more
carnestnesse, did not attain, persuasion, the Baron of Acamara speaking to the
contrary with his utmost eloquence.

It is a rashness (he said) to contend against impossibility; we must leave
the Port free to our enemies, because we have not Forces to defend it. The
reasons alleged were probable, if the Island of Cyprus had but one only Port:
But having so many, which of them shall we defend? The Thracian Fleet is so
numerous, that they divided can assail us in diverse parts. On the other side,
we have not so many men that we can part them. In my opinion, it will be the
surest way to preserve our Soldiery in the principal Cities until wisdom or
fortune shall afford us an occasion to attempt greater matters. If by Arms we
should oppose their landing, we should have our enemies in our face. Leaving
them the Port and the Field, fighting them they will be always divided. The
Soldiers will the rather stick to our defense, seeing that we would not have
our security by their danger. The Cities are well stored with provisions for
life, and Ammunition for war: Is it possible then in the mean while that our
miseries should not awaken the pity of those who fear the greatness and the
ambition of the Thracian. I believe the Embassage destined to the King of Egypt
will not prove fruitless. The King of Arabia would not see our oppression.
Mauritania and Gorsica doubtless willstir in our defense. In the mean while,
to keep our Forces entire is the most secure way: It will always be time
enough to hazard them. Valor consists in fighting, not in precipitating. Let
us let our enemies land, it being an act of prudence to leave that which cannot
be held without peril. This is my opinion, who have no Interest greater than
that of the public safety. Notwithstanding I always reserve my self to an
obedience of what your Majesty shall command.

There was not any that had the confidence to oppose those reasons: Whereupon
the Thracians came to land without hinderance. But they would not remove from
the Port until they received information from their Spies. Being certified of
King Vassileos Resolutions, they plundered a great part of the Isse with small
profit to themselves, the people and all things of value being got into the
principal Cities. They put it into a dispute whether they should first attempt
the Conquest of the other Cities, or of the Metropolis, which was Arsinoe. Many
delivered their opinions, and amongst others the Duke of Pereno maintained they
should first take the other Cities before they laid siege to Arsinoe.

Conquests (said he) and victories consist in the reputation of Armies: And how
can this reputation be acquired continuing at the siege of a City rendered
inexpugnable by the strength of the situation, and the obstinacy of the
Defenders? I for my own instruction have studied the design, and I think it
insuperable if you have no secret intelligence, which if you have I am
satisfied. It is built upon a natural Rock, and not liable therefore to be
mined. The walls are all of fine stone, and so broad that two carts may meet.
On the top they are made after the fashion of a Scarpe, and within there is so
much room that it can contain an infinite number of people. Within it is
fortified by an high Cavagliere, and three Bastions of earth. It has a
Bulwark in the wall furnished with warlike instruments, that both from above
and below scour the ditch from one side to the other. It is also defended by
great Towers which encompasse it, and within has a large street following the
Circuit of the walls for the convenience of the horse. The Ditches are deep,
industriously made by the force of Chizels. The Flankers of the Ditch are as
high, or higher than the top of the walls. The earth without is made like a
Scarpe, so that the houses of the City cannot be discerned, and in assaults can
receive no harm. There is also the Castle trenched about with ditches, into
which the Sea comes, in such wise situated, that I figure to my self the
winning of it an impossibility. Contratiwise, setting upon others less strong,
and weaklier defended, our Soldiers will receive a recompense for their
labors more commodiously, and with less danger. All the chief strength of
King Vassileo is within Arsinoe; there he attends us, there he wishes for us.
He will consume us before he can be overcome. It is provided with victuals a
long time, and fears not storming. For my full discharge I must add, that to
besiege it is to endanger the Army, the air being unwholesome, and the waters
corrupted, whilst they within the City on the other side have most pure in
their wells. All the Island being surprised, what will King Vassileo do with
the only place of Arsinoe? Afterward we may with less inconveniency besiege
him, having no Foe at our backs. I beseech your Majesty to excuse me, if
peradventure I have not encountered the best, and your meaning.

The Duke of Nicopolis, all the other remaining silent, thus answered him: If
all the Cities of the Kingdom of Cyprus would fall into our hands with that
facility that your opinion figures to you, I should likewise subscribe that
Arsinoe should be the last that should prove our Forces. But all the Cities
being very strong, I must affirm there can be no securer counsel given, than
in the first place to bear our Arms to the Siege of Arsinoe. It will be a
great terror to King Vassileo, and all his Kingdom, to see us resolved upon
the most difficult enterprise; without taking Arsinoe, and the King, what will
the Kingdom of Cyprus avail us? When these are fala into our hands, who can
supply his Office? Who will refuse to obey us? Rewards and punishments are
ordinarily fomentations to the greatest resistances. The King being taken, who
will adventure his life without hope of reward! And who will prove faithful,
not fearing the punishment of infidelity? But let us pass to a point of higher
consequence. We ought, without doubt, to believe that King Vassileo will be
aided, either by those that love him, or by those that fear us. To persuade
our selves otherwise, is to give credit to the apparency of dreams, and to
flatter our own desires in an impossible supposition. Their Embassage designed
for Egypt is now known, and the jealousies of other Princes, who fear our
greatness. Succors then coming in time, before Arsinoe be took, or King
Vassileo slain, all our endeavors will prove in vain, and our Armies
fruitless. Then we shall be necessitated to adventure a battle with an
incertainty to which side victory will incline. The taken City seeing aid come
will be against us, partly for hating to be under our command, and partly to
deserve some reward from their King. Having betrayed, and renounced their
friends, with the greater facility they will deceive their enemies. It is not a
secure resolution to confide in the conquered, whilst any hope of their former
Liberty remains in them. They will rather be an impediment to us; for being to
go to field, we must dismember our Forces to guard them with a good number of
Soldiery, not to afford them an opportunity of rebellion. Arsinoe won, all is
won, and the Kingdom subjugated. The head is that which enlivens the members,
and gives motion and strength to all the rest of the body. That the place is
inexpugnable I know not to affirm, although I acknowledge it very strong. As
light is communicable to all eyes, so there is not any place that submits not
to a valor above ordinary. All that which is subject to necessity, and to the
command of the elements, may also be brought under the Laws and strength of a
Conqueror. A Sword can make way through all; neither is there any thing but
perseverance, and experience may overcome it. So much the greater will the
glory and the reputation of the Thracian Armies be, which attempt not upon
enterprises imagined possible. Facile attempts are thought unworthy of the
Thracians.

This opinion prevailed, whereupon all the Army began to press upon Arsinoe,
they having took order that their Galleys should block up the mouth of the
haven. Viralto, who was unwilling to adventure upon so unequal a battle, kept
within the Walls, issuing forth only under the advantages of night. The first
time he did great harm to the Thraeians, with the slaughter also of many of
their Officers: But once falling into an Ambuscado, he was in danger of being
slain, losing a great part of his men. Therefore he adventured but seldom
forth; and only to impedite their Machines, which the enemy built, carrying
fire to them, but ever with very much danger.

The Duke of Nicopolis perceiving that a part of the Army was sufficient for
the begirting of Arsinoe, whilst they within possessed with fear stole out to
run away, and not to fight, counseled Dorcone to attempt some surprizall.
The Thracian approving of the Counsel, with ten thousand men marched to
Ceraunia, sending the Count of Maronia with as many more to surprise Carpassia.
This fell speedily into the Earls hands; for coming upon it by night, and the
Guard being deceived, he was brought into it without Resistance. They saw
themselves seized upon before they knew the Thracians. Some that had time to
lay hold on their Arms, there miserably lost their lives. The Count staid not
there, for leaving a good Garrison in it, he advanced to the taking in of some
Towns, in the which he found no opposition of any moment.

Clides was a very strong Castle, which with a few Soldiers could withstand
any violence. A Knight of good birth commanded there in Chief; but so
unskilful in Martial affairs, that he had scarce the courage to look on the
enemies Colors, and so basely fled thence, that he became a shame to his
Nation, and a disgrace to those who had advanced him to that Degree. So the
Count took that place, and remained Master of all the Champaine toward that
part of the Island. On the other side, Dorcone, going to force Ceraunia, had
the Fortune to seize upon a a Gate unexpectedly; but was suddenly repulsed by
the Guard he found there. The Baron of Nicomia was Governor, a subject for
every condition regardable, but admirable for his Loyalty. He defended the
place with so much Valor, that he gave not occasion to the Thracians hope to
depart thence with Victory: Although a sudden fire had consumed his
Provisions of Meat, and his Ammunition for war, he was not at all dejected,
resolving rather to dye then to be wanting to the Generosity of his own heart.
The Thracian, who desired to carry this place, tempted the Baron by those
means that ordinarily use to overcome any possibility. The King made a Letter
his Subject to overcome that mind, that so well knew how to defend himself
from his Sword.

Count of Nicomia.
Now that Fortune gives me occasion to hope for the possession of this
Kingdom, and of this place in particular which you keep; I will make a show of
my goodness, and the estimation I hold of those that resemble you in virtue, I
will invite you to give me a thing that will be mine, and which you cannot keep
but for some moments, and with danger rather to lose your life then defend it.
I desire this place as your Gift, not so much to obtain the Possession of it,
as to meliorate the Conditions of a Knight, who has known how, by his valor,
to oblige even his Enemies. You in defending it have accomplished all the Vows
of your honor and reputation; and have exceeded those, of whom hitherto I have
made trial. Conceit not your self obliged to endeavor a thing impossible,
nor to combat against necessity. Assent then to that which you cannot avoid.
You are invited by a King, who makes profession of Glory, and who would not
counsel you to an Action, if he supposed that it were unworthy. If you
consider your own state, and that of this place, you would perceive the
dangers, to which the Gallantry of your beart exposes you. I mention not
rewards, not to contaminate the generousnesse of your Miude. Suffer not that
Necessity should inasperate the Indulgency of a Conquering Adversary.

Dorcone.


This Letter carried by a Trumpet, bad no other effect, but obtained an Answer
as repleat with Courage, as that heart was generous that dictated it and the
hand valiant that writ it. Notwithstanding, he forgot not that he writ to a
King, who might hereafter chastise him for an inconsiderate Answer. He writthen;

SIR,
When by the Majesty of King Vassileo, this Place was assigned to me, I
vesolved rather to be buried in it, then give it up to any others then the King
who recommended it to me. I should do the same for your Majesty, if I had
received the honor to serve you in any Fortune. It only grieves me that I
have shown so much easiness in my Actions, that they have been able to move
the hopes of a King to tempt me to infidelity. Nevertheless, I hope I shall
not deserve the lesser glory by enforcing my self to overcome those
Necessities with the which your Majesty thinks I am environed, and to render
that belief fallacious which figured to you proceedings against my Loyalty. I
shall not pretend any higher Reward by my Actions, but the satisfaction of my
King, with the which I shall always be,

The most humble, and most devoted Servitour of your Majesty, The Count of
NICOMIA.


The Thracian disdaining to see the constancy of those that were combated by
necessity, gave command they should be stormed at two places in one time,
Those within with such an undauntednesse defended themselves, that very many
times they made them repent, whose courages had transported them so far. The
Governor willing to lay hold on any advantage, commanded a Captain to issue
forth with a Troop of Horse, and to charge the Enemy on the left side, whilst
another should do so on the right. The Thracians intent only on their Assault
might receive a notable loss.

The Captain refused to go, saying; That he loved not his men so little to
endanger them to Death. That it was rashness, not valor, to fight without
hope of victory. That to open the Gates could not be without peril, at the
same time Conquerours, and the vanquished having opportunity to enter into the
City. The Governor angry at such a Reply, and the rather because it was in the
hearing of all the Officers, and believing without doubt that he was gained by
the Treacheries of the Thracian, unwilling that such a Liberty should pass
into an example, drew his sword, and many times calling him Traitor, and enemy
to his King, with two thrusts killed him, running him thorough the breast. This
was carried to two of the dead man's brothers, who with no ordinary valor were
repulsing the violence of the enemy. Not supposing themselves secure of their
lives, and making more account of Revenge then honor, they left their
standings, and making many others adhering to them and friends to do the like;
they said, What reward can arise to be from Victory, since our own party is
crueller then the enemies? What Palms can glory promise us in a triumph soiled
with our blood? Are not the Thracians sufficient to kill us, but we must feel
the sword of our friends? This is the fruit of our hopes. This is the end of
our victories. Are soldiers so recompensed? Do they so Crown Conquerours with
the death of their Brothers, with the slaughter of their friends, and the
destruction of the most valiant? The Foe surely would not have been so cruel.

The Thracians were aware that on that part the Wall was without Defense; but
they were unwilling to be too suddenly confident, suspecting Treachery.
Lastly, the boldest among them leading the way, they made it easy to others to
climb after them; whereupon a great number being got up, they set open a Gate,
with the death of those that made resistance. The Governor ran thither, but it
was too late, the enemy being increased, and he in such manner being abandoned
by his own Party, that he had not so much time as to retreat into the Castle.
Notwithstanding, his defending himself with a great deal of Courage, he was
set upon by such a multitude of Soldiers, that after he had received many
wounds, he fell down dying, whilst the Thracians possessed the whole City.

They fell to the sack of it, with such a slaughter of the Inhabitants and
Soldiers, that there was not a person of any condition, who was not a partaker
of the mischief. The Covetousness of the Conquerors being satiated with the
Riches of that City, which were inestimable, they gave themselves over to
luxury, not sparing the most noble Maids, or the most chaste Women. The night
came upon them, which found them drowned in sleep and wine, without either
Guards or Sentinels. They that fled from Clides, assembling together all those
others which forsook the Towns to retire into Arsinoe, understood the taking
in of Ceraunia. The Count of Terra Grossa, that led those soldiers, imagining
with himself that Victory had rendered them without Guards, and Defense,
resolved to assault them.

It was a little after midnight, when he attempted to surprise a Gate. It
succeeded happily to him, finding only the shouldiers, who rather suffered
themselves to be slain, then show any signs of fighting. They were in such
manner spread over the City, that the noise was not observed, every one
supposing those voices were of their own soldiers. If also any loud groan
pierced the ears of the Captains, it was believed of the miserable
inhabitants. It was already day, when lastly, approaching death made them aware
of the damage they had received. The King would have made head, but finding
himself only with ten or fifteen of his Guard, he thought it wisdom to
withdraw from danger. He cast away the Royal Ensigns that they might not
witness who he was. The confusion of soldiers wearied with so much slaughter,
exempted him from imprisonment, and secured his flight, the greatest part of
his notwithstanding being took Prisoners.

He was got a League from Ceraunia, when he discovered a Troop of Horse which
came against him. He accounted himself dead. He began to cry out, he was the
King, that they should not hurt him. These, throwing themselves from their
Horses, ran to reverence him, revealing themselves for the Brothers of that
Captain, slain by the Baron of Nicomia. They said they were come to change
Fortune, not willing to live any longer under his Command, who had so cruel
Ministers; That if he would please to accept of their service, he should find
them as faithful, as where they had given a trial, by abandoning the defenses
of the Wall. The Thracian received them with affection, offering himself a
Companion to revenge the injust death of their brother.

Being arrived at the Camp under Arsinoe ^s Fugitives, they brought a great
terror into the minds of the Soldiers. And although this loss was
insensible to the greatness of such an Army, nevertheless, Valor consisting
more in the heart then in the number; many figured to themselves dangers
remote, not only from imagination, but sense. If the news of the Victories of
the Count of Moronia had not reconsolated and envigorated the Army, without
doubt this enterprise had fallen to nothing. When they saw those Soldiers so
laden with spoils, envying their felicity, with a great deal of courage they
longed for an occasion to fight.

Viralto gave them one; for being advertised of all their successes he
consulted, with K. Vassileo to tempt Fortune a little under the auspiciousness
of the night. By redoubled Messengers he gave the Count of Terra Grossa to
understand, that with the greatest strength possible he should march off to the
enemy, just at that time when he thought him the most engaged in sleep. That
giving a sign by fire of it, and finding himself answered, he should fall on
them with all violence, forbidding Pillage to every body, and taking of
Prisoners.

The Count, having received this Command, put himself into order, without
communicating his thought to any whatsoever. Being drawn near to the Enemies
Camp, the night being already far spent, and the sign given and received,
he divided his men into two Bodies, to bring the greater confusion, and the
greater fear. There were two ways which led to the Thracians Quarters. The
one the ordinary, known to all, through the Champaine: the other full of Bushes
and Stones, a little about by the Shore. By this he would march, commanding the
Baron of Lapithi, a Knight of great Fame, though poor in estate, to advance
through the other.

These two Divisions (amounted to above three thousand Combatants, and although
unequal in number, yet not inferior in hope) attended the advantage to
assail an Army, which they believed reposed secure under the shadow of the
night. They silently marched on, nor broke silence until they were come up to
the first Guards. Then thundering forth an infinite of shouts, that would have
incited fear in the breast of undauntednesse it self; A sound of such warlike
instruments accompanied those cries that animating all to victory rendered the
Soldiers more fearelesse against the enemy. Fear and death opening a gap
among the Thracians, made them give way to the Corpse de Guard, who with their
flight filled all the Tents with confusion and noise. The nearest, becoming
bold by necessity, ran to Arms, but sleepy, and full of wine, no knowing
either Command, or obedience, fell upon themselves, treading upon, and striking
one another.

They said, repleat with fear, where are those that assail us? Who has the
boldness to disturb so powerful an Host? Are they enemies, or traitors that
provoke us to Arms? Many in this while thought upon flight, which was no less
dangerous than fighting. Though the Trumpets called the Soldiers to their
Colors, though the Captains endeavored to reduce them into their Ranks, it
succeeded but slowly, and with disorder, the darkness concealing the blushes
of the Cowardice of the most vile. At the self same time the news of this ill,
and the shouts of the Soldiers arrived at the cares of the Thracian. He
presently armed himself, commanding the Duke of Nicopolis that he should make
resistance on that part, whilst he turned himself to the other.

To see their King so exposed to dangers was the occasion that all hastened to
the fight, not so much to overcome the enemy, as to defend the King, and to
merit by the attestations of their valor. The Count of Terra Grossa having
broken into the Trenches, and won some of the Forts strove to set them on fire.
But the Thracian coming upon him with the greatest strength of his Army, saw
the mighty slaughter of his. The Soldiers were already drawn back to the
breach, when in the mean while Viralto marching out of Arsinoe fell upon the
Thracians, meaning to come on their backs. He assaulted them with mighty
outcries to increase the horrors of the battle, and the night.

Viralto said to the Soldiers: On valiant Spirits, and triumph over those,
who, almost overcome with sleep and fear, have no resistance against your
valor. Let us sacrifice to Revenge, by the benefit of the night, these cruel
men, who causelessly hate us. Regard not their number, which is neither defense,
not security to them, but adds to their confusion. Being disorderly in
croudes, the darkness will make them kill one another instead of us. If with a
generous resolution you do not strive for the victory, which Fortune offers
you, there will be hereafter no more hope neither for liberty, nor for life,
nor honor.

This threefold assault in this manner daunted the courages of the Thracians,
that with a difficulty they were made to move by their Officers. The Count of
Macronia, with all the strength he could gather, turned himself to that part
of the danger, and constrained Viralto to retire with all those that followed
him. Whereupon these, not a jot retarded by the hurt of wounds, by the loss of
their Companions, or by the fear of death, would pass the Bridges or dye. Now
they grappled with those that resisted them, and now with an obstinate
resolution, making a Lather of dead bodies, they attempted to clime upon their
Rampires; Darts and Arrows, though sent at random, yet fell not in vain.

Viralto, willing to show proof of his courage, forced the Trenches in despite
of all those that opposed him. He could dot be followed but by a few, the
Princes of Missia and Epirus falling on with such a number of Sonldiers, that
the Duke was enforced to render himself prisoner, whilst all those were
slain that accompanied him. On the other side, Dorcone and the Duke of
Nicopolis rendered vain the Forces of the Count of Terra Grossa, and the Baron
of Lapithy.

The night to both the Armies increased the slaughter exceedingly, for not
perceiving advantages, or dangers, every one encountered death without fearing
it. The Count of Terra Grossa not able any longer to abide the impetuousnesse
of the Thracians set fire to their Tents, making also the same to be done to
many of his. The Thracians, on the other side, making the wood-worke to be cast
to the ground, prevented the fire from increasing: Yet the smoke adding to the
darkness of the night occasioned more horror to the Soldiers, and the
Conflict to be more cruel. Many fallen and dying with a new manner of anger
attempted revenge upon Carcasses. Others losing their swords made use of their
nails and teeth, with so much savagenesse, that they appeared rather beasts
than men.

The Duke of Nicopolis, not able any longer to abide that the victory should
hang doubtful, the Sun being now risen, leaving his command of the Soldiers
to the King of Scythia, and the Infant of Macedonia finding that multitude
availed not but to disorder them in those narrow passages, led a great Party
out thence, and taking a compass fell upon the backs of the enemy, making a
way through them. The Count of Terra Grossa advertised of this danger, without
expressing any show that he shunned it, sent word to the Baron of Lapithy, that
wheeling about with all the speed possible, he with his men should sustain
that charge. The Baron obeyed; but being presently followed by the King of
Scythia, and the Infant of Macedonia, he was taken in the way by the Duke of
Nicopolis. There in an open place, their small number being known, they were in
such manner straightened, that they had not hope to save themselves.

The Count of Terra Grossa, who saw the danger the Baron was in, hopeless to
conquer, charged on to relieve him. Dorcone followed him, animating his to
victory. He said: Behold the enemy that flies and leaves the Field. Behold the
Palms which a Triumph promises us. This miserable Remnant that has escaped
our hands it behooves us to subdue, to give satisfaction to our anger. Behold
the Enemy that retreats, not so much to over come, as to be overcome. Rescue
with all your force your friends from the madness of this desperate Foe, which
runs to death. So having said, he moved to follow the Count, accompanied by all
his Squadrons.

Cruelty triumphed in this new encounter, Every moment the Soldiers fell, and
their own dangers gave them not leisure to compassionate the miseries of
others. The Colors were confused and disordered in the battle, and the Army
now lost those Parties that observed martial Rules. The quantity of the dead
served as Trenches for King Vassileo's Soldiers, encompassed by so many Arms
that defense was impossible. The slaughter that the Archers made was without
number. Dorcone, not regarding that he was a King, concentred himself among
the thickest, hazarding himself to every danger. He was followed by all the
Princes, and those of his Guard, who continually made vows for his health and
safety. The Duke of Nicopolis also followed by the Barons of Cordia, and of
Achialo exposed himself to all perils. Now he broke the order of their Ranks,
now encountering the most courageous, he gave leisure to others to assail the
weakest. Finally, he managed his sword with such a fierceness, that his
enemies thought him a lightning. Yet nevertheless this did not daunt the
courage of his Adversaries. The hope of Liberty, and the desire of Victory made
them fearelessely to despise death. The Count of Terra Grossa, in valor, and
in the richness of his Arms singular among the others, visited the Squadrons
one by one, exercising at one and the same time the office of a private
Soldier and Captain. He made use of commendations and rebukes, accordingly as
the Actions of the Soldiers deserved. He was ready to repair their Losses,
sending always fresh Soldiers in their rooms that fell. He said, We must,
friends, either conquer or dye. Behold there Arsinoe which expects you. And it
is necessary that you open your way by your force; What will become of you, if
you had rather dye flying than fighting? He dies not, that gloriously loses his
life, defending himself, his Country, his Friends, and Children. He spoke
these words with so much boldness, that although he knew the danger, yet he
seemed to fear none.

He encountered in the greatest terror of the Fight the King of Thracia,
conceiving he undertook the most glorious enterprise of all, because it was
the most difficult, he attempted to kill him. Three blows he gave him, the one
after the other, so mighty, that he fell down senseless on the earth. He
believing him dead, or at the least mortally wounded, ran upon the Count, who
finally being run through with many thrusts, after he had sold his life at a
dear price, breathed out his soul, which seemed very unwillingly to abandon
that body, and may be guessed it was loath to go forth, fearing the violence of
so many Arms.

On the other side, Dorcone being remounted, without having received any hurt,
fell upon the Soldiers, who having lost their Count despaired of their lives.
In a short time the Field showed it had produced an infinity of Carcasses.
There was nothing seen but dead men, nothing heard but such as were trodden on
and wounded. The Thracians were become so formidable, that there was not an eye
that durst look them in the Countenance. The clamours of the Baron of Lapithy,
who encouraged them to fight, were not heard: The fear of death being
powerfuller than all things. Whilst he blamed their Cowardice with many words
of infamy, he was just struck with an Arrow in the mouth, which he held open,
whence silence and dying seized him at one and the same time.

This death gave the last shake to the soldiers hopes; having none remaining
that could regulate their fears, nor bridle their Cowardice, they showed their
backs to their enemies. Many retreated to the sea, and many to save themselves
hid themselves in Caves. But the greatest part, carried by fear, ran they knew
not whither, leaving their heads and their members to the discretion of their
heels. There were some that losing their breath with long running, fell down
an infamous prey to the horse that pursued them. Others (Fear not leaving to
them a distinction of dangers) ran of themselves into the sea, and dyed there,
because they would not dye; as if the waters had that pity which they despaired
to find in men. But many, and those of the most worthy, to whom death was not a
terror to daunt them, flying, and fighting, took the way which lead to
Arsinoe. There they found that Fortune had presented a Tragedy not inferior to
theirs.

The Princes of Missia and Epirus, emulatours between themselves, ran together
to make a Pomp of their valor by the death of those Soldiers, who, after
Viralto was taken prisoner, aimed at nothing but to retire. There had not any
o^ them escaped with his life, if King Vassileo, fearing this the last day of
his reign, had not issued out against them, but the disorder, and the terror
was so great, that changing their retreat into flight, that venerable old man
with his words and entreaties was not able to stay their Cowardice. Finally,
all the Chief, ashamed to see their King in danger to be lost, and their own
duty adding courage to their fear, they made a stand afront the Enemy, so that
their flight might succeed with the least damage possible. The two Princes
notwithstanding had forced the Gates, entering with the Soldiers that fled, if
the prevention had not come from the Walls.

The slaughter being over, all those Princes retired into Dorcone's Tent, the
which although it was secured from being assaulted, he would not nevertheless
(it being about an hour after Sunset) put off his Arms, unwilling that the
joys for the Victory should again produce the dangers of the night past: He
made the Sentinells, and Corpse de Guard, to be doubled, to be ready against all
those sudden Chances which ordinarily happen to Conquerors; Fortune many
times rejoicing to draw grief out of Consolations.

In Arsinoe on the other side, sorrow and terror was seen in the face of all.
Women, old men, and Children ran into the Temple, making vows to the Gods for
their safety. This night was so repleat with groans, that they occasioned
horror, even in those Breasts who had ^ever known what it was. This lamented
for his Son, this his Father, she her Father, she her Husband: And there
figuring the enemy in the City victorious, and triumphing, increased their
terror. The greatest part of the Women altogether forgetting the weakness of
their Sex, ran to the Walls to carry stones, and other instruments to resist
the Assailants. Others, (on whom Fear had not the power to clear their minds
of Covetousnes) hid their Money, Jewels, and Bracelets in the most secret
places, and the privatest holes. Many giving themselves over to grief, were so
overwhelmed in a dull sorrow, that they were insensible to all things. And
some over their little Children, deplored their own, and their infelicity,
feeding them more with tears then milk. In sum, every thing was so repleat
with Confusion, Terror, and Amazement, that there was not an eye that had the
boldness to take any sleep; nor a member that desired, or would have any repose.

The Day, and the Light augmented their sadness, the Loss and the Danger
appearing ever greater then the fear. The Field was looked upon all covered
with dead bodies, that presented to the sight a spectacle so dolorous, that it
would have enforced to sorrow a breast of Marble. But all their sadness
notwithstanding gave place to the griefs of Floridea, Her mind, that seldom
was deceived in its Auguries, assured her of her damage, and the loss of the
Duke of File^: she ran hastily to the Gate to enquire the news on which her
life or death depended. One by one she entreated the Fugitives, asking them of
the General. This said, he was safe; That, that he would come presently.
Others, that he was taken Prisoner; and many, that he was slain.

Although fear, that always presents things greater then they are, combated
her; yet in her self she was not void of desperate hope, which after the
manner of a Heart, is the last that dies in our affection. Sometimes being
tormented by passion, she vented her self upon the Cowardice of the Soldiers;
saying to them; Where, where (O you pusillanimous!) have you left your
General? He that has no greater Interest in this War then your safety, has
hazzarded his life for you; and have you so vilely abandoned him? Perhaps you
suppose you may be secure, without the protection of his valor. May be you
persuade your selves you may live, though he be dead. Who has had the Guard
of his person? Who was near him in the Battle? Friends, I am not afraid of
unluckie News, being always accustomed to grief. Finally, understanding,
that in the Entrance of the Enemies Rampires, (it being impossible to relieve
him) he was taken Prisoner; suddenly annimated by that Love which renders the
weakest breasts valiant, altogether forgetful of her own dangers, she went
out of the walls, running like a mad woman toward the Tents of the Thracians.

Being stopped by the Guards, she cried to be carried to the King. There was
not any that had the boldness to deny her this request; the simpler sort
believing her a Goddess: For just such an one her beauty described her. She was
seen to run so swiftly over the dead bodies, without any sign of fear, that
they could not imagine but she was above humane. She was guided to the
presence of Dorcone, who with his Arms on, discoursing with his, about the
conclusion of the War, attended till Aurora had dismissed the night. Floridea
prostrating her self at his feet, attempted with signs and tears to gain a
pity from them whom she was to persuade. The Thracian unable to suffer that
that Beauty should continue so languishing, commanded; That rising she should
express her desires. Let the Magnanimous breast of your Majesty (added
Floridea) vouchsafe pardon to the tenderness of the affection of an
unfortunate woman. I well know that pity resides in Regal minds; for they
having the instruments to make happy, would not that their hearts should be
inferior to their Fortune. I come then (O Magnanimous!) to supplicate you for
an Action which will augment Glories to your Triumph and Acclamations to your
Fame. In the first Battle, an only Brother of mine became a prey to your
Victories. He fought through mere necessity constrained by King Vassileo's
Commands, being a stranger, brought into Cyprus by my infelicity. He ^^th no
other enmity against the Thracians, then that of obedience which he owed to
him, against whom he was not able to refuse it. I add not with new tears
provocations to the generosity of the King of the Thracians, who ought not to
receive Motions for his Munificence, but from himself. I wipe them away, not
because I feel my grief to waine, but not to offend the divinity of that
mind which is not liable to Affections. I would offer any thing in recompense
of such a favor, if my poverty and yoer greatness admitted of Gifts, I have
not the ability to prepare you royal ones, nor you a mind to receive them: At
the least I should give you thanks, but the bitterness of my sorrow so
confuseth me, and the greatness of the benefit permits me not. Let this also be
an Adjunct to the wonders of your Glories, that you can bestow favors on
those, who eve know not how to return thanks. To a Magnanimous man, his own
Conscience is a great reward. Yet you may assure your self, that all my
speeches shall be nothing but Encomiums of your Liberality, and all my Vows
shall not supplicate the Gods, but to see you live eternally, as you shall live
immortally in the memory of all Ages.

So she held her peace, awaiting an Answer in such a posture, that in silence
she had voice, and entreaties, and peradventure also violence. All were
persuaded by these words, which came forth accompanied with a certain Majesty,
that the gave a credit to her passion. The Thracian delayed his Reply, feeling
his heart at one and the same time combated by diverse affections. The Memory of
Dianea, to whom he had sacrificed all his Affections, would not give place to
the beauties of Floridea. But fire cannot be eternal among ashes: It may well
preserve it self, but finally it will go forth. He blaming the foolishness of
his thoughts, which obliged him to love an Object, which could be not loved,
gave himself over a prey to this new beauty; so much the rather, for the
seeing her in his power, added fomentations to his love, facilitating hope to
him. He then answered:

Fair Maid, if I by silence have entertained your hopes with fears, it was not
because I found my self unresolved to pleasure you. Lay the fault of my
suspension on your face, which astonisheth even those that are willing to serve
you. Your Brother shall be delivered, and all that which may accomplish the
vows of your Desires. I know not, notwithstanding what cruel pity you have
about you, imprisoning those that give you Prisoners. You only perhaps would
do violences. Peradventure you disdain that others should have the Valor to
take Captive. But be it as it will, what ever depends on you, is grateful to
me. Know that in reverencing you, and loving you, I yield not at all to the
Brother whom you seek for. If I shall live, Fortune shall no more glory to
behold you a Supplyant. Do you also exercise that pity which you have
experimented in others.

Floridea replied not. The bashfulnesse that soon shadowed her face, tied also
her tongue. She bowed, kissing the Thracians hands, who would not resist it, to
accreditate the beginnings of his Love to be of estimation. All the Prisoners
came, among which, not perceiving the Duke, she afresh gave way to her tears.
Dorcone omitted no diligence to have him sought for among the dead; but that
not availing, he commanded Floridea should be kept carefully. He was in such
wise enamoured on of her beauties, that without enjoying her, he persuaded
himself he could not live. He willed that the Count of Ruffan^, under the
species of comforting her should endeavor to render her persuaded to his
pleasures

This was an old man, blemished with the most enormous dishonesties. He had
nothing in him but what was vice. Years that use to remember men of Repentance
for their dissoluteness, in this man fomented sensualities. The fear of losing
them, made him more covetous of enjoying them. By Arts the most dishonest he
had got possession of his Masters Affections, who seeing him of Customs
conformable to himself, could not but love him. His Vices raised him to that
Degree of Honor; whereto others by virtue hardly arrived to by desire. This
man that with a presence that counterfeiting goodness, would have beguiled
wariness it self, entered to speak with Floridea, who sitting on a bed
bewailed her infelicity. The first words were of Complement; the Count saying:
That by Commission from his Majesty he was come to comfort her; promising her
(for his part) all diligence to search out all signs, that might discover her
Brother. Floridea answered with so much the more humility; adding, that she was
acconsolated in her Miseries, that rendered the Protection of such a King
interested, and the good will of so worthy a Knight.

The Count then taking occasion began to say to her: Lady, if your countenance
gave me not evidences of your Wisdom, I should enforce my self with words to
make you believe what a gift Fortune, through the merit of your beauties has
bestowed upon you. But acknowledging in your Arguings, that exceed the
Discourses of those that have spent all the years of their life in
Negotiations; I will only say, that Dorcone has made you worthy of his
affections, and of his Embraces. See how Heaven compassionates the Resentment
of your tears, and how the Gods undertake the Protection of Beauty. I will
not presume to persuade you, because I cannot doubt you will slight the love of
a King, whom to enjoy, the Goddesses in Contention would descend from Heaven.
These graces fall but on a few. To undervalue them, is to show your self
unworthy of them: and the rather, because it would be an ungrateful act, and
dangerous to oppose your self to the Desires of a Prince, who has overcome
all delays to favor you, and who may obtain that by force, which your
wilfulness may deny him. Peradventure your Love may persuade him to greater
matters. There are many Alexanders that espouse their servants. The Opinion of
the vulgar, and of those in particular, that with deceitful names, and vain,
betray the simplicity of maids, falls not upon Princes, that give Laws without
receiving any. There is not any thing that is unconvenient to a King, so it be
agreeable to his pleasure. I add no more; not to prejudice your Election, and
not to steal from you that merit which your promptness to his Majesty's
Desires may acquire for you.

Floridea received so much displeasure at the words of the Count, that the
fear to see her self exposed into the hands of the Enemies of her honor,
could not make her forbear those words; which could not be spoken but with
peril. Although necessity presented before her eyes the profit of
Dissimulation; notwithstanding, she would not suffer that her tongue should
seem base against those that tempted her in her reputation. Before she answered
him, she stood a little in suspense, to premeditate a proper Reply, and to give
way to her anger, that it should not stop, nor hinder her tongue. After she
added;

I answer you, (good old Man) that you might not believe I assented with my
silence to those Proposalls, unworthy of your age, and my reputation. You have
ill employed those gray hairs, whilst you know not how to serve, but as a
Minister of infamous Actions. I cannot persuade my self, that Dorcone would
soil with blemishes the Graces he has done me. I should be undeserving to
have received them, if I had not his consent to maintain mine honor. I know
not how a Carcass of Fortunes fury can allure the pleasure of a King. I rather
believe it a treason of your perfidiousnesse, then a desire of his Majesty, who
representing on earth the Image of the Gods, cannot incline his heart to such
baseness. Every thing is lawful to Kings, because it is supposed, that a King
will not put his hand into things illegal. He would be unworthy of this name,
or to speak better, he would have nothing of a King but the name, who is not
mightier than others in all the virtues. And though Kings may do what they
will, yet honor is without their jurisdiction. I have an hand, which though it
cannot resist the forces of another incontinency, can nevertheless settle my
honor in a secure place. I have not an heart that can suffer me to be
dishonored, nor has your speech persuasion to make me such; your infamous
employment for this time has gained you nothing but the indignations of
heaven, which by me shall be accelerated upon you, if I may one day sit upon
the Throne of my Ancestors.

The Count was not troubled at this refusal; being accustomed to know that
women deny that with the greater earnestness which they the most ardently
covet. He would not reply any thing to her, either not too much to provoke her
anger, or to let her strive with her own affections; very well knowing that
Ambition is the Tyrant of women. He acquainted not the Thracian with Floridea's
backwardness, being confident to overcome her at the second encounter; not
being able to persuade himself (by his experience in others, that a feminine
bosom could long resist the strokes of Interest.

In the mean while Dorcone spent the remainder of the day in consults about
finishing of the War. All the Cities of the Kingdom, upon notice of the
Thracians victory, fell voluntarily into the hands of the Conqueror. He
looking on them all with a merciful eye did no hurt to any save to those of
Cerannia. He made it be ruined to the Foundations, making all the ancient, and
men fit to bear arms to be buried among those Ruins alive; making Slaves, on
the other side, of all the Women and Children. The night that followed this
slaughter was so replenished with Thunder, Lightning, and Thunderbolts, that it
appeared that heaven agreed to foment the fury of the Thracians. Truly, it
seemed that it would open Gulphs to bury those Wretches who found heaven and
earth conspired to do them mischief. All the Poles and Tents of the Thracians
were thrown down, torn, and scattered by the winds which blew with such a
violence, that many times the Soldiers were not safe from their fury. There
was seen to fly through the field an abundance of diverse things, with such a
confusion of the Army, that one Troop of horse would have been sufficient to
have conquered them.

The Guards that had the Custody of Floridea had left her; although those
terrors would not suffer her to think of making an escape. The night grew more
repleat with darkness, in such manner, that if it had been observed it calmed
the winds, which being afraid of themselves had not the courage to press upon
those shaddows. Torches lighted in a great number through all the Army served
not but to confound the sight the more. Floridea stood there in a great
amazement when she heard her self called by name by a voice unknown to her.
She was the more terrified believing it a Ghost; but persuading her self after
that it might be the spirit of Viralto, which came to invite her to death, or
to guide her out of the hands of those Barbarians, recovering a little courage,
she asked what it demanded of her that it called her. That if it was a Ghost
that intended to affright her, it was deceived, she being also reduced into
that same state by her own grief, and the injuries of Destiny. But on the
other side, if it was the shadow of him whom she adored, that she rejoiced at
it, because she might make him see the greatness of her Love. She heard it
reply to her: That he was a man that desired to deliver her from the captivity
of those who every moment contrived treacheries against her reputation: that if
she would secure her honor and her life, she should follow him in silence.
Floridea obeyed, walking all that night, and esteeming any danger inferior to
that which was threatened her by the Thracians. But she felt for all that an
alteration of the heart so vehement, that she could not but prognosticate some
ill to her self.

They arrived at the mouth of a Grot, just upon that time that darkness
vanished, disdaining perhaps to be trodden on by the horses of the Sun. There
she suddenly perceived her guide to be Prodirto the Duke of Lassimano. He had
continued in the Court after the departure of the Prince of Create. Knowing
Viralto, he observed him daily, attending a time to revenge the offenses
received from him. The first day that Viralto assaulted the Thracians he took
notice of Floridea: but made no show of it, waiting an opportunity for his
designs. Seeing her enter among the enemies he followed her. He found no
difficulty in concealing himself among such a multitude, having the habit, and
the language of the Thracians. Taking the opportunity of those darknesses he
led her into that Cave, very well known to him, into the which he had always
retreated before he was wounded in that of Dianea. Floridea knowing him,
received so grand a sorrow, that she fell in a swoone, with danger perhaps to
have been killed among those Rocks, if the Duke had not received her between
his arms. Being returned to her self, she said to him:

Is it possible (O cruel one) that thou art not yet satiated with the
infelicity of my fortune? Is it possible that thy barbarousnesse should not be
extinct in the blood of my Father, and my Brother, and that it is not buried in
the ruins of my house? Perchance thou have stolen me from the Thracians,
because thou fear, that to torment me, they had not instruments more
inhumane than those of thy perfidiousnesse. Wicked Traitor, unfaithful to thy
Prince, and heaven, and thy self; preserved till now alive to accomplish only
the high judgments of the Gods, who with the cruelty of the impious exercife
the patience of the good. I cannot conceive how the the earth rendered execrable
by the excesses of thy infamies, prepares not for thee at every step either a
Precipice, or a tomb. You Thunders of Jove, that exercise the furies of your
anger upon towers and mountains, infensible of your chastisements, why strike
you not this perfidious, this wicked, this sacrilegious man.

Prodirto, grown furious at these words, which, reproaching him for his
enormities, could not be but displeasing, coming against her villanously, gave
her many blows on the face, saying to her: Learn, impudent one, to injure
those who so many times have preserved thee free from wrongs. Receive now the
fruits of my anger, having not had the will to try those of love. Let your Duke
of Filena come now to free you from him, who has an heart more cruel against
those he hates, than he has it amiable to those he loves. Enjoy now my
indignation, of the which I have showed my self so anxious. Because you have
abhorred my embraces, having given up your self to those of others: Now to thy
double vexation I will take them more to triumph over thy obstinacy, than to
gather the most vile leavings of thy immodesties.

Thou lie (O wicked man) replied Floridea; for there is not any that can
boast himself over my honesty. But it is no wonder that a Traitor should take
away the fame of those Princes whom he will murder. I care not that thou
hate me, equally despising both thy love and hatred. Distaine (cruel man)
thy hands in my blood: For I only remain a Remnant of the barbarismes of thy
Infidelity. Thou have reason to kill me, that I may not witness to the world
that thou art the most infamous Traitor that lives.

Then (added Prodirto, interrupting her) shall I neither have power nor
punishment to bridle thy mordacious insolency. Dares then the Temerity of an
impudent woman thus far! So saying, he began to strike her with so much anger,
that the blood ran from many places. She schreeched out as loud as ever she
could, rather to incence him more, than for any relief she might receive to
her sorrow; were she secure of her honor, she would not have showed a
resentment for all the mischiefs of the world; she much more feared the love
of Prodirto, than the offenses and injuries.

Whilst Floridea with bitings, blows, words, and schreeches fomented the
furiousnesses of Prodirto, Astidamo the Prince of Creete was brought into a
grief not inferior to hers. In a short time he was carried to Creete, having
in his voyage received no other discommodity than that which the absence of
Dianea occasioned. Hefound them just a celebrating the Funerals of his Father
and Mother, who both died in one day. He showed a passion only to deceive the
observation of Subjects, who rejoice in the tenderness of their Princes. They
seldom weep that by the death of their Parents obtain a Kingdom. Great
gainings would stop tears in the eyes of pity it self. He suddenly appeased
the alterations of the Kingdom, occasioned by those, who, by being of the
blood royal, had had ambitious hopes for the Crown. The deaths of some the
most culpable terrified the boldness of others. He forgot not to exercise his
mercy toward the penitency of those which ran to his feet. He well knew that
those Kingdoms were not stable which were builded upon blood. He had, under
the pretense of reducing his Subjects to obedience, raised an Army worthy of
his greatness. All hastened to serve him with Arms, Money, and Men, to gain
a place in the affection of their new Prince. He, thanking every one, gave the
highest Commands to those who had the vastest thoughts, not thinking himself
safe by leaving them in Creete, lest in his absence they should attempt any
Innovation. Making afterward, with the greatest celerity possible, all the
Ships and Galleys of the Kingdom to be prepared in readiness, and, embarquing
all his Militia, he made them direct their Prores toward the Island of Cyprus.

To avoid the injuries of heaven, he was compelled to take land in an Island
uninhabited, with so much impatiency, that his complaints against the
aversenesses of heaven was the least of his ravings. Eight days were past
wherein the sea continued his fury, when a Longboat, guided by four
Mariners, who fled from shipwreck, entered the Port: There was within it a
Knight of no ordinary presence, who, with two Squires, rendered thanks to the
Gods that they had escaped out of the hands of death. Astidamo went quickly to
see them, and there knew the Knight, who was the Baron of Cormio, a Subject to
King Vassileo. He enquired of him the news of Cyprus, and the causes of his
voyage. He answered: That the King of Thracia, being displeased at the justice
of King Vassileo against his daughter, was departed from Cyprus, with a
resolution to return back with a powerful Army. That he had been sent in all
haste into Egypt to procure Aid from that King upon any condition: that he had
obtained it, the King of Egypt promising, in less then two months either to
enter into Thracia to call back Dorcone to the defense of his, or else to come
to Cyprus with a potent Flect. That returning joyful with this answer, he had
been many days tossed by the seas, against which having neither force nor
instrument to resist, perceiving themselves near that Haven they were
abandoned beyond the hope of Fortune, who having spent all her rigours with the
Ship which carried them (it being swallowed by the waves) afforded me here a
landing place, and security.

Astidamo could hardly suffer that he should give a period to his discourse,
but he asked of what justice he spoke exercised against his daughter by King
Vassileo. I (Sir) replied the Knight, would not weary you with a new Relation,
supposing you had been fully informed of it, it being every where known, that
King Vassileo understanding from his own Daughter her self, that without the
assent of her Father, she was denated to a Marriage, he had made her be put to
death in prison with a sorrow even to those who loved her not. You have killed
me, replied Astidamo with a report so miserable. He had scarce said these
words, but he fell down half dead between the Arms of his. Being returned to
his senses. he gave himself over to tears and lamentations, with such a
resentment of those that waited on him, that they would have esteemed to dye
the least expression of their sorrow.

Fortune (he said) how do thou know to torment this heart, which believed it
self near to felicity. These Armies, this Militia which declare me one of the
greatest Kings of the world, serve to no other end but to augment my
affliction. If one undergoes a poverty contrary to his desires, he need not
complain but of Destiny: but he that in wealth and power envies not the
felicity of Jove, feels the greater torment, by how much the less he can
satisfy his appetites. Every greatness has its contraries, neither is there
authority or power which are not exposed excessively to the anger of Heaven. I
will not (friends) present my Griefs to you, for in the remembrance of it,
perhaps my pain will be redoubled upon me, and I have more strength to endure
it, then to express it. It should not be great, whilst my Tongue can conceal
the greatnesses of it. And if by the extremity of it, I be not compelled to
reveal it, I would not speak it, lest I should torment your minds with the
effects of pity. Compassion would add ease to my sorrows, which my
infelicity wills should torment me to an excess. To have Companions, which is
a grand Consolation to the afflicted, is not convenient for him, who ought
only to be tortured by passion. But why do I multiply in Complaints, having
(to prove death in sorrow) designed to bury them in my soul!

He accompanied these words with so many tears, and so lively resentments,
that there was not any who would not have borne part of his Evil to have eased
him. Now with a vehement Motion, and unquiet, he gave sign of the ardour he
felt within his Breast. Now sitting immovable, with an abundance of sighs he
showed, that his soul tormented, gave signs of leaving the body. Now he fixed
a great while his eyes upon heaven, as if he implored the aid of the gods, or
rather that he complained of them that agitated him with so many infelicities.
The night came on, which instead of affording himself rest, heaped afflictions
on him. Those silences, and those horrors which usually lull asleep thoughts
and sadnesses, could not now give a stop to the passions of a desperate heart.
Rather under the shadow of night those dolours seem to be privileged; for the
which the light of the day would have reproved him of shame. He went to bed,
but could not lie in it, but by minutes. Having given a Command to his to
withdraw, he went forth with the greatest secrecy into the Island, where
giving his heart to the disposal of his feet, he was carried into the thickest
part of a wood, in the which there was neither footstep, nor sign that any
body came there. There not seeing any witnesses that might censure his passion,
he bestowed upon grief all the tears his eyes could administer. There was a
little Fountain with steps. Above it he cast himself in a careless manner;
pouring forth so great a Lamentation, that his words came not out but broken
and imperfect. When his heart could no longer supply water to his eyes, his
tongue undertook their Office; he said:

What will thou do, O King of Creet, the true scope of all the miseries of
Fortune? What will thou do, the sole occasion of the death of the most
beautiful woman, that Heaven, Art, and Nature agreeing could frame? What
thing hitherto have thou not felt? To what infelicity have thou not been
subject? VVretched, and miserable King, what thing more will thou wait for,
what thing more will thou hope for? To what greater Calamities will thou
reserve thy self? Dead is Dianca, Dianea is dead. Heart have thou patience to
suffer it? And have thou Mouth the boldness to speak it? Pardon me, O happy
soul, Pardon me; beloved soul, that I know not how to die at the news of thy
death. Peradventure heaven would that thou should live in me, the Cruelty of
thy Father having denied thee to live in thy self, or rather it would honor
thy Sepulcre with the tears of one who has infinitely loved thee, and in whom
his heart shall sooner die then his affection. I live by the severe judgment of
the justice of the gods, who having known me innocently guilty, will
nevertheless punish me, by not suffering me to die. Unhappy Dianea, slain and
condemned by thy Spouse and Father! Miserable old man, why have thou been
willing to defile thy hands in the blood of thy Daughter? Cruel Father? wicked
Father, Father unworthy the name of a Father; Where are such impious Cruelties
practiced? Impieties so cruel? An only Daughter of beauties so singular, that
they would have awakened Emulation, and Envy in those of heaven, who in
Prudence, and in the other Virtues, gave not pre-eminence to the wifedome of
the most wise, he has sacrificed to his fury. Then Errors, and the Errors of
Love can find no pity in the affections of a Father. Why had not thou
Parents so cruel, that thou might not have condemned thy self in the life
of thy Daughter? But whither does my passion transport me, and my grief? The
Father has not been the murderer of his Daughter; I am guilty of this crime,
I have slain her, the sacrilegious blow proceeded from my hands. And guilty of
such an excess. shall I live? shall it then be true, that I can endure the
killer of Dianea to live? No, no Dianea: behold the blood of thy greatest
Enemy, which is as voluntarily offered to thy death, as unwillingly he deprived
thee of life. If among shades there is a correspondency of Affection, or
memory of a Benefit, I hope that thou will be wholly mine, seeing with how
much readiness, without sparing of my blood, I know to revenge thee.

This said, he drew his sword, fetching some deep sighs, fixing his eyes on
heaven: Now full of pity, now of fury, and set it to his breast to have slain
himself. The which doubtless had happened, if a most beautiful Lady, who
without being observed, had heard a great part of his Lamentations, had not
staid him, taking the sword out of his hand. He was so disposed to die, that he
fell, without seeing who hindered him from it. Breathing a languishing sigh, he
said: You do nothing that with an unsought for pity endeavor to save my
life. It is a greater Commiseration to kill me, then to let me live, for that
would be the only ease to my dolours. And besides, there is not any that can
hinder desperate men from death.

These words being finished, he fixed his Eyes on her, who having got his head
into her Lap, enforced her self to consolate him. Knowing the Effigies of
Dianea, he began to cry out; Now, (O Friend!) I am sure of the greatness of
your affection, since you have not been unwilling to grace me with these last
Offices. But why will you be cruel to me with a pity, which doubly torments
me? I cannot outlive you, neither can I live without you. Dianea her tears
for a while being stayed, answered him; Friend, if you desire the Company of
Dianea, live! For I am alive. Astidamo perceiving that it was not a Ghost, as
at first he was persuaded, and that the Reports of her Death were false, having
forgotten in a moment his passed Commotions, so gave up himself a prey to Joy,
that he had like to have perished; so great a swooning coming upon him that it
possessed all his senses.

After his spirits were recovered, they fell to embracings, with that
tenderness of affection as their affection could expres. They gazed upon one
another, not crediting the truth, their hands, nor their eyes. They multiplied
their embraces and kisses, nor had afforded an end to those Consolations, if
the day being much spent, they had not been come upon by the Knights, who were
in search for their King, not without doubting some misfortune.

Then they redoubled their joys, his showing Dianea to them, whom with so
desperate accents he had bewailed as dead. They all came to kiss her hands,
reverencing her as their Queen. With these welcomes they retired to the Fleet,
and the Tempest being ceased, Astidamo gave order for departure. But before
they undertook their Voyage to Creet, Dianea gave an Account how she escaped
the Anger of her Father, and how she fled fram the Dangers of Death.

The History of Dianea's Escape.
MY Father (she said) was obstinate in his Resolutions to make me assent to
Nuptials with the Thracian. I to render him diffwaded, used all those Means,
and all those Arts, which were subministred tome by necessity and love. All was
in vain, for being the more exasperated he came to force me. Then esteeming
silence a greater crime then the former, I cast my self at my Fathers feet,
giving him a Relation of our amorus practices, yet prosecuted with promise of
marriage. My Father altered in such manner, that consigning me to the Council,
he would that the Law should be observed, which condemned all those to death,
that born of Royal blood, presumed to marry themselves. For me there was no
pity. Those of the Council endeavored all ways to save me, but they could
not obtain from the King that the Law should be altered. The Duchess of
Delprato obtained through favor to be my companion in my Sepulcher.

They use in Cyprus (and I believe it is known to you) to bury those who have
any Characters of Nobility, in a vault under ground, one or more persons of
those who loved them best in life, continuing there a year. The Duchess
feigned, that one of my Damsels was elected for her Companion in this Function,
who of Counsel in the Intention of the Duchess, deceived the Executioner of
the sentence, making her self took in my stead. The Duchess gave an appearance
to the Deceit, scattering so many Tears, and such Sighs, that they deafned
the Air. She acquainted me with it just at that time, wherein prepared to dye,
I had not an hope to comfort me. She made me put on the Clothes of the
Damsels, and I entered with her into the Tomb, which was prepared for me.

The Report of my death was spread over the whole City with an universal
sorrow. There was not any that made doubt of it, whilst my own Father believed
no otherwise. I remained so buried many days, with such a passion, that I
should rather have chosen death a thousand times. Finally, one night, (though
there was never known neither Light nor day) we found by chance a secret
Portall, which led into a Grot. Having lighted a Torch, we walked to see the
end; It brought us into a field near the Sea shore, there finding by chance a
Vessel which was upon sail, we went toward Creet, with the thought of finding
you.

Fortune, that knows to show her self an Enemy to the most just desires, made
us fall into the hands of Traute, a Pirate. He scarce saw me, but he had a
design of me, believing me Daughter to the Duchess, for such I always gave
out my self. A great deal of his fierceness being laid aside, he requested
my affection with such humility, that I wonder in my self how for love he
could be separated from himself. I, inanimated by his humiliations, entreated
him for a time to be able to dispose of my self to his will. Having obtained
this occasion of delay, I got the Duchess to speak to one of the Pirates, who
next to the Traute was in chief Command. Our enterprise being in good order,
and our hopes agreeing, the Dutchels taking Pilane aside (for so was the Pyrate
named) she said to him:

Son, I will not speak at large because time permits me not. I would not that
my tongue should make jealous so many eyes, and so many ears as observe us. My
daughter is ardently enamoured of you; she has perceived that you have not
disdained to look on her with some liking, whereupon she gives you to
understand that she will rather make an election of death than consent to be
another. She beseeches you therefore, if her affection be pleasing to you, to
defend her from the violences of Traute. He daily assaults her, and if your
valor does not oppose it, he will shortly use force. Then henceforward it will
be your thought to prepare a defense for those things which are dedicated to
you, and not to stain your honor with the infamy. That things recommended to
your protection should become a prey to the insolency of others.

These words in such manner won possession over the heart of Pilane, that he
answered: Mother, I thank you for the occasion you have presented me to quiet
my heart, which already I have sacrificed to the beauties of your daughter.

If Traute will contend with me for her, he shall prove what the force in the
breast of a Lover can do. In this mean while, to avoid the injuries of heaven,
and the sea, which threatened death to the most dauntlesse, we retired into this
Island in a Port unhabited. Here was a Supper prepared, where all the Pirates
sat down, willing also that we should sit; when they were full of meat and
wine they fell into a thousand dishonesties, and Traute by force cast his arms
about my neck espying me near him. Pilane plucked him back by the arm, saying
to him: Traute, That prey belongs not only to you which is made common to all.
At thy pleasure thou shall be Patron of the things which belong to thy part,
not of those which not being divided appertain to all; you have been chosen
the head, but not a Tyrant, and you not observing the Laws of your election,
neither am I bound to observe those of obedience.

Traute, not accustomed to injuries, being enraged by wine, threw at him a
great Bowl of silver, saying to him: So the rashness of those is to be
corrected who refuse to obey. This offense was not without resentment, because
Pilane, who stood upon wariness, wounded him with a knife in the breast, and
killed him. The others suddenly betook them to Arms, and they being almost
all overcome with wine, their strokes were not but mortal. I then said to the
Duchess: Mother, Let us go hence not to remain a prey to the Conquerours. My
fear carrying me into the thickest part of the wood, I believed that the
Duchess followed me, and was not aware of it, but after a great while that she
had not been with me. The grief I had at it I leave to them to consider, who
knew how well I loved her. I would to have found her have turned thence back
again, but night coming upon me I could not. I continually wandered, my passion
keeping me in a perpetual motion. Lastly, called by your tears I have found
my Astidamo, than whom, through the benignity of the Gods, I could not attain
to a grace more desired, nor more unexpected.

Here she was silent, redoubling her Embraces; Astidamo not being able, but
with multiplied signs of consolation, to express the joy which his heart
felt. He sent many Knights in search of the Duchess, who returned without
having received any notice, yet the comfort to see themselves united mortified
in great part the grief they received at such a loss. For all this Dianea
would not depart thence before some Galleys had took a circuit round the
Island. They returned with news of the death of the Pirates, but there was not
any that could give them notice of any thing else. Lastly, they appointed their
departure toward Creete, so invited by the sea and the winds which recalled
them to their voyage.

Floridea, in the mean while ploughed in a Sea more perilous and fierce, with
making resistance against the forces of the Duke, she was become so
strengthlesse, that already her hands strived no more for victory against the
Ardour of that impious man who attempted to dishonor her. Her mouth, that with
bitings had afforded defenses to the purity of her heart, could scarce utter
some languishing Ah me! which being ecchoed to by those Rocks would have
mollified the Duke himself, if that love and disdain had not estranged him
from himself. He having scratched her face in many places, which was an
adjunct to the horrors of his fierceness, continued to strike her with such
an unmercifulness that I know not how his hands were not affrighted at so
infamous a wickedness. There were no more defenses in the miserable Floridea;
Her flesh either black or torn, her hair was rufled and rent; Her eyes,
enlanguished by grief and tears, durst not look up not to see the Testimonies
of her shame; Her spread Arms gave boldness to that impious man to redouble
his Assaults the more.

He was now ready to steal the fruits of his love, when those languishing
voices called a Knight to their protection, who seeing those violences, and
knowing to whom they were used (accidents not being able to raze from the
memory of Lovers the remembrance of the beloved) he began to cry to the Duke
that he should stay, if he would not be slain as basely as he was employed.
Prodirto changed his anger into fury, there being not a mightier passion than
for that which retards the delights of the sense; whereupon he said:

Knight, you shall feel the reward which those gain who with rashness
intermeddle in the businesses of others. So saying, he gave him a thrust, which
his arms falsifying made a little wound. That hurt cost him dear, for he
suddenly found himself struck on the head, from whence began to run a great
abundance of blood. For all this Prodirto showed no signs of Cowardice, now
rewarding, and now warding the blows of his Adversary. He used dexterity and
strength accordingly as his judgment gave rules and advertisements to his
hand. The Vows of Floridea, with which she strove to supplicate the pity of the
Gods, promised her no other victory but that of hope. They were both wounded
when they drew back to take wind. The Knight blaming his weakness, which
suffered him not to attain the victory, cried out, O Gods, what judgment may
be formed of your providence, whilst you refuse to assist to the protection of
those who defend justice! One only man, spotted with the most unworthy
Characters of infamy, has strength to put me in danger of my life, not only
not to overcome. With these vows he ran to assail the Duke, who knowing him
by his voice, was daunted in such manner, that having no longer the heart to
defend himself, he would have fled away, but the Knight prevented him, for
with two redoubled blows he took away his life.

This end had Prodirto the Duke of Lassimano, a man of inimitable conditions,
if dishonesty and ambition had not been predominant. In foreign Wars he
gained no ordinary name, and in his Country he had not Equals. In battles it
was not discerned which was the mightier in him, either Prudence, or Fortune.
His Countenance showed the ferocity of his heart, though his Fortune and Eyes
manifested his perfidiousnesse. Of his Customs it is not able to frame a
judgment. He was bold in his resolutions, neither trusted he secrets but to
himself. He found death from his hands for whom he evermore had woven snares.

Floridea cast her self at the feet of the Knight, who making himself known to
her for Viralto, (who, having escaped from those that kept him, was come
thither by chance) there was not any external sign which she made not to
declare her joy. She wept, swooned, cried out; and with centuplicated embraces
it seemed that she would make her self one with her beloved. These first
impetuousnesses being passed over, she said:

Supernall Gods, that by your unknown wisdom from poisons extract Antidotes,
and from Lamentations joy; I know not how to render you thanks for so many
felicities which have conquered my desire. If all these words were souls, and
all they consecrated to your honors, they would not be sufficient to tender
you thanks for such a benefit. Because by your goodness every the least
expression is accepted of, I have humbly thank you, O Celestial Deities, O
Supreme Intelligences. From you I acknowledge my life, the which only to day I
have learned to desire. To day newborn I begin to live. To live with the
torments of an amorous passion has no other of life but the name and the
opinion. The streightnesses of the World, the contempts of Love, the anger of
Destiny, the loss of my Father, and Brother, and of my Country, have been all
instruments to felicitate me. There is not any that should complain of ill.
Mortals accuse not Fortune as the Minister of your infelicities; for the
providence of the Gods knows how to draw Ashes from Glory, and Glory from
Ashes. Whilst she said these words, she hung about Viralto's neck, and it
seemed that with a covetousness of desires she was insatiable to all the
demonstrations of joy, or rather that she would hold him so embraced, as if she
doubted the truth of her sight and feeling. They waited for the night, to
depart thence with the greater security, because the Thracians held all the
Island.

In this mean while King Vassileo maintained himself with the Relics of a
beaten Army and driven into Arsinoe from moment to moment expecting death.
After the imprisonment of Viralto, he gave the Command of the Army to the Count
of Salinera, who for wisdom and affection had few Equals in the service of his
Prince. The Count having regard to the weakness of his men, had no other
thought but to defend the Wells from assaults. He had neither Forces, nor the
boldness to join Battle with them, who rendered audacious by Victory, and
their number boasted themselves invincible. The great abundance of Provision
that was within Arsinoe, suffered not the besieged to feel the incommodities
of a siege. On the other side, the Thracians being become secure by the
dauntedness of their enemies, wore away all their days in Chases or Banquets.

One day the two Princes of Missia and Epirus, the Infant of Macedonia, with
many others of the chief of the Army, met together in the Scythian Kings
Pavilion. Heated with meats and Wine, they fell into diverse Discourses. How
much the more Fire is suppressed, so much the more it operates with greater
force. Some proposed, what was the most unbeseeming thing for a Knight? The
doubt displeased not, because there was not any that feared to have in himself
any thing unworthy of a Knight. The Opinions were as various, as were the
Genius's, and the humors of those that discoursed.

The Scythian, accommodating his words to his heart, said; To fly from Dangers
is the indeleble blemish of a Knights Reputation: Who would not encounter
death, has not an undauntednesse: who has not that fear, and who fears is
base; and Cowardile is that, which above all things is contrary to the Glories
of a Knight. A Knight ought not to suffer injuries, no not from those who are
much his Superiors in Fortune. If he encounters not dangers to prepare a
Revenge, he blemishes his name with notes of Infamy. When perils enforce a
Knight to make Resistance, it is pure necessity, not valor. He ought to exceed
others, who would be greater then others, He that with a virile leas^reness
waits that Fortune should present him Subjects to try himself, is obliged to
Fortune, not to himself. Even Cowards sometimes will maintain a Bussle. In
brief, the animosity to create perils, is the prime glory. As to attend that
Chance, should deliver a City into his hands, is the mightiest shame to a
Knight. Even the Sun would merit Reproaches, if with a precipitate and
continual motion, it should daily seek for dangers among shades. In atchieving
is honor, and in things hard by others, immortality.

The Infant of Macedonia said; That so high Rewards being due to faithfulness,
he could not persuade himself, that more blameable things could be in a Knight
then infidelity. This would soil the lights of the Sun, not only the
Actions of men. An unfaithful man is abhorred by all, because all fear his
Treacheries. Faithfulness is a thing sacred, the first daughter of Jove, the
honor of men, and of the gods. Without this neither the earth nor the sea
would enjoy any peace. It is a particular Deity, which resides silently in
those breasts that possess it. A man otherwise void of this, may be termed a
Carcass: And less, he is more vile then nothing. The Damages of Infidelity
are much more mightier then that which can be conceived in the mind, or
expressed by the tongue.

The Count of Tinia would that it should be Ingratitude. And what other (said
he) can contaminate the birth and the virtues of a Knight, but Ingratitude,
abominable in all. A Knight is elected to chastise those that acting
ungratefully, offend Heaven, Nature, and their Friends. Now how much the
mightier will his Reproach be, when he falls into that vice the Trespasses
against which he is made choice of to punish* All other faults carry with them
some excuse, or some Appearance of Reason. Only Ingratitude has no pretense
that can excuse it, has no reason that can defend it. It is a vice so
detestable, that it becomes even odious to those that exercise it. Whoever is
unthankful is unsaithfull, bebecause he rebels against those obligations which
he owes to the favors of others. He is cruel, because he torments the
Liberallity of those to whom he is known beholding. In sum, all Vices are
seen in ingratitude, and therefore an unthankful Knight is unworthy of the
name of a Cavalicre.

The Baron of Cardia maintained that Cruelty was the most blameworthy thing in
a Knight. Cruelty (he added) is the most certain Portent of, or Folly, or of
Covetousness. To be short, all Vices are Vices; but Cruelty holds the
pre-eminence. It spoils, unbowels, unsoules the world. It is the worst of all
things, by reason that from it all the worst things proceed. Who is cruel, is
vile, a desire of Blond not reigning but in those Bosoms which are corrupt. He
is an enemy of Nature, since he procures the Destruction of his own species.
He offends the Gods, that with pity only have gained divine Attributes. He
injures himself, because by the death of others he robs himself of those
Duties which would have afforded him a superiority among others. Lastly, he is
the worst of Animals, the which although they be void of Reason, are not
nevertheless without pity.

The Prince of Missia, with his usual mordacity said; That Love was the most
detestable thing in a Knight. This (cried he) is that that disturbes the
Intellect, that contaminates the Reason, that tyrannizeth over the Will, and
that makes a man different from himself. Who loves, betraies himself in the
tyranny of a face, who knows not to obey any thing, but affections, nor knows
not to be faithful but to those who always betray. Love is a species of
Infamy, since it subjects the will of that heart to the which the Gods have
prescribed no laws, but voluntary.

The Prince of Missia ushered in these Reasons with a laughter, repleat with
contempt, holding his eyes continually fixed upon the Prince of Epirus. He who
in his own conceit was lost in love, thought that those words wounded his
Reputation, so much the more, because upon him all their looks were cast, as
upon himalon who was subject of this Discourse. He having no longer sufferance
to see himself injured, interrupting him, said to him: Prince of Missia, if
your declare your Opinion without thought to wrong me, I shall take no
Resentment at it, because the Table even permits those things, which should not
be spoke. If I have loved in Excess, I repent not; because my Affections have
not been unworthy. Who is so bold to reprehend me, lies, and peradventure
blames love, because he is unworthy to be beloved. Declare your self then,
because I am not accustomed to be reproached, and in particular by you in these
Errors.

The Prince of Missia answered: I spoke by Chance, dictated by Reason. But that
you should not believe that I say this for fear of your Anger, I will make it
good with my sword, that having loved without Moderation, you have done a thing
unworthy of a Knight; and therefore merited for it a public reprehension. The
Prince of Epirus, let him not finish these words, but drawing (in disdain) his
sword, he flew toward the Prince of Missia, who doing the same, met him. The
Tables went suddenly to the ground, and all those Knights with their naked
swords interposed themselves to quiet them. The two Princes notwithstanding,
staid not a jot, both desiring that the death of the one should serve as a
Victime to the Revenge of the other. They bestowed their blows at random,
holding equally all those for their Enemies, who for all they interposed
themselves, showed themselves Neuters. Clamours already were multiplied, and
Fame spreading the wounds and deaths of these two Princes, enforced all to
betake them to their Arms, with a Confusion equal to the Peril.

Dorcone, at notice of this, came into the place of Contention. The two Princes
seeing the King, drew back, but not laying aside that Ire, which in their
hearts was implacable. He being informed of the Cause of the Quarrel,
endeavored by all means to persuade them to peace. But all became fruitless,
by reason the Prince of Epirus would that he of Missia should unsay whatever he
had spoke to injure him. On the other side, the Prince of Missia pretended he
would not give satisfaction to him, because from himself he had received
injuries. Finally, the Thracian having no greater authority over them, then
that which they were pleased to let him have, was content that within public
Lists they should determine their Quarrel.

With all speed all retired to their Tents to arm them, whilst a most large
place was prepared for the Combat. Ten thousand soldiers, with the Baron of
Racara, had the Guard of the Camp, to the end that they might not permit, that
either by word or sign the Combatants should be favored. The Soldiers ran in
strife to get the best place, as if that Battle was made to delight the
sight. Some in their desires favored the Prince of Missia, others him of
Epirus, accordingly as these Princes suited to the Genius of those, who for the
most part love and hate without reason.

But the wiser sort notwithstanding abhorred that fight which could not be
determined but to their own damage. The Victory either on the one, or the
other fide, could not but prove funebrous.

In this mean while, there was heard to proceed from the Pavillion of the
Prince of Missia, such clamours, that they seemed to deafen Heaven. This was
the occasion of it: The King of the Scythians had with his own hand armed the
Prince, taking notice of all the Arms with a diligence not ordinary, when he
said to him; Prince of Missia, you are to fight against the most courageous
sword of the world. The Prince replied, having his heart and eyes without
fear: May be you have an ill opinion of my valor? The Scythian answered, I
know you are of such a Generosity, that you yield not to any whosoever; but
nevertheless, you are to combat against one, who has had more Victories then
Foiles; and this makes me presage your destruction.

The Prince was altered at these words, whereupon he said; If you had loved me,
you would have had a more worthy an opinion of my valor. Auguries so
infelicious, (although despised by my undauntednesse) settle me in a mind,
that you are interested with my Enemies, and that you come to tempt me to
Cowardice, to advantage those with terrifying me. The Scythian, not accustomed
to permit, that the pride of his heart should lend an ear to such like
Reproaches, added; I would to Heaven Prince that your hand corresponded to your
tongue, and that you were as valorous in striking, as you are in speaking.
Notwithstanding, if Fortune favor you with Victory, I will that you shall
render me an account of what you have spoke, more confident in my patience
then your valor. The Prince replied, that then and always he would make him
know, that he spoke unworthily, putting into doubt his force, and his
undauntedness. The Scythian was not longer able to refrain, but with his shut
hand came against the Prince, who laying hand to his sword, began to lay at him
with many blows. The Scythian had nothing but a sword, and yet he defended
himself so well, that for the most part he deceived the eye, and the hand of
the Prince.

Dorcone arrived just upon that time there, when tardency could not but be
perilous, because the Soldiers of the Prince, and the Scythian, were run with
Arms to aid their Lords. The Thracian attempted by all means to appease
them, making use of both his authority and entreaties, when in the Tent of the
Prince of Epirus the like shoutings were heard: arising from a Contention,
perhaps greater than the former. The Prince of Epirus was armed by the
assistance of many Knights, which reached him, and looked to his Arms. The
Infant of Macedonia, willing to give him his sword, saw that it had written on
it; The Sword of the Heirs to Mars. With a mighty earnestness he requested
how he attained the possession of that Sword. The Prince answered, that the
King his Father had won it by strength of Arms, killing a Knight that wore it.
The Infant added, I know not Prince, whether you understand the secret of this
sword. This is a gift which Mars was willing to bestow on his Posterity. To me
it belongs more then to any other. By my paternall and maternall Line I am
descended from the God of War. To those that would have a larger Information,
I engage my self to make this good by strength of Arms. Provide your self
therefore of another Sword, for this shall not go forth of my hands but with
my soul.

The Prince full of indignation, taking a Lance, would have struck the Infant,
who being aware of it, made the Blow prove in vain. After they continued
fighting, there being not any that had the courage to interpose, the pity of
many having taugt others, that there is not a greater Folly, then to procure
the safety of others with danger to themselves. Dorcone ran thither, leaving
in the Prince of Missia's Pavillion, the Duke of Nicopolis, that he might not
suffer any Inconveniency to ensue. He proposed a thousand Offers, mentioned
infinite ways to pacify them. He interposed Entreaties, and desired time to
decide their Controversy; but all was in vain, whilst obstinate, they would
then put an end to their Quarrel. The Infant was content to lend him the
Sword, so it were requested with some humility. The Prince answered, that all
the force of the world should not be sufficient to make him desirous to borrow
that which absolutely was his own.

On the other side, Dorcone, leaving here such a Guard, that he might fear no
worse, would have the Advice of his Counsel upon this. Whilst the Baron of
Falarta bore now from one side, then from another the Commissions of the King
for the decision of so many differences, he met with a mightier then the
others. He hasting by his Majesty's Orders, a Dog of the Infante's of Armenia's
ran under his Legs, and made him fall to the ground. The Baron changed at this
accident, and so much the more, perceiving the laughter of the bystanders, and
of the Infant in particular: whereupon drawing his Sword, at one blow he
killed the Dog. The Infant conceiving the wrong to his Dog done to himself,
gave him a stroke with such a violence, that the Spectators doubted of the
Barons life: He, avoiding the blows, withdrew from the Assaults of the
Infant, who, with that his fury had no other effect, but to gain ground on
the Baron, at the same time tiring himself out of breath. The Baron resolute
to strike, not according to the impetuousnesse of his anger, but conformably to
the rules of occasion, expected that this fury should weaken his Intellect and
strength. When he perceived his strokes grew more faint and slow, he drowned
his sword in the body of the Infant, fixing him to earth in an estate neither
to entreat for, nor to receive his life.

The Armenians, not able to endure so funebrous a spectacle, took arms to
revenge the death of their Prince. The Thracians did the same to carry the
Baron out of danger. All the Camp betook them to Arms, making slaughter of
all those which would make head. The Prince of Epirus and Missia had
opportunity to meet, notwithstanding that the Scythian and the Infant of
Macedonia ran always between them. The Soldiers were all crowded up to help
their Princes, laying upon one another with so much cruelty, that a greater
they could not have used toward their enemies. Being enclosed within the
Lists, and in their Tents, they were slain without resistance, so straight a
place not able to contain such a multitude. They that were trodden under foot
were more than the wounded, men and horses contending with an equal feracity.
The Squadrons were in a manner united, so that there was not room to retire or
fly. They struck with their bodies no less than with their weapons. In so
closed a fight there was no other hope but to dye. All equally were enemies,
and many times the Soldier killed him who had saved his life. Nothing was
heard but confused cries, languishing schreekes, that, mixed with the noise of
Arms, formed to the ear a sound most dreadful which threatened death.

The Thracians, by reason they were the greater in number, made the more
slaughter of the others, although also they made the greater loss: Dorcone
cried out, but was not heard, he was not obeyed. He used all means to appease
that uproare, but it availed not; for they obstinate in fight attended not to
any thing he said.

Is it possible (he cried) that you will with your own bloods give the victory
to your enemies? What Anger, what hope, what reward enforces you to be cruel
against your friends? Employ those weapons with a more meritorious violence
against those who laugh at your furies. What Deity constraines you to sacrifice
your selves here to death? What barbarismes? What foolishnesses are these? What
Fate wills it, that the besieged should enjoy their security by our perils?
Shall then a simple indignation, sprung by chance, do more than an inveterate
hatred of your enemies? You cannot be overcome but by your selves. Would you
then that the Foe should triumph over you long of your selves? Vent your rage
against those who from the Walls look for safety from our harms.

These words nevertheless prevailed not any thing in those minds, which
encruelized had not distinction to know their madness. The complaints, and the
voices of the wounded did not allay at all the fury of the Combatants, rendered
incapable to obey, and to command. All those Princes rushed into the Squadrons,
by maine force routing them, not taking either example, nor moderation by the
misfortune of those that were fallen before them. The Thracians many times
endeavored to draw out of the Rampires, obeying more to the hand than to the
voice of the King; but the Soldiers of the Armenian, and the Scythian, with
those of the other Princes permitted them not. The Infant of Macedonia and the
Prince of Epirus, many times meeting, and many times parted by the great Crowd,
fell, upon one another afresh. Perceiving that to use their swords was
impossible, they closed, each striving to cast his enemy. They both fell, nor
could they rise again, this being the last fall to them. The Press was so
great, that whosoever fell was not in a state to rise, fining a Sepulcher many
times before death.

The Scythian, who ran formidable, carrying terror by the most illustrious
blood, met with the Prince of Missia, who wheresoever he passed left always
signs of his valor. Both of them seeing they were so near (every other
enterprise being cast aside) turned against that which they most hated. That
Tragedy had not presented a Scene more funebrous. Before he struck, the
Scythian said: Now thou shall pay for the contempt which with thy speeches thou
have given to my Councels and Affection. A Boy might well receive directions
from a King that loved him. I hope shortly to make you see that it had been
better for you to have been born without a tongue. Thou shall not have friends,
neither the protection nor authority of the King which shall hide thee from the
fury of this sword. The Prince answered: In truth thou art come at this time to
receive chastisement for thy pride. I know thou desire I were timorous and
base, because thy particular knowledge of thy own debility made thee fear one
day the undauntednesse of this heart. They replied no more, because with their
swords they began to work treason to their lives. The strength of their
Armours made many of their blows fall in vain, although from many places they
drew blood. They were so straightened by the multitude of Soldiers, that they
could only strike with their fists. This nevertheless they did with such a
strength and anger, that, their Armours being bruised, they were both desperate
of their lives. Throwing aside their swords, they drew their knives, with which
they left not any place of their Armours which they attempted not to kill by.
The Scythian was more fierce, and the Prince more discreet, so that no
advantage was known between them. Finally they resolved to overcome or dye. The
Scythian struck the Prince in the groine with cutting the buckles of his
Armor, the blade entered into his bowels. He feeling himself slain struck
the Scythian in the throat, between the joining of the Brestplate and the
Helm. They both fell to the earth, breathing forth their souls, which without
doubt will renew the fight, if hatred and anger are nourished among the dead.

Dorcone, seeing this Battle so obstinate, endeavored by his utmost power to
make his men draw out of the Rampires. Lastly, it succeeded, though he was
diverse times in danger to be overpressed. Two hours only remained to the day,
when with his head and his hand unarmed he began to pacify the Soldiery, who
being advertised of their peril, began in a great measure to calm their
anger. But their miseries were redoubled on them, when they were certified that
Fire had taken possession of their Fleet. Such a multitude of Galleys were on a
sudden come upon them, that the Thracians not having time to weigh Anchor, or
to retire into the Sea, were become a prey to fire, which in a mighty
quantity was thrown upon them. Although the distance was of many miles, those
terrors were nevertheless heard, which declaring the burning rendered the
damage irreparable. Their fear was increased upon them, when they understood
that the enemies who had made the fire, in a grand number being landed, were
marching thence to fall upon them.

This was Astidamo King of Create, who, joyful that he had found her alive,
without whom he could not live, had resolved to return into his Kingdom.
Whilst they were in their voyage, by asking after news, they understood the
destruction of the Kingdom of Cyprus made by the Thracians. That all the firm
land of the Island being lost, Arsinoe only held out besieged by so many Arms,
and so many Armies, that it could but a little longer resist the force of so
many enemies. That the Armeniuns, the Scythians, the Macedonians, with many
other Princes, had declared themselves against King Vassileo, and to their
detriment had raised Money and Soldiers. Dianea at these news was not able to
stop her tears that in abundance fell to vent forth the passion of her mind,
casting her self at the Kings feet, she said to him:

I supplicate Astidamo, over whom my affection presumes to find some desert.
Sir, If I should not love my Father I were unworthy to be yours, and in the
same time to live. You your self would but be a shadow of that heart that had
not affections for him who has given me my being. If I had no other reason to
love him, I have that of his begetting me to be yours. His having condemned me
to death alters not my love. I rather glory to be daughter to a Father, who had
rather punish his Child than derogate from Justice. That mind should not be but
celebrated which condemns it self not to leave Crimes unpunished. At this
present, that he is exposed to the invasion of Barbarians, to the power of the
Thracians, who boast to impose servitude upon Cyprus, I beseech you, by that
affection that interests you, to afford aid to my affairs, which at other
times you have not known how to refuse to him. Permit not (O magnanimous) that
these wicked ones should vaunt to have the Father of her Prisoner to whom you
have acknowledged your self so many times a Prisoner. Besides, how could you
rejoice in my embraces which would be continually sadded by my fears? I need
not add that the Kingdom of Cyprus is mine after the death of my Father,
because where my entreaties prevail, it is not fit that Interest should plead
a Title. So much the rather, because the greatness of your mind receives not an
alteration from those lownesses that reign only in vulgar bosoms. I know if
Cyprus should fall under the subjection of the Thracians, Creete would not be
secure from the ambition of those who would enlage the mightiness of their
Empire beyond the Confines of the World. But of this also I need not use a word
to that heart which has never been capable of fear, and which rejoices that
others conquer to make his own triumphs the more glorious. Let this only be an
Adjunct to the immortality of your name, that you have twice delivered Cyprus
from the barbarismes of the Thrasians, and given twice life to a King when he
the least hoped for it, and least deserved it. Dianea has never entreated
Astidamo without being heard. I assure my self the more in it, because I
supplicate for a Father.

Astidamo embraced her, saying to her: Dianea, I was unwilling to interrupt
you, extremely rejoicing in your piety. The tendernesses showed toward your
Father, confirms my opinion that you know how to love. I glory that the
heavens have vouchsafed me the possession of a mind which forgets not the
Obligations of Nature. Not to have a memory for injuries is proper to your
generosity. The wrongs a Father does, should not beget anger in those that
receive them. The earth at no time has reason to complain of the Lightnings
that Jove throws on it. I will go to the succor of your Father, because it is
not convenient, that any beloved by you should be in danger to be lost. I know
that beauty will carry felicity into that Kingdom which undergoes so many
miseries only by reason of your absence. He speedily commanded that their
Voyage should be directed toward Cyprus; Fame giving out that having obtained
a Wife he went to get possession of her dowry. To the Soldiers he promised the
spoils of the Thracians, proposing one other intervall to the victory but till
he met with the enemy.

Favored by the Sea and the Winds, they arrived upon the Fleet, which under
the Command of the Count of Brandilia was dispersed into the Ports without
fear, and without defense. The Thracians beheld at one and the same time the
Fire, Arms, and Death. The Count was busy in play with all the other prime
men that had Command in the Fleet in a Galley far distant from the rest. Being
informed of the fire, not willing to leave off play, he being a winner,
commanded it should be quenched, supposing it kindled by accident through the
carelessnesse of the Galeyots, or Mariners. Being assured the Navy was
assaulted by enemies, now persuaded the winds could not have such force, he
would not nevertheless stir, until the violence of the fire represented the
inevitable danger to him. Then necessity rendering him a certainty of his
neglect, he consented not to retire or fly, much more fearing the displeasure
of the King than death. Perceiving the flames unextinguishable, and defense
impossible, he commanded his Galleots they should charge upon one of those
Galleys, whilst he himself resolved to dye on the weapons of some worthy
person. There was not any there that would understand, or that would obey him.
Fear had so daunted the minds of them all, that to avoid the fire they leapt
out to swim, finding no defense but in desperation. The slaughter was great,
whilst both Elements conspired to the damage of the Thracians.

Astidamo victorious, without delay made his Soldiers go a Land; understanding
by his Scouts the discord that was in the Camp in the Enemies Army, heightning
his courage, he said to his:

On O valorous! Let us pursue the Victory: Here is neither danger, nor labor
in assaulting those who are overcome by their own discords. Being at division
among themselves, they will bring confusion and terror among themselves. They
were infinite in number, but there has happened such a slaughter among them,
that they will not any more have strength to make resistance. The prime
Chieftaines that rendered that Army formidable are killed by their own weapons,
and the Gods would have made them all dye so, had they not been willing to have
afforded some glory to your valor.

On, on (O valorous) take to heart the tears of Dianea, my entreaties, and
your own reputation. Make a slaughter of these impious ones; kill them, for
they would do the same to you if your virtue would permit them. To take a
Prisoner is to add an impediment to you, and to save enemies. Spoils will not
be wanting to you. These words being ended, which were attended by a felicious
shout of all the Soldiers, he marched against the Thracians, who being got out
of the Lists, were put into that order which sear, danger, and the shortness
of the time would permit them.

Dorcone, on the other side, inanimating, and exhorting his, said: See to what
terms your particular angers have reduced you. Now by a general resolution
repair that honor which in the opinion of men would be hardly censured of by
reason of your rage. Although the past misfortune has swept away a great part
of our Soldiers, we are nevertheless yet the more in number. They would not
have had the boldness to have affronted us without the advantage of our own
differences. They have been invited by us, having built their hopes uponour
ruin. Perhaps you believe the Cretans will venture their lives for an old man
repleat with ingratitude: That they will dye without hope of reward. They will
hardly make trial of your force but they will supplicate us for pardon. If you
have nor the heart to defend your selves, you will be necessitated to dye
basely. We are encompassed by enemies; We must conquer or dye. Call to mind
your victories, and that you are in the presence of your King, who has
returned from all battles with honor.

These and other words the Thracian used to encourage them. The fight begun,
the two Kings of Creete and Thracia defended their right Wings. The left of the
Thracians was maintained by the Duke of Nicopolis, whilst the opposite was
commanded by the Count of Cornia of the blood Royal, and who among the
Chiefetaines of Creete held the first place. Both the Armies fell to it with
such an impetuousnesse, that the desperation of the Thracians was very easily
discerned, and the boldness of the Cretensians. Ire from it self presented
miserable speeches. Every thing was slaughter, every thing demonstrated death
horribly. Dead bodies were seen in heaps, in mountains, without distinction
either of their dignity or merit. The wounded fell upon the dead, and before
they could dye, they had the horror to see the destruction of a Parent, or a
friend. Many unburied bodies the living buried. Blood fell in so great an
abundance that the Soldiers could not keep their feet.

The Count of Cornia showed proofs worthy truly of his valor, opening a way
through the thickest, with the genuine fierceness of his heart. He encountered
the Duke of Soitone. He turned upon him, willing to Nobilitate his Victories,
by the death of some remarkable Person. He struck him with two redoubled blows
upon the Helm, while not being able to resist such a force, gave way to the
Iron to enter, making almost his life to follow them. The Count called out to
his to strip him: but being treacherously wounded in the Flank by the Baron of
Achialo, he was enforced to fall, with such a Resentment of his, that they
killed the Duke, not yielding to take him Prisoner: for the which he used all
Importunity, promising Mountains of gold.

Astidamo, hearing of the death of the Count, became in such wise encruellized,
that neither Prayers nor Lamentations had power to move him to pity. Shields
and Helmets had no more resistance against his sword, then if they were of
Glass. Every stroke felled to the Earth, or killed. By his look and voice he
drove the soldiers before him, who equally dreaded his menaces, and strength:
And for the most part, when his Sword fell upon them, they believed it a
Thunderbolt.

Also Dorcone rusht into the Troops, routing them with such a courage, that
there was not any that fled not from his blows. He struck down, wounded,
flew, and with a desperate resolution, abandoned himself into all dangers.
Astidamo, who to attain to the Victory, knew the head of the Thracian was
necessary, called him by name in the thickest Crowd of the soldiers. These
words often, and often repeated, arrived to the Ears of Dorcone, who
disdaining himself for being challenged the first, ran speedily thither, where
Astidamo carried death, both in his Countenance and Sword. Before he would
strike him, he said to him: Who art thou that have the boldness to invite me
to the Combat? Astidamo answered; I am he who am glorious by the death of thy
Brother. O ye Gods, replied the Thracian, I render you thanks of passion, that
I have suffered till now, since you have presented me the occasion to revenge
that blood which was shed by so much injustice. To thee (O beloved soul) I
offer up this victory, it thou disdainest not a Sacrifice so infamous. Astidamo
replied not, but with his Sword, giving the Thracian a blow that made him a
little wound in his Flank. On the other side, the Thracian struck Astidamo on
the arm, so that the blood issued forth in great abundance.

Whilst these Combated, Victory turned her back upon the Thracians, who by
little and little drew back, retreating. All their Chief were either slain or
wounded. Whereupon, not having any that should awaken their Courages, they
began to be disordered, and to fly thence, whither they were transported by
their fear; Which increased much more upon them, when King Vassileo, not
pardoning those years which necessitated him to repose, marched out with the
Count of Salinera, falling upon the backs of the Thracians, who being so
intercepted, knew not whither to fly thence. The burning of the Fleet, and the
cry of Soldiers, confused by the fragour of Armours, carried into Arsinoe, the
state of the Enemy, who nevertheless took on them a Resolution to issue out,
not willing to overcome without danger, neither without labor. Here the
slaughter was more then great, because the Thracians shut up into the midst,
knew not how to get off, becoming of Besiegers, the Besieged. They knew not
what to do, but to cry for Quarter, and throwing down their Arms to embrace
the feet of the Conquerours. All the Standards were laid on the Earth, and the
Companies no longer acknowledged their Officers. There was nothing else heard
but indistinct Cries and pitiful of the overcome, which inhorridated the air.

Death and Fear had deprived the Thracians of all Resistance, so that
excepting Dorcone there was not any that made head, at the least not to die
cowardly. The Thracian perceiving himself encompassed by so many victorious
soldiers, said to Astidamo; You confess your baseness, that you have not the
boldness to overcome me one to one. Astidamo answered; Let us withdraw aside:
for I would that you your self should be judge of it. This said, he commanded
his, that they should not offend him, receiving many times on his own Shield,
the strokes of those that ran solicitous to wound him. They went forth
together, retiring after many Compasses into a Valley, which enclosed round by
some Hills, made show as if it were so shut up for some Fight. Here then they
staid to renew the Assault.

They began then afresh to strike with so much Anger, and so much Force, as if
then only they gave beginning to a Battle. Astidamo rendered vain all the
blows of his Adversary, knowing him of great strength. Now he fenced, now he
bowed, now with his Sword he put by the Thracians; whose Valor being in great
measure decreased, by a continual toil, his blows were not but weak.
Whereupon, Astidamo, although wounded in many places, preserved the more his
mind, and his courage more; Feigning he would strike Dorcone on the face, he
wounded him in the Hip, who grown furious at it, made in a moment a wound on
Astidamo's Head.

They both lost blood, and leaving warding, and the rules of a Duel, they
attempted not but to kill. How much the more the fight wanted of Art, it was so
much the more perilous and mortal. The Fury in those debilitated strengths
then began to languish, when Astidamo wounded Dorcone in his Breast, in that
part the nearest to his Heart, plucking back his Sword all bathed in blood. The
Thracian fell, but with that heart that feared not death; helping himself with
his left hand, he stood to his Guard, resting on a knee. Astidamo admiring at
the virtue of such a man, said, Yield (O Generous) since that Fortune wills that
thou shall be overcome. The Thracian abusing that gentleness, which offered him
the gift of his life, stuck his Sword into his Thigh, running it quite
thorough. Astidamo grown furious, and crying; Is this the recompense of my
Mercy, thrust his Blade into the sight of his Helm, which could not resist the
force of an Arm, moved by a most just Anger. The Thracian dyed, when Astidamo,
not having strength any longer to stan, fell likewise down, ready to dye, not
leaving any distinction to know the Victor from the Conquered.

King Vassileo in the mean while remaining with the Cretensians master of the
Field, gave leave to the Soldiers, that they might enrich themselves with
Plunder and Prisoners. This Victory in such wise rejoiced the mind of the
Citizens, that there was not any of them, who enjoyed not part of the fruit of
the Victory. The weakest old men could not stay in the City, nor the infirmest
Company of Women and Children. Every one ran out to get some prey of the
spoils of the Enemy. The Prisoners were without number, and the booty was
above value. So rich preyes, never Cyprus nor Creet had enjoyed.

King Vassileo, seeing the Crown settled on his Head, and those destroyed that
attempted on his Kingdom, and life; would be informed, if this succor was
dropped from Heaven. When he understood, that that Army belonged to Astidamo,
King of Crete, he was assaulted by grave thoughts. Peradventure, he had a
fear equal to that he had had of the Thracians. He knew that Enmities with
Kings were not appeased, but with blood. He very well remembered, that he had
forbidden him the Court with terms more then severe: And that by the
condemnation of Dianea, he had expressed signs of the hatred he bore to the
Kingdom of Crete, unwilling to endure her in life, who had presumed to match
her self with his Enemy. He feared these succors aimed not but to oppress
him; the Armies of Potentates not moving, but upon grand Interest.
Nevertheless, dissembling those Passions, which permitted him not to enjoy the
joys of the Victory, leaving to the Count of Salinera the Command of his men,
with some few of his, he went in quest of Astidamo, willing by a demonstation
of Confidence and Affection, to mascherate his diffidences, and his fears.

Astidamo, not being to be found in the field, he imagined he was retired to
the Navy.

He took his way thitherwards, but being something near, he espied a Lady, who
by her fashion and motion, made a grand Pomp of her self. Approaching nearer,
and descrying the likenesses of Dianea, he cried out: What is this that is
made an Object to my eyes? Are these Dreams or Phantasms, that occupy my
Cognoscitive virtue? This was Dianea, who hearing of her Fathers coming to the
Navy, was descended thence to meet him.

Suddenly, as he drew near her, prostrating her self at his feet, she said
to him; Father, I am that unhappy Dianea, who have demerited your affections. I
have lived, not because I have deserved life, but because Destiny has been
pleased to make me an Instrument for your security. Excuse me (O Father) if by
my presence I am come to funerallize the joys of your Victories. But in
Consolations, Favors, and Graces are dispensed: I supplicate you therefore,
(most benign Father) for pardon. Forgive by your favor the Errors of that
heart that has offended you, not to injure it self. It is true, I have loved
the King of Creet, and I could not but love him, he having elected me for his
Consort. I conceived it a greater Crime to deny him, then to afford him my
affection. Who ever knows Astidamo, and loves him not, knows not who deserves
Affection. Father, excuse my tongue, that presumes to run so much in the
Applauses of Astidamo, for I know not how to honestize my Error better, then
by exalting the Prerogatives of him, who has made me commit them. I should
plead something in Excuse of my fault, if I could repent me of it. I know not
how to acknowledge a penitency for such an Excess, since from thence the
Defense of your State, and the safety of your person is derived. Behold, (O
Father) at your benign feet, Dianea, who until now, through your displeasure
confesses her self unhappy. Behold her at your feet, who though condemned by
you, has not therefore refused to love you. Let my sorrow to have provoked
your indignation make amends for what I have trespassed in. Awaken (merciful
Father) those Affections to which Nature obliges you. Remember that you are a
Father, and that only I can preserve alive the memories of your greatness;
suffer not (affectionate Father) that your Daughter Dianea should supplicate
and weep without being heard.

King Vassileo, that hitherto remained oppressed by a not known alteration,
shedding so many tears, that one might even say, that the snow of his head
thawing issued through his eyes, with a very great affection cast his Arms
about the neck of Dianea; saying to her: Oh! Of how many victories to day have
the Gods been favorable to me! Beloved Dianea, lay aside those sorrowful
remembrances which perchance may render my presence odious to you. Let Oblivion
take possession of all things past. I receive you for my daughter with a double
consolation, having so many times bemoaned you for dead. Believe me, I have
received punishment for the sentence fulminated against you, because a Father
is condemned in the guiltiness of a Daughter. But where is Astidamo, to whom
we profess our selves doubly engaged, both for your preservation, and my life?
To this purpose I came to the Navy. We are a severe Judge, but not an
ungrateful Prince.

Dianea replying the same sollicitousnesse, not knowing what was become of
Astidamo, began to suspect some ill. She used all diligence to have a certain
account. Many of the chief spread themselves through the field to direct them
the way, when they were turned aside by the slaughter of their enemies. Others
with lighted Torches disquieted the dead, with a fear to find him whom they
sought for. The night was much spent, when the report was that Astidamo was
found dead not far off of the field. Fear carried the news of it to the ears
of Dianea, who, with an inquietude equal to the love she bore him, gave
command that the authors of the report should be found; she heard too much of
that she would not from two Soldiers who had found him by chance, and were
come thence to acquaint their Captains with it.

His death divulged, and the night assisting these cruelties, rather amplifying
into worse all that Fame delivered, there was to be seen in the faces of all
signs of sadness and displeasue. The voices of the Soldiers were in such
wise heated, that, abandoning their Ranks, and not obeying their Officers,
they knew not what else to do but with horrible exclamations to lament and
sigh. There neither Ostentation nor Adulation had place, for they felt a
mightier passion in their souls than they could express with tears. The Army
now appeared a Desert for silence, now an hell for the cries that were heard
there. All the Soldiers in Arms with lighted Torches roared out the world was
ruined, all their hopes were destroyed, with a behavior so licentious, that
King Vassileo was in some hazard of his life.

Dianea, after the manner of one distracted, ran crying, Where art thou O
friend? Who has had the presumption to ravish thee from me? You tutelar Gods
of Cyprus, how have you a sufferance at these injuries which this death has
administered? Is this the recompense he receives for his Labors, his
Assistances, his Love? Most unjust heaven, since that evermore against him thou
have produced malign Influences. O inconstant Fortune, what availes it me to
have escaped from the anger of thy punishment, to have fallen into the hands of
him whom I adored, to have delivered my Father from his enemies, and my
Country, to have obtained a pardon for the errors of my heart, to have twice
beheld the destruction of the Barbarians; if finally these joyful remembrances
serve to no other purpose but to infelicitate me!

Unhappy Astidamo, dead without the last embracements of Dianea. But how could
he have been able to endure the presence of her, who has been the cause of his
death? To save my Father, I have killed him. Then could not I gain my Father
without the loss of my Husband, nor enjoy my Spouse without the loss of my
Father. O rigours of Destiny! O inexorable necessities of Fate! Trust your
selves O mortals in the graces of that blind Goddess that affords
prosperities, to the end that with greater oppression we may receive her
discourtesies. I having freed my Father, seen the Thracians destroyed, and
having attained to the Title of the Queen of Creete, and of Princess of Cyprus,
believed I was not subject to the instability of her inconstancies. But these
highnesses have proved no other but instruments to precipitate me the more.

So saying, she arrived where Astidamo lay. Then, redoubling her tears and
sobs, it seemed that her heart would issue through her eyes, or that she would
altogether distill her self into tears. She said sometimes, when her
lamentation allowed her an intervall:

Unhappy Dianea, who could have presaged to thee an object so infelicious? The
fear of Lovers, which presents to the Intellect, things which befall not under
sense, could not, no, not by the assistance of sleep could not have presented
Scenes so unlucky. Who could have made my eyes believe thy presence would have
proved offensive? O beloved, O delighted in, O desired Astidamo! I should
number up thy beauties, and thy perfections ravished from me in that time
wherein I chiefly hoped to enjoy them, but I will not render the Parcae more
proud of so worthy a Rapine. Pardon me, if, having a mind to follow thee, I rob
from thy memory the due Tribute of my tears. It Is true, I ought to love life
only to bewail thee, but I know the Recordancie of thy virtues have no need of
Commiserations; who knows not eternally how to lament Astidamo, will wear the
brand of the punishment not to have known him.

With these and the like conceits Dianea bemoaned her self, not permitting
that her words should come forth but accompanied with tears and sighs. That
hot humor which bubled from her eyes, falling upon the face of Astidamo, gave
some spirit to him; whereupon opening his lips languishingly, he sent forth a
sign. Dianea perceiving that messenger of life, using violence against her
grief that rendered her desperate, having took some part of comfort, began to
say to him:

Beloved Astidamo, observe the Exequies which Dianea celebrates to thee with
lamentation. Friend, abandonate not Dianea, for Dianea will not forsake thee
alive or dead. Astidamo opened his eyes, but was again enforced to close them,
made heavy and troubled by weariness, and the abundance of blood he had lost.
The Chirurgions came, who found his wounds perilous, but not without hope of
life. They only bound them up, applying Remedies and Lenitives to the sword of
the Thracian, to the astonishment of those who knew not the secrets of Nature,
and the power of Sympathy. Wounds are healed with medicining the sword of him
that made them, without the pain of the patient, and without the violences of
those remedies which render a thousand times to the Infirm, death desirable.

He was brought into Arsinoe upon the arms of his. Being left to repose, the
Physicians commanded that he should not be disquieted for any accident
whatsoever. Dianea notwithstanding would wait at his bed all the remainder of
the night. Ever and anon she stole to the Curtains, doubtful of some new
fainting, and fearing lest Destiny again should ravish him from her. He
languished between sleeping and waking, and it was near upon day, when he had
not opened his eyes, neither had any knowledge where he was, nor of who
attended on him. His voice was languishing and imperfect, so that his words
proceeded so ill composed, that they were hardly distinguished by ears, the
nearest to him.

As soon as he could discern Dianea, who by maine force kept back her tears,
he said to her; Friend, do not doubt of my life: For I cannot dye having you
near me. Afterward, understanding the destruction of the Thracians, obtained
with little loss to his, and the discourse of King Vassileo with Dianea, in a
great measure he gathered strength, and gave signs of recovery. The
Chirurgions having found in the Arms all the best tokens, promised him sound
within the space of a few days.

The people then, and the Soldiers, receiving a certainty of this, gave
themselves up to rejoycings. Some walked to the Temples to render thanks to the
Gods. Others seeming mad for joy, ran up and down the streets. Diverse studied
Epithalamiums, and Panegyricks. Many prepared for Banquets. All finally
embracing their Friends, and rehearsing to others that which all knew,
redoubled their Consolations. Yet there was not any that equalled the mind of
King Vassileo, and of Dianea. The first time the King visited Astidamo, he said
to him: Friend, The affection you bear this house does not allow me the
occasion to pass into the duty of an excuse. Who knows how to oblige without
hope of reward, can also suffer ill satisfactions without disdain. I make
preparations for the Nuptials of Dianea, not to give you that which is yours,
but that in the celerity you might take knowledge of my heart.

So the Espousals were hastened on with that solemnity which is proper to so
grand Princes. There was not a Pomp that could be equalized to this. The
superbiousnesse of Asia, and the rarities of Africa here demonstrated the
extremes of their power. In the Temple of Venus the Ceremonies were
celebrated. Afterward attended by all the people, they returned to the Palace,
wearing away many days in Banquets, and Tournaments. Their rejoycings were
afterward redoubled in the Childbed of Dianea; she was delivered of two Sons,
who for valor and beauty need not envy their Parents. Dianea, being accounted
of as an heaven, would also emulate it in Twins. I remit the relation of their
glories to the Genius of some pen more sublime.

FINIS.

