LONG Parliament-VVork, (if they will please to do it) FOR The Good of the
COMMONWEALTH: OR, The Humble Desires of the Well-affected, Revived.

Tendered to the most serious Consideration of the Parliament, Army, and
others, in XX. PROPOSALS, Concerning I. Liberty of Conscience. II. Punishment
of Sin. III Putting down bad, (...) up good Magistrates. IV. Maintenance of
the poor. V. Education of all Children, and Youth. VI. A^ation of the Law about
Theft. VII Putting down of Tithes, and appointing a Gospel-like maintenance for
good Ministers: VIII. Satisfying of Proprietors who have Impropriations. IX. A
putting down Farmers of Excize, etc, and settling another way to collect it. X.
Calling to account for all public moneys concealed, or gotten by fraud XI.
Regulation of Law, and bringing it into the Country. XII. What Causes should
be tried at Westminster, and what not. XIII. Reducing of the Judges Sallary.
XIV. Limits to the power of Parliaments, and to the time of their sitting. XV.
Rules to be observed in electing Parliament men. XVI. Their Qualifications
XVII. The work of the Sheriff and other Commissioners about it. XVIII. The
trial of the Elections, by the Council of State. XIX. About Advance of trade.
XX. About Hospitalls and Almshouses.


London, Printed by T. L. for G.Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle, near the
West End of Paul's, 1659.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THe several Particulars insisted on in this small Tract being exposed to
publi^ (...) it is desired that they may not be the occasion or provok^ (...)
to envy. The general good of the Nations being aimed at in all the Proposalls,
which if it shall graciously please the Parliament to approve of, and cause to
be brought to offect, which is much hoped, and longed for, especially as to the
substan^ial parts of them; the benefit of these things will appear, and
doubtless the well-affected will both now (when they are done, and hereafter
have abundant cause to praise God (as well as to pray to him) for all that are
in authority (or in eminent place) over them so acting for their weal and
safety.

The Publisher hereof, who well knows that in the main of this short discourse
he has expressed the humble desires and hearty well-wishes of very many of the
good people in this Commonwealth, has thought fit (for several reasons which
he is ready to give to any Friend that shall demand them) to desire that his
Name be not made public with it, although he has been, and shall always
(whilst life and strength is vouchsafed) be ready faithfully to serve his
Country, to the utmost hazard upon all occasions.

Long Parliament-Work, etc.
PROPOSAL The First.
That the civil and Christian Liberties (at least) of all good people respected
(or comprehended) in the sixth Proposal of the Army, lately presented to the
Parliament, may by Law be asserted and secured, and that with such penalties
(...) on such as shall presume to encroach upon, or (...) the same, as that all
may be detterred for the future ^ther Magistrates or others) from being in
jurious to any on that account; for else it is an easy thing for any that have
Power in their hands, to abuse it in some degree (or other) of persecution, (if
they are minded) when they know there is not a Law to punish offenses of that
nature.

II.
That none may presume to take Liberty to themselves for comm^tting of
Wickedness against the Law of God and man, in Murders, Adultery, Fornication,
Swearing, Drunkenness, Oppression, Extortion, Bribery, Couzening, (...) and such
like abominacions; there may be an Act with strict penalties to command all
Civil Officers of the Commonwealth (and all others) to use their utmost
endeavors to bring all such as shall transgress any of the Laws made in those
Cases, without fear, favor or affection to due and deserved Punishment; and in
case it shall be (sufficiently) proved by two Witnesses, That any whomsoever
have neglected their duty therein, they may be made very exemplary for such
their neglects, in such manner as the Parliament shall think fit to appoint.

III.
That according to the ninth and tenth Proposals of the Army, which has been
taken into some consideration by the Parliament, Such persons may be entrusted
with the management and exercise of the Government, who are of suitable spirits
to the Good Cause and Interests of these Nations, and to make way for the same.
That all Aiders, Assisters of, and Adherers to the late King Charles Stuart,
his Son, or any other person or persons whatsoever, of that party, against the
Parliament or Commonwealth of England; and all other persons whatsoever that
have made use of any Authority or Power under pretense of Law or otherwise, to
deprive or abridge any of the good people of the^e Nations of their Christian
Liberty; or have, or shall express themselves in any way mockers, scoffers, or
revilers of godliness, or of the professors thereof; or are otherwise
scandalous or loose in their conversations, or have not given good satisfaction
of their affection and faithfulness to this Cause, may be speedily removed out
of all Places of Power or Trust in the Magistracy, or other management of the
public Affairs of these Nations; and that no such persons may be admitted into
any such places of Power or Trust for the future. And in order hereto,

That all Charters of Cities, and Towns Corporate within this Commonwealth,
which were granted by any of the Kings, or by the late Lord Protectors, unto
the said Cities and Towns-Corporate, may be speedily brought into the
Parliament, to the end that they (or such of them as shall be thought necessary
to be continued) may be granted and se^led in ^he Name, and by Authority of the
Parliament (as the Government is now constituted) and that in the doing
th^reof, the Government of such great Bodies (or Societies) of People (as are
in such places) may be committed into the hands of persons who are fitly
qualified for it; that is to say, Such as are the most eminent for godliness,
faithfulness, and constancy to the good Cause and Interests of these Nations,
(as aforesaid) and not be left to the Management of so many (most of which
fully discovers themselves to be none of the best in several places of this
Commonwealth) and how can it be expected that Vice should be punished by such
as are vicious themselves? or Virtue countenanced by those that are destitute
of, and Enemies to it?

IV.
That if possible (as surely it is) a way may be found out to set all such poor
to work, and to compel them to labor who are able, that they may not live in
such an idle and beggarly condition as they do; and that an effectual course
may be constantly taken to provide and allow sufficient maintenance for such as
through age or otherwise are impotent, and not able to work, so that they may
not be necessitated to beg or starve, either of them being a great shame for
such a wealthy Nation as England to suffer; and how great a scandal does it
occasion to our Profession of Christianity? For better effecting hereof, be
pleased to require the Minister of each Parish throughout the Nations, to have
an inspection into the necessitous condition of the poor, and to set time apart
every Week for that end, and according as he finds their needy condition to be,
then constantly to provoke those as are under his charge, to discharge their
duty to the utmost for their relief; and that all other Officers to whom the
care of the poor is committed, may be strictly enjoined to see that sufficient
maintenance be duly given to such, as occasion requires; and that from time to
time diligent inquiry may be made by the several Judges in their Circuits, and
at all quarter Sessions, how the Laws made in the Poors behalf are observed,
and when breaches are found, the transgressors should suffer according to the
Law and their demerits; that no neglect of so necessary a duty as this of
relieving the distressed, may escape unpunished.

V.
That all children and youth who are capable of learning may be put to School
(both rich and poor) until (at least) they can read the Bible; want of
learning being one great cause of much ignorance and profaneness (in the land)
learning on the other hand being an apt means to direct in the performance of
duty both to God and man, and does not only capasitate such as have it
oftentimes to gain a livelihood by it (when other means fail) for themselves
and friends but does also make more serviceable to the Commonwealth, and that
good Schoolmasters may be provided in every Town and Parish for that end and
purpose; and parents and masters of families, rich and poor may be enjoined to
put their children and youth to School as aforesaid, and the Constable and
other officers required to see that no neglect herein be committed, especially
by the poor who usually are very remiss and careless in the education of their
children, which does the more dispose them to evil (and to the manifestation of
it) when grown to the age of men and women: surely this might be done without
much charge, and the good of it will fully answer (in a short time) all the
difficulties that are in it.

VI.
That there may be a Law for punishing of Felons, who steal above the value of
thirteen pence half penny, more agreeable to the rule of Scripture and to
humanity, then the Law now in being, which for a long time has been executed
on such offenders, to the taking away of life for matters of small moment; for
does not so severe and unsuitable punishment rather harden such as are addicted
to theft in that evil, then dissuade from it, for such as are minded so to
maintain themselves in an idle and wicked course of life, do in all probability
often think, that if brought to trial, through the importunity of friends, the
Jury will incline to mercy, and the Judge to clemency and so they shall escape
hanging, but if not they resolve to have (according to the old proverb) A short
life and a sw^et, and regard not to think they shall come to such an end,
concluding that but few will be so rigorous as to take away their lives for a
little moneys or goods, or that they dare not do it; and if sometimes they
escape the extremity of the Law; they flatter themselves with thinking of
escaping always. Now oh that it might please the Parliament to annull and make
void that harsh un-Scripture like and unequal law of putting to death for
theft, and instead thereof to make a law that it may be most severely punished
according to the degrees and manner of it (not taking away life at any hand)
but compelling those that are able to make restitution, as Scripture does
direct, Exodus 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 7. but for those that are not able to restore,
they may be kept close to work (if able) in houses of correction for a
competent time according to the offense committed, or otherwise serve, be sold
(or kept in prison) and doubtless this course if taken would more deter from
stealing, then the way now practiced; surely man's law should be as conformed to
Gods law as may be; and if they were so particularly in this case of theft, it
would be more for the common good of the Nations both here and hereafter, when
an account must be given at Gods tribunal for all deeds done in the body, and
then Lawmakers and law maintainers, as well as law-breakers, must submit to
the just and righteous sentence of their Judge; and how the inflicting of
death for theft unrepented of, will or can be justified, we believe none can
manifest, but the contrary may easily be proved both by Scripture and
sufficient reason, if any desire it.

VII.
That although its most requisite that a godly, faithful and painful
Gospel-preaching-Ministry, be every where encouraged, countenanced and
maintained, as in the seventh proposal of the Army, yet it is most humbly and
earnestly desired, as it was formerly by the Army and many other well affected
people of this Commonwealth, that the way of doing it may be altered from what
it now is, Tithes being most apparently found to be very contentious and
burdensome; extremity of the Law as to treble damages being much made use of,
and the paying of Tithes in kind in some respects in many places in stead of
being the tenth part amounts to the fifth (or there abouts) and the payment of
them being much scrupled (and that not altogether without good ground) by the
consciences of many good people, as not being a Gospel maintenance, who are
necessitated either to pay them against conscience, or else to run the hazard
of undoing (almost) by enduring the execution of the Law, when the covetousness
or envy of any will prompt them to exact the benefit (of that (harsh) law) of
treble damages, and thereby also such Ministers, using such severity do
occasion much dishonor, to the name of Christ in rendering the Gospel (in
Scripture called glad tidings) to the poor very burdensome and grievous
exactions; and surely if this un-gospel and Jewish like way were put to an end,
and some other settled, much more consonant to the Gospel-rule, it would give
great satisfaction, and render the Ministry more acceptable to the people, and
their profession and enjoyments would be much more comfortable to themselves
and their friends; but here let there be no mistake in any, to think that such
as are ignorant of the Gospel, scandalous and insufficient are at all desired
to be encouraged and maintained, nay let not such be suffered to continue in
the public exercise of their calling or profession to deceive and destroy the
souls of the people and their own together, but let them betake themselves to
employments for a livelihood, more expedient and safe for them.

VIII.
That all impropriate Tithes which belong not to the Ministers, but to other
persons may be (still) paid as formerly, till a course can be likewise found
out for taking of them away by giving satisfaction to the proprietors either by
the supreme authority of the Nation or by the people (who pay them) their
agreeing with the owners about them in a way of purchase or otherwise.

IX.
That whereas the Farming of the Excize, Customs Postage of Letters, etc. have
been found to occasion much grievance and many complaints from the people, who
(for filthy lucres sake) have been rigorously dealt withal in many places of
the Nation (as might easily be made appear) by the Farmers, especially of the
Excise, who being by Law empowered to act as Commissioners, and so made Judges
in their own causes, (a thing both unreasonable, and heretofore unusual) do
ordinarily exact forfeitures from such as are either ignorant of or mistake the
Law, and so have not only paid away their gains, but have been so impoverished
and perplexed, that they have often left Brewing, though it be the way of their
livelihood, and thereby have been made incapable of enjoying a comfortable
subsistence; and how easy is it to make them suffer unjustly, if persons will
swear falsely, which how many are ready to do for money, who make not conscience
of an oath? And how needlessly troublesome are the searchers many times, in
raising and disturbing the Brewers and their Families, who refuse to compound
(at great Rates) with them, that they may (if possible) charge them (right or
wrong) with making false Entries, and so make them liable to the great penalty
of the Act, and recover the same into their purses, by which (or like means)
how exceedingly have many of the Farmers been enriched, and the people
wonderfully enraged both against the Law and Lawmakers, as well as against the
Executioners of it? Now for remedy hereof, and that the said Excise and
Customs, etc. may be improved for the benefit of the Commonwealth, free from
such oppressions: It is humbly proposed to consideration, That the Justices of
Peace in every County may when they know what proportion is charged on every
County, (in which for a rule, regard may be had to what the Farmers have paid
yearly) allot or appoint (as righteously as they can) what is to be paid by the
several Cities and Towns, and other places within their Jurisdiction; and when
every City, Town, or other place, does know their particular charge, then two
of the neighboring Justices, with the Chief MAGISTRATE, or other civil
Officers may once a year, or every six months, (during the time as it must be
kept up) use such means as they think best, to charge every particular House
which by Law is obliged to pay (according to Right and Equity) only from the
whole within their bounds, to take order that the full sum charged on each
City or Town, (or other place) may be ansvvered and satisfied; and it is not
much doubted, (if at all) but that the Justices would once or twice in a year
act in this business for the great good and ease of their neighbors; and
without any doubt at all the people will cheerfully, and much more easily
raise the Excise, and account themselves much obliged to have the business so
ordered, and that a Collector may be appointed in every City and Town, and a
Receiver-General in every County to take and pay the whole to the Parliaments
Treasurers, as they shall direct and order; Certainly all places may have the
charge which is imposed on them, raised by their own Officers and Neighbors,
who will better understand how equally to divide or proportion the same, then
such as are strangers, and do undoubtedly farm it more to raise great estates
to themselves if they can, (as diverse have done) then to serve the
Commonwealth by such an undertaking.

X
That in every County three or five of good integrity, (who have not any of the
public money in their hands to give an account of) may be appointed as
Commissioners speedily to call to a strict account all manner of persons as
Committees, Receivers, and Collectors, and others who have received any of the
public Moneys; and that the said Commissioners may (as speedily as is
possible) return the Names, and the places of abode of all such as have any of
the public money in their hands, and likewise what sums they have, to the
Parliament or Council of State, or to such as shall be empowered to receive and
report the same, to the end that an effectual course may be taken that all
concealed money, or whatever has been gotten unjustly, by fraud or otherwise,
may be recovered as the Parliament shall appoint, to serve the public use in
this time of necessity, and to help pay the Nations Debts; and let the said
Commissioners be sworn to discharge their Trust in the matter with all
diligence and faithfulness.

XI.
That in pursuance of the second Proposal of the Army lately presented to the
Parliament concerning regulation of Law, and Courts of Justice and Equity, as
that they may be a protection, and not vexatious or oppressive to the People of
these Nations.

It is humbly desired, That all ordinary matters of controversy or difference
which does or may happen to arise between person and person, may be heard and
determined in the several respective Counties where the people live, or rather
in the Hundred where they are committed or arise, without any Appeal, but to a
Parliament when it sits, or otherwise to the Council of State; and that they
may be monthly judged by twelve men of free and honest condition, chosen by
themselves, with their grave or chief Officer amongst them, and that they may
swear to judge every man's cause aright, without fear, favor, or affection; and
that there may be a public Office in every County to register all Leases made
for any Land in that County; and also all Conveyances whatsoever, and all
Charges upon the Lands, all Bonds and Contracts of any value, that so it may
readily be known in whom the interest of Land remains, and what encumbrances
lie upon it; and every Estate or Charge not entered there, to be void in Law:
And that the Country have the choosing of their Registers in their respective
Counties once a year, upon a fixed day, and that they have plain Rules and
Limitations made by Authority of Parliament, and severe penaltys inflicted for
transgressing of them: And that in case of Appeals, (as aforesaid) a Committee
may be appointed to judge what cases are needful for to be taken cognizance of,
either by the Parliament or Council, and what not, and to put a period thereto,
if they can; or otherwise to certify the matter to the one or the other, for
the Complainants obtaining final judgment in the case from the one or other of
them, whom it may happen to come before

XII.
That it may be declared what Cases or Actions may be brought to be judged by
the Courts at Westminster, and what not; and it is humbly and earnestly desired
for the general good of the Commonwealth, That no more then what there is an
absolute necessity for, may be brought to trial thither, by which means the
people will be freed from much pain in travel, and from great expenses in the
prosecution of their business: Oh that this might be so considered of, as to be
speedily granted, notwithstanding all the endeavors which most probably the
Lawyers (for their advantage sake) will make to the contrary.

XIII.
That the Judges which are employed in the service of the Commonwealth, may
for their Salaryes have only five hundred pounds per annum, each Judge, for
discharge of their duty; and it is hoped that (since there have been such great
Debts contracted in the time of the late Protectors Government, when they (as
is informed) had doubled the sum abovementioned, (if not more) and the Nation
having been so much impoverished by the Wars and long payments) they will be
well contented with such a Sallary, being as much as (it is credibly reported)
was their allowance in the Kings days; and they cannot but say (if they will
speak the truth) the Nation was not then in so low a condition by much, as now
it is, nor at such great expenses.

XIV.
That such l^mits and bounds may be set to the Power of the present and all
future Representatives of the people, as likewise to the time of their sitting
in Parliament, that they may be in a capacity to govern and preserve the
people, whom from time to time they represent, to assert and secure their
Civil and Christian Liberties, to make War and Peace as just occasion is, and
to act in all other things for their weal and safety, and not otherwise; and
this for prevention of such inconveniences as will necessarily arise, if a
perpetual and unlimited power should be exercised, and remain in any
Parliament, as formerly was incident to the Government when a King or other
single Person did bear the sway in these Nations; it may be accounted too much
presumption to propose what time this or any other Parliament shall sit* or how
large or little their power shall be, as to the particulars of it; and
therefore the whole is humbly submitted to this Parliaments grave and timely
consideration, hoping they will do these necessary works in convenient time.

XV.
That such qualifications and rules may be agreed on, acted, and declared in
words that are the most plain, and ea^^e to be understood, whereunto the people
should by penalty be enjoined to yield obedience at all times in the Election
of their Representatives, and under this Head it is humbly and earnestly
desired that such as have forfeited their freedoms to elect, and of being
elected to serve in Parliament, by their voluntary aiding, assisting, or
abetting any of the late Wars, which were raised by the King, his Son, or their
Adberents against the Parliament or other government of the said Commonwealth,
may for ever be disabled from electing, or being elected, to the end the
public peace may not again be disturbed, through the endeavors of any so
affected, which most probably they will be laboring after, in pursuance of
their Malignant principles, if they be but admitted to share in the Legislative
power with those as subdued them, it being very incident to persons when power
is in their hands to take all opportunities for being revenged on such as have
not only subdued them, but caused them to raise and pay great sums of money out
of their Estates for their Delinquency, the which was done by them that they
might possess the rest, but certainly it cannot be rationally expected, nor was
it so conditioned by the Parliament or their Committees as we know of; That
upon paying their Compositions they should be fully restored to the same or
like condition as they were in before the Wars, as to the power of electing, or
of being elected for the end aforesaid, except by some good service sdone for
the Commonwealth they have demonstrated themselves to be thoroughly converted
in Judgment and affection from the error of their former evil ways.

XVI.
That such only may be chosen to be Representers of the people in Parliament as
are generally reputed for men fearing God, of good conversation and of
self-denying public spirits, and so suitably disposed to seek the preservation
and welfare of the Commonwealth, and that they may not be despised for youth
and accounted weak in Judgment, it seems necessary that they be at least aged
one and twenty years, or rather twenty five.

XVII.
That the Sheriff in every County, and the chief Magistrate in every City, and
Town Corporate, and two or four Commissioners, (the best that can be found)
joined with them may take special care that none appear to elect, or to be
elected, but only such as are qualified for it, and if any other
notwithstanding shall presume to put themselves on that work, effectual
course may be taken with them to cause them to pay their Forfeitures according
as by Law they shall be required, and the Commissioners as well as the
Sheriffs and Magistrates to sign the Returns.

XVIII.
That the Council of State may have full power established in them by Law, to
call all such Sheriffs, Magistrates and Commissioners to account that shall
neglect their duty therein, and withal according to the Law for regulating of
Elections, as aforesaid, they may question any of the Elected, and where they
find them not chosen according to the Law provided in that case to reject or
put them by from serving as Members in Parliament; and this to be constantly
practiced as the best way for admission of Members, or for excluding them from
sitting; and much trouble and other inconveniences will be avoided which are
like to occur, if the Parliament themselves at first coming together, should be
the (only) Approvers or Excluders of Persons; but if the Sheriff and the
aforesaid Commissioners perform their work answerable to the foregoing rule,
there will be none of this kind of trouble to the Council of State at all.

XIX.
That a Committee may be speedily appointed, and from time to time continued to
consider of, and endeavor the advance of trade what lies in them, and that a
constant respect may be had thereto in the making of war and peace at all
times, it being of so much concernment, toward the prosperity of these
Nations, and next to the safety of them, should be taken care of.

XX.
That all Donations of any and every Founder of Hospitalls and Almshouses, and
of such as have given any Estate to such charitable uses, may be only made use
of for future time exactly to answer the ends of the Doners, and to fulfill
their Wills in the matter, that so those to whom of right the benefit of them
belongs, may not be unjustly put from it, as in several places they have been,
through the corruption of the Officers or Overseers of such places; and surely
it is in ustice (if not theft) in a high nature, to dispose of that to one,
which was by those that gave it, assigned to another; and when such as survive,
and are charitably minded on such an account, do observe the wrong or injustice
done in such cases, how are they discouraged from such like works of Charity,
when they see the charity of others so abominably abused before their eyes?

POSTSCRIPT.
MAny other things are most necessary to be done, as settling of the Militia of
these Nations in the hands of such as are of known fidelity, and thoroughly
resolved, faithfully to preserve and maintain the public and good interest of
the Commonwealth as it now stands, and the paying of the debts, especially to
the Army and Nav, with all possible expedition, according to the late Votes of
Parliament, and many ways might be proposed how to do it, but it being
informed that the Parliament are resolved to go through with that, and other
good things, no more is thought meet for the present to be added, save most
earnestly to entreat all persons, espe^iall, those who have been instrumental
to invite the Parliament to sit, that they be very sob^r, and wait on the Lord
with patience, seeking to him for counsel and his blessing on them, that they
may go on in the work of their generation, without any other hasty or
unwarrantable interruption; a thing most dangerous, and not to be adventured on
until a most palpable and great necessity does call for it; which we trust the
Lord will in much mercy prevent. Amen, Amen.


