THE EARL OF LOTHIAN JUSTICE GENERAL OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND, HIS DISCOURSE
TO THE LORDS of the JUSTICIARY At the Opening of the COURT At Edinburgh January
the 27th. 1690.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Society of Stationers at their Printing House in
Harts-Close over against the Trone-Church, Anno Dom. 1690.

THE EARL OF LOTHIAN HIS SPEECH.
MY LORDS,
I Cannot but acknowledge, that when I look upon my self in this Station His
Majesty has been pleased to Honor me with, and considers the greatness and
weight of the Affair, with the want of Experience, and many other personal
Unfitnesses I lie under; it could not but add Confusion to my just
Apprehensions, if I were not in a great measure assured, when I look upon your
Lordships, men of such eminent Abilities, Integrity and Skill in the Laws and
Constitutions of this Kingdom; whom His Majesty has with so much Care and
Judgment picked out to be Lords of the Justiciary and Assessors in this Court.

This, My Lords, is my Encouragement; as I hope it will prove the
Encouragement, as well as Security of the Kingdom: And indeed nothing being of
more Consequence to the Establishing of the Crown, the Peace and Flourishing of
the Nation, the Calming of the Minds and Apprehensions of the People, then the
Assurance of the Impartial Administration of Justice; I am persuaded this
Choice of your Lordships, will have that desirable Effect.

I desire not to look back, or make any Reflections upon the by past
Miscarriages; I wish they were so buried in Oblivion, that there were no
Remembrance nor Vestige, but in so far, as to be a Beacon to make us hold off
from making Shipwreck upon the same Rocks: I pray God save us from yet
undiscovered Shelves.

Neither shall I (My Lords) pretend to discant upon Justice, it being a more
common Theme and beaten Road in Discourse, than impartially put in practice:
Yet this, I hope, I may adventure to say; That though the vicissitude of humane
Affairs in the lapse of Time, diverse Designs, Corruptions of Men, even
Eloquence it self, the grand Sophister of Reason, has Disguised, Masked and
Perplexed the plain naked Truth: Yet Right and Wrong are such Antipods, are at
so great a Distance, has so different an Aspect, that they are always known,
Talked, yea Decided in the very Mercat-place, what ever has been the
Endeavors of unjust Power to the contrary: So that which has been often
renderd difficult and intricat to the most Learned, ought and may be Adjusted,
to the Capacities of the meanest Artizans.

Though I must confess the Corruptions and Wickedness of Mankind has necessitate
even Justice it self (which of all other things ought to be most equal) to
incline more to Rigor and Severity then were to be wished; yet it ought to be
dispensed with such Moderation and Candor, that even the Sentence it self might
convince the World, if not the Panel, that there has not been wanting in it,
even Grace and Favor.

And though it be an old received maxim, That there is equal Injustice in
acquitting the Guilty and Condemning the Innocent; yet the first, as it Savours
more of Humanity, so the surer to be leaned to: But if we would follow the
Divine Precept, of doing to another what we would have done to our selves; though
perhaps we came not always up the length of the Rigidity of Humane Laws, yet
we would Act by a good Conscience, and seldom commit an Error.

So if this one Point were gained (without which Humane Society can never be
established upon a sure foundation) as it would do more to suppress the
Villainous Cruelty, Robery, Murders, and Depredations of the Barbarous
Highlanders, and the subtle Contrivances of the Thieving Borderers, than many
Troops of armed Men; so it would give the Country, that Assurance, the Court
that Luster, the Government that Reputation, and our selves that Peace of
Conscience; that as it would appear in the Satisfaction and Serenity of our
Countenances, and in the Confidence of Innocence appearing before us, so it
would exceedingly show it self to the contrary, in the Apprehensions and
Amazement of the Guilty.

But farther, My Loyds, since it is neither the Goodness, nor Fertility of the
Soil, the being nearer, or at a more remote distance to the Warmth of the Sun:
These, Experience has shown, has by their Luxury more contribute to the
Misery, Slavery, and Bondage of the Inhabitants, then any Advantage: Neither is
it the Goodness of the Laws, most of the Nations in the World, even Pagans
themselves, having excelled in them; but it is their passing through such
Impure Channels, (their unclean Hands,) whose Ambition; Luxury. Pride and
Covetousness have rend red such fit Tools, for Tyrannical and Arbitrary Men,
that they are never wanting to be made use of for the Oppression and
Destruction of their Country. So if for the future, these could be guarded
against, and all of us would esteem it our Duty, Honor, and Interest, to
imitate our Religious, Prudent, Valiant and Just Prince and Deliverer; It would
not only render us, the most Happy People upon Earth, but would give us more
true Reputation, than the Glory we boast of, by a Succession of above one
hundred Kings, His Majesty's Royal Predecessors.

And if (for my part) I should be so Happy, as but to add one grain weight to
the Scale of Equity, I should esteem it the greatest Advantage, and my self
over paid of all the Pains I could ever be capable of, But I shall give your
Lordships no farther Trouble, desiring you to proceed to the Constituting of
the Court in its due Forms, that Justice may have a straight Course, by running
in its proper Channel,

FINIS.

