A TREATY OF Commerce, Navigation, AND Marine Affairs, Concluded and Agreed on
at RESWICK,

BETWEEN His Most Christian Majesty's Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, on the
one part;

AND The Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the Lords the States General of
the United Provinces of the Netherlands, on the other.

WITH Some Account of the Proceedings since between the French and Dutch
Commissioners relating to the TARIFF.

Never before in English.

Translated from the Dutch and French Copies.

LONDON Printed, and Sold by A. Baldwin near the Oxford-arms in Warwick Lane,
MDCXCIX.

TO THE READER.
THE Business of settling the Tariff between Holland and France has been so long
in agitation, so generally talked of, and yet so little understood as to the
essential Grounds thereof, that it has been thought a Work not unacceptable to
the Public, to give a clear View of it; and since the same can appear no where
so well as in the distinct Treaty of Commerce and Navigation, that has been
some time since concluded between the said Nations, which has never yet been
exposed in English, we have thought fit to publish the same in the full Extent
of it, with the separate Article relating to the Imposition of fifty Pence per
Tun upon Strangers, (about which the main of the Contest has been) whereby it
will appear how Just and Equitable the Dutch Pretentions are, and that it is a
mere Sham for their Opponents to say, They understood not what they did, when
they agreed to it; as it may be of some good use to our selves when we come to
treat about Trade with that Nation, who, by what has followed in consequence to
the ensuing Treaty, can never be bound too fast.

A Treaty of Commerce, Concluded and Agreed upon at RESWICK in HOLLAND, ON The
20th of September, 1697. BETWEEN His Most Christian Majesty's Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries, on the one part; AND The Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries
of the Lords States General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, on the
other.
THE Treaty of Peace that has been concluded this Day between the most
Christian King and the Lords States General of the United Provinces, having put
a final Period to all the Causes of Discontent, which, for some time past, had
alienated the Affection which his most Christian Majesty has always had for
their Good and Prosperity, according to the Example of the Kings his
Predecessors; and the said Lords the States General returning also to the same
Desires, which they have heretofore testified for the Grandeur of France, and
into the Sentiments of a sincere Acknowledgment of all the Obligations and
considerable Advantages which they have formerly received: His Majesty being
unwilling to obstruct any thing that may confirm it; and the said States
General being no less desirous to perpetuate the same, have thought there could
be no better and more assured Means pitched upon to effect it, than by
establishing a free and perfect Correspondence between their Subjects both on
the one side and the other, and for that purpose to regulate their particular
Interests, in point of Commerce, Navigation and Maritime Affairs, by the most
proper Laws and Agreements that can be, for the prevention of all the
Inconveniences that may lessen a good Correspondence between them: His said
Majesty, in compliance with the Desires of the said States General, appointed
the Sieur Nicholas Augustus de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Celi,
Councellor in Ordinary to his Majesty in his Council of State; the Sieur Lovis
Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy, the King's Councellor in Ordinary in his
Council of State, Marquess of Treon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, of the
two Churches of Fortisle, of Mevillet, etc. and the Sieur Francis de Callieres,
Lord of Callieres, la Roche, Chellay and Gigny; to be his Majesty's Ambassadors
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries in the Assembly for the Negotiation of the
Peace: And the said Lords the States General, the Sieurs Antony Heinsius,
Councellor and Pensionary of the States of Holland and West-Friesland, Keeper
of the Great Seal, and Superintendant of the Fiefs; Everhard de Weed, Lord of
Weed, Dijckvelt, Rateles, etc. Lord Proprietor of the Town of Oudewater, Dean
and Rector of the Imperial Chapter of St. Mary at Vtrecht, Dijck-Grave of the
River Rhine in the Province of Vtrecht, President of the States of the said
Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, the Nobilities Deputy of the
States of Friesland, and Curator of the University of Franeker, Deputies in
their Assembly on the part of the States of Holland, Vtrecht and Friesland, to
Confer and Agree upon a Treaty of Commerce and Navigation in the following
manner, by Virtue of their Powers respectively produced by them, the Copies
whereof you have hereafter inserted.

I.
THE Subjects of his Majesty and of the Lords the States General of the United
Provinces of the Netherlands, shall reciprocally enjoy the same Liberty, in
point of Commerce and Navigation, which they have already had before this War,
in all the Kingdoms, States and Provinces of the one and the other Party.

II.
And thus they shall not for the future exercise any sorts of Hostilities or
Violences against each other, either by Sea or Land, or in Rivers, Roads and
fresh Waters, under any Name or Pretense whatsoever; and moreover the Subjects
of his said Majesty, cannot take any Commissions for particular Ships, or
Letters of Reprizal, from any Princes or States, who are Enemies to the said
Lords the States General, and neither trouble nor damnifie them any manner of
way, by Virtue of such Commissions or Letters of Reprizal, nor even to rove
with them upon the Sea, under the Penalty of being prosecuted and punished as
Pirates; which shall be reciprocally observed by the Subjects of the United
Provinces, in respect to his Majesty's Subjects; and to this end there shall be
most express and apposite Prohibitions published and renewed, as often as there
shall be occasion on either part, that they shall by no means make use of such
Commissions or Letters of Reprizals, under the forementioned Penalties, which
shall be severely executed upon all Offenders in that kind, besides, an entire
Restitution to be made to those who have received the Damage.

III.
And in order to obviate, as much as is possible, all those Inconveniences,
that may arise by the taking of Prizes through Inadvertency, or otherwise, and
more especially in remote Parts; it has been agreed, That if any such Prizes,
on either side, shall be made in the Baltic Sea, or that of the North, from
Torneuse, in Norway, to the end of the Channel, in the space of four Weeks, or
from the end of the said Channel, to the Cape of St. Vincent, in the space of
six Weeks, and from thence in the Mediterranean Sea, and as far as the Line, in
the space of ten Weeks, and on the other side of the Line, and all other parts
of the World, in the space of eight Months, the same to be computed from the
publication of these Presents; the said Prizes and Damages, which shall be made
on either side, after the Terms prefixed, shall be accounted for, and whatever
shall be so taken, shall be restored, with a Compensation made for all Damages
that may arise thereby.

IV.
All Letters of Mart or Reprizals, which may have been granted heretofore, for
any Cause whatsoever, are declared Null, and cannot hereafter be granted by any
of the said Allies, to the Prejudice of the other's Subjects; if it be not only
in case of a manifest Denial of Justice, which yet cannot be taken for granted,
if his Petition, who makes a Demand of the said Reprizals, be not communicated
to the Minister that shall be upon the Place, on the part of that State,
against whose Subjects they ought to be granted; to the end, that in the space
of four Months, or sooner if possible, he may inform himself to the contrary,
or procure that Justice be done, as required.

V.
His Majesty's particular Subjects are not to be Sued or Arrested as to their
Persons or Goods, for any thing that may be owing from His Majesty; nor the
particular Subjects of the said Lords the States General, for the public Debts
of the said States.

VI.
The Subjects and Inhabitants, of the Countries under his Majesty's Obedience,
and of the Lords States General, shall Live, Converse, and keep Company one
with another, with all good Friendship and Correspondence, and mutually enjoy
the liberty of Commerce and Navigation in Europe, in all the Bounds of each
others Country, of all sorts of Merchandises and Wares, whereof the Commerce
and Transportation is not generally and universally Prohibited to all, as well
Subjects as Strangers, by the Laws and Constitution of either of the States.

VII.
And for this end, his Majesty's Subjects, and those of the Lords States
General of the United Provinces, may freely, and without Interruption frequent,
with their Ships and Merchandises, the Countries, Lands, Towns, Ports, Places
and Rivers, that belong to either States, to carry thither and Sell the same to
all sorts of Persons without distinction; to Buy, Traffic and Transport all
kinds of Merchandises, whose Importation or Exportation and Transport, is not
forbidden to his Majesty's Subjects and those of the States General, without
that this Liberty ought to be reciprocally prohibited, limited or restrained,
by any Privilege, Commission or particular Grant; and without its being lawful
for either the one or the other, to concede or bestow upon their Subjects any
Immunities, Benefits, free Gifts, or other Advantages, above those of the
other, or to their Prejudice; and without the said Subjects being obliged on
either side, to pay greater, or other Customs, Charges, Gabels, or Impositions
whatsoever laid upon their Persons, Goods, Wares, Ships or Fraughts, directly
or indirectly, under whatever Name, Title or Pretense it may be, above those
which shall be paid by the proper and natural Subjects, both of the one and the
other Party.

VIII.
The Subjects of the States General are not to be treated otherwise, or in a
worse manner, in respect to the Custom due for Anchorage, Paris Sol, and all
other Charges and Impositions, however denominated, whether under the Title of
the Custom of Strangers, or otherwise, without any Exception or Reserve, than
the Subjects themselves of his most Christian Majesty, who are not Freemen of
the said Places, where the said Customs are raised.

IX.
As to what concerns the Levant Trade into France, and the Twenty per Cent.
which is raised upon that Account; the Subjects of the States General of the
United Provinces, shall also enjoy the same Liberty and Immunity as the most
Christian King's Subjects, so far, that it shall be lawful for the said
Subjects of the States General to carry Merchandises into the Levant,
Marseilles, and other free Ports in France, as well in their own Bottoms, as in
French Vessels; and that neither upon the one nor the other Account, shall the
said Subjects of the States General be liable to the said Twenty per Cent. but
in such Cases only wherein the French themselves are liable, who carry
Merchandises in their own Vessels to Marseilles, or other free Ports, and when
this same shall effect no alteration to the Prejudice of the said Subjects of
the said States General.

X.
It shall be lawful for the Subjects of the States General to import, enter and
sell both in France and the New Conquests, with all freedom and without any
molestation, pickled Herring, without distinction, and without being obliged to
Pack them again; and, notwithstanding all the Edicts, Declarations and Orders
of Council that have been made to the contrary, and particularly those of July
the 15th and 14th of September, 1687. whereby it is prohibited to import or
bring into the Ports of France or New Conquests any Herring, otherwise than in
Pickle and salted with Brovage Salt, and enjoined that the said Herrings be
brought into the Seaports pickled in Barrels, eighteen whereof should make
twelve of packed Herring, which Arrests shall be revoked and remain of none
effect.

XI.
The Subjects both of the one and the other Nation shall have a reciprocal
Dispatch of their Business at the Custom-house or Offices as well in France as
in the Countries of the States General equally and without any distinction, as
soon as possibly can be, without retarding of or working any impediment to them
whatsoever.

XII.
There shall be a new Tariff established that is common to both, and pursuant
to both their conveniences, in the space of three Months, and in the mean time
the Tariff of 1667. shall be executed by way of provision; and, in case they do
not agree upon a new Tariff within the said space of time, the Tariff of 1664.
shall take place for the future.

XIII.
The Men of War both of the one and the other Nation shall always find the
Roads, Rivers, Ports and Havens free and open to come in, go out and ride at
anchor, so long as they shall have occasion, without being obliged to be
visited; but yet this Freedom is to be used with Discretion, that they may
administer no Matter of Jealousy, by too long and affected an abode, or
otherwise to the Governors, of the said Places and Ports, to whom the Captains
of the said Ships are to give the Reason of their Arrival and Stay.

XIV.
His Majesty's and the said Lords States Generals Men of War, and those of
their Subjects that may be fitted out for War, may with all manner of freedom
carry off the Prizes, which they may have taken from their Enemies,
whithersoever they please, without their being obliged to pay any Customs,
whether to the Admirals or Admiralty, or any other: And also the said Ships or
said Prizes, when they enter into any Havens or Ports belonging to his Majesty
or the States General cannot be stopped or seized, neither must any of the
Officers in the said Places pretend to take an Estimate of the Value of the
said Prizes, which may go out and be conducted freely and with all manner of
liberty to the Places implied in the Commissions, which the Captains of the
said Men of War are obliged to show: And, on the contrary, There shall no
Refuge nor Retreat be allowed in their Ports or Havens, to those Ships that
have made Prizes of such as have belonged to his Majesty or the said Lords the
States Generals Subjects; but in case they put in through Stress of Weather or
Danger at Sea, they must be obliged to go out as soon as possible can be.

XV.
The Subjects of the said Lords the States General are not to be reputed
Aubains in France, and are exempted from the Law of Aubain, and may dispose of
their Estates by Will, Gift or otherwise; and their Heirs, continuing to be
Subjects to the States General, as well in France, as else where, may receive
their Succession, even ab intestato, although they have obtained no Letters of
Naturalization; and yet the effect of this Concession is not to be hindered or
contested, under pretense of any Right or Prerogative of the Provinces, Cities
or private Persons, but they may in like manner, without the said Letters of
Naturalization, establish themselves with all freedom in any of the Cities of
the Kingdom, there to carry on their Commerce and Traffic, yet without
acquiring any right of being Citizens there, without they have obtained Letters
of Naturalization from his Majesty in due Form; and all those of the United
Provinces shall be generally in every thing and throughout as favorably
treated, as his Majesty's own natural Subjects; and particularly shall not be
included in the Taxes which may be laid upon Strangers: And all that is
contained in the present Article, shall be observed in reference to the King's
Subjects living in those Countries that are under the Obedience of the said
States General.

XVI.
Those Ships that are laden by one of the Allies, and passing near unto the
others Coast, or are forced into the Roads or Ports by contrary Winds, Storms
or otherwife, shall not be forced to unlade or sell their Merchandises there,
or part of the same, nor be obliged to pay any Customs, without they unlade
their Merchandises in that Place voluntarily and of their own free will.

XVII.
The Masters of Ships, their Pilots, Officers and Soldiers Seamen and other
seafaring Men, the Ships themselves, with the Wares and Merchandises wherewith
they are laden, are not to be seized nor stopped, by virtue of any general or
private Order whatsoever, or for any Matter or Cause that can be assigned, no
nor under the pretense of the Preservation and Defense of the State; and
generally nothing can be taken from the Subjects of either Party, but by the
Consent of those to whom it belongs, and by paying the things which shall be
desired of them, wherein however its not meant, that this should take in those
Seizures and Arrests that are made by Order and Authority of Justice, and the
ordinary Courses; and for just Debts, Contracts, and other lawful Causes, upon
the Account of which, process shall be made by way of Right according to the
form of Law.

XVIII.
All the Subjects and Inhabitants of France, and the United Provinces, may,
with all freedom and safety, sail with their Ships, and traffic with their
Merchandises, without any distinction who may be the Owners thereof, from their
own Ports, Kingdoms and Provinces, as also from the Ports and Kingdoms of other
States or Princes, toward such Places as belong to those who are already
declared Enemies, as well of France, as the United Provinces, or of one of the
two, or which may become to be so. As also the same Subjects and Inhabitants,
may, with the same freedom and security, sail with their Ships, and traffic
with their Merchandises, without making any distinction who may be the
Proprietors of the same, from the Places, Ports and Roads of those who are
Enemies to the one and the other of the said Parties, or to one of the two in
particular, without contradiction or disturbance whatsoever, not only directly
from the said Places of the Enemy unto a neutral Port, but also from one
Enemies Place unto another, whether the same be found situated under the
Jurisdiction of the same Sovereign, or belong unto several.

XIX.
This Traffic and Transporting of Merchandise extends unto all sorts but such
as are contraband Goods.

XX.
Among that sort of Merchandises, which are esteemed Contraband, are only to be
comprised all sorts of fire Arms, and things of that kind, such as Cannons,
Muskets, Morters, Petards, Bombs, Grenades, Sawsages, Carriages, Forks,
Bandeliers, Powder, Match, Saltpeter, Balls, Pikes, Swords, Head-pieces,
Curasses, Halberts, Javellins, Horses, Saddles, Cases of Pistols, Belts, and
other Utensils of War.

XXI.
Under this sort of contraband Goods, they are not to include Wheat, Corn, and
other Grain, Oils, Wines and Salt, nor generally any thing that appertains to
the sustenance and support of Life, but they shall remain free, as all other
Merchandises and Wares that are not comprehended in the foregoing Article, and
the Transporting thereof is allowable even to those Places that are Enemies to
the said Lords the States, excepting to such Cities and Places as are beseiged,
blocked up or invested.

XXII.
In order to the executing of what is aforesaid, it has been agreed to be done
in the following manner, that when those Ships and Barks belonging to his
Majesty's Subjects, come laden into any of the Havens belonging to the said
Lords the States, and are minded to go from thence to those of their Enemies,
they shall be obliged only to show to the Officers, belonging to the Ports of
the said Lords the States, from whence they depart, their Past-ports,
containing a particular Account of their Ships Lading, attested and signed with
the usual Hand and Seal, and viewed by the Officers of the Admiralty of those
Places from whence they first parted, with a declaring of the Place whither
they are bound, all being done according to the ordinary and usual Form, upon
which exhibition of their Past-ports, in the Form aforesaid, they are not to be
disquieted nor farther called to an account, detained nor retarded in their
Voyages, under any Pretense whatsoever.

XXIII.
The same thing is to be done in respect to the French Ships and Barks, that
put into some Roads belonging to the Territories under the Obedience of the
said Lords the States, without entering into the Ports, or if they go in, yet
have no mind to unlade and break their Cargoes, of which they are not obliged
to give an Account, unless it be that there is a suspicion, lest they should
carry Contraband-goods to the Enemies of the said Lords the States, as has been
said before.

XXIV.
And upon an apparent cause of Suspicion in this Matter, the said Subjects are
obliged to show in the Ports their Past-ports drawn, according to the Form
before specified.

XXV.
But if they should enter within the Roads, or meet with some Ships of the
Lords the States out at Sea, or some private Vessels, the said Ships of the
United Provinces, for the avoiding of all Disorder, are to come no nearer unto
the French than a Cannon-shot, but may send their small Bark or Shalloop on
board the French Ships or Barks, whereof three or four Men only are to enter
into the same, unto whom the Masters of the French Ships shall show their
Pass-ports and Letters of Mart abovementioned, according to the Form of the
said Letters of Mart, which shall be incerted at the end of this Treaty; by
which Pass-ports and Letters of Mart, it may not only appear what his Cargo is,
but also the Place of the Abode and Residence, as well of the Master as of the
Ship herself; that so it may be known by these two ways, whether they carry
contraband Goods, and that as well the Quality of the Ship, as of the Master,
may sufficiently appear thereby, to which Past-ports and Letters of Mart an
entire Belief and Credit ought to be given; and to the end the Validity thereof
may be the better known, and that they can be by no means falsified and
counterfeited, his said Majesty and the said Lords the States General shall
prescribe certain Marks and Counter-signings thereunto.

XXVI.
And in case, by the aforesaid Means, there be found in the said Vessels and
French Barks, bound to the Harbors of the Enemies of the said Lords the
States, any Merchandises or Commodities, which are above declared to be
contraband and prohibited, they shall be unladen, and declared confiscated in
the presence of the Judges of the Admiralty of the United Provinces, or other
competent Persons; but yet for all that, the Ship and Bark, or other Goods,
Merchandises and Commodities that are free and not prohibited, found in the
same Ship, shall by no means be seized and confiscated.

XXVII.
It has been moreover agreed and concluded, that all the Lading which shall be
found of his Majesty's Subjects on board a Ship that is an Enemy of the said
Lords the States, though the same be no contraband Goods, shall be confiscated,
with all that shall be found in the said Ship, without any Exception or
Reserve, but yet also, all that which shall be and be found in such as belong
to the most Christian King's Subjects, shall be free and pass, though the Cargo
or part thereof appertain to the Enemies of the said Lords the States,
excepting contraband Goods, in respect unto which they are to regulate
themselves, according to what has been ordered in the preceding Articles; and
for the more particular illustration and clearing of this Article, it is
moreover agreed and concluded on, that in case it should happen, that both the
Parties, or else one of them, should be engaged in a War, the Goods
appertaining to the Subjects of the other Party, and laden in their Ships who
are become Enemies to both, or one of the Parties, cannot be any ways
confiscated, upon the account or under pretense of the said imbarking of them
in an Enemy's Ship: And that shall be observed not only when the said
Commodities shall be put on board them before the Declaration of the War, but
also when the same shall be done after the said Declaration; provided it be
done within the respective Times and Terms hereafter prescribed, viz. If they
have been laden in the Baltic Sea, or that of the North, from Terneuse in
Norway, to the end of the Channel, in the space of four Weeks; or from the end
of the Channel, to the Cape of St. Vincent, in the space of six Weeks; and from
thence into the Mediterranean Sea, and as far as the Line, in the space of ten
Weeks; and beyond the Line, and the other Parts of the World, in the space of
eight Months, to commence from the Publication of the present Treaty: And this
in such a manner that the Merchandises and Goods of the Subjects and
Inhabitants that are laden on board those Enemies Ships, can by no means be
confiscated, during the abovenamed Terms and ascertained Limits; but shall be
restored to the Owners without any delay, if it be not so that they have been
laden after the expiration of the said Terms: And nevertheless it shall be by
no means lawful to carry to the Enemy's Ports such Merchandises as are
contraband, which may be found on board of such an Enemy's Ship, though the same
be set free for the abovementioned Reason. And as it has been regulated above,
That a free Ship shall go unmolested with the Goods laden thereon, it has been
moreover agreed and concluded on, That this Liberty shall also be extended to
the Persons that shall be found on board a free Ship, so far, that though they be
Enemies both of the one and the other Party, or of one only of them, yet being
found in a free Ship, they must not be taken out, if so be they are not
Soldiers, and actually in the said Enemy's Service.

XXVIII.
All the Subjects and Inhabitants of the said United Provinces shall
reciprocally enjoy the same Rights, Liberties and Immunities in their Commerce
and Trade in his said Majesty's Ports, Roads, Seas and Dominions, as has been
said, as his Majesty's Subjects shall enjoy in those of the Lords the States,
and on the High-Seas; it being to be understood, that the Equality shall be
reciprocal every ways on either side; and also, that in case hereafter the said
Lords the States shall be at Peace, Amity and Neutrality with any Kings,
Princes and States that shall become Enemies to his said Majesty, each of the
two Parties shall reciprocally enjoy the same Conditions and Restrictions as
are expressed in the Articles of the present Treaty, relating to Trade and
Commerce.

XXIX.
And the more to confirm the Subjects of the said Lords the States, that there
shall be no Violence offered them by the said Men of War, all the Captains of
the King's Ships, and others of his Majesty's Subjects, shall be enjoined not
to molest nor damnifie them any manner of way, under the Penalty of making
their own Persons and Goods liable to repair the Damages suffered and to be
suffered, till full restitution be made thereof.

XXX.
And for this reason, every Captain and other Commander, shall for the future,
before their departure, be obliged to give good and sufficient Security before
proper Judges for the Sum of fifteen Thousand Livres French, to answer each of
them for the Misdemeanors they may commit in their Voyages, and for the
Contraventions of their Captains and Officers against the present Treaty, and
against his Majesty's Orders and Edicts which shall be published by virtue and
in conformity to the present Agreement, upon the forfeiting and vacating of the
said Commissions and Grants; which shall also be practiced in like manner by
the Subjects of the said Lords the States General.

XXXI.
If it so happen that any of the said French Captains take a Vessel laden with
the said contraband Goods, as has been said already, the said Captains are not
to open nor break up the Chests, Males, Bales, Packs, Tuns and other Casks, or
transport, sell or exchange them, or otherwise alienate the same till they have
been brought ashore in the presence of the Judges of the Admiralty; and, after
an Inventory taken of the said Merchandises found in the said Vessels, if so be
the said contraband Goods, making up but a part of the Lading, the Master of
the Ship thinks well and consents to deliver up the said contraband Goods to
the said Captain, and pursue his Voyage; in such a Case, the said Master shall
by no means be hindered to pursue his Course and the Design of his Voyage.

XXXII.
His Majesty, being willing that the Subjects of the said Lords the States
General should be treated in all the Countries under his Obedience, as
favorably as his own Subjects, shall give all necessary Orders, that the
Judgments and Arrests, that shall be made concerning the Prizes that may be
taken at Sea, shall be done with all the Justice and Equity imaginable, by
Persons of unsuspected Credit, and such as are not interested in the Matter in
question. And his Majesty shall give positive and effectual Orders, That all
the Arrests, Judgments, and Decrees of Justice already given, and hereafter to
be given, be readily and duly executed, according to their proper Forms.

XXXIII.
And when the Ambassadors of the said Lords the States General, or some other
of their public Ministers, who shall be at his Majesty's Court, shall make
Complaint of the said Judgments, that are given, his Majesty will make a Review
of the said Judgments in his Council, to examine whether the Orders or
Precautions, contained in this Treaty, have been followed and observed, and to
provide for the same, according to Reason, which must be done in the space of
three Months at farthest; and yet neither before the first Judgment, nor after
the same, during the Review, shall the Goods and Effects, that are reclaimed,
be sold or unladen, unless it be with the Consent of the Parties concerned, to
prevent the loss of the said Merchandises.

XXXIV.
When a Process shall be moved in the first and second Action, against those
who have made Prizes at Sea, and such as are Interested in the same, and that
the said interested Persons happen to obtain a favorable Judgment or Arrest,
the said Judgment or Arrest shall be executed without any caution,
notwithstanding any Appeal of the Person who shall make the Prizes, but not on
the contrary, and what is said in the present and precedent Articles, for the
administering of good and undilatory Justice to the Subjects of the United
Provinces, concerning Prizes made at Sea, by his Majesty's Subjects, shall be
extended and put in practice by the Lords the States General, in respect to
Prizes taken by their Subjects, from those of his Majesty's.

XXXV.
His Majesty, and the Lords the States General, may at all times Build or
Fraught in each others Countries, such a number of Ships, whether for War or
Trade, as they think good, as also buy such a quantity of Ammunition, as they
have occasion for, and employ their Authority, that the said Bargains for
Ships, and buying of Ammunition, be done honestly and at reasonable Rates; but
yet so that neither his Majesty, nor the Lords the States General, shall give
the same leave to the said Enemies of the one and the other, in case the said
Enemies be the Attackers and Aggressors.

XXXVI.
If it so happen, that any Men of War or Merchantmen be run Aground or
Shipwrecked, by Storm or other Accident, upon the Coast of one or other Ally,
the said Ships, Apparel, Goods and Merchandises, and what shall be saved
thereof, or if out of foresight, the said things being perishable, have been
sold, and that the whole be reclaimed by the Owners or others, who had the
Charge thereof, within a Year and a Day, shall be restored without the form of
a Process, they being obliged only to pay a reasonable Charge, and such as
shall be regulated between the said Allies, for the Right of Saving; and in
case of any Contravension to the present Article, his Majesty and the said
Lords the States General promise effectually to employ their Authority, to
punish those of their Subjects with all possible Severity, who shall be found
guilty of these Inhumanities, which to their great regret have been sometimes
committed upon the like Occasions.

XXXVII.
His Majesty and the said Lords the States General shall not receive, nor
suffer their Subjects to receive, in any of the Countries under their
Obedience, any Pirates and Free-booters whatsoever, but they shall pursue,
punish and chase them out of their Ports; and the Ships they had made Prey of,
as well as the Goods taken by the said Pirates and Rovers, that shall be found
in being, shall forthwith, and without Form of Law, be freely restored to the
Owners that do reclaim them.

XXXVIII.
The Inhabitants and Subjects both of the one and the other Party, may
everywhere in the Territories under the Obedience of the said King and said
Lords the States General, make use of such Advocates, Attorneys, Notaries and
Sollicitors, as they think good, to whom also they shall be appointed by the
ordinary Judges, when there is occasion, and that the said Judges are required
to do it, and the said Subjects and Inhabitants on either side shall be free in
such Places where they make their Abode, to keep their Books of Trade and
Correspondence, in such Language as they please, without their being upon that
Account disquieted or molested.

XXXIX.
No Consuls for the future shall be allowed to be on either side, and if it be
thought convenient to send Presidents, Agents, Commissioners or others to
either's Country, they shall not fix their Abode in any place, but where the
Court does ordinarily reside.

XL.
His Majesty and the said Lords the States General, do not allow of any Man of
War or other Vessel fitted out by the Commission and for the Service of any
Prince, Republic or City whatsoever, shall come and make Prize in the Ports,
Havens or other Rivers, which belong unto them, of any Ship belonging to the
one or the other Party; and in case any such thing should happen, his said
Majesty and the said Lords the States General will employ their Authority and
Power, to cause restitution or reasonable reparation to be made for the same.

XLI.
If, through Inadvertency or otherwise, any Non-observances or Contraventions
should happen in the present Treaty, on the part of his said Majesty or of the
said Lords the States General and their Successors, the same shall not cease to
continue in full force, without their coming upon that account to a breaking of
the Confederacy, Friendship and good Correspondence; but the said
Contraventions shall be forthwith rectified, and if the same do proceed from
the fault of some particular Subjects, they alone shall be punished and
chastised.

XLII.
And that Commerce and Amity between the Subjects of the said King and those of
the said Lords the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries
may be the better established for the future, It has been agreed and concluded
on, that if any interruption of Friendship or Rupture between the Crown of
France and the said Lords the States General of the said United Provinces
should hereafter happen, (which God forbid) there shall be always nine Months
allowed, to commence from the time of the said Rupture, for the Subjects on
either part, to withdraw their Effects, and transport them whither they please;
which shall be lawful for them to do, as well as to sell or transport their
Goods and Movables with all freedom, without giving them any let or
molestation, or proceeding, during the said Term of nine Months, to any seizure
of their Effects, much less to arrest their Persons.

XLIII.
Both the one and the other Party shall prevent, as much as in them lies,
whatever may any manner of way either directly or indirectly hinder the
execution of the present Treaty, and especially the seventh Article; and they
do oblige themselves, upon the least Complaints of any Contraventions, that
shall be made, to make reparation without any delay.

XLIV.
The present Treaty, concerning Commerce, Navigation and Maritime Affairs,
shall endure for five and twenty Years, to commence from the Day of the signing
thereof, and the Ratifications of it shall be made in due form, and exchanged
on either part in the space of three Weeks, reckoning from the Day of signing,
or sooner, if it can be done.

XLV.
And for the greater Confirmation of this Treaty of Commerce, and of all the
Points and Articles contained therein, the said present Treaty shall be
published, verified and registered in the Court of Parliament of Paris and in
all other Parliaments throughout the Kingdom of France, and the Chamber of
Accounts of the said City of Paris; and also the said Treaty shall in like
manner be published, verified and registered by the said Lords the States
General, in the Courts and other Places where they have been wont to make the
like Publications, Verifications and Registrings.

The Form of the Past-ports and Letters that ought to be given by the Admiralty
of France, to the Ships and Barks, that go out, pursuant to the Articles of the
present Treaty.
LOVIS, Count of Thoulouse, Admiral of France, to all those to whom these
present Letters shall come, Greeting: Be it known, that we have given Leave and
Permission to (...) the Master and Conductor of the Ship, called, (...) of the
City of (...) of the Port (...) Tuns, or thereabouts, being at present in the
Port and Haven of (...) to go to (...) laden with (...) after his Ship has been
visited, and he before his departure taken the Oath, in the presence of such
Officers as exercise Jurisdiction over Maritime Affairs, that the said Ship
appertains to one or more of his Majesty's Subjects, the manner whereof shall
be subjoyned next after these Presents; and that he will keep and cause to be
kept, by those that make up his Equipage, the Maritime Orders and Regulations,
and commit the Roll, signed and verified, to be registered, which contains the
Names and Sirnames, Birth and Abode of the Men that compose his Crew, and of
all such as go on board him, whom he cannot imbark without the knowledge and
permission of the Officers that are appointed to manage the Maratime Affairs;
and to whatever Port or Haven he shall enter with his Ship, he shall show to
such Officers and Judges as have the Inspection of Maritime Affairs the present
Leave, and give a faithful Account unto them of what has happened during his
Voyage; and he shall carry the King's Flags, Arms and Ensigns, as also ours
during his Voyage. In witness whereof we have set our Hand and Seal unto these
Presents, and have caused the same to be Counter-signed by our Marine
Secretary, at (...) Day of (...) thousand six hundred

Signed Louis, Count of Thoulouse, and a little lower by

A Form of the Act that contains the Oath.
WE (...) of the Admiralty of (...) do certify, That (...) the Master of the
Ship, named (...) with the abovementioned Past-port has taken the Oath
mentioned therein. Given at (...) the (...) Day of (...)

Another form of Letters that should be given by the Cities and Seaports of the
United Provinces, to the Ships and Barks that go out from thence, according the
foresaid Article.
TO the most Serene, most Illustrious, most Puissant, Honorable and Prudent
Lords Emperors, Kings, Republics, Princes, Dukes, Counts, Barons, Lords,
Burgomasters, Sherriffs, Counselors, Judges, Officers, Justices and Governors
of all good Cities and Places, as well ecclesiastical as secular, who shall see
or read these Presents: We the Burgomasters and Rulers of the City of (...)
make known, that (...) the Master of the Ship (...) appearing before us, has
declared upon solemn Oath, that the Ship named (...) of about (...) lasts, over
which he is at present Master, appertains to the Inhabitants of the United
Provinces, so help him God: And, as we are desirous that the said Master of the
Ship should be assisted in his lawful Affairs, we do entreat all Persons in
general and particular, where the said Master with his Ship and Goods shall
arrive, that they would be pleased to receive him kindly, and treat him
becomingly, by suffering him according to the usual Rights of Toles and Customs
to be in, by and near your Ports, Rivers and Dominions, by leaving him to sail,
pass, frequent and trade, where he thinks fit; which we will readily
acknowledge. In Witness whereof, we have affixed our City-Seal hereunto.

In Witness whereof, we his Majesty's abovementioned Ambassadors, and those of
the Lords the States General, by virtue of our respective Powers, have in the
said Names signed and sealed these Presents with our own Hands and Seals, at
Reswick, the 20th of September, 1687.

Thus signed: (L. S.) N. A. de Harlay Bonneuil, (L. S.) Verjus de Crecy, (L.
S.) De Callieres, (L. S.) A. Heynsius, (L. S.) E. de Weed, (L. S.) W. v. Haren.


The separate Article.
BEsides what has been agreed and concluded on by the Treaty of Commerce, made
between his most Christian Majesty's Ambassadors, and those of the Lords the
States General of the United Provinces, this twentieth Day of September, 1697;
It has been farther agreed by this present separate Article, which shall be of
the same Virtue and Force as if it had been incerted word forword in the said
Treaty, That the Imposition of fifty Sols per Tun, settled in France upon
Foreign Ships, shall for the future entirely cease in respect to those Ships
that appertain to the Subjects of the States General of the United Provinces,
and may not hereafter be re-established, and this in such a manner, that the
Ships of the said Lords the States General, shall be discarged of the said Tax,
whether the said Ships go directly for France from the Countries or Territories
of the said Lords the States General, or from any other Place whatsoever,
whether the same be Laden or in Ballast, or whether also they be Laden for to
unload in one or more Places in France; or else that being minded to take in
Lading in such Places whither they have an intention to go, and not finding any
there, they go to other Places for their Supply; or whether also the said Ships
of the Subjects of the Lords the States General, go out of the Ports of France
in order to return Home, or go elsewhere, in what Places soever they may be,
laden or empty: Whether, again, they have taken in their Lading in one or more
Places, since it has been agreed on, that neither in the said Cases, nor any
other which may happen, shall the Ships, belonging to the Subjects of the said
Lords the States General, be subject to the said Imposition, but that they
shall be and remain exempted there from, as well in coming from as going into
the said Ports of France, saving only in the following Case; to wit, When the
said Ships take in Merchandises in France, and Transport the same from one Port
of France to another in the said Country, in order to dispose of the same, in
which case only, and upon no other Account, are the Subjects of the said Lords
the States General, obliged to pay the said Custom as other Strangers do. The
present separate Article shall be Ratified and Registered in the same manner as
the Treaty of Commerce.

In Witness whereof, We his said Majesty's Ambassadors, and those of the Lords
the States General, by virtue of our respective Powers, have in the said Names
signed and sealed this separate Article with our own Hands and Seals; at
Reswick in Holland, 20th of September, 1697.

Thus signed: (L. S.) N. A. de Harlay Bonneuil, (L. S.) Verjus de Crecy, (L.
S.) De Callieres, (L. S.) A. Heynsius, (L. S.) E. de Weed, (L. S.) W. van
Haren.


Here follows the full Powers of the most Christian King's Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries.
LEwis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to all those who may
see these Presents, Greeting: As we more ardently desire nothing than to see
the War wherewith Christendom is at present afflicted, ended by a good Peace;
and seeing that by the Assiduity and Mediation of our most dear and most
beloved Brother, the King of Sweden, the Towns of Delph and the Hague have been
agreed upon by all Parties to be the Places where the Conferences, necessary
for that end, are to be held; we being moved by this same desire, of stopping,
as much as in us lies, with the assistance of Divine Providence, the Desolation
of so many Provinces, and Effusion of so much Christian Blood, make known, That
we putting an entire Confidence in the Experience, Capacity and Fidelity of our
beloved and faithful Councellor in Ordinary in our Council of State, the Sieur
Harlay de Bonnevil, of our well-beloved the Sieur Verjus, Count of Crecy, Baron
of Couvay, Sieur of Boulay, of the two Churches of Fortisle, of Mevillet, and
other Places, and of our well-beloved the Sieur de Callieres, de la
Roche-Chellay, and de Gigny, by the advantageous Proofs which they have given
us in diverse important Employments wherewith we have entrusted them, as well
within as without our Kingdom; by these Causes and other Considerations moving
us thereunto, we have entrusted, ordered and deputed the said Sieurs de Harlay,
de Crecy, and de Callieres; and we do by these Presents, signed with our own
Hand, Entrust, Order and Depute, and have and do give unto them full Power,
Commission and special Command, to go into the said City of Delph, in Quality
of our Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries for the Peace, and there
to confer whether directly or by the interposition of the Ambassadors
Mediators, respectively received and agreed upon, with the Ambassadors,
Plenipotentiaries and Ministers of our most dear and great Friends the States
General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, and of their Allies, who
shall be all provided with sufficient Powers, and there to treat upon the means
how to terminate and appease the Differences that at this Day occasion the War;
and our said Plenipotentiaries may all three of them together, or two of them
in case of the absence of the other through Sickness, or some other Impediment,
or one alone, in the absence of the other two, in the like case of Sickness, or
other Impediment, agree, and thereupon conclude and sign a good and firm Peace,
and generally negotiate, promise and agree, to whatever they shall think
necessary for the effecting of the said Peace, with the same Authority as we
ourselves could or might do it, were we there present in Person, though there
were somewhat therein that should require a more special Order than what is
contained in these Presents; promising, upon the Faith and Word of a King, to
hold good, and to fulfill all that the said Sieurs de Harlay, Crecy and
Callieres, or any two of them, in case of the others absence through Sickness, or
other Impediment, or any one of them, in the absence of the other two, in the
like case of Sickness, or other Impediment, shall stipulate, promise or agree
to, and to dispatch our Letters of Ratification thereupon, within the time they
shall be promised in our Name to be produced, for such is our Pleasure: In
Witness whereof, we have fixed our Seal to these Presents. Given at Versailles
the 25th of February, 1697, and of our Reign, 54. Signed Lovis. And upon the
Fold was written, By the King's Command, signed Colbert.

Here follows the Tenor of the full Powers of the Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries of the Lords the States General.
THe States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, to all those
to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting: As we desire nothing more ardently
than to see the War, wherewith Christendom is at present afflicted, ended by a
good Peace, and that through the Care and Mediation of the most Serene King of
Sweden, Rijswick has been agreed upon by all Parties to be the place of holding
the Conferences: We being moved with the same desire of preventing, as much as
in us lies, the desolation of so many Provinces, and the effusion of so much
Christian Blood, are very desirous to contribute whatever depends upon us
toward it, and for this Purpose, have in the said Assembly, deputed some
Persons of our own Body, who have given several Proofs of the Knowledge and
Experience they have in public Affairs, as well as the Affection they retain
for the good of our State: And as the Sieurs James Boreel, Lord of Duynbeek,
Westhoven and Meresteyn, Senator and Burgomaster of the City of Amsterdam, and
the deputed Councellor of the Province of Holland; Everhard de Weed, Lord of
Weed, Dijckvelt, Rateles, etc. Lord Proprietor of Oudewater, Dean and Rector
of the Imperial Chamber of St. Mary of Vtrecht, Dijk-Grave of the River Rhine,
within the Province of Vtrecht, President of the States of the said Province,
and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, Deputy for the Nobility to the States
of Friesland, and Curator of the University of Francker, who are Deputies in
our Assembly on the part of the States of Holland, Vtrecht and Friesland, have
signalized themselves in several important Employments for our Service, where
they have given marks of their Fidelity, Application and Address in the
management of Affairs; for these Causes and other Considerations us moving
thereunto, we have commissionated, ordered and deputed the said Sieurs Boreel,
de Weed and de Haren, and we do by these Presents commission, order and
depute, and have given, and do give unto them full Power, Commission and
special Order to go to Rijswick, in Quality of our Extraordinary Ambassadors
and Plenipotentiaries for the Peace, and there to Confer either directly or by
the interposition of the Ambassadors Mediators, respectively received and
agreed upon, with the Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of his
most Christian Majesty and his Allies, furnished with sufficient Powers for the
same, and there to treat upon the means of terminating and pacifying those
Differences, which cause the War at this Day; and our said Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries may all three together, or two of them, in case of the
absence of the other through Sickness or some other Impediment, or one only, in
the absence of the other two upon the like accounts of Sickness or other
Impediment, agree, and thereupon conclude and sign a good and firm Peace, and
generally negotiate, promise and consent to all that they shall think necessary
for the effecting of the said Peace, and generally do whatever we ourselves
might do, were we actually present there, although it were requisite for that end
to have a more especial Power and Order, than what is contained in these
Presents; we promising sincerely and in good truth to hold all that for firm,
stable and satisfactory, which by our said Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries,
or any two of them in case of the Sickness, Absence, or other Impediment of the
third, or by any one of them, in the absence of the other two, upon the like
account of Sickness or other Impeaiment, shall be stipulated, promised and
agreed to, and to cause our Letters of Ratification to be dispatched thereupon,
within the time they shall promise in our Name to produce the same. Given in
our Assembly at the Hague, under our Great Seal. Signed by the President of our
Assembly, and signed by our Secretary, April 6. 1697. It was signed F. B. de
Reed, and upon the Fold was written, By the Order of the said Lords the States
General. It was signed F. Fagel, and sealed with the Great Seal in Red Wax.

THe States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, to all those
to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting: As we desire nothing more ardently
than to see the War wherewith Christendom is at present afflicted, terminated
by a good Peace, and that by the Care and Mediation of the most Serene King of
Sweden, all Parties have agreed upon Rijswick to be the Place where the
Conferences shall be held, and we being incited with this same desire, of
putting an end, as much as in us lies, to the Desolation of so many Provinces,
and the Effusion of so much Christian Blood, are willing to contribute all that
we can do thereunto; and for this end we have already deputed formerly some
Persons of our own Body, in quality of Extraordinary Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries in the said Assembly, who have given diverse Proofs of the
Knowledge and Experience they have in Public Affairs, as well as the Affection
they retain for the Welfare of our State; to wit, the Sieurs James Boreel, Lord
of Duynbeek, Westhove and Merestein, Senator and Burgomaster of the City of
Amsterdam, and the deputed Councellor of the Province of Holland; Everhard de
Weed, Lord of Weed, Dijckvelt, Rateles, etc. Lord Proprietor of the Town of
Oudewater, Dean and Rector of the Imperial Chapter of Vtrecht, Dijck-Grave of
the River Rhine in the Province of Vtrecht, President of the States of the said
Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, the Nobilities Deputy to the
States of Friesland, and Curator of the University of Franeker, Deputies in our
Assembly from the States of Holland, Vtrecht and Friesland; and as at present
we have thought fit to join a fourth Person to our abovenamed three
Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, for the very same effect; and
that the Sieur Antony Heinsius, Councellor and Pensionary of the States of
Holland and West-Friesland, Keeper of the Great Seal, Superintendant of the
Fiefs, and Deputy in our Assembly for the same Province, has signalized
himself for our Service in several important Employments, wherein he has given
Proofs of his Fidelity, Application and Address in the Management of Business;
for these Causes and other Confiderations moving us thereunto, we have
commissionated, ordered and deputed the said Sieur Heinsius, we do commission,
order and depute by these Presents, and have given and do give unto him full
Power, Commission and special Order to go to Rijswick in quality of our
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary for the Peace, and there to confer
either immediately, or by the interposition of the Ambassadors Mediators,
respectively received and agreed on, with the Ambassadors Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiaries of his most Christian Majesty and his Allies, furnished with
sufficient Powers for the same, and to treat upon the Means how to terminate
and pacify the Differences, which occasion the War at this Day; and our said
Ambassador and Plenipotentiary may together with the said Sieurs Boreel, de
Weed and de Haren, our three other Ambassadors Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiaries, or with two or one of them, in case of the absence of the
rest, through Sickness or other Impediment, or even alone in the absence of all
the three, in case of the like Sickness or other Impediment, agree and
thereupon conclude and sign a good and firm Peace; and, in general, negotiate,
promise and consent to all that he shall think necessary for effecting the said
Peace, and generally do whatever we our selves might do were we our selves
there actually present, although for that end it might be requisite he should
have a Power and more special Order than what is contained in these Presents;
we promising sincerely and in good truth, to hold all that firm, stable and
satisfactory, which the said Sieur Heinsius, together with our other three
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, or with any two or one of them, in case of
the Sickness, Absence or other Impediment of the rest, or even alone in the
absence of all three, upon the like account of Sickness or other Impediment,
shall stipulate, promise and agree to, and to expedite our Letters of
Ratification of the same within the time he shall promise in our Name to
produce the same. Given at the Hague, in our Assembly, under the Great Seal;
signed by the President of our Assembly, and sealed by our Secretary, Aug. 5.
Anno 1697. Signed F. B. de Reed, as upon the Fold it was written, By the Order
of the said Lords the States General. It was signed, F. Fagel, and sealed with
the Great Seal in Red Wax.

Here follows his most Christian Majesty's Ratification of the Treaty of
Commerce, Navigation and Marine Affairs.
LEwis, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre, to all those to whom
these Presents shall come, Greeting: As our well-beloved and faithful
Councellor in Ordinary in our Council of State, Nicholas Augustus de Harlay,
Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Cely; our dear and well-beloved Lewis
Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy, Marquess of Treon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of
Boulay, of the two Churches of Fortisle and of Mevillet; and our dear and
well-beloved Francis de Callieres, Knight, Lord of la Roche-Chellay and of
Gigny, our Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, by virtue of the
full Powers we have given them, have concluded, finished and signed on the 20th
of September last at Risswick, with the Sieurs Antony Heinsius, Councellor and
Pensionary of the States of Holland and West-Friesland, Keeper of the Great
Seal and Superintendant of the Fiefs in the same Province; Everhard de Weed,
Lord of Weed, Dijckvelt, and Rateles, etc. Lord Proprietor of the Town of
Oudewater, Dean and Rector of the Imperial Chapter of St. Mary at Vtrecht,
Dijck-Grave of the River Rhine in the Province of Vtrecht, President of the
States of the said Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, the
Nobilities Deputy to the States of Friesland, and Curator of the University of
Franeker, Deputies in their Assembly on the behalf of the States of Holland,
Vtrecht and Friesland, in quality of Ambassadors Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiaries of our most dear and great Friends the States General of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries, in like manner furnished with full
Powers, the Treaty of Commerce, Navigation and Marine Affairs.

Fiat Insertio.
We being satisfied with the said Treaty of Commerce, Navigation and Marine
Affairs, in all and every of the Points and Articles that are contained and set
forth therein, have as well for our selves, as for our Heirs, Successors,
Kingdoms, Countries, Territories, Seigniories and Subjects, accepted, approved,
ratified and confirmed, do accept, approve, ratify and confirm the same, and
fully promise upon the Faith and Word of a King, under the Obligation and
Pledge of all and every our Possessions at present and to come, to keep and
observe it inviolably, without ever going or acting to the contrary, either
directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever: In witness whereof we have
signed these Presents with our own Hand, and caused it to be sealed with our
Seal. Given at Fountainbleau, the 3d of October, Anno 1697; and of our Reign
fifty five. It was signed Lovis; and a little lower, By the King's Command.
Signed, Colbert.

Here follows the Ratification of the Lords the States General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, of the Treaty of Commerce, Navigation and
Marine Affairs.
THe States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, to all those
to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting: As there has been on the 20th of
September, this present Year 1697, A Treaty of Commerce, Navigation and Marine
Affairs agreed and concluded at Rijswick in Holland, by the Sieur Nicholas
Augustus de Harlay, Knight. Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Celi, Councellor in Ordinary
to his most Christian Majesty in his Council of State; the Sieur Lovis Verjus,
Knight, Count of Crecy, Councellor in Ordinary to the King in his Council of
State, Marquess of Treon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, of the two Churches
of Fortisle, of Mevillet and other places; and the Sieur Francis de Callieres,
Knight, Lord of Callieres, la Roche-Chellay and Gigny; his most Christian
Majesty's Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries in the Assembly at
Rijswick, in the Name and on the Part of his said Majesty; And by the Sieurs
Antony Heinsius, Councellor and Pensionary of the States of Holland and
West-Friesland, and Keeper of the Great Seal, and Superintendant of the Fiefs
in the said Province; Everhard de Weed, Lord of Weed, Dijckvelt, Rateles, and
other places, Lord Proprietor of the Town of Oudewater, Dean and Rector of the
Imperial Chapter of St. Mary at Vtrecht, Dijk-Grave of the Rhine in the
Province of Vtrecht, President of the States of the said Province; and William
de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, the Nobilities Deputy to the States of Friesland,
and Curator of the University of Francker, Deputies in our Assembly for the
States of Holland, Vtrecht and Friestand, our Ambassadors Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiaries in the said Assembly of Rijswick, in our Name and on our
Part, and by Virtue of their respective full Powers, of which Treaty the Tenor
follows:

Fiat Insertio.
And forasmuch as the Contents of the said Treaty does import, That the
Ratifications of the same should be executed in due form, and exchanged on
either part in the space of three Weeks, or sooner if it could be done,
computing it from the Day of signing; we being very desirous to give Instances
of our Sincerity, and to discharge our Word, which our said Ambassadors have
given for us, have allowed, approved and ratified the said Treaty, and every
Article thereof before transcribed, as we do allow, approve and ratify it by
these Presents; promising in good Faith and Sincerity to keep, maintain and
observe it inviolably, Point by Point, according to the Tenor and Form
thereof, without ever going or acting to the contrary, either directly or
indirectly, in any sort or way whatsoever. In witness whereof we have caused
these Presents to be signed by the President of our Assembly, countersigned by
our Secretary, and affixed our Great Seal thereunto. Given at the Hague, October.
10. 1697.

Here follows his most Christian Majesty's Ratification of the separate Article.
LEwis, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre, to all those to whom
these Presents shall come, Greeting: Having seen and examined the separate
Article, which our well-beloved and faithful Councellor in Ordinary in our
Council of State, Nicholas Augustus de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count
of Celi; our most dear and well-be-loved Lovis Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy,
Marquess of Treon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, of the two Churches of
Fortisle and of Mouillet; and our dear and well-beloved Francis de Callieres,
Knight. Lord of la Roche-Chellay and Gigny, our Ambassadors Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiaries, by Virtue of the full Powers we have given them, have
concluded, agreed and signed on the 20th of September last at Rijswick, with
the Sieurs Antony Heinsius, Councellor and Pensionary of Holland and
West-Friesland, Keeper of the Great Seal, and Superintendant of the Fiefs;
Everhard de Weed, Lord of Weed, Dickvelt, Rateles, etc. Lord Proprietor of
the Town of Oudewater, Dean and Rector of the Imperial Chapter of St. Mary at
Vtrecht, Dijck-Grave of the Rhine in the Province of Vtrecht, and President of
the States of the said Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, the
Nobilities Deputy to the States of Friesland, and Curator of the University of
Franeker, Deputies in their Assembly for the States of Holland, Vtrecht and
Friesland, in the quality of Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of
our most dear and great Friends, the States General of the United Provinces of
the Low Countries, in like manner furnished with full Powers, of which separate
Article the Tenor follows:

Fiat Insertio.
We being satisfied with the said separate Article in all the Contents thereof,
have allowed, approved and ratified, and do allow, approve and ratify the same
by these Presents, signed with our own Hand, promising, in the Faith and Word
of a King, to accomplish and observe, and cause the same to be observed
sincerely and in good truth, without ever suffering, either directly or
indirectly, the violation thereof, for any Cause and upon any Account
whatsoever: In Witness whereof, we have signed these Presents, and set
thereunto our Seal. Given at Fountainbleau, the 3d of October, in the Year of
Grace, 1697. and of our Reign fifty five. It was signed Lovis, a little lower,
By the King's Command. Signed, Colbert.

Here follows the Ratification of the Lords the States General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, of the separate Article.
THe States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, to whom these
presents shall come, Greeting: Seeing it is so, that besides the Treaty of
Commerce, that was agreed and concluded at Rij^wick in Holland, on the 20th of
September this Year 1697, there was also a separate Article, made by the Sieur
Nicholas de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Bonneuil, Count of Celi, Councellor in
Ordinary to his most Christian Majesty in his Council of State; the Sieur Louis
Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy, Councellor in Ordinary to the King in his
Council of State, Marquess of Treon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, of the
two Churches of Fortisle, of Meuillet, and other Places; and the Sieur Francis
de Callieres, Knight, Lord of Callieres, de la Roche-Chellay, and of Gigny, his
most Christian Majesty's Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries in
the Assembly at Rijswick: And by the Sieur Anthony Heinsius, Councellor and
Pensionary of the States of Holland and West-Friesland, Keeper of the Great
Seal, and Superintendant of the Fiefs of the said Province; Everhard de Weed,
Lord of Weed, Dijckvelt, Rateles, and other Places, Lord Proprietor of the
Town of Oudewater, Dean and Rector of the Imperial Chapter of St. Mary at
Vtretcht, Dijck-Grave of the Rhine within the said Province, President of the
States of the said Province; and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, the
Nobilities Deputy to the States of Friesland, and Curator to the University of
Franeker, Deputies in our Assembly at Rijswick, in our Name, and on our Part,
by Virtue of their respective full Powers, of which separate Article the Tenor
follows:

Flat Insertio.
We being satisfied with the said separate Article, have approved and ratified
it, and do allow, approve and ratify the same by these Presents, as much as if
it were inserted in the said Treaty of Commerce, promising inviolably to keep,
maintain and observe all that is contained therein, without ever going or
acting either directly or indirectly to the contrary, under any pretense
whatsoever: In Witness whereof, We have caused these Presents to be signed by
the President of our Assembly, countersigned by our Secretary, and affixed our
Great Seal thereunto. Given at the Hague, October. 10th, An. 1697.

FINIS.

