LONDONS WONDER.

Being a most true and positive relation of the taking and killing of a great
Whale near to Greenwich; the said Whale being fifty eight foot in length,
twelve foot high, fourteen foot broad, and two foot between the Eyes.

At whose death was used Harping-Irons, Spits, Swords, Guns, Bills, Axes, and
Hatchets, and all kind of sharp Instruments to kill her: and at last two
Anchors being struck fast into her body, she could not remoove them, but the
blood gusht out of her Body, as the water does out of a Pump.

The report of which Whale has caused many hundred of people both by land and
water to go and see her; the said Whale being slain hard by Greenwich upon the
third day of June this present year 1658. which is largely expressed in this
following discourse.

June LONDON, Printed for Francis Grove near the Sarazens head on Snow-hill.
1658. June 6.

The Preface.
IN the most sacred and holy Word of God, (which is written for our
instruction; in which (by the merits of Jesus Christ) depends our salvation, by
reading, hearing, and preaching) And in this holy Scripture, the perfect
Creation of the World is set down, in the true and largest mannner; as you may
read, in the first Chapter of Genesis, penned by the faithful hand of Moses,
who was in the place of a King, Priest, and Prophet, to the Children of Israel.
In which Chapter, by reading or hearing, you shall find proved positively, how
the Omnipotent God, great JEHOVAH, the Lord of lords, and King of kings, whose
power has no end, whose glory is unspeakable, whose mercy is infinite, whose
goodness cannot be numbered, nor his blessings paralleled: He who rides on
the skies, and makes the earth his footstool; that is Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending. It was this good God, that first framed this
Universe; It was the Lords work, and the Lords will, that created this world:
It was the glorious almighty power of Heaven, that first founded this fabric;
it was God that made of nothing, something; and it was the Lord that made the
Sun to govern the day, and the Moon to govern the night; it was the Lord of
Hosts that made the great Whales, and all the fishes swimming in the waters;
and it was the great God of our salvation, that made every living creature. And
was it not the Lords excellent power, to make man according to his own Image,
pure, just, and holy; yea, in the State of all blessed felicity. But how soon,
through transgression, did man remove himself from that happy paradise, that
heavenly mansion, that portion of joy, which he so soon spent, like the
prodigal son: read the 15 Chapter of St. Lukes Gospel.

The fall of Adam has been our ruin, for we by his sins, as heirs from his
loins, are all dead in sins and trespasses. Nevertheless, we are all made
whole by the second Adam; For as the Serpent was lift up in the Wilderness, so
must the Son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. The 3d. Chapter of St. John's Gospel, and
the 14 and 15 verses. This place of holy Scripture does manifestly prove, by
the mouth of our Savior Jesus Christ, that whosoever believes in him shall be
saved. But on the contrary, those that deny Christ, and have crucified our
blessed Savior and Redeemer, will deny them before his Father which is in
heaven.

It is through unbelief, that we have such strange apparitions in the air,
where has been the appearance of four Suns altogether, the Moon has been seen
as red as blood, strange kind of hail and rain, great winds and earthquakes,
most horrible and terrible thunder in the midst of winter, to the great frights
and terror of many thousands of people; great inundations of water, destroying
hay, corn and cattle, besides men, women, and children: great and unheard of
tempests at Sea, splitting the Vessels against the shore, and driving others
upon the sands, where many a Mariner has been cast away through distress, and
many a widow made contrary to expectation. Within this few years, great fires
(by negligence, or some ill casualty) has happened in many places of this
Commonwealth, and especially in the Metrapolitan City of London, turning many
stately buildings into dust, and burying the living with the dead, by means of
the pondeous weight of timber and goods that lay upon them. All these examples
are sent as messengers of God, to forewarn us, and fore-arm us, against the
dreadful day of the Lord: For says the Lord, Behold, I come, I bring my
judgments with me.

A Brief Relation of a Great Whale that was Killed near Green-wich.
UPon the third of June this present year 1658. a huge whale came swimming up
the Thames and was first seen by a boy at black-Wall being of a mighty bulk
and bigness, which something frighted the boy to see such a Monstrous fish: the
boy presently revealed it to some Watermen thereabouts, who instantly got
Harping-irons: Spits, Hatchets, Bills and Axes, and fell a striking the Whale
as far as they durst venture. The Watermen stripping off their Doublets and
Breeches, and went only in their Shirts and Drawers to be light and nimble at
their work; and to escape the danger of drowning in case the Whale had
over-turn'd them, they struck the Harping-irons all at one time into her body,
but she quickly removed them out again.

Some stabbed spits into her, and the Master of the hay that lives at the
three Flower-deluces in Greenwich, shot a brace of bullets into her; and
although the blood spouted out of her body, as if some had pompt her, they were
half afraid that she would get from them; the vehemence of her Wounds made her
disgorge the water out of her mouth in a bundance, that the people there
present were amazed to see it, and although the tide was very strong and the
wind against her, she hauld the boats at her pleasure, for they stuck Ankers
into her body with spits and irons; and she removed them as fast as they struck
her, till at last a Fisherman threw a little Anchor, which got into one of her
nostrills, and stuck so fast that she could not remove it, and whilst she was
in this ecstasy and danger of death she would sometimes bounce above the water
as high as a house, and down she would sinck into the Thames again, then up
again leaping and tossing her body above the water, sometimes eight or nine
foot high; all this while the Seamen, Watermen, and Ship Carpenters waited
their opportunities to strike the harping irons into her, which upon all
occasions they did with much vigellency, care and industry; and by wounding of
the Whale so often, and so much, the water that the place contained
thereabouts, for at least twenty yards round, was like a pond of blood, and
those that were near her, and at her execution were besmeared with blond as if
they had been in a slaughter house, there was such running and riding with the
people both to see and hear of the destroying of this Whale, as is almost
increadible; diverse of the Gentry and worthy Citizens went thither in their
Coaches, and abundance from Westminister, London, and the burrow of South-wark
repaired both by Land and Water to see this Fish of Wonder, and the Watermen
and others made a prise of her; for, they took twopence a piece of all the
spectatours, so it proved a gallant day of Jubillie to the Watermen, which is
according to the old saying that it is an ill wind that blows no body profit,
at last two Ankers belonging, to the fishers, was struck fast into the body of
the VVhale, which was the cause of her death; and when the people perceived
that her breath was departed, they unanimously (with a great shout leaped upon
the back of the VVhale, and fell to cutting of her up with axes, hatchets,
bills, and other sharp instruments for the same purpose, and it is to be noted
that a little before her death she gave most grievious, deadly, doleful and
heavy groans, that by the report of the people that both saw and heard it, they
never heard of the like before. It had Crab-lice sticking upon the body of it,
that were as big as a spider, then as they were a deviding the body into
several pieces by chopping of it with hatchets and the like they made
merchandise of it.

Some bought pieces as big as a man's middle, and some took lesser pieces to
show to their neighbors, friends and acquaintance, that what is reported
concerning this hugeous whaile, is an absolute truth; and as a monument of
Remembrance, they do both safely and securely lock it up, esteeming more rarely
of it, then a dish of Anchovis, Salmon, or Lobsters, that is a present for a
Lady, for although a whale be not good to eat, it is novelty, and very strange
and much more stranger to be caught in the River of Thames so near to London
bridge. The Cronicles do specify, that several great fishes, have come at some
remarkable times at the distance of many years, to the wonder and admiration
of many people then living, which strange concourse of nature with those great
fishes, have bin as a sign of some dangers approaching, but this was one
special favor of providence, that although at the killing of this whale there
was abundance of men women and children, and some of them at sometimes were
very near her, and yet none of them had so much hurt done them as the fillip of
a finger. The company that was her Executioners, and at her death did measure
her, and found the vast length of the whale to be full eight and fifty foot,
and she was complete 12 foot high, she was 14 foot in breadth, and two foot long
between the eyes; she had very large nostrills, and a hugeous wide mouth, and
in one of her nostrills an anchor being cast, was one of the mane causes of her
death, she stared with her eyes most strangely, and was at least six hours a
killing, out at last the whale was made there prise, and the water men gaind
the conquest.

But certainly I cannot conceive to the contrary, but that this whale (coming
thus contrary to custom) is some sign or token of heavens displeasure, for it
is the judgment of the men of art, that strange things produecs strange affects
now whether we gave credit to there sayings or no, we must and oughtt to
believe the scripture which is spoken by the mouth of our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, as you shall find it written in St. Matthew gospel the
24th Chapter read the whole chapter, which manifestly declaires the times and
seasons as we live in, for we have had wars and rumors of wars signs and
apparistions in the air, and sure enough that the day of the Lord is at hand,
therefore whilst it is to day let us harken to the will of God, and let every
Christian that takes up the name of a Christian, by true Christiany, to prove
himself to be a Christian both by his faith and good works, for says the
Apostle St. James in his Epistle, that faith without works is dead, and so is
works without faith, Read the second chapter of James, then since it is so that
we live in such times of danger let us be lovers of one another? and repent
from the bottom of our hearts that God may divert his judgments from us, and
repent him of the evil as he has threatened against us, let us be as tender
of one another souls, as we are of the apple of our eye, let us lock them up
in the love of Christ, that we may be made pertakers of his heavenly Kingdom
to be seated on the throne of grace, and Crowned with the Imperial Crown of
Glory.

FINIS.

