Mr. LOVE's CASE: Wherein is Published, First, His several Petitions to the
Parliament. Secondly, A full Narrative of the late Dangerous Design against the
State, written with Mr. Loves own hand, and by him sent to the Parliament;
wherein he sets down his several Meetings and Secret Actings with Major
Alford, Maj. Adams, Col. Barton, Mr. Blackmore, Mr. Case, Mr. Cauton, Dr.
Drake, Mr. Drake, Cap. Far, Mr. Gibbons, Mr. Haviland, Major Huntington, Mr.
Jenkins, Mr. Jaquel, Mr Jackson, Lieut. Col. Jackson, Cap. Massey, Mr. Nalton,
Cap. Potter, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Sterks, Colonel Sowton, Colonel Vaughan, and
others. Thirdly, Mr. Loves Speech and Prayer on the Scaffold on Towerhil,
August 22. 1651.

Printed by an Exact Copy, taken in Shorthand by JOHN HIND.

Fourthly, Animadversions on the said Speech and Prayer.


Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be showed before the
whole Congregation. Whosoever diggeth a pit, shall fall therein: And he that
rolleth a stone, it will return upon him, Prove. 26. 26, 27. London, Printed for
R. W. and Peter Cole at the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange.
1651.

To the Supreme Authority, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England:
The Humble Petition of Christopher Love, a condemned Prisoner in the Tower of
London;
Most humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner having received the Sentence of* Death by the High Court
of Justice, and is preparing himself in all humility and serious submission to
drink that bitter Cup, the terror whereof, though much abated through the
pardoning Mercies of God in the blood of sprinkling; yet your Petitioner being
brought down to the dust of death, desires to see the righteous Lord in this
Sentence, acknowledging it to be just with the Most High to cut him off both in
the midst of his days, and in the midst of his Ministry; He desires to be
deeply humbled under the mighty hand of God, lying now before the Lord and you,
putting his mouth in the dust, that there may be hope that the Lord will pardon
his manifold iniquities, and that your Honors will pass by his Offenses done
contrary to your Laws, which (as he formerly did, so still does confess)
renders him culpable, for which he is unfeignedly sorry: Your Petitioner goes
not about to plead Excuse, but with an humble Submission prostrates himself at
your feet, acknowledging he has offended against the Acts of this
Commonwealth, and thereby is fallen under your sore displeasure, of which he is
very deeply sensible and sorrowful also.

Your Petitioner therefore (having no other refuge left him on earth to redeem
his Life from death, but the Favor of this Honorable House) makes his humble
Addresses to you in the day of his deep Distress, that you would, as the Elect
of God, put on bowels of Compassion toward him, that his life may be given him
for a prey, that he may give his life for a Sacrifice for the glory of God and
good of this Nation; and if the Lord shall please to stir up your hearts to
remit the Execution, and absolve him from the Sentence of Death, it will be to
him as life from the dead, and he shall thankfully acknowledge God as the
Author, and you as the Instruments; and humbly hopes it will be no matter of
grief to you in the Great Day of your Account, to rescue his life from going
down to the Pit, and he is persuaded that hereby the hearts of many that are
godly, will be comforted and united, and many Thanksgivings from them will
redound to God in your behalf, and will lay Obligations on your Petitioner the
remainder of his days to lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and
honesty, and a Promise in his place and calling to endeavor the Peace and
Welfare of this Commonwealth.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. Christopher Love.
Read July 9. 1651.
To the Supreme Authority, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND:
The Humble Petition of Christopher Love, a Condemned Prisoner in the Tower of
London;
Most humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner does with all Thankfulness acknowledge it a singular
Providence of God, and special Favor of the Parliament, that a door of Hope is
yet open, and opportunity once more offered to prostrate himself at your feet
for a Grant of his Life, which if you vouchsafe, he shall accept as an Act of
great Grace and Mercy. It is no little grief of heart to your Petitioner, that
through unadvisedness and weakness he is fallen under your sad and heavy
Displeasure, and has offended against the Laws of this Commonwealth, and now
by the Sentence of the High Court of Justice (to which he submits with all
Christian meekness and humble acknowledgement of Gods hand therein) is in
inevitable and sudden danger to lose his Life, without your merciful and
gracious Interposition: And whereas there is a Surmise of a Plot continued
against the Peace and Welfare of this Commonwealth, he does protest in the
presence of God the Searcher of all hearts, that he knows no Plot or Design
against the present Government; nor is he privy in the least to any
preparations for, or intendments toward any intestine Insurrections or
foreign Invasions, or to any Correspondencies now held with any in, or of the
Scottish Nation, or any other whatsoever: He is not ignorant how much Malignants
will triumph at his death, nor is he without natural affections to his dear
Wife and Children, nor without real desires of life to do God and his Country
service, which are powerful Persuasions to him to do whatever he can, without
wounding his Conscience.

Your dying Petitioner humbly prays, That as the Elect of God, you would put on
bowels of Compassion, and in imitation of your Heavenly Father, (whose Mercy
rejoices against Judgment) be pleased to absolve him from the Sentence of
Death, which will be to him as life from the dead; and this new Life received
from your hands, will lay strong Obligations on your Petitioner, to endeavor in
his place and calling, the composing of Differences among the Godly, and
preserving spiritual Peace and Love throughout the Churches of the Saints, as
well as the civil Peace and Welfare of the Commonwealth; And he further
promises neither to Plot, Contrive or Design any thing to the hurt of this
present Government; and if it shall be required, to put in further Security for
performance hereof; and if none of these things should move you to vouchsafe an
Absolute Pardon, yet let him implore thus much from your hands, as his last,
though very uncomfortable Request, That you would be pleased to change the
Sentence of death, into Banishment into some strange Land, where he may sit
alone, lamenting his sad and deplorable Condition.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. Christopher Love.
Read July 11. 1651.
To the Supreme Authority, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND:
The humble Petition of Christopher Love condemned to die, and the hour of
Execution drawing near;
Most humbly shows,
THat whereas there are but very few hours between your Petitioner and Death,
he is humbly bold before he breathe out his soul to God, to breathe out his
Request to the Parliament, by making his last Address to you, humbly
acknowledging he has incurred your high Displeasure (of which he is deeply
sensible) and violated the Laws of this Commonwealth, for which he is
unfeignedly sorrowful, and now also submits to the Sentence of the High
Court, and promises and offers further Security neither to Plot, Contrive or
Design the Subversion of this present Government, accounting it as a brand of
the highest Ingratitude to employ his life against you, if he should by an Act
of Grace and Favor receive a new life from you.

Wherefore your dying Petitioner, before he commend his soul to God on the
Block, he pours out his soul to you, at your Bar, That you would be pleased by
your gracious, merciful and seasonable Interposition, to prevent this sad
stroke now the hand is even lifted up, and he is as one giving up the ghost;
and if he have provoked you so far as to render him incapable of an Absolute
Pardon, yet he humbly beseeches you to change the Sentence of death into
perpetual Banishment; in so doing, your Mercy will triumph over Justice, and
the greatness and nearness of his danger, he being as one free among the dead,
will exceedingly greaten the freeness of your Grace and Mercy.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. Christopher Love.
Read July 15. 1651.
To the Supreme Authority, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND:
The humble Petition of Mary the Wife of Christopher Love;
SHOWS,
THat your poor Petitioner has great cause to say, Blessed be God, and blessed
be You, for your merciful Vote of the 15th of July (a Day never to be
forgotten) in adding a month to the Life of her dear Husband, which has
opened a door of Hope to her in the midst of the Valley of Achor, and made her
glad, though she be a woman of a sorrowful Spirit; yet your distressed Handmaid
is overwhelmed with grief and anguish of Soul, and cannot be comforted when she
remembers that doleful Day the 15th of August, so near approaching, her heart
does almost die within her, and she is as one giving up the ghost, before she
is delivered of the fruit of her womb.

Wherefore your greatly distressed Handmaid does again pour out her soul with
renewed and importunate Requests, Beseeching your Honors to commiserate her
deplorable Condition, by putting on bowels of Pity and Compassion toward her
dear condemned Husband; that she may not grapple with the intolerable pains of
Travel, and the unsupportable thoughts of her Husband's death in one day; O
that the Life of your Handmaid and her Babe might be a Ransom for the Life of
her condemned Husband! she had rather choose out of love to die for him, then
for sorrow of heart to die with him: Now the good Lord incline your hearts to
give him his life for a Prey, wheresoever it shall please your Honors to cast
him.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. Mary Love.

To the Supreme Authority, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND:
The humble Petition of Christopher Love, a Condemned Prisoner in the Tower of
London;
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner does humbly adore the wonderful Goodness of God, and most
thankfully acknowledge the great Mercy of the Parliament, for so seasonable and
acceptable an Act of Grace to such an offending Suppliant, that when there was
but a step between him and death, the number of his days being accomplished,
and he almost cut off from the Land of the living, then you mercifully
interposed and gave him his Life for a month longer, which was to him as a
Resurrection from the dead; The consideration whereof melts the heart of your
Petitioner, and makes him (after a more narrow search into his heart and ways)
more deeply sensible then ever of his sin against God, and more sorrowful for
his high Crimes and Offenses against the Parliament, in his late and great
Miscarriages.

He humbly acknowledges he has so highly violated the Laws of the
Commonwealth, as that thereby he has rendered himself guilty of the Sentence
of death, justly passed on him by the High Court of Justice; He does also
herewith humbly offer to your Honors a free and full Narrative under his hand
of the whole Design (to the best of his remembrance) which he leaves to your
grave Wisdoms and favorable Interpretations, fully resolving that he will
neither plot, contrive or design any thing prejudicial to the present
Government; but will in his place and calling oppose any Designs whatsoever
(whether in this or the neighbor Nation) that may tend to the ruin of this
Commonwealth.

Your dying Petitioner with all humble importunity prostrates himself at your
feet, puts his mouth in the dust, (O that there may be hope!) craving your
tender Mercy, begging his Life at your hands, promising never to employ that
Life against you he shall receive from you, but does hold it his Duty in his
place and calling, to lay out himself for the glory of God, the good of his
people, the Peace and Safety of this Commonwealth.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. Christopher Love.
Read August 14. 1651. Reod again August 16. 1651.
A Brief and full NARRATIVE Humbly presented, with my Petition to the
Parliament, By me CHRISTOPHER LOVE.
COnsidering how a clear and full Narrative may satisfy the State (although it
may prejudice my self) I am willing with an Ingenuous Freedom and openness of
heart to make known the whole matter, so far as I distinctly know and well
remember, humbly hoping that this large acknowledgement of mine (which is more
then any in the world can prove against me) shall not be taken as an
Aggravation of my fault, but as a Demonstration of my Ingenuity. Before I
mention the matters of Fact, I humbly crave leave to signify the time when,
and manner how I came to be entangled in this unhappy Business.

As for the time, it was after the breaking off the Treaty between the King and
the Scots at Jersey; for before that time (to the best of my remembrance) I was
not privy to, or acquainted with any meetings about the sending of Captain
Titus (whose face I never saw) to Jersey, or sending Letters to him, or
receiving Letters from him whiles he was there; or about sending any Letters
to, or receiving Letters from the King, Queen, Jermyn, Piercy, or any other
person in Foreign parts during the Treaty at Jersey: But after that Treaty was
ended, Mr. William Drake came to me, told me he had News to impart; and to that
end, he desired to know (if he could get Friends together) whether I was
willing that they should meet at my house (it being conveniently situate in
the midst of the City) that so he might communicate what he heard of Affairs
abroad. To satisfy my curiosity to hear News, I was content to let him, with
those he should bring to meet at my house: Thus for the time when and manner how
I came to be present at any meetings about Intelligence.

I now come humbly and truly to relate the matter of Fact, which is as
follows; It appeared to me by the Testimony of the Witnesses, that there were
frequent meetings by Mr. Drake, Alford, Titus, Adams, and others, soon after
the death of the late King; and Applications made to the King of Scots, the
Queen his Mother, to Jermyn and Piercy, both before and during the Treaty at
Jersey, of which I know nothing, nor was I present: But the first meeting I was
at was at my house, and was (as I remember) at the reading of a Letter which
came from Captain Titus after the Treaty was ended at Jersey; the Contents of
that Letter was (if I mistake not) to this effect: That the Treaty at Jersey
was broken off through the violent and evil Counsels of desperate Malignants;
and that he had something of concernment to communicate, which he durst not do
in person, being not safe for him to come over into England, nor could he well
do it by writing, he judging it not fit nor safe to send by the common Post,
fearing a miscarriage; wherefore he desired some body to be sent over to him to
Calice, to whom he might give an account of all Proceedings. Upon the reading
of this Letter, Mr. Drake moved that some person should be desired to go to
Calice; for said he, We shall hear the whole Relation of the business at
Jersey: Whereupon Major Adams or Cap. Far were moved by Mr. Drake to go. There
was mention of Major Alford to go, though he was not present that I know of;
nor was he ever within my house, as I remember, until after he returned from
Calice: So that there was none that I know of was gone. Mr. Drake told me,
Major Alford was the fittest man to go over to Calice, having business of his
own to go into France, to look after his Prodigal son: So that it was (said he)
a plausible pretense to conceal his going over to meet with Titus. There were
present at this first meeting, Mr. Drake, Mr. Jenkins, Major Adams, Dr. Drake,
Cap. Far, Cap. Potter, and my self, with some others; but who more, I cannot
remember.

About two or three days after Major Alfords return from Calice, Mr. Drake told
me he was come to London, and told me he would go to several Ministers and
Citizens, to desire them to meet at my house, that so we might hear what news
Major Alford brought with him from Calice, accordingly the next day in the
Evening they met at my house, Mr. Drake brought Major Alford with him; Major
Alford at that meeting gave an account of his conference with Titus, and of his
receiving a Copy of the Kings Letter from him, as also a Narrative of the
Proceedings at the Treaty of Jersey: But he said (if I mistake not) that he
brought not over the Letters himself, but delivered them to a Passenger that
came over in the Ship to carry them, lest that himself should be searched; but
after he came into England, he received the Letter and Narrative from the
Passenger (but who he was I know not) and so brought them to London, Whether
the Copy of the Kings Letter was read at my house in my hearing, I remember
not; yet I deny not, but it was read there: I am sure I heard that the Contents
of it, were to this effect, That he took in good part the Affections and
Loyalty of those who formerly had made Applications by way of Petition to him
(of which Petition I know nothing) And if ever God restored him or put him in a
Condition, he should remember them. The Narrative which Alford brought from
Titus, was read in my house in my hearing, which was to this effect, He made a
large Description of the King of Scots, commending his Prudent Carriage and
good Inclinations to an Agreement with the Scots, but that his bad Council
about him hindered it: Also he made a Rehearsal of his Sufferings from the
Cavaliers at Jersey, how he was imprisoned in a close Room: Many things else
was in the Narrative which I have forgotten. There were present at this
meeting, Major Alford, Mr. Drake, Mr. Case, Major Adams, Mr. Jaquel, Mr.
Jackson, Mr. Jenkins, Doctor Drake, Cap. Potter, M. Sterks, Cap. Far, and my
self, with some others; but who more, I do not remember.

A little before or about the Treaty, between the King and the Scots at Breda,
there was a meeting at my house, Mr. Drake proposed, That we should think of
some way to promote the Agreement between the King and the Scots; where by the
way, I desire humbly to give notice, That this was the first and only meeting
of this nature, and for this end, as my house, that I know of. At this meeting,
Mr. Drake took out some Papers out of his Pocket written in Characters, which
he read in my Study; What he read, went under the name of a Commission and
Instructions (as he termed it) to be sent to the Lord Willoughby; Alderman
Bunce, Massey, Graves and Titus, to appoint them to advise with, and use their
Interest in Persons of Honor about the King, to provoke him to agree with the
Scots, and to take the Covenant; as also to advise with the Scots
Commissioners, and persuade them, That in their Agreemnt with their King, they
would have special respect to the Interest of Religion, and terms of the
Covenant; the Commission ran in this form, as if it were in the names of all
the Presbyterial party in England: After I heard it read, I expressed my self
against it, alleging several Reasons, chiefly, That it was an Act of high
Presumption for private persons to send Commission with Instructions, and an
act of notorious falsehood, to say, This was in the name of the Presbyterial
party of England; when none but a few persons then present knew thereof that I
know of: Many in the Company did express a dislike thereof, as well as my self;
I mention not this my descent as an Apology to excuse my self, I know a
condemned man should not plead an excuse, but merely as a Relation of such
Circumstances which will make my Narrative more clear and full: I shall anon
mention particulars rather to aggravate, then extenuate my fault. But to return
to the business of this meeting, Mr. Draks did also read a Letter in this
meeting, but to whom it was, I know not, neither know I the Contents of it; I
was at least a dozen times called out of the Room, whiles the Company were
there met; so that I am not able to give so full and particular an account of
the Contents of the Letter, and of the Commission and Instructions: What Mr.
Drake did about the Commission and Instructions after he was gone from my
house, I know not; what he sent away, I know not; nor did I know by whom it was
sent away, until Major Alford declared before the High Court, That he received
the Papers from Mr. Drake, carried them to Gravesend, and delivered them to one
Mason (whose face I never saw) and he carried them to Holland. There were
present at this meeting, Major Huntingdon (who was never at my house before nor
since, whose face I never saw before, nor since, but at my Trial) There were
present also Mr. Drake, Dr. Drake, Mr. Jackson, Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Cauton, Major
Alford, Mr. Gibbons, Major Adams, Cap. Far, and my self, with some others*
whom I cannot remember.

I was present sometimes at private Fasts, particularly at Major Adams and
Colonel Bartons; in both places I saw on the Table, a Paper written, by whom
know not; where among other ends of those Fasts, this one End was specified, To
desire a Blessing upon the Treaty between the King and the Scots. At Major
Adams house Mr. Case Preached and I prayed, but who else exercised, I remember
not. I confess I did in that Fast pray, That God would rescue the King from
Wicked and Malignant Councels, That God would redeem him from the Iniquity of
his Fathers house, That there might be a firm Agreement between him and his
Subjects of Scotland, such as might consist with the Interest of Religion, and
Terms of the Covenant. Present at this meeting, Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Case, Doctor
Drake, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Cauton, Mr. Sterks, Mr. Drake, Major Adams, Mr.
Jaquel, my self and many others; but I cannot call one more to mind.

There was a Fast also at Col. Bartons, where Mr. Jenkins and my self Preached,
Mr. Case, Mr. Cauton, Mr. Robinson prayed, sundry other persons were present;
but I remember none but Col. Barton, Dr. Drake, Lieut. Col. Jackson, Mr. Drake
and Major Adams.

About a year since Captain Potter spoke to me to desire some money for a good
use, for a poor Scotchman who was to leave this Nation, his name was Sterks,
but he was no Agent for any in Scotland that I know of: I gave Captain Potter
Ten shillings to give to him.

In the month of July, 1650. or thereabouts, there was a rough-draft of a
Letter read in my house, intended to be sent to the Church of Scotland, by whom
it was written, I know not, by whom it was read I remember not, I heard but a
part of it read, The substance of that part of the Letter which I heard, was to
signify the great sufferings that many of the Brethren here were under, what
snares and dangers we were daily in; yet to assure them of our stedfastness to
the Covenant, to which end we desired the help of their prayers, promising them
ours: I declared my self against the sending away of this Letter, yet it was
(as I heard) written afterward by Mr. William Drake, and that with Sack in a
Table Book, or Paper Book, and sent away by one Col. Bampfield (whose face I
never saw) and without my knowledge or consent carried by him into Scotland:
There were present at this meeting, Cap. Potter, Doctor Drake, Major Adams,
Major Alford Mr. Sterks, Mr. Jeaquel, Mr. Gibbons, Cap. Far, and my self, with
some others whom I remember not.

After Dunbar fight, there was a rough-draft of a Letter read in my house, it
was spoken to be directed to the Commissioners of the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland; The rough-draft was read by Doctor Drake, but that it was
written by him, I cannot positively say: I suppose he drew up that Letter and
Copy which was sent away, but cannot affirm it. I confess I did offer some
general Heads to be inserted in the Letter before it was drawn up, which were
to this effect: First, To intimate that their Brethren here did sensibly lay to
heart their sad loss, That so many of them should fall by the hands of their
Brethren. Secondly, To desire them to search into the cause of the Lords severe
displeasure against them. Thirdly, To understand the true state of their
Affairs so far as was fit for them to impart; and for us to know, Whether they
did still maintain Religious and Covenant Interest. There were present at this
meeting, Mr. Case, Major Adams, Doctor Drake, Captain Massey, Lieut. Col.
Jackson, Mr. Gibbons, Cap. Potter, and my self, with some others whom I
remember not.

Soon after this, there was a Letter read in my house by Cap. Massey, as was
said to be from Major General Massey, which was the first Letter that I
remember was read in my house, which came from Scotland; This was near three
months after Dunbar fight: Together with this Letter from Massey, there were
Letters read from Alderman Bunce and Mr. Drake at the same time (if I mistake
not) The substance of Alderman Bunces and Mr. Drakes Letters, I have wholly
forgotten; but the Contents of Masseys Letter was to this Effect, He mentioned
the Poverty of his Condition, to what Necessities both Titus and himself were
reduced, having no Command at all in the Scottish Army: He also in his Letter
related the number of the Scots, who were both slain and taken prisoners; and
wrote for Money and Arms to be sent him, by the way of Holland: All the company
was against sending money on a Military Account to provide Arms; all did
disavow that: But there was a Proposition made (by whom I know not) to send
them money for a supply of their personal Necessities: The sum propounded was,
either Three hundred pounds, or else Four hundred pounds. I confess, I did
second this Proposal, and did move for the Contribution of money for them, but
named no sum, and utterly disclaimed the business of Arms: I moved it chiefly
for Massey (for I knew not Titus) because Massey had formerly done eminent
Services for the good of this Nation; and I moved it merely for a supply of his
personal Necessities, without any reference to the War: I confess, I did
subscribe Ten pounds for that purpose, and did give it accordingly, laying it
down on the Table in my Parlor, wrapped up in a Paper with C. L. written on it.
There were many present in the Room, but none saw me lay it down (that I know
of) nor did I see any take it up, yet I believe Cap. Massey received it. I
confess, I did not only subscribe the sum that I my self did give, but I did
write down also some few of the sums, which others said they would give:
Particularly I writ down Ten pounds which Lieut. Col. Jackson promised to give,
Ten pounds which Maj. Adams promised to give, and Five pounds which Cap. Far
promised to give, and Five pounds which Mr. Jaquel told me of before, if there
were need he would give: But I received not the money from any of those
forementioned, but only from Mr. Jaquel I received Five pounds for the use of
Massey and Titus, and the next meeting laid it on my Table, wrapped in a Paper,
with Mr. Jaquel written on it. I might possibly receive Five or ten pounds from
some of the company, who met at my house, for the use of Massey, but cannot now
remember from whom. There were several sums of money left on my Table, but I
saw them not laid down, nor did I see any take it up; yet I suppose Cap. Massey
did receive it, and return it.

I do confess, I writ an answer to Massey's Letter, which none in the World
could accuse me of; it was the first and only Letter that ever I writ into
Scotland, since the Wars began: I writ it in long hand, for I never used Cipher
or Character in all my life. And though before the High Court I did say (and
that truly) I never wrote Letter to any person of the Scottish Nation, since the
Wars began, yet I durst not say, I never writ to any person in the Scottish
Nation, because I did write this one (and but this one) Letter to Massey: The
substance of the Letter was to this effect, To let him know, his Friends here
could not forget the eminent Services he had formerly done; That we were sorry
to hear of the Necessity of his Condition; That some Friends here had resolved,
as an Expression of their Respects toward him and Cap. Titus, to send them
Four hundred pounds (although I believe that sum was never raised) for a supply
of their personal Necessities: But as for Arms, I wrote expressly, We could not,
we would not provide any; it was neither safe, nor fit for us to engage in a
business of that nature: Wherefore I prayed him to forbear any such motions to
us. There were present at this meeting these persons following, Major Alford,
Lieut. Col. Jackson, Mr. Case, Cap. Massey, Major Adams, Dr. Drake, Mr.
Gibbons, Mr. Cauton, Cap. Far, and my self, with some others; but who more, I
cannot well remember.

There is one thing I have yet to declare concerning a learned and godly
Brother, Dr. Drake, which I hope will not turn to his prejudice; He did twice
or thrice bring Letters to my house, and read them when we met: I believe they
were from his Brother M. William Drake who is in Holland, the matter of them
was, An expression of Brotherly affection, a remembering to Friends, and a
relation of what News he heard either in Scotland or Holland, and an exciting
sometimes to do something to raise money for the Scots, which motion Dr. Drake
did reject, and (as he told me) writ a Denial. Dr. Drake did also show me the
Transcript of a Letter (which he said) was from the King; it was written in his
Brothers Letter; the substance of it was to this effect, That he was glad he
was joined in the same Covenant with such honest men, as he had cause to judge
them to be; but to whom the Letter was written I know not, nor can I remember
one passage more in it.

About February last past, Capt. Potter (and M. Jaquel with him) brought
Letters to my house, which was the last Meeting (to the best of my remembrance)
at my house about a business of such a nature, when Capt. Potter came in, he
said, He had News to show me, and took out of his pocket several Letters, I
think they were most, if not all opened, before he brought them to my house:
One Letter was from M. Bailey a Minister in Scotland, another from Col.
Bampfield, a third subscribed by four Lords of Scotland, viz. Argyle, Loudon,
Lothian and Belcarris; there was a Letter or two more, but from whom or to
whom, I know not; I cannot remember the Contents of each Letter on the bare
hearing Capt. Potter reading of them, only in one or more of them, there was a
Narration of the Affairs of Scotland, how they stood since Dunbar Fight; what
Divisions and Parties there were in Scotland, some for the King, others for the
Kirk, and some for neither. There was a motion also for 10000 l. to be raised
for the Affairs of Scotland, but all present disliked the motion, and did
utterly refuse to act any thing in that business, and resolved to give a
Negative Answer: I was desired to write an Answer to Col. Bampfield, which I
did, but who writ answer to the other Letters I do not know certainly, only
this I know, Dr. Drake was desired to return an Answer to M. Bailey, which I
believe he did: It was agreed on by us who were present, That though we did
dislike the motion for raising so great a sum for the Scottish Affairs, yet we
would send a Gratuity to the messenger; we judged it convenient to give Col.
Bampfield and his man 40 l. In these Letters sent by Col. Bampfield were an
Answer to that Letter which M. Drake writ with Sack in a Table Book or
Paper-book, which was sent in July 1650. but the Answer not returned till the
February following. I confess I writ an Answer to Col. Bampfield's Letter, but
to none of the rest; I wrote (though I knew not the man) on purpose to stop
further Solicitations to us for money; the Contents of the Letter was to this
effect, To give him notice of the Receipt of his Letter with the Letters
enclosed; I did write peremptorily, we could not, we would not raise any
moneys, it was neither fit nor safe for us to do so, I desired him to desist
any such motions for the future, telling him we should not satisfy his
expectation and the Scots; I writ plainly to him, that we had no occasion to
use or employ him in any business for us: I gave him notice also of 30 l. sent
him, and 10 l. given his man, for their care and pains. This was the sum of
that Letter I writ to Col. Bampfield who was then in Holland. Besides one
Letter to Massey in Scotland, and this to Bampfield in Holland, I never writ
any other about business of this nature; moreover I gave 5 l. toward the 40 l.
and delivered it to M. Jaquel, but whether he returned it or who else I do not
certainly know, nor who else made up the sum of 40 l. I know not; only this I
know, it was agreed upon that among our selves we should raise that sum, and so
have no more to do with Bampfield; there were present when the Letters were
read which were sent by Bampfield, Dr. Drake, Captain Potter, Mr. Jaquel, and
my self: This was the last meeting, as I remember, which was at my house about
these Transactions, I was unwilling to continue it any longer.

There is one thing more I make bold to mention, That there are other persons,
besides those I have named, who did now and then come to these Meetings at my
House; as Mr. Robinson, Mr. Nalton, Mr. Haviland, Mr. Blackmore, Col: Vaughan,
Col: Sowton; these were also present at one time or another, but at what
particular Meeting I cannot positively say.

Thus I have clearly laid open the whole matter of Fact so far as I well
remember, and distinctly know of Passages about these Meetings and Transactions
at my House; yea, I have expressed more then all the Witnesses have proved, or
then all the men in the world could prove against me; and now I humbly hope,
the Parliament will be as free in pardoning, as I am in confessing, that as by
what I have done, I am an object of your just displeasure; so by what I have
confessed, I may become an object of your free grace and favor.

I fully resolving never to engage again in a business of the like nature, if
through your clemency you pass by these sundry and great Offenses upon my free
Confession, and full resolution to leave them, you will resemble God himself,
who has said, He that confesses and forsakes his sins shall find mercy.

Having thus laid open my heart in this matter, in an ingenuous
acknowledgement, I humbly crave leave to express my self in a few Particulars
for further satisfaction to the Parliament.

1. Although I was present at several meetings in my House to hear Letters
read, yet I used not to be at meetings elsewhere about businesses of this
nature; it seems there were meetings in other places many Months before I knew
any thing.

2. There are no persons who used these meetings, so far as I remember (and as
I am informed) but they are already discovered and made known.

3. There is no Intelligence or Correspondencies now held that I know of, with
any in, or of the Scottish Nation, or any employed by them.

4. I am not privy to, or acquainted with any Plots or Designs now carrying on,
for raising intestine Insurrections at home, or joining with Foreign Invasions
from abroad.

5. There was never any money raised that I know of, for any of the Scottish
Nation to carry on their War; yea, when Letters were read wherein there were
motions to that purpose, I utterly refused to do any thing therein.

6. I do retain as vehement a Detestation of Malignancy, whether in England, or
in Scotland, as ever I did, and shall in my Place and Calling oppose such a
Design and interest with as much zeal and faithfulness as ever.

7. Lastly, I do faithfully promise never to engage in a business of the like
nature as this, wherein I have been ensnared; nor shall I Plot, Contrive or
Design the subversion of this present Government, but shall under the same,
lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty.

I have no more to say, but to make this humble and last request, That this my
large Confession may not be taken as an Aggravation of my fault, but as a
Demonstration of my Ingenuity. I acknowledge by your Justice, you might in one
day leave a Flock without a Shepherd, a Wife without a Husband, Children
without a Father, and a Body without a Soul: But my Hope and Prayer is, That
your Mercy will triumph over Justice, That I shall hear that joyful sound, That
my life shall see the Light, That I shall be rescued from going down to the
Grave: To which, if God shall incline your hearts, I shall devote the remainder
of my days, to the glory of God, and good of his people, The peace and safety
of this Commonwealth, against all the Malignant Enemies, and Opposers thereof.

I have but one Request more to make to this Honorable House, That if some
Passages about these Meetings and Transactions have passed my Observation, or
slipped my Memory (as happily through tract of time some things have) That you
would not impute it to my Wilfulness, but to my Forgetfulness of things done so
long ago.

From the Tower of London, July 22. 1651. I Attest the truth of this Narrative
under my Hand. Christopher Love.

Mr. Love's Speech made on the Scaffold on Tower Hill, August 22. 1651.
Mr. Love being brought upon the Scaffold by the Sheriffs, Mr. Sheriff
Titchburn showed him the Warrant directed to the Sheriffs of London for his
Execution, telling him that he took no pleasure in this Work, but it was a Duty
laid upon him.

To which Mr. Love replied, I believe it, Sir.

Sheriff Titchburn. I have done my duty for you.


Mr. Love. The Lord bless you.


Lieutenant of the Tower. The Lord strengthen you in this hour of your
Temptation.


Mr. Love. Sir, I am. I bless God my heart is in heaven. I am well.


Sheriff Titchburn. I desire you to consider we have the other to execute
afterward, and six a clock is our Hour; but we shall give you as much time as
we can.


Mr. Love. I shall be the briefer.


Then putting off his Hat two several times to the people, he spoke as
follows;

SECTION I.
BEloved Christians, I am made this day a Spectacle unto God, Angels and Men,
and among men I am made a Grief to the Godly, a Laughingstock to the wicked,
and a Gazing-stock to all, yet blessed be my God not a Terror to my self,
although there be but a little between me and Death, yet this bears up my
heart, there is but a little between me and Heaven. It comforted Doctor Tailor
the Martyr when he was going to Execution, that there were but two Styles
between him and his Fathers house; there is a lesser way between me and my
Fathers house; but two steps between me and Glory, it is but lying down upon
the Block, and I shall ascend upon a Throne: I am this day sailing toward the
Ocean of Eternity, through a rough Passage, to my Haven of Rest; through a
Red Sea to the Promised Land. Me thinks I hear God say to me as he did to
Moses, Go up to Mount Nebo and die there, so go thou up to Tower Hill and die
there. Isaac said of himself that he was old, and yet he knew not the day of
his death, but I cannot say thus: I am young, and yet I know the day of my
death, and I know the kind of my death also, and the place of my death also;
it is such a kind of death as two famous Preachers of the Gospel were put to
before me, John the Baptist, and Paul the Apostle, they were both beheaded; ye
have mention of the one in Scripture Story, and of the other in Ecclesiastical
History: And I read in the 20th of the Revelation and the 4th, The Saints were
beheaded for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus.

SECTION II.
But herein is the disadvantage which I am in in the thoughts of many, who
judge that I suffer not for the Word, or for Conscience, but for meddling with
State matters. To this I shall briefly say, That it is an old guise of the
Devil, to impute the cause of Gods Peoples Sufferings, to be Contrivements
against the State, when in truth it is their Religion and Conscience they are
persecuted for. The Rulers of Israel, they would put Jeremiah to death upon a
Civil account, though indeed it was only the truth of his Prophecy made the
Rulers angry with him; yet upon a Civil account they did pretend he must dye,
because he fell away to the Caldeans, and would have brought in Foreign Forces
to Invade them: The same thing is laid to my charge, of which I am as innocent
as Jeremiah was. I find other instances in the Scripture, wherein men the
cause of their Sufferings were still imputed to meddling with State-matters;
Paul, though he did but Preach Jesus Christ, yet he must dye, if the People
might have their will, under the pretense that he was a m^ver of Sedition. Upon
a civil account my life is pretended to be taken away, whereas indeed it is
because I pursue my Covenant, and will not prostitute my Principles and
Conscience to the Ambition and Lusts of men.

SECT. III.
Beloved, I am this day to make a double exchange, I am changing a Pulpit for a
Scaffold, and a Scaffold for a Throne; and I might add a third, I am changing
this numerous multitude, the presence of this numerous multitude upon
Tower Hill, for the innumerable company of Angels in the holy Hill of Zion; and
I am changing a guard of Soldiers for a guard of Angels, which will receive me,
and carry me into Abraham's bosom. This Scaffold it is the best Pulpit I ever
preached in; for in the Church-Pulpit, God through his Grace, made me an
Instrument to bring others to Heaven, but in this Pulpit he will bring me to
Heaven. These are the last words that I shall speak in this world, and it may
be this last Speech upon a Scaffold may bring God more glory, then many Sermons
in a Pulpit.

SECT. IV.
Before I lay down my Neck upon the Block, I shall lay open my Case unto the
people that hear me this day, and in doing it I shall avoid all rancer, all
bitterness of Spirit, animosity and Revenge, God is my record whom I serve in
the spirit, I speak the truth, and lie not; I do not bring a revengeful heart
unto the Scaffold this day; before I came here, upon my bended knees I have
begged Mercy for them that denied mercy to me, and I have prayed God to forgive
them who would not forgive me; I have forgiven from my heart the worst Enemy I
have in all the world, and this is the worst that I wish to my Accusers and
Prosecutors who have pursued my blood, That I might meet their souls in Heaven.

SECT. V.
I shall divide my Speech into three parts; speak something concerning my
Charge, and a word concerning my Accusers, and touching my Judges, without any
animosity at all, and then something concerning my self for my own vindication,
and then a word of Exhortation; and so I shall commit my soul to God.

Concerning my Charge, it is black and hideous, many things falsely suggested,
but nothing capital sufficiently proved by any one act, that I am conscious to
my self, proved against me that I did. The Charge was high and full, but the
Proof empty and low: Though there were eight Witnesses that came in against me;
yet none of them did prove, That ever I writ any Letter, or directed any man to
write a Letter into Scotland or into Foreign parts: No man proved, That I sent
away any Letter, that I received any Letter, that I collected, or gave, or lent
any Money to assist or promote the Scottish War. This is all that was sworn
against me, That I was present when Letters were read, that I made a motion for
Money to give to Massey; so that Beloved, my presence at, and concealment of
Letters that were received and sent from Foreign parts.

There being a disturbance amongst the people, he said, I am amused, I must
break off, things are true.

But the tumult being appeased, he went on, saying,

SECT. VI.
As concerning my Accusers I shall not say much, I do forgive them, and I pray
God forgive them also; yet what the Evangelist observes concerning Christ's
Accusers, I may without vanity or falsehood say of mine, that they did not agree
among themselves; yea not only contradicting one another, but sometimes a
Witness contradict himself. And though their Testimony did condemn my person,
yet I have condemned their Testimony; and truly there are many remarkable
Circumstances that I might take notice of, either in, or before, or since the
Trial, that might be worthy observation; but I will not insist upon them, only
in the general; I will name none of them, in the general some of them have sent
to me to pray me to forgive them the wrong they have done me. One of them has
written to me under his own hand, to pray me to forgive him the wrong he has
done me; And told me withal, That that day that I should die a violent death,
his life would be no comfort to him, because he was an Instrument in taking
away mine. Others of my witnesses, they were some terrified before they would
testify, some hired, some fined before they would bear witness against me, but
I will forgive them.

SECT. VII.
As concerning my Judges, I will not judge them, and yet I will not justify
them, I believe (I will say but this of them) That what moved (John Baptist
what moved) Herod to cut off John Baptists head, moved them to cut off mine,
and that was for his Oaths sake John Baptist [meaning Herod] to avoid perjury,
he would commit murder, whereas if John Baptists head had been upon his
shoulders, he would have been guilty of neither.

SECT. VIII.
I have something in the second place to speak concerning my self, and then I
shall come briefly to a Conclusion. Concerning my self, I have gone through
various reports: There are many Sons of slander, whose mouths are as open
Sepulchers to bury my Name before my friends can bury my body. My comfort is,
there will be a Resurrection of Names as well as Bodies at the last Day; God
will not only wipe off tears from mine eyes this day, but wipe off all blots
and reproaches from my Name before many days be over; And though my Body will
soon rot under ground, yet my hope is, my Name will not rot above it: I am not
ignorant what Calumnies are cast upon me, and more likely to be after I am dead
and gone. The very night before my intended Execution the last month, there
was an insulting Letter written to me to tell me, that after I was dead there
should be something published against me to my shame; I hope you will have so
much charity as not to believe Reproaches cast upon a dead man, who will be
silent in the grave, and not able to speak a word in his own justification. I
am aspersed both as to my Practices, and as to my Principles.

SECT. IX.
I shall begin with the first: There are five Aspersions as to my practices
that are laid upon me; First, That I am a Liar, that I am an Extortioner, that
I am an Adulterer, that I am a Murderer, and that I am a turbulent person;
crimes scandalous in any man, but much more abominable in a Minister.

Now I hope you will believe a dying man, who dare not look God in the face
with a lie in his mouth. I am accused of lying, that what I denied before the
High Court of Justice, that afterward I should confess, or else was proved
against me: Now in the presence of God I tell you, as I would confess nothing
that was criminal, so I did deny nothing that was true, and that I might seal
it to you with my blood; what I did deny, the protestations I made before the
High Court, I make them briefly now, That I never writ Letter to the King,
Queen, Church or State of Scotland, or to any particular person of the Scottish
Nation since the Wars began to this day: That I never received any Letter writ
to me, either from the King, or from the Queen, or from the Church or State of
Scotland, or from any particular person of the Scottish Nation since the Wars
began to this day: That I never collected, gave or lent one penny of money,
either to the King, Queen, Church or State of Scotland, or to any particular
person to send into Scotland, to any particular person of the Scottish Nation to
this day. It is true, I confessed though it was not proved, and happily upon
that ground the mistake might rise, I did give money to Massey, but he is of
the English not of the Scottish Nation, and I did write a Letter to him, but he
is of the English not of the Scottish Nation. That for which I here come, is for
moving only for money for him, and for being present when Letters were read
from him and others; and I am so far (though man has condemned me) from
thinking that either God or my own Conscience condemns me for a sin in what I
am condemned for, that God and my own Conscience acquits me; and what I said at
the Bar when I received my Sentence that now is to be executed, I shall say now
upon the Scaffold, That for the things I am condemned, neither does God nor my
own Conscience condemn me.

SECT. X.
The next particular, I am accused to be an Extortioner, and this is in the
mouths, I am loath to name them because I would not show rancor, but I am
charged as if I should be a grievous Extortioner, to receive 30 l. for the loan
of 300. besides 8 l. in the hundred for interest, which in the presence of God,
and of you all, I do declare to you, is a most notorious and an abominable
falsehood. I am accused likewise to be an Adulterer: and that this Report it is
not in the mouths of mean men, but in the mouths of those that sit at stern, as
if I were a debauched person, and were guilty of uncleanness. Now I tell you
through the grace of God, as Luther said of himself in another case, That he
was not tempted to Covetousness, through the grace of God I can say, I was not
tempted in all my life to uncleanness. It does not much grieve me though these
slanders lie upon me: I know my betters have been worse accused before me.
Athanasius he was accused by two harlets that he had committed folly with them,
and yet the man was chaste and innocent. Beza was charged not only of
Drunkenness, but of Lasciviousness also, and many others have been accused with
the same, if not worse slanders then I have been.

SECT. XI.
But that which goes nearest my heart, I am accused to be a Murderer also, and
this is a Charge high indeed; I am charged with the guilt of all the Blood of
Scotland, whereas if I did lie under the guilt of one drop of blood, I could
not look upon you with so cheerful a Countenance, and I could not be filled
with so peaceable a Heart and Conscience as I am at this day, I bless my God I
am free from the blood of all: indeed those who lay this to my charge, they do
to me as Nero did to the Christians, he put Rome on fire, and then charged the
Christians with it: so they put England and Scotland into a flame, and yet
charge me with the guilt of that Blood, who have poured tears to God night and
day to quench the burning which some men's Ambition and Lusts have kindled. I
would fain know of any man what act it is I have done, what was it was proved
in the High Court against me to make me guilty of Scotland's blood? Did I ever
invite the Scots to invade England? what man did lay that to my charge? Did I
ever encourage our English Army to invade Scotland? what action is it that I
have done that makes me guilty of the blood? Indeed this I have done, and this
I own, and this I stand to; I have as a private man prayed unto God many a day,
and kept many a Fast, wherein I have sought God, that there might be an
Agreement between the King and the Scots upon the interest of Religion, and the
terms of the Covenant. Now by what consequence can this be strained to charge
me with Scotland's blood? For my part, I was but only at one Meeting where
that Question was proposed (Fasts only excepted) what should be thought fit to
be done to promote the Agreement between the King and the Scots, and that was
moved in my house, and to that end when there were some things there produced
which they called a Commission and Instructions to send to Holland; as soon as
ever I heard them, I did declare against them: I did declare that private
persons, it was an act of high presumption for private persons to
commissionate, and an act of notorious falsehood to say, it was in the Name of
the Presbyterian Party, when none knew of it as I know, but only those few
that were then present. Now this is only a politic Engine to make the
Presbyterian Party odious, who are the best friends to a wellordered Government
of any sort of people in the world.

SECT. XII.
I am accused likewise to be a man of a turbulent spirit, to be an enemy to the
Peace and Quiet of the Nation. Now to this I would be judged, let my
Congregational and my Domestical Relations judge for me, whether I am not a man
that would fain have lived quiet in the Land: I am, as Jeremy was, born a man
of contention, not actively, I contend, I strive with none, but passively, many
strive and contend with me; God is my witness, my judgment has put me upon
endeavors after all honorable and just ways, for peace and love among the
godly. The grief of my heart has been for the Division, and the desire of my
soul for a Union amongst Gods People. And when I speak of a union, I would not
be misunderstood: I do not mean a State-union to engage to the present Power,
that is against my Principle, that is to say, a Confederacy with them that say
a Confederacy, that is rather a Combination then a Gospel-union. Those who have
gotten Power into their hands by Policy, and use it by Cruelty, they will lose
it with Ignominy.

Sher. Titchhurn. Sir, be modest: I am not able to endure this, indeed I am not.


Love. Sir, I shall look God in the face with what I say. (Beloved) I am afraid
of your Union which I plead for, to wit, a Church-union (I am stopped in many
things) a Church union, to wit, love among the Godly. This is it the desires of
my soul have been ever for, that those that fear God might walk hand in hand in
the fellowship of the Gospel, both in truth and love: if this Union be not, I
am afraid through our divisions a company of loose Libertines will rise, who
will endeavor not only to overthrow Doctrines of Faith and Religion and Manners
(but then correcting himself, he said) Doctrines of Faith and the power of
Godliness, but even good Manners also. I remember an observation of Holy
Greenham, giving his judgment upon the State of England, he said thus, There
is a great fear of Popery coming into England; I fear that too; but I fear more
the coming of Atheism into England, then the coming in of Popery; and truly
that is my fear also. Thus as to my practices.


SECT. XIII.
A word now as to my Principles.

I am accused to be an Apostate, to be a Turn-coat, to be this, to be that, to
be any thing, but what I am. In the General I will tell you, That I bless my
God, an High Court, a long Sword, a bloody Scaffold, has not made me in the
least to alter my Principles, or to wrong my Conscience. And that I might
discover to you my Principles, I hope I shall do it with freedom; I will
iritate and provoke none; what I shall say, shall not be an iritation, or
provocation of others, (at least not intended by me) but only as a genuine and
clear Manifestation of my Principles how they stand.

First, Then my Principles; As to Civil and Religious Affairs, I declare, That
I die with my Judgment set against Malignity, I do hate both name and thing; I
still retain as vehement a detestation of a Malignant Interest, as ever I did;
yet I would not be misunderstood: I do not count the Godly party, our
Covenanting Brethren in Scotland, I do not count them a Malignant party; nor
their defending their Nation, and Title to their King, to be a Malignant
Interest, but an honest and a justifiable Cause.

SECT. XIV.
Secondly, I am of this Judgment (though I am against Malignity) yet I am not
against, but for, a Regulated Monarchy; a mixed Monarchy, as ours was, I judge
to be one of the best Governments in the world: I did (it is true) oppose in my
Place and Calling, the Forces of the late King, and were he alive again, and
should I live longer, the Cause being as then it was, I should oppose him
longer. I did oppose his Forces, but never was against the Office: I do as much
hate Court Parasites, who would screw up Monarchy into Tyranny, as those who
pull it down to bring in Anarchy: I was never.

Thirdly, I was never for putting the King to death, whose Person I did promise
in my Covenant to preserve. It is true, I did in my Place and Calling, oppose
his Forces, but I did never endeavor to destroy his Person. There is a scandal
raised of me, That in a Sermon at Windsor I should have these words, [That it
would never be well with England, till the King were let blood upon the
Neck-Vein] Which in the presence of God, and of you all, I never spoke such
words, as relating to him, though my judgment then was, and still is, for
bringing Malignants, who did seduce him and draw him from the Parliament, to
condign punishment. I deem it an ill way to cure the Body Politic, by cutting
off the Political Head.

SECT. XV.
Fourthly, I die with my Judgment not satisfied to take the Engagement, I pray
God forgive them that impose it, and subscribe it, and preserve those that
refuse it.

I would not (in the next place) be looked upon (now I am a dying man) I would
not be looked upon as a man owning this present Government, I die with my
Judgment against it. It is true, in a Case of Life, I did Petition the present
Power, and did give them the Titles they take to themselves, and other men give
them; but herein I did not wrong, nor cross my Principles: There are many
Instances in the Scripture to justify this; Hushai did give the Title to
Absolon, though Absolon had no right to the Title: David was the lawful King,
and David himself gave him the Title as well as Hushai: And Calvin he gave a
Title to the French King, calling him Rex Christianissimus, The most Christian
King; yet he knew he was a Papist: And we gave a Title to King Henry the
eighth, to call him, The Defender of the Faith; and yet he had no right to the
Title; he was an Opposer, not a Defender of the Faith: The Title was given him
upon an evil ground, because he opposed the Faith; he opposed the Doctrine of
Luther, and therefore the Pope gave him that Title [The Defender of the Faith]
and yet none did scruple to give him the Title that was then commonly given him.

SECT. XVI.
In the next place, I discover my Judgment; I provoke none, only tell you
what my own thoughts are, That so after I am dead and gone, I might not be
belied; for I dare not now belly my Principles: My Judgment is against the
Invasion of the Scottish Nation by our English Army: They who gave us a friendly
Assistance, who were joined with us in the same Covenant, who drew a Sword with
us in the same Quarrel; should I live a thousand years, I should never draw a
Sword against them in all my life. Scotland may say as it was said of Edom, The
men of my Confederacy that were at Peace with me, have risen up against me,
deceived me and prevailed against me. Because Scotland will not be a
Commonwealth, they shall not be a people; because they will not break
Covenants, some men would have them broken; because they will not lay their
Consciences waste, their Land must be laid waste.

Lastly, And so I have done, only with a word of Exhortation. I die cleaving
to all those Oaths, Vows, Covenants and Protestations, that were imposed by the
Two Houses of Parliament, as owning them, and dying with my Judgment for them:
The Vow and Covenant, The Protestation, The Solemn League and Covenant: And
this I tell you all, I had rather die a Covenant keeper, then live a Covenant
breaker.

SECT. XVII.
I have only, now I am come to the third and last part of my Speech, and so I
shall have done, and commit my Soul unto God who gave it, My Exhortation, it
shall be to this great City; unto the Godly Ministry of it, and unto my own
Congregation, from whom death has parted me, which nothing else could.

To the City, I wish an affluence and a confluence of all Blessings upon it;
and yet I fear gray hairs, as the Symptoms of a Declension, are here and there
upon it; yet she knows it not. O London, London! God is staining the pride of
all thy Glory; thy Glory is flying away like a Bird; contempt of the Ministry;
opposition against Reformation; general Apostasy; Covenant breaking has
brought London low, and I fear will bring it lower: I tremble to think what
evils are coming upon it. This City, it is the Receptacle of all Errors, That
as your Commodities have been vented and spread from hence into every corner of
the Land, so has Heresies and Blasphemies had their first rise from this great
and populous City, and spread into all the Country.

SECT. XVIII.
To the Inhabitants of this City, I commend but these few Particulars.

First, Let me beg you to love your painful and your godly Ministers, if they
be taken away, you are like to have worse come in their rooms: I know the
Presbyterian Ministers are the great eyesore, who have formerly been counted
the Chariots, and the Horsemen of Israel. But I will say to London, as was said
to Leyden, That after Junius was taken away (an Orthodox Minister) Arminius
that pestilent Heretic came in his room; if your godly Ministers (as there are
ten already at one blow taken from you) if they be taken away, Arminians,
Anabaptists, nay Jesuits are like to supply their rooms, if God in mercy
prevent not.

Secondly, Submit your selves to Church Government, that would lay a curb and
restraint upon your lusts, it is a golden, and an easy yoke, to which if you
do not submit, God may lay an heavier, an iron yoke upon your necks.

SECT. XIX.
Thirdly, Take heed of those Doctrines that come under the Notion of New
Lights; I have judged that those Doctrines you ought to suspect whether they be
true, when the brocher of them says it is New; for Truth, it is as old as the
Bible: A remarkable passage I would suggest unto you, in Deuteronomy. 32. it is said
there, They chose them new gods, that were newly sprung up; what were these new
gods? the next words tell you, they were old devils, they sacrificed to devils,
not to God: Now their Sacrificing to the old Devil, it was called a Sacrificing
(to deceive the People) to new gods that were newly come up; new gods, they
were but the old devils: So I say of many of those things that go under the
notion of New Lights, it is but old darkness, old Heresies raked out of the
Dunghill, which were buried in former ages in the Church, with contempt and
reproach many hundred years ago. Again,

SECT. XX.
Fourthly, Bewail your great loss that you have in the taking away of so many
Ministers out of your City: there are ten Ministers (if I mistake not) that are
taken away and removed in one blow; those who were burning and shining Lights
in their several Candlesticks, and bright Stars in their several Orbs; though I
am not worthy of the world, therefore I am taken out of it; yet as for my
suffering Brethren who are now in Bonds and Banishment, the world is not worthy
of them.

Again, in the next place, take heed how you be forward in engaging in a War
with your godly Brethren in the Scottish Nation; for my part, I have opposed the
Tyranny of a King, but I never opposed the Title: take heed what you do.

SECT. XXI.
I have something in the next place to speak to the godly Ministry of this
City, were it not that I were a dying man, I would not speak to such reverend
and grave men; I would, as Elihu being but a young man, I would say, Multitudes
of years should teach wisdom, and I would hold my tongue; but the words of a
dying man take, whether they be discreet or no, or so well ordered and managed
or no; for them, I would first desire God to show them mercy, they that have
begged for mercy for me at the day of my death, I will beg but this of them,
That as they have not been ashamed of my Chain, so they would now wax confident
by my Bonds and by my Blood; I know they are maligned and threatened, yet my
Prayer is for them, that in Acts 4. 29. Now Lord, behold their threatenings, and
grant that thy Servants may Preach thy word with all boldness: Though I am but
young, yet I will offer my young experience to my grave Fathers and Brethren, and
that is this; Now I am to dye, I have abundant peace in my own Conscience, that
I have set my self against the Sins and Apostacies of this present Age: It is
true, my faithfulness has procured me ill will from men, but it has purchased
me peace with God, I have lived in peace, and I shall dye in peace: That which
I have to beseech of the Ministers, is this, To beg them to keep up
Church Government: Whatsoever God does with the Governments of the world,
turning Kingdoms upside down, yet the Government of the Church will stand; And
of all Governments, I dye with this persuasion, That the Presbyterial
Government makes most for Purity and Unity throughout the Churches of the
Saints: I would beg them therefore to keep up Church Government; That they
would not let their Elderships fall; That they would take heed of too general
Admissions to the Lord's Supper; That they be not too prodigal of the Blood of
Christ, by too general Admissions of men to partake of the Supper, that Sealing
Ordinance: And now I am speaking to them, I shall speak a word of them, and so
I have done.

SECT. XXII.
I have heard many clamors since I came to Prison, as if that Plot (which it is
called) that I am condemned for, as if all the City Ministers they were engaged
in this Design, which as a dying man I tell you, That all the Ministers that
were present at the meeting, and had a hand in that business for which I am to
be put to death, all those Ministers, they are either in Prison, or they are
discovered already; and therefore, I do here upon my death free the Ministers
of the City, That those who are not yet in trouble, nor discovered to the
Committee of Examinations, none of them had a hand in that business in which I
was engaged, in which my conscience does tell me I have not sinned.

SECT. XXIII.
I have now (I have done immediately, for I would fain be at my Fathers house)
but a word to speak to my own Congregation, and I do return praises unto God,
and thanksgiving unto him, for the love I have had from them; I found them a
solid and a judicious people, and many of them Religious: The Ministry of that
learned man Mr. Anthony Burges did much good amongst them, though I have cause
to be humbled, my weak Ministry did but little; they afforded me a great deal
of love, and a liberal maintenance: And this is all I desire of them, That they
would choose a godly, learned, and an Orthodox Minister to succeed; it would be
a great comfort to me before I go to Heaven, if I had this persuasion, that a
learned, Orthodox, godly man should fill that Pulpit. And for encouragement to
any godly Minister, whose lot it shall be to succeed me, I will say this to
him, That he will have as comfortable a livelihood, and as loving a people, as
any people in London, a few only excepted;) I had as much satisfaction amongst
them, as ever I had in any condition in all my life, and should never have
parted from them, had not now death parted us, to which I do submit with all
Christian meekness and cheerfulness.

SECT. XXIV.
I am now drawing to an end of my ^peech, and to an end of my life together:
But before I do expire my last breath, I shall desire to justify God, and to
condemn my self. Here I come to that which you call an untimely end, and a
shameful death; but blessed be God, it is my glory, and it is my comfort; I
shall justify God; he is righteous, because I have sinned; he is righteous,
though he does cut me off in the midst of my days, and in the midst of my
Ministry. I cannot complain that Complaint in the Psalmist, in the 44 Psalm,
Thou sellest thy people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their
price. My blood it shall not be spilt for naught; I may do more good by my
death, then by my life, and glorify God more in dying upon a Scaffold, then if
I had dyed of a Disease upon my bed. I bless my God I have not the least
trouble upon my spirit; but I dye with as much quietness of mind, lie down I
hope I shall upon the Block, as if I were going to lie down upon my Bed to take
my rest. I see men hunger after my flesh, and thirst after my blood, which will
hasten my happiness, and their ruin, and greaten their guilt: For though I am
a man of an obscure Family, of mean Parentage, so that my blood is not as the
blood of Nobles; yet I will say, mine is a Christians blood, a Ministers blood,
yea it is innocent blood also: My blood, my body, my dead body, it will be a
morsel which I believe will hardly be digested, and my blood it will be bad
food for this Infant Commonwealth (as Mr Prideaux called it) for this Infant
Commonwealth to suck on: Mine is not Malignant blood, though here I am brought
as a grievous and a notorious Offender.

SECT. XXV.
Now Beloved, I shall not only justify God (as I do without a Complement,) for
he is very Just, that my Prison was not my Hell, that this Scaffold is not the
bottomless pit, I have deserved both, I have deserved it: I do not only
justify God, but I desire this day to magnify God, to magnify the riches of
his glorious grace, that such a one as I, born in an obscure Country in Wales,
of obscure Parents, that God should look upon me, and single me out from among
all my kindred, single me out to be an Object of his everlasting Love; that when
for the first fourteen years of my life I never heard a Sermon, and yet in the
fifteenth year of my life, God through his grace did convert me: And I here
speak it without vanity (what should a dying man be proud of?) for these twenty
years, though I am accused of many scandalous evils, I speak it to the praise
and glory of my God, for these twenty years God has kept me, I have not fallen
into a scandalous sin; I have labored to keep a good Conscience from my youth
up: I magnify his grace, that he has not only made me a Christian, but made
me a Minister, judged me faithful, and put me into the Ministry; and though the
Office be trodden upon, and be disgraced, yet it is my glory, that I dye a
despised Minister: I had rather be a Preacher in a Pulpit, then a Prince upon a
Throne; I had rather be an Instrument to bring Souls to Heaven, then to have
all the Nations to bring in tribute to me. I am not only a Christian, and a
Preacher, but, what ever men judge me, I am a Martyr too, I speak it without
vanity: Would I have renounced my Covenant, and debauched my Conscience, and
ventured my Soul, there might have been more hopes of saving my life, that I
should not have come to this place: but blessed be my God, I have made the best
choice, I have chose affliction rather then Sin; and therefore welcome
Scaffold, and welcome Ax, and welcome Death, welcome Block, welcome all,
because it will send me to my Fathers House.

SECT. XXVI.
I have great cause to magnify Gods Grace, that he has stood by me during my
imprisonment: It has been a time of no little temptation to me; and yet,
blessed be his grace, he has strengthened, and stood by me: I magnify his
grace, that though now I come to dye a violent death, yet that death is not a
terror to me; through the blood of sprinkling the fear of Death is taken out of
my heart: God is not a terror to me, therefore Death is not dreadful to me. I
bless my God (I speak it without vanity) I have formerly had more fear in the
drawing of a tooth, then now I have in the cutting off my Head. I was for some
years, five or six, under a spirit of bondage, and did fear Death exceedingly;
but then when the fear of Death was upon me, Death was not near me: but now
Death is near me, (blessed be my Savior) he has the sting of Death in his own
sides, and so makes the grave a bed of rest to me; and makes Death, the last
Enemy, to be a friend, though he be a grim friend. I bless God further, that
though I am to be cast out of the world; I bless my God, though men judge me to
be cast out of the world; yet that God has not cast me out of the hearts and
prayers of his people. I had rather be cast out of the world, then be cast out
of the heart of any godly man. Some think me (it is true) not worthy to live,
and yet others judge, I do not deserve to dye; but God will judge all men, I will
judge none.

SECT. XXVII.
I have now done; I have no more to say, but to desire the help of all your
prayers, that God would give me the continuance and supply of divine grace to
carry me through this great work that I am now to do; That I, who am to do a
work I never did, I may have a strength that I never had; That I may put off
this Body with as much quietness and comfort of mind, as ever I put off my
clothes to go to bed. And now I am to commend my Soul to God, and to receive my
fatal blow: I am comforted in this, though men kill me, they cannot damn me;
and though they thrust me out of the world, yet they cannot shut me out of
Heaven. I am now going to my long home, and you are going to your short homes:
but I will tell you, I shall be at home before you; I shall be at Heaven, my
Fathers house, before you will be at your own Houses. Now I am going to the
Heavenly Jerusalem, to the innumerable company of Angels, to Jesus Christ the
Mediator of the new Covenant, to the spirits of all men made perfect, to God
the judge of all; in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right
hand there are pleasures for evermore.

I shall conclude.

But then Mr Sheriff Tichburn telling him, that the words were, the spirits of
just men made perfect.

Love. He then corrected himself, saying, To the spirits of just men made
perfect, and to God the Judge of all; in whose presence there is fullness of joy,
and in whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

SECT. XXVIII.
I conclude with that speech of the Apostle: I am now (in 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7. I am
now) to be offered up, and the time of my departure is at hand; but I have
finished my course, I have kept the Faith; Henceforth there is a crown of
righteousness laid up for me; and not for me only, but for all them that love
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; through whose blood (when I have shed
my blood) I expect Salvation, and remission of sins. And so the Lord bless you
all.

Then turning to Mr Sheriff, he said;

May I pray?

Sheriff Tichburn. Yes: but consider the time.


Love. I have done Sir.


Then turning to the people, he said; Beloved, I will but pray a little while
with you, to commend my Soul to God, and I have done.

Then Mr Ash told him:

Mr Ash. The House is risen, and therefore --


Love. To which Mr Love answered, I, I, Sir.


After which he prayed with an audible voice, saying,

SECT. XXIX. Mr Love's Prayer.
MOst Glorious and Eternal Majesty, Thou art righteous and holy in all thou
do to the sons of men; though thou have suffered men to condemn thy servant,
thy servant will not condemn thee; He justifies thee, though thou cuttest him
off in the midst of his days, and in the midst of his Ministry; blessing thy
glorious Name, that though his name be taken away from the Land of the Living,
that yet he is not blotted out of the Book of the Living. Father, my hour is
come; thy poor creature can say without vanity and falsehood, he has desired to
glorify thee upon Earth; glorify thou now him in Heaven. He has desired to
bring the Souls of other men to Heaven; let his Soul be brought to Heaven. O
thou blessed God, whom thy Creature has served, who has made thee his hope,
and his confidence from his youth; forsake him not, now he is drawing nigh to
thee; now he is in the valley of the shadow of death, Lord be thou life to him;
smile thou upon him, while men frown on him. Lord, thou have settled this
persuasion in his heart, That as soon as ever the blow is given, to divide his
Head from his Body, he shall be united to his Head in Heaven. Blessed be God
that thy servant dies in those hopes. Blessed be God, that thou have filled the
soul of thy servant with joy and peace in believing. O Lord, think upon that
poor Brother of mine, that is a companion in tribulation with me, who is this
day to lose his life as well as I: O fill him full of the joy of the Holy
Ghost, when he is to give up the ghost: Lord, strengthen our hearts, that we
may give up the ghost with joy, and not with grief. We entreat thee, O Lord,
think upon thy poor Churches: O that England might live in thy sight; and O
that London might be a faithful City to thee; that righteousness might be
amongst them: that so peace and plenty may be within their walls, and
righteousness within their habitation. Lord, heal the breaches of this poor
Nation. Make England and Scotland as one staff in the Lords hand; that Ephraim
might not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim; but that both might flee upon the
shoulders of the Philistines: that men of the Protestant Religion, engaged in
the same Cause and Covenant, might not delight to spill each others blood, but
might engage against the common Adversaries of our Religion and Liberties. God
show mercy to all that fear him.

SECT. XXX.
Think upon our Covenant-keeping Brethren in the Kingdom of Scotland, keep them
faithful to thee, and let not them that have invaded them overspread their
whole Land: Prevent the shedding of more Christian Blood, if it seem good in
thine eyes. God, show mercy to thy poor Servant who is here now giving up the
ghost. O blessed Jesus, apply thy Blood, not only for my Justification unto
life, but also for my comfort, for the quieting of my Soul, that so I might be
in the joys of Heaven before I come to a possession of Heaven. Hear the prayers
of all thy people that have been made for thy Servant: and though thou have
denied prayer as to the particular request concerning my life, yet let herein
the fruit of prayer be seen, that thou will bear up my heart against the fear
of death. God show mercy to all that fear him: Show mercy to all that have
engaged for the life of thy Servant, let them have mercy at the day of their
appearing before Jesus Christ. Preserve thou a godly Ministry in this Nation,
and restore a godly Ministry, and cause yet good days to be the heritage of thy
people, for the Lords sake. Now Lord into thy hands thy Servant commits his
spirit: And though he may not with Steven see the Heavens opened, let him have
the Heavens opened; and though he may not see upon a Scaffold the Son of God
standing at the right hand of God, yet let him come to the glorified Body of
Jesus Christ, and this hour have an intellectual sight of the glorified Body of
his Savior. Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and Lord Jesus stand by me thy dying
Servant, who has endeavored in his life time to stand for thee. Lord hear,
pardon all his infirmities, wipe away his iniquities by the blood of Christ,
wipe off reproaches from his name, wipe off guilt from his person, and receive
him pure, and spotless, and blameless before thee in love: And all this we beg
for the sake of Jesus Christ. Amen and Amen.

SECT. XXXI.
Mr Ash. You make a Christian end I hope.


Mr Love. I, I, bless God.


Then turning to Mr Sheriff Tichburn, said, I thank you for this kindness; Sir,
you have expressed a great deal of kindness to me: Well, I go from a Block to
the bosom of my Savior.

Then he asked, Where is the Executioner?

When the Executioner came forward, he said, Art thou the Officer?

Executioner. Yes.


Love. Then lifting up his eyes, he said, O blessed Jesus, that has kept me
from the hurt of death, and from the fear of death. O blessed be God, blessed
be God.


And taking his leave of the Ministers, he said;

Love. The Lord be with you all.


And taking leave of Sheriff Tichburn, he kissed his hand.

Then he kneeled down, and made a short prayer privately.

Then after rising up, he said, Blessed be God, I am full of joy and peace in
believing; I lie down with a world of comfort, as if I were to lie down in my
Bed. My Bed is but a short sleep, and this Death is a long sleep, where I shall
rest in Abraham's bosom, and in the embraces of the Lord Jesus.

And then saying, The Lord bless you, he laid himself down upon the Scaffold,
with his Head ove the Block: And when he stretched forth his hands, the
Executioner cut off his Head at one blow.

THE PREFACE Briefly declaring the occasion of the ANIMADVERSIONS.
THe Roman Orator commends it as the property of a good Orator, not only to
speak things pertinent and proper to his Cause for the promoting it, but also
to take heed of speaking any thing that may prove prejudicial to it. The great
cause which Mr. Love both in his life and at his death (at least as himself
insinuates over and over in his Discourse ensuing) desired above all things to
plead and promote, was the cause of Jesus Christ, and the salvation of the
Souls of men. Now though I can easily believe that he spoke and taught many
things in the time of his life, and some things at the time of his death, which
were and are of very good consequence toward the advancement of this Cause;
yet I clearly find him, partly by what I read in the words uttered by him upon
the Scaffold immediately before his death, partly by what I have seen printed
and published formerly, either in his Name, or with his approbation and
consent, partly also by what I have heard from some of his Sermons; that he was
very defective in the property of a good Orator mentioned, and that he was apt
to speak, not only things very impertinent and eccentrical to his Cause, but
even such things also (sometimes) which were of a manifest inconsistency with
the Interest of it. I shall (at present) only give notice of such Passages or
Touches, which came from him in his Speech or Prayer on the Scaffold, which are
of a very prejudicial import to that most honorable Cause of Jesus Christ, and
the Salvation of men, to the promotion and maintenance whereof he professes
himself to have been so entirely devoted: that so what he acted or spoke as a
skilful Workman, and was truly and really advantageous to his Cause, may have a
clear, entire and perfect operation in order hereunto, and not be encumbered,
foiled or impeded in their working by things of a contrary tendency and spirit
mixed with it. In this respect I trust his Friends will find no cause (I am
sure will find no just cause) of offense in that separation of the vile from
the precious, which is intended in these Animadversions; especially
considering, that if Mr. Love himself were alive, with that Christian ingenuity
whereunto he pretends once and again in this Discourse, he could not but accept
it as a Service of love and faithfulness, for any man to strengthen those
things which are worthy and good in him, by disabling and weakening that which
is otherwise: However, it is not meet nor of any good consistence with those
sacred Respects which are due from every man unto mankind, to tempt the living
unto folly, by giving honor unto the dead. Better it is that Mr. Love's
reputation should be a little clouded, then that it should glare in the weak
eyes of men to make them blind: As for men of clear intellectuals and composed
judgments, Mr. Loves Speech might without the least danger of tempting them,
have been presented naked; there being nothing in it but what is transparent
enough to such men: Only persons of effeminate and enslaved apprehensions may
possibly conceit, that they see visions of worth and excellence, where there is
nothing but darkness and deceit, and so may receive dangerous impressions from
what they think they see, if their eyes be not anointed with some eye salve of
such an interpretation, which shall bring forth that which is within the veyl,
into the outer and open Court of the Temple.

ANIMADVERSION upon Sect. I.
IN this first Section, we have a first fruits of Mr. Love's Confidence in his
death, together with a taste of that pleasant Fancy, on which (it seems) he fed
with much contentment whilst he yet lived; viz. how honorable that Death which
he was now to suffer would be unto him, as wherein he should parallel those
great Worthies of heaven, John the Baptist, Paul, and the Saints beheaded in
the Revelation. Far be it from me to envy either Mr. Love's or any other man's
confidence in their death. The great Desire and grand Design of my Soul is, to
consult (with the utmost of my endeavors) the Confidence of men, yea of all men
without exception, in, and at their death. But though I envy no man's confidence
in death, yet I confess I pity the confidence of many at such a time; yea I
pity many surviving, fearing lest the confidence of some dying, should prove a
snare of death unto them. Mr. Love's confidence upon the Scaffold my soul
pitieth, having so many and such pregnant grounds of Reason in mine eyes to
judge it, if not hollow and heartless, yet bottomless and groundless; Yet I
confess I pity those more, who through ignorance of their grounds, live under
much danger of being ensnared and hardened in evil, by occasion of the said
confidence: For when evil doers (especially the firstborn of this generation,
Traitors) shall without repentance, and this some ways professed, die full of
confidence in God, whether real or pretended, it is a sore temptation upon men,
not to be so tender or fearful of such practices, as the hatred and high
displeasure of God against them, admonishes them to be. Therefore, for the
sakes of such persons who are in danger of being made confident in evil by Mr.
Love's confidence at his death, I shall brief^y account unto them the grounds
of my great jealousy and fear, that this confidence was (as the Apostle
speaks) in the face only, and not in the heart; or if in the heart, yet
without any substantial or sufficient ground for the raising of it.

1. The holy Ghost himself mustereth Traitors, Heady, High-minded, persons
without natural affection, amongst such men who have [i. e. sometimes have, or
may have] the Form of Godliness, and yet deny the power thereof. Now though Mr.
Love and his Abettors in their equivocal Dialect, wherein like Canters, they
use common and familiar words in uncouth and unknown significations, will not
(it is like) call men of his [Mr. Love's] practices and ways, either Traitors,
Heady, High-minded, without natural affection, etc. yet in the ordinary and
best known signification of these terms, and in the sense wherein the holy
Ghost uses them (unless they will quarrel our English Translation) he was both
Traitor, Heady, etc. and so looked upon and adjudged, by persons who are not
wont to pervert or wrest words into by-significations to make the innocent
guilty. I do not speak now of the Parliament, Council of State, or High Court
of Justice only, but of all sorts of persons in the Land, who have not either
their hand or their heart in Mr. Love's counsels and practices. I mention those
whom the Apostle terms (...), without natural affection, in reference to Mr.
Love, because it was the observation of some who were present at his Execution
from first to last, that though he prayed for his fellow-Traitor and the Scots,
not only the professed, but highly expressed Enemies of his Country and Nation,
yet he made not the least mention either of his wife or children, either in his
Prayer or Discourse. Now if Mr. Love at his death was no better then a person
having the Form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, there was no good
ground for that his confident rejoicing therein.

2. The Lord Christ says expressly, That if we forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will our Heavenly Father forgive us our trespasses. Now
though Mr. Love pretends fairness and clearness of spirit in this kind again
and again, and that he brought no rancor or revengefulness of heart to the
Scaffold; yet that he was inwardly full of this rottenness, his most venomous,
virulent, false and bitter Insinuations against the Parliament and State,
uttered upon the Scaffold, testify to the face of his greatest Advocates: See
especially upon this account Sect. 12 where you will find him so
unchristianly, and with such insufferable rancor and malice inveighing against
the State, that one of the present Magistrates, acknowledged by Mr. Love
himself (and not without cause) a good Friend of his, openly professed that he
was not able to endure it. Now if Mr. Love died upon such terms, that his
Heavenly Father could not, according to his expressly declared will, forgive him
his trespasses, certainly he could have no sufficient ground for that
confidence which he expressed at his death.

3. We read in Scripture of many confidences and rejoycings in men, and these
Professors, without sufficiency of ground to justify or bear them out. Paul
speaks of some who gloried (...), in the face, or in appearance, not in the
heart. And our Savior himself speaks of many, who (as he says) will say unto
him [i. e. think at present that they may with confidence say unto him] in that
[great] day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name
cast out devils? and in thy Name done many wonderful works? To whom
notwithstanding he will reply and profess, that he never knew them: Depart from
me ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7. 22, 23.

4. Mr. Love did not, could not at his death out-confidence the ordinary sort
of Papists, Priests and Jesuits amongst us, that have from time to time drunk
of the same cup with him (as well as John Baptist or Paul) and upon the same
account, in which particular John Baptist and Paul separate from him (as we
shall see presently) and leave him in the company of those other.

5. It is no very hard matter for a man strongly acted and assisted by a spirit
of popularity (a spirit with which Mr. Love has been observed by many to have
been one spirit or flesh rather, for many years past) to harden himself against
the fear of Death; to suppress, smother and keep under those workings of Nature
and Conscience, which ordinarily discover themselves upon the approaches of
Death, in such persons who have no design to drive by the smothering or
suppressing of them; nor any collateral help or aid from any such spirit, to
enable them to the subduing and vanquishing of them.

6. Mr. Love (it is more then probable) was not only vehemently exhorted,
encouraged, importuned, but even solemnly by all the sacred Interests of high
Presbytery, conjured by his Clergy-companions, to die like a valiant and
resolute Champion of the Cause, and not to bewray the least grudging of any
fear or repentance, for any thing he had acted upon the service thereof; lest
it should be said of Presbytery, Her glory was stained and betrayed by the
cowardice of her firstborn.

Seventhly (and lastly) when I consider these passages in Mr. Love's Prayer,
[Sect. 30.] O blessed Jesus, apply thy blood, not only for my Justification
unto life, but also for the comfort, for the quieting of my Soul, that so I
might be in the joys of Heaven, before, etc. And farther, Hear the Prayers of
all thy people that have been made for thy servant; and though thou have denied
Prayer as to the particular Request concerning my life, yet let herein the
fruit of prayer be seen, that thou will bear up my heart against the fear of
death; When (I say) I seriously consider the express import of these passages,
they raise this apprehension in me, (and questionless upon the same terms they
will raise the same in any other man) that Mr. Love's confidence was not at
least as yet (I mean in the entrance and beginning of his Speech) ascended so
high in his heart and soul, as his tongue reported it unto the people. When
Saul was dead, David prayed no more for deliverance from him. And if Christ (as
Mr. Love himself confesses) denied Prayer concerning his life, why might he
not deny it as concerning the quieting of his soul, and the bearing up of his
heart against the fear of Death? And if this be granted, evident it is that Mr
Love did but (...), theatrically act the part of a Confident man upon the
Scaffold.

Several other things there are, which much dis-satisfie me touching the
legitimacy and well-groundedness of Mr Love's rejoicing and confidence at his
death, which I shall not at present (for brevities sake) mention: How matters
stood between God and his Soul at his giving up of the Ghost, is a secret too
hard for my soul to enter into. I had rather hope (as Mr Ash said unto him)
that he made a Christian end: nor do I desire to leave any touch or tincture of
a contrary impression in any man; My whole intent in what has been said
hitherto, is to put that confidence to rebuke which he brought with him to the
Scaffold, not to prove that he died in unbelief.

Concerning that vainglorious and light Conceit, That his Death should turn to
such an high Account of Honor unto him, because John Baptist and Paul glorified
God by the same death, and because he read of Saints to be beheaded, etc. I
shall speak little to it, supposing that it weighs no more then the dust of the
Balance in the Judgment of any considering man. Mr Love well knew, that it is
not poena, but causa, quae facit Martyrem, not the punishment (much less the
kind of punishment) that makes a Martyr; Which makes me a little to marvel
with what face he could say (as afterward we shall hear him saying) That
whatsoever men may judge, yet he died a Martyr. John Baptist was beheaded, not
simply for his Conscience, or for the discharge of his Conscience, but for the
discharge of his Conscience, being honest and good, and rightly informed:
Whereas Mr Love suffered a beheading, if for the discharge of his Conscience
(which I think to considering men must needs be very questionable) yet was it
for the discharge of an erroneous conscience (as his Petitioners themselves
pleaded by way of extenuation of his Crime) yea, indeed of a conscience so
desperate erroneous and corrupt, that the like conscience has scarce been
heard of, no not among the Heathen themselves (much less among Christians) viz.
That a man stands bound, in stead of being subject to the Powers that are
(which is the express Commandment of God) to destroy or practice the
destruction of these Powers: So that Mr Love's conscience for which (as he
says) he suffered, being truly interpreted, was such a conscience by which he
judged himself bound to act in a Diametral opposition to the plain and express
revealed Will of God; And whether such a conscience as this be a Christian
foundation of Martyrdom, let Mr Love's greatest Friends judge. Concerning Paul
and the Saints spoken of in the Revelation, they were beheaded for the Word of
God, and for the testimony of Jesus; Whereas Mr Love (as himself acknowledged
in his Narrative written with his own hand, and delivered unto the Parliament)
was to suffer beheading (in case he should not obtain pardon from them) for his
sundry and great Offenses; confessing withal, that by what he had done, he was
an object of their just displeasure: and again, that by their justice they
might in one day leave a Flock without a Shepherd a Wife without an Husband,
Children without a Father, etc. Doubtless neither Paul nor the Saints mentioned
by M. Love, were objects of the just displeasure of those who beheaded them;
nor were they beheaded for their sundry and great Offenses, nor yet by the
justice of those who punished them with death. Therefore M. Love being partaker
with Judas in his sin, the cause of his death, can reap no honor for having
John or Paul, or the Saints his companions in the kind of his death: And
indeed, might he not as well (yea and much better, all this duly considered)
have prophesied of shame and dishonor likely to acrue unto him by such a kind
of death, which had been frequently inflicted upon Papists, Priests and Jesuits
for treasonable practices against the State and Supreme Rulers thereof, as
indulge himself with a conceit, That his death must needs become a Crown of
Honor unto him, because John Baptist and the great Apostle Paul died the same
kind of death, though (as the world knows) upon far different occasions?

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 2.
In this Section Mr. Love busieth himself in washing a Blackamoor, hoping by
that time he has done, to make him as white as Snow: That he suffers for the
Word, and Conscience, and not for meddling in State-matters; he proves, 1.
Because it is an old guise of the Devil, to impute the cause of Gods Peoples
Sufferings, to be Contrivements against the State. 2. Because the Rulers of
Israel would have put Jeremy to death upon a Civil account, whereas the true
ground was the truth of his Prophecy, and that this made them angry with him.
3. Because Paul, though he did but preach Christ, yet the people would have him
dye, under a pretense that he a was mover of Sedition. 4. (And lastly) because
himself says, That his Life is pretended to be taken away upon a Civil
account, whereas it is indeed, because he pursues his Covenant, will not
prostitute his Principles, etc. Light and darkness have (in a manner) as much
communion between them, as the three first of these Arguments with his Cause;
For, is any guise of the Devil whatsoever, a Demonstration or proof of Mr.
Loves Innocence, or that he must needs suffer for the Word and Conscience, and
not for Statizing out of his Sphaer? Who is able to find out the Quadrature of
this Circle? Or must Mr. Love needs be innocent of the Crimes charged upon him,
and proved against him; because Jeremy and Paul were innocent from those
Imputations, which without any proof at all were charged upon them? Or must
those Magistrates, who, being persons of known godliness and worth (at least a
great part of them) yea, and Mr. Loves real and cordial Friends (most of them)
upon Trial found Mr. Love guilty, and passed Sentence upon him accordingly;
must these (I say) of necessity be Corrupt, Malicious, Enemies to the Truth and
Word of God, because the Rulers of Israel, with whom Jeremy had to do, and the
people with whom Paul had to do, were of no better Principles or Temper?
Certainly, neither Satan, nor Jeremy, nor Paul, nor their Adversaries, are any
Legal or Rational Compurgators for Mr. Love in his Cause now in Agitation:
Indeed if he, or any Advocate for him, could as substantially prove, as he
confidently asserts, that which follows in the fourth place, viz. That his life
was pretended (I suppose he would rather have said, intended, though neither
would be very proper) to be taken away because he pursues his Covenant, and
will not prostitute his Conscience to the ambition and lusts of men, this would
amount somewhat near to a Proof of his Conclusion: But alas! for him to affirm
such things as these, not only without any sufficient, yea, or tolerable
proof, or color of proof, but even against his own Concessions and Confessions
(in his Narrative specified under the former Section, wherein he pretends over
and over to Ingenuity) proves nothing else, but that either he wants
ingenuity, or the knowledge of his own heart, or both; when he spoke (. 4.)
thus, God is my record, whom I serve in the Spirit, I speak the truth, I lie
not, I do not bring a revengeful heart to the Scaffold this day, etc. I marvel
what the man means by a revengeful Heart, Rancor, bitterness of Spirit,
Animosity, etc. Surely he is a Barbarian unto me, and speaks a Language which I
understand not: To charge Ingenuous and Conscientious men with taking away his
life because he pursues his Covenant, will not prostitute his Principles and
Conscience to the ambition and lusts of men (with much more of like strain, of
which afterward) is in my understanding, as pregnant as express a Symptom of
a revengeful Heart, Rancor, etc. as a person in his condition is lightly
capable of. Can (says Bildad in Job) the Rush grow without mire? Or is it
possible that such virulency and viperousness of words as those, should proceed
from any other Principle, but from an heightened spirit of Rancor, Bitterness
and Revenge? But what Article in Mr. Loves Covenant was it, for his pursuit
whereof his Life was taken from him? Is there, was there any such Article in
this Covenant, by which he stood in conscience bound to trinket with the
declared and professed Enemies of the State and Nation, to attempt the
undermining or disturbing of the present Government here, by Correspondencies
and Communication of Councels with Foreign States? Or was it for any thing
else, but such accursed Practices as these, and that proved against him by many
witnesses, yea, and confessed in his Narrative by himself, that his Life was
taken from him? When I compare those Passages in his Narrative (which he would
it seems have looked upon as a Masterpiece of Ingenuity) wherein he owns the
Justice of the Parliament, confesses himself an Object of their just
displeasure, craves pardon for his sundry and great Offenses, etc. with the
words lately mentioned, and many others of like strain in the sequel of this
Speech, wherein he justifies himself in the highest, makes himself a Saint in
what he had done; a Martyr, in what he should suffer, charge his Judges and
the State with persecuting him for the Word of God; his Conscience, for not
prostituting his Principles and Conscience to their Ambition and Lusts (with
several other expressions of a like Hellish import) I cannot but stand amazed
at the searedness and debauchery of the Conscience of the man, or how it should
ever enter into his heart to think of being honorable in his death, who thus
notoriously and desperately prevaricated with his own former ingenious
Confessions at the time of his death: Either let one or other of his Friends or
Advocates name what Principle it was, one or more; for the non-prostitution
whereof to the ambition and lusts of men, he was adjudged to death, and make it
good, that it was for such a non-prostitution that he was thus adjudged; or
else the world shall have ground in abundance to believe That Mr. Love acted
the part of a most Unchristian Calumniator upon the Scaffold in the very
approaches of death.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 3.
Here we have the second part of the Theatrical flashy flourishes of Mr. Loves
confidence: But strange it is, that such virulent and desperate calumnies as he
had breathed out from his soul in the words immediately preceding, should be
seconded with such confidential raptures and gloryings as these. Is the
exercising of revenge upon his enemies, the rise and bottom of Mr. Loves
confidence in God? Doubtless Mr. Love here sacrificed to an unknown God: But
the copyhold of his confidence has been touched already; whereas he assumeth
unto himself the honor of having been an Instrument in the Church-Pulpit of
bringing others to Heaven, it is well if he stretches not himself beyond his
line. Whether he has brought any to Heaven, or no, I know not, possibly it may
so be: But certain I am, that of later times he has brought many to some
Hellish practices. The several happy changes which here he promises unto
himself, I could with more liberty of Faith have believed might be performed
unto him, had he not so lately made that unhappy change of an humble
Penitentiary and Confessor of his sin, into an haughty and stubborn justifier
of himself, and calumniator of other men. How his Speech upon the Scaffold
should bring glory to God in any other sense, then that wherein (in the
Apostles phrase) The lie of men abounds to his glory, I understand not. I
hear that one who was present at it, openly said, That there was more Divinity
in Canterburies death then his (or words to such an effect;) and that another
having heard the said Speech, brake out in these or the like words: Lord have
mercy upon us, what shall we say, or do, when men will (or dare) tell lies at
their death.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 4.
In this Section we have a most worthy and Christian Profession, as far as the
interest of words can lightly contribute toward it. O that there had been an
heart in the Professor to have given a real account of Truth in this his verbal
Profession. But alas! The same Fountain, though not out of the same hole,
which sends forth these sweet Waters here, sends forth most bitter Waters
elsewhere, as we have tasted in part, and may taste further afterward. Does
Mr. Love think that either God or men, will judge such a man to be free from
all rancor, all bitterness of spirit, a revengeful heart, that he has forgiven
from his heart his worst enemies, etc. Who loves all words that may do them
mischief, who cuts them with his Tongue as with a sharp Razor, who spits out of
his mouth the poison of Aspes in their very Faces, and at the time of his going
out of the world, is more intent and bent in his spirit (as far as a reasonable
estimate can be made) to leave them an inheritance of Hatred, Ignominy,
Trouble, and of all manner of mischiefs, and evil entreaties from the world,
then upon any other design whatsoever? whereas he seems desirous to disparage
his Enemies (as he calls them) in comparison of himself in this, That though
they denied mercy unto him, yet he had begged mercy for them; and though they
would not forgive him, yet he had forgiven them; the truth is, That even this
also is no better then a slander: For upon what ground could he judge, That they
had not as well begged mercy for him, as he for them? Or did they therefore
deny him mercy, or not forgive him, because they executed the Laws of God, with
the execution whereof they were entrusted? I believe they forgave him in such a
sense as he forgave them; and if so, they forgave him much more then he them. I
presume Mr. Love forgave them only such debts as they had contracted by
injuring him, not what they had contracted by sinning against God: If so, then
all that Mr. Love forgave them, amounts to nothing at all; and this by his own
confession (a little before) who acknowledged the Justice of their proceedings
against him: Therefore if they forgave him (as I presume in charity they did)
the debt which he had contracted by injuring them, their forgiveness of him was
much more Christian and worthy then his of them. But the forgiveness of the
debt which he had contracted by sinning against the Laws of God, the just Laws
of the Land (so acknowledged by himself) the peace of the Nation, the lives of
other men, by the non-execution of Justice, he had no reason to expect at their
hands, considering that they are the Ministers of God to take vengeance on them
that do evil, Romans 13. 4.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 5.
If Mr. Love may be his own Judge, nothing capital was sufficiently proved
against him: Allow him his own sense of the words, capital and sufficiently,
and possibly he may be innocent. But the High Court of Justice, though a great
part (I think I might say, the greatest) of the Members of it, were very real
friends to him, and their hearts much set to have helped him out of the briars,
as far as Justice and a good Conscience would give way, were not of Mr. Loves
mind touching his Innocence; yea Mr. Love in his Narrative was not of the same
mind (in this point) with himself here; How he came by so much Innocence
between the time of his exhibiting the said Narrative to the Parliament, and
the time of his coming to the Scaffold, his best Advocate (I suspect) would be
ashamed to declare. Innocence is not contracted by obstinacy, or by the
greatest confidence in denial of the Truth. Mr. Love when he ingenuously (as
himself professed) acknowledged the Justice of the Parliament in their
proceedings against him, did plainly enough confess that the Proof against him,
was not empty, but as high and full as the Charge it self. Those Expressions,
That no witness proved that ever he writ a Letter or directed any man to write
a Letter into Scotland, etc. plainly prove him to have been more cautelous then
chaste: and that he walked all along with his fellows in their unhallowed
practices, under the protection of that Motto, Si non cast, tamen caute. He
that desires to know more particularly how Mr. Love with the rest of his fellow
Trinketers, divided their thoughts and endeavors between doing of mischief on
the one hand, and the keeping themselves out of danger, what mischief soever
they should do on the other hand, may receive satisfaction only by a perusal
of the six and seven pages of a small Discourse lately published under the
title of, A short Plea for the Commonwealth; whereas he affirms, That all
that was sworn against him, was, That he was present when Letters were read,
and that he made a motion to give Money to Massey, is a most shameless and
horrid untruth, as appears by the Depositions of several Witnesses against him.
Captain Potter deposed, That he carried the Letters sent from Bampfield, from
Argile, Loudon, Lothian, Belcarris, and another from a nameless person
(supposed to be Mr. Baily) to Mr. Love to take advice upon them. This Letter
had the letter L endorsed upon it, whereupon this Captain Potter conceived it
to have been intended to Mr. Love, and therefore carried it to him. This
witness further deposed, That Mr. Love himself and Mr. Jaquel read those
Letters that were opened, and opened the others also and read them likewise,
and discoursed of them, and upon advice resolved to do nothing in it (the
business negotiated in these Letters.) This is more then that All, which Mr.
Love affirms was sworn against him. The same witness yet further deposed,
That Mr. Love and Dr. Drake were appointed to draw up a Letter to be sent into
Scotland to Col. Bampfield, and that this Letter was left at his shop, and that
he apprehended that it came from Mr. Love. This is yet more then Mr. Loves All.
Major Robert Huntington (another witness) deposed, That a Question being moved
about a Commission to be sent into Holland to the Lord Willoughby of Parham,
Col. Graves, Massey, and others; what power they had to give or send such a
Commission, Mr. Drake answered, We have the Kings Command for it, and the
Authority of some secluded Parliament men, which I look upon as the Power
beyond that now sitting: Whereupon Mr. Love replied, Come, come, let it go.
This is not simply more, but much more (in import and weightiness of crime)
then what Mr. Love affirms was sworn against him. Instance might be given in
sundry particulars besides these deposed upon Oath against him by other the
Witnesses, whereby Mr. Love may be evicted not to have been so conscientious or
tender of speaking nothing but Truth, as becomes a Minister of the Gospel,
especially at such a time, when he is called immediately to give up an account
of his Stewardship to his great Lord and Master, with whom there is no place
for any man that loves and makes a lie, Revel. 22. 15.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 6.
We heard (. 1.) that M. Love pleased himself much with his Conformity to John
Baptist in the kind of his death (though he was conformable to Judas in the
occasion and cause of his death) here to make his face to shine like the Sun in
the eyes of weak and dim-sighted men; he conforms himself to Christ himself in
his Accusers; although herein also he much forgets himself in calling those
Christ's Accusers, whom the Evangelists call Witnesses. What he affirms that
he may without vanity or falsehood say of his, whether witnesses or accusers, as
far as my Informations, which I judge competent in the case, do extend, he
cannot affirm without both. I never heard of any disagreement between them in
the least about any thing relating to M. Love, much less of any of them
contradicting himself; Nor do I know any sufficient ground to believe that one
of them should in writing pray him to forgive him the wrong he had done him, or
that he told him any such story as he relates; considering first that (. 8.) he
tells an untruth of the same kind, as viz. that on the night before his
Execution, there was an insulting Letter written unto him to tell him, that
after he was dead, there should be something published against him to his
shame: The Letter he speaks of, not having the least touch or savor of any
insultation, nor threatening any thing to be published to his shame after his
death, but was grave and sober, full of love and respects to him, as an
unpartial perusal of it will inform any man, (it being since printed by the
Author upon occasion of such an unchristian aspersion cast upon it by M. Love.
Secondly, that none of his Accusers (as he terms them) or Witnesses, did
testify any thing against him, but what (as far as I understand) they stand by
and own to this hour; no nor any thing (to my best remembrance) that makes more
against him then his own Narrative and Confessions here. Thirdly, Because what
he immediately subjoyns (toward the close of this Section) I have reason in
abundance to believe is absolutely false; as viz. That some of his Witnesses
were terrified, others hired, some fined before they would testify against
him: For though a Fine was pronounced to be imposed on one of them, which after
upon his conformity was omitted, yet it was not before he would, i.e. was
willing to testify against him: For this he freely offered in Court to do
before his Fining: Nor was he fined for refusing to testify against M. Love,
being ready enough (as was said) to do this without fining, but for refusing to
take an Oath according to the Law justly provided in such cases. But for him to
affirm that any of his Witnesses were either terrified, or hired, in order to
the drawing of any Testimony from them against him, was to wrong his Conscience
at such a time, when it most nearly concerned him to have been most tender of
it. He has Friends and Favorers surviving in great numbers, many of them men
of learning and parts, and that know how to inform themselves, of any thing
that is like to make for his Vindication; One or more of these shall do the
office of a friend to his Name and Memory, by engaging themselves to make due
proof of what he here affirms, viz. That some of his Witnesses were
terrified, others, etc. that so the blot and shame of a miscarrying tongue may
not test upon him. Fourthly, Because by reason of his swallowing even Camels of
untruth so frequently and familiarly as he does in this Discourse, I have
ground to be jealous (at least) lest as the conscience of the Jesuit is molded
into this principle, that it is lawful to say or do things otherwise unlawful,
in ordine ad bonum spirituale; so Mr. Love's conscience stood free and large in
him, to speak and do almost any thing in ordine ad bonum Presbyteriale. Fifthly
(and lastly) Because M. Love was rooted to the center of the Earth, and built
up to the midst of Heaven in such a Principle in Divinity, which gives fair
quarter to the foulest practices that are, in the Saints especially, when they
certainly know they shall die presently, viz. that no perpetration of sin and
wickedness whatsoever, can separate those from the love of God in Christ, who
have at any time believed in him.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 7.
I never met with so many senceless and unsavory Contradictions within so small
a compass, as in this Speech: How can Mr. Love say that he will not judge his
Judges, nor yet justify them, when as in the words immediately following, he
must of necessity either do the one or the other: For, if he supposes the
Oath, for the sake whereof his Judges (as he says) cut off his head, to have
been justifiable or lawful, and they by the tenor and band of this Oath stood
bound to do what they did in cutting off his Head, then he clearly justifies
them; if he supposes either the said Oath to have been unlawful, or their Fact
in cutting off his Head to have been besides, or contrary to this Oath, and
that they had no Engagement upon them otherwise to do it, then he judges them.
But the truth is, we can upon no better or more favorable account ease Mr. Love
in the greatest part of things uttered by him in this Speech, then by
conceiving that the words spoken by him, bear a far differing sense and
signification in his understanding, from that which they bear in ours: For,
what is it to judge in our sense of the Word, then to charge with Injustice,
Unrighteousness, acting contrary to the Word or Laws of God? And whither Mr.
Love does not again and again, and seven times over (in this discourse) thus
charge his Judges, I refer to his Friends themselves to judge and determine:
Therefore in the ordinary acception of the word, Judge, when Mr. Love says, he
will not judge his Judges, he speaks besides the Truth: And though here he
refuses to justify them, yet when the Spirit of Ingenuity was upon him (as
himself once and again professes it was, in the Composure of his Narrative) he
did fairly and fully justify them, as we have already heard, and is further
manifest in the Narrative it self Printed herewith. By the way; of how sad and
bleeding a consideration is it, that a man whose heart served him to be
ingenuous in his life, should quench so Christian a Spirit, and suffer himself
to be hardened at the time of his death. Besides, did he not fully justify his
Judges in his last Petition to the Parliament, in these words: He humbly
acknowledges that he has so highly violated the Laws of the Commonwealth, as
that thereby he has rendered himself guilty of the Sentence of death justly
passed on him by the High Court of Justice? The words immediately preceding
these, are of a like import.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 8.
I shall say little upon this Section, having already given notice how untruly
and unchristianly he calls the Letter here specified, an insulting Letter. Yet
to say, that it was written to him for such an end as here he charge it with,
viz. To tell him that after he was dead something should be published against
him, etc. as if this had been either the only or the principal drift of the
Letter, is much more dis-ingenuous. I presume there is no man that shall please
to read this Letter (being since printed) but will acknowledge the drift and
scope of it to have been honorable and Christian, and not unworthy the best and
dearest Friend M. Love had.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 9, 10, 11, 12.
M. Love here instanceth five Aspersions laid upon him in point of practice. As
for those of Extortion and Adultery, I never so much as heard M. Love, and
either of them, named together. I will not say that M. Love prudentially
subjecteth himself to such aspersions, from which he knows he can sufficiently
purge himself. But he that lies under a suspicion of several Crimes, and is
able fully to assert his innocence in respect of any one or more of them, gains
an advantage hereby to make the purgation of himself from the rest the more
creditable. Concerning Murder; neither did I ever hear this formally, or in
the letter of it, laid to his charge; But that in his Communications with the
King of Scots, and other persons of his adherency, declared Enemies to the
State and Government of this Commonwealth, he was eminently and transcendently
a murderer, has been sufficiently proved against him upon oath, by many
witnesses; yea his own Confessions in his Narrative and Petitions do not fall
much short of such a proof. Therefore whereas (. 11.) he traduceth those who
charge him with the guilt of that blood, which has been spilt in the present
Wars between the two Nations; that they do by him as Nero did by the
Christians, etc. (a notion suggested by the same spirit of Revenge unto his
fellow Gibbons also) he deals by them as Potiphar's wife did by her servant
Joseph, who being incontinent her self, accused him of incontinency to his
Lord, because he refused to gratify her lust. M. Love, Mr. Gibbon, and the
rest of their Association being desirous that this State, and those in present
power amongst us, should condescend to their impolitique Principles and Humors,
in admitting the Scottish King to a monarchical Throne over this Nation, and
herein to own a Scotisb Superintendency over them and the Nation; and they
refusing to comport with them in such their lusts and desires, and attempting
by the best, and (indeed) the only means they had to withstand the said King
in his claim to the English Throne, together with the Scottish Nation (his
imperious and proud Abettors in this his Claim) upon this Account, and this
only, Mr. Love and M. Gibbon charge the Blood that has been spilt in the
present Wars between the Nations, upon the State and present Powers amongst us.
Let the world, if there be a part of it yet unbewitched and capable of judging,
give Sentence, in case there be blood spilt between a company of Thieves, and a
like party of harmless Travelers by the way, upon occasion of an Assault made
by the former upon the latter, whether the spilling of this blood be to be
charged upon the latter or the former. Nor let any Advocate either for M. Love
or M. Gibbon, think to justify them in their imputation of the said blood
spilt, upon the State or men in present power, by pretending that they sent an
Army into Scotland, and made war upon the said King and Scottish Nation, before
they attempted any thing against this: For evident it was, and is,
circumstances purporting hostility in that Nation against this, standing as
then they did, that the warlike Preparations and Levies at this time on foot
and hastened in that Nation, sorely threatened and endangered this; So that the
war since breaking out between the two Nations, was not occasioned (or properly
begun) by the English Army sent into Scotland, but by those Levies and
formidable Preparations for War, which the Scottish King and Nation were
advancing with an high hand, before the said English Army came amongst them:
Nor is there the least color or pretext of Reason to think, that in case the
said Army had not entered the Scottish Territories, the War hereby might have
been prevented; because the Scottish Nation was now big with this bloody birth,
ready to cry out and to be delivered, when the said Army entered. All that can
reasonably be imputed to the entrance of the English Army into Scottish
quarters before their entrance into English, is and was, That Scotland by this
means became the Seat of the War, which otherwise England must have been. It is
the opinion and judgment of Civilians (generally) That men may lawfully make
War when they fear, lest themselves should be warred upon. We ought not (says
Albericus Gentilis a learned Civilian in Oxford in Queen Elizabeth's days, we
ought not) to expect present Force: it is more safe if we meet with that which
is future; with much more to this purpose transcribed by M. Prynne in his third
Part of the Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, cap. 14. where a
judicious Reader may receive plenary satisfaction, not simply concerning the
Lawfulness, but also the Necessity of the Parliaments sending an Army into
Scotland, under such circumstances as then ruled. So that it was unworthiness
of spleen and revenge both in M. Love and M. Gibbons (though they be both great
pretenders to meekness and clearness of spirit toward their Adversaries) not
goodness of Conscience that prompted them upon the Scaffold with this
imputation against those whom they call their Adversaries, viz. That they are
the men upon whose heads the blood spilt between the two Nations rests. And
as the high Priest with the chief Priests took it very hainously at the hand of
the Apostles, that they should charge them with the crucifying of Christ; (Ye
have filled Jerusalem, say they, with your Doctrine, and intend to bring this
man's blood upon us:) So do M. Love and his fellows swell with indignation
against those, who entitle them to the late bloodshed between the Nations,
though their title in this kind be as unquestionable, as that of the Priests
to the crucifying of Christ. It cannot upon any tolerable account of Reason be
said, That had not the English Army entered Scotland, no blood between the
Nations had been spilt: but it may upon a very lively and pregnant account be
said, That had not M. Love, M. Gibbons, with the rest of the Conspiracy
tampered the King of Scots into an Agreement with that Nation by solemn
promissory engagement of themselves and their Party in England, to stand by him
upon that condition, and by signifying unto him and his Party their
disaffections to the present Government, this blood had not been shed. And this
I have credibly heard to be the acknowledged soul-perswasion of one of the
greatest and ablest parts amongst the Conspirators. The Conclusion here is,
That both M. Love and M. Gibbon wash their hands from blood with very foul
water, and which defiles them yet more, when they burden their Adversaries (so
called by them) with that guilt which sticks so fast and close unto themselves,
and is the fruit, not of the Ambition and Lusts of their Adversaries, but of
their own.

Whereas in purging himself from the Aspersion of Lying, he says thus, I hope
you will believe a dying man, who dare not look God in the face with a lie in
his mouth, intimating, as if his being ready to die, was a bridle in his lips
to restrain him from lying; the truth is, according to that principle of his
(formerly mentioned) that he, who ever once truly believed, can never by any
sin or wickedness whatsoever lose the love and favor of God; his being ready to
die in conjunction with a persuasion of his Saintship, should rather be a
temptation upon him to lie or commit any other wickedness, then an engagement
upon him to refrain lying: For in case he were in hope of living still in the
world, and should practice lying or any other sin, he had cause to fear, that
though God would not cast him out of his saving Love for such practices, yet he
might, and would severely punish him otherwise. But when a person of such a
principle certainly knows that he shall presently die, he has no ground to
fear any punishment at all from God, for whatsoever he shall now either say or
do, because death (according to the said principle) delivers him for ever out
of his hand. Nor am I free from all Jealousy, but that the Principle I speak
of had some malignant inf^uence upon M. Love's spirit, in many of those
unworthy strains and misdemeanors which proceeded from him at his death.
Whereas he pleads to that particular indictment of lying, insisted upon by
himself, That what he denied before the High Court of Justice, he neither
afterward confessed himself, nor was it proved by others against him; very
possibly, in his equivocal sense of the words, denying, proving and confessing,
that which he pleads may be true: But M. Love, had he been ingenuous when he
was before a Court of Judicature, where the common and known Dialect of the Law
uses to be spoken, and where critical and captious Formalities of speech are
not expected, he should have denied only such things, which according to a
Law-sense of the words used by him, he could truly have denied. Upon these
terms he could neither have denied that he ever wrote Letter to the King,
Queen, Church or State of Scotland; nor yet that he never received any Letter,
etc. Because in the Law-signification of the words, writing Letters, they are
as well said to write Letters, who are either advising or consenting to, or
directing in the writing of them, as they who write them with a Pen: And I
presume, That if any man aspersed Mr. Love with the Crime of Lying, in this
particular, by lying, they meant equivocating, and so used the milder term of
the two in their Charge. But whereas he presently says, That he came [meaning
to die upon the Scaffold] only for moving for money for Massey, and for being
present when Letters were read, etc. How notorious an untruth this is, has
been already showed; where we found Matters of a far higher Nature proved
against him then these: But I cannot but tremble to meet with those words from
his mouth, That for the things I am condemned, neither does God, nor my own
Conscience condemn me; When I compare them with words coming from himself, both
in his Narrative and Petition a few days before; In his Narrative (as was
formerly observed) he acknowledged once and again the Justice of the
Parliament, in their Proceedings against him: In his Third Petition, he
professes himself unfeignedly sorrowful for his violating the Laws of this
Commonwealth: In his Fourth and last, he has these words, The consideration
whereof [speaking of the Grace of the Parliament in his Reprieval] melts the
heart of your Petitioner, and makes him, after a more narrow search into his
heart and ways, more deeply sensible then ever of his sin against God, and more
sorrowful for his High Crimes and Offenses against the Parliament in his late
and great miscarriages, etc. Does not God condemn sin committed against him, as
well in Mr. Love, as in other men? Or was Mr. Love Antinomianized at his death,
holding that God sees no sin in believers? Or however, was Mr. Loves
Conscience so desperately now hardened, as not to condemn him for high Crimes,
and great Miscarriages? If his meaning were, That God had pardoned the sins for
which he was brought to the Scaffold, and in this respect did not condemn him
for them; or that his Conscience, notwithstanding these sins, did not condemn
him for an Hypocrite, nulli fidian, or the like, the words were nothing but a
mere delusion of the people.

When he comes to wash off the aspersion of his being a man of a turbulent
spirit, ( 12.) How notoriously (and indeed senslesly) does he prevaricate with
his Cause in hand, doing like a man that should with an importune confidence
assert his Chastity; and yet immediately commit the crime of Adultery in the
very face of those, before whom he had endeavored such a Vindication of
himself? For who is a man of a turbulent spirit, but he that seeks and sets
himself to divide between Rulers, and those that ought to live in subjection
unto them, by alienating the minds and affections of the one from the other:
Upon which, there must needs follow an interruption and disturbance of the
Political Harmony and Accord in the State and Commonwealth? Or what course can
be taken by any man of a most desperate Consequence, for the firing of the
spirits of People, with Hatred and Revenge against their Governors, then to
accuse them of Usurpation of their Power on the one hand, and with the
Administration of it with Injustice and Cruelty on the other; and withal to
labor to possess the people with a conceit, That God has determined to cast
them out of the possession of their Power with Ignominy and Shame? Or are not
these words of Mr. Loves, Those who have gotten power into their hands by
policy, etc. Words of this import, and conquently of as turbulent an
inspiration, as a tongue set on fire of Hell (as the Apostle speaks) could
lightly utter? Is this Mr. Loves ingenuity, his meekness, his sweetness of
spirit, his forgiving from his heart the worst of his enemies? If this be his
forgiveness, what would his revenge have been? How true is that intelligence
which we have from Solomon, The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel? Whereas
the Cruelties (so called by Mr. Love) of just men, are tender mercies. Neither
can the persons whom he so unchristianly traduceth, by any act whatsoever,
express more Mercy, greater Compassion toward the many Millions of persons in
the Land, then by cutting off evil doers from it by the Sword of Justice, such
especially who defile it with Blood. But with what face could Mr. Love charge
those in Power, to have gotten this power into their hand by policy; if by
policy he means any thing dishonest or dishonorable unto them? Were not those,
who now sit in Parliament, lawfully called to these places of trust by the
people? Or was it any ways dishonest, or dishonorable in them, to keep their
Covenant in bringing the Grand Delinquent and Incendiary of the Land to condign
punishment? Or to dissolve that Government under the intolerable Oppressions
and Vexations whereof the people of the Nation had now groaned these 500 years
and upwards; wanting either the heart or opportunity until now, to break the
yoke of so cruel a bondage? Or was it any policy in them, but what was most
worthy men in those high places of trust, committed unto them by the people;
when they clearly, and by sufficient experience found, That the House of Peers
who had no Parliamentary Interest granted unto them by the people, together
with some of their own Members, daily prevaricating with the common cause, and
real Interest of the people, palpably bent in their Counsels and Actings, to
have kept the Nation under the abomination of that Tyrannical Insolency and
Power, from which it was now in an hopeful way of deliverance: Was it (I say)
any unworthy policy in those now in power, to provide for the Liberties, Peace
and Safety of the people, by discharging the one and the other from those
places of Interest and Power, which gave them the opportunity of practicing
with so high an hand against them.

Whereas they are charged to use their Power with cruelty, this is so
broadfac'd a calumny, that nothing need be said for their vindication from it:
Magistrates are not therefore cruel, because they carry not the sword in vain,
or because, being Ministers of God to take vengeance on evil doers, they fulfill
their Ministry in this kind: Cruelty would be much more truly and justly
chargeable upon them, in case they should carry the sword in vain, and suffer
evil doers, Traitors, Incendiaries, Disturbers of States and Commonwealths,
etc. to pass unpunished: And therefore, unless Mr. Love could either have
produced some better ground for his charge of Cruelty against the State then
his own sufferings, or else have evicted, not only the many evidences brought
against him as an evil doer, but his own confessions also in this behalf, he
had provided much better for his honor and conscience too, by leaving this
charge to be levied by some son of Belial, who has neither honor nor
conscience to pollute.

Whereas he undertakes to Prophecy, That those in Power will lose it with
Ignominy; it is well for them, that as the wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God, so neither does the righteousness of God accomplish the
wrath of man: But upon what account does Mr. Love prophecy this hard
prediction against the State? If God revealed it unto him, certainly it is a
new light, and himself in the sequel of this Speech charge us to take heed of
believing new Lights; it may be because himself had no more, whither wisdom
orgrace, then to lose his Ministry with Ignominy, therefore measuring those in
Power by himself, he conceived that neither would they have any more, then to
lose their Ministry also upon the same terms: But I trust, the persons whom he
ignominiously destroys with his prophecy, will by wisdom and faithfulness
destroy the credit of his prophecy, and preserve themselves in Power with
Honor whilst they live, and leave it with honor to their Successors at their
death: It is most like that Mr. Love adventured his Reputation on this
prophecy, upon a confidence, That his Reputation amongst unworthy persons was
such, that rather then they would suffer him, though dead, to lie under the
disgrace of a false Prophet, themselves would make him a true, by tracing his
steps in seeking to d^^^st them with Ignominy of their Power. The seed which he
had sown, both f^^merly in his life, and now at his death, he conceived was too
spirituous and pregnant to rot under the clod, and that therefore he might be
bold to prophecy the springing up of it after his death.

He does much more prudently, in referring himself to his Congregational and
Domestical Relations, to have it decided by these, whether he was a man of a
turbulent spirit or no: It is very probable that where he might rule the roast,
and umpire in chief, he might be composed and calm enough: Does the wild ass
bray (says Job) when he has grass? or loweth the ox over his fodder? I
believe, that had the State judged it meet to be as condescentious to his
humors and desires, as it is likely the Relations he speaks of were, they
should not have tasted much turbulency of spirit in him, at least against
themselves: If he were alive, I would calmly put this Question to him, Whither
the grief of his heart, which he expresses for the division amongst Gods
people, was occasioned simply by the Division he speaks of, and not rather from
hence, That all the Godly in the land would not so far reverence his judgment,
as to conform and submit to it; I know no man, the desire of whose soul is not
for Union amongst the Godly, upon such terms. I do in part believe him, That
his judgment put him upon endeavors after all honorable and just ways for
peace and love among the Godly; but I believe withal, That his Ambition and
height of spirit put him upon many ways also in this kind unjust and
dishonorable. His Principle (as he calls it) which teaches him to declare
against engaging to the present Power, and to term this A Combination, rather
then a Gospel-Vnion, was affronted by a contrary Principle in him a few days
before; as, viz. when (in his second Petition to the Parliament) he ingageth
himself to preserve the civil peace and welfare of the Commonwealth, and
neither to plot, contrive or design any thing to the hurt of this present
Government: A like engagement (and almost in the very same words) he makes the
second time in his third Petition. In his last Petition, he declares it as his
full resolution, That he will neither Plot, Contrive, or Design any thing
prejudicial to the present Government, but will in his place and calling oppose
any designs whatsoever, whether in this or the Neighbor Nation, that may tend
to the ruin of this Commonwealth. Doubtless, in these promises and engagements
(especially in the last) there is every whit as much comprehended, as can with
reason be imagined to be contained or intended in that Engagement to the State,
at which his Principle is so much offended; so that it is a plain case, that
Mr. Love was as unstable as water in his Principles, and could at pleasure
prostitute them, though not to the ambition or lusts of other men, yet to his
own: His fear of Atheism and Popery coming into England, would be much more
reasonable then yet it is, in case his Design of bringing in the Scottish King
to the English Throne should prosper, it being much more likely that he would
give his power to the Beast, as his Father, and many of his Predecessors had
d^^e before him, then that those in present Power should do it: I shall not
ch^^ge Mr. Love himself with Atheism; but those words spoken by him to the
Sheriff, the occasion considered, Sir, I shall look God in the Face with what I
say, have no enmity at all in them against that horrid impiety.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 13.
In this Section M. Love begins the account of his Principles: Where first he
pretends to bless God for that, which is notoriously untrue (unless he speaks
Parables in plain words, and has a meaning which I know not of) viz. That
neither an High Court, nor a Bloody Scaffold, has made him in the least to
alter his Principles. His Principles now upon the Scaffold differ toto coelo,
from what they were a few days before, unless he then owned Principles that
were not his own (as we lately showed from his own words in his Petitionary
Applications to the Parliament.) And what should alter them, but the Scaffold
he speaks of, is above my Reach or Reason to conceive. If his meaning be, That
his Principles are now, and formerly, the same Geometrically, i. e. Alike
proportioned to his respective Conditions, now, and then; so that as then they
were prudentially fitted to the exigence of his Condition, as then it stood,
and are now fitted with alike Prudence (as he conceived) to his Condition as
now it stands (in a far different posture) I can believe him; But I do not
believe that he had any desire to be understood in this sense by his Auditory,
when he says, That he still retains as vehement a detestation of a Malignant
Interest as ever: Doubtless he does not retain the same notion of Malignancy.
The word is now of a more contracted signification with him, then formerly.
Heretofore they were all Malignants, who assisted the King against the
Parliament; Now, not all they, nor scarce the one half of those who assist him,
are such; but only they that come to his assistance, not having on a
Presbyterian Garment. If he had lived until now, he need not have put in a
proviso to save in his Covenanting Brethren in Scotland harmless, from the
suspicion of Maglinancy for assisting their King: For, whether it be the coming
of their wisdom unto them, or the return of their Conscience, they have quitted
his Assistance.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 14.
Here he talks of a regulated Monarchy, and a mixed Monarchy. There is little
less then contradictio in adjuncto, in both expressions. Lawmakers (I confess)
in Monarchical States, have sometimes done their good wills to regulate
Monarchy by Laws: Sed vetuere patres, quod non potuere vetare. Monarchies of
the best Regulation by Laws, were yet as exorbitant in the Practique, and in
the exercise of Monarchical power, as if they had been Ruleless and Lawless. A
mixed Monarchy (in strictness of Speech) is as unproper as a compounded simple.
But Mr. Loves judgment concerning the preheminency of a mixed Monarchy amongst
Governments, is not of so much weight, as to counterpoise the lightest Argument
in oppositum. His affection of hatred equally bent against Court Parasites, who
would screw up Monarchy into Tyranny, and against those who pull it down to
bring in Anarchy, is praiseworthy; Only I suspect (in the latter Clause) an
evil eye of insinuation against the Parliament, as if he desired to infuse this
foolish Faith into the people, That they pulled down Monarchy, not with any
intent to set up a better Government in the stead of it, but to bring in
Anarchy or Confusion. Whether he was at any time formerly for putting the King
to death, or no, I cannot positively say; if he was not, he was an unhappy man
to express himself, both in words and deeds, so like unto a man of such
intentions as he did. He confesses his judgment formerly was, and still is,
for the bringing of Malignants, who did seduce him, and drew him from the
Parliament, to condign punishment. But what if Malignants did not so much
seduce him in this kind, as he them? who now deserve, and this according to
the express letter of the Covenant, to be brought to condign punishment? They
that best knew him, have often said, That himself was the head, and not the
tail, of those Councels, by which he acted against the Parliament. I know no
alteration in the Cause, between what is now, and what it was at the time Mr.
Love speaks of, unless it be in this; That the Parliament now, both with more
Christianity and better Policy, causes the Presbyterian Interest to contain it
self in its own proper Channel, which before was like the River Jordan in the
time of Harvest, when he overflows his banks.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 15.
Here M. Love professes that he dies with his judgment not satisfied to take
the Engagement, and yet prays God to forgive those who subscribe it: What is
this, being interpreted, but to pray to God to forgive those concerning whom he
is not satisfied in his judgment, whether they sin or no? But as Paul, having
first given this testimony to the Galatians, ye did run well, then
expostulatingly demands of them, who hindered you that you should not obey (i.
e. continue to obey) the truth? So let me first give this Testimony to M. Love,
(as I have given it already, being furnished with it from his own Petitions) He
did some few days before, run well, not simply in owning the present
Government, but also in engaging himself home to it, and for it: and then
expostulate with his friends (himself not being in a capacity to answer) who
hindered him that he should not hold out in so good and commendable a race unto
the end? He labors in the very fire to purge himself from the Crime (as now the
Scaffold it seems had made it) of his late owning the present Government; but
the fire he uses is purely elementary, and will not purge or burn: For if
David and Hushai gave the Title of King to Absalom, there is little question
but in a sense, and that intended by them, it did of right belong to him;
Neither the one nor the other of them gave the title of King to him, until he
was proclaimed King by the men of Israel, yea and was possessed of the royal
city Jerusalem and the Throne; So that he was truly and properly King when the
Title of King was given by these men unto him; though it is true, he came to be
a King, and so to have right to such a Title, in a most wicked and treasonable
way. So that both David and Hushai looked upon Absalom as a true King, though
with usurpation, when they gave the Title unto him; and consequently did
nothing contrary to their judgments and consciences herein. But M. Love it
seems was not persuaded in his judgment or conscience, that the Parliament was
the Parliament or Supreme Authority of the Commonwealth of England, when he
gave these Titles unto them, therefore he sinned against his conscience in so
doing: So that saying, That herein he did not wrong or cross his Principles,
does he not plainly imply that his Principles and Conscience thwart and cross
the one the other? If he had any such Principle, which either led him or gave
him leave to act or speak against his Conscience, it was a Principle of
darkness and of death. If Calvin judged that the Title Christianissimus did in
no sense belong to the French King, I know not who can excuse him in giving it
unto him. And if the Subjects of this Nation did generally give the Title,
Defender of the Faith unto Henry the eighth, knowing no sufficient ground why
it should, or could with truth be given unto him, neither can they be defended
or justified in giving it. But why does M. Love insert or insist upon these
words, In case of Life? Does he suppose that the case he speaks of will alter
the case of owning the present Government, from sin to righteousness? Or is it
his Principle, That to save his Life he may do any thing whatsoever, and yet be
blameless? But how does he here toil and turmoyl himself to salve the honor of
his Conscience, only that he might reproach and calumniate the Parliament with
the more authority and reputation, yet he that spent so much of his breath
(which at such a time when he had so very little of it left, should have bin
precious to him) about vindicating his innocence in owning the present
Government, though it was (it seems) as much against his Principles to own it
then when he did own it, as it is now when he disowns it (no change, as himself
professes, being made in his Principles by the Scaffold) has not a word,
either here or elsewhere, to speak for himself, has not a drop of water to
wash off that foul stain and blot from his Conscience, which it contracted by
casting dirt and mire in the faces of those, not only whom he had a few days
before owned in the capacity of their Government and Authority, but to whom
likewise he had publicly given a large testimony of Justice, Mercy, Wisdom,
Gravity, of being the Elect of God, etc. yea and to whom he had publicly and
solemnly promised and engaged himself, neither to plot, contrive or design any
thing prejudicial to them, but to oppose any Design whatsoever against them.
Doubtless neither David, nor Hushai, nor Calvin, nor any man either of
Conscience or Honor, would have broken or falsified, especially so publicly
and in the face of the Sun, such solemn Promises and Engagements made to
persons in dignity, and to whom they had so immediately before given such large
testimony of many worthy Endowments; and all this without giving the least
account of such desultory and fedifragous practices.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 16.
It seems by the Contents of this Section, that Mr. Love's Principles stood
fair for the Invasion of the English Nation by the Scottish Army, but fell foul
upon the Invasion of the Scottish Nation by the English Army. This he declares
against: unto the other he is silent, as consenting to it. All the world may
hereby see, that his Principles were calculated according to the exigency of
his Interest and Faction, and not for the service of Righteousness and Truth.
For was not the Scottish Nation joined in the same Covenant with the English,
wherein the English was joined with the Scottish? If not, the English made a
very sorry Bargain in covenanting with the Scottish. If so, then suppose the
Grounds and Reasons for the one Invasion and the other, had been but equal or
the same, and that the English could give no better an Account otherwise of
their invading (as Mr. Love is pleased to clothe a smooth Action with a rough
garment) the Scottish Nation, then the Scottish are able to give of their
invading England; yet the English Invasion of Scotland is much more justifiable
or excusable, then the Scottish of England, in as much as the Scottish were first
in the Provocation. But (as has been lately proved) the sending of an Army by
the English into Scotland, is every ways justifiable, warranted by the
judgments and decisions of the best learned in the Civil Laws, who are very
competent Judges in the Cause, being altogether unrelated unto the persons or
Nations; Whereas there has not yet been (nor indeed can there be) any
tolerable Account given of the Scottish Invasion of this Nation: Besides what
has been formerly said, to take off whatsoever may seem unjust or hard, in the
sending of an Army into Scotland by the Parliament of England, two things
further may here be added: First, that presently after the Execution of the
late King, they (the Scottish Nation) proclaimed their own King, King of
England. Secondly, not content with this Usurpation over this Nation, they
engaged themselves further to assist him in his Acquirement of the English
Throne. So that when the English Army went into Scotland, there was no such
thing in being as that Covenant between the two Nations, which Mr. Love speaks
of; the Scottish having before this broken it in pieces, and trodden it under
their feet, and so had absolutely disobliged the English from the bands or
terms of it. But when he says, that because Scotland will not be a
Commonwealth, they shall not be a People, doubtless in stead of speaking his
Conscience, he spits out his Gall; For he could not but know that the English
had no quarrel at all, took no offense against the Scottish, for choosing
themselves to be a Kingdom rather then a Commonwealth; but because they would
not suffer the English to be a Commonwealth, but would compel them by force of
arms to be a Kingdom like to them, yea and to take a King of their choosing.

For the Friendly Assistance Mr. Love speaks of, as given by the Scottish to the
English, it was rather Assistance then friendly; For with that Assistance they
gave they mingled much Hostility, behaving themselves like persons
light-fingered, who when a well furnished house is on fire, are easily invited
to assist in the quenching of it, and very possibly may do some service this
way: but their eye is more upon booty, then service or assistance. However, if
the Scottish have given assistance to the English worthy Mr. Love's Epithet,
the English are not behinde-hand with them in that kind of courtesy. A
friendly Assistance was very lately given to the Covenanting Party in Scotland,
when they stood in mickle need of it by the English; and this not only without
any covenanted hire, but also without any uncovenanted spoil or plunder. The
Scottish were double paid for their Assistance, by the English: the English were
royal, and gave theirs freely. I shall not disturb Mr. Love in his cleaving to
his Oaths, Vows, Covenants, and Protestations; Nor do I marvel at all, that he
should rather desire to dye a Covenant-keeper, then live a Covenant-breaker:
but this I confess I do more then marvel at; That this being his desire, he
should be no more loyal and true to it, then both to live and die, not a
Covenant-keeper but a Covenant-breaker, and this in the main and most important
Articles of the Covenant, such I mean, which respect the Safety, Peace and
Liberties of the Nation.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 17.
His good wishes to the City of London, God perform; his fears may they vanish,
as the grounds of them here expressed are (for the most part) empty and light.
As to contempt of the Ministry; the number (I confess) of the children of this
guilt, is too great, the Lord in mercy lessen it. Yet (blessed be God) it is
not so great as the Arithmetique of Mr. Love's known principles computeth it.
They are not all guilty of contempt of the Ministry, who do not honor every
man that calls himself a Minister, or that preaches with the invisible
Character of Imposition of hands upon him; The contempt of some, who look to be
honored as Ministers, may rather be matter of wisdom and duty then of sin.
There are sundry kinds of Ministers, from whom men are commanded by God to
turn away. Such as are Clouds without water, and full of fire in stead thereof,
such as are raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame, such as
ordinarily build hey, and stubble, and wood, in stead of silver, gold, and
precious stones: the Judgments and Consciences of understanding men will not
suffer them to honor; But Mr. Love here, according to the Politic Dialect of
his Tribe, would fain have the neglect, which many Ministers very deservedly
suffer, to be thought, not the neglect of their persons, but of their Function
and Ministry, that so themselves may not be suspected as accessory to it;
Whereas the certain truth is, that far the greatest part of that which he here
calls the Contempt of the Ministry, is nothing else but a Rush growing out of
the mire of the Ministers themselves. However, if Mr. Love made an estimate of
the Contempt of the Ministry in the City of London, either by his own Parish
and People, or by the view and bulk of his more usual Auditory, he had (I
presume) no great reason to prophecy evil or danger against the City for that
sin.

What he means by Opposition against Reformation, is (I suppose) too well
known, to be looked upon by men acquainted with the ways, methods and grounds
of Gods Judgments, as any thing much endangering the City in this kind.
Opposition (I confess) against that Reformation of the hearts, lives and ways
of men, which the Scriptures every where with all importunity press upon the
Consciences of men, is a sad symptom of imminent danger to a City or People
where it is general; But Opposition to that which in the Dialect of High
Presbytery (which Mr. Love much uses) is termed Reformation, is little
symptomatical in that kind.

There is the same Consideration of his Covenant Breaking. There is a
Covenant Breaking, which (doubtless) has brought London much lower, then
otherwise it should or needed to have been, and which, if not more repented of,
will lay it yet much lower. But the Execution of Justice upon the late King,
the Non-admission of the present King of Scotland to the English Throne, the
Non-elevation of the Standard of High Presbytery, the Non-opposing of all that
Mr. Love opposed, under the name and notion of Error and Heresy, the
Non-forbearance of sending an Army into Scotland, which are sufficiently known
to be meant by Mr. Love's Covenant Breaking; these are so far from being any
ways prognostique of evil toward the City, that to men of free and sound
judgments, they are auspicious, of a good and gracious presage.

What he means by his General Apostasy, his Principles considered, I confess I
understand not. He denies a possibility of Apostasy from any thing that is
truly good or pleasing unto God: and how Apostatizing from that which is
otherwise, as from Hypocrisy, Formality, Lukewarmness or the like, should be
of any ill abode or presage unto men, opposes my apprehensions. True it is,
that the City (as he says) is a great Receptacle of Error, though, of All, I
cannot say with him; But first, all that Mr. Love calls Error, is not
therefore Error, or proved to be Error because he so calls it. Doubtless Mr.
Love was not greater then Paul, and therefore knew but in part: Now he that
knows but in part, is not competent to determine in whole. Secondly, A great
part of those Errors with which the City is really polluted, call Mr. Love and
Ministers of his Sect, if not Patres, yet Patronos; If he and others of his
fellows did not broach them, yet have they drawn them forth, and given the City
to drink. Thirdly, Another considerable part of them, are the legitimate Issue
of his and their spurious Doctrines, and nothing else but the natural and
express consequents of those unsound principles, wherewith he seasoned many.
But I trust that the light of the Truth as it is in Jesus breaking forth daily
with greater brightness, will scatter (a great part at least of) that mist of
errors, which yet much darkeneth the City (though it be a Goshen, compared
with any other City that I know, or have heard of, throughout the world) so
that the errors yet resident in it, shall not be the ruin of it.

ANIMAD upon Section 18, 19, 20.
In these three Sections he commends himself in five particulars of spiritual
advice unto the inhabitants of the City.

First, He beggs of them to love their painful and godly Ministers; but lest
there should be error in persona he presently informs them* that he means
Presbyterian. If these were sometimes counted the Chariots and horsemen of
Israel, and are now the great eyesore; I fear it is because they are turned to
be the Chariots and horsemen of Aram. But to whom are they the great eyesore
he speaks of? I suppose he means, to the State, and men in power. I confess
there is ground enough for Master Love to suspect (I am willing to think that
he uses the word know in the lowest signification) that the persons he speaks
of are a great eyesore unto these men, and many others there being so much
visible in many of them, which cannot lightly but offend and grieve the eyes of
all beholders, whose eyes are not of the same constitution and temper with
theirs. But the spirit of High-Presbytery is exceeding querulous and
effeminate. If the State will not fulfill all their pleasure and gratify them
in toto and in solido of all they demand, or expect, it presently casts them
into fits of passion and discontent; they are men neglected and despised.
Setting aside what has been done to a few of the sons of this late Conspiracy
against the State they have no ground at all from any measure they have
received from the State, to judge themselves any great eyesore to it. I know
not what they would have more from the State, then what they have; unless it
be, All things under their feet. When he tells them, that ten of their godly
Ministers are taken from them at one blow, I know not how he will make up his
account, unless he reckons himself for more then the one half of them. As for
those who fled from them, when none pursued them, but their own guilt, he
cannot upon any competent account of truth number these amongst those, that
were taken from them by others. But what blow was it, by which so many were
taken away from them, as were taken? Or who gave this blow? When God cast off
the ten tribes he imputes it to their Idolatry. Thy calf, O Samaria has cast
thee off* Hos. 8. So when He and the Jews were parted, or separated the one
from the other, He imputes this separation to their sins, Your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, Esa. 59. That which in punishments justly
inflicted, is afflicting, or destroying, is not to be charged upon the Judge,
but upon the offense and crime committed. Upon this account the blow, by which
Mr. Love tells the Citizens of London, that so many of their godly Ministers
(verbo sit venia) were taken from them, was not given either by the Parliament,
Council of State, or High Court of Justice, but by their own ungodliness, and
treasonable practices against the State and Commonwealth: these are they which
have taken away so many of their Ministers at once. These Ministers were no
ways necessitated to practice that evil, which they did; but their Judges
were necessitated in point of Conscience, and by the command of God, to inflict
that punishment upon them which they now suffer for their evil; therefore this
punishment is not to be imputed to their Judges, but to themselves, and their
own miscarriages.

2. He exhorts the said persons of his present address, (the Inhabitants of
the City) That they would submit themselves to Church Government, which would
lay a curb and restraint upon their lusts, telling them, that it is a golden
and easy yoke, etc.

The exhortation (in general) is weighty and worthy by all men to be received:
Church Government, as the kind, and constitution, together with the
administration of it, may, and ought to be, is of a most Sovereign virtue and
import for that great end he speaks of: But that Church Government which Mr.
Love intends, at least as far as the Christian world has had the trial of it
hitherto, in such administrations of it, as it has found amongst men, has
given but a very slender testimony of any such heavenly virtue or vigor in it.
Hac non succ^ssit: alia aggrediundum est via.

3. He admonishes them to take heed of Doctrines that come under the n^tion of
new lights: If by new lights, he means Doctrines brought into the world since
the completing of the Scriptures, and which cannot by a legitimate and clear
descent derive their pedigree from these, the admonition is wholesome and
grave; but if by his new lights, he means all such Doctrines or Tenets, which
have not received countenance or approbation from the generality of Ministers
of a later Edition, and since the times of Luthers and Calvin's Reformations,
his advice is indeed artificially calculated for the Meridian of high
Presbytery, but very disserviceable to the advancement and growth of
Christianity.

4. He exhorts them to bewail their great loss in the taking away of so
many Ministers out of their City; and then recounting the number of them, finds
them, if he mistakes not, ten; under the covert of such an exception or
reserve, he might as truly have said, they had been twenty. He speaks of some,
as being in banishment. Those of them in this condition, were adjudged thither
by no other Judges then their own Consciences. When the City of refuge is
sought unto, it is a sign that there is blood shed, and that there is some
avenger of blood that follows the chase. The Ministers he speaks of, he does
the rather lift up unto heaven, with those glorious Elogiums he bestows on
them, that so he may cast those so much the deeper into hell in the peoples
thoughts, whom he would have looked upon as the Authors of their taking away.
But the Malefactor, as has been said, not the Judge, is the Author of his
sufferings: If they were lights, they were far more burning then shining, but
with an un-hallowed fire: if Stars, stars they were of a very Malignant
influence upon the State where they lived, and in their Conjunction, made a
very dangerous and fiery constellation: Those of whom (as the Scripture
testifies) the world was not worthy, were a generation of men of another
spirit, holy, humble, and harmless, were content to suffer from the world, to
do the world service. Mr. Love's men are a generation that must have the world
bow down unto them, and lick the dust at their feet, to strengthen their hand
to do them service: neglect from men, is as the shadow of death unto them.

5. (And lastly) He gives them a brief Item, to take heed of being forward to
engage in a war against their godly Brethren in Scotland. If these godly
Brethren in Scotland had not been forward to engage in a war against them, the
Counsel had been Christian and prudent. But inasmuch as these godly Brethren
first engaged in a war against their godly Brethren here, (as has been
formerly showed) it is no point of Christianity or prudence to demurre upon a
course of defense, or of prevention of the mischief.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 21.
There is a red thread of revenge against the Parliament and State, struck
quite thorough this farewell piece of Mr. Loves to the world, from the very
beginning to the end of it, visible enough (and indeed, too much) in every
Section, which creates a sad jealousy with me, left his fi^^s Architectonicus,
his predominant end in his last address on earth, was to have the men in
present Power under the hardest and most hateful ^^^^ment with the people,
that he could imagine or devise. In many passages he hales in by head and
shoulders such things, which a man cannot tell how or why they should come
there, but only to asp^rse the State, and to envenom the spirits of the people
against them. In these his Applications to the godly Ministry (as he terms it)
of the City, he does his best to make them believe (for he affirms that he
knows it) that they are maligned and threatened; and this the people must
conceive to be by the State: yea, and the cause and ground hereof must be
supposed to be for setting themselves against the sins and Apostacies of the
times, for his faithfulness wherein he himself had procured ill will from men.
Poor man! Does he call his sin against God his high crimes and offenses against
the Parliament in his late and great miscarriages, for which himself confesses
(in his last Petition to the Parliament, as was formerly showed) that the
Sentence of death was justly passed on him by the High-Court of Justice; does
he (I say) call sin against God, high crimes great miscarriages his
faithfulness in setting himself against the sins and Apostacies of this present
age? I confess if these were his faithfulness in that kind he speaks of, it was
his faithfulness that procured him the ill will of men. If such notions and
conceits as these were the foundation of that abundant peace of his Conscience,
and which he says he has with God, and with which he dies, I fear he may be
too truly compared to the foolish builder, who neglected the rock, and built
his house upon the sand; which soon after fell, and great was the fall thereof.
But to persuade the godly Ministers of his present address, (together with the
people) the more effectually that they were certainly maligned and threatened,
he will needs (upon this account) lift up a prayer for them, in the words of
those Christians, Act. 4. 29. And now Lord behold their threatenings, and grant
that thy servants may preach the word with all boldness. But is not this an
horrid profanation of the sacred Ordinance of Prayer, and of him that has
appointed it; to represent persons unto God as guilty of such crimes whereof he
knows them to be innocent; especially when he also that prays, has no
tolerable ground to judge them such* as they are represented by him unto God in
his Prayer? What ground or color of ground, had Master Love to accuse the
Parliament or State before God of threatening the godly Ministers of the City
for preaching the Word of God? What Minister did they ever threaten upon any
such account as this? Possibly such Ministers*s who in their preachings have
turned the good Word of God, and Gospel of Jesus Christ, into firebrarnds of
Sedition, into scurrilous and bitter invectives against those, whom God has
set in Authority over them, who in stead of lifting up their voices like
Trumpets, to make the people to know their abominations, have lift them like
Trumpets to provoke and animate them to commit abominations; possibly, (I say)
such Ministers as these they have discountenanced in such ways of impiety and
profanation of the Word of God as these.

His persuasion that the Presbyterial Government makes most for purity and for
unity throughout the Churches of the Saints, the experience which the world
has had of this Government in those places, or Churches, where it has had its
throne, does not much countenance or confirm: but I shall not here
counter-argue it. Whereas he beggs of the Ministers that they would keep up
Church Government, and had only added, and not intermeddle with the
Civil-Government of the State, his advice had been both Christian and
seasonable.

ANIMAD. upon Section 22.
I will not say that Master Love here freeth all the Ministers in the City,
those only excepted who are already discovered from having a hand in his
business (he dislikes, it seems, the word Plot) in such a sense, wherein not
long since he freed himself, from whatsoever was not, or could not (as he
thought) be proved against him. I judge it not improbable, but that the
Ministers of his exemption may be free from all interposure of particularities
of advice for the driving on M. Loves design (this word he owns in one of his
Petitions though the word Plot, grates upon his spirit) yea (possibly) they may
be free in respect of the knowledge of the particularities of the method, and
transactions, by which the Design was carried on and ripened from time to
time, by the Arch-Contrivers: such works of darkness are in danger of coming
abroad into the light, before their time, and so to mischieve or destroy the
workmen, in case the number of those, who either shall meet frequently for the
managing and forming of them, or to whom the particulars of them shall be
imparted, be too great. It is seldom seen, but that that which is known to
many* soon after comes to be known unto all. Yet I believe there is hardly any
Minister of the Presbyterian persuasion about the City, but knew well enough
that there was Scotch-Ale in brewing, and that Master Love and his Accomplices
were not asleep as to their Interest and cause. Yea, and that from time to
time, though they could not call Master Loves Design by its proper name, yet
they prayed heartily in general and covert terms for the prosperity of it. But
Master Loves Conscience now upon the Scaffold, tells him (it seems) a quite
contrary t^le, to what it told him a few days before. When he was a Petitioner
to the Parliament for his life, his Conscience told him that he had Sinned
against God, that his late miscarriages were great, his crimes and offenses
against the Parliament, high, etc. But in the interim (it seems) the Rabbis of
his Conscience, (...) had been with him, and shined a new light into him. About
the entertainment whereof, had he followed his own Counsel directed unto others
in the like case, (formerly mentioned) and had taken heed of receiving it, it
had been much better and safer for him.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 23.
What M. Love gives in honor to his Congregation, I shall not take from them:
Only what he gives unto himself in this kind, as, 1. That he should never have
parted from them had not death parted them: 2. That he submits unto death
with all Christian meekness, etc. I make some question whether he had right to
give it, or no. For, he that had parted from one Congregation upon a far
different occasion from that of death he speaks of; why might he not, his
judgment remaining the same touching a lawfulness of parting, have parted from
another, and another after that, upon a like occasion? Men may be confident of
their present intentions and purposes: but to prophecy of their future, is to
run an adventure. But whereas he professes his submission unto death with all
Christian meekness, I leave him to be judged out of his own mouth, in this
very discourse, wherewith he has avenged himself on his Judges, whom he calls
his adversaries, to the uttermost.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 24.
In the beginning of this Section he professes his desire to justify God, and
to condemn himself. A Christian and worthy profession! But that which he
professes a desire to do, he does very faintly, and by halfs: But that which
is contrary to what he desires, as he says, to do, he does vigorously, and
with his might. In his justifying of God, he is very general, and faint: and
yet more general and superficial, in condemning himself. But in the
justifying of himself, and condemning others, he is enlarged beyond his line.
For the justifying of God, he says only, that he is righteous: in the
condemning of himself, he says no more, but only, I have sinned, (which the
most innocent and righteous person under heaven may say truly.) But for the
justifying, and commending of himself, with a mixture of insinuations against
others, how copious and eloquent is he? First he says, his blood shall not be
spilt for naught; wherein he make's himself equal with the Saints he
mentions from the Psalm. 2. That he may do more good by his death, then by
his life: which, though it may be true enough in a sense little to his honor,
yet in his notion must imply, either that his Oration, which he was now
uttering, was so effectual and full of power, that many of those that heard
it, would either be converted, or else much edified by it; or else that his dying
with so much courage in such a worthy cause, as he was now to suffer for, would
make others confident in the further maintenance and prosecution of it, whereby
God should be much glorified. 3. He sings over his former note of confidence, I
bless my God, I have not the least trouble, etc. I die with as much quietness
of mind, etc. By which he does not only commend himself as one of the
firstborn sons of Faith, but farther insinuates the goodness and
justifiablenesse of his cause, whereby the people may be the more incensed
against his Judges. 4. He says, that he sees that men hunger after his flesh,
and thirst after his blood, which hastens his happiness, and their ruin, etc.
wherein at once he justifies himself in the highest, and condemns others
proportionably. 5. He says, his blood is innocent blood; (is this to condemn
himself, and not plainly to condemn others by his self-justification?) 6. He
says, that his dead body will be a morsel, which he believes will hardly be
digested, and that his blood will be bad food, etc. What are these but
Rhetorical flourishes of his own righteousness and innocence, full of
reflection upon his Judges, as men that had sinned with an high hand against the
peace and safety of the Commonwealth, by sentencing him to die.

7. (And lastly) that he may proclaim his innocence, as well in the Negative,
as Affirmative, he says, Mine is not Malignant blood, though, etc. was Mr.
Loves desire to condemn himself, in speaking these things; or are they the
words of a man taking shame unto himself, and justifying God thereby: The truth
is, he has condemn^d himself by speaking them, all along calling evil good,
and good evil, putting darkness for light, and light for darkness, bitter
for sweet, and sweet for bitter, stumblings and mistakes of a very sad import,
so near the threshold of death.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 25.
In the beginning of this Section, he seems (in part) to repent of the former,
but his words are of no good consistence. He proves God to be very just, by
this, that his prison was not his Hell, etc. inasmuch as he had deserved it.
This is an argument to prove him gracious, or merciful; but that men have not
in punishment, what they have deserved in sin, has no face of a proof that God
is very just. If Mr. Love had here also stood upon his Justification, and said,
I have not deserved it, his Argument had been more congruous, though the
Sentence more culpable: yet in the sequel of this Section also, he resumes his
sweet morsells of self-justification, and self-commendation, and puts them
again under his tongue. Here he assumeth the honor of Ma^tyrdome unto himself,
Whatsoever men judge of me, I am a Martyr too. I have read that Petilian,
against whom S. Augustine wrote, canonized Judas for a Martyr Done. Pseudoma^^.
ca. 2.
: and that the Circumcelliones, whom the same Author likewise mentions, were
very earnest with those they met, to kill them, that so they might be accounted
Martyrs ^^^teol. Hae^^s. l. 3. c. 19.
. And therefore to that demand of Mr. Love, What should a dying man be proud
of? answer may be, that a dying man, especially touched with a spirit of
vainglory, may very possibly be proud that he shall die a Martyr, and enjoy
the honor of such a death afterward. Neither is there any great weight in
these glorious expressions* Welcome Scaffold, welcome Axe, welcome Death,
welcome Block, welcome all, because it will send me to my Fathers house,
considering that one of the worst of the Heathen Emperors died with these
words in his mouth, Vt puto, Deus fio, i.e. Me thinks I am even now ready to be
made a God. We gave (upon the first Section, as I remember) a more particular
account by what wind Master Love might very probably sail into that Port of
Confidence, wherein we here find him; and yet make Shipwreck too in the
Harbor, in case he were not the more circumspect. But Master Love must the
rather be a Martyr, that so his Judges may be persecutors. Their defamation to
the people, is an Oar that he plyes hard upon all occasions. Witness the words
a little preceding those last recited: Would I have renounced my Covenant, and
debauched my Conscience, and ventured my soul, there might have been more hopes
of saving my life, etc. Unworthy man! who required of him, either the
renouncing of his Covenant, or the debauching of his Conscience, etc. in order
to the saving of his life? Or if he calls either the disowning of his late
treasonable negotiations with the Scottish King, Kirk, and Nation or the owning
of the present Government, either a renouncing of his Covenant, or a debauching
of his Conscience, or the venturing of his Soul, he voluntarily and freely of
himself did all these (as has been showed over and over from his own Narrative
and Petitions) for the saving of his life. And what he should further mean by
the renouncing of his Covenant, debauching etc. I confess I understand not,
unless it should be the taking of the Engagement imposed by the State. But that
he voluntarily and of his own accord engaged himself (in his last Petition to
the House) to do all things required, that are lightly imaginable to be
required, in that Engagement, was likewise formerly proved from his own clear
and express words. Nor is the taking of the Engagement in that formality of
words wherein it is recommended by the State unto the Nation* any ways
inconsistent with the Covenant, no not in any literal or Grammatical sense that
can be put upon it: nor needs any man either debauch his Conscience, or venture
his soul in the taking of it. I fear there are more Consciences debauched, and
souls ventured, by the refusal, then by the taking of it. By the way, if Master
Love had ventured his soul, whether by taking the Engagement, owning the
present Government, or the like, it is a demonstrative Argument* according to
his principles* that he neither was a Saint nor one of the Elect of God,
because the souls of all such are out of all possibility of miscarrying.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 26.
In this Section we have little observable, but only further inculcations of
his courage and confidence in the face and presence of Death (as if he were
jealous the people would not believe him at this point, without much
importunity of Assertion) together with some more gentle insinuations then
formerly of his Innocence; only the last clause here is very remarkable, God
will judge all men, I will judge none: When he says that He will judge none,
does he not retract and cancel all the hard sayings formerly uttered by him,
wherein he had judged and condemned his Judges and the State? But welcome
Repentance, though at the Eleventh hour of the day.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 27, 28.
The heart and strength of these Sections also, is of the same Argument with
the former; he displays the Banner of his Confidence yet again and again before
the people: Those Expressions, Though men kill me, they cannot damn me; though
they thrust me out of the world, etc. are of a Suspicious interpretation, That
Mr. Love was not yet perfectly recovered out of his fit of Passion: The denial
of Power, in such cases, as that wherein he now speaks, usually supposes a
will or disposition to do that, for the doing whereof, power is wanting. Nor
does he say much either for his own comfort, or for the edification of the
people, in saying, That the men who kill him (I suppose he means, who by the
Sword of Justice take his life from him, which is very unproperly termed
killing) cannot damn him. For first, questionless all the people very well
knew, That men could not damn him: Therefore the saying turned to no account of
Edification unto them: Nor secondly, was it much for his own comfort, that the
men he speaks of could not damn him; because had they had such a power, he had
been in never a whit the more danger from suffering from them in that kind,
there being not the least inclination or will in them to make use of such a
power, in case they had had it. As they that die in the Faith of Jesus Christ,
are in never the more danger of being damned by God, because he has power to
damn them; That justice, of which the men Mr. Love speaks of, were Ministers
appointed by God, required only his natural life from him: And far was it from
the hearts or thoughts of the Ministers hereof, to require more: Nay, had not
Justice very importunely, and with a loud voice called and cried unto them for
that life of his, which is now taken from him, far had they been from taking or
desiring it. So that it was but a very Unchristian strain of Mr. Loves
exulcerated Spirit against them, to say or insinuate, That they hungered after
his flesh, and were thirsty for his blood: And much more to intimate, as if
they had a mind or will to damn him, in case they had power. Was it either
Christian or proper, for Mr. Love to sanctify himself unto prayer, especially
being now to pray his last, by taking such words unto him as these? How
importunely, and with what over-weeningness of conceit of his own worth and
excellency, he transfers those words of that Great Apostle, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7.
upon himself, I shall not stand to argue. And with what truth he could say in
the Apostles sense (wherein doubtless he would be understood to speak) I have
kept the Faith, I leave to his Great Lord and Master, both his and mine to
determine.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 29, 30.
In these two Sections Mr. Love commends by Prayer, both himself and his own
Soul, as all others whom he judged it meet to pray for, unto God. In a great
part of this Prayer, and of the particular Requests made therein, I apprehend
nothing but what is savory and Christian. I trust that these words toward the
latter end of this prayer, Lord hear, pardon all his infirmities, wipe away his
iniquities by the blood of Christ, etc. carried in them an implicit
Repentance, both of that sin against God, of those high Crimes, and late great
miscarriages against the Parliament; for which (as himself a few days before
this Prayer, confessed) he was justly condemned, as likewise of all those most
untrue, bitter and Unchristian invectives uttered against the Parliament and
State in this Speech upon the Scaffold, together with all the rest of the sins
of his life. And when in his last Petition, he prays to be received by God,
pure, and spotless, and blameless before him in love: I trust he prayed not to
be received by God as any other person, then what he really and in truth was;
and consequently, That he was blameless in love. If so, then was that spirit of
spleen and Unchristian bitterness, by which he spoke so many unseemly things
against those, who little deserved it at his hand, in the foregoing Speech, by
this time vanished and gone out of him; And indeed it was now high time to cast
him out, because there had been no entrance for Mr. Love into his Fathers house
(he speaks of) in his company: When he says, That he had made God his Hope and
his Confidence from his youth up, I wish that his heart did not deceive him; It
is not lightly possible that men should labor so in the fire, as Mr. Love did,
to promote or uphold a carnal and worldly Interest, who truly make God their
Hope and Confidence. As in his zeal for God, and for the bringing of the souls
of men to heaven, he was equalized, if not exceeded by the Jews in Paul's days,
and by the Scribes and Pharisees in our Saviors, (who compassed Sea and Land
to make one Proselyte) so was he also in his glorying or boasting in God.
Foundations, not Buildings or Superstructions, are the great Oracles in
Religion to be consulted about the Spiritual Estates of men. After he had
gloried this great glorying in God, Lord, thou have settled this persuasion in
my heart, That as soon as ever the blow is given to divide my head from my
body, I shall be united to my Head in Heaven, he prays thus, O blessed Jesus,
apply thy blood, not only for my justification unto life, but also for my
comfort, for the quieting of my soul, etc. And again, Hear the Prayers of all
thy people that have been made for thy servant; and though thou have denied
Prayer, as to the particular Request concerning my Life; yet let herein the
fruit of Prayer be seen, That thou will bear up my heart against the fear of
death. If the former glorying had succeeded these Petitions, and not gone
before them, the consistence between the one and the other, had been of a
better and more easy Interpretation. When he prays for his
Covenant-keeping-Brethren in the Kingdom of Scotland, he prays for a
Generation of men that is not, Covenant-keepers being several years since
perished from amongst the Inhabiters of that Nation: Covenant-takers are here
generally metempsychosed into Covenant-breakers. His Petition, To make England
and Scotland one staff in the Lords hand; The Lord, I trust, will shortly
perform. That he should pray so particularly for men of a Foreign Nation, and
for a Brother of remote Blood (though of near relation in guilt) and not once
mention in his Prayer, his nearest relations in Nature, Wife or Children,
especially having brought them into an afflicted and sad condition by his
Miscarriages, was the observation of some sober men present, not without
offense.

ANIMAD. upon Sect. 31.
I have nothing to Animadvert upon this Section, but only that which helps me
to hope the better of his present Condition; as viz. That I perceive no
breathing at all herein of that evil spirit of Wrath and Discontent, which had
wrought so effectually in him until his Prayer (in the two last Sections) and
the more immediate approaches of Death. The departure of this spirit from him,
before his own, is a ground of good hope, That this latter shall not be sent
thither, from whence the former came.

FINIS.

