Mr. LOVE His Funeral SERMON, PREACHED By himself on the Scaffold on Tower
Hill, in the hearing of many thousand people, on Friday the two and twentieth
day of this instant August.

Divided into three parts; 1. The Matter for which he suffered, 2. The Clearing
or Justifying of himself. 3. His Exhortation to the People.


WITH His Prayer immediately before his head was severed from his body; and
other Remarkable Passages about his Death.

Published for general satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Wood, 1651.

Reader,
BEfore I enter upon the substance of Mr Love's last Sermon or Speech upon the
Scaffold, thou art to take notice of the Parliaments lenity, in respiting his
Execution near upon 6 weeks after the time first limited or appointed for him
to suffer. During which time (though much means was used to save his life by
others) himself continued in his former way of justification of his own
innocence, notwithstanding the testimony of 8 Witnesses at his trial, against
whom could be no exception. So that for his own part in stead of using laudable
means to preserve his life, he rather (to outward appearance at the least) did
choose to die without without giving real satisfaction to the world, that it
was not as well to satisfy his own obstinate will, as justly to suffer the
sentence renounced against him.

On Tuesday last the Parliament ordered that Mr. Love should be no longer
reprieved, and that the High Court of Justice should have notice of this order,
whereupon the High-Court of Justice met on Wednesday signed warrants. for his
execution on Friday following, between the hours of twelve at noon, and six at
night.

In pursuance of which Warrants, the Lieutenant of the Tower this present
Friday being the twenty two of August, delivered him to the Sheriffs of London
at the Tower Gate, from whence being accompanied along by Mr. Calomy, he came
to the Scaffold on the Tower Hill; and being upon the Scaffold, after he had
saluted many friends thereon, he turned himself to the people, and leaning over
the Rail amongst others, he uttered these words following.

Mr. LOVE his Funeral Sermon, or an abstract of his last words upon the
Scaffold on Tower Hill immediately before his Execution on Friday the twenty
two of August, 1651.
Beloved,
BEfore I lay my Neck upon the Block, I shall say some thing concerning the
occasion of my coming hither as you see this day. Then he said he should divide
that which he had to declare into three parts.

First, touching the matter for which he suffered.

Secondly, the clearing of himself.

And thirdly, The discharging of himself of all kind of ranker or hatred
against any; with some Exhortations to the people.

He persisted in the same way as he was in dureing his Trial, taking God to
record, That he wrote no Letters, or gave direction for any to be written; Yet
it was proved, and acknowledged by himself, That he did see Letters written,
and was privy to their sending away.

He likewise called God to Record, That he collected no money for the Scots
design; yet was there money collected and laid down before him, and afterward
sent away: and if this kind of equivocating can clear him of the guilt, let any
indifferent man judge; yet he said there was not any one thing prooved against
him which was capital.

He instanced many Scriptures, and compared himself by way of Innocence, to
Jeremiah, saying, That he was as guiltless as that Prophet who was charged
(though in another case) with Conspirancy. He said it had been the lot of many
of the Saints of God to be beheaded, and freely forgave all his prosecutors,
saying, That the worst he wished to any of them, was, That their souls might
meet him in heaven.

Mr, Love also said that the Scaffold was the best Pulpit that ever he preached
in, in all his life; for that from thence he should not descend but ascend and
mount up into heaven.

One thing more very observable is that although he denied compliancy with the
Scots by writing or supply of money; yet he confessed that he had both written
to Major Genesis Massey, and sent money to him.

He exhorts the people in a general way, to the service of God, and so
concluded with this prayer. Mr. Love having ended his speech or sermon, began
his prayer standing at the rail thus.

O Lord God I thy unwor^hy creature being at the last g^sp of breath do here
humbly prostrate my self unto thee hoping in the merits of Jesus Christ my
Saviou^ ^^d Redeemer that thou will have mercy on m^, and (...) beseech thee
not only for my self but for him that is to die with me, and I hope my prayers
will prevail as our savior did for the thief upon the Cross, and that thou will be so merciful to us, that we may both meet in thy eternal Kingdom I do
here declare as a dying man that I have always been for magist^acy and
government, and do humbly beseech thee that thou will not lay to the charge of
this people their slightning of the Ministry of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
trampling down his Ministers, I do freely from my soul forgive all the world,
as I desire God for Christ's his sake to forgive me.

Much more to this effect was uttered by him; and his prayer being ended, he
immediately began t^ unbutton the collor of his Doublet, and turning about,
came to the Sheriff, bowed very low to him, and shaking him by the hand, took
his leave of him: He then laid his hand, upon the Executioner, saying, Friend,
I forgive thee. Then his Doublet being off, he put up his hair under his Cap,
and at once settling himself down on the Block, he presently (without raising
himself again) gave the signal, with which the Executioner severed his head
from his body at one blow.

His body was presently taken up, and put into a Coffin ready prepared, and
carried to his own house: Mr. Dun the Chirurgian went with it, and afterward
sowed the Head to the body.

After th^s Mr. Gibbons was brought upon the Scaffold, he was about four or
fi^ve and twenty years of age, and he formerly had been servant to Mr. Hollis,
he made a speech to the people confessing and saying, that he had been misled
by wicked counselors, and seemed very pennitent and sorrowful that he had
falsely betrayed his trust; he made many stops, the tears trickling down his
c^eek^, he made this confession of his henious crime and guilt, (as he said) to
clear his conscience, and to the end that the world might take notice thereof,
and take warning, and that no aspersion fall on himself or or others after his
death. He took notice of Mr. Loves being executed before him, and said, that he
was confident he was with his Savior, with whom he had sure and confident
hopes to be within few minuits: Yet toward the conclusion of his speech, some
words passed from him which savored of ranckor, for which he was gently
admonished by the Shreiff, and when had made an end of his speech he made a
short prayer, recommending his soul into the hands of Jesus Christ and so
committed himself to the block.

FINIS.

