The true and perfect SPEECH OF Mr. Christopher Love On the Scaffold on
TOWER HILL ON Friday last, being the two and twentieth Day of this instant
August, 1651.

COMPRIZING His Funeral Sermon; His Exhortation to the Citizens his
Propositions touching Religion; And His Prayer immediately before his Head was
severed from his body.

TOGETHER With Mr. GIBBONS his Speech; and the manner of his Deportment,
Carriage, and Resolution:

Published for the good of the Commonwealth of England

two in one heart

Imprinted at London by JOHN CLOWES. 1651.

(...)ove his Speech on the Scaffold on Tower Hill on Friday last, being
accompanied by the Sheriffs, Mr. Calamy (the Minister) and other Gentlemen of
quality; With the manner of his Deportment; upon the preaching of his Funeral
Sermon, and his Exhortation to the People worthy of perusal.
Beloved Christians, I am made this day a spectacle to God, Angels, and Men. I
am made a grief to the Godly, a laughing stock to the wicked, (...) a gazing
stock to all, yet blessed be God not a terror to my self, although there be but
a little between me and death; yet that which ^eares up my heart is, that there
is but a little between me and Heaven* it com^orted Dr. Tailor that famous
Martyr, going to his execution, to think th^^^ was but two styles between him
and his Fathers House, there is a lesser way between me and my Fathers house;
but two steps between me and glory: it is but lying down upon the Block and I
shall ascend upon a Throne* ^ am this day fa^ling toward the Ocean of
eternity, through a rough passage to ^y Haven of rest, through the red Sea unto
the promised Land: methinks (...) God sp^^^ as he said to Moses go up to Mount
Nebo and die there; so to me go up to Tower Hill and die there* Jacob was old,
yet knew not the day of his death, yet I am young, and know the day of my
death, the kind of my death, and the place of my death. Also such a kind of
death is it, that two famous Preachers of the word of God suffered it before
me. John the Baptist, and Paul the Apostle, both beheaded, mention being made
of one in Scripture story, the other in Ecclesiasti^all History* these and
other Saints as I have read were beheaded for the Word, and for the(...) but
herein is my disadvantage, men think that I suffer not for Religion or
Conscience but for meddling with State-matters an old guise of the D(...) the
cause of death to the intermedling with State Affairs, the Rulers of Israel
would put Jeremy to death upon a civil account, because he fell away from the
Chaldeans, and (as the people said) would have brought (...) foreign force to
invade ^^em, which thing is laid to my charge, and (...) thereof as Jeremiah
was* I find the cause of men's sufferings in Scripture, (...)mputed to
State-matters. Paul m^st die, if the people have their will, though he preache^
Christ Jesus, yet by them accounted a mover of sedition upon a civil account is
my life taken away; y(...) prosecuted nothing against the present power. I am
this day making a double exchange, a Pulpit for a Scaffold and a Scaffold for a
Thro^^, and may also trade a numerous multitude for the innumerable Company of
Saints on Tower Hill, for the holy Hill of Sion, and this Guard of Soldiers
for a Guard of Angels to carry my soul unto Abraham (...) this is the best
Pulpit I ever came into, in my former God made me an instrument to (...) others
to Heaven, hereby God brings me to Heaven. These are the last words I shall
speak, and perhaps this last speech of mine may bring more glory to God, then
my former Sermons. Before I lay down my neck to the block, I shall lay open my
cause to the people, I speak the truth and lie not, God is my witness whom ^
serve in my spirit, I do not bring a revengeful heart to the Scaffold, but
avoiding all rancor and malice, I have bagged mercy for them that denied mercy
to me* and have prayed God to forgive them that would not forgive me; and the
worst I wish to them is, that I may meet their souls in Heaven. Concerning my
charge which is black and hiddeous, wherein many things were falsely suggested,
but nothing sufficiently proved by any one Act. The Charge high and full, but
the proof empty and low, though there were eight Witnesses against me, yet
none proved that I ever wrote any Letter, or directed any to write, no man
proved that I sent away any Letter that I collected any money for King, Queen,
or any of the Scottish Nation, as concerning my accusers, I have forgiven them,
and I pray God forgive them also; they not all agree amongst themselves; for
some being terrified beforehand, would not bear witness against me. Another
sent to me under his own hand, desiring to forgive him for the wrong he had
done me, and told me that day I should die a violent death, his life would be
no comfort to him, because ^e was an instrument of taking away mine. As
concerning my accusers, I will not judge them, neither will I justify them. I
believed what moved Herod to put off John Baptists, was the cause of my death,
for telling Herod of his herd incest, and for his Oaths sake Command was given
to behead John; to avoid, perjury, he would commit murder: had John's head
continued on his shoulders, he would have been guilty of (...). Concerning my
self who have gone through many and various ^^po^ts, some have been ready to
bury my name before my friends were ready to bury my body. God will not only
wipe off tears from mine eyes after death, but will one day wipe of blots from
my name; my hope is, my name will not rot above ground when this body of mine
shall rot under ground* and be resolved into dust. I am not ignorant what
calumnies are cast (...) me, the verynight before I was to suffer the last
month, an insulting Letter came to my hand, intimating that something would be
written against me after my death; but I hope you are more ingenuous then to
give credit to it, seeing I cannot then speak for my self* I am aspersed, both
as to practice and principles, there are 5 aspersions laid upon me, first to
matter of practice that I am a liar. I hope you will believe a dying man that
dares not look God in the face with a lie in his mouth, I denied nothing* that
was true before the Court what I denied before that, I confessed afterward say
some, that I never wrote Letter to the King or Queen, Church or State of
Scotland, that I never received any letter wrote to me from any one of them;
that I never collected, gave or lent one penny to this or that particular
person, or to any of the Scottish Nation; it is true I confess, and herein lies
the mistake; but it was (...) proved against me that I sent either money on
Letters to Massey, he was of the English, not of the Scottish Nation, I am
accused of moving to send money ^o the King and State of Scotland, which I
never did, and therefore that I said at the (...) after my sentence, I say
(...) that for the things I am condemned, neither does God not my own
conscience condemn me* The next particular I am accused of is to be an
extortioner, I am charged as to have received 30. l. of the loan of 300. l.
which in the presence of God and of you all is a notorious fable; I am accused
likewise to be an adulterer: but as Luther in another case said he was not
tempted to covetousness^, so may J say that through the grace of God, I was not
tempted to uncleanesss in all my life, it does not much grieve me though these
sl^nders lie upon me, When as Athenasius was accused by two H^rlots that he had
committed folly with them, though he was very chaste but that which comes
nearest my heart is this, that I am accused to be a murderer, also charged
with the guile of all the blood that has been shed in Scotland were I gu^lty
of one drop of it; I could not be filled with so much tranquillity and peace of
mind, so much serenity and joy of spirit as now I am. I bless God, I am free
from the blood of all men, they do to me as Nero did to the Christians, he set
Rome on fire, and charged the Christians with it: they put England and Scotland
in a fl^me, and l^y the charge upon me, which only the ambition and lusts of
wicked men have kindled. Did I ever invite or encourage our English Army to
invade Scotland? his I have done, and stand too, I have as a private man prayed
to God, wherein I have besought him, that there might be an agreement between
the King and the Scots upon interests of Religion.

I was only at one meeting where such things were proposed, namely to promote
the agreement between the King and Scots: I do declare against the Commissions
as they called them, and it is an Act of high presumption and of notorious
falsehood to say it was a plot of the Presbyterian party; it was the subtilty
of a politic party to raise this thereby to make the Presbyterians odious,
who are the best ordered persons for a Government in the World.

I am said to be a man of A turbulent spirit, and an enemy to the peace of this
Nation, ^ndeed I am borne a man of contention, not active but passive ^ many
strive and contend with me, I strive with no man, the grief of my heart has
been for divisions, and the desire of my soul for a union among Gods people, I
do not mean a State union to engage against the present power, that is rather a
combination and a confedracy then a union: Those that have gotten power by
policy and use it with cruelty, shall lose it with Ignominy; I remember an
observation of holy Greenwood, giving his judgment upon State, Government he
feared the coming in of Popery; I fear Atheism, Blasphemy, and all manner of
H^resie is rushing in upon this Land; that as to my practice, A word now to my
principles. I am accused to be an apostate, to be this, to be that, to be any
thing, but what I am: A high Court, A long Sword, and a bloody Scaffold, has
not made me to change my principles, what I shall say is not to provoke any; I
die with my judgment set against malignity; I do not count the covenanting
Godly party in Scotland to be Malignants for defending their Land against
invaders though against malignitie, not against a mixed Monarchy: I did oppose
the forces of the late King in my place and calling, and should he live now and
were I to live longer, should do it still; I did oppose his forces, but (...)
never against the Office of a King; I was against Court Parasites that would
scrue up Monarchy to Tyranny, as against those that pull it down to bring in
Anarchie, I was never for putting him to death, nor did I ever endeavor to
destroy his person, there is a speech upon the preaching a Sermon by me at
Vxbridge, that all would not he well till the King was let blood in the
neck-veine, but this report as many other is full of vanity and folly.

I die with my judgment not satisfied to take the engagement, God preserve
those that refuse it: I would not in the next place be looked upon as owning
this present Government, I die with my judgment against it: it was in the case
of life, I did petition, giving them the titles as other men do. Husha gave the
title to Absalom though David was the lawful King, Calvin gave a title to the
French King Rex. Christianissimus, and we to Henry the 8th. st^ling him
defender of the Faith, he had no right to the ^itle, because given him upon an
ill ground by the Pope for opposing the doctrine of Luther, which none did
scruple afterward to give him. In the last place, to provoke none my judgment
is against the invasion of the English Army into the Scottish Nation that
joined with us, I drew their swords in our quarrel; and now be (...) they
would not be a Commonwealth, they shall not be a people, because they would not
lay their Consciences waste, their Land must be laid waste; I die cleaving to
all those Oaths, Vows, and Protestations, and that solemn League and
Covenant that were imposed by the two Houses of Parliament, and I had rather
die a Covenant keeper then live a Covenant breaker.

The third and last part of my Speech is with a word of exhortation to this
great City; and then I commit my soul to God that gave it. I have wished it
both af^^ence and confluence of all happiness: London, London, God is staining
the pride of all thy glory, contempt of the Ministry, opposition against
Reformation has brought London low, and I fear will yet bring it lower. I
tremble to think what ^vils are coming upon it for as Commodities have been
spread from hence into all the corners of the Land, so Heresies and Blasphemies
in all parts of this Nation have their rise from hence; first let me beg you to
love the painful and godly Ministers if they be taken away; you are like to
have worse come in their room; Ministers are now the great eye sores, when
before counted the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel. After Junius was taken
away, Arminius that pestilent ^^eretique came in his room: Anabaptists,
Arminians, nay Jesuits are like now to spread ^pace. Submit to Church
government that would lay restraint upon your lusts. A golden yoke if not
submitted to, God may lay an iron yoke upon you; Take heed of those Doctrines
that come under the notion of new lights, when the brothers the^eof say it is
new, it is to be questioned whether they be true. In 3^. Deuteronomy. ^7. it is said,
there they sacrifice^ to Devils, not to God, to gods whom they knew not, to
now gods that came newly up: their new gods, what were they but old Devils*
many of those things going under the notion of her ^^ghts, are but old
darkness raked out of the dunghill of error that has been ^ast out, and by
the Church buried with reproach. 4. Bewail the great less you have of the
taking away your Ministers, already ten Ministers at once, those burning and
sl^ining lights in their particular Candlesticks, and bright Star^es in their
several Oths, though I am not worthy of the world, yet I am taken ou^ of it;
but as for my suffering Brethren, which are under bonds and ^anishments in the
world, of them the world is not worthy. Take heed of engaging the Wa^^e with
(...) friends, I have opposed the Tyranny of a King, but I never opposed the
Ti^le take heed what you do, to speak to the (...) Ministers of this City; were
(...) a dying, I would say nothing, for multitude of years teach wild in, and
therefore would be silen^: I desire God to show them mercy. I would beg but
(...) of them as they have not been ashamed of my chains, so now that they
would wax confident by my bonds and blo^d, Acts. 29. Now Lord behold their
threatenings: and grant unto thy Servants, that with all boldness they may speak
thy word, though I am but young I will offer my young experience to my grave
Fathers and Brethren, now I am to d^e I have abundance of peace in my own
Conscience, that I have set my (...) against sin and apostasy by purchasing ^ll
will from such, I have procured peace from God, I have lived ^^ pe^^^, and I
shall die in peace, the Government of the Church, will stand: and of all (...)
with this persuasion, that the Presbyterian Government makes most for purity
and unity throughout the Churches of the Saints: take heed of too general
admissions to the Lords Supper, and be not to prodigal of the blood of Christ.
Now speaking to them I shall speak a word of them, and so finish, Many (...)
there, as if all the City Ministers did engage in this design; for which I a^
now condemned as a dying man; I tell you, all the Ministers that were present
at the meeting, ^or had any hand in that business, they are either in prison or
discovered already: therefore upon my death, I free all the Ministers else, and
in which my conscience does tell me I have not sinned: I have done immediately;
for I would fain be at my Fathers house: I would speak to my own Congregation,
to give praise to God for them, and to return thanks to them; for they have
afforded me a great deal of love (ex^ept a few) and liberal maintenance: This
is all I desire of them to choose a Learned, Godly, and Orthodox Minister to
succeed; and it would be a great comfort to me before I go to Heaven if such a
one filled the place; where he shall have a good livelihood, and much love; I
had never parted from them, but that Death separated me; to which I do submit
with all Christian-meekness, and cheerfulness: I am now drawing to an end of my
Speech, and to an end of my Life together: But before I expire my last breath,
I come to justify God, and condemn my self; for God is righteous, because I
have sinned, though he does cut me off in the midst of my days, and of my
Ministry; I cannot take up that complaint in the 44 Psalm, That thou sellest
thy people for naught: My blood shall not be spilt for naught; I may do more
good by my death, and glorify God more upon a Scaffold, then in dying upon my
Bed: Blessed be God I have not the least trouble in my mind; I shall quietly
lay my self down upon the block; I see men hunger after my flesh, and thi^st
after my blood; which will heighten my happiness, and hasten their ruin:
Though my blood be not as the blood of Nobles; yet mine is Christian blood;
nay, Ministers blood; nay more innocent blood also: My dead-body will be a
morsel hardly to be digested, and but ^ad food for this Infant Commonwealth
(as Mr. Prideaux calls it) to suck upon; but ^^od is just, that he has not made
the Prison Hell, and this Scaffold the bottomless if; it is of his mercy: I do
not only justify God, but must also magnify the riches of his grace toward
me, that I who was born in Wales (an obscu^e Country, of obscure Parents)
should be singled out. For 14 years I never heard one Sermon; yet in the^ 5
year it pleased God to convert me: Blessed be God that has not only made me a
Christian, but a Minister also* and judging me faithful has put me into the
Ministry; it is my glory I die so; I had rather be a Preacher in a Pulpit,
then a Prince upon a Throne; I had rather be an instrument of bringing souls to
heaven, then that all Nations should bring in tribute to me, what ever men
judge of me, I am a Martyr, would I have injured my Conscience, and ventured my
soul, there had been more hope of saving my life: blessed be God, I have not
sined, but chosen affliction rather then sin; welcome death, wellcom Axe,
wellcom Scaffold, wellcom all, because they will send me to a mansion in my
Fathers house; thanks be to God he has stood by me in all my imprisonment, he
has strengthened and supported me, though I now come to an untimely end; death
is not a terror to me, God is not a terror, therefore death is not dreadful. I
have formerly been under a spirit of bondage, and had more fear in the drawing
of a tooth, then now for the cutting off my head: when fear was upon me, death
was not near; now death is near, fear is vanished. I bless God, though men
judge me to be cast out of the world, God has not cast me out of his own
people: some think I am not worthy to live, yet others judge I do not deserve
to die. I have done, having no more to say, but to desire the help of your
prayers, that God would give me continual supplies of divine grace to carry me
through this great work I am to do, that doing a work I near did, I may have
that strength I never had, that I may put off this body with as much comfort of
mind, as ever my Clothes to go to rest. Now I am to commend my soul to God,
and to receive my fatal blow: though men thrust me out of the world, they
cannot shut me out of Heaven* I am going to my long home, and you are g^ing to
your short home; but I tell you, I shall be at home before you, I am going to
the Heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable Company of Angels, to the spirits of
just men made perfect, and to God the Judge of all, in whose presence I shall
have fullness of joy, and pleasure for evermore. I conclude with that Speech of
the Apostle in 2 Timothy 4.6.7. I am ready to be offered, and the time of my
departure is at hand, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course,
and I have kept the faith henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day,
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing, through
whose blood, when I have shed my blood* I do expect full remission of all my
sins, and so the Lord bless you all.

And then taking his leave of them, said; Beloved Christians I desire your
Christian assistance in this great work; I beseech you join with me in prayer:
And so immediately (standing at the Rail) expressed himself as follows: MOst
Eternal and glorious Lord God, I thy poor and unworthy Creature, do here humbly
prostrate my self before thy sacred Majesty; beseeching thee through the merits
of Jesus Christ my blessed Savior and Redeemer, to have mercy on me; and to
wipe away all my sins and transgrissions; and dear Father I humbly beseech thee
that thou will be pleased to strengthen me with thy blessed Spirit, in this
great work, that so I may freely and willingly lay down my neck upon the block;
and all this I implore and ^rave, not only for my self, but for my brother
also that (...) day to come after me; with wh(...) hope (...) have a triumphant
meeting in thy glorious and eternal Kingdom.



Having ended his prayer, he turned himself about to the Executioner, saying;

Friend, Are all things in readiness: Yes sir, Replied the Executioner:
whereupon, he unbraced his Doublet, and gave it to a friend and than pulled out
a Red Scarf out of his pocker, and gave it to the Executioner, saying, Dispose
of this upon the block as thou think convenient, which accordingly he did,
spreading it upon the Sawdust, and laying it upon the Block; Then Mr. Love put
his hand in his pocket and took out 3. l. wrapped up in a white paper, and gave
it to the Executioner saying; Friend, here is three pieces for thee, do thy
Office, and I beseech God to forgive thee, as I freely do* then Mr. Love
kneeled down, and laid his Neck upon the Block; and by the sign of lifting up
his left ha^^ the executioner immediately let fall the ax, and at one blow
severed his ^^ad from his shoulders: which being done, be took up the head in
his hand, and presently after laid both body and head in the black coffin
together* which was soon carried off, having a mourning cloth over it, Doctor
Dun (the chyrurgeon) attending the same, for the uniting of both together again.

That thinking upon the separation of his Head from his Body, it was a sweet
contemplation to him, to consider the conjunction of his soul with his head in
Heaven, being as ready to die as Moses was, when there was no more between God
and him, but Moses go up and die, with an heroical alacrity tempered with a
gracious humility, did he give up his soul to God, and bid farewell to the
world.

No sooner was his Corpse carried down to the Scaffold stairs, but immediately
Mr. Gibbins (formerly Secretary to Col. Hollis) was guarded up by some of the
Sheriffs Officers, who came in ^ Coach from the Press-gard at Newgate, to the
place of execution on Tower Hill. He deported himself with a great deal of
resoluteness and gallantry, and after an indifferent copious Speech, to this
effect, That he was innocent of what he was b^ought thither for that day; but
yet notwithstanding would not change his condition of laying his neck to the
Block for an Emperors Throne, if he might get ten thousand worlds by it: then
immediately going to prayer, (having ended the same) he unbraced himself, and
gave his Cloak, Doublet, and two Rings to his Uncle, and two pounds to the
Executioner, and then laying his neck upon the Block, the Executioner did his
Office by receiving the sign, and lifting up his left hand, severed his head
from his shoulders at one blow, and a little (...).

FINIS.

