A DECLARATION OF THE MOST CHRISTIAN KING, LOVIS THE XIIIth. King of FRANCE and
NAVARRE. DECLARING The Reasons wherefore His MAJESTY has prohibited all Trade
with ENGLAND.

ALSO That He has given Commission to raise an Army for the Assistance of the
KING of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1649.

A DECLARATION of the most Christian King, LOVIS the XIII. KING of FRANCE, and
NAVARRE.
Lodovicus Rex.

WHereas about eight years since, a party of tumultuous and discontented
persons, abusing the name and privilege of Parliament, by fair and specious
pretenses, and the assistance of the riotous City of London, drew the Subjects
of England into a most violent and bloody Rebellion against their natural
Liege Lord, our dear and Royal Uncle, Charles the First, King of Great
Britain and Ireland, of most blessed and pious memory, which they carried on
with implacable hatred, and indefatigable devilish policies, pursuing all that
did oppose them with blood and rapine, and wading up to the ankles and neck,
through a whole red Sea of humane and Country blood, to the accomplishment of
their execrable and prodigious designs: Which having fully compassed, by
getting His Majesty's Sacred Person into their power; after a most inhumane
manner they hurry him from one Prison to another, continually perplexing him
with amphibolous Propositions, such as neither in conscience became a
Christian, nor in honor a King to grant. At length with Kisses and All-hailes
in the forefront of their Treason, they invite His Majesty to a Personal
Treaty; who to manifest his passionate desire to peace, spread His Royal Self
into acts of Grace and Favor; going beyond all His Predecessors in munificent
Concessions: Yet even when he had yielded beyond their hope and expectation,
and surrendered His most indisputable Rights and Prerogatives into their hands:
with malice as inexorable as the grave, deep and bottomless as hell, they
abruptly break off, and by force of Arms drag him to the Bar; where Vassals
took upon them to judge their Sovereign, and call him to an account, who owed
an account to none but God alone, and having Blasphemously upbrayded him with
the unjust infamies of Tyrant, Traitor, and Murderer; and sufficiently sported
themselves with scorn and contempt, after a small intervall of time, in
Triumph they convey him to the Scaffold, which in aggravation of his sorrow,
they had prepared at the entrance into his Royal Palace, where in the sight
of his Subjects they committed a most Barbarous Assassination upon his Sacred
Person, by severing his Royal Head from his Body, by the hands of the Common
Hangman; a prodition without a match, and such as has filled even the very
Souls of Heathens with horror and amazement: For it was the most nefarious,
facinorous, flagitious and incogitable act of Persons neither generous, for
there was no drop of ingenious blood in them; Nor men, for they were forsaken
of humanity, and had lost the Bowels of manly compassion; Nor dogs, unless of
the Brood of Cerberus; nor Tigers, nor Panthers, nor ravening Woolves, nor
Sheebeares, nor any thing but the most unnatural, strange, very incarnated and
transanimated Devils, that ever usurpt humane shape, to the vexatious torment
and destruction of mankind: Nor have these sponges of blood yet sucked their
fill, but with implacable Malice they yet pursue his Royal Issue, and by force
of Arms withhold from them their Indubitate and successive Right, and have
solemnly Proclaimed them Traitors in the chief streets of that Kingdoms
Metropolis, and all other Cities and Corporations, and that it shall be lawful
for any man to kill them, wherever they shall meet them within the limits of
those Territories as Spies and Enemies to the Commonwealth. And they have
further declared and Proclaimed, That they will for ever abolish all
Kingly-government, in England and Ireland, as chargable, unnecessary and
Tyrannical, and in stead thereof will establish an eternal Anarchy, (which
they call a Commonwealth) perpetually enslaving the miserable people of those
Kingdoms, to the Tyrannical wills of them and their Posterity; and having
broken the Diadems of State, and possessed themselves of the Regalia, are now
by way of sale, sharing all the Lands and Revenues of the Crown, with the
appurtenances among themselves and their Favorites; Thus are they mounted to
transcendents, not to be placed in the classes or Ranks of hitherto
experienced or practiced wickedness; So that if all the Records and Chronicles
ancient and Modern, Divine and profane, were thoroughly searched by the most
scrutinous eye, and all black and dire machinations, plots and conspiracies,
either contrived or acted by Rebels and Traitors, against their Princes, were
arithmatically cast up, here would be found the summa Totalis, Rebellion and
Treason, being now brought to the fullness of perfection:

Nor are these Fedifragones, miscreants contented to imbrue, and bathe their
hands in the Kings blood, but they persecute all his relations; enriching
themselves in the ruin of his illustrious Queen: inforcibly withholding from
her that Dowry which the King and his Council, in consideration of a large and
vast Sum of Money, alloted for her maintenance: Whereby they have broak the
ancient league between the Kingdoms, and given us fair occasion in hostile
manner, with our Armies of Horse, and Foot, to invade that Kingdom; Nor can we
conceal our deep sense and just indignation, at those gross and scandalous
obloquies, which they daily cast upon the person and reputation of our dear
Aunt, the Queen Dowager, by their libellous Pamphlets, those Messengers of
their Malice, which like the plagues of Egypt reduplicated and multiplied,
they daily send forth, by which Aegypticall flies, they endeavor, what in them
lies, to cause the sweet ointment of her precious name to stink upon the face
of the Earth; although her unparralelled virtues are so candid and general,
that she may without flattery be styled, The Paragon of Queens, the Glory and
miracle of her Sex, whose Honor and injuries, we are bound by the bonds of
nature, and affinity, to vindicate and revenge.

And that they might macerate the whole world in blood, and set all Christian
Kingdoms into flames and combustion, they have dispacht their Incendiaries,
like Locusts into all parts of Christendom, who by subdolous and sly
insinuations and pretenses of popular Liberty, and freedom from Monarchical
Tyranny, endeavor to carck the bonds of protection and fealty between Kings
and their Subjects, as they have lately done in this our Kingdom, whereby
Trumpeting sedition and Rebellion in the ears of our people, they lately
stirred them up to mutinies and insurrections to the apparent hazard of our
Royal person, Crown and Dignities, which are now by Gods goodness appeased
and allayed; by which policy of dividing Kings and their Subjects throughout
Christendom, they hope to immerge all possibility of our aid and assistance
in restoring their present Sovereign, and establish their hermaphroditicall
Government with greater Security.

Having therefore upon very just grounds both of Conscience and reason, taken
these premises into our Princely consideration, we have thought good, by the
Nature and deliberate advice and consent of the most illustrious Lady the Queen
Regent our Royal Mother, and of the Princes, Prelates and Parliaments of our
Kingdom, to stop and forbid all trade and commerce between the Subjects of our
Kingdom and that Rebellious Nation; till they shall return to their due
obedience to their Sovereign; and by our Royal Proclamation which we have
caused to be published in all our Cities and Towns Corporate, within this our
Kingdom of France, etc. We have strictly prohibited all English Wool and
woollen Cloth, or any other commodities to be brought into this Kingdom, and
we have thereby Commanded all Sheriffs and Mayors, Balliffs and subordinate
Officers to make diligent search in all Cities, Towns, and Ports within their
several Jurisdictions, and to seize upon and confiscate to our use, all such
prohibited goods as they shall at any time hereafter find in any part of our
Dominions, and whosoever shall conceal any such prohibited goods so in their
custody, and not discover them to the chief Magistrate, or some other
subordinate Officer in the City, Town or Port, where they dwell within the
compass of four and twenty hours, shall forfeit their Estates, and for the
first fault, suffer one Years Imprisonment; for the second, five Years; and for
the Third, perpetual Imprisonment without bail or mainprise. And we have
further by our said Proclamation commanded, that no Merchant or other Subject
of our Kingdom, doc export or suffer to be exported by any English Merchant or
others, any Corn, Wine, Oil, Skins, Nuts, Chestnuts, Beef, Pork, or any other
Merchandises into that Kingdom of England: and whosoever shall be found
offending herein, shall incur the penalty of High Treason. And we have further
commanded all Englishmen, of what degree or quality soever, not warranted and
protected by the King of England, or not naturalized Den zons of this Kingdom,
to depart this Kingdom by the 18 of October, next ensuing the Date of that our
said Proclamation; and that no Englishman whatsoever not protected or
naturalized as aforesaid do presume to remain in any part of our Dominions,
upon pain of being executed, as Spies, Enemies and Traitors, to this our
Kingdom: And it shall be High Treason for any Subject of this our Kingdom, to
conceal or harbor within their Houses any Englishman, not protected and
naturalized as aforesaid, and not discover the said person to some Magistrate
or Justice of Peace within four and twenty Hours.

And conceiving our selves bound both as a Christian and a King, by the bonds
of Religion and Nature, and the long continued League between the Kingdoms, to
revenge the barbarous murder of the late King of England, of glorious memory,
to repair the injuries of our Royal Aunt, his Queen Dowager, and to restore
King Charles the Second our Cousin, to the Thrones of his Kingdoms, and subdue
his People to his obedience, we have Issued forth our Royal Commission under
the great Seal of our Kingdom, whereby we have authorized our Right trusty
and welbeloved Cousin the Count of Saint Paul, to raise eight Regiments of
Horse, and twelve of Foot, each horse Regiment to consist of eight hundred, and
the Foot of a thousand; and of our own Free will and princely grace, we are
pleased to advance two years pay out of our Royal treasury: and to furnish
the said Count of Saint Paul, with a train of Artillery, and all other
necessaries for martial employment; and have straightly commanded the said
Count and all other Officers, and Soldiers of that Army, faithfully and
obediently to observe all such commands, as they shall from time to time
receive from our most entirely beloved Cousin the King of England: and that they
be ready to enter any part his Majesty's Dominions, as shall be thought most
necessary by the said King and his Council, and there to join with any of his
Majesty's Armies, and to fight with, kill and slay all that they shall find in
Rebellion against his said Majesty: And forasmuch as all Christian Kings are
concerned herein, we have thought good to publish this our Declaration, which
we have caused to be translated into all Languages, that all the Kings and
Princes of Christendom may take notice of our proceedings, and after our
example, may contribute their utmost power and assistance for the restoring
that injured King to his Dominions, and reducing his Subjects to his obedience.

Given at our Court at Paris, September 2d. 1649.
FINIS.

