THE DISCOURSE OF ROBERT EARL of LOTHIAN, JVSTICE-GENERAL, His Majesty's
COMMISSIONER TO THE GENERAL-ASSEMBLY, After the Reading the KING'S LETTER. Upon
the 16th Day of January, 1692.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT WM
RR


EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, anno Dom. 1692.

THE DISCOURSE OF ROBERT Earl of LOTHIAN, Justice General, His Majesty's
Commissioner to the General Assembly, etc.
Right Reverend Ministers, and Elders of this General Assembly,
I Shall not take up your Time with any thing concerning my self, being sensible
of so many Natural Unfitnesses for the Character I bear, that it were no little
Disingenuity, to endeavor by an Apology to extenuat them; But being very
unexpectedly Commanded by the King, whose Orders I Dispute not, to meet you at
this Affembly, I choosed rather to expose my Reputation which hitherto I have
been tender enough of, with this Disadvantage to come after a Person so well
Qualifyed and Fitted for this Affair; then to decline any thing wherein His
Majesty may think I could in the least be Serviceable to Him, or have any
Prospect of being any manner of way Instrumental in settling the Peace of the
Church, which has for so long a time been Rent, without any great appearance
hitherto of an effectual way for its Healing.

And indeed the known Inclinations of His Majesty to go the greatest length can
consist with Royalty, to effectuat so good a Work, are no less Encouragments
to your Well-wishers, then they should be Incitments to make you go all the
Lengths and Advances on your parts, that such a Pious and Protestant King
deserves at your Hands, who is willing to do more voluntarly, than what could
ever be extorted from His Royal Predecessors, even in their lowest Condition;
And which can in Reason never be expected from any shall succeed in the Royal
Throne. But as no less was to be looked for from the Return of your Prayers,
and your sincere Endeavors in the work of the Ministry in the midst of
sharpest Trials, than the Blessing of such a King, your Deliverer, who in
following the Steps of his Renouned and Noble Predecessors the Princes of
Orange, the Bulwark and Deliverers of the Protestant Interest throughout the
World, has now in a manner put it in your own Hands, to settle the Peace, and
Unity of our Church; so upon the other hand, if there should be any Shyness or
Remissness in coming up the length to give His Majesty a suitable Return, as it
will be justly thought by your Friends, a Stroke from Heaven, from hidden
Causes of GODS unsearchable Decrees, as the Destruction of the Primitive
Churches were; So the Opportunity lost, will be an Advantage and Rejoicing to
your Enemies, probably not to be regained. But I shall Wish and Hope for better
things from this Reverend and Wise Assembly, who have in your own Hands, to
make your selves a more general one, by uniting the Church, removing Error and
Scandal, stopping the Mouths of your Adversaries, and make the Church of
Scotland more famous than any Church, or Churchmen I know, who in no Age were
much commended for Charity toward their Brethren; tho no Christian Duty is so
much recommended by Holy Scripture.

There is one thing I cannot forbear to mention, much talked of, being much in
the Heads, and in Controversy in this Age, which is Church Government, and
which I cannot deny to be Material, it being the Hedge about the Vineyard,
without which the tender Plants cannot be raised, neither the mature Fruit well
preserved; Yet in comparison of several others, it appears not to be of so
great Consequence, being that which so many Learned, Pious and Orthodox Divines
differ so much upon, who would suffer Martyrdom before they would yield to
Points, that make not so great Noise, and tho that Fence he of very good use,
it cannot be supposed, it is raised to keep out Fellow Laborers, who are
willing to work in the Vineyard; Since those came in at the last hour, were
made equal with those that came at the first hour, who had born the burden, and
heat of the day; So it would seem reasonable, that since the Bishops, who were
looked upon as your Persecutors, being laid aside by Act of Parliament, and of
whom, tho it cannot be said, they did come up the length of the Piety, or Moral
Virtues, of those Bishops of the Primitive Times, or of those in our Neighbor
Nation of England, who have given so recent a Testimony of their Faithfulness;
Yet that should be no hinderance, why those should not be cordially Received
into the Government, who are already in the Exercise of the more essentials,
with this double Advantage, both to strengthen you considerably, and leave the
others without so much as the hopes of either Party, or Abbettors.

What can after this be the Grounds of rational Apprehensions or Jealousies?
Since Episcopacy is now Abolished, and Presbytrie Established by an Act of
Parliament, which His Majesty since, has given repeated Assurances, not to
alter; Sure then the most prudent, whereof, I am persuaded, there are many in
this Grave, and Wise Assembly, will not stand upon Nyceties and Punctilio's, so
extrinsick to Men of your Profession, which even to Laics, Princes, or States,
where Points of Honor have got so unreasonable Footing upon, are at best but
blameable Formalities, which neither answers the Laws of GOD, nor Men; nor
Biggottry, which I hope, you need not be guarded against, though incident to
Churchmen; And the Character of the Erroneous, is found to be oftnest Lodged
in the narrowest Heads and Capacities, and frequently mistaken for Zeal.

But I forbear, being loath to take up your time; Only this, that I think it a
Stretch to Reason, to Comprehend, how Royal Authority, in a Protestant King,
can Clash with a Protestant Church, in His own Dominions, no Articles of Faith
being controverted; So I shall only lay before you, what His Majesty, with so
much Reason expects, and which both your Friends and Enemies, looks upon with
such different Eyes and Expectations, and is, what I suppose, your real
Interest, in the first place, cheerfully to receive your Brethren with open
Arms, who are willing to Join, and who have never been made appear to be either
Scandalous or Erroneous, and who are ready to submit to the Government, and
leave those things of smaller moment, until that great Blessing of a Christian
Charitable Union be perfected, without which, all endeavors else, will be to
small purpose; But upon the other hand, if there shall be any Ministers, that
Preached under Episcopacy, should now have any Remissness to embrace the Offer
of your accepting of them as it will discover what Spirits they are of, and
what Measures should be taken, so it should not retard, nor render suspect,
those who freely offer themselves.

But I shall hope, that henceforth, the only Endeavor shall be, in an Holy
Emulation, who shall show most readiness, to be Unite; That they may join their
Labors, in the Work of the Ministry; And that my part may only be that of a
Witness, with the Satisfaction, of having the Honor, to Acquaint His Majesty,
of what I am Confident, He will be so very well pleased with.

FINIS.

