A LOOKING-GLASS FOR TRAITORS BEING The Manner of the TRIAL of those Barbarous
Wretches at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey, who contrived and compassed the
Death of his late Sacred Majesty King CHARLES the First, of ever blessed
memory: With an account of their several Araignments, Conviction, Condemnetion
and Execution.
A: The Lord major: B: The Comissioners: C: The Kings Council: D: The2
Sheriffs: E: The Clerks: F The Jury: G: The Prisoner: H: The Witnesses: I: The
Bayl-dock: K: The Criers of ye Court: L: The Keepers: M: The Stayre Case: N:
The houses looking into ye Court: O: Persons of Quallity Spactators within ye
Court: P: The Common people in ye outward yard: Q: The yard between the Court
and ye Bar:

I: C delin.


The names of the Lords and others, unto whom the Commission of Oyer and
Terminer was directed under the Great seal of England. for the trial of the
pretended Judges of His late Sacred Majesty.
THomas Aleyn Knight and Baronet, Lord Mayor of the City of Lendon: The Lord
Chancellor of England. The Earl of Southampton, Lord Treasurer of England. The
Duke of Somerset. The Duke of Albemarle. The Marquess of Ormond, Steward of
His Majesty's household. The Earl of Lindsey High Chamberlain of England. The
Earl of Manchester, Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household. The Earl of Dorset.
The Earl of Berkeshire. The Earl of Sandwich. Viscount Say and Seal. The Lord
Roberts. The Lord Finch. Denzill Hollis Esquire. Sir Frederick Cornwallis,
Knight and Baronet, Treasurer of his Majesty's household. Sir Charles Barkley,
Knight, Comptroller of His Majesty's Household. Mr. Secretary Nicholas. Mr.
Secretary Morris, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper. Arthur Annesley, Esquire. The Lord
Chief Baron. Mr. Justice Foster. Mr. Justice Mallet. Mr. Justice Hyde. Mr.
Baron Atkins. Mr. Justice Twisden. Mr. Justice Tyrrel. Mr. Baron Turner. Sir
Harbottle Grimston, Knight and Baronet. Sir William Wild, Knight and Baroner
Recorder of London. Mr. Sergeant Brown. Mr. Sergeant Hale. John Howel Esquire.
Sir Geoffery Palmer, His Majesty's Attorney General. Sir Heneage Finch, his
Majesty's Solicitor General. Sir Edward Turner, Attorney to His Highness the
Duke of York. Wadham Windham, Esquire. Edward Shelton, Esquire Clerk of the
Crown.
The Names of the Grand Jury sworn were
Sir William Darcy, Baronet, Foreman. Sir Robert Bolles, Baronet: Sir Edward
Ford, Knight. Sir Thomas Prestwick. Sir William Coney, Knight. Sir Charles
Sidley, Baronet. Sir Lewis Kirk, Knight. Sir Henry Littleton, Baronet. Sir
Ralph Bovey, Baronet. Edward Chard Esquire. Robert Giggen Esquire. John
Fotherley Esquire. Charles Gibbons Esquire. Thomas Geree Esquire. Richard Cox
Esquire. Robert Bladwell Esquire. Henry Mustian Esquire. John Markham Esquire.
Edward Buckley, Gent. Francis Bourchier, Gent. Edward Lole. Heart, Crier.
HIs Majesty (in pursuance of an Act of Parliament which had left the persons
following to be tried according to Law, for being the principal Actors in the
sad Tragedy of his Fathers death) issued out a special Commission of Oyer and
terminer to the Judges and others Commissioners for that purpose: and
accordingly Wednesday the 10. of October they met at the Sessions House in the
Old Bailey, and the same morning the following persons were ordered to be
brought from the Tower to Newgate, and a way was made from the Press-yard
backwards to the Sessions house, privately to convey them to and again, to keep
them from the pressing of the people.

Thomas Harrison. John Cook. Robert Titchburne. Sir Hardress Waller. Simon
Meyne. Owen Roe. Mr. John Carew. Peter Temple. Robert Liburne. Col. Adrian
Scroop. James Temple. Gilbert Millington. Mr. Thomas Scott. Hugh Peter's: Isaac
Pennington, Col. John Jones. Daniell Axtell. John Downs. M. Gregory Clement.
Francis Hacker. Edmund Harvey. Augustine Garland. Henry Marten, Vincent Potter.
Will. Heveningham. Henry Smith. Thomas Wait. George Fleetwood.
All which being brought to the Bar, were indicted and arraigned to the
following effect:

That they not having the fear of God before their eyes, but being led by the
instigation of the Devil, had maliciously, traitorously, and advisedly
imagined, consulted, contrived, and compassed the death of His late Majesty
Charles the first of ever blessed memory; and that they had aided, procured, a
betted, assisted, and comforted a certain person with a vizard upon his face,
and a frock upon his body for that purpose.

To which all pleaded Not guilty, except Sir Hardres Waller and Col. George
Fleetwood, who being conscious of their own guilt, and satisfied with the
hainousness of their fact pleaded guilty, and put in their Petitions to the
Court craving mercy. And although Mr. Hugh Peter's said he would not plead
guilty for ten thousand worlds, yet he was found to be a great forwarder of
that black design.

This being the first days work, which was only to arraigne, the next day
being Thursday Major Genesis Harrison singly was brou^ht to the Bar, but before he
could get a Jury that he liked, he took upon him the liberty of an English man
and excepted against thirty five persons, which being done twelve were chosen
upon whom he put himself for his Trial, and being charged by the Kings Council
for being one that Signed the Commission for the establishing a High Court of
Justice, One that Sat among them, One that Signed that Horrid Warrant for the
Kings Execution; and was One likewise who had Contrived the Time the Place and
the Manner of the Kings Execution. Major General Harrison in his Pleadings
carried himself so confidently to the Court as if he thought himself Careless
and Unconcerned in the business: and seemed to justify not only the Power
under which he Acted but also the Act it self, saying that Kings had formerly
been privately Assassinated and Murdered, but what they had done was in the
Face of the Sun and in the Fear of the Lord; whereat the Court was much
troubled to see that he should make God the Author of that Horrid Murder; and
being told that the thing he called the Commons of England were so far from
being a Parliament, that they had not the least color of Authority, and that
if they had been the whole house of Commons and joined to the whole house of
Lords, they could not by any Act of theirs take away the Life of the least
Cripple at the Gate, much less of the King, etc.

Major General Harrison not being able to speak to the matter of Fact, it was
left to the Jury who without going forth of the Court immedia^ely found him
Guilty, and Sentence accordingly passed on him, To go from that place to the
place from whence he came, and from thence to be drawn upon a Hurdle to the
place of Execution, there to be Hanged by the Neck till he were half Dead, that
he should be cut down a Live, and his Members cut off before his Face and burnt
in the Fire, his Bowels to be taken out and burnt likewise, his Head to be cut
off and his Body to be divided into four Quarters, and disposed of as his
Majesty shall think fit. Which sentence was put in Execution on Saturday
following at Charing Cross.

The next day being Friday the Court called to the Bar, Col. Adrian Scroope,
Mr. John Carew, Mr. Thomas Scot, Mr. Gregory Clement, and Col. John Jones.

Col. Scroope leads the Van of these Five to the Bar, and after his Indictment
was read, and being charged as one that sat in that bloody Court, and set his
hand to that Wicked Warrant for the Execution, the Kings Council produced
Witnesses which confirmed the same, to which Col. Scroope pleaded that he could
not justify himself from the Fact, but did entreat Council as to matter of
Law, that he was no Parliament Man, but only acted in the High Court of
Justice by a Commission from the Parliament which was then accounted the
supreme Authority of the Nation, and was owned by the Generality of the people,
and that sitting in that Court by command of that Authority he hoped it would
justify him, and therefore desired Council to provide himself. But being told
as Major General Harrison had been that there was no matter of Law in the
thing, and that the Illegal Usurpt power of those few members which Authorized
that black Court had not the least color of an Authority, which answer
silenced him, and so being left to the Jury was likewise found Guilty.

Mr. John Car^w was next called for to the Bar, and being Taxt in manner and
form with Col. Scroope for signing to the Act for Establishing a High Court of
Injustice and signing the aforesaid bloody Warrant for the Kings Execution; he
like Major Genesis Harrison would have justified the Act, pleading Error to the
Indictment because that said he did it not having the Fear of God before his
Eyes whereas what he had done was in the Fear of the most Holy and most
Righteous Lord; he likewise was found Guilty by the Jury.

Mr. Thomas Scot is called who so much Gloried in his being a Contriver of the
Kings Death, that he desired it might be writ upon his Tomb that all ^he World
might know it, but now being brought to the Bar he pleads not Guilty; he said
that he had often prayed with tears that if there were any wickedness in the
Death of the King God would be pleased to convince him of it, but that he never
received any conviction; he would have pleaded the Authority of the Parliament,
but being told there could not be a Parliament without King, Lords and Commons
his Plea had the like success of the former.

Col. John Jones who was Mr. Scotts bedfellow, who seeing that all the
Arguments which they had contrived between them to answer the charge proved
ineffectuall, and that the Plea on the other side of the Kings Council was
un-answerable, confessed his being present at the Court, and signing of the
Warrant for the Kings Execution; upon which he was by the Jury returned guilty

Mr. Gregory Clement delivered a Petition to the Court and desired to plead
guilty to the Indictment, acknowledging the heinousness of the crime, and that
his former plea of Not guilty might be waved. Upon which the five received the
aforesaid sentence together.

On Saturday Mr. John Cock and Mr. Hugh Peter's were brought to the Bar. Mr.
Cook was taxed for signing that wicked Libel called A charge of High treason
exhibited on behalf of the people of England against Charles Stuart King. He
pleaded so much like a Lawyer, that it was answered, That he he had transgrest
the Law very much that unders^ood it so much; that whereas he pretended to be a
servant to the people of England, it did concern the Jury to take notice
thereof, for they were part of the people, and ifthey did own what he said they
justified the Prisoner; but it was hoped that they stood there to tell the
World that the people of England had nothing to do in it; that he was the man
that said the King must die, and Monarchy with him, and that he frequently
interrupted the King, not suffering him to answer for himself, and was aegry
with the Court that (as he pretended) they suffered the King to trifle away
time. He was likewise found guilty.

Mr. Hugh Peter's stood strangely amazed and could say nothing for himself,
against that Jury of witnesses that appeared against him: as that he said,
England could not be settled till 150. were taken away, which he said were L L
L, viz. the Lords, the Levites, and the Lawyers; that he was often conspiring
privately with Oliver Cromwell the Kings death, that he could even reverence
the High Court of Justice, it looked so like the judgment of the world which
should be at the last day by the Saints: With many other blasphemies too large
to enumerate; he was as aforesaid found guilty.

On Monday Col. Axtell, Col. Hacker, and Capt. Hewlet were brought to the
Court; the First for being Guard to the High Court of Injustice, the Second for
guarding the King to the Scaffold, and the Third for cutting off his Head: Col.
Aztell commanded the Soldiers to cry, Justice, justice, Execution, execution:
Col. Hacker signed the bloody Warrant for that wicked Murder, and Capt. Hewlet
was the probably supposed Man that gave the Fatal BLOW, as by the course of the
evidence may appear, viz. That his voice was heard upon the Scaffold, and his
Breeches were seen under his Frock, that he confessed he was to have 100 l. and
preferment in Ireland to do it; that being asked whether he Cut off the King's
Head or no, he said what he had done, he would not be ashamed of; and if it
were to do again he would do it: more to the same purpose was witnessed by
several witnesses, and by one, who being sworn, said that the Common-Hangman
professed he did not do it; all three-were found guilty.

The other Eighteen, (viz. Sir Hardresse Waller, William Heveningham, Isaac
^enington, Henry Marten, Gilbert Millington, Rob. Tichburn, Owen Roe, Robert
Lilburn, Henry Smith, Edmund Harvey, John Downs, Vincent Potter, Augustine
Garland, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne James Temple, Peter Temple, Tho. Wait,)
were brought to the Bar on Tuesday morning; and having seen the vanity of
wanding out and pleading not guilty, they all fairly laid down the Bucklers and
submitted to the mercy of the King, and received the Sentence of Death as the
others had done before them, only Mr. Heveningham was that day set b^; but on
Friday following the 19. of October, the Court met on purpose, and passed the
like Sentence upon him.

Mr. Carew was Executed according to his sentence on Monday the 15th. of
October, On Tuesday Mr. Cook and Mr. Peter's received the reward of their
Iniquity, On Wednesday Mr. Scot, Mr. Gregory Clement, Col. John Jones, and Col.
Adrian Scroope received no other Favor then the former, all at Charing Cross,
and on Friday Col. Hacker was only Hanged at Tyburn and carried home in a
Hearse, but Col. Axtell was there Quartered and his Quarters carried back on the
Sledge.

London, Printed for Thomas Vere and William Gilbertson. 1660.


