Mr. Love's Speech made on the Scaffold on Tower Hill, August 22. 1651. With
his Proposals to the Citizens of London; his Desires touching Religion, and his
Judgment concerning the Presbyterian-Government; As also, his perfect Prayer
immediately before his head was severed from his body: Printed by an exact Copy
taken in shorthand.
Mr. Love being brought upon the Scaffold by the Sheriff, Mr Sheriff Titchburn
showed him the Warrant directed to the Sheriffs of London for his Execution,
telling him that he took no pleasure in this Work, but it was a Duty laid upon
him. To which Mr. Love replied. I believe it, Sir.

Sh, Titchburn. I have done my duty for you.


M. Love. The Lord bless you:


Lieu of the Tower. The Lord shrengthen you in this hour of your Temptation.


M. Love. Sir, I am: I bless God my heart is in heaven; I am well.


Sh. Titchburn. I desire you to consider we have the other to execute
afterward, and 6 a clock is our hour; but we shall give you as much time as we
can.


M. Love. I shall be the briefer.

Then putting off his hat two several times to the people, he spoke as
follows;

BEloved Christians, I am this day made a Spectacle unto God, Angels and Men;
and among men I am made a grief to the godly, a laughing stock to the wicked,
and a gazing-stock to all; yet blessed be my God not a terror to my self:
although there be but a little between me and Death, yet this bears up my
heart, there is but a little between me and Heaven: it comforted Dr Tailor the
Martyr when he was going to Execution, That there were but two stales between
him and his Fathers house; there is a lesser way between me and my Fathers
house; but two steps between me and Glory; it is but lying down upon the Block,
and I shall ascend upon a Throne: I am this day sailing toward the Ocean of
Eternity, through a rough passage to my Haven of rest; through a Red Sea to the
Promised Land. Me thinks I hear God say to me as he did to Moses, Go up to
Mount Nebo and die there; so go thou up to Tower Hill and die there. Isaac said
of himself that he was old, and yet he knew not the day of his death; but I
cannot say thus: I am young, and yet I know the day of my death, and I know the
kind of my death also, and the place of my death also; it is such a kind of
death as two famous Preachers of the Gospel were put to before me, John the
Baptist, and Paul the Apostle, they were both beheaded; ye have mention of the
one in Scripture story, and of the other in Ecclesiastical History: And I read
in the 20. of the Revelation, and the 4. The Saints were beheaded for the Word
of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus. But herein is the disadvantage which I
am in in the thoughts of many, who judge that I suffer not for the Word, or for
Conscience, but for meddling with State-matters. To this I shall briefly say;
That it is an old guise of the Devil, to impute the cause of Gods Peoples
sufferings, to be Contrivements against the State, when in truth it is their
Religion and Conscience they are persecuted for. The Rulers of Israel they
would put Jeremiah to death upon a Civil account, though indeed it was only
the truth of his Prophecy made the Rulers angry with him: yet upon a Civil
account they did pretend he must die, because he fell away to the Caldeans, and
would have brought in foreign forces to invade them: the same thing is laid to
my charge, of which I am as innocent as Jeremiah was. I find other instances in
the Scripture, wherein the main causes of their sufferings were still imputed
to meddling with State-matters; Paul, though he did but preach Jesus Christ, yet
he must die, if the people might have their will, under the pretense that he
was a mover of Sedition. Upon a civil account my life is pretended to be taken
away, whereas indeed it is because I pursue my Covenant, and will not
prostitute my Principles and Conscience to the ambition and lusts of men.
Beloved, I am this day to make a dou^le exchange, I am changing a Pulpit for a
Scaffold, and a Scaffold for a Throne; and I might add a third, I am changing
this numerous multitude, the presence of this numerous multitude upon
Tower Hill, for the innumerable company of Angels in the holy Hill of Zion; and
I am changing a guard of Soldiers for a guard of Angels, which will receive me,
and carry me into Abraham's bosom. This Scaffold is the best Pulpit I ever
preached in; for in the Church-Pulpit, God through his Grace, made me an
Instrument to bring others to heaven, but in this Pulpit he will bring me to
heaven. These are the last words that I shall speak in this world, and it may
be this last Speech upon a Scaffold may bring God more glory, then many Sermons
in a Pulpit. Before I lay down my neck upon the block, I shall lay open my Case
unto the people that hear me this day; and in doing it I shall avoid all
rancour, all bitterness of Spirit, animosity and revenge; God is my record
whom I serve in the spirit, I speak the truth and lie not; I do not bring a
revengeful heart unto the Scaffold this day; before I came here, upon my bended
knees I have begged Mercy for them that denied mercy to me, and I have prayed
God to forgive them who would not forgive me: I have forgiven from my heart the
worst Enemy I have in all the world, and this is the worst that I wish to my
Accusers and Prosecutors who have pursued my blod, that I might met their souls
in heaven, I shall divide my speech into three parts; speak something
concerning my Charge, and a word concerning my Accusers, and touching my
Judges, without any animosity at all, and then something concerning myself for
my own vindication, and then a word of Exhortation; and so I shall commit my
soul to God. Concerning my Charge, it is black and hideous, many things falsely
suggested but nothing capital sufficiently proved by any one act that I am
consc^ous to my self, proved against me that I did. The charg was h^gh and
full, but the Proof empty and low: though there were 8 Witnesses that came in
against me, yet none of them did prove that ever I writ any Letter, or directed
any man to write a Letter into Scotland, or into foreign parts. No man proved,
that I sent away any Letter, that I received any Letter, that I collected, or
gave, or lent any money to assist or promote the Scottish War. This is all that
was sworn against me, that I was present when Letters were read, that I made a
motion for money to give to Massey so that Beloved, my presence at, and
concealment of Letters that were received and sent from foreign parts.

There being a disturbance amongst the people, he said, I am amused, I must
break off, things are true. But the tumult being appeased, he went on, saying;
As concerning my Accusers I shall not say much, I do forgive them, and I pray
God forgive them also: yet what the Evangelist observes concerning Christ's
Accusers, I may without vanity or falsehood say of mine, that they did not agree
among themselves; yea not only contradicting one another, but sometimes a
Witness contradicted himself. And though their testimony did condemn my
person, yet I have condemned their testimony; and truly there are many
remarkable Ciocumstances that I might take notice of, either in, or before, or
since the trial, that might be worthy of observation; but I will not insist
upon them, only is the general, some of them have sent to me to pray me to
forgive them the wrong they have done me. One of them has written to me under
his own hand, to pray me to forgive him the wrong he has done me; and told me
withal, that that day I should die a violent death, his life would be no
comfort to him, because he was an instrument in taking away mine. Others of my
Witnesses, they were some terrified before they would testify, some hired,
some fined before they would bear witness against me; but I will forgive them.
As concerning my Judges, I will not judge them, and yet I will not justify
them, I believe that what moved Herod to cut off John Baptists head, moved them
to cut off mine, and that was for his Oaths sake, John Baptists [meaning Herod]
to avoid perjury, he would commit murder, whereas if John Baptists head had
been upon his shoulders, he would have been guilty of neither.

I have something in the second place to speak concerning my self, and then I
shall come briefly to a conclusion. Concerning my self, I have gone through
various reports: There are many sons of slander, whose mouths are as an open
Sepulcher to bury my name before my friends can bury my body. My comfort is,
there will be a Resurrection of Names as well as Bodies at the last Day; God
will not only wipe off tears from mine eyes this day, but wipe off all blots
and reproaches from my Name before many days be over; and though my body will
soon rot under ground, yet my hope is my name will not rot above it: I am not
ignorant what Calumnies are cast upon me, and more likely to be after I am dead
and gone. The very night before my intended execution the last month, there
was an insulting Letter written to me to tell me, That after I was dead there
should be something published against me to my shame I hope you will have so
much charity as not to believe Reproaches cast upon a dead man, who will be
silent in the grave, and not able to speak a word in his own justification. I
am aspersed both as to my Practices and as to my Principles.

I shall begin with the first: There are five Aspersions as to my practices
that are laid upon me: First, that I am a Liar, that I am an Extortioner, that
I am an Adulterer, that I am a Murderer, and that I am a turbulent person;
crimes scandalous in any man, but much more abominable in a Minister.

Now I hope you will believe a dying man, who dare not look God in the face
with a lie in his mouth. I am accused of lying, that what I denied before the
high Court of Justice, that afterward I should confess, or else was proved
against me: Now in the presence of God I tell you, as I would confess nothing
that was criminal, so I did deny nothing that was true, and that I might it
seal to you with my blood; what I did deny, the Protestations I made before the
Court, I make them briefly now, That I never writ Letter to the King, Queen,
Church or State of Scotland, or to any particular person of the Scottish Nation
since the wars began to this day: That I never received any Letter writ to me,
either from the King, Queen, Church or State of Scotland, or from any
particular person of the Scottish Nation: That I never collected, gave, or lent
any money either to the King, Queen, or State of Scotland. It is true, I
confessed though it was not proved, and happily upon that ground the mistake
might rise, I did give money to Massey, but he is of the English, not of the
Scottish Nation, and I did write a Letter to him, but he is of the English not
of the Stottish Nation. That for which I here come, is for moving only for
money for him, and for being present when Letters were read from him and
others; and I am so far (though man has condemned me) from thinking that
either God or my own Conscience condemns me for a sin in what I am condemned
for, that God and my own Conscience acquits me; and what I said at the Bar when
I received my Sentence that now is to be executed, I shall say now upon the
Scaffold. That for the things I am condemned, neither does God or my own
Conscience condemn me.

The next particular, I am accused to be an Extortioner, and this is in the
mouths, I am loath to name them because I would not show rancour, but I am
charged as if I should be a grievous Extortioner, to receive 30 l. for the loan
of 300 l. besides 8 l. in the hundred for interest, which in the presence of
God, and of you all, I do declare to you, is a most notorious and abominable
falsehood. I am accused likewise to be an Adulterer; and that this Report is not
in the mouths of mean men, but in the mouths of those that sit at stern, as
if I were a debauched person, and were guilty of uncleanness. Now I tell you
through the grace of God, as Luther said of himself in another case, That he
was not tempted to covetousness, through the grace of God I can say, I was not
tempted in all my life to uncleanness. It does not much grieve me though these
slanders lie upon me: I know my betters have been worse accused before me.
Athanasius he was accused by two harlots that he had committed folly with them,
and yet the man was chaste and innocent. Beza was charged not only of
Drunkenness, but of Lasciviousness also.

But that which goes nearest my heart, I am accused to be a Murderer also and
this is a Charge high indeed; I am charged with the guilt of all the blood of
Scotland, whereas if I did lie under the guilt of one drop of blood, I could
not look upon you with so cheerful a countenance, and could not be filled with
so peaceable a Heart and Conscience as I am at this day, I bless my God I am
free from the blood of all, indeed those that lay this to my charge, they do to
me as Nero did to the Christians, he put Rome on fire, and then charged the
Christians with it, so they put England and Scotland into a flamt, and charge
me with the guilt of that blood, who have poured tears to God night and day to
quench the burning which some men's ambition and Lusts have kindled.

I would feign know of any man what act it is, I have done, what was it was
proved in the high Court against me to make me guilty of Scotland's blood? Did
I ever invite the Scots to invade Englandd, what man did lay that to my charge?
Did I ever encourage our English Army to invade Scotland? What action is it
that I have done that makes me guilty of the blood? Indeed this I have done,
and this I own, and this I stand to; I have as a p^ivate man prayed unto God
many a day, and kept many a Fast, wherein I have sought God; that there might
be an Agreement between the K. and the Scots upon the interest of Religion, and
the terms of the Covenant. Now by what consequence can this be strained to
charge me with Scotlands blood; For my part, I was but only at one Meeting
where that Question was proposed (Fasts only excepted) what should be thought
fit to be done to promote the agreement between the King and the Scots, and
that was moved in my house, and to that end when there were some things there
produced which they called a Commission and Instructions to send to Holland; as
soon as ever I heard them, I did declare against them: I did declare that it
was an act of high presumption for private persons to commissionate, and an act
of notorious falsehood to say, it was in the Name of the Prhsbyterian Party,
when none knew of it as I know, but only those few that were then present. Now
this is only a politic Engine to make the Presbyterian Party odious, who are
the best friends to a wellordered Government of any sort of people in the world.

I am accused likewise to be a man of a turbulent spirit, to be an enemy to the
Peace and Quiet of the Nation.

Now to this I would be judged, let my Congregationall and my Domemesticall
Relations judge for me, whether I am not a man that would fain have lived quiet
in the Land: I am, as Jeremy was, born a man of contention, not actively, I
contend, I strive with none, but passively, many strive and contend with me;
God is my witness, my judgment has put me upon endeavors after all
honorable and just ways, for peace and love among the godly.

The grief of my heart has been for the Division, and the desire of my soul
for a Union amongst Gods People. And when I speak of a Union I would not be
misunderstood: I do not mean a State-union to engage to the present Power,
that is against my Principle, that is to say, a Confedracy with them that say a
Confedracy that is rather a Combination then a Gospel union. Those who have
gotten power into their hands by policy, and use it by cruelty, they will lose
it with Ignominy.


Sher. Titchburne, Sir, be modest: I am not able to endure this, indeed I am
not.


Love. Sir, I shall look God in the face with what I say. (Beloved) I am afraid
of your union which I plead for, to wit, a Church union (I am stopped in many
things) a Church union, to wit, love among the Godly. This is it the desires of
my soul have been ever for, that those that fear God might walk hand in hand
in the fellowship of the Gospel, both in truth and love: if this Union be not,
I am afraid through our divisions a company of loose Libertines will rise, who
will rise, who will endeavor not only to overthrow Doctrines of Faith and
Religion and Manners but then correcting, himself, he said) Doctrines of Faith
and the power of Godliness, but even good manners also.

I remember an observation of Holy Greenham, giving his judgment upon the
State of England, he said thus, There is a great fear of Popery coming into
England, I fear that too; but I fear more the coming of Atheism into England,
then the coming in of Popery, and truly that is my fear also. Thus a: to my
practices.

A word now as to my Principles.

I am accused to be an Apostate, to be a Turn-coat, to be this to be that, to
be any thing, but what I am In the General I will tell you, That I bless my
God, an high Court, a long Sword, a bloody Scaffold, has not made me in the
least to alter my Principles, or to wrong my Conscien^^. And that I might
discover to you my Principles, I hope I shall do it with freedom, I will
irritate and provoke none: what I shall say, shall not be an irritation, or
provocation of others, (at least not intended by me) but only as a genuine and
clear Manifestation of my principles how they stand.

First, Then my Principles; as to Civil and Religious Affairs, I declare, that
I die with my Judgment set against Malignity, I do hate both name and thing, I
still retain as vehement a detestation of a Malignant interest, as ever I did;
yet I would not be misunderstood: I do not count the Godly party, our
Covenanting Brethren in Scotland, I do not count them a Malignant party, nor
their defending their Nation, and Title to their King, to be a Malignant
Interest, but an honest and a justifiable Cause.

Secondly, I am of this judgment (though I am against Malignity) yet I am not
against, but for a regulated Monarchy; a mixed Monarchy, as ours was, I judge
to be one of the best Governments in the world; I did (it is true) oppose in my
Place and Calling, the Forces of the late King and were he alive again, and
should I live longer, the Cause being as then it was, I should oppose him
longer. I did oppose his Forces, but never was against the Office: I do as
much hate Court-Parasites, who would screw up Monarchy into Tyranny, as those
who pull it down to bring in Anarchy: Thirdly, I was never for putting the King
to death, whose Person I did promise in my Covenant to preserve. It is true, I
did in my Place and Calling oppose his Forces, but I did never endeavor to
destroy his Person. There is a scandal raised of me, That in a Sermon at
Windsor I should have these words, [That it would never be well with England,
till the King were let blood in the Neck-veine] Which in the presence of God,
and of you all, I never spoke such words, as relating to him, though my
judgment then was, and still is for bringing Malignants, who did seduce him
and draw him from the Parliament, to condign punishment. I deem it an ill way
to cure the Body Politic, by cutting off the Political head. Fourthly, I die
with my judgment not satisfied to take the Engagement, I pray God forgive them
that impose it and subscribe it, and preserve those that refuse it. I would not
(in the next place) be looked upon, now I am a dying man. I would not be looked
upon as a man owning this present Government, I die with my judgment against
it. It is true, in a cuse of Life, I did petition the present Power, and did
give them the Titles they take to themselves, and other men give them; but here
in I did not wrong, nor cross my Principles: There are many instances in the
Scripture to justify this, Hushai did give the Title to Absolon, though
Absolon had no right to the Title: David was the lawful King, and David
himself gave him the Title as well as Hushai: And Calvin he gave a Title to
the French King, calling him Rex Christianissimus, The most Christian King; yet
he knew he was a Papist: And we gave a Title to King Henry the Eighth, to call
him, The Defender of the Faith; and yet he had no right to the Title, he was an
opposer, not a Defender of the Faith: The Title was given him upon an evil
ground, because he opposed the Faith; he opposed the Doctrine of Luther, and
therefore the Pope gave him the Title [The Defender of the Faith] and yet none
did scruple to give him the Title that was then commonly given him.

In the next place, I discover my judgment; I provoke none, only tell you what
my own thoughts are, That so after I am dead and gone, I might not be belied,
for I dare not now belly my Principles: My judgment is against the invasion of
the Scottish Nation by our English Army: They who gave us a friendly
Assistance, who were joined with us in the same Covenant, who drew a Swo^d with
us in the same quarrel should I live a thousand years, I should never draw a
Sword against them in all my life. Scotland may say as it was said of Edem, The
men of my Confedracy that were at Peace with me, have risen up against me,
deceived me and prevailed against me. Because Scotland well not be a
Commonwealth they shall not be a people; because they will not break Covenants,
some men would have them broken; because they will not lay their Consciences
waste, their Land must be laid waste.

Lastly, And so I have done, only with a word of Exhortation. I die cleaving
to all those Oaths, Vows, Covenants and Protestations, that were imposed by
the Two Houses of Parliament, as owning them, and dying with my judgment for
them; The Vow and Covenant, the Protestation, The Solemn League and Covenant:
And this I tell you all, I had rather die a Covenant keeper, then live a
Covenant breaker.

I have one word more to say I am come to the third and last part of my Speech,
and so I shall have done, and commit my soul unto God who gave it, My
Exhortationit shall be to this great City, unto the Godly Ministry of it, and
unto my own Congregation, from whom Death has parted me, which nothing else
could.

To the City, I wish an affluence and a confluence of all blessings, and yet I
fear gray hairs as the Symtoms of a Declension, are here and there upon it: yet
she knows it not: O London London: God is staining the pride of all thy Glory,
thy Glory is flying awaylike a Bird, contempt of the Ministry* opposition
against Reformation general Apostasy, Covenant breaking have brought London
low, and I fear will bring it lower, I tremble to think what evils are coming
upon it. This City: it is the Receptacle of all Errors. That as your
Commodities have been vented and spread from hence in every corner of the Land,
so have Heresies and Blasphemies had their first rise from this great and
populus City and spread into all the Country.

To the Inhabitants of this City, I commend but these few Particulars.

First, Let me beg you to love your painful and your godly Ministers, if they
be taken away, you are like to have worse come in their rooms: I know the
Presbyterian Ministers are the great eye sore, who have formerly been counted
the Chariots, and the Horsemen of Israel. But I will say to London, as was said
to Leyden, That after Junius was taken away (an Orthodox Minister) Arminius
that pestilent Heretic came in his room; if your godly Ministers (as there are
ten already at one blow taken from you) if they be taken away, Arminians,
Anabaptists, nay Jesuits are like to supply their rooms, if God in mercy
prevent not.

2ly, Submit your selves to Church government, that would lay a curb and
restraint upon your lusts, it is a golden, and an easy yoke, to which if you
do not submit, God may lay an heavier, an iron yoke upon your necks.

3ly, Take heed of those Doctrines that come under the Notion of New Lights; I
have judged that those Doctrines you ought to suspect whether they be true,
when the brocher of them says it is New; for Truth, it is as old as the Bible:
A remarkable passage I would suggest unto you, in Deuteronomy. 32. it is said there,
They chose them new gods, that were newly sprung up; what were these new gods?
the next words tell you, they were old devils, they sacrificed to devils, not
to God: Now their Sacrificing to the old Devil, it was called a Sacrificing (to
deceive the people) to new gods that were newly come up; new gods, they were
but the old devils: So I say of many of those things that go under the notion
of New Lights, it is but old darkness, old Heresies raked out of the Dunghill,
which were buried in former ages in the Church, with contempt and reproach many
hundred years ago. Again,

Fourthly, Bewail your great loss that you have in the taking away of so many
Ministers out of your City: there are ten Ministers (if I mistake not) that are
taken away and removed in one blow; those who were burning and shining Lights
in their sevreall Candlesticks, and Bright Stars in their several Orbs; though
I am not worthy of the world, therefore I am taken out of it; yet as for my
suffering Brethren who are now in Bonds and Banishment, the world is not worthy
of them.

Again, in the next place, take heed how you be forward in engaging in a War
with your godly Brethren in the Scottish Nation; for my part, I have opposed
the Tyrany of a King, but I never opposed the Title: take heed what you do.

I have something in the next place to speak to the godly Ministry of this
City, were it not that I were a dying man, I would not speak to such reverend
and grave men; I would, as Elihu being but a young man, I would say, Multitudes
of years should teach wisdom, and I would hold my tongue; but the words of a
dying man take, whether they be discreet or no, or so well ordered and managed
or no; for them, I would first desire God to show them mercy, they that have
begged for mercy for me at the day of my death, I will beg but this of them,
That as they have not been ashamed of my Chain, so they would now wax confident
by my Bonds and by my Blood; I know they are maligned and threatened, yet my
Prayer is for them, that in Act. 4. 29. Now Lord, behold their threatenings, and
grant that thy Servants may Preach thy word with all boldness: Though I am but
young, yet I will offer my young experience to my grave Fathers and Brethren, and
that is this; Now I am to dye, I have abundant peace in my own Conscience, that
I have set my self against the Sins and Apostacies of this present Age: It is
true, my faithfulness has procured me ill will from men, but it has
purchased me peace with God, I have lived in peace, and I shall dye in peace:
That which I have to beseech of the Ministers is this, To beg them to keep up
Church government: Whatsoever God does with the governments of the world,
turning Kingdoms upside down, yet the Government of the Church will stand; And
of all Governments, I dye with this persuasion, That the Presbyterial
Government makes most for Purity and Unity throughout the Churches of the
Saints: I would beg them therefore to keep up Church Government; That they
would not let their Elderships fall; That they would take heed of too general
Admissions to the Lord's Supper; That they be not too prodigal of the Blood of
Christ, by too general Admissions of men to partake of the Supper, that
Sealing Ordinance: And now I am speaking to them, I shall speak a word of them,
and so I have done.

I have heard many clamors since I came to Prison, as if that Plot (which it is
called) that I am condemned for, as if all the City Ministers they were engaged
in this Design, which as a dying man I tell you, That all the Ministers that
were present at the meeting, and had a hand in that business for which I am to
be put to death, all those Ministers, they are either in Prison, or they are
discovered already; and therefore, I do here upon my death free the Ministers of
the City, That those who are not yet in trouble, nor discovered to the
Committee of Examinations, none of them had a hand in that business in which I
was engaged, in which my conscience does tell me I have not sinned.

I have now (I have done immediately, for I would fain be at my Fathers house)
but a word to speak to my own Congregation, and I do return praises unto God,
and thanksgiving unto him, for the love I have had from them; I found them a
solid and a judicious people, and many of them Religious: The Ministry of that
learned man Mr. Anthony Burges did much good amongst them, though I have cause
to be humbled, my weak Ministry did but little; they afforded me a great deal
of love, and a liberal maintenance: And this is all I desire of them, That they
would choose a godly, learned, and an Orthodox Minister to succeed; it would be
a great comfort to me before I go to Heaven, if I had this persuasion, that a
learned, Orthodox, godly man should fill that Pulpit. And for encouragement to
any godly Minister, whose lot it shall be to succeed me, I will say this to
him, That he will have as comfortable a livelihood, and as loving a people, as
any people in London, (a few only excepted;) I had as much satisfaction amongst
them, as ever I had in any condition in all my life, and should never have
parted from them, had not now death parted us, to which I do submit with all
Christian meekness and cheerfulness.

I am now drawing to an end of my Speech, and to an end of my life together:
But before I do expire my last breath, I shall desire to justify God, and to
condemn my self. Here I come to that which you call an untimely end, and a
shameful death; but blessed be God, it is my glory, and it is my comfort; I
shall justify God; he is righteous, because I have sinned; he is righteous,
though he does cut me off in the midst of my days, and in the midst of my
Ministry. I cannot complain that Complaint in the Psalmist, in the 44 Psalm,
Thou sellest thy people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their
price. My blood it shall not be spilt for naught; I may do more good by my
death, then by my life, and glorify God more in dying upon a Scaffold, then if
I had dyed of a Disease upon my bed. I bless my God I have not the least
trouble upon my spirit; but I dye with as much quietness of mind, lie down I
hope I shall upon the Block, as if I were going to lie down upon my Bed to take
my rest. I see men hunger after my flesh, and thirst after my blood, which will
hasten my happiness, and their ruin, and greaten their guilt: For though I am
a man of an obscure Family, of mean Parentage, so that my blood is not as the
blood of Nobles; yet I will say, mine is a Christians blood, a Ministers blood,
yea it is innocent blood also: My blood, my body, my dead body, it will be a
morsel which I believe will hardly be digested, and my blood it will be bad
food for this Infant Commonwealth (as Mr. Prideaux called it) for this infant
Commonwealth to suck on: Mine is not Malignant blood, though here I am brought
as a grievous and notorious Offender.

Now Beloved, I shall not only justify God (as I do without a Complement,) for
he is very Just, that my Prison was not my Hell, that this Scaffold is not the
bottomless pit, I have deserved both, I have deserved it: I do not only
justify God, but I desire this day to magnify God, to magnify the riches of
his grace, that such a one as I, born in an obscure Country in Wales, of
obscure Parents, that God should look upon me, and single me out from among all
my kindred, single me out to be an Object of his everlasting Love; that when
for the first fourteen years of my life I never heard a Sermon, and yet in the
fifteenth year of my life, God through his grace did convert me: and I here
speak it without vanity (what should a dying man be proud of?) for these twenty
yea^s, though I am accused of many scandalous evils, I speak it to the praise
and glory of my God, for these twenty years God has kept me, I have not fallen
into a scandalous sin; I have labored to keep a good Conscience from my youth
up: I magnify his grace, that he has not only made me a Christian but made me
a Minister, judged me faithful, and put me into the Ministry; and though the
Office be trodden upon, and disgraced, yet it is my glory, that I dye a despised
Minister: I had rather be a Preacher in a Pulpit, then a Prince upon a Throne;
I had rather be an instrument to bring Souls to Heaven, then to have all the
Nations to bring in tribute to me. I am not only a Christian, and a Preacher,
but, what ever men judge me, I am a Martyr too, I speak it without vanity: Would
I have renounced my Covenant, and debauched my Conscience, and ventured my
Soul, there might have been more hopes of saving my life, that I should not
have come to this place: but blessed be my God, I have made the best choice, I
have chosen affliction rather then Sin; and therefore welcome Scaffold, and
welcome Ax, and welcome Death, welcome Block, welcome all, because it will send
me to my Fathers House.

I have great cause to magnify Gods Grace, that he has stood by me during my
imprisonment: It has been a time of no little temptation to me, and yet,
blessed be his grace, he has strengthened, and stood by me: I magnify his
grace, that though now I come to dye a violent death, yet that death is not a
terror to me; through the blood of sprinkling the fear of Death is taken out of
my heart: God is not a terror to me, therefore Death is not dreadful to me. I
bless my God (I speak it without vanity) I have formerly had more fear in the
drawing of a tooth, then now I have in the cutting off my Head. I was for some
years, five or six, under a spirit of bondage, and did for Death exceedingly;
but then when the fear of Death was upon me, Death was not near me: but now
Death is near me, (blessed be my Savior) he has the sting of Death in his own
sides, and so makes the grave a bed of rest to me; and makes Death, the last
Enemy, to be a friend, though he be a grim friend. I bless God further, that
though I am to be cast out of the world; I bless my God, though men judge me to
be cast out of the world; yet that God has not cast me out of the hearts and
prayers of his people. I had rather be cast out of the world, then be cast out
of the heart of any godly man. Some think me (is true) not worthy to live, and
yet others Judge, I do not deserve to dye; but God will judge all men, I will
judge none.

I have now done; I have no more to say, but to desire the help of all your
prayers; that God would give me the continuance and supply of divine grace to
carrying through this great work I am now to do; That I, who am to do a work I
never did, I may have a strength that I never had; That I may put off this Body
with as much quietness and comfort of mind, as ever I put off my clothes to go
to bed. And now I am to commend my Soul to God, and to receive my fatal blow: I
am comforted in this, though men kill me, they cannot damn me; and though they
thrust me out of the world, yet they cannot shut me out of Heaven. I am now
going to my long home, and you are going to your short homes: but I will tell
you, I shall be at home before you, I shall be at Heaven, my Fathers House,
before you will be at your own Houses. Now I am going to the Heavenly Jerusalem,
to the innumerable company of Angels, to Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new
Covenant, to the spirits of all men made perfect, to God the judge of all; in
whose presence there is fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. I shall conclude.


But when Mr. Sheriff Tichburn telling him, that the words were, the spirits of
just men made perfect.

Love. He then corrected himself. saying,

To the spirits of just men made perfect, and to God the Judge of all; in whose
presence there is fullness of joy, and in whose rrght hand the ear pleasures
for evermore.

I conclude with that speech of the Apostle: I am now (in 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7. I am
now) to be offered up, and the time of my departure is at hand; but I have
finished my course, I have kept the Faith; Henceforth there is a crown of
righteousness laid up for me; and not for me only, but for all them that love
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; through whose blood (when I have shed
my blood) I expect salvation, and remission of sins. And so the Lord bless you
all.

Then turning to Mr Sheriff, he said; May I pray?


Sheriff Tichburn. Yes: but consider the time.


Love. I have done Sir.

Then turning to the pleople, he said;

Beloved, I will but pray a little while with you, to commend my soul to God,
and I have done.


Then Mr Ash told him:

Mr Ash, the House is risen, and therefore --


Love. To which Mr Love answered, I, I, Sir. After which he prayed with an
audible voice, saying,

Mr. Loves Prayer.
MOst Glorious and eternal Majesty, Thou art righteous and holy in all thou
do to the Sons of Men; though thou have suffered men to condemn thy
servant, thy servant will not condemn thee; He justifies thee, though thou
cuttest him off in the midst of his days, and in the midst of his Ministry;
blessing thy glorious Name, that though his name be taken away from the Land of
the Living, that yet he is not blotted out of the Book of the Living, Father,
my hour is come, thy poor creature can say without vanity and falsehood, he has
desired to glorify thee upon the earth, glorify thou now him in Heaven. He
has desired to bring the souls of other men to heaven, let his soul be brought
to heaven. O thou blessed God, whom thy creature has served, who has made
thee his hope, and his confidence from his youth; forsake him not now he is
drawing nigh to thee; now he is in the valley of the shadow of death, Lord be
thou life to him; smile thou upon him while men frown on him* Lord thou have
settled this persuasion in his heart, That as soon as ever the blow is given to
divide his Head from his Body, he shall be united to his Head in Heaven.
Blessed be God that thy servant dies in those hopes. Blessed be God, that thou
have filled the soul of thy servant with joy and peace in believing. O Lord,
think upon that poor Brother of mine, that is a companion in tribulation with
me, who is this day to lose his life as well as I: O fill him full of the joy
of the Holy Ghost, when he is to give up the Ghost: Lord, strengthen our
hearts, that we may give up the ghost with joy, and not with grief. We entreat
thee, O Lord, think upon thy poor Churches: O that England might live in thy
sight; and O that London might be a faithful City to thee; that righteousness
might be amongst them: that so peace and plenty may be within their walls, and
righteousness within their habitation. Lord, heal up the breaches of this poor
Nation. Make England and Scotland as one staff in the Lords hand; that Ephraim
might not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim; but that both might flee upon the
shoulders of the Philistines: that man of the Protestant Religion, engaged in
the same Cause and Covenant, might not delight to spill each others blood, but
might engage against the common Adversaries of our Religion and Liberties. God
show mercy to all that fear him.

Think upon our Covenant-keeping Brethren in the Kingdom of Scotland, keep
them faithful to thee, and let not them that have invaded them over spread
their whole Land: Prevent the more shedding of Christian blood, if it seem good
in thine eyes. God show mercy to thy poor Servant who is here now giving up the
Ghost. O blessed Jesus, apply thy blood, not only for my justification unto
life, but also for my comfort, for the quieting of my soul, that so I may be
in the joys of Heaven, before I come to a possession of Heaven. Hear the
Prayers of all thy people that have been made for thy servant: and though thou
have denied prayer as to the particular request concerning my life, yet let
herein the fruit of prayer be seen, that thou will bear up my heart against the
fear of death. God show mercy to all that fear him: Show mercy to all that
have engaged for the life of thy servant, let them have mercy at the day of
their appearing before Jesus Christ. Preserve thou a godly Ministry in this
Nation, and restore a godly Ministry, and cause yet good days to be the
heritage of thy people for the Lords sake. Now Lord into thy hands thy servant
commits his spirit: And though he may not with Steven see the Heavens
opened, let him have the heavens opened; and though he may not see upon a
Scaffold the Son of God standing at the right hand of God, yet let him come to
the glorified body of Jesus Christ, and this hour have an intellectual sight
of the glorified body of his Savior. Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and Lord
Jesus stand by me thy dying servant, who has endeavored in his life time to
stand for thee. Lord hear, pardon all his infirmities, wipe away his iniquities
by the blood of Christ, wipe off reproaches from his name, wipe off guilt from
his person, and receive him pure, and spotless and blameless before thee in
love: And all this we beg for the sake of Jesus Christ. Amen, and Amen.


Mr. Ash. You make a Christian end I hope.


Mr. Love. I, I, bless God.


Then turning to M. Sheriff Tichburn, said, I thank you for this kindness;
Sir, you have expressed a great deal of kindness to me: Well, I go from a
block to the bosom of my Savior.

Then he asked, Where is the Executioner?

When the Executioner came forward, he said, Art thou the Officer?

Executioner. Yes.


Love. Then lifting up his eyes, he said,

O blessed Jesus, that has kept me from the hurt of death, and from the fear
of death. O blessed be God, blessed be Cod.


And taking his leave of the Ministers, he said,

Love. The Lord be with you all:


And taking leave of Sheriff Tichburn, he kissed his hand.

Then he kneeled down, and made a short prayer privately.

Then after rising up, he said, Blessed be God I am full of joy, and peace in
believing; I lie down with a world of comfort, as if I were to lie down in my
bed. My bed is but a short sleep, and this death is a long sleep, where I shall
rest in Abraham's bosom, and in the embraces of the Lord Jesus.

And then saying, The Lord bless you, he laid himself down upon the Scaffold,
with his head over the block: And when he stretched forth his hands, the
Executioner cut off his head at one blow.

FINIS.

