Some Considerations Relating to the East India Trade.
Upon occasion of some Papers lately set forth against the Company.
THose Worthy Persons who first attended to the Management of the Present
East India Joynt-Stock, were excellently Tempered for the recovery of a Trade,
so sadly disordered by the preceding Interlopers, in the extravagant Enhansing
of the Commodities of those Countries, and beating down of Ours There; which
could never have been reduced, but by such moderate Beginnings, and Continuance
of some Years. Which when once Effected, and all things well settled, It was no
less seasonable, for the indefatigable Application of that Eminent Person, (so
unjustly aspersed) with the Concurrence of the rest, to dilate the Trade;
wherein that Progress was made, and those new foundations laid and traced out,
as particularly along the Coasts of Mallabar, in the Queen of Attingas Country,
and in the Ging^e Country on Choromandell side, and of Sumatra, and the more
Eastern Seas, as would have exceeded Expectation.

When such a Crew of New Interlopers broke in again, as put all into confusion.
And not so content, made in their Business to Decry, to Clamor, and to
Instigate all Mankind against them; as well in the Mogul's Dominions, as here.
To which alone that Expensive War with so great a Prince, (though not
un-presidented by the Portuguese, Hollanders and other Europeans) and all the
Vexations here at home, particularly that sudden Calling in of Moneys, do owe
their Original; But which by the Goodness of God, have all hitherto been waded
through, with so much Honor and Justice, as nothing but Ill Will and
Mischievous Designs, can deny them this Praise.

The Style of the Mogul's Phirmaunds, will affect none, who have observed that
of the Eastern Princes to all their Neighbors. As for Instance, that of the
Turks, to the Emperor of Germany, to the Poles, Venetians, Persians, etc. And
so of the Saracens and Tartars, from whom He derives. Mean while the Company is
not only Tolerated, but Courted to Return, and Settle again in all his
Provinces.

The admission of Armenians (being no more than our Neighbors would be glad to
afford them) is but a Temporary Allowance, whereby to gain some inspection into
the Vp-Land and Northern parts; and thereby New Markets for our Woollen
Manufactures, which have never yet penetrated so far up, and is above all
things sought after by the Company. And in Truth, those Armenians are the only
Merchants on the face of the Earth, that can greatly increase the Vent of
English Cloth, and would wonderfully Augment it, if they might carry Our Cloth
to Turkey, paying that Companies Duties, as they may, Dutch Cloth, without
paying any Duties, but what the Natives pay themselves.

The proportioning the Number of Votes, by the quantity of Stock, is no more
than is warranted by the Royal Charters, carrying with it The approbation of
Kings, Privy Council and Sages of the Law, The General Usage of all the
Joynt-Stocks in England, Of all Part-Owners of Shipping in Europe, And those
famous Sea-Laws of Olleron and Barcellona so universally received. Without
which, in a Joint Stock, The Proprietors of small Stocks, might buy and sell
the Whole: An inconsiderable Bribe or Advantage, out-weighing their Trivial,
and perhaps designing Shares in the Joint Concern. But this is seldom used, in
ought but in Elections for the Court of Assistants; (In which Court the whole
management of the Stock being transacted, no Member has any more than a single
Vote.) And yet of great necessity to be exerted, in case of Combinations of the
Ciphers against the Figures. It being much less probable, that the greater
Stocks should misuse this Privilege, than the smaller.

Our Prudent Neighbors, as Popular as the Constitution of their State is, have
yet thought good, and found it so, to settle that of their Company wholly
Aristocratick, and Perpetual: and (for fear of Ostracisms, good only to Exile
the Best, the Ablest, and the most Experienced;) have established their Court
of Assistants (or seventeen Bewinthebbers) for Life, and still to be supplied
by the Votes, not of the Multitude, but the Survivors.

But this objection seems to arise from such, whose practices have run the
Company upon the necessity of Private Contracts, (Which are no other than
Sales, by allowance of the General Court, committed to the management of the
Court of Assistants, and by them made to who bids most.) The same thing as by
the Candle, only sometimes thought fitter, when the q^^^tity is great, and
Combinations apprehended. Or else from such, who for other ends, would have us
criple our selves, from the power of a Remedy, which no Merchants nor Companies
in the World, were ever yet debarred of, nor can be without; Trade will be
free, or will go where it may be so. It may allow of a Limitation to the assent
of the General Court, but no Exclusion.

Nor is it necessary for Joint Stocks to be strained like Procrustes's Guests
to the Model of Elections for Parliament. Which, were that to be new framed,
who knows what Modifications it might admit of? But yet will all good
Patriotts, ought to beheld, as Venerable and Sacred for its Noble Antiquity, as
Blessed, for its happy Influences on this Nation.

As for the Island of Polleroon, no Fortifications upon so small, so Remote an
Island, so situated within the strength of our Undisturbed Neighbors, could
ever be rendered Impregnable. Nor was it for so Changeable and Precarious an
Establishment as this Companies is now represented, to be very lavish in that
way of Expense; as these pretended Under-Valuations, of those which they have
elsewere found needful to Undertake, do but too much confirm.

And although the Suggestions, as if the maintaining an Ambassador at the
Mogulls Court, would excuse all the great expense of Fortifications, may seem
plausible at first hearing, until we take into consideration, the Instability
of that Government, Frequent Convulsions about the successions, Rebellions,
Wars and Disturbances, to which that Unfinisht Conquest, is ever obnoxious,
(Where so many of the Ancient Raja's do still retain a Tributary Possession, in
the many fastnesses of those Woods and Mountains;) And then the Necessity of
Forts and Castles will speak for it self. Not forgetting the late attempt of
the French, in the Road of Fort St. George.

And here I must needs admire their monstrous Zeal for their Countries honor,
at the charge of their Country men; Who rather than their Project of
Subscriptions, should not be received in India with all imaginable applause,
would have their needless Ambassador, go stuffed with the Restitutions from the
Company in Specie, which (they cannot but have learnt) have been already made
at Surrat in ready Money, with the very Fraights to the Junks out of which the
Goods were taken, to the content and admiration of all Parties concerned; As if
they would have the said Companies Stock laid out in Carpets, for this new One
to make a Solemn Entry upon.

That the Company are in a capacity to revive and carry on their Trade, is now
Actually in practice. But whiles they make such a noise, the imaginary
Necessity, of so vast an Increase of the Stock, for the full carrying on of the
Indian Trade, it were fit, to consider soberly, how great a Limb of the
Consumption of those Commodities here, is lopt off by the French Prohibition;
besides other obstuctions as such a Juncture at this, and it will then appear,
how safe a Precedent, the Prudence of the first Conductors of the present
Joynt-Stock have laid before us.

It was no Fault of the Companies, that they have not been allowed a
Parliamentary Confirmation, whilst it was neither fit nor safe, may I not say
Criminal, for them to question a^ Authority, in their Case, which the
Parliament themselves would never yet undertake. Nay have on several occasions,
if not directly approved, Let pass. But it had been a National, and Irreparable
Misfortune had they Sat still, and waited for it until now.

The Companies Enemies are at length brought to agree, that a Joynt-Stock is
the only good way to manage and improve the Trade for India.

Mean while, what Loads of Jnjuries and unspeakable damages, have the
Interlopers and their Adherents heaped upon the Company, and by Consequence
upon the Nation, under this Exploded Pretense of Liberty, to undo both the one
and the other, as far as in them lies; Besides these unseasonable disturbances
to the High Court of Parliment, which Battery being thus blown up, they do but
change their Colors, and under the fresh notion of a new Stock, begin again.
But what pity, were it, that such restless Intruders should be suffered thus to
proceed, from one Cavillation to another, to discredit, and molest so well
deserving a Society! Rather may our Honorable Representatives make reflection,
how mischiveous they must needs have been in India, from their carriage here.

So they asperse the Company on the one hand, for making a Piratical War in
India, to recruit their Stock, by rich Prizes from those Merchants. And on the
other hand, for not condemning them when brought in, Though (as appeared) out
of an honorable intention to preserve them entire, in order to a fair
Restitution; when the great Mogul, being better satisfied of the Misdemeanors
of his great Governors (who were thereupon displaced, and succeeded by others,
better disposed toward the Company) should condescend to an amicable
Composure. Much more might be enlarged here to the Reputation of the Company,
had they not just grounds to apprehend ill Offices abroad, by the Instruments
of these our homebred Enemies; whereof we have had but too many Instances, in
the inflaming of the Quarrel. It is good Manners, to let Great Princes speak
their own Style, whiles they do us Right.

That Infamous Term of Conspirators, and Tricks, is most liberally bestowed
upon the Company, for their Worthy Endeavors, to assert the Right of a stock,
entrusted to their Management. But after so many years combining, to ruin it,
both abroad and at home, and the courses taken to inveigle others into their
Interests, by cajolling them into Subscriptions for a new Stock, upon hopes, if
not assurance, of twenty per Cent. profit thereon (without one penny
disbursement) as soon as ever they shall have obtained an Act of Parliament for
their purpose: One would think this should much better suit with their own
Intreagues, Conspiracies being generally engaged in, to ruin the Innocent, and
not the preserve a Right in Possession. But in this manner, with unequalled
Confidence, do they lay their own Mischiefs at the Companies door. Imputing the
Wars with the Mogul and Siam, with all the multiplied consequences to the
Trade, the Stock, the Shipping, Men's Lives, the Customs, the Nation, and even
the calling in of Moneys, unto the Companies Piratical designs. Whiles all
these have been the mere effects of their own unworthy Practices.

As if a Company of Men should come to the Supreme Magistrates, and tell them.
There lies a spacious Plain upon the Confines of three Potent States; of a
consequence well known to all. Our Industrious Countrymen have several times,
and not unsuccessfully, put in for our Nations share; but for want of
Countenance from above, have been as often disturbed, by men of like unruly
Principles with our selves. At length, some Public Spirited Persons, with such
Authority as the Reigning Powers would afford them, (and this from the time of
Good Queen Elizabeth's first Charter, never disallowed of before,) took heart,
and rather than endure so irreparable a loss to the Nation, Undertaking the
Work, had at length recovered this Desolate Plantation into a posture so
inviting, That We not longer able to refrain, resolvedly broke in (at the
Windows, though the Doors were open) and throwing down all the Fences, with all
the Mischief and Combinations we could devise and pack against them, both
abroad and at home: We have reduced it into a Condition, which will require
both Time and Charge to restore it. And now, how reasonable soever it were, to
strengthen and comfort the Undertakers, and their Successors, who having so
vigorously Weathered all these storms, and laid out in Building Castles, Towns,
Factories, and Buying Lands, Territories Privileges and Revenues, which cost
them at sundry times above 1000000 l. might promise to themselves from this
High Court, that tender Consideration at least, which our Laws do allow even to
a Tenant at Will, (who having Tilled his Ground, and Sowed his Grain, may not
be turned out before he has got in his Crop.) Especially, when the main
Encouragement upon which they did engage their Fortunes, was, that they should
have three years continuance after warning. We do present these our Clamorous
Requests to the Supreme Magistrates, that laying aside all regard for the
injured Parties, the Widows, Orphans, and all that number of Interessed,
unconcerned in any of our Suggestions, they will de pleased to Legallize all
the Wrongs that we have done them, and (for Encouragement to such as our
selves,) give up this costly Plantation to our Discretion, that we may take all
that they have, at all manner of Disadvantages, to them; In short, We may kill
the Heir and the Inheritance shall be ours:

William Langhorn.


