THE CUSTOM Of the Manor of Paynswicke, Taken out Of the Decree in Chancery,
and carefully Examined For the benfit of the Tenants or others that may be
concerned.

By Thomas Loveday, in the Year 1687.

London, Printed in the Year, 1688.

JAcobus Dei grac. Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae et Hibern. Rex fidei defensor.
etc.
Omnibus ad quos presents Litt. per veniunt Salut.
in videmus jus prox. irrotula mentum ejusdam decreti sive. judicij coram nobis
in Cancellar. nostra Inter. Johan. Hamond alias Jorden, et aliis Tenand.
Manerij de Paynswicke in Com. Glouc. queren. et Henr. Jernegan Armiger. et
aliis Defens. nuper fac. et redit in Rotulis cum. Cancellar. nost. predic.
irrotulat ac ibidem. de Recordo residen. in haec verba.

JAmes by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these present Letters shall come greeting;
we have sen^ the Inrollment of a certain Decree of Judgment before us in our
Chancery, between John Hamond alias Jordan, and other Tenants of the Manor of
Paynswicke, in the County of Gloucester Plaintiffs; and Henry Jernegan Esquire and
others, Defendants lately made and Enrolled in the Rolls of our said Court of
Chancery, and there remaining upon Record in these words, etc

THE CUSTOM Of the Manner of Paynswicke.
WHere heretofore John Hamond, alias Jorden, John May, John Brown, Thomas
Bishop, Edmond Flecher, Richard Gardner, Thomas Tailor, Thomas Harcoppe,
Richard Coocke and William Barns an Infant within Age, by Gyles Charter and
Agnes his Wife, his Guardians, Complainants, for and in the behalf of
themselves and diverse others, being all of them several Copyholders and
customary Tenants of diverse several customary and Copyhold Messuages, Lands
and Tenements parcel of the Manor of Paynswicke, in the County of Gloucester;
and time out of mind demisable, and used to be demised in grants and
admitances, by Copy of Court Roll of the said Manor, to the taker or takers
thereof, by the words Sibi and Suis, which words make and create within the
said Manor, a customary estate of inheritance in fee simple at the will of the
Lord, according to the Custom of the said Manor, there exhibited their Bill of
complaint into the honorable Court of Chancery against Henry Jernegan the elder
Esquire Henry Jernegan the younger, Esquire and Thomas Neast Defendants, and on the
contrary side, the said Henry Jernegan the elder, and Henry Jernegan the
younger, Complainants, did afterward exhibit their Bill of complaints into the
said honorable Court of Chancery against the said John Mayo, John Brown, and
the rest of the said Copyholders and Tenants of the said Manor of Paynswick
Defendants; in and by which said first Bill, the said Tenants did declare, that
whereas the said Henry Jernegan the elder, in the Eight and Twentieth year of
the late Queen Elizabeth, and before was seized in his Demeasne as of Fee or
Fee-Tail of and in the said Manor of Paynswick, with the Right Members and
Appurteances thereof: And the said Complaynants John Mayo, John Brown and
Thomas By shopp, and their Ancesters, and others the then Customary Tenants and
Copyholders of the said Manor of Paynswick, then and long time before that,
had and held severally to them and their Heirs, at the will of the Lord,
according to the Custom of the said Manor, diverse several Copyhold and
Customary Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, parcel of the said
Manor, time out of mind there used and accustomed to be granted and demised by
Copy of Court Roll of the said Manor of Estates of Inheritance in Fee-simple,
by the words (sibe and suis) at the will of the Lord, according to the Custom
of the said Manor, and within the said Manor then and time out of mind there
were and had been, and ought to be used and accustomed diverse Ancient laudable
Customs touching the Copyhold and Customary Messuages, Lands and Tenements
there, and namely and particularly amongst others; that the Heir of every
Copyholder and Customary Tenant dying seized of such customary Estate, of and
in any Copyhold or Customary Massuages, Lands or Tenaments of the said Manor,
was to be, and ought, and was used to be presented and admitted Tenant of the
same customary Messuages, Lands and Tenaments at the Court of the said Manor,
upon reasonable tender and request in that behalf, for the fine of one years
Rent only; and that the customary Tenants of the said Manor by the custom
there, ought to have all the Herbage and Panage of the common woods, and common
Hills, and the Lords Wastes of the said Manor, and in or about the Month of
March, in the said Eight and Twentieth year of the said late Queen Elizabeth,
some differences grew and were like to arise between the said Henry Jernegan
the elder, then Lord of the said Manor, and the then Copyholders, or
Customary Tenants of the said Manor; and the said Tenants being unwilling to
contend in suit of Law with their Landlord, did in dutiful and submissive
manner make means unto the said Master Jernegan for a good and peaceable end,
with his love and good will; and the said Master Jernegan being a Gentleman
well inclined unto a peaceble end; and the said then Copyholders desire the
same, it was thereupon agreed and directed between them, that the Customs of
the said Manor, whereof there was or might be likelihood of question or
controversy, should, and might be considered of, and known in some certainty,
and truly set down in Writing, to be allowed of, and held by the Lord and
Tenants for quiet of them and their Posterity: And thereupon sundry of the
Customs of the said Manor were then remembered and considered of, and agreed
upon, and were set down in Writing indented, made between the said Henry
Jernegan on the one Party, and the then Copyholders and Customary Tenants of
the said Manor, of the other Party; and Enterchangably by them Sealed and
Delivered, the Tenor and Effect whereof is as follows, that is to say.

This Indenture, made the Twentieth day of March, in the Eight and Twentieth
year of the Reign of Elizabeth, by the Grace of God of England, France and
Ireland Queen Defender of the Faith, etc. Between Henry Jernegan of Cossey in
the County of Norfolk Esquire and Lord of the Manor of Paynswick in the County of
Gloucester of the one Party; and all the Customary Tenants of the Lordship and
Manor of Paynswick aforesaid, of the other Party, Witnesses, that whereas of
late years, some Questions and variance has been moved between the said Henry
Jernegan, and his Customary Tenants of the said Lordship and Manor of
Paynswick, about diverse and sundry Articles of the Custom of the said Manor;
the said Henry Jernegan tendering the Quietness, Love and good Will of his said
Tenants, and in consideration of the hope of the like dutiful Service, good
Will and Behavour, toward him and his Posterity hereafter, always to be
performed by the said Tenants and their Heirs and Assigns, willingly as to his
late Father and Mother, and others of his Ancestors has been heretofore
showed, done and accomplished, at the humble Suit and Petition of all the said
Tenants tendered and exhibited to the said Henry Jernegan, the Twentieth day of
March, before the date of these presents, by the mediation of John Dereham
Gentleman, Serveyor general to the said Henry: Does by these presents for him
and his Heirs Ratify, Confirm and Establish these Articles, as in this
Indenture are expressed to stand, be and remain as true and perpetual Articles,
of the Custom of the Manor of Paynswick aforesaid.

I. Imprimis, The Custom is, and time out of mind has been, that the Tenants
of the said Manor do hold their Massuages, Lands and Tenements by Copy of
Court Roll, Sibi and suis; whereby they have an Estate of Inheritance to them
and their Heirs, according to the Custom of the said Manor there.

II. Item, The Customary Tenants there, from time out of mind have used, and
ought to pay their Rents yearly at four Terms in the year usual and accustomed
(viz.) The Annutiation of our Lady, the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, Saint
Michael the Archangel, and the Birth of our Lord, and shall have a Reeve to
gather the same, after the Custom of the said Manor, and the same Rents shall
pay to the Lord, or his Officers, accordingly, within Eight and Twenty days
next after every of the said Feasts.

III. Item, That one of the Customary Tenants being an Homager, ought to be
Reeve, and to collect and gather the Customary Rents, Revenes and Profits of
the said Manor, and shall pay the same to the Lord or his Officers, within
Eight and Twenty days, next after every of the said Feasts of the Anuntiation
of our Lady, the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, Saint Michael the Archangel,
and the Birth of our Lord, where the Lord or his Officers shall appoint, by his
or their Precept; and also against every audit of the Lord to be kept for the
said Manor shall gather and leavy the extract of the Court, and make a true
Account thereof, and pay the same at the Lords Audit yearly, which Reeve ought
to be elected and chosen yearly by the Homage of the said Manor; for if such
Reeve so elected, shall happen to Imbessel, or Waste the Lords Rent, Revenues
and Profits of the said Manor; that then the said Tenants are bound by their
Custom to answer the Lord the same Rent, Revenues and Profits at the days and
times aforesald.

IV. Item, The Reeve upon his Account, ought to have allowance of Six and
Twenty Shillings Eight Pence for his pains-taking in gathering of the said
Rents, which allowance has been used time out of mind.

V. Item, There are certain other Lands, called the Thirteens, the Tenants
whereof, by the Custom, are bound to carry Venison for the Lord into such place
or places as the Lord shall appoint them, by the space of one day and a night a
piece, at their own charges, or else to stand to a yearly Fine of eight Pence,
to the use of the Lord of the Manor at the Election of the Lord.

VI. Item, The Tenants by their Custom, time out of mind used, may give and
sell their Customary Lands at their will and pleasure, making a surrender of
the same, either in open Court to the hands of the Steward for the time being,
or else out of the Court, into the hands of the Reeve of that year or his
Deputy, in the presence of two Customary Tenants of the same Manor, and the
same surrender must be presented at the next Court, or else the Surrender to be
void, and upon every Surrender so made, and presented in Court; the Lord is to
have an Heriot, if the Land be Heriotable, that is to say, for every yard and
half yard of Land, which the Tenants hold, to give or pay the best quick
Cattle, and in default of such Cattle, the best Household stuff or Goods of
what kind soever.

VII. Item, That upon every decent of any Customary Lands of Inheritance the
Lord is to have one years Rent for his Fine, and a Heriot in manor aforesaid,
if the Land be heriotable.

VIII. Item, That upon every Surrender, either in Possession or Reversion, the
Lord is to have seven years Rent of the thing so surrendered, for his Fine; but
if any Tenant having first surrendered the Reversion of any customary Lands, and
will afterward Surrender his Estate in possession; or if any Woman that
holds Lands and Tenements by her free Bench, according to the custom, shall
surrender her Estate, which she has for term of her or his Life; in these two
kinds of Surrenders the Lord is to have but one years Rent, and a Heriot, if
the Land be Heriotable upon the surrender.

IX. Item, At every Surrender made in Reversion, no Heriot is due, until the
Death of him or her which made surrender, nor none other advantages due to the
Lord but the Fine only.

X. Item, After the death of any Tenant, the Wife of the same Tenant, if any
such be, shall be admitted to her free Bench in the Lords Court, by the payment
of one Penny, to have to her during her Life, paying such Rents, Customs and
services thereof, due and accustomed.

XI. Item, After the death of any such Woman, the same Tenement or Tenements,
which were in her tenure; shall come and descend to the next Heir on the part
of the Husband of the same Woman, and for lack of an Heir, to the next Kinsman
of the same Husband, if no Surrender be thereof made before, after the said
Custom, without payment of any Heriot for the Woman, which held by her free
Bench, as before is said.

XII. Item, If any Woman Inheritrix die seized of any Tenement or Tenements,
and no surrender by her in her Life time made; that then all such Lands or
Tenements, whereof she died seized shall come and descend to the next Heir,
after the custom and manor, Paying an Heriot for the same Woman if it be
heriotable.

XIII. Item, That all Tenants by their Custom time out of mind used, may sell
their Woods, Timber, Trees, and other Fuel and Brush, growing in and upon their
Tenements, without license of the Lord or his Officers, and that every Tenant
may Let and Set his Customary Lands, or any part thereof, without license of
the Lord or of his Officers; and also to make any Quarrey, to Build or repair
upon the same, and not otherwise; upon any part of his Customary Lands.

XIV. Item, The Tenants time out of mind have used at their will and pleasure,
to Build Cottages upon their Copyhold Tenaments, and to Let and Set the same
without any license, asking or paying any Fine to the Lord for the same, saving
that the head Tenant is to answer and pay the Amercements and Pains for all
Trespasses, as shall be committed by any under Tenant in the Lords Wood and
Park, Demesnes, or in any Woods or Grounds of any of the Customary Tenants,
presented and offered by the Lords Tenants in the Court, if any of the said
under Tenants Estreted, be not able to satisfy and pay the same.

XV. Item, If a Woman holding by her free Bench, do Marry sundry Husbands, at
sundry times, yet shall she enjoy the same during her Life, without forfeiture
thereof.

XVI. Item, By the Custom, every yard or half-yard of Land, holden by Copy,
after the custom and manner is heriotable, and the Heriot to be paid a^ the
death of the Tenant, that dies seized thereof, or upon the surrender of hi^
Possession when the Reversion was surrendered before.

XVII. Item, If any Customary Tenants shall Let or Set his yard or hal^ yard of
Land, which is heriotable, and a^ his Decease the Lord not answered, the best
Beast for his Heriot, which did commonly manure the said Premises, by the space
of one year next before his decease or the full value thereof, that then such
Persons to whom the same yard or hal^ yard by the Custom ought to come (...)
shall pay to the Lord or his Officers, within six Weeks next after the death of
such Tenants, three Pounds for every yard Land, and forty Shillings for every
hal^ yard instead of an Heriot, and in case default be made thereof; then it
shall be lawful for the Lord by his Officers, to^ take one Whole years profit
of such yard or half yard to his own use and behoof instead of the said Heriot.

XVIII. Item, That all Land, called, Mondays Thirteens, Farrendels, Burgage^
and Curtelages are not heriotable.

XIX. Item, If a Man have diverse Sons, and the eldest dies having Issue of his
Body lawfully begotten, whether it be Male or Female; and after their
Grandfather dies, the Issue of the eldest Brother shall Inherit as next Heir
to the Grandfather.

XX. Item, If a Man dies, having diverse Daughters, and no Sons, and has so
many yards, or half yards of Lands as Daughters, then shall every Daughters by
the Custom, have a yard or half yard Land, and the like order is with
Tenements; but if the Tenant so dying, have but one yard, half yard, or one
Tenament, having diverse Daughters as before is said, that then the same yard,
half yard, or Tenement, by the Homage and Steward there, shall be prised to the
best value, and the price thereof to be divided equally amongst the said
Daughters, saving that the eldest Daughter shall have her choice, whether she
will have the yard, half yard, or Tenement, or the Portion of Money to her
allotted by the Homage and Steward; and if she take the said yard, half yard,
or Tenement, then she to pay the Money to her other, Sisters after the prized
price.

XXI. Item, That after the death of every Tenant that dies seized, of any
Lands or Tenements within the said Lordship; at the next Court there holden,
Proclamation shall be made openly, to enquire who is the right Heir of the
Tenant so deceased, or who can make any claim or title to the same Tenure or
Tenures; and if at the first Court there come none to Challenge the said Tenure
or Tenures, then there shall be Proclamation made openly at (to other) the next
Court there holden in like manner as is aforesaid, and then if none having
Right come to challenge the same, from thence forth the Lands shall be Echeated
to the Lord, to dispose of the same at his Will and Pleasure, except the next
Heir that has Right to the same, be beyond the Seas, or in the Kings Wars.

XXII. Item, That whosoever is to be admitted Tenant to any Tenure within the
said Lordship, ought openly to be admitted in the Court before the Homage, and
to have his Copy read openly in the Court, that all Men there may hear and know
that he is admitted Tenant accordingly; and if any Person having Right to any
Tenure by Inheritance, is to be admitted Tenant, then he ought to be taken and
presented by the Homage; and if any challenge any Tenure by Surrender, that
then the Surrender must be made, either in the Court openly, or else to be
brought into the Court by credible and sufficient witnesses, that it may be
known to the Homage, and so be admitted Tenant as it is aforesaid, according to
the Custom there used time out of mind.

XXIII. Item, Whosoever takes any Tenure there of the Lord, he must take it
either by means of Inheritance of himself or his Wife, or by surrender of some
other that is an Heir, or else by means of some Forfeiture or Escheat into the
Lords Hands, and it must be expressed in the Copy of the Taker, whether he
takes his Tenure by right of Inheritance of himself or his Wife, or by
surrender of any Person, or by Forfeiture or Escheat into the Lords Hands, ^or
by the Default of an Heir; to challenge it otherwise, no Man can take any
Tenure there, nor the Lord can let it otherwise, by the Custom there used time
out of mind,

XXIV. Item, That the Tenants by their Custom, ought to have the Herbage and
Paunage of the common Woods and Hills, and the Lords Waste, as time out of mind
they have used.

XXV. Item, That the Tenants there, at such time as the Lord of the Manor of
Paynswicke, shall not be Comorant, or Dwelling within the said Lordship, shall
have such Strays as shall happen into their Custody from time to time, paying
such price as they shall be indifferently prized by the Reeve of the Manor,
and four of the Homagers to be chosen by the said Reeve; the said price being
presented and allowed by the Lords chief Officers, at the next Court to be
holden within the said Manor.

XXVI. Item, The Custom is, and time out of mind used has been, that the
Sheriff or any his Bailiffs and Ministers, cannot enter within this Liberty to
serve any Process, upon any Person within the same, unless it be with a
Commandment or Subpena.

XXVII. Item, If any Tenant does give or sell any part or parcel of his
Tenements, or the whole without Surrender, it is a Forfeiture.

XXVIII. Item, If any Tenant do let down his Tenement or any part thereof,
being payned at two Courts, to Build the same by a certain pain, and the third
Court on pain of Forfeiture, and does not Build the same according to the order
in the Court, taken by the Homage and the Steward, it is a Forfeit.

XXIX. Item, If any be an Inheritor to any Lands or Tenements, does sell the
same to any Person or Persons before he, or she shall become Tenant to the Lord
in his Court, and do other Suits and Services, according to the custom there,
it is a Forfeiture.

XXX. Item, If any Tenant do detain or withold any Rents willingly, which are
due to the Lord; or does withdraw his Suit, and Service from the Lords Court,
being not essoyned four general Courts together, one after another, is cause of
Forfeiture.

XXXI. Item, If any Tenant do convey any Part of the Lordship, to any other
with intent to deceive the Lord of the same, it is a Forfeit.

XXXII. Item, If any Person do hold any Customary Lands jointly within this
Manor, it is a Forfeiture by the Custom.

XXXIII. Item, If any Reeve chosen by the Homage, shall refuse to gather the
Lords Rents and Profeits, or shall refuse to beat the Office according to the
Custom, and to pay the Rents and Profits by him levied by virtue of his Office,
is cause of Forfeiture.

And after that, And according to the same Articles and Customs agreed upon,
and put in Writing; the Customary Tenants of the said Manor of Paynswicke,
quietly enjoyed their Customary Messuages and Tenements, and were admitted
Tenants from time to time, and did yield and pay all Rents and Customs
accordingly, and according to the said Custom as in former and ancient times
they had done, and enjoyed the same, and also there were, and time out of mind
had been, within the said Manor diverse other ancient Customs and Usages, not
mentioned nor set down in the said Iudenture, and namely by the Custom of the
said Manor, the Customary Tenants thereof, have used to exchange their
Customary Lands, or part thereof one with another, they first coming into the
Court of the Manor, and there paying license to make such exchange, and each
of the said Tenants so exchanging, paying therefore two pence a piece for
every. Acre so exchanged, and the same Exchanges being from time to time
Entered and Recorded in the Court Rolls of the said Manor, have been ever held
and allowed as lawful; And also the Custom of the said Manor there used was
and had been, that if any customary Tenant dyed seized of any Customary Estate
of Inheritance, of or in any customary Lands or Tenements of the said Manor,
his Heir being under the Age of One and Twenty years, that then the next of Kin
to the said Heir, not Inheriotable to the said customary Lands, ought to have,
and used to have the Custody of the same Heir, of such his Lands until the full
Age of One and Twenty years, of such Heir, yiedling account therefore unto the
said Heir at his full Age, the oversight, government and commitment thereof, to
be in the Court upon charge of the Homage of the said Manor. And whereas also,
about three or four Years before the said Bill exhibited on Henry Barns,
Grandfather of the said Plaintiff William Barns, was a copyhold Tenant, and
dyed seized of a Copyhold and Customary Estate of Inheritance, in Fee-simple of
certain copy hold Lands and Tenements, parcel of the said Manor, which by the
Custom of the said Manor, descended unto Humphery Barns, Son and Heir of the
said Henry, which Humphery dyed seized of the said Estate, and by the said
Custom, the same descended to Henry Barns, Son and Heir of the said Humphery
Barns, which said Henry Barns, Son of the said Humphery, dyed seized of the
said Estate, and by the Custom of the said Manor, the same descended, and came
to the Plaintiff William Barns, Brother and Heir of Henry Barns the Son; and
the said Plaintiff William Barns, is an Infant of the Age of Ten Years or there
about, and under the Age of One and Twenty; and the said Plaintiff Giles
Carter, having Married the Mother of the said Plaintiff William Barns, the said
Plaintiff William Barns, is and ought by the Custom of the said Manor, to be
in the Custody of the said Plaintiff Giles Carter, and Agnes his Wife; all
which ancient and laudable customs are and had been used, as the said plaintiff
alleged until then of late; but so it was as they also alleged by their said
Bill, that some estate or conveyance being lately had and made of the said
Manor, by the said Defendant Henry Jernegan the elder, to the use of the other
Defendant, Henry Jernegan the younger, he the said Henry Jernegan the younger,
pretended and went about to call in question, and to avoid diverse of the said
Complainants Estates, upon pretense and surmise of some defects or want of
Warrants, or mistaking in the st^^ing or keeping of the Courts of the said
Manor, or of the Steward that kept the same, or of the parties in whose names
the same Courts were kept, and that therefore the admittances of sundry of the
said Plaintiffs should be void, which the said Henry Jernegan the younger gave
out he would avoid, and to that end, whereas upon every descent of an Customary
Land of Inheritance, the Lord by the Custom of the said Manor, is to have one
years Rent for his Fine, and the Tenant or next Heir thereupon to be admitted
to the same Land; the said Defendnant Henry Jernegan the younger, denied, that
there was any such Custom, and also denied unto the said Complainants, the
Herbage and Paunage of the common Woods, Hills and Wastes of the said Manor,
which the ancient Court Rolls of the said Manor did prove, remaining in the
Defendants Custody, and that the said Henry Jernegan the younger had of late
oppressed the commonable Grounds, with great numbers of Sheep, and had caused
the Steward of the said Manor not to make entry of any exchange between the
Customary Tenants of the said Manor, for such Fines as has been accustomed;
and also the said Henry Jernegan the younger, had made some grant of the said
Plaintiff Barns his customary Lands, of purpose to prejudice him being a poor
Infant; and that the said Henry Jernegan the younger, had made some secret
^ses, of some of the said Customary Lands and Premises, belonging to the said
Plaintiff, to diverse Persons unknown to them, and had commenced, or caused to
be commenced, and threatened to bring and Prosecute diverse Suits at the common
Law against the said Plaintiffs, concerning the Premises, for avoiding whereof,
and that the said Customs might be certainly known and Establi^^'d, and for
that the said Defendants, (...) their Stewards, had in their custodies (...)
the Writings which did show the said C^stoms, without which the said Plaintiffs
were not able to defend themselves at the common Law, but were like without the
aid of this Court, to be without ^emedy in the Premises, for all which causes,
the said Complainants prayed the process of this Court against the said
Defendants, Henry Jernegan the elder, Henry Jernegan the younger, and Thomas
Neast to answer the Premises, and to show cause why the said Customs heretofore
agreed upon, between the said Hen^y Jernegan the elder, and the Tenants of the
said Manner of Paynswicke, and the other beforementioned Customs should not
stand and be retified by the decree of this Court, as by the said Bill of
complaints of the said Tenants, remaining of Record in this Court appeared,
unto which Bill the said Defendants made their answer in this Court; and first
^he said Henry Jernegan the elder did, in and by his several answers, in
substance confess all the said Customs alleged in the said complainants Bill,
and confessed the making of the said Indenture by himself, unto the said
Tenants, and said that he had since continued and ^llowed of the said Customs,
and was ^till ready and willing to approve and al^^ow thereof, according to the
true intent of the said Indenture of Articles, and confessed that he had made a
conveyance of the said Manor of Paynswicke, to the use of his said Son, the
other Defendant, which he said he hoped was not prejudicial to the said
Customs; and the said Henry Jernegan the younger, and Thomas Neast by their
said answer said, That during the Minority of any Infant, to whom any Copyhold
Lands of the said Manor did descend upon, by the Death of his Ancestors, the
Lord of the said Manner ought to have the Wardship and Custody of the said
Lands; and that he the said Henry Jernegan the younger, by virtue thereof
having Right to the Customary Lands of the said William Barns, did grant the
same Lands unto the other Defendant Thomas Neast, and the said Defendants Henry
Jornegan the younger, and Thomas Neast did by their said answers traverse and
deny the residue of the points of the said Bill, and so concluded their said
answer, as by the said several answers also remaining of Record in this Court
more fully and at large appeared, whereunto the said Complainants replied, and
the said Parties being at Issue, a Commission Issued out of this Court for
Examination of Witnesses on both Parts, which being returned, and according to
the ordinary rules of this Court, published a day for hearing of the said
cause, was by this Court appointed in the last Trinity Term, as well upon the
said Bill exhibited by the said Mr Henry Jernegan the younger, against the said
Tenants Defendants, as on the said Bill exhibited by the said Tenants
Complainants, against them the said Henry Jernegan the elder, Henry Jernegan
the younger, and Thomas Neast Defendants, at which day, being the Eight day of
June last, For as much as upon the entering into the hearing of the matter that
day, in the presence of the Council, learned on both Parts, for the touching
the Customs of the said Manor, this Court thought it fit, for avoiding further
Controversy and Suits, that some indifferent Persons might, upon consideration
had of all the Court Rolls of the said Mr Jernegan, and the Copies of the
Tenants, mediate an end between the Parties, so as the said Mr Jernegan, Lord
of the said Manor, might have that which appertained unto him in reasonable
proportion, and that he might use his Tenants lovingly and kindly, upon their
submissive carriage toward him, whereunto the Council on both Parts assented;
it wa^ therefore then amongst other things, ordered that the matter should be
refered to Mr Thorsby one of the Masters of this Court, and Mr. Bridgman, and
Mr. Coventre being of Council with the Parties to the end that they three upon
the sight of all the Court Rolls of the said Manor, and all the ancient Copies
of the said Tenant, which were all to be brought before them upon the Oaths of
the Parties, and also upon fight of depositions of Witnesses taken in this
cause, the deposition of such Witnesses as were Tenants only excepted, of whose
Testimony the Court gave no allowance, might treat, mediate, and set down some
good end between the Parties if they could, if not, that then they should
certify this Court the difference between them, whereupon such further order
should be taken in the cause, as should be meet, according to which order the
said Mr Thorsby, Mr Bridgman and Mr Coventre made their Certificate to this
Court, in manner and form following, that is to say, The Twenty seventh day of
November, One Thousand Six Hundred and Thirteen; between Henry Jernegan the
younger Esquire Complainant, and the Customary Tenants of the Manor of Paynswicke
in the County of Gloucester Defendants; and between the said Tenants
Complainants, and the aforesaid Henry Jernegan Defendant, by warrant of an
Order of the Eight of June last: We have considered of the Court Rolls of the
said Manor brought before Us by the said Jernegan, and the Copies brought
before Us by the said Tenants, and also of the depositions of Witnesses taken
in this cause; and we have also advisedly perused the Indenture made by Henry
Jernegan the elder Esquire Father of the Plaintiff, and finding the same in diverse
Articles, rather by the unskilful Penning thereof, then for any matter of
substance to vary, both from the Rolls and Witnesses, we have thought good to
explain the same in such sort as follows.

First, Whereas it is contained in the Sixth Article of the said Indenture,
that every Surrender made into the hands of the Reeve or his Deputy, ought to
be presented at the next Court, or else the same to be void, we find that such
Surrender may be presented at or before the next general Court of the said
Manor, commonly called the Law-day, and holden within the Month after either
of the Feasts of Easter or St Michael the Archangel, and upon every such
Surrender made, the Lord is to have his Heriot, if the Tenement be heriotable,
of such Cattle or Goods as the Tenant had at the time of the said Surrender so
made to the Reeve or his Deputy, or at any time after.

And whereas, it is contained in the One and Twentieth Article of the same
Indenture, that after the Death of every Tenant, dying seized of any Lands or
Tenement within the said Manor, Proclamation shall be made at the next Court,
and at two other next Courts, and if none come to challenge the same Lands,
then the same Lands shall escheat to the Lord.

And in the Seven and Twentieth Article of the same Indenture it is contained,
that the Tenants for Waste done, shall be pained at two Courts, and at a third
Court upon pain of fo^feiture; we are of opinion, upon view of the said Rolls
and depositions, that the Courts mentioned in the said two last mentioned
Articles, are to be taken for the two general Courts usually holden within the
said Manor, within one Month after the Feast of Easter, and St Michael the
Archangel, commonly called Lawdays, and that no Tenant of the said Manor,
shall incur any prejudice or damage by reason of the not doing of any thing
contained in the said Articles, or either of them, so as the same be done at
such general Court or Courts as is aforesaid; and whereas the said Seven and
Twentieth Article concerning Waste, by the words thereof does seem to extend
only to the letting down of Houses, we are of opinion that the same was meant
and intended to extend to all Wastes and decays in Houses, and this we
conceive was the true meaning of the Parties, howsoever the said Indenture be
somewhat imperfectly penned.

And whereas in the Eleventh Article of the same Indenture it is declared, that
after the Death of a Woman holding by her free Bench the Tenement or Tenements
wherein her tenure shall come to the next Heir, on her part of the Husband of
the same Woman, and for lack of ^uch Heir to the next Kinsman of the said
Husband; we do find that the Custom of the Manor is and so wa^ meant to have
been declared by the said Article, that after the Death of such a Woman, such
Tenements shall disiend to the Heirs of the same Husband according to the
course of the common Law, and not otherwise.

And whereas by the Thirteenth Article of the same Indenture it is declared,
that all Tenants by their Custom, may fell Woods, Timber or Trees upon their
Tenement; we do not find it warranted by any Rolls or other proof, that any
Tenant holding by free Bench or other ways for Life, may fell any Woods,
Timber or Trees, except for their necessary Boots, to be spent and employed
upon the said Tenements, and therefore we hold it meet, that the said Article
as to so much thereof, as concerns the felling any Wood, Timber, or Trees, to
be explained not to extend but only to such Tenants as have Estates of
Inheritance.

And where in the same Thirteenth Article of the Indenture it is declared, that
every Customary Tenant may be^ and Let his Lands without License; we find the
same Custom warranted by sundry proofs; howbeit we find it proved, that such
Lease is to hold no longer then to the Feast of St Michael the Archangel, next
after the Death of him or her that made it, and in cause of Death to be
determined at Michaelmas after such Death, or by Surrender, or Forfeiture of
the Estate, in the mean time for what term of Years soever the said Lease be
made, and so much we hold meet to be added, in the explaination of the said
Article.

And where by the Twentieth Article of the same Indenture it is declared, how
and in what sort the Daughters of any Customary Tenant of the said Manor,
ought to divide the Inheritance of their Ancestors; we hold it meet to be added
by way of explaination of the said Article, that in case any one or more of the
said Daughters of such Copyholders, happen to dye either in the life time or
after the death of such Copyholder, that the Heir or Heirs of her or them so
dying, ought to have the like benefit in every respect, for and touching any
thing contained in the said Article, as the Party or Parties dying should or
ought to have had if he or they had happened to live.

And concerning the Fourteenth and Five and Twentieth Article of the said
Indenture, we do not find the same warranted by any proofs, nor do hold them
fit to be coutinued, but are of opinion that the same shall be henceforth
utterly disallowed.

But concerning the rates of Fines, both upon Death and Surrender, being the
matter chiefly controverted between the said Lord and Tenants; we find proved
both by deposition of Witnesses, and by sundry Copies and Rolls of the times of
King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, and some of antienter
times, that the Tenants upon Surrenders used to pay four Years Rent for their
Fines, and upon decent one Years Rent for their Fines; and in this we find a
very constant course with little or no variance for Threescore Years now past
or more, until by the said Indenture the Fines upon Surrenders were raised from
four unto seven Years Rent, at which rate they have continued ever since the
making of the said Indenture, and therefore we are of opinion that it is very
meet, that the Fines of the Tenants of the said Manor, shall be continued and
paid in certainty, according to the said Indenture, and that no further
question be hereafter moved by the Lords of the said Manor, that are or shall
be concerning the said point of incertainty of Fine; after consideration had of
all which things we found some difficulty how to compose the said cause, unless
we could settle some other Questions not mentioned in the said Indenture,
between the said Lord and Tenants, and therefore by assent and with the good
liking of all the said Parties, we took consideration thereof also, and to that
purpose, whereas some question has been between the said Lord and Tenants, for
that the Lord claimed to have the wardship of the said Tenants Heirs being
within Age, to his own use, for as much as it appeared to us, that upon that
point there has been a Trial by verdict at the common Law, which past against
the Lord, we hold it meet that the Lord for the time being, be henceforth for
ever excluded, to have any further benefit or power, by color or pretense of
such ward, but only the committing of such Heir to some of his near Kindred, by
the advice of the Homage, for which commitment the Lord for the time being
shall have for a Fine three Years Rent and no more, saving one Years Rent more
which the Lord is also to have in every such cause, in respect of the dissent
to the Heir, and if any Lands shall afterward defend to such Heir during his
non age, then the Lord shall have the like Fine and Fines in every respect,
according to the Rent of the Land so newly descended, as he had or shall have
upon the first commitment. And whereas there are within the said Manor, sundry
Lands called by the name of the Demeasue, Lands, which we find has been time
out of mind accustomed to pass by Copy, and nevertheless because they are
called Demeasues, the Lord has of late made question whether they are
grantable by Copy or not, a thing in our opinions of small weight, to shake the
validity of a thing so long continued. And there also within the said Manor,
certain Lands called Chantry-Lands, which being but of small quantity, and
lying intermixed amongst the Copy-holds of the said Manor, have of long time
been granted by Copy of Court Roll. And there is also a certain Ground called
Wickerige-hill, which the Lord Pretends has been parcels of the Waste of the
said Manor, but we find that by long continued usage, the Tenants have enjoyed
several parcels thereof, as part of their Tenements which they hold by Copy; we
are of opinion that it is meet, that the same Demeasue-Lands and Chantry-Lands,
shall be accounted and enjoyed as Copyhold, by the respective owners thereof:
And that the said parcel of Wickerige-hill, shall be for ever here after
likewise enjoyed by the respective Owners and Possessors thereof, in like sort
as now it is, without further claim, let or interuption of the said Henry
Jernegan, or of any other that shall be Lord of the said Manor, saving that
the Lord may put in his Cattle there as a Commoner at all times, when the same
Ground shall lie fallen, or otherwise open to the Waste next adjoining
thereunto. And whereas their is another question between the said Lord and
Tenants, touching the Fines to be paid to the Lord upon any exchange of any
Land, to be made amongst the Tenants; we find that the said Tenants have used
to make such exchanges, paying for every Acre to the Lord of the said Manor
for his Fine, the sum of four Pence, which rate we ^old meet should be
ratified, allowed, and confirmed for ever: These things being so digested, we
moved the Tenants that they would be content to raise among them, some
reasonable sum of Money, to be bestowed on their Landlord, for his favor and
good will, which they very dutifully, and lovingly yielded unto, and upon our
motion did agree, to pay unto him, the sum of One Thousand Four Hundred and
Fifty Pound; that is to say, Five Hundred and Fifty Pounds, at or before the
fifth day of December now next coming, Four Hundred and Fifty Pounds upon the
fifth day of December, which shall be in the Year of our Lord God, 1614. at the
Church Porch of Paynswicke, and Four Hundred and Fifty Pounds residue, upon the
fifth day of December, which shall be in the Year of our Lord God, 1615. at the
place aforesaid; which money we have wished, and the said Mr Je^negan has
under taken shall be bestowed in such sort, that the benefit thereof may redown
not only to himself, but unto his Wife, who has a Jointure in the said Manor,
and to his Son and Heir John Jernegan, in whom we find the Inheritance of the
said Manor expectant upon his Fathers Death, is by good conveyance settled;
and the said Tenants have likewise assented, that whereas by the said Indenture
it is declared, that they ought to have the Herbage and Panage of the common
Woods, common Hills, and Wastes of the said Manor; and it stands proved by
Witnesses, that they ever enjoyed the same, and the Lord has been wholly
excluded thereof: The Lord of the said Manor for the time being, may for the
better breeding and increase of Wood, enclose one full third part of all the
Woods, and Wood grounds of the said Manor, which do now lie open and in
common, saving the Waste ground called, Sponbed-hill alias Kimsbury-hill,
whereof he may also enclose Five and Twenty Acres, in such places and manner,
as the same parts so to be enclosed, have been lately set out by the Lord and
Tenants; and that the said Lord may keep the same parts so enclosed, from time
to time according to the Statutes in that behalf; and also that the Lord of the
said Manor for the time being, shall have common with the said Tenants, in the
Waste and commonable Grounds aforesaid, after the Rate and Proportion of two
yard Lands and no more, for the Land the said Lord ^ow has, and for such Lands
as the Lord of the said Manor shall hereafter happen to have common, after
such Rate and Proportion, as the Tenants of the said Manor have o^ shall have,
wherewith the said Mr Jernegan is well contented; in Respect of all which we
hold it meet, if it shall so seem meet to this honorable Court, that the said
Indenture with such explanations, alterations, and additions as are before set
down, with other the premises by us before thought meet to be done and
performed, should be ratified by the decree, and authority of this honorable
Court, against the said Henry Jernegan the elder, and Henry Jernegan the
younger, and Elinor his Wife, and John Jernegan his Son and Heir, apparent,
their and every of their Heirs and Assigns, and against all and every Person
and Persons, having or lawfully claiming, or that shall hereafter have or
lawfully claim, from, by or under them, or any of them, the rather for that the
said Mr Jernegan the elder, at the time of the making of the said Indenture,
was owner of the Inheritance of the said Manor; and for that we conceive, the
said Tenants have given for bying their Peace, a very ample and liberal
satisfaction to their Landlord, not inferior in our opinions, to the true worth
of any benefit they shall, or may receive by this Order; and to the end the
said Mr Jernegan may be secured of the Money, agreed to be paid unto him, and
an even course may be held, for the satisfying all charges sustained in this
business, we have caused the said Tenants among themselves, to make a Taxation,
what every of them is to pay, as well to satisfy the said Money payable to Mr
Jernegan, as all charges incident to this business, which Taxation is set down
in a Schedule, to these presents annexed; and we hold it meet, if any the
Persons thereby taxed, shall make default of payment of any the Sums by them
payable, the Lands and Tenements of him that shall make such default, may by
order of this Court be Sequestered, into the hands of any meet Persons, to be
nominated by the said Mr Jernegan, as well for contribution to be made to such
of the Tenants, as have already given security for the said payment, and
undergone the charges of this business, as for the satisfation of the said Mr
Jernegan for the residue, with damages for the forbearance thereof, after the
rate of fifteen in the Hundred; and all the charges in the procuring, or
executing the said sequestration; which Schedule annexed unto the said
Certificate, follows in manner and form following, that is to say, A Schedule
containing the Names of the Copyholders of the Manor of Paynswicke in the
County of Gloucester, and what Sums every of them is to pay for their several
Tenements, and at what days, according to the report of Henry Thorsby Esquire one
of the Masters of the high Court of Chancery, John Bridgman and Thomas Coventry
Esqs made in the said Court of Chancery, the seven and Twentieth day of
November, Anno Regni Regis Jacobi Vndecimo.

SUms to be paid the fifth of December One thousand six hundred and thirteen,
John Bishopp, eleven Pound three Shillings four Pence, Richard Knowles, five
Pound, John Tickle eight Pound five Shillings, John King eight Pound, Thomas
Castle twelve Pound eight Shillings six Pe^ce, Elizabeth King five Pound five
Shillings, Robert King four Pounds, John Poole eleven Pounds ten Pence, Thomas
Gardener senior, Thomas Gardener junior, thirteen Pound, John Gyde seven Pounds
ten Shillings, John Winchcome five Pounds fourteen Shillings, William Twening
seven Pounds sixteen Shillings, Anthony Gardener five Pounds, John Mower
fourteen Pounds ten Shillings, John Gardener of Hascome, five Pounds, John
Tunly five Pounds, Thomas Wine eight Pounds, Elizabeth Hawkins five Pounds,
John Beard four Pounds ten Shillings, Thomas Vaughan three Pounds nineteen
Shillings six Pence, William Widow one Pound twelve Shillings, Thomas Short
two Pounds two Shillings, John Russel three Pounds five Shillings, Robert
Harris one Pound six Shillings, William King twelve Shillings, John Hunt four
Shillings six Pence, William Bangerfeild three Shillings, John Seaman Docter of
Law, one Pound ten Shillings, Thomas Hilman four Pounds two Shillings, Thomas
Pit seven Pounds, Henry Mayo five Pounds, Richard Gardener nine (...) six
Pence, Thomas West twelve Shillings, Peter Bird three Pound five Shillings,
Thomas Andrews sixteen Shillings, Thomas Flamberd six Shillings, Alice Syford
six Shillings, Humphery Whiteaker eight Shillings, Adam ^ingell six Shillings,
Henry Lord eleven Shillings, William Myll two Pounds, Walter Coocke six
Shillings, William Harding six Shillings, Francis Harding eleven Shillings,
William Heath six Shillings, Harding Widow nine Shillings, Jone Pilson six
Shillings, Thomas Coals one Shilling, Patrick Tickle six Shillings, William
Twening three Pounds, John Clarke six Shillings, William Hawkins ten Shillings,
Thomas Motly ten Shillings, William Little six Shillings Thomas Jenkins two
Pounds five Shillings, John Fream six Shillings, William Rice eleven Shillings,
Robert Clutterbuck one Pound seven Shilling, John Holder four Pounds six
Shillings six Pence, Gyles Wheler three Pounds six Shilling eight Pence, Gyles
Arther ten Shillings, Gybbens ten Shillings, Reylocke Widow ten Shillings,
Edward Gardner one Pound, Michael Harding six Shillings, John Stama^e eight
Shils. Thomas Williams six Shillings, William Hasilton eight Shillings, Cook
Widow, James Cook eight Shillings, John Cook six Shillings, Eliener Warren
three Shillings six Pence, Elizabeth Cooper eighteen Shillings, George Sturmy
six Shillings, John Corbet six Shillings, Henry Ridler sixteen Shillings,
William Wren ten Shillings, Ann Jackes six Shillings, Julian J^ces six
Shillings, Elinor Jaques six Shillings, Thomas (...) ten Shillings, William
Hewling six Shillings, John Streate six Shillings, Toby Myll four Shillings
four Pence, Richard Pit six Shillings, John Gardener two Pounds ten Shillings,
John Badger two Pounds, Ann Whitehorn eight Shillings, Thomas Adams and William
Linnet two pounds, Edmond Gynner six Shillings, Richard Bancknot twelve
Shillings, Samuel Davis six Shillings, Nicholas Ashman six Shillings, William
Mason six Shillings, Robert Twening one Pound nine Shillings, Richard King six
Pounds two Shillings eight Pence, Thomas Kyne six Shillings, James Myll sixteen
Shillings, Richard Sellors twelve Shillings, William Niblet six Shillings, Ann
Cooper one Pound eleven Shillings, Thomas Creese six Shillings, Richard Smyth
six Shillings, John Hayes twelve Shillings, Amie Hoocke and Thomas Knowles ten
Shillings, Robert Long six Shillings, Thomas Gybbins six Shillings, Court
Hooper one Pound eight Shillings six Pence, William Lo six Shillings, Joan
Wren eight Shillings, Margaret King eight Shillings, John Twening ten Pounds,
John Twening of Wergine, three puonds sixteen Shiiling, Henry Aldredg Fifty
Shillings, William Blyss five pounds ten Shillings, William Barns ten Pounds
ten Shillings, William Clyssold ten Pounds, Widow Clysso^d ten Pounds, Thomas
Merret five Pounds, Thomas Blyse five Pounds, Thomas Loveday six Pounds nine
Shillings, Edmond Flecher twenty nine Pounds six Shillings eight Pence, John
Mayo sixteen Pounds, John Jordane seventeen Pounds, Widow Ockey three Pounds
sixteen Shillings, Richard Flecher four Shillings, Thomas Flecher four
Shillings, John Brown eleven Pounds, Richard Gardener and his Wife, and Thomas
Merret six Pounds, John Loveday two Pounds fifteen Shillings, Edward Hitchins
twelve Pounds ten Shillings, Thomas Tailor eleven Pounds ten Shillings, John
Gardener three Pounds six Shillings, George Phelps five Pounds, Ann Blyss, Viz.
eight Pounds five Shillings, John Phillipts five Pound five Shillings, John
West five, Corbers viz. four Shillings, John Daber four Shilling, Christopher
Freame six Shillings, Robert Es^ington four Shillings, William Povie four
Shillings four Pence. Thomas Twening four Shillings four Pen^e, John Wats one
Shilling, Thomas Cliffold one Shilling, Richard W^^ob one Shilling, Henry
Flecher one Shilling, Gyles ^ardner one Shilling, John Baugh twelve Pounds,
John Watkins ^^x Pounds, Thomas Bishop ten Pounds, Richard Gardner and William
Mayle twenty seven Pounds thirteen Shillings; Thomas Hurrupp thirteen Pounds
eleven Shillings, William Osborne ninteen Pounds thirteen Shillings four Pence,
Walter Tocknel three Pounds ten Shillings, Richard Wilshe^e fifty Shillings,
Richard Gardner seven Pounds five Shillings, William Bennet five Pounds, John
Gyde junior thirteen Shillings two Pence, William Mayle one Pound fifteen
Shillings, John Tomes one Pound seven Shillings, Elenor Pyper two Pounds ten
Shillings, William Tomkins one Pound five Shillings, William Andrews one Pound
five Shillings, Richard Coocke twelve Shillings, Thomas Knowles twelve
Shillings, William Watkins eighteen Shillings, Hawkins vid. six Shillings,
Michael Harding six Shillings, John Myll three Shillings, Richard Myll six
Shillings, Sharp vid. six Shillings, Arther Hillman ten Shillings, Je^ffery
Ma^field six Shillings, William T^ckell six Shillings, Henry Wheler one Pound
seventeen Shillings six Pence, William Mayo eight Shi^^ings four pence John
Osborn one Pound one Shilling, John Walkby ten Shillings, Steven Coock six
Shillings, John Webb eight Shillings, William Shewell sixteen Shillings,
Richard Deane three Pounds eleven Shillings six Pence, John Osborn four Pounds,
Richard Coocke five Pounds four Shillings two pence, Robert Coocke two ^ounds
sixteen Shillings, John West seven Pounds, Robert West eight Pounds nine
Shillings, Walter Humphreys six Shillings, John Glyford six Shillings, Henry
Clement two Pounds ten Shillings, James Collins two Shillings, Thomas Whiting
three Pounds fifteen Shillings, John Shot two Pounds ten Shillings, John Poole
ten Pounds, John Gardener two Pounds ten Shillings, William Loveday nine Pound
fifteen Shillings six pence, John Whiting four Pounds one Shilling four pence,
Henry Stamage eight Shillings, Thomas Green three Pounds fifteen Shillings,
Thomas Brown one Shilling, Ailce Collins an^ James Collins twelve Shillings;
Thom^s Smart one Shilling.

In the Decree its set down the Tenants are to pay one Thousand four hundred
and fifty Pounds, at three pays, the first pay is ^ve hundred and fifty Pounds,
which is hear set down as in the Decree, the other two pays, which is four
hundred and fifty Pounds a piece, the Tenants are taxed two several times more,
and set down at large as aforesaid, to be paid the fifth of December, 1614.
and the fifth of December, 1615.

UNto the which Schedule, as also to the said Certificate, the said Mr Thorsby,
Mr Bridgman and Mr Coventrey, have subscribed their names, as by the said
Schedule and Certificate remaining of record with the Register of this Court
appears, upon all which proceeding it pleased this Court on the nine and
Twentieth day of November, to order and decree this Cause as follows; Where^y
an order of the eight of June last, the matter in question between the said
parties, was referred to Mr Thorsby one of the Masters of this Court, and to Mr
Bridgman and Mr Coventrey being of Council with the parties, to the end that
they three upon the sight of all the Court Rolls of the said Manor, and all
the ancient Copies of the said Tenants, which were all to be brought before
them, upon the Oaths of the parties, and also upon sight of the depositions of
Witnesses taken in the case, the depositions of such Witnssees as are Tenants
only excepted, of whose Testimony the Court gives no allowance might treat,
mediate and set down some good e^d between the parties if they could, if not,
then to certify the differences between them, where upon such further order
should be taken in the cause as should be meet; for as much as this Court was
this day informed by Mr Lawrance Hide, being of Council with the said Tenants,
that the said Mr Thorsby, and the said Mr Bridgman and Mr Coventrey have
according to the said order, considered of the Court Rolls of the said Mann or
brought before them by the said Plaintiff Jernegan, and the Copies brought
before them by the said Tenants, and of the depositions taken in the cause; and
have also advisedly perused the indenture made by Henry Jernegan the elder Esquire
Father of the Plaintiff, and have thereupon made a full and absolute end of the
cause, and set down the same very exactly under their hands, and certified into
this Court, which was now showed forth and offered to be read; It is therefore
this present Term of St Michael, that is to say on Monday the nine and
twentieth day of November, in the Year of the Reign of our Gracious Sovereign
Lord James, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King
defender of the Faith, etc. That is to say of England, France and Ireland the
Eleventh, and of Scotland the Seven and Fortieth, by the right honorable Thomas
Lord Ellesmert, Lord Chancellor of England, and by the whole Court of Chancery
Ordered and Decreed, that the said Certificate, and all the matters therein
contained are and be ratified and confirmed by the Decree and Authority of this
Court, and the several sums of Money limited and set down in the Schedule,
contained in the said Certificate, to be paid by the said Tenants at the days
and times expressed in the said Schedule, and all the rest of the matter in the
said Certificate contained, are decreed to be performed to all intents and
purposes, according to the tenor and true meaning thereof.

NOs autem tenorem irrotu lamenti decreti predict ad requisitiones Willi^lmi
Osburne et Edmundi Flecher et aliorum Tenentium Manerij predicti duximus
Exemplifican per presents in cujus rei Testimonium has litteras nostras fieri
fecimus Patentes test me ipso apud Westmin. primo die Februarij Anno Regni
nostri Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae duo decimo eScocia quadragissimo Octavo.

Examina^ur per nos, M. Carew J. Hone.
Cleric.

We therefore the tenor of the Inrollment of the Decree before said; at the
request of the said William Osborn, and Edmond Flecher, and other the Tenant^
of the Manor aforesaid, have caused to be exemplified by these Presents, in
Witness of which we have caused these our Letters, to be made Pattents witness
our selves at Westminster, the first day of February, in the year of our Reign
of England, France and Ireland the Twelth, and of Scotland the eight and
Fortieth.

Examined by We, Matthew Care^ and John Hone.
Clerks.

FIN

