A LETTER FROM THE Duke of Luxembourg, TO THE FRENCH KING: Giving a Full
Account of the Late Battle in Flanders.
Translated from the French Copy.
Licensed Acording to Order 1693.

THO according to my former and long experienced Methods, I have endeavored to
buoy up the drooping Spirits of the Soldiery with the glorious Idea of Victory,
and so put new Life and Vigor into the Hearts of your Gallick Troops; yet
notwithstanding all my Skill and Industry herein, I fear I shall find my Labor
of small Effect, not to say, lost: So hard is it to impose upon any (tho of
never so mean or vulgar Capacity) the belief of what their very Senses has most
apparently found to the contrary: The Verity hereof I now experience; for the
Army is so sensible how dearly they paid for the thing, which I am forced (even
against my Conscience) to nickname Victory, that they take it as an Injury to
Truth, and an Affront to themselves. But that your August Majesty may have a
right Prospect of the state of your Majesty's Troops in Flanders, I thought fit
by the trusty Hand of Monsieur D' Artagnan to give your Majesty as full an
Account, as at present I can; Which is as follows.

Upon the 28th. by the Consent of a Council of War, on Consideration that many
of the Enemies Troops were upon several Occasions Detached and Commanded to
sundry Places for different Services, We marched our Army toward the Enemies
Camp, knowing in must be much weakened by the late Detachments, and
consequently the forcing thereof less Difficult than otherwise we could have
thought it would have been. And on the the 29th. early in the Morning we came
within shot of the Enemies Cannon, who were very liberal thereof; for which in
a short time we made them plentiful Returns with ours; But with different
Success: For tho I used my utmost Endeavors to cover our Troops from their
Cannon, yet were we more Annoyed and lost far more Men than the Enemy, by
reason of their more advantageous Posts. Hence we concluded it necessary to
come to a closer Engagement, which was effected about Nine of the Clock in the
morning, by sending down a strong Body of Foot to attack the Enemy upon their
Right; who by the vigorous Charge of ours, after some Dispute, were forced to
Retire, by which, tho with great loss of men, we possessed our selves of some
Hedges, which seemed very advantageous Posts, being in the Valley of Lare; But
we no sooner had possessed them, but the Enemy signalized their Courage and
Conduct by regaining what we with vast Numbers and great Loss had obtained. In
the mean time we made an Attack on their Left not far from the Village of
Landin, and there had a very hot and sharp Dispute for about Two Hours: But
having no Success, and lying open to many Disadvantages, whereby we sustained
vast l^ss of men, we were forced to draw off disorderly from that Part: And
while this was in doing, we sent down many fresh Battalions, supported by
several Squadrons, to make a second Attack upon the Enemies Right; but were
Repulsed with great Loss several times, till at length, with continual fresh
Supplies, we broke through, and made some of the Enemies Squadrons to Retire;
which notwithstanding were Rallied again, and beat us back; but our men being
masters of some Hedges were Reinfoced by all the Troops of the Household, and
therewith Fought with the Advantage of Flanking all that were posted at the
Head of their Intrenchment, and presently broke in upon the Enemy with such
Numbers, that they were no longer able to maintain their Posts against us;
being at the same time flanked by our Foot, that still remained posted in the
Hedges. Here we gained a considerable Advantage of the Enemy, for as much as
their Cavalry were forced to change the Form of their Lines, and were thereby
put in some Disorder: Yet for all this their Cavalry made Head against us for
some time, while the rest of their Army, beginning at the Left, made a very
good Retreat. We being hotly Engaged with the Horse, lost all Opportunity of
falling upon their Rear: Besides our Troops were so fatiegu'd with their former
Marches, and this Days hot Service, that we were in no Condition to impede
their Retreat. Thus on the 29th. of July we made our selves Masters of their
advantageous Posts. The Number of the slain are many and uncertain; but by
reason of the several Disadvantages we had, ours is the greater Loss. This,
most dread Sovereign, is all the Account I can give at present, which I thought
fit to send with all Expedition.

Dated from the Camp July 29, 1693. Luxembourg.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Lyford in Fleet Street, 1693.


