THE QUACKING MOUNTEBANCK OR The JESUIT turned QUAKER. In a witty and full
Discovery of their Product^ and Rise, their Language, Doctrine, Discipli^
Policy, Presumption, Ignorance, Prophanes, Dissimulat^ Envy, Uncharitableness,
with their Behaviors, Gestu^ Aims and Ends. All punctually handled and
proved, to give our Coun^ men timely Notice to avoid their Snares and sub^
Delusions,

Simulata Sanctitas Duplicata Iniquitas. BY ONE WHO WAS AN EYE AND EA^ WITNESS
of their Words and Gestures in their (...) hired great Tavern Chapel, Or the
Great Mouth within ^dersgate.

LONDON, Printed for E. B. at the Angel in Pauls-Church-Yard, 1655.

THE QUACKING MOUNTEBANCK. OR The JESUIT turned QUAKER.
And they shall say, have we not prophesied in thy Name, but he shall say,
Depart, etc.

I know you not, etc.

Matthew. 7.22.23. Who has required these things at your Hands,

Isay 1.12. I sent them not says the Lord

Jer. 27.15. When they shall say unto you, lo here is Christ, or there,
believe them not.

Matthew. 24.23. Mar. 13.21. For Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of
Light it is no great thing If his Ministers also be transformed, as, etc.

2 Cor. 11.14.15. They would deceive the very Elect, etc

Mar. 13.22. The Enemy came and sowed Tares, etc. Then appeared the Tares also,
etc. Sr. from whence has it Tares, he said an enemy

Mat. 13.25.26.27. Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheeps
clothing,

Mat 7 15 Who shall persuade Ahab? and one said I will, and the Lord said how?
and he said, I will go and be a lying Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets,
and the Lord said, thou shall prevail, go forth and do so,

1 King 22.20. etc.
THESE several Texts of Holy Scripture are placed in the Frontispeice to stand
as a Cloud of Witnesses against these Heathnish people, who so much despise and
reject all Books and Learning, and who do, as much as they can, cast the
Council of our Savior Christ behind them, who has said, Search the
Scriptures, for they testify of Me, and also of the Prophet David, who in
Psalm. 1. says, That the man is blessed who meditates in the Law of the Lord day
and night, yet these who are such Quakers and Tremblers fear not to speak evil
of Dignities, and not only refuse to submit to Magistracy and Dignities on
Earth but to reject even Gods Sacred word it self, but not to withold the
Reader from what we promised, we shall come succinctly, and truly to describe
this Herd of strange beasts lately come amongst us. and first concerning,

THEIR PRODVCTION AND RISE.
These Creatures cannot much boast of Antiquity; they cannot surely pretend
much to Gentility, for they are not of Welsh Extraction; they scarce know the
Heralds Office, nor did they come in with the Conqueror: They are much like
to Mushrooms and Toad-stools springing up in a night; they are surely like to
Jonas Gourd in one particular, which came up speedily, and most wish that they
might decay as suddenly; they are the Lapwings of these times, run about with
their shells on their heads, they hate idleness, for they put themselves to work
as soon as they are whelped, Running to and fro about the City: They may be
some kin unto French Tailors, delighting to be in the last and newest fashion;
it may truly be verified of them, we are but of yesterday and know nothing,
they have their Rise not from men, but beasts, and those not tame but wild by
nature, from a Fox, who was of late kennneld, but now he and his whole Litter
are abroad, and therefore it is fit they should be stoutly hunted: Their Actions
show them to be true Foxes as Sampsons were, running and whisking about our
Land with Firebrands of Sedition and Dissension at their tails to spoil the
good Corn; Foxes, they are for they live all upon preying, it is wishd that
Salomons advise might be followed, Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that
spoil the grapes, it is thought and not improbably, that these were whelped in
the Kennell of Ignatius Loyola the Jesuit, in the Roman Territories, and are
now run over hither for forage and booty: their Rise is ignoble and beastly,
but it is not to be doubted, but they will quickly increase and augment, because
they couple twice or thrice every week, and have now hired a large strong
kennell to practice in, where any one, if he please, may hear their open
mouths bark out great swelling Nonsense at the sign of the Great mouth within
Aldersgate, which house has had strange Masters, once it was a Pallce for a Noble
man, another time a place for a Printer, next for a Vintner, then for a Cook,
and at present a great den for subtle Foxes.

THEIR LANGVAGE AND DISCIPLINE.
These two are joined together, because they help one the other, for as their
Language is too great, so is their Discipline too little, and yet they may be
well separated, for their Language is without any discipline at all, they are
no Soldiers, for they observe no Orders, they do Potius Latrare quam Orare,
rather houle or bark, then preach or pray; yet as subtle as they are, they are
no Conjurers, for they love not to keep within Compass, their Language is as
wild as their Nature, neither keeps time, method nor matter; they seem tobe
enemies to all Music for they keep no Stops, and yet they may have some skill
in it, for they run upon Divisions and Quavers, Prick-song pleases them, for
they squeale above Elah, and are excellent at the Base: they should have skill
in Geometry, for they will compass the Land to gain Proselites and the most, if
not all of them measure it by the foot, having not horses to ride, without all
doubt they have some experience in Astronomy, for most of them are Lunatic or
Planet struck, their Language aims at the new Building of old Babel fortheir
babbling and bawling tends all to Confusion; we may safely say that these
Creatures were not borne Tonguetyed, they are so voluble, though they give such
License to their tongues yet they do it without License, neither ever had they
the gift of Tongues, their Language is not substantial but frothy, for they
foam at the Mouth whilst they prate: Solomon says, That a man full of words
shall not prosper and then surely there is no fear that any of this Litter will
come to be Aldermen: though they talk and prate of Great Matters, yet it is no
great matter what they say, if in a multitude of words there must needs be sin,
then questionless these are not yet all Saints: they have little or no faith,
for they never keep their words, they affect no Union, and yet they never use
Division in their Text. Their Language is harder either then Welsh or Wild
Irish, their persons and Tongues are alike, for both defy Magistrates and
Ministers. A man may easier bind up a Bushel of Sand in a halter, then carry
away four or five hours of their illitterate nonsense and confused babbling. In
brief, their Language is too irreverent for a Temple, and too uncivil for a
Tavern, yet such Tongues there are at the sign of the Mouth.

THEIR DOCTRINE.
Our Savior was strictly examined concerning his Disciples and his Doctrine,
and if He, why should not these; these cry up as much they can Light Liberty,
and it is known they aim at lightness of Liberty, they cry that all men want
Light, and if they should be weighed in the balance they would be found too
Light, while they prate of Liberty, they take too much liberty, while they wish
others to get Liberty, they abuse their Liberty, while they speak of Light,
they love the Dark, and their bauling in the light, of the light, is enough to
extinguish it; they are Libertines, and therefore must also be light fellows,
now and then they interline a word that the Grace of God has appeared, though
they do it without any Grace, and never make it out to their confused Auditory
to what end or purpose, They teach their she Disciples to whine, and their He Is
to houle, any of them take upon them to talk, though nothing to purpose, their
Doctrine and principles are all unstated, for themselves know not what they
are, and until the next pretended inspiration, are like hogsheads, empty; they
are like Ruben unstable as water, and to keep up their Bawling with boldness
and impudence; they rail against Priests and Levites, though themselves be of
the Tribe of Gad or Many-asses: They allow no Magistrates, not because they are
not allowable, but because they are not of their Brotherhood, their Doctrine
is weak and full of Ignorance, for they were never tutored, nor will ever
endure sound Learning, they are no friends to the Company of Stationers, for
they are more blockish, then bookish: It Is doubted by most, that should they
receive their wages for their work, twould be a halter, for they would scorn
the benefit of their Clergy; because they hate them so deeply, and would not be
able to read their Neck-verses. Their Doctrine is as the Apostle says, The
Doctrine of Devils, they are the latest spawn and fry of Rome, and it is pity,
they should have such large Room to build up old Rome within the walls of our
London, but to proceed.

4. THEIR POLICY.
THis they have and use naturally, all Foxes are subtle, go tell that subtle
Fox, says our Savior of Herod, but yet these heighten their Nature by
practice and experience. See this in some particulars, they come not far abroad
till they be able to traverse and find their game, in stormy weather, they keep
close in their Dens, Kennells, and hiding holes, for fear of being ruined for
their boldness: How many such dens and kennells of these beastly creatures
does that old Fox keeper of Rome keep filled, as Seminaries, Cloisters,
Fryeryes, Monasteries, Nunneries, Abbyes, Prioryes lined full of such Foxes old
and young, which (as occasion serves upon all advantageous oportunities are let
loose and sent abroad to prey under various Names, Titles, Orders, Degrees,
under all pretended out sides and shapes of Sanctimony and gifts, and
Revelations and Inspirations: Their sly disguised creeping forth amongst us,
vaild with the smooth Umbrages of Messages from God, of Dictares from the Holy
Ghost, of Immediate and Infall be Inspirings, how have those gilded and
guilful Pills swallowed down ignorantly, wrought bitter effects and sad
Conclusions: Their zealous and extraordinary appetite to devour under these
palliated terms of Conversion, New birth new Light, Spiritual Gifts, heavenly
Endowments how do they devour young game, such as are not wise enough to shun
and avoid these pretended holy and mortified Creatures: Is not their policy
deep and great, when partly by fair speeches, specious presents, pretended
Infusions of Grace, long prayers, outward humility, wresting of Scriptures,
application of Prophesies long since accomplished only to themselves in these
days, especially that Eminent Text in Joel, It shall come to pass in the last
days that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, though the Apostle Peter
says Act 2. this Scripture was then fulfilled in his time yet these hold out,
it is to them, to them only who are sent from God, inspired by God and his
Spirit, hereupon they pretend Raptures, Ecstasies, Swounings, Swellings,
Groanings, Tumblings, and Prostrations, Skreekings, Murmurings, Trances,
Sensible feelings, and Manifestations of Gods Spirit coming into them; and in
this politic frenzy; they pretend they have him, he is now within them, and
so must speak, and must only be heard, as sent by God to give Commands,
Directions; and Advisoes to the great Ones of the earth, these boast themselves
to be the favorites of Heaven, that all but themselves are in darkness, in
bondage in corruption, that they know the mind of Christ, to these glorious
politic pretexts, they have added of late, outward poverty, voluntary
humiliation, simple and shameless nakedness, extreme penance, superstitious
abstinence, poor habit, mean fare, hard lodging; refraining of acquaintance,
leaving their Trades and callings, affecting solitariness, sullenness,
bitterness, with a seeming renouncing of all worldly preferments and pleasures
and profits, with diverse other such Antiquated and popish trinkets and
trumpery revived, and then as their spirit of Delusion suggests, they must
disguise themselves and pretend some special peremptory message to White Hall,
to give extraordinary Informations, Injunctions or Directions (as they pretend)
from the Lord. and if not forthwith admitted, then presently they give out,
that all our present Governors are naught ungodly and Antichristian, because
they did not receive these Imperious Dictates from Gods Saints and Gods
Prophets (if you please to credit them) These are some of those many Fox-like
tricks of policy they daily practice to gain Admiration, O subtle Renard! to
get such footing in so short a time, but to go on, the next is.

5 THEIR PRESVMPTION.
THey have made their foreheads as hard as an Adamant, blu^sh they will not,
they are so impudent; ^'st not presumption to exclude all others from Communion
with God, and only include themselves? to assume an Office so high, without any
lawful Commission? to run furiously not being sent? to press impudently into
the Wedding room not being called, nor having on a Wedding Garment? to sit the
highest with out the leave of the master of the Feast? to undertake to teach
others who were never learned themselves? to impropriate that to themselves,
which is denied to none? to brag of the assurance of Gods favor to themselves
and that rather merited then given freely, and to debar all others from it? to
esteem all others as dross, and themselves the pure gold? they are much like
theives that steal and take away other men's Goods, but at last hang for it,
they are like to Froth cork, and black soape, strive to be uppermost, they as
those wicked ones in Psalm. 12. say, Our tongues are our own, who is Lord over
Us, they presume all our Magistrates are asleep, and so they may play their
pranks, Other men's Indulgency and forbearance sets them on float, they are
worse then the Scribes and Pharisees, for though they sat in Moses chair, yet
that place belonged to them: but these rail at all that are lawfully in it; and
take it to themselves, they hold all to be black but themselves, surely they
are purblind for they look not on any man aright, they would persuade men that
none live in the sun but themselves, nor are worthy of it because not of their
Newfound Land way; they are much like Icarus, will be flying though it be with
waxen wings, and be drowned; or like Phaeton, will be in the Chariot of State,
though they break their necks in the conclusion, They give our, their care is
so much for Heaven, that they give no respect to men upon Earth; One would take
them to be good fellows, for they make all, and account the best of men scarce
their fellows, they are much like to flies and gnats, play so busily about the
Candle, till at last they burn their wings and themselves; these are the true
priests of Baal, for they do Baul to the purpose; in brief, because they are
not punished, they think they are not punishable; they entrench upon all men's
jurisdictions and so they are not hurt, care not what hurt they do: They can
not endure Gods word, because it describes these filthy dreamers, who creep
into widows houses, and lead about silly women laden with diverse lusts,
speaking ill of dignities, using Religion but for a Cloak of their malicious
designs; in a word they are the true Frogs of Egypt, croaking and crawling in
all places, and except the sooner removed, will defile this whole Land and make
it stinck, yet further,

5. THEIR PROPHANES AND UNCLEANNESS.
IT is registered of one of the Emperors that while he was baptized, he defiled
the Fount with his Excrement, and it was said, he would prove an Enemy to
Christians, and so it came to pass, so he had his name Copronymus, but these
unclean profane Esaus brood, have not only defiled the place of their
Baptism, but esteem it in it self an Unclean, Unholy thing; they not only not
respect Persons, Times, or Places; but Despise the One, presume to Alter the
other, and Overthrow the third: They think they may pull Down the Houses of God
that be in the Land, because Papists have prayed in them, and rob them of all
their means, pretending themselves of Israel, and all others of Egypt, Vzza was
punished severely for but touching the Arc to bold it up with his hand, but
these employ their hands to overthrow it, they say of our Churches, as the
Children of Edom did of Jerusalem, Psalm. 137. Down with them, down with them
even to the ground, they love not those that are Tryers of Ministers, because
they keep an Order in the Worship of God, these love no Order, and therefore
Revile; there is not the strictest tie or bond that God has laid on man to
perform, but they st^ive to violate it; turning The Grace of God into
wantonness,, for the Sabbath, they hold it Jewish and Ceremonial, as for the
Sacraments, they are so Mysterious, that they slight them, for Honor to
Parents, they acknowledge it not, and for Marriage they hold all in Common,
they seem to hate all Enclosures and Pastures, for they would lay all open, for
the Scriptures, the Holy word of God, they say with the Papists, it is a Dead
Letter in it self, and that it receives all the Vigor by their Unlearned, and
Presumptious Tautologicall Empty Interpretations, nay indeed go further then
so, for they hold their sudden Inspirations and Enthusiasmes and Dreams and
Raptures, to excel Them for worth, they say clean contrary to what Peter heard
spoke to him, what God has cleansed, call thou not unclean, but these count
those things, Persons and Ordinance, which God has set apart to be unfit for
Use, and therefore despise them, these are like Flies in the Ointment, defile
it: they account all men unclean but themselves, and therefore cry out, Touch
not, Stand off further, for I am holyer then Thou; to conclude this point; its
wished they were farther gone, for they are as black as Pitch, and he that
touches them shall be sure to be defiled.

7. THEIR DISSIMVLATION, ENVY, AND UNCHARITABLENESS.
These three shall be handled together, as they practice them, and as they
usually are linked together; their Dissimulation precedes, for they may say of
that as the Silver smiths at Ephesus, did of their Shrines, You know how that
by this we get our living, if the Fox did not wear the Lambs skin, he would not
be so soon discovered, their words are as Smooth as oil, and yet they be very
swords, they are like Sodoms Grapes, seem fair but taste deadly, like Pilate
washing his hands, yet condemning Christ, or not unlike to Judas, who kissed his
Master but withal betrayed him, with Joab speaking freindly, but wounding
deadly: What are all their Formal shows, but mere Hypocrisy? their long
Teachings of six or eight hours Babbling but devouring Houses and leading about
simple women, and this is too commonly known: what are their outward
Pilgrimages in our streets, their Wanderings into the Countries to cause the
light, as they say, to come amongst the country people, the crying down all
preaching but their own? and as they are Counterfeit, so they are Envious,
greive that any man has Light truer then theirs, their main aim is to put down
the Law and the Gospel, the Magistrate and the Ministry, if these go Down, then
hey Up go they ah; they are like Esops dog, lie in the Manger, and will not let
the horse eat Provender, though themselves cannot, so these, though they cannot
nor Will feed souls, yet they inveterately hate those that do, their Envy it is
thought is the cause that all, or the most of them are such Meagre Carcases,
and such Yellow tan'd Skellitons appearing more like Haggs and Hobgoblings,
then Men or Modest women, they are not unlike those men that were possessed
with Devils who lived in the Feilds and Mountains, and Graves, so that none
could pass by that way without fear of danger, these chose solitary and wast
places at first in the Woods, Feilds, and Mountains, but now they are so
impudent they have their Kennells in the greatest Cities and Towns, they are
very unfit to be Judges, for if their Power was according to their Will, they
would empty the Earth of men and weomen, and send them to Hell in a crowd,
their months are full of Cursing, that it is thought, they are not under a
Blessing, and they are so Uncharitable that they envy that God is so Patient
and merciful, their prayers are rather that fire may come down from Heaven and
consume us, rather then that the Sun should shine to warm and refresh us, they
say we are all in the dark, but they rather desire all men were Blind: Nero
wished that all Rome had but One head, that he might at one blow strike it Off,
but these cannot endure that we should have any Head at all, and that makes
them so Sourly and Maliciously to revile and rail against our Head the public
Magistrates, they are so far from praying for them, that like Foxes they would
sain Prey upon them: they are for certain out of Charity with their Auditory,
or else they would Bless them at parting; but these Snarle at, and bite them
in their whole Exercise, and therefore it is a Witty and a true Proverb, When the
Fox preanes beware the geese: whom they cannot Allure, they Envy and Hate; and
because they gain but a few, they must needs hate the more; they are Enemies to
Almeshouses, Schools, and Colleges, they hate the First, because founded upon
Charity, and the Two later because they Breed up, and are Nurseries for learned
Scholars, Judges and Magistrates, all which are Eyefores to their unlawful
assemblies, of which it may truly be said, My Soul come not into their
assemblies for in their fury the killed a man and dig'd through a wall, and for
certain their fury is great, both in and out of their Meetings against a Man,
against Authority, and lawful Magistracy, and therefore they do like Foxes,
dig down and through all Fundamental Laws and Civil Policy and Societies,
which are the Walls of our Happy Subsistence, and we are all bound to pray that
God would keep out these Vermin called Quakers from digging down these Walls,
these Foundations, but we hope they are deeper laid than to be Vndermin'd, and
higher built then to be leapt over by these Insulting, Presumptuous Company of
Foxes, For if the Foundations be cast down, what shall the Righteous do?

8. THEIR IGNORANCE.
ANd in this particular they do not only Equal but outstrip the very Papists,
for they hold only, That Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, yet they debar
not Knowledge from their Priests, but these as well Speakers as Hearers,
exclude All Knowledge and condemn it, sure they are no kin to Egyptians, for
they were fearful at their three days Darkness, these applaud it. they have
some affinity to Bats Night Ravens, and Owls, for they love Night better then
Day, so these Darkness rather then Light: They are not of Salomons mind, for he
prayed for Wisdom and Knowledge and Understanding; but these prate and preach
against It: They cannot endure any Schoolmasters, because they Whip their
Disciples for their Ignorance, they are utter Enemies to the society of
Almanac Makers; because they discourse only of the Stars, and the Heavens:
And these never intend to trouble that place. They praise Greenland to be a
very gallant Country, because there is more Darkness than Light, and there^ good
store of their fellow Creatures, they live there as Bears and Foxes may go
together, it is reported they intend to plant there, only they doubt the Bears,
as the better Creatures will not yield them Possession, it is thought its high
time for them to be gone, for they have played such Fox-tricks here, that our
Country is weary of them, they hold that place of Scripture to be Apochypha, My
Son, get Knowledge, and above all get Understanding, they regard not knowledge
because the Apostle Paul says, Knowledge puffs up, They applaud that for an
excellent sentence of Agrippa unto Paul, Too much Learning has made thee mad,
and yet these are mad and yet without learning: they care not for that place of
Scripture, which says, If the blind lead the blind they both fall into the
ditch, and because the Scriptures do so much speak against Ignorance, the speak
as much against Them, yet as ignorant as they be, they presume to Teach the
learned and greatest Magistrates, who so bold as blind Byard, to conclude
these, surely they were bred near Dunstable, they are the Snuffers against
Magistracy, they cannot endure to hear of the Schools of the Prophets, they
are like Naash the Ammonite desire to put out the Eyes of all Israel, they are
clean contrary to God and Good men, for God, is Light, and his Chrildren are of
the Light, these love Ignorance and affect Darkness, but to proceed to the
next; and that is.

9. THEIR BEHAVIOVRS, GESTVRES, AIMS, AND ENDS.
THese four particulars are fitting to be discovered, not any ways to uphold
them, but to set them open to the view of the world: these Characters show
their Nature, Disposition, and Intention, their Behaviors are for the most
part according to their Breeding, Education is reputed a second Nature, and
has a strong Influence upon the whole Course of the After-life, hereupon it
ought to be the care of Parents to give Virtuous Education to their Children,
it being for a Foundation to all their future Actions either for Honesty,
Justice Civility, or Worth; or on the contrrry for In ustice, Incivility,
Dishonesty or baseness.

It plainly may, and does appear, that these persons either never had It
bestowed on them, or else they have strangely Degenerated from those formerly
received Principles, and so usually such parties, prove Prodigious and
Monstrous, or Dangerous and unhappy to themselves, and the Common Wealth,
wherein they had their first breath.

To our purpose, We know not much of their Extraction, nor do accuse their
Parents as careless of their duties in this particular, yet so much, we can
safely say, that if Fortes creantur a fortibus, Eagles get Eagles, not
Buzzards, Owls or Jack-Dawes, so Lions bring forth Lions not Foxes Hogs and
Dogs, for certain these are either Metamorphosed or elce their Progenitors
were Ignoble, Vicious, and Sordid, sor to take a short view of their persons.

First, They want Learning even to that degree, that most of them know not the
very Elements, Rudiments or first beginnings of it, hence it comes to pass,
that universally they cry down all Learning and learned men; for certain they
must needs be poor Creatures who are altogether destitute of such a worthy
Jewel, which indeed is the prime Ornament of the Soul, and enables and
furnishes it generally for any Virtuous or worthy employment, so that they are
sent out into the would empty and lame.

Secondly, They want Calling, for the most part we know it that many of them
never were brought up to a Calling, a gross fault in those that had, and
undertook the Steerage of their youth, Train up says Solomon, a child in his
way, i. e. his Calling, in his youth, and he will not forget it when he is old:
But where there is no trayning up in a Calling in a Way, in youth, it is no marvel
they Wander without a Way (any good way) all the rest of their life: er elce,
if though they had a Calling, they left it and forsook it through want of good
advise, or Foresight, Distemper Discontent or too much Severity and Rigor of
their Masters, which are all miserable Presages of future Calamity; and
desperate, if not Ruinous events: Now if the the fault be in the Masters, they
may have some Plea, but little Help, but if it proceed from themselves, scarce
(upon some or any of the fore mentioned Acts) is Excusable, much less
Allowable, such men (if yet worthy that name) put themselves not only out of
the way but out of Gods Ordinary and usual way of Protection) He shall keep
thee in all thy ways, but he that puts himself out of the way of his Calling,
exposes himself to all dangers, as being out of Gods Custody and Tuition.

It is certaily known that these persons do not abide in a calling, not follow
it Powerfully nor Subordinately; especially since they thrust themselves into
this Extravagant course of Teaching, by pretended Inspiration: and many of them
through Distemper by lewd irregular Carriage, burst out into ill Husbandry, and
lavish Spendings, and at last turned Desperates not knowing where to pitch or
steer aright, and so ever since have been Erratick and wandering Planets.

Thirdly, They want Competency of means caused principally by being out of
Employment, or Poverty of Parents, and this affliction, if it falls upon a
Choleric stubborn Nature, one that affects Liberty and License without
control, works Strongly and strangely, and forces them into all Idle,
unlawful uncivil or unhonest actions.

Fourthly, Want of Regularity, and due Temper of Spirit, not knowing either how
to shun Poverty, when it falls, nor be contented with or under it being laid
upon them; nor taking Care, nor using Lawful means to get out of it, and of
this Condition many of those persons are, They know not of what Spirits they
are.

Fifthly want of Grounds and Principles of Religion; scorning or not earing to
hear the Word preached by the public Ministers, and so not having the Fear of
God before their eyes at all, or not so much, as they ought: they go astray as
soon as they are born and speak lies, as the Prophet David says.

Sixthly, Many of them have been Professors formerly, but by contention and
baughtinesse of Spirit, and for want of Assisting grace and Humility, fall off,
and so set up this Trade of Batiologie and Vain Babbling.

Seventhly, Hope of Gains and Outward credit amongst men, to be accounted some
what Excellent, or Envy to the Preachers by Law established, these are as
Pullyes to draw them in, and Spurs to set them forward,

To these many others might be added, but these are sufficient to cause their
Behavior to be either toward God or Man unreverent, undecent, uncivil,
unnatural, God having justly given them up to their own hearts lusts to work
all wie^ednes even with greedines, hence at any meeting they carry not
themselves in an ordinary affable way amongst their Equals, hence they sco ne
their Superiors, and truly give no man his Due: but superciliously and
vaingloriously or stubbornly and surly, and irregularly, they ^ear themselves:
slighting or not regarding persons of their nearest natural Relation in their
Comportment shows their Loose and extravagant breeding; so that their
unmannerly and uncivil carriage to all sorts of people proceeds from a double
cause: from want of Civil and Moral Education; and from a proud, affected,
Supercilious, vain Conceit of their sublime gifts, excellent qualities, and
Divine inspirations: And so judging all others inferior to themselves, and
indeed holding others not fit for their sanctified societies (as they pretend)
herupon many can witness that at the sign of the Mouth, two Gentlemen of good
quality after their Longwinded exercise was ended, came in a civil and
courteous comportment, to, two of their she Disciples, who during Foxes
Rambling, and confused Babbling, were taken with their Whyning yelping
puppy-like Phrensical fits; and the Gentlemen very civilly came and asked them,
whether they were ill? or whether they were crowded to much? or what reason
they had for so doing? and protested seriously to those two Femalls, that they
desired to be informed not out of Curiosity, but for Satisf^ction; they two
stood staring in the Gentlemen's faces a good pretty while, and spoke not to
them at all, the Gentlemen humbly desired them the second time to be pleased to
inform them concerning these particulars; they both hereupon in a furious and
Hag-like rage and passion belched out of their unclean Mouths, these direful
curses and Execrations against those two men and others that stood by, you are
both Damned wretches, you are straw and stubble hay and dross, and are good
for nothing but Hell fire, which shall Consume you, another standing by, and
hearing such violent expressions come from them, told them they did not well to
condemn any man, and that their judgment was unjust, the women turned suddenly
to him, and said that he was no other then a Firebrand of Hell as well as the
other, and that their time of burning was not far off, and being asked, how
they know that, they replied furiously again, they were commanded to tell them
of it, this was their deportment to men of modest and calm spirits, who
protested afterward that they could not have believed they had been such angry
and violent people; and that they desired nothing, but would fain have been
satisfied about their Whining and strange yelping, so boldly impudent they are
and lavish in their exercise, that though they belch out Blasphemy, Heresy,
Nonsense, Contradiction, Absurdities, Untruths, Lies, Slanders, Revilings
against God and Christ, the Scriptures, Magistrates (the high^st not exempted)
and Ministers yet, when as they are told of it, though by judicious able men
yet they shall have no better entertainment, then to be judged, and forthwith
cond^mned to Hell flames and torments, as though They had the keeping of the
keys of the Grave and Hell; had power to Bind or Lo^ at their pleas^e any,
whom they shall like or dislike, they have (as they affirm) such a purity that
God sees no sin in them, nay they do not acknowledge themselves Sinners, but
Purged, enlightened, perfected so, that all corruption and sin is subdued in
them; hence they take Liberty to use or abuse the creatures amongst themselves,
and imagine Community of women, though against the Laws of God and the Land,
to be not only not a sin but allowable, and therefore they so licenciously
practice it. Should all their Actions and behaviors so irreligious and
profane, so obscence and uncomely be set down, it would swell into a large
story, but indeed they are for the most part so strange and unnatural, that it
is not fitting for a modest pen to write them, nor a chaste Nature to read them,
next follows.

THEIR GESTVRES,
THese are so Antic and Apish abroad, that the very Children deride and abhor
them, as they range rudely through the very streets at noon day naked. So they
practiced in the Countries in Yorkshire, Lancashire, Cheshire and else where,
even Women casting away all Modesty of of their sex, as well in the day time
as in the night accompany with men, with strangers not their own Husbands, but
these regard not the solemn ties or bonds of Marriage, but are broke out into
all shameless and unparalleled Bestiality: Though most of them be scarce able
to get rich and costly apparel, yet such as they have formerly used, they now
cast off, they eat and drink promiscuously without rendering any thanks to God,
before or after the receipt of their diet: they are so clean (as they pretend)
that they need no washing, and therefore it may truly be said of them, that as
they are no Scribes, so they are not Pharisees, for they washed oftener in a
day, then these in six; the Pharisees prayed often, (these as thinking
themselves not bound to Duties of that inferior rank) use it not: Their
gestures in the time of their public tumultuous Meetings are various and
strange, sometimes standing, sometimes sitting, sometimes tumbling, wallowing
from one side to another, lying on their bellies, sometimes on their backs:
never kneeling, shaking their hands as though troubled with a deep Palsy;
strangely Casting up and distorting their Eyes, and wreathing their Mouths,
lying as dead as in a Tra^nce or a Swoune, strangely whining, sqealing,
yawling, groaning, foa^ing, at mouth, as troubled with the Falling sickness,
and their Leader and Chief Speaker, that nimble Mercurialist Fox, who has run
up and down diverse countries and deluded sundry people under several shapes and
Habits and forms, now come to London wears a bush, a long bush of Hair by his
Ears like a Fox tail, which he strokes often and plays with and sports with
it, as a Fox does with his tail, to the Merriment and laughter of the
spectators, and this done with such Confidence and impudence, it is not to be
believed till seen.

The Rainbow has not more Colors then these Creatures variety of shapes,
habits, forms, gestures, surely they never were bred in Spain, for they never
alter their Fastion: but they may be thought to be French, always changing
their Habits, and varying their Postures, they are like to Weather-Cocks,
always turning with the Wind, it would puzzle an expert Limner to set them
forth in their Colors, except he used all colors, in a word, they are like a
Windmill and a Woman's fancy, all upon Alteration.

THEIR AIMS AND ENDS.
We are now come to the last description of these Land- Chamelions, what they
intend and aim at, the Butt they shoot at, and that's as unjust as any of their
preceding actions, did they lay down a good end, they might be the better born
withal; though they did fail in some particulars to attain it: but their drift
and scope as the means by which they use to accomplish it, we comprise in the
se four heads.

First, Sedition in the State; and so consequently subversion of Government.

Secondly, Enriching themselves and to gain Credit.

Thirdly, To Delude poor simple people.

Fourthly, To sow Division in Religion, and to effect their designs to the
full, they have assumed that way and profession to them selves, that if any
delusion will work: this that they profess is the most likely. For first (they
say) they come, and are sent immediately by God, now this Bait if once
swallowed, sets them up to the purpose, for are not all bound then to obey when
God commands, and this Exempts them from punishment too, for what Ingenuous
Magistrate will oppose them, (being as they say) sent from God, left happily by
so doing, he may seem to strive against God, and what need they now be
questioned, having gotten allowance and authority from the Magistrate? whom
need they fear, they may range and reign as they please, and then secondly, if
sent of God, and authorized by the Magistrate, who will not be ready and
willing to assist them with means if they sow Spiritualls; it is not to be
questioned; but they Will and may, quickly reap Temporalls? wealth, and gifts
and oblations flow in from all persons, And thirdly, This pretense being
adjudged for pure and sincere, especially joined with Humility, and heavenly
Messages, who would not forthwith be an Auditor, a Proselite, and a follower?
who will not be taken with such whom Heaven sends as Ambassadors, and thereupon
their Doctrines are swallowed down: People will not let any of their words fall
to the ground, and having now well refreshed themselves with Large Benevolences
from seduced people, who will not cry up what they say, and cry down that that
they disprove off, and so in the consequence down goes the settled and orthodox
professors of Religion as Antichristian, and of the fourth Monarchy, and so to
be utterly overthrown and cast down, all this is feazible by these cunning
Artificers: These Foxes know how to lie down and prostrate Themselves as
natural Foxes usually do, when they intend most mischief with glaring, with
their Eyes cast up, and fixed in their heads as if they were dead, and by this
subtle trick, Foxes get and catch many a prey, and these use such Arts to
persuade their Auditors that they are mortified, or in a spiritual Trance, but
this is done to win Disciples, to their Lure, and to persuade men of their
celestial Raptures, their discourse is broken and half distracted, cunning
inveygling; but certain it is, if they be so shameless and impudent in the day,
in the light, what will they not do having opportunity to act in the Dark, in
the night; they are indeed Monsters not of Afric but brought up in England,
and whether it be safe to give Liberty long to such Foxes, who would ruin the
State, overthrow Religion, seduce People, and advance Themselves above all
others, it is left to wise and judicious persons to determine and order. Thus far
the Fox has been hunted with his Litter, some more able pen (it is hoped) will
undertake to follow the Game being now hot in chase, and the Foxes out at prey,
but an end is put to our pursuits at present, desiring that others would keep
up the Game; and follow the Pursuit with skill and power it wilprove both for
profit and pleasure. One step further,

In the last place, consider their boldness to intrude into places of public
worship, to affront, disturb, and out face both the Preacher in his Exercise,
and the people from hearing, notwithstanding the commands of Authority, to the
contrary, they are like to butchers flies will venture on, though beaten for
their boldness; and where they can seize, they presently taint: they pretend to
be all Spiritual, yet they all love the Flesh; their women like not the
Apostles Injunction, To learn in silence and subjection; but these thrust on to
be Teachers, and Rulers: they like not Saint Paul's advise, who would not permit
women to speak in public; but these presume so far, even to Railing and
Scolding; there were some Seducers in old time, of whom it is said, They crept
into houses; these scorn to creep or peep, but impudently rush, and run into
all places, not to hear but to control the Preachers Doctrine: women are
called houswives, they should in modesty keep at home; but these are Gadders
and Rovers abroad; Salomen makes it a Demonstration of a naughty woman, whose
feet will not stay within doors: What may be thought of these then, who are
Praters, Busi-bodies, and Wanderers,

But their chief Virago, is one who is called Martha Symmonds, Alias in truth,
she is wife to Mr. Bourn the Astronomer in Morefeilds, a special Light Saint.
A true Martha indeed, who cumbers her self with two much business of other
folks matters, who runs and gadds up and down with Missives, and leaves
Letters, and sends them abroad to gain Disciples; what a bubbub did she cause
in Shordich Church the last Lords day, by boldly and impudently talking to, and
against the Minister, till she was forced away by the Churchwardens and other
Officers, and so others in other places act their parts stubbornly against all
Rules of Modesty and Civility.

It Is believed by understanding people, that they use Charms, Spells and
Jncantations, by tying of Ribbons Laces Knots, and by giving some slight
present, which upon the Receipt has had strange operations upon such as have
taken them, so that they have been as it were possessed and frantic, and have
broken out into strange fits, as persons intoxicated, and have hereupon fallen
out with those of their nearest Re^tion, as Wives with their Husbands, and
Husbands with their Wives, nud Parents with their Children, even to such an
high degree, that they have left one the other, and have sold and profusely
lavished and given away their Estates, even to strangers, nay prodigally and
unwisely given away their wearing apparel, and have put themselves into
Antic and Whimsicall habits, even to the scorn and derision of beholders; nay
they have not only strangely Metamorphosed themselves in their habits, but some
of them have been so impudently bold, as to go naked in the public streets,
and Market places, though one of them was well tutourd and whipped into better
manners, who of late coming through Smithfeild amongst the country Carters, who
bring hay to town, was stopped by a lusty Country fellow, and asked why he
disgraced him self so, the Quacker answered, the Lord had commanded him to do
so, to whom the Carter very bluntly replied, and the Lord has commanded me to
whip and lash you foundly, which with a good Cart whip was seasonably
performed; if more of them met with such Discipline and such rough Tutors, it
would be a sure means to force them to a Reformation, and to leave off their
simple Pilgrimags, and uncivil Perambulations.

To conclude, These English Crocodiles leave no polytick ways untried to work
upon Weak Proselites, they prevail most upon the femall Sex, as knowing the
Woman was first seduced, and then seduced the man, in Sum, they are the
Cankerwormes of Magistracy, the Rats-bane of the Ministry, the Rust of
Learning, the Defilers of Modesty, the Underminers of Civi^l Society, the
Disturbers of Order, the Quicksands of Government, the Fomenters of all
seditious and disorderly practices.

In a word, they are like Pharoahs lean and illfavourd kine, are come up here
to devour the Fat and the fair ones, Religion, and Law: which if not timely
stopped in their furious carriere, by men in place and authority, may prove the
Gulf to sink all good Orders and Government, in this Commonwealth.

-- Venienti occurrite Morbo.
FINIS.

