A TRUE RELATION OF The late Success of the Kings and Parliaments Forces in
PEMBROKE-SHIRE:

Wherein The great VICTORY against the Kings Forces in Wales by Major General
LAVGHORNE is fully Related.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Relation be forthwith printed
and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
Aug. 25. 1645.

A true Relation of the late Successes of the Kings and Parliaments Forces in
Pembrook-shire.
ON Tuesday the twenty eight of July 1645. the Enemies main body being in
Haverford-west, we drew forth out of Garrisons of Pembrooke and Tenby, with
five hundred and fifty Foot, and two hundred Horse and Dragoons, (being the
most could be spared with security out of the Towns) and two small Guns, and
Marched that day to Canellon, within five miles of Haverford-west, there met
seven of the Enemies scouts, killed one, and took the other six: that day
Captain Batten Arrived at Milford, and by Divine Ordination above hopes, Landed
150. Seamen to increase our Foot. We kept the field till Friday the first of
August, (no Enemy appearing) then Major General Stradlinge, and Major General
Egerton, drew forth out of Haverford with four hundred and fifty Horse, eleven
hundred Foot, and four field Guns into Colby Moor, three miles from Haverford,
and there put themselves in Array for a fight: A small party of our Horse,
guarded on both sides with an hundred and fifty Musketeers, charged their whole
body, began the encounter about six of the Clock in the afternoon, and
continued very fierce and doubtful near an hour; but in the conclusion, the
Enemies Horse were totally Routed, the residue of our Horse fell on some part
to do Execution upon the Foot; the other to pursue the Horse speeding for
Haverford: We killed of the Enemies an hundred and fifty, took about seven
hundred Prisoners, in them men of note, Lieut. Col. Price, Major Braude, Major
Guddinge, Capt. Somes, Capt. Wade, Capt. Price, Capt. Thomas, Capt. Lloyd,
Capt. Dawkins, Capt. Morgans, with twenty two Lieutenants and Inferior
Officers, four Guns, five Barrels of Powder, near eight hundred Arms, all
their Carriages and Provision, and chased them home to their Garrison; the
night then approaching, we might not beset the Town to keep in their Horse, but
drew back to the field, so that in the night, the enemy deserted the Town and
fled, leaving a Garrison in the Castle: Saturday we entered the Town and
Besieged the Castle, began our Battery on Monday, but spent much Ammunition to
little purpose.

Tuesday giving over we fired the outer gate, and seized the walls, gained the
Castle, took prisoners and hundred and twenty Common Soldiers, and near twenty
Commanders and Officers, whereof were Colonel Manley the Governor, Lieut.
Colonel Edger, Major Hawton, Captain Bushel, Capt. Thomas, Capt. Baudley,
Capt. Moore, and Capt. Cromwell; one piece of Ordnance, and hundred and twenty
Arms, some pillage to the Soldiers, beside the Provision.

Yesterday being the 8. of August, we had a day of public Humiliation and
Thanksgiving in Pembrook and Haverford, and the Leager: This day, we drew our
force of Horse and foot before Carew Castle, and are drawing up our Ordnance to
plant them before the Castle; relying upon the Lord of Heaven for a blessing;
In all these Actions we bless God, we lost but two men, and about sixty
wounded, none mortally.

Rowland Laughorne.

FINIS.

