A LETTER Written to A MEMBER Sitting At WESTMINSTER,

E R
(...)

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

A LETTER Written to a MEMBER, etc.
SIR,
OUt of that great service and high esteem I have for you, both as a Gentleman
and Christian, I presume to give you the trouble of this paper, which I beg of
you most ingenuously to peruse, as a Person of Reason and Civility, which I
hope as yet you have not wholly cancelled: And therefore I take the freedom to
present you with the Scene of their public transactions, as a Member of the
House; desiring you would be pleased to treat your self with the serious
consideration of the Admirable dispensations of Divine providence and justice,
clearly evidenced to a common apprehension in that true Lex Talionis. The House
of Commons at the beginning of their Sessions, having by their fair pretenses
gained a good opinion with the Vulgar, did raise and foment great Tumults, as a
means, when they could not convince by Arguments, to overawe with power of
those, who by their clamorous insolence, so violently, assaulted the late Kings
sacred person, that they forced him for his own defense to a retirement from
Westminster. Not many years after those very Contrivers, the greater part of
the House, though they highly caressed Cromwell and the Army at Triploe-Heath
near Cambridg; (promising them by Skippon an Act of Indemnity, and their
Arrears) were beaten notwithstanding with their own weapons, every Regiment
crying Justice, Justice, which was the same language, which the Tumults first
used against the King by their connivance and instigation: and afterward was
ecchoed by the Army against themselves to their seclusion, in 1648. When these
present Members, the minor part of the House (designing to make themselves
absolute, and to divide the large Revenues of the Church and Crown among
themselves and their Adherents, as a poor petty reward for their greater
service to the Kingdom) did fear the greater and honester part of the House
would spoil their game, in voting the concessions of the late King at the Isle
of Wight to be a ground of a firm peace, and being out numbered could not carry
on their design by a Vote, courted the Army into a compliance with their
unhandsome sense, which was to keep out the greater part of the House by force,
because they would not submit to their Judgments, to their too too partial
Interest. I wish I could not call these proceedings Arbitrary, which have no
other Basis, but the dictates of their own Will, which would have been happily
buried in their first conception without any farther product, had they not
received birth and sustenance from a military power, good Physic in time of
great distempers, but an ill constant nourishment. It had been better their
Resolves had merited their value from a due number of Votes, then from the
unequal balance of an unjust weight of Arms; But may be they will reply the
least part of the House was the best, the greater as they pretend was acted in
principles destructive to the Kingdom. This is the one sense, if they may
decide the dispute; But they are not competent Judges in their own Case. For
they being the less, ought to be governed by the greater part of the House:
and so Major pars signodi est tota; the Major part of the convention is the
whole, and the less is to subscribe to the greater. Else farewell all order
and due determination of Controversies in public or private Assemblies: If the
worsted party may be permitted to dispute, every man is so much a kin to his
own Judgments, as part of himself, that he will never acknowledge himself to be
constious of error, always attended with the sad consequents of guilt and
shame. Therefore when the less considerable part of the House could not
protect themselves by the reason of Law, they over-powred the greater by the
Law of the Sword, in some cases a good hand of Justice, but always an ill head
of Law, of which the Soldiery is little versed in the Theory, and therefore
too much in the Practick, being unfit Arbitrators of it, although the unhappy
differences of this unsober Age have too often made them so. Now the Minor part
of the House having created themselves sole Masters of the House of Commons,
did farther act the Politicians, and did by Ragione di stato, contrive a way to
lessen the power of the Crown the Fountain of Honor, by taking away the great
stream of it, the House of Barons, who had a high obligation to serve him, who
had conferred their Honor upon them: The surviving Fraction of the lower
House, did by an insolent Ordinance pull down the upper, which was much more
Ancient and Honorable than their own. This Action exceeding all rules of
reason and sobriety, did not give bounds to their Arrogance and Ambition,
setting their Feet on the Necks of the Lords, that they might more easily
strike at the head of the King, when contrary to all Law, Religion, their
Protestation, League and Covenant, and Oath of Allegiance by a pretended Court
of Justice, and their omnipotent power, they Arraigned, Sentenced, and most
inhumanely Murdered; And afterward Banished the just Heir of the Crown, and his
Royal Relations, making them first hear the Subject of their own Malice, and
abroad the Object of others Charity. What English Heart that has either sense
of Humanity, Loyalty, or Religion, but must highly resent these unheard of
Barbarismes, with no less a^^onishment than indignation? All which they have
committed, that they might h^^hthen themselves above all Law, no body on Earth
(as they conceived) being in a capacity to call them to an account for their
Violations of Humane and Divine Laws. But they were highly mistaken; This
illegal deportment toward their Fellow Members, the House of Lords, and our
late most Gracious Sovereign, chaulked out the way to their Servants (that were
Commissioned to fight for them) to turn their Masters, they constituting the
Soldiery first Moderators between them and their Fellow Members, devolved a
power on the Army, after the House had most Barbarously taken away their Head
that most pious Saint and Martyr the King, and when they had sat so long, and
expended so much Blood and Treason, and done so little good for the Nation:
Cromwell by the power of the Sword did deem it a piece of Honor to himself,
and Justice to the Kingdom to take them out of the House, they having so
unnaturally destroyed their own Heads, were no better than dead Members in Law,
as the Masters of that faculty do affirm: When they had by the cursed
insinuations of the Jesuits (ever pernicious Counselors to this Nation, given
that fatal stroke, which at once determined our Royal Sovereign and themselves,
and the Glory and Happiness of these then three flourishing Kingdoms. I wish
they did travel abroad, that they might be better educated, and then their Ears
would ring, and their hearts I hope relent to hear the sad Character, the World
gives of them in their parallel with the Jews, by reason of that horrid
murder. I wish them from my very Soul a hearty contrition of Spirit in an
unfeigned Repentance, that the most precious blood of that immaculate Lamb, may
wash them clean from the guilty of that innocent blood, which else will cry
loud against them at that greater Session above, when they shall be divested of
all power of the Soldiery to assist them. Now I beg of them to entertain
themselves in their own Ordinances, in which they may be pleased to take a
short view of their scandalous Transactions, in ejecting their fellow Members,
the House of Lords, the Reverend Bishops, most Sacriligiously pocketing up the
revenews of the Church and Crowns, shedding that innocent blood, invading all
honest men's Liberties and Proprieties. Who out of conscience would not sign the
unworthy results of their arbitrary Counsels. I appeal to their own Souls, they
being but the lesser faction of the House, guilty of so many breaches of Trust,
for which they were twice ejected by that power, which first gave them their
monstrous being; The People often resuming their Trust in Electing new
Delegates to Act for them in many successive Parliaments: Whether they have not
great confidence in Entitleing themselves to a Monopoly (all being put down but
themselves) of being perpetual Parliament men. That they might offer a further
Rape to the will of the Nation, in debauching them from their first chaste love
of Monarchy, the best of Policies for Order, Unity and Commerce, to gratify
their spurious Lust, in the enjoyment of some new light Curtisan, Ociana, a
mere Bawd and Romance of Government, intending therein to Null all Ancient
Fundamental both Civil and Common Laws, which else will stand as so many
Records of their baser crimes, to bring in them for the future to condign
punishments. Give me leave to tell them, that the best way in order to their
Temporal and Eternal happiness, is to make peace above and below, with God and
the Nation, in speaking a just restitution (according to that good old School
Divinity, Non remittitur pecatum, nisi restituatur ablatum) for giving up those
estates (which they have most injuriously seized) to the true owners the
Church, and Crown, and call home again the just Heir, a Person of so much
Honor, Piety, and Clemency, that he writes the unworthy injuries of his
Enemies in Dust, and the loyal services of his Friends in Marble. Who is of
such a happy memory, that he forgeteth nothing but disservices? But suppose he
were not a Person of that Candor and Moderation, as they would have him to
remit those high violations which have been acted by them and their Adherents,
against him and the sacred Person of his Royal Father and his Loyal Subjects;
They need not possess themselves with vain fear, when he proffereth to resign
all power of dis-obliging them, into the (...) of a free Parliament, and out of
his gracious inclinations to a firm peace, will condescend to Ratify, what
shall be Enacted by them. He says a so in his late Declaration that they shall
keep his and the Church Lands, till they have received their Money, both
Principal, and Interest, which they have paid for them: and then they must
confess (if they be ingenious) it is exquitable on all accounts to restore the
Lands and Revenews to their true Masters, the King and the Church. Pray be
pleased to consider that the Royal interest (without which we have been a prey
to Foreign Nations,) will again reconcile us to them, and give us such a repute
as to be able to hold a fair correspondence with Foreign Princes, that the
Merchants may receive a due encouragement, who are the Honor and Support of
the Trade of this Nation; But some will reply, if the King be enthrowned, the
Court will speak charge to the Kingdom, but it is easily answered, that it is
much less expenceful, then the Army, which costeth two Millions to maintain
against a just Court, which never had scarce half a Million beside the Crown
Lands, to support it in its greatest Splendor; and when the King shall be
Estated in his Fathers Royal Throne, there will be no need of an Army, he will
desire no other Guard but the innocence of his person and the Love of his
Subjects. Pray be pleased to communicate my desires to the House, not to
sacrifice these Nations (once the envy of the world) to the merciless fury of a
Foreign Invasion, to preserve their ill gotten Estates by Sacrilege and
Oppression, but to condescend to the Election of a free Parliament made up of
the three Estates of the Kingdom a most excellent Model of Government and a
rare Harmony, Composed of the different Interests of the Nation, consentring
together in this happy Fabric the only expedient left to Reedifie our Ruined
Church, in the restaurations of the reverend Fathers of it, commended to us
from the holy Apostles through so many ages, as a defense against Heresy and
Schysme and to repair the breaches of our distracted State, in the blessed
inanguration of the Kings most Royal Person, as an instrument of Gods Glory and
our happiness, which that it may suddenly succeed, is the earnest prayer of,

SIR, Your most faithful Servant, L* L.

FINIS.

