The Freedom of PREACHING, OR Spiritual Gifts defended: PROVING That all men
endowed with Gifts and Abilities may Teach and Preach the Word of God.

Numb. 11. 29. Enviest thou for this? Would God all the Lords People were
Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them.

Mar. 9. 38, 39, 40. We saw one casting out Devils in thy Name, and we forbad
him, because be follows not us.

But Jesus said, forbid him not, for there is no man which shall do a miracle
in my name, can lightly speak cvil of me; for he that is not against us is on
our side.

1 Cor. 14. 5. I would that ye all spoke with tongues, but rather that ye
Prophesied.

By D. Lupton, Servant of Jesus Christ in the work of the GOSPEL.

London, Printed by R.W. for R. Harford, at the Bible and States Arms in
Little-Brittain. 1652.

The Freedom of Preaching, or, Spiritual Gifts defended.
1 Cor. 14.1. Covet Spiritual Gifts, but rather that ye may Prophecy, or
Preach.


SOme occasions of business forcing my stay in London for awhile, I did (as
opportunity would give leave) hear some teachers of Gods Word, at present
reputed, and adjuged famous Divines; but certain it is, that fame and common
report overvalues them, for even in their pulpits they could not forbear to set
forth their spleen and envy, even against such persons as deserve a better
esteem, if it be but for their rare and excellent gifts and spiritual
abilities, with which it has pleased God to entrust and enrich them; and what
is more;

In a great Congregation. (viz.) Sepulchers, upon a Lords day in the Afternoon;
it was publicly preached, that gifts were not to be regarded; that they puffed
men up, that it was a sure sign of an Hypocrite, and of a withering professor
to show his gifts, and to stand upon his ability of gifts, (and yet himself was
then exercising his gifts, and as it is known well) he did strive to set forth
his able gift of preaching to the full, and would be very angry, if any should
tell him that he wants gifts and parts, and yet to undervalue men of gifts; he
made an opposition betwixt Graces and gifts, which though they may sometime in
some persons be separated, yet usually they go together, and may very well be
both in one and the same person at once; as he conceivs they are in himself,
but thinks not possible to be in others.

Upon hearing this, I enquired of a friend upon what occasion the Presbyterian
Rabbis did so violently express their spleen and indignation, and against whom
it was; He told me that there were diverse Tradesmen and Artists, in and about
London who Preached and Teached the word, and yet never were in any University,
nor were ever made Ministers by the Assembly of Divines, and such men they
could not abide, nor endure that they should have liberty to preach, and that
of late they were more countenanced by some great Personages, to the great
scandal (as they say) of the public Ministry, and to the ruin and
destruction of many that hear them, and their Pernicious Doctrines, and to the
venting of sects and damnable Heresies, and (as they would make men believe) to
the destruction and Confusion of the Church and Commonwealth.

Being thus informed by a friend, I did resolve with my self, to set forth my
own judgment, and satisfy others in this particular, andhereupon set pen to
paper, to clear and vindicate such gifted men in their actions of Preaching
Gods Word, from these too virulent and violent Spirits of the Presbyterian
Classis, who vainly think, that none have any Talents but themselves, or that
none (having any Talents) may employ them publicly to the Exchangers, without
leave and Authority from their Elderships first had and obtained: though the
texts says plainly; Thou ought to have put my money to the Exchangers; Mat.
25.27. Thou, it is not only thou (O Presbyterian alone) but I, and others too,
and ought to have done it; urget singulos ab officio: from every man's duty: to
put out his or their talent to the greatest augmentation of Gods glory, and to
the general benefit and edification of men's souls.

To uphold this truth therefore, which is so violently opposed, but not
possible to be everthrown, no, not by all the Company of those learned Rabbis;
whose Anger would not be so extreme against spiritual gifted men, but that they
fear, if these be followed or set up, that they themselves and their places of
profit will in short time be slighted and dissallowed off, thinking as those
wicked Priests did of our Savior Christ, if we let him alone, all men will
follow him. To confirm this point therefore, and to make it good to the world,
I lay down these following Arguments; which I desire all that read them
seriously, to consider with themselves concerning them; and let the
Presbyterian beneficed Rabbis, as soon as they can, answer them; or else if
their proud Spirits will permit it, to embrace them, and submit to them.

First, That the public preaching, or teaching of Gods word is not restrained
or confined, nor committed to any one sort or condition of men only; but that
any one, of any calling (if a Member of the Church of Christ) though of the
meanest sort, if he or they be endowed with gifts proportionable, by the Spirit
of God, to execute and undergo the work, may Preach or teach publicly, as
well as our great Scholars, who stand so much upon their corrupted Ordination.
Thus proved.

First, From the manner of Gods bestowing and giving his spiritual gifts; Jam.
1.5. He does not bestow all upon one servant, and nothing upon another; but he
distributes to all as he pleases; So that if any man; the holy Apostle does
not say this man only, or that (as the Presbyterian or Dr. in the Schools) but
if any man, poor or rich, learned or unlearned, lack Wisdom, Let him ask it of
God, who gives to all men liberally, and upbr aideth not: as to say, you are
not in holy Orders; the Bishops, nor Presbyters have laid no hands upon you,
you are not fit or worthy, or the like; No, be upbraideth not, (and said the
text) It ( i.e.) Wisdom shall be given to him, to any; James 1.5. Now to sum
up what is for our purpose, we see, that if any man, Tradesman, Artificer,
though never so mean, if he or they pray to God in faith, for wisdom, which is
the only Ornament and necessary gift for a Preacher; and it is not expressed
what wisdom, it may be Wisdom not only to search, but to expound and interpret
the Scriptures; why, that shall be given, and liberally too, and to any one;
Here Is no confining or limiting, or excepting, or preferring of persons, For
God is no respecter of persons. Nay further, he many times fills the poor and
hungry with good things, with graces and gifts of his holy Spirit, to enable
them to confound the wise in their own conceit, and learned too, but sends the
rich (in Schollership, in Parts, in Arts, in Preferments, by outward Ordination
and calling to the supposed Ministry of the Gospel) empty away; and shall such
great Presbyters, who yet may be empty of these good things, be the only
Teachers and Preachers allowed to be amongst us, and despise, (and as much as
in them lies) hinder and exclude the poor in worldly esteem, (though end owed
with Wisdom from Heaven) from Preaching Gods word Freely; What, is their eye
evil, because Gods eye is good? or shall God give to any without upbraiding,
and shall these Presbyters Rail, Accuse, Revile and Condemn such for Sectaries,
whom God enables and approves off? Shall God of his Royal Munificence give to
any, and shall these grudge or repine at it? since he has made his graces and
gifts free, shall these only persuade men, that all are empty but themselves?
away with such ridiculous Impostures and delusions; for since any other man may
have wisdom from God, as well as themselves, nay many sooner and plentifuller
than themselves, why may they not teach and preach as well, if not better than
themselves? Every Preacher should be Endowed with wisdom from above; If
Tradesmen, and Mechanics (as they are called in scorn) be full of wisdom, let
them, any of them preach, and preach freely.

Secondly, To proceed to a second Argument; for in so doing they do but what
God would have them do; for to this end and intent God bestows his gifts; as he
gives them to any that ask, so he gives them to be Employed, and managed and
Improved; they will not be the lighter but the brighter for being used; this
shall be made plain, as we may see it by our Saviors own words, Mat. 5.15.
Neither do men light a Candle and put it under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick,
and it gives light to all that are in the house: and so Mark. 4.21. Is a
candle brought to be put under a Bushel, or under a Bed? and not to be set on a
Candlestick? and Luk 8.16. No man when he has lighted a Candle, covers it
with a vessel, or puts it under a Bed, but sets it on a Candlestick, that
all that enter in may see the light; and so Paul to Timothy, Stir up the gift
that is in thee. 1 Timothy 4.13. Up and be doing, and the Lord be with thee. Thou
ought to have put my money to the Exchangers. Mat. 25.27. Now to Collect for
our purpose out of these places; three of the Evangelists agree that a Candle
is not to be hid or obscured; Men use not so to do, says Matthew, there is no
such order; nay, its against Common practice, is a Candle brought, says Mark;
No sure, there is none has so little reason, or judgment to do so; No man (says
Luke) when he has lighted a Candle; For it is against all common benefic, it is
to give light, and to be set up, it guides all, and lightens all that enter in,
or that are in the house.

To come closer yet to our intendment; what is resembled by the Candle, but
Illumination, Enlightening grace of God in the Soul, or Gods word is the Candle
in the soul, the clear understanding the Scriptures, knowledge of them; when
God does lighten this Candle in any man, of what degree or calling soever, for
there is no man (but some gross Malefactors are debarred from a Candle from
light,) the poorest man that is, will endeavor to have a Candle set up in his
house; We say, when it does please God to do so, (as he uses) why, such men
that are so enlightened themselves, they are to give light to others, by pure
and clear preaching and living; Nay, they are to be set up, why not in Public
Congregations? they are not to be suppressed or kept under by any censures of the
pretending Presbyters but let them be as it is fitting and seemly advanced, set
up, that they may teach, give light to them that sit in darkness, etc.

Now seeing that God lights these Candles, who dare snuff at him, or them? or
strive to blow them out, or pull them down? will our Rabbis persuade men that
none can have Candles lighted but they, or that no Candles must shine and burn
but in their houses or studies? or that none knows how to light a Candle but
they? will they be so uncharitable (as it is to be feared they would, had they
but the power in their hands, which they have long gaped after) as to blow out
all other men's Candles, that theirs may burn alone.

Did God say, Genesis 1. Let there be light, and for all equally to enjoy, and
will yet these men envy and grudge that other men have light as well and as
freely as themselves? Or yet further, will they, or dare they be angry that
other men's Candles give light, better light, purer light, more light, freer
light then theirs do, or can do? or do they vex themselves that there is so
many lights, new and true lights set up every where, or almost in every Corner?
Do they not grudge to see how their Candles burn dimmer and dimmer, and it is to
be feared will go shortly and suddenly out in a stinking, noisome smell? Oh my
friends, look well to it; Shall not others work while they have the light, as
well and better than you have done, since God Commands all to work, and has
lent them light, and set up their Candle? then hinder them not, do not longer
strive to extinguish the light in any man; I wish you in this matter, to accept
of that good and Christian Counsel of Gamaliel, Take heed what ye intend to do
as touching these men, refrain I say from these men, Act 5. ver. 35.36.37.38.
and let them alone; for if this Counsel, or this work be of men, it will come
to naught; but if it be of God, (as it was then, and is indeed now) ye cannot
overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight against God. That's our
second argument, God gives his gifts to all, to edify withal, not to be idle;
whosoever then has the gift of Prophesying or Preaching, let him or them use
it to the utmost; desire spiritual gifts (says the Apostle) by prayer, but
rather that ye may Prophecy, 1 Cor. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. And yet he writ that to all
the Corinthians, not only to the Presbyters; but to the whole Church at
Corinth, yes, and to all that in every place call upon the name of the Lord
Jesus. 1 Cor. 1.2. And yet all these are to desire that they may be able to
Preach and Teach the Word; for certain the Apostle would never have wished to
pray to God, that they might all Prophecy, or Preach, if it had been
unlawful; and to stir up them more earnestly to it, he shows them the
Excellent benefit and profit of Preaching: 1 Cor. 14.3, 4. He (says the
Apostle) any one, or every one that Prophesies, speaks to Edification,
exhortation and comfort, but I had rather (says he) that ye could all
Prophecy: Mark there, he says All. Also to the Romans, having then gifts, that
is, as soon as God has bestowed gifts upon any, differing according to the
Grace that is given to us, whether Prophecy, let us Prophecy according to the
proportion of faith: Romans 12.6. Whatsoever the gift be, it ought not to be
concealed, but Employed, there is the End of it; if it pleases God to give the
gift of Prophecy, presently to the work, Preach in season and out of season; 1 Timothy 4.2, 3. And yet the Apostle does not tie this Preaching to any one
particular calling, sect or person, but to All that be in Rome, beloved of God.
Romans 1.7. and by consequence, why may not All in London, as well as All in
Rome, if gifted with Prophecy, Preach the word of God? and yet this done by
Apostolical exhortation. Away then with all such Sophisticated Presbyterian
Maxims, that would fain tie up the Dispensation of Christ's Ordinances to their
libits and as they did for gains pull the Bishops out of their chairs, so for
Envy and Lucre they would have none exercise the preaching of God Word, but
who should pass the censure of their Approbation, as if Gods word was to be No
where, nor by any persons taught, but where and by whom their ignorant zeal
shall think fit. Oh stupid ignorance!

Thirdly, It Is lawful for any that is gifted, to Preach; from the Approbation,
consent, and good liking of the best and holiest men that ever were: We Will begin
with that story recorded by Moses's pen: Number. 11.28, 29, 30. Moses found the
stubbornness of the Children of Israel, and he complained unto God, that he was
not able to bear the burden of them any longer; and God bids him gather
seventy of the Elders of Israel together, and he would take of the Spirit from
Moses, and put it upon the Elders: Observe how God gives the Spirit to whom and
when he pleases; it is not tied more to a Presbyterian Elder, or Rabbi, than
it is to a Porter or a Carman: But when these seventy Elders did come up, there
were two that staid behind, Eldad and Medad by name; and whereas it might be
thought a sin that they came not up; and might have been suspected not fitting
for to receive the Spirit, yet God gave it not only to the Elders who came up;
For they all prophesied ver. 25. and ceased not; but also to those two who came
not up, for they also did Prophecy in the Camp, among the Soldiers; and indeed
their Practice was thought strange, for there ran a young man, and told Moses
that these two did Preach among the Soldiers, and Jofhua out of his zeal
presently did (as out Presbyters would have done now) fobid them, by all means
(my Lord Moses) says Joshua, forbid them, never suffer such a thing as this is;
they came not up at your summons, and what this may come to, if suffered,
cannot be imagined, it cannot be good, for sure they preach without the Spirit
of God, the other Elders we know have it, but how these should have it, I know
not, and to let such as they are prophecy and Preach in the Camp, it may be
very dangerous, for they may persuade men to neglect coming up to the Public
Ordinances, and so the Priests will be slighted, and the Sacrifices not
regarded, and men will do as they please; forbid them (Oh my Lord) as you
tender the glory of the Priesthood and the Sacrisices, and Oblations; should be
upheld, for the maintenance of the Priests and Levites? I pray forbid them
forthwith; and as Joshua, so our Priests and others cry out against such as
Preach in the Armies, or without their Ordination and Imposition of hands; Oh!
would our Magistrates forbid them, it is a dishonor to Religion, and in short
time will make men not regard to come to Churches, or to the Sacrament; and
Tithes hereupon will be denied, and we the Ministers, The true, Orthodox,
Godly, able, and only Ministers, shall be of no worth or esteem, it is not
fitting they should Prophecy, they have no such power from us. Oh! Good
Parliament of England, forbid them, or else our calling goes down; Well, but as
Moses did answer Joshua, so will I do our men; enviest thou for this? (says
Moses) Number. 1.29. Would to God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that
the Lord would put his Spirit upon them.

To gather from hence: Moses we see was so far from hindering that good work
(though be had power, and Authority to have done it, and though he was deeply
and earnestly solicited by Joshua to to put it in execution, and though it had
not been used before, or practiced in the Camp) that he seems rather to check
Joshua, for his desiring to hinder them, than any ways to molest them himself,
Enviest thou for this? ver. 28.29. What is this to you, you should rather
uphold and encourage the Preaching of Gods words, than be against such as are
willing to take pains to instruct others, you or thou! I had not thought you
would ever have envied against a good work; It does not become thee to Envy at
other men's good labors; It is so far from being evil or naught, as I wish
heartily that all the people had the like gift, I would to God that they all
could Prophecy; assure your self (as you are my Servant) you ought not to
grudge or envy at them, but rather to Countenance and encourage them, for they
do the Lords work, and therefore let them alone, Envy not at it. Let them
alone, it is Gods pleasure and his will, and therefore let them alone; and thus
may it be said to all our Rigid Presbyters, why do ye Envy that others as well
as your selves preach? is it fit for such as you profess to be, should be
envious, angry men, and for this? that great are the company of of the
Preachers? Psalm. 68.5. Shake off such envy, you should rather praise God for
it, there will be the less work for you to undergo; are you stronger than
Moses? he was weary and not able to bear the burden of all that people alone;
are not many, too many of your Congregations too great for you? though you
think not the means too much, nor yet enough; yet it is to be feared the people
are too great and many for you to provide spiritual food for; how contrary are
you to the mind of Christ; pray (says he) to my father, that he would send
forth Laborers into his Harvest, the Harvest is great and the Laborers but
few, Mat. 9.37.38. Many hands make like work, and therefore be thank full for
it, that God is pleased in the latter days to pour out his spirit upon all
flesh, and that the Spirit rests with others, though mean and base in your
opinion: Shall Moses wish that all the Lords people were Prophets and
Preachers, and will you speak against it?

To the Confirmation of this, yet a step or two further: It Is recorded in the
Gospel written by Mark 9.38.39. of John, that he told our Savior that they saw
one casting out Devils in his Name, and because he did not follow them, they
forbad him. But Jesus said, forbid him not, for he that is not against us, is
on our part; Luke 9.49. the Apostles did then, as many would do now, though
they see that Gods work is done, and that the power of the Devil is daily
weakened, yet because there are some gifted by Gods blessed Spirit who Preach
down sin, and follow not the Presbyterian Way, they are presently offended at
them, and in all have they do what they can to hinder and forbid them in that
great work of preaching: the Apostles might say, when they saw him casting out
Devils; Why do you exercise this Aughority? where is your power given you from
Christ, show your Orders, where did ever you receive such commission? We are
the only true Preachers, we are sent by our Master Jesus Christ, it is not
fitting you should Preach or Practice such things, except you had a Warrant, or
Calling from Christ, and therefore we forbid you: and so say our Presbyters
too, even to such men who are gifted with the Spirit, Why take you upon you to
Teach and Preach? where were you ordained, how came you into the holy Ministry?
what Classis, or Synodal Convention authorized you? What degrees in Schools or
Universities have you taken? and if not allowed by us who are the successors of
the Apostles, and can (but not as yet have, nor ever will be able to) prove our
Ordination Divine; Why dare you, not being in holy Orders, undertake to Preach
at all? but what reply made our Savior; Forbid him not, for he that is not
against us, is for us. Luke 9.49, 50. So it may be replied to our Apostolical
conceited Rabbis, who judge none Able or fit but themselves for the Ministry;
forbid not these men, they do Christ's work, they are for Christ, and overthrow
the works of the Devil; rather help such men forward, but by no means forbid
them; Take heed you Quench not the Spirit in these men, 1 These. 5. though
perhaps but tradesmen, and the meanest too; Despise not Prophesying, not any,
and resist not the Holy Ghost. Act. 7. Can you be justly angry that Christ's
Gospel is propagated? What is it to you what Instruments God pleases to use or
Employ? What if it please God to send these out to the Hedges, Highwaies and
Lanes (whither your stateliness will not vouchsafe to go) to call in the Halt,
the Lame and the Blind (to whom you will scorn to Preach, or with whom you do
disdain to converse) if by this means Gods house be filled, and so the Saints
gathered up together, have you any cause of Anger for their Compassion, Pains
and Charity? And to shut up this Argument; What reason have you to disable
them, whom God has enabled; or to debar them, whom God has set up? or did the
Gospel come only from you? or is it only resideing in your Classes? or are
you angry that the Sun of Righteousness shines into these men's shops more then
into your Pulpits or Studies? or are you offended that the sweet dew of the
Spirit of Grace is shed abroad, and Communicated to poor Tradesmen as well as to
others? He has given gifts unto men, Psalm. 68. not only to your selves, but
to other men also; since therefore all are allowed by Moses to Preach, and none
forbidden by Christ, who do his work, Cease any longer to cry up your selves
for the only men; and let others have liberty to hold out Christ in his word
as well as your selves. Freely ye have received, freely give. How can these men
give freely, when you do all you can to stop their mouths? beware this Envy
mines you not. There were four sins that cast our the Bishops, the first was
their Secular Offices, and intermedling in State Affairs. The second was, their
Pride of life and Ambition. The third was their Covetousness. The fourth was
their suppressing Godly men, and as much as in them lay, the very Power of
Godliness. Look to it, if these be your sins, they will cast you down, and out
of Moses Chair ere long; make not your Pulpits Chairs of State, and your selves
Counselors of State.

Fourthly, It is a great sin for any man to hide his Talent; Mat. 25.28, 29.
and a heavy punishment will they suffer that do not employ Gods Gifts and
Graces in the highest degree and measure; and a great reward is promised by
Christ to any, and all such, who are faithful and careful to do the Lords
work. We know how weak his excuse was that pleaded he was afraid to put out his
Masters money; I was afraid, and went and hid it, here is thine own; his fear of
loosing it, or having it stole, or diminished, made him hide it; yet none of
these, nor all these, were a satisfactory answer to his Master. Thou oughest to
put it out, Mat. 25.27. You should not have feared loss, God will so bless, and
guide, and prosper his own work, that however, if his word should return empty
(which is impossible) yet the labourer shall not lose his reward or recompense:
And see how God complains of this Servant that did not employ his Talent, Thou
wicked and sloathfull Servant, Mat. 25.26. and take therefore the Talent from
him. v. 28. and Cast ye that unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, v. 29.
Blessed is that Servant whom when his Master shall come, he shall find so
doing. Why not Preaching?

The Apostles indeed, according to our Savior Christ's Promise made to them,
staid at Jerusalem till they were endued with power from above, till they were
filled with the Holy Ghost; but presently after they went about all places,
Preaching and Teaching Jesus Christ to Jews and Gentiles; According as ye have
received the gift, says the Apostle; and therefore all men, when once they have
received the hidden Manna, that comfortable tincture of Gods Spirit, they
cannot but speak, as the Apostle Peter, Acts 2.5, 6. For the love of Christ
constrains them. Now God, as he knows what number to employ, so he gives
diverse gifts to diverse men; but there is none can prove that he does not enable
any with the Spirit of Prophecy but Scholars; For the Apostle Paul says
plainly, writing to the Corinthians, What, came the word of God out from you,
or came it only unto you? 1 Cor. 14.38. Unto you only O Rabbis and
Presbyters! surely not so: and he wishes them, wherefore Brethren covet to
Prophecy; and yet these were not of the Presbytery, but of the Believers, and
if they might Prophecy, why not ours now? Why that debarred to believers now,
more then it was in the Apostles times? Nay, why enjoined as an excellent thing
to Christians, to learn to Preach then; and why prohibited, or thought
unfitting to believers and gifted men in our days? They cannot say but that God
does now enable with gifts and graces as he did then, his arm is not shortened,
nor his love decayed; and our Presbyters cannot but acknowledge that they pray
for God gracious assistance and for his gifts to be bestowed upon them; and if
so, others may have them as well as themselves, by Prayer; and then why not
Preach as well as they? Or would they make the world believe that God has tied
himself to bestow those peculiar gifts and graces to men of their Coat only,
and not to others, though in strength of faith they shall petition the throne
of Grace for them more than themselves? and therefore there being such
punishments threatened to any, who do not employ Gods gifts, whether Preaching,
or any other; and such rewards to them that shall put out their gifts; for the
Prophet Daniel says, that they (whosoever they be) that turn many unto
Righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. the
reward is great, and indeed able to incite any that is able to follow that
work, but the Prophet has not tied the reward only to such as conceive
themselves Ministers ordained by men; But to any sort of men whatsoever: though
our Ministers apply that reward to themselves alone, as though none ever
converted any souls to righteousness but they: and the Apostle James says also
of this reward; If any of your brethren do err from the truth, and one convert
him, let him know that he has saved a soul from death, and shall bide a
Multitude of sins, Jam. 5.19, 20. But the Apostle says here, if one (i.e.) any
one of the brethren; for thus he writes, James 1.1. any one of all the twelve
Tribes scattered abroad shall convert, etc. and therefore any one that God has
given Ability of gifts and graces to; Let them set themselves to work, and
follow this spiritual plough; For their reward or punishment is upon following
or failing, certain and sure.

Fifthly, It was allowed of, and approved by the Apostle Paul; nay says he, I
do rejoice therein, and will rejoice, Phi. 1.18. at what good soul! That many
of the brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to
speak the word without fear, Phil. 1.14. What Is more plain? Many, and many of
the brethren waxed bold to Preach, and at ver. 4,5. making request with joy,
for your fellowship in the Gospel; in helping him in the Preaching of it; not
only the Bishops and Deacons, but all the Saints also. Nay says the Apostle,
Phil. 1.1. Some preach Christ of envy and strife, and in contention, not
sincerely, what then? Nowithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in
truth, Christ is preached, and therein do I rejoice, Phil. 1.16, 18. says he,
and will rejoice; here was a freedom for any of the believing brethren to speak
and Preach the word of God.

And again, speaking of the people of God. Phil. 2.15, 16. Ye shine (says the
Apostle) as lights in the world holding forth the word of life; was it good and
commendable then, for any that could Preach, to do it, and is it to be thought
unseemly now? It is a happiness to hear such men, (let their profession be
never so mean) if they hold out the word of life; for Gods word is the savor of
life unto life to them that believe. 1 Cor. 2. but mark seriously the words,
and all men may see what good souls these were; though of several trades and
diverse callings, they did not, would not hide the word, nor yet withold the
word, but these held it out liberally, generally, to all, publicly, meekly,
kindly, sincerely, that all might see it, and understand it, that all might lay
hold upon it, and have a share in it, they held it our, so that the meanest
capacity might apprehend it; and this a voluntary Act of theirs, and none
blamed them for so doing; and as for the Apostle, he was glad at heart (good
man) to see their boldness and excellent gifts in Preaching, and yet we may
say, they were no Presbyters; nor ever were ordained by the Presbytery, nor
set apart to the Ministry, and yet they held out the word for any to receive;
What can our Pulpit men, and such as would have none to hold out the word but
themselves, say against this? they will not we hope (and vet they are bold
enough) blame the Apostle, as suffering any thing that was disorderly, or
unfitting, neither can they justly blame the men, of what trade soever they
were, for their Christian Courage and sincere Preaching; for they held out the
word of life: a lawful, justifiable and commendable Act; and therefore, what
should hinder, but that such Tradsmen, being so gifted and enabled with
strength of faith and spiritual knowledge, even in our days, may do the like;
And lastly, it is said too, that the Apostle was so far from forbidding them,
that he prayed in every Prayer, for their good success; it is to be wished that
our Presbyterians were of the same mind too; but we have to a conclusion.

Sixthly, The Ark, the Tabernacle, and the Temple of Solomon, were all Types of
the Spiritual Temple of Christ; We know that there were men of sundry Trades
and Professions; and indeed none other but Tradesmen and Artificers did build
any of those three. For first, for the Ark, there were Carpenters, Sawyers,
Smiths, Joyners, and many other Trades to make it up complete and compact. So
for the Tabernacle, there were almost all Trades employed to finish it; both
these were made by Tradesmen gifted and qualified with wisdom and skill; and no
man; none of the Priests found fault with them for their labor. And so for the
building of the Temple, there were hewers of wood 80000. in the mountains, and
60000. that bore burdens, and many thousands that dug, cut and squared
Stones; there were Brasiers, yes, and Gooldsmiths, and Silversmiths, and
Carvers, and Founders, with diverse other Artificers yet by these that Temple
was builded; nay, without these it had not been builded at all; yet in this
great work, none was idle, all employed, and their work was so exactly done,
that it was renowned over the whole world; Now to say what is truth. In the
building the Spiritual Temple, the Mystical body of Christ, shall there be none
allowed to work but the Presbyters and Classical Elders? Alas, alas! If so,
when will the work be done? It will go but slowly on if these only are to be
employed.

And further we do observe, that all the curious works of the Tabernacle and
Temple were accomplished by gifted Tradesmen, not a Priest or Levite gave any
Instructions; Nor had they indeed skill or Ability of knowledge in those
curious works, but God, (says the Text) put an excellent spirit of wisdom into
the hearts of the workmen, and so the work prospered in their hands.

And it is wished that no Tobiah's, and Sanballats, would by false suggestions,
or untrue Informations oppose these spiritual builders; If they shall, as God
then raised up Cyrus, so will he now set up and advance pious Magistrates to
defend and encourage these spiritual Artificers: The work must be completed,
and it is high time to set to it; We hope none will grudge at it, for it is the
Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes; Shame and disgrace will cover
their faces, who do any ways retard it. Now why only the Scribe, Doctor of the
Law, and the wise men of this world employed here? Nay, why not rather they
debarred? For Christ's Temple is spiritual, and so they not able builders; and
God, says the Apostle Paul, has chosen the poor, and the weak, and the
despised in the world to confound the great and the mighty; and we know the
work is difficult, they that are put into this must have patience to bear great
burdens, and heat, and cold, which many of our Presbyters are too nice to
undergo; and they must work in the quarries of stone, upon men whose
Consciences are as hard as stone, they must temper Lime and mortar, be in the
dirt; behold here I pray, can we imagine that our neat and smooth Divines, so
called, will submit to such Offices and Services accounted so sordid and mean?
and yet by such must the Spiritual Temple of Christ be accomplished and built;
they must be such as will be content to live hard, and lie hard, and have small
or no wages here perhaps, except ill reports, and to be accounted the of
scouring of the world; and yet these has God in his infinite wisdom designed
for the work; and therefore I will pray as Moses, Prosper thou the work of our
hands upon us, oh prosper thou our handy work. Psalm. 90. v ult. To conclude,
the Church of Christ is by Solomon compared unto an Army: Now it is known that
the Captains and Leaders of an Army were in the Jews wars, not only of the
Tribe of Levi, of Aarons loins, but of all the other Tribes, and yet they
instructed the Army, guided the Army, and made the Army complete; and why not
so now in our Spiritual war, shall there be none to Lead, Instruct, Guide and
Manage it but our Presbyters only?

And in the height of harvest, any wise man will be glad to see others willing
to come to help him to reap and gather in his Corn into his Barn; and their
work is the more commendable, because it is freely offered and undergone, and
prevents the danger of stormy weather; glad and thankful husband men will be
to see their Corn safe at home: surely 't would be an Act of ingratitude to
rail at, or revile those who helped in the heat of the day: And is it not so in
this spiritual harvest? Our Presbyters should rather rejoice to see others so
willing to help on the reaping and gathering of the Saints, especially seeing
now the harvest of the earth is ripe, as it is Revel. 14. If others to help
forward the work, do put in their Sicles, and help to bring home, for fear of
the raging storm of persecution, surely they deserve thanks and commendation
for their willing labors offered, and undertaken in this kind.

To help forward a good work, in a time of need, is worth double thanks, and
the more, when it is performed with willingness of mind; and however if men
should prove ungrateful to such for their voluntary labors, yet their reward
is reserved for them by Christ himself. I know (says the Apostle) whom I have
trusted, and 2 Timothy 4.8. He says resolutely: Henceforth there is a Crown of
righteousness laid up for me, etc. And for all such as do the Lords work
willingly.

The Application is easy. Know O Presbyterians, that God has Curious, wise
workmen, even Tradesmen in these days, whom he daily does enable with gifts, to
help on the gathering of the Saints, and to finish up the Spiritual Temple of
Christ the Lord of life, to whose labors is wished all good succeess and
happiness, and for whose encouragement this defense is set out, to the worlds
veiw and censure; hopeing that none will be angry at it, for as much as it is
intentively written, to uphold truth, and to propagate the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Psalm 51.18. Do good in thy good pleasure to Sion, build thou the walls of
Jerusalem.

Matthew 9.37, 38. Then says he to his Disciples, the Harvest truly is
plenteous, but the Laborers are few.

Pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth Laborers
into his Harvest.


FINIS.

