THE LOVES AND ADVENTVRES OF CLERIO and LOZIA. A ROMANCE.

Written Originally in French, and Translated into English By Fra. Kirkman,
Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. and are to be sold by William Ley, at his shop at
Paul's Chain. 1652.

TO His much honored Friend WILL. BEESTON, Esquire
Worthy Sir,
Diverse times (in my hearing) to the admiration of the whole Company, you have
most judiciously discoursed of Poesy: which is the cause J presume to choose
you for my Patron and Protector; who are the happiest interpretor and judge of
our English Stage Plays this Nation ever produced; which the Poets and Actors
of these times, cannot (without ingratitude) deny; for J have heard the chief,
and most ingenious of them, acknowledge their Fames and Profits essentially
sprung from your instructions, judgment and fancy. J am versed in Foreign
tongues and subscribe to your opinion, that no Nation ever could glory in such
Plays, as the most learned and incomperable Johnson, the copious Shakespeare,
or the ingenuous Fletcher composed; but J believe the French for amorous
language, admirable invention, high achievements, honorable Loves inimitable
constancy, are not to be equalled: and that no Nation yields better Arguments
for Romance Plays (the only Poems now desired) then the French: Therefore,
and for you have I translated the Adventures and Loves of Clerio and Lozia; and
I doubt not though they fail to receive encouragement from you, your son, Mr
George Beeston (whom knowing men conclude, a hopeful inheritor of his Fathers
rare ingenuity) may receive them with a gracious allowance.

And sir, though the work be not entirely happy in your construction (for my
years are not arrived to knowledge to add where the Author wants matter, or to
lessen where he abounds) yet you will find much newness in the Story, worthy an
excellent Poet to insoul it for the Stage; where it will receive full perfection
equal to the ambition of

The constant admirer of your Excellent Parts, Fra. Kirkman, jun.

THE Loves and Adventures OF CLERIO and LOZIA.
THe Fortune of Man is an obscure riddle, which Time only the most Orthodox
Interpretor of the Heavens, of the Gods, and Nature, can truly explicate.

My Ladies! The Fortune of the Famous Clerio and the fair Lozia, whose lives
and loves are both delineated in this ensuing History, I present to you, with
this persuasion, That as a pleasant Land-skip it will yield some small
contentment to your minds, and recreation unto your Spirits. In the
Description of whose variable conditions, I will first begin with Clerio, whom
with my pen I will portrait before your eyes, as our chiefest and choicest
Judges.

This young Gentleman from his youth being endued with courage, and induced by
curiosity, went abroad into Foreign parts, to see the customs of those
places, to add by industry some higher degree of perfection to that which
Nature, amorous of him, had so freely bestowed upon him: After he had seen
Germany and the Eastern Countries he stayed three whole years in Italy where he
was accounted so perfect and exact in all sorts of exercises becoming a
Gentleman, that it was impossible to find any man more perfectly accomplished
then himself. This Merchant for honor, having made a successful adventure,
returned home to the Court full fraught both with glory and renown, which
(durst I say so) was empty during his absence, of the greatest part of its
splendour, who was not like a star of the first Magnitude shining brightly in
the firmament thereof, but as a glorious Sun, whose presence brought a day, and
whose absence a night, upon the Horizon of the Court, which did not only
inlighten it, but sliding from the eyes it crept into the hearts of the fairest
Ladies the Court afforded, who at the first sight of so lovely a wonder, were
wonderfully enamored of him.

Clerio not settling the circumference of his desires in the center of any of
their hearts, which were so desirous of his, but as a triumphant Conqueror
carried al theirs captives into Spain, leaving them behind to bemoan their
misery in so happy yet unhappy affections, where also he murdered a Million of
innocent lovers by an over-rigid disdain of their beauties: but they were soon
avenged on him for this rigorous dealing; for not long after he became
exceedingly in love with the Princess Lozia who was young, rich, and very
beautiful, equally adorned with pulchritude in her face, and perfection of
parts in her mind. And although Clerio was a gentleman but worth fifteen
thousand Francs of revenue, yet did he undertake to serve so noble a Princess,
who since the decease of her Father and Mother, was under the Gardianship of
the Duke of Blanfort her Uncle, who intended to match her to the Duke of
Doudonne his Son, and for fear any other should espouse her, he watched her so
narrowly above the common custom of the Country both with Argo's and with
Lynk's eyes, and kept her within so straightened limits, that if Clerio could by
chance see her, yet could by no means come to speak to her. Filled with love
and despair he did so diligently inquire and carefully pursue his desired
wishes, that at last he came to know her Lady of honor, which was named
Vincia, and was a French Gentlewoman, the death of whose husband did so
exceedingly afflict her, that she was constrained to banish her self by a
voluntary exile into Spain. Clerio being very joyful of this news procured the
sight of her, whom at the first view he knew not, although she was his near
Kinswoman, because he had not lately seen her, and which was the strangest, she
was acoutred after the Spanish fashion; but in fine after a thousand hearty
congratulations and welcome imbracements they promised to owe each the other so
much service and affection, that under this pretext Clerio visited Vincia every
day, not so much because his respects unto his Cousin did oblige him thereto,
as he was drawn thither by the attractive loadstone of lovely Lozia.

The Moon had six several times received its borrowed light before Clerio
durst discover unto his Cousin that affection which he bore to her Mistress;
but at last not being able to resist those fervent flames that the eyes, those
two glorious Suns of that famous Princess had kindled in his heart; meeting one
day with Vincia in the Garden, thus aboarded her.

Vincia, do not you know, seeing my countenance altered and my face so wan,
that there is also a change in my heart, which appears thus upon my brows,
and that if you were very quick sighted and had but a window to open into my
heart you would see the Characters of love so deeply engraven thereon, that the
very perusal of them would sufficiently acquaint you with my doleful
condition: Vincia being overtaken with sorrow and impatience interrupted his
discourse; saying,

Clerio, I never had so sensible an apprehension of any afflictions as of that
which your dolorous speeches have caused in my heart: alas, whence has so
sudden a change as since yesterday happened to you? I entreat you to case my
drooping Spirit of that weight of sorrow which your silence has laid upon it
by the continuation of your discourse, and conceal not any thing from so sure a
friend as I am, whose love will make any enterprise, be it never so difficult
or dangerous, both facile and delightful, to gratify so noble a Spirit as
yours. My dear Cousin, I do not esteem any thing so much, of all that I have
brought with me into this Country, but it shall be subordinate to pleasure or
to profit your good grace: there is none of all my kindred whom I affect or
honor more then your self; believe that if the loss of all my means with my
life it self, might but redeem the least part of your lost delights, I shall
esteem my self to live in dying, if my death can procure that contentment to
you which has been denied to my miserable life.

Oh Vincia, said Clerio, six months at least are passed since I was first
amorous of the most pure and perfect beauty that ever the sun beheld, and do
you account of this but as a day? My Cousin pardon me I beseech you, for I did
suppose some sudden accident had happened to you since I saw your honor, for you
have ever covered your amorous dolor under color of a certain disease
wherewith you were tormented, this you know; but pray honor me so far as to
tell me what Lady you bear so great affection to?

It Is with Lozia my dear Cousin, which name is forced by mine extreme passion
to be pronounced with my mouth, as her glorious beauty has stamped it with an
indelible character upon my heart.

Lozia, my Cousin! I should rather have believed the most impossible things in
the world to be feasible then this to be true; shame and death could not have
given you so insensible a sense of your mishap, as in the love of so fair an
object: know you not that the beauty of Princesses are as the beams of the Sun,
which we must look on in an oblique line with admiration, not in a direct line,
with desire of possession; for when we are drawing nearer to so dazeling a
light, and farther from our own, we must stiff those venomous desires in the
first motions of their conceptions, for fear they prove Vipers to our souls,
and in their birth break through the bellies of their mothers, and so draw the
first beginning of their lives from the miserable end of ours.

I knew well enough, replied he, that you would think it strange that I, who
have the reputation of an understanding man, have been so weak as to let so
strong a passion get so powerful an head. If on the other side you consider not
that Nature has so perfectly accomplished her, that she subjugates the reason
and the soul of all who see her to serve her. I had thought after I had been a
year in Spain to return again into mine own Country, but her beauty, gifts and
graces are such strong Anchors, that after twenty years they will still hold me
fast at her feet, notwithstanding all the storms and tempests which
discontentments and despairs can stir up in the sea of my Soul: I will wait for
a quiet calm from the honor of her good grace, and the cessation of my sorrows
by the interposition of your favorable endeavors.

Clerio (quoth Vincia) I am in a strait, and know not what to do; if I forsake
you, I foresee your destruction; if I assist you, I do but mingle my ruin with
yours. But as the saying is, Good blood cannot lie, but must in the afflictions
of friends needs discover it self: so do I already perceive it running to my
heart to change those icy fears that are there congealed of any peril into so
many flames of love and assurance of success, for the obtaining of which I will
employ my utmost abilities, even to the loss of my life, in obedience to your
Commandments. I know that the beauties of Ladies move indifferently the
passions of men, and that being stirred up, they drown the greatest part of the
gallantest persons by their merciless surges. Therefore my Cousin, should we
rather seek to save you from this Shipwreck, then to remain in the bemoaning of
your misery, which in tract of time will bring forth a greater? You are not the
first which has been in love with Queens and Princesses. There have been an
infinite number of them which had neither the half of your spirit nor your
merit, who in the end by patience and discretion have attained to the height
of their desires. Histories are full of such passages, as you know, who are not
ignorant of any thing which concerns the perfection of a Gentleman: But if it
seem good to you, I give you this as mine advice; That you feign that you are
in love with me, and that you employ, every one, as you shall see opportunity,
to perform any friendly office in that behalf, and often write letters to me,
that removing all suspicion, you may see your Lady every day under color of
visiting me, and I will stamp so good an impression of your merits upon her,
that with the good opinion which she already has of your honor, I hope it
will be an easy matter to make her love you; she is yet a child, and nothing
more easy then to bend her heart to our desires: No body understands our
language; I lie in the chamber with her, and sometimes she honors me so much,
as to let me lie in the bed with her, and that you know is the place where
Souls have the most free association; therefore there will I discourse of your
great love toward me, and will bestow so many encomiums of praise upon your
honor, that by force she shall willingly affect you; and when I see her never
so little inclined toward you, I will endeavor to engage her so deeply in the
enterprise, that she shall be able to do nothing which I shall not first
approve of, for of necessity she must come to me to be her Counselor, and then
what issue your affairs will come to, judge you.

Vincia, said Clerio, the assurance of your affection is that wherein I place
the sureness of my ambitious love, which gives me as much hope and confidence
of success, as I can have distrust from the thoughts of her greatness, and the
apprehension of the smallest of my deserts.

My Cousin, quoth Vincia, time does now call me to depart, and wait upon my
Mistress to Church, and she without question will question me concerning what
we have discoursed all this while, which will be a very opportune occasion for
me to speak to her concerning you, but be sure you fail not to come to me on a
visit of respect after dinner. After Vincia had given her Mistress the good
morrow, with a pleasant smile she gave her her Fan: Lozia being of a courteous
disposition, doubting this was for some unhappy accident, asked her the
occasion of it, but the other being at this time to play the cuning woman,
refused to tell her, to make the relation go the better, and after an infinite
number of excuses and evasions, being as it were unable to deny her entreaties,
or rather disobey her desirous commands, said, Mistress, I cannot but laugh to
think of the discourses I and my Cousin have had together this two hours in
the Garden, concerning the great love he bears to me. He offered me his service
with the elegantest words that I ever heard; but I am sorry either that he is
so much in love with me, or that I am so nearly akin to him: for he is a most
gallant gentleman, and I believe a gentlewoman will be served as worthily thily
by him as by any man in the world. He is so perfectly accomplished, that there
is no sort of exercise in which he is not very expert: He is a brave Dancer, a
good Horseman, and speaks most learnedly, has been a great traveller, is
discreet, courteous, beautiful, and as perfect as Nature could possibly make
him: Would to God that he were but as passionately affected for some other,
whose parts and graces did in some sort bear proportion to his.

But wherefore will not you love him, quoth Lozia? I will procure a license for
you from Mr Cardinal, mine Uncle, to marry him. If I could but meet with one of
my quality, which is like to him, I would make more account of him then so. You
see that they intend to marry me to my cousin, which at the best is but a sot:
therein is the condition of you, other gentlewomen, more happy then ours,
seeing you have the choice of those persons which you like best of. But we,
which are above the ordinary sort of people, either become come fools in
following our own fantasies and inclinations in our young days, or else we
must wait till we are old for some party whose means is suitable to ours; and
if there can be such a one found in ten Kingdoms, though not a man but a little
better then a beast, we must be espoused to him, and spend the residue of our
days without any pleasure with them: Vincia, I find him so amiable, that I
counsel thee to entertain him courteously.

Whilst Vincia was in discourse with the beautiful Lozia, Clerio spoke to
himself, advantaged by his vain imaginations concerning his love, whereby had
it not been that he had had some confidence in his Cousin, he would have almost
killed himself with his own fears, which were his greatest enemies: Now
imagining that Lozia would never stoop so low as to love him, then doubting his
design might be discovered, and so both of them endangered, arguing thus
against himself to his utmost ability, he had almost disarmed himself of all
his hope, and given his love up at least for lost: But whilst he was floating
upon the waves of these distracted irresolutions, the time of the assignation
approached, wherein he was to visit his Love, for which end he dressed himself
after the French fashion; his Hose fastened with black, the Doublet with white
Satin cut, doubled with fillets of Gold and collar of Amber, with a Chain of
Musk hanging by a Ribbon five double, upon the which was fastened a fair
picture; his head comely, and bestrued with Cyprus powder; his Beard and Hair
shining like the radiant Phoebus, the eyes and features of his vizage fair, his
hand and favor extremely beauteous, he had Gloves perfumed, his Colloshoo's of
Velvet, his Hat was ombraged with a plume of black Herons Feathers, together
with an ensign of Diamonds, which gave as great a luster to his fair vizage, as
the Sun in the Meridian; a Mantle of Velvet cut upon black, and half covered
with little bands of Satin, completely fashioned; his Girdle embroidered with
Gold, his Sword with the gards of Milan.

Being attired after this fashion, the most common, and counted the most comely
in that time, accompanied with two Gentlemen, two Pages, and four Lacquies very
neatly dressed; he went toward the Palace of his beautiful Lozia, at whose
gate he sacrificed a sigh to his Love, and his Love unto the eyes of his
beauteous Mistress; incontinently he met within the Hall his Mistresses waiting
Gentlewomen with a Viol, who entreated him to dance with them; and one took his
Cloak, and the other his Sword: These Ladies living rather after the Custom of
the French, then the Spaniards, did oblige him to gratify them in their
requests. In the mean while Lozia asked where her Gentlewomen were; and one of
her Pages told her, that they were dancing with Clerio. The Princess being
provoked with a desire to see him dance, and persuaded by the counsels of
Vincia, ran immediately to the Hall, and looked upon him through an hole that
was in the Wall so long, till his legs were wearier with leaping, then hers
with standing, or her eyes with beholding so pleasant a prospect. At last she
returned to her Chamber, and began to talk with Vincia concerning the
gallantness and gracefulness of her Cousin, and bid her go down and entreat him
to come up. Vincia having given her Cousin the common salutation, took him by
the hand, and led him up the stairs to the Chamber door of the Princess; at the
which he put his Cloak upon his right shoulder, and with his left hand held the
hilt of his Sword, and took his Hat in his other hand, and entered thus into
the Chamber with an awful observance of the Princess, who rising a little out
of her Chair, commanded that they should bring one for him, and set it by her:
To whom Clerio with a reverend humility said, Fair Princess, I esteem it a
superabundant honor done to me to stand so near so bright a Sun. The Princess
seeing him of so courteous and noble demeanor, desired him to be pleased to sit
down. I doubt, fair Lady, quoth he, you do but deride me, but seeing you will
have it so, I cannot so far fail in mine obedience to your Commands as to
refuse it. Then to make it appear how welcome the sight of him was, she detained
him a long time with her in such discourse.

Sir, is this the fashion to dress your self, as you learned it in the Court of
France? methinks it is very comely, and befits you very well: I perceive the
liberty that you Gentlemen have to apparel your selves according to your own
mind; and those which have most ingenuity invent the most handsome and comely
habiliments: You entertain your Ladies with the most honest liberty and
courteous civility that can be desired; and nothing you have is not at liberty,
except sometimes your captivated hearts; but yet you are oftentimes so false
and unfaithful, that you may be always justly suspected rather to flatter then
favor, to be loved, then to love your Mistresses: Is it possible that you are
so deeply in love with your Cousin as I am told?

Madam, replied Clerio, I do exceedingly honor and affect her; but my merit is
so little, that it is insufficient to oblige her so much as to render me the
like love again. Yes, quoth she, but it is, even enough for the most noble
spirits that Spain can show, where there are such whom I do highly honor: But
speak the truth, I know well enough that you are not so amorous of Vincia, as I
have been made believe you are: Vincia, what think you of it?

I believe Mistress as you do; he is willing to pass away his time, but that he
should do it with me, is too much honor: I am sorry for nothing, but that I am
too unworthy to be wedded to so worshipful a Gentleman; but all the offices of
love that I can perform to pleasure him in the pursuit of his desires, I shall
be ready to adjuvate him with my best assistance, because of that goodwill he
does profess he owes me. Lozia taking the words out of Vincia's mouth, said
thus; Most Noble Clerio, although your own merits are able Orators to plead
your Nobility to any Lady, and discover your excellency to any discerning eye;
yet if that little I have may be any ways profitable for you in the obtaining
either of your Cousin, or any other of this Country, make account of my utmost
endeavors therein, in which I conceive the courtesy will be not so much done
to you as to her. And for my own part, I take so much pleasure in your company,
that I wish you some honorable Match in this place. I have my self a French
heart, although I am a Spanish woman by Nation: Vincia knows how much I honor
any French man, especially such who do resemble you: Your countenance is a sure
sign to all that see you of those excellent qualities which your spirit is
endowed withal. Clerio was very glad of such an opportunity, whereon he might
take hold to praise Lozia to her self, and with her true commendations to
mingle a little of his earnest and ardent affection.

Maddam, quoth he, these expressions of yours, filled with honor and
courtesy, give me an assurance of your excellent ingenuity and courteous
dispositions, together with an evidence to me of mine unhappiness by mine
estrangement from those perfections which you attribute to me, rather to stir
up in me a longing after them, then any hope of the possession of them. Nature
(to whom you are exceedingly obliged) has expressed its most exquisite Art in
the making of so fair a face, the splendour of whose beauty does both astonish
and affect the hearts of those which are so Eagle eyed as to be able to look
upon so bright a Sun: And Love it self, as if it were in love with you, has
bestowed on you the choicest flowers of its Garland to adorn you withal; Your
perfect beauty, your alluring gestures, that Rose and Lilly-like color mingled
together, to beautify you; Your sweet behavior and your courteous carriage are
as so many insensible Spells to charm, or sweet singing Sirens to entice the
noblest spirits of this Age to an inevitable amorous Shipwreck. He had
proceeded in his discourse, but was forced abruptly to break of, being
interrupted by the coming in of some Ladies, who casting their eyes upon him,
and seeing him so commendable, began all to load him with Encomiums of Praise
before Lozia, which added Oil to the flame of her affections, which had been
before kindled by the sight of so lovely an object. During which time, Clerio
was with his Cousin in a corner of the Chamber, who gave him an Antidote of
Hope against his despair of success. But because distrust is an inseparable
Concomitant with true love in a Lovers mind, he could not work this persuasion
into his heart, that he should ever be so happy as to participate of so great a
good. The poor Princess, during the presence of her company, sat upon thorns,
which made her that she could not sit still, but must needs rise with one
excuse or other, that she might look upon her beloved Clerio; now and then put
a period to their discourse, that she might the better think upon the person
and the deserts of him, the thought of whom so much delighted her. In the mean
while, Love, which loves not to lose any time, did so inflame their hearts at
one time, that they were no more two, but one. Noble Clerio, what woulst thou
bestow upon the Messenger of so welcome news, as sure as thou think it
uncertain, and thy self nearer to the possession of a dreadful Tomb, then to
have occasion to triumph in thy victory over thy dear Lozia? Clerio, recall thy
spirit out of that sad and dangerous Paroxism of affliction wherewith it is
tormented; and whilst thy Mistress pours love-tears upon the fire of thy
fervent desires, devote thy self unto her love, which will make thee so happy
by thy love unto her. While Vincia was promising her Cousin to speak to her
Mistress at night in his behalf, one of his Gentlemen came in to advertise him,
that an Ambassador from France was arrived newly, and now at his house; and
although it was not usual for Ambassadors to lodge in such houses, yet the
quality and merits of Clerio made him worthy of so extraordinary a favor. He
upon this rises presently, and lest he should have been troublesome to the
company, he would have privately departed. But Lozia, whose eyes were Gardians
for her heart, which Clerio had (without his knowledge) in possession, presently
acquainted her with his departure. Whereupon, filled with love, yet with wary
discretion, she rose up, and said to him in a courteous manner, Noble Sir, what
is the cause you will so soon forsake our company? To whom he related the
reason of his departing, and then after a complemental farewell did go home to
his house, which was directly opposite to his Mistresses, and welcomed the
Ambassador with kind entertainment. After they had discoursed a little while of
serious affairs, he took his Lute, and set himself down at the window, playing
most melodiously thereupon: Lozia hearing this excellent Harmony, went to hear
it at the window, and desired the Gentlewomen to come and participate of her
pleasure, whose ears he contented no less by the melody of his Music, then
their eyes by the beauty of his countenance. These Ladies a little after took
their leaves of the Princess, who returned them thanks for their kindness, and
then retired into her Closet, to give audience to those importunate
love-thoughts that pressed so hard upon her heart, which new guests spoke after
this sort; It is our common custom to go visit all those Ladies which have
submitted themselves to our Empire, that giving our selves into their
possession, we may get their Souls by way of retaliation into our power.

My friends (quoth Lozia) I know not how I can with love refuse you, and much
less how with safety I can receive you, a thousand things prohibit me the
first, and my passion only councels me to the second, but in vain do I enter
the lists of dispute with you, who have already desprived me insensibly of the
use of my Reason, and with a dolorous sigh and a doleful voice which were
evident symptoms of an afflicted spirit, she breathed out this subsequent
discourse.

O delightful liberty! which hitherto I have steadfastly preserved from
inthraldome, to so many puissant Princes who have used their utmost power to
captivate it to their love and merits. A liberty no more a liberty, but a
shamfull slave unto a thousand foolish passions: to thee I profess I am
exceedingly obliged for keeping me so long a commander over the most noble
Spirits of this age, whom I have tirannically wounded. And thou o divine
Reason! now I come to take my farewell of thee permit me to give thee thy last
embraces, and that having been so familiarly conjoined, I should now shed some
tears of sorrow for so long and irksome a separation: Farewell.

But Reason interrupted her farther Soliloquies: saying,

Fair Princess, what is it that thus you perplex your self about? intend you to
ruinate that honor and renown, which has so long a time run in the veins of
your predecessors? consider that if you wholly devote your self, being yet but
a child, to the government of your unbridled passions, you will become one of
the meanest shrubs that has grown in so great a garden; you will take the
crown of glory off your head and lay it in the dust, and then no doubt if it be
quickly buried by the tombstone of reproach, you will spoil the glorious
garland of your honor by giving the choysest flower away to so mean a person,
and darken your glorious Sun by conjunction with so small a star; what if the
wound in your reputation, should not be utterly incureable, yet at least your
credit will be accounted little, in the worlds valuation, by reason of the
remainder of the scar? Cannot you who are a peerless Princess both in goods and
goodness, elect some mighty Monarch, and in stead of a base degeneration by
your foolish love into a lower stock, ascend by a lawful and honorable
marriage, into a more noble family? Shall not you have more contentment in the
being a mother unto a Noble Prince, who will carry upon his front the lively
image both of your mighty husband and your self, which will give cause of hope
and expectation to your servants, who will be much loved of his friends, and
more feared of his Foes, then to be matched unto a low not to say vile person,
who will be equally slighted by your friends and scorned by your enemies? The
charm must needs be very great which has thrown all your senses into such a
swoon, that they are insensible of their pains, and foresee not their
inevitable perdition, it is neither the slight account that you make of me, nor
the fear of my unhappiness, which does provoke me to such complaints, but
rather a charitable sympathizing with you in your unavoideable misery, for
whilst I see you such an exile from your self, tormented with such stinging
griefs, I can do no less, but do this my last Office as the safest remedy to
recall your Spirit from out of that mortal dream of deceitful conceits, upon
which you ruminate, and raife you from the thoughts of foolish fancies, to
settle your affections upon more honorable objects.

Lozia knew her fault but knew not where to find a remedy to amend it, full
both with love and with grief she vented out these sayings. My loving friend
these worthy and weighty councels would be sufficient to turn me from foam
light and little love, but not from so passionate affection which has already
gained so absolute a conquest over me, that I account all employments
whatsoever as unprofitable except those which give me occasions and
oppertunities to meditate upon so defireable a subject. Thou proposest nothing
to me but vanity, glory, ambition, and oftentation, which are lent out but
for use and taken away in an instant leaving nothing behind but a sting of
sorrow, because they cannot be regained. This life is so short yet so filled
with thorns that they are miserable indeed who to fill their chests with gold
and their persons with praise, empty their eyes of rest, and their spirits of
sweet contentment, fill their heads with stinging cares to get, and their
hearts with fears to lose what may be obtained. It is a great default in
fathers duty, to seek for such marriages for their children, where there is a
great stock of money, but none of love, wedding them rather to the portion then
the person, and not give them liberty to chose where they like and settle their
loves upon worthy, though not wealthy persons: satisfaction rises not out of
superfluity, neither discontent from want. I can be well contented with an
empty purse together with the full enjoyment of my beloved Clerio, and had
rather be a servant unto him, then the Queen of the most flourishing Kingdom
in the world; rather had I be a subject to him then have the world subject unto
me. What are Dukedomes and such things to me, which can neither satiate my
desires nor content my spirit; my Clerio, his deserts will be a sufficient
dowry, to which I will add some chains of precious Margarites and pieces of
pure gold, which will maintain my love and I in any part of the world, in which
we will live as Princes, though not Princes over it. It is an act of a weak
judgment not to content it self with less then the surplusage of what it has,
which should be willingly spared in the time of adversity, but used at
pleasure for contentations only in the calm of prosperity. Had not I better
voluntarily deprive my self of the possession of a Principality more absolutely
to command the Virtues of Clerio, then keeping the possession of mine estate,
should by a bloody War be shamefully driven out of all, as Craesus was by Cyrus.

This poor Princess was so enamored with Clerio, that doubting of her
succesfull issue, she resolved rather to lose her estate then her servant; more
would she have said to Vincia, had not one come to call her to Supper. The
Princess hearing the voice of her Lady of Honor, framed her countenance as
well as she could to its wonted color, lest she should perceive it change,
supposing that Clerio was in love with Vintia, which might be a remora to her
prosperous proceedings. But she did it not so cunningly, but Vincia read in her
face what grieved her heart; as dissembling goes not long undiscovered before a
discerning eye, and frequent familiarity advantaged likewise her knowledge of
the change of her Soul by that alteration that appeared in her face.

Vincia very joyful that her affairs did go forward without any impediment, did
not as yet make any show of her design to her Mistress for fear of displeasing
her: but seeing her disquietness was likely to continue, not being as a
Landflood for the present swelling over the banks, but a constant spring, which
would never cease to cast out its water, till it were dried up by the enjoyment
of her longed for Clerio: She, as curious to know her distemper, and cautious
of her health, would demand the cause of such a sudden change. All supper time
she did so narrowly eye her actions, that she was past all peradventure
persuaded that she was in a lovesick Paroxism. Then began the Princess to
revive her spirit with the exhilerating thoughts of excellent Clerio; then
again is there engendered in her breast carnest desires for his sweet enjoyments,
with affectionate sighings for that longed for opportunity, whose lives were no
sooner began by love, but they were strangled in the womb by fear and
discretion: Her humid eyes firmly fastened downward, her trembling body, her
unaccustomed startlings and disquietness, her asking for one thing in stead of
another, would have sufficiently evidenced her perplexity of spirit to any
body, which would have added the least suspicion to an intelligent mind. As
soon as Vincia was gone from table, she wrote this Letter unto her Cousin.

CLERIO, Your merits and your wining behavior are such powerful Orators for you
to your Mistress, that I hope you will not need your Cousins help: I have many
things to acquaint you withal, but those I had rather speak then write,
thereby to be honored with your company; I fear this unexpected joy may be as
great an impediment to your rest, as your accustomed afflictions were.


Clerio read the Letter, but did not make an appearance of any change, lest
Lozia's Page should discover any thing thereby. After he had prayed him to stay
till he returned, he went into his Closet, and wrote this ensuing Answer.

I should, did not I repose my whole confidence in your gracious endeavors, and
anchor my hopes upon the assurance of your constancy, be tossed up and down, as
a Ship is upon the waves, in the expectation of so great a happiness as you
promise to me; and if many others had not received the like courtesies and
favors from Fortune as I now do wait for, I should doubt of the obtaining of
my desires: I have desired nothing more then the fruition of the fair Lozia, as
witnesses my superlative passions to be her servant, which I have much
desired, but yet have despaired hitherto to encompass, because she is the most
fair and famous Princess in the world.


Lozia sustaining her spirit with hope to finish her begun love, would often
turn her eyes toward the Chamber of her servant, upon what errand you know
well enough; but missing the view of Clerio, she saw her Page with a Letter in
his hand coming from his house, to whom she presently sent one of her
Gentlewomen for the Letter and the Page before he had spoken to any body:
Presently the Gentlewoman went and conducted the Page unto Lozia, who was alone
in a Gallery. Lozia demanded who had sent him to Clerio his house; he not
knowing any thing, freely told her, that Vincia had sent him with a Letter to
her Cousin, and he had there the Answer to it. She without any more ado opened
the Letter, and read it, and not dreaming of any thing less then the ardent
affections that were in Clerio toward her, at the sight of such unexpected
tidings she was ravished almost between love and the ecstasy of joy: Wherefore
she commanded the Page to go his way, that he might not discover that sudden
and cheerful alteration that was easily legible in her countenance. Who has
seen the Sun after he has for a season retired from us, return, and with his
glittering beams dissipate all those mists, clouds and vapors that did obscure
our light, and with a fair day give us also so fructifying a warmth, that the
Earth which did before in his absence bring forth nothing but brambles and
thistles, by the profitable approach thereof is made the mother of a fruitful
Harvest; he might have also seen the Sun of his Love disperse those griefs and
sorrows, and discloud those gloomy days, and enliven a number of sweet delights
and joyful raptures, which before were stifled with immoderate fears. This fair
Princess, after she had read and kissed the Letter an hundred and an hundred
times, uttered forth these words, drawn from the bottom of her affected heart:

If those Mortals are esteemed most happy, and most in Heavens favor, which are
most gratified with divine Benedictions, there is no Princess in the world
which at this time can truly say she is more happy then my self, who am so
highly honored by the most perfect and peerless Gentleman in all the world,
whose virtues and person I reverence, admire and adore altogether as much as
the love and knowledge that I already have of his unmatchable merits do oblige
me. O sweet Letter, I cannot but kiss thee once again, seeing thou have been
touched with the hands of my Clerio; let me behold thee with admiration and
affection, seeing I find in thee so perfect pleasure; let me read thee, that I
might retain in memory those selected words of thine, which assure me of thy
love, my noble Clerio. O mine head, open the floodgates of thy tears, and
expend them upon the excess of thy present ecstasy of joy. O mine heart, still
contribute more fuel unto the flames of thine affections, and make as it were a
bonefire therein, in token of triumph for thy conquest over so loving an enemy.
Lozia being a little recovered from this sweet and sudden transportation,
called Vincia, and took her by the hand, and told her her heart, saying, You
know the affection which I have born to you ever since you entered into my
service, and those desires I have had to do you any courtesy; but your not
having occasion, nor I opportunity to oblige you, must not be objected against
my natural disposition, which inclines me to engage indifferently all sorts of
persons, but principally those to whom I am deeply indebted, as I am to you:
And if the sensibility of so many faithful services which I have received from
you, should not draw me to an acknowledgment of your affections; yet mine own
honor and reputation and your deserts would freely force me to procure your
advancement. I know that you having a sufficient estate, have made choice of me
among many others, who have desired you not for any inconveniency in your
affairs, but affection unto my welfare: I am not ignorant of your quality, nor
those perfections wherewith you are endowed, which is the reason I have
permitted you so familiar a society with my self above all others which are
near me: There is not need of any other testimony of the truth thereof, then
your own knowledge: But if it fall out to my misfortune, to have more need of
your assistance then you have of my protection, will you therefore Vincia cease
to continue your former favors, (and upon the utterance of these words
embraced her, and poured from her beautiful eyes a pearly shower of tears upon
the bosom of Vincia,) and especially in one thing wherein I am constrained to
come to you for counsel, and to bind you by the strictest Oaths that can be
made to speak the truth? Is it true that Clerio is so deeply drowned with
sorrow, and so fervent and passionate for the love he bears me, as appears by
the Letter he has wrote to you, which I have subtly gotten from the Page
which carried him yours?

Madam, said Vincia, I conceive none should ever dissemble before Princes, and
conceal any thing that they should discover, much less should I to you, to whom
I am a servant as well as subject. The truth is, this Clerio has for six
Months been exceedingly amorous of you, and has not acquainted me therewith,
till within this day or two: Your Greatness caused in me as great apprehension
of his misfortune, as did his violent passion pity in me for his pains: But
seeing that his good fortune has granted him so much honor from you, as to
prevent the extreme desires he has for you, with the inestimable good of your
favor; My Mistress, I prostrate my self at your feet, humbly to adore you for
the honor you bestow upon us, protesting to you, that seeing you judge us
worthy of it, we will return you as much obedience and humble service, as (if I
durst say it) that you shall be more happy in the mean condition of your
Clerio, who will all his life long believe that his Summum Bonum depends upon
your gracious aspects, then if you had made a more ambitious election. This
noble Princess, impatient to see her at her feet, interrupted her discourse in
the middle, to raise her up, and embracing of her, said;

Vincia, my dear Cousin, it is not me to whom you give this duty, a posture
inconsistent with mine honor to tolerate; but from henceforth ought you to
live with me, as the most kind and benign Cousin that you have in the world. I
so much honor the merits both of you and your Cousin Clerio, that I will prefer
any one that belongs to him before the nearest relations I have. Let us
forget all those passed vanities full of pricking thorns, the Roses whereof are
gathered by frequent familiarity. I perceive my self to be so perfectly happy
by the love of you and your Cousin, that I desire we may consult of a way to
conceal it from the watchful eyes of so many that spy after my actions; I know
your spirit is able to find out some fit invention.

Vincia answered her, Mistress it is very late and I am afraid that you may get
some sickness, or at least your folks which are so suspicious may doubt
something to see us talk so long together. I pray Mistress go to bed, for this
business deserves to be dreamt of a little: to morrow Clerio shall come see
you, who being of a very quick apprehension, and advantaged by the knowledge of
his exceeding happiness in your favor, will soon find out a way to continue
us all in so happy a condition.

Lozia, approving her counsel, went to bed presently, and when her gentlewomen
were withdrawn, and she alone with Vincia, she began to delight her self with
the imagination of her new lover: after some love talk Vincia asked her if she
wished Clerio was there, she answered her smilingly, Yes Vincia, provided you
are there: and what, you would be afraid of him? No, but I should be ashamed.
Vincia seeing the childishness of this child, began to laugh, and begged of her
to sleep; sleep had ho sooner with the night of her eyelids obscured those two
fair Suns, her eyes, but a pleasant dream crept into her head, and lodged there
till the morning. Her Soul, half ravished with these sweet delights, had
continued longer in this amorous ecstasy, had not Vincia called her out of it:
Her eyes at their opening, as a clear and ruddy morning, gave light to a
thousand beauties and graces that Heaven and Nature had with their own hands
made appear upon her face: Her gently languag'd mouth, enriched with a red
Coral, opened it self to disclose the dream to Vincia, and perfuming with her
odoriferous breath all the air of the chamber at the same time, discovers in
her mouth the richest and most Orient Pearls and Treasures that the East can
show, which would equally enamor and astonish all that saw it. This fair
Princess began thus:

Vincia, thou have done me a displeasure, to deprive me of those sweet
enjoyments my sleep afforded me; and that thou may give me thine advice
concerning such wonderful things, I will recount them to thee as well as I can.

Vincia, I was no sooner asleep, but methoughts I was in a great Forest of
Cedars and Palm Trees, where there was the most delightfullest Walks that can
be desired; the warbling noise of a thousand Nightingales did make it so
sweetly resound, that a Lute, whose strings are dexterously fingered by some
experienced Nymph, could not make such pleasant Harmony: Constantly keeping in
the midst of these delights, at last I met with an Hermit, who came thither to
gather Herbs and Roots for his refection, according to his custom, for forty
Years. This good father, after he had courteously saluted me, accoasted me, and
asked me if I desired to behold those most remarkable things that were near his
Cave; believe, Curiosity had constrained me to go walk there, and setting
himself before, prayed me to follow him: we had not gone two hundred paces, but
at the end of the Wood we met with one of the fairest Dens that could possibly
be made, built by two Lovers, so sumptuously in sweet solitariness to enjoy
their amorous desires: Entering within the door, we saw two white Torches
lighted, that the Souls of these two Lovers carried in their hands, the better
to guide all those that came thither: At the entry there was a Fountain,
enriched with all sorts of workmanship that either Art or Nature could afford
it; Venus pourtrayed in white Marble, excellently imbossed, with a thousand
hearts under her feet, as a Trophy of her Beauty, and in her hand she had a cup
of Agate, out of which she pours pure water to wash the hands of those which
do come in. Passing further, these Torches lighting us, we came into the Cave
it self, at the entrance whereof was another great Fountain, fifteen paces
square, covered all over with pure Marble, in which by an incredible Art was
made swim an Heart, a couple of Dogs, and two Hunters following them, all of
Marble, into which this water did pleasantly inspire motion and voice; on each
side was a delightful Forest in boss, of Marble too, filled with Birds so
livelily painted, that they would have been taken for living, whose melodious
singing was so sweet, that Art excelled Nature it self: A thousand Characters,
Trophies of Love and Sonnets, were read of these faithful Lovers, written with
their own hands, and indicted by their passions, upon the Pillar and all the
angles of this spacious Cave: Six Nymphs did sing so pleasantly in honor of
their love, that it is hard to say whether there were more pleasure to the ears
in the hearing of their voice, or to the eyes in the beholding of so complete
and perfect beauty that they were adorned with. Vincia, I should never have
been weary of these delicious delights, if the Hermit had not taken me away to
show me a fair River covered with Swans, and the sides adorned with rows of
precious Stones, which served for Walks to these two Lovers, and for a subject
to help them to discourse of their passionate distempers. Delighting my self
with the pleasure which I could not but have in so delightful a place, I saw
before me a Peacock, who went from us as fast as we advanced toward him, and
made a famous show with his fair Feathers, which did resemble so many Suns; I
never saw so beauteous an one in all my life: and just then you awakened me.
Vincia, I desire you to declare to me your opinion concerning this Dream.

Madam, I am not quicksighted enough to see the bottom of this Dream, nor a
capable Interpreter of so obscure a Riddle, which promises you according to my
apprehension a world of contentment and good Fortune: But there is in this Town
a most eminent Magician, to whom if you please to do this honor as to send to
know, he will be very glad to tell you his utmost knowledge. Vincia judged
according to her capacity that this was a true Hierogliphick of the love of
Lozia, which should succeed to the advantage of her Cousin; and therefore to
give more weight and credit to the Interpretation, had rather another should
unfold it, who was altogether unconcerned in the business, and less related to
Clerio then she was, whose affinity and affection might have been weighty
causes of the questioning of the truth of her words. With this honest excuse
she satisfied Lozia, whose curiosity yet unsatisfied sent to fetch him: As soon
as he had spoken with the Page, and desired him to stay a little for him, he
went into his chamber, and falls to his Invocation, Spells, Charms, and all
other sorts of Tricks, that he might be instructed of his Devils of what Lozia
would ask him, unwilling to present himself before so great a Princess like an
Ignoramus, without ability to resolve her demands, or else to terrify her with
the appearance of his Circles, Spirits, etc. With this wise foresight he went
to Lozia, who did with Vincia stay for him in a Closet: As soon as he came they
shut the door, and Lozia declared her Dream to him, with desires to be resolved
of the truth of it as near as he could, telling him she sent for him not to
flatter her, but befriend her with the true declaration of the consequents of
her Dream; and though she was never so great, yet she was as subject to the
sinister accidents, as gracious aspects of Fortune; and that if Nature and
Heaven had in her minority made her partaker of the goods and glory of the
world, and set her upon the pinnacle of preferment, yet was it likewise powerful
and puissant enough to throw her down into the ditch of disgrace, and make her
as wretched as she has been happy. The Magician seeing the liberty he had
allowed him, said;

Madam, The commandment by which you do oblige me to speak freely, does so well
agree with my desires and my profession, that I am very glad to see my self out
of the fears I had you would not delight therein: my words shall not constrain
you to any thing in the world, but leave you to your free consent, and only
explicate and unfold the words and meaning of your Dream. The Heaven which
suiteth with your inclination to lead you insensibly to your destiny, may (as
the author of the cause) change also the effect and event of your fortune,
which I judge to be very uneven, now elevated, then dejected. This Forest and
Gave presage to you a pleasurable and solitary life. This Hermit foresheweth
one which will serve you as a Guide and great Agitator in your affairs. The
Dogs and Hunters which chase this Heart is your good, which your kinsfolk and
enemies will pursue to the end. The chirping Birds, the Characters, the Songs
and the Nymphs, are but so many sweet delights and contentments which you shall
enjoy. Those pleasant Walks for the Lovers alone, who almost only live free
from glory, ambition and jealousy, among the flowers, and the full enjoyment,
not of goods, but sweet contentment, and an hundred amorous ravishments which
this green place does promise, accommodating it self not only to the eyes, but
to the delights of the very Souls of the Lovers; each moment new occasions will
occasion fresh joy and delights. This Peacock is the person you affect, who
although he be a Gentleman, yet notwithstanding shall be as far from your
Greatness, as the feet of the Peacock disagree with his feathers; but those
fair Suns that he seemed to carry, are his excellent endowments, merits and
perfections which shall inflame your soul with an amorous heat; that prefering
him before a thousand others, you shall become after your clandestine love so
famous by his courage, that you shall judge your self happy in his marriage: But
this River covered with Swans denotes a change of Fortune, which shall carry
you a great way, and as the Swans dye when the sweetness of their singing is
most delectable, so after an infinite number of happy days, you will dye with
that in your arms which you love most in the world, when you shall be best
contented, and swimming in the midst of the River of peace, prosperity and
delights. Although Lozta was but young, yet she was Mistress in the art of
dissimulation, making as if she regarded not these so desirable news, fearing
lest the Magician should discover any thing of her intentions, which might be
an impediment to her love, which were represented to the life by the unfolding
of this Dream, the true Prophecy of her Destiny, and with a countenance as pale
as her heart was hot with the flames of love, she said,

Mounsier, I cannot without wronging both mine own judgment and your deserts,
doubt of your sufficiency, which all the world admireth not as a man, but
rather as the Oracle of this Age; yet cannot I believe that love can make me so
far forget my duty as to love a Gentleman, seeing I cannot sufficiently esteem
such who, equalling my birth and means, honor me so far as to love me: But I
doubt not but my cruel Fortune may take some other way to ruin me, then by
running away with such a person, and so this way your Prophetic words will
agree with my adverse condition: But though it should be so, yet I pray you say
nothing thereof, because the people reposing such confidence in your words,
will hold them for true divinations of my future misfortune; and further, the
public fame thereof will be as disadvantageous as displeasing to to me, whose
misery will come soon enough without the addition of wings. And then putting
her hand into her pocket, she drew out a purse with two hundred Crowns, which
she prepared for him; and when she had put it into his hands, to whom he said,
the residue of his help was at her service, when opportunity should afford him
means to effect it, and whatsoever happened to Lozia to make her unhappy, yet
her whole life should be exceeding contentful; though Fortune took away the
first as his, yet Virtue did preserve the other. In this instant Vincin heard
some one tread in the Gallery, which made them all silent to hear who it was;
Vincia told her it was the Duke of Blanfort and the Prince of Doudonne: Lozia
run presently to meet them, and Vincia conveyed the Magician out another way,
and came instantly to her Mistress to accompany her. The Duke of Blanfort
meeting her, saluted her, who was yet undressed almost at dinner time.

Mounsier, quoth Lozia, you will account me very lazy to be yet undressed, but
the reason is, because I have been busied all the morning in looking upon the
thing in my Cabinet; but if it please you to dine here, I will be ready by that
time you have walked two or three turns in the Garden. I am willing, my Niece.
And after he had took his leave of her, he went down: Lozia gave him Vincia to
discourse with till she was ready, and took one of her Gentlewomen to help her
attire her self. The Prince of Doudonne, her Cousin and servant stayed with
her, who would one while hold the Looking-glass, then would give her a Ribbon,
thinking by such amorous services to render himself more acceptable to Lozia,
hoping that she in conclusion would affect him not as a loving Cousin, but a
passionate Mistress. But poor Lovers, how do I bemoan you, who, forced either
by destiny or inclination, do desperately affect your Mistress, who do
publicly honor you, when in their Souls they disesteem and contemn you as
sordid servants; they sweetly show the Roses and Lillies in their hands and and
faces (though far from their hearts) to those that do respect them, and
secretly give the Thorns to those that serve them, that after a thousand griefs
and wounds and sorrows they may make your patiences condign with such passions,
and that your blood may serve for a sacrifice to their parts and graces, which
conquer the greatest Conquerors, and captivate them to their pleasure, who have
undergone the greatest perils. They have eyes full of sweet alluring glances
and charms to subjugate the most famous spirits, whose hope depends not upon
your deserts, but on their sickle humors. This is that in which the condition
of Lovers is miserable: For he is more happy which meets with his Mistresses
inclination, then he which is filled both with grace and goodness. Poor blind
people, you accept of the discretion, not the love, that forces them to tender
you this duty: You are possessed with a folly next to madness, to imagine, that
this Sex, which is the weaker, has more Reason and Judgment then you which
ordinarily honor ill-favored and foolish persons, and pass by both amiable and
honorable Objects. Do not you think, that they are often troubled with
fantastical humors, which carry them beyond the bounds of Reason, and even the
knowledge of the condition and deserts of those who desire to serve them, to
follow their own fancies, in the loving and esteeming those who are unworthy,
and slighting of those which are deserving? If they are indifferent fair and
rich, a thousand folks as well as you will endeavor to acquire their good
grace, and this cannot be without a thousand unquiet and vexing thoughts: If
they are already engaged, you may as soon subdue a Kingdom as conquer them, and
well leave your designs to Courtiers, who knowing not where to employ their
time better then in familiar frequentation of Ladies companies (which is the
last and the best file to polish the noblest spirits) may at their leisure and
pleasure stretch out these amorous strings to their own contentment, and
sustain all defeats and denyals with incredible patience. I speak to those
which serve Ladies, as the Prince of Doudonne and many others did the Princess
Lozia to gain her love, and were all repulsed to augment the honor of a
Gentleman, who was raised upon their rejections, and served himself with their
disdain as a Trophy, to honor his triumph for his conquest over the beauty and
graces of his Mistress, who as soon as she was accoutred, not according to her
custom, but her haste, with a white Damask Gown lined with Satin, and a
Peticoat of Silver Cloth, and so went down to her Uncle, who was discoursing to
Vincia concerning the design he had to wed his daughter to her Mistress, and
entreated her to assist him therein, knowing how prevalent she was with her; he
promised her money, means, love, affections, profit, pleasure, and what not?
and would have persued his discourse, but that the sweet voice of his Neice did
interrupt him. This unparalled Princess in beauty and grace did with a
smiling face desire the Duke of Blanfort to go to dinner, and excused her self
for making him stay so long. Her Uncle did find her so courteous, that he said,
Nature has made you so amiable and perfectly beauteous, that I find you more
gracefully arrayed with your graces and beauties, then any other can be with
the most rich Stuffs and Orient Pearls of the East: I wonder not if your merits
and beauty do acquire so many gallant servants, and if the knowledge you have
thereof makes you so disdainfully handle them; and I protest you have reason
for it; for I conceive that the most meritorious Prince in Europe cannot
deserve your honorable grace, unless that does more voluntarily resign it self,
then any ways merit it.

Sir, quoth the lovely Lozia, you begin dinner with deriding me, and spare me
no more then strangers: I do possess these deserts and beauties rather from
your gallant application, then from the gift of Nature, for which I have more
cause to complain, then I am beholding to your complement, which has
attributed that unto me which Nature has denied me: I do believe my portion
rather then my person, and my means then my merits, do oblige so many to honor
me with their love, who sometime praising and commending me for the defects in
my Soul and my parts, which rather provoke me to bewail my misery, then
foolishly affect their hiperbolical expressions: And if I should be so
beautiful as they would make me believe, the apprehension of the loss of that
little I have, moves me with as much displeasure, as the possession can give
me content. Seeing the Table covered, they altered their discourse, and
receiving from a Gentleman her servant a Towel, offered the end thereof to her
Uncle, who refused to wash first, and therefore both did together; and after
they had a little disputed about the honorablest place of the Table, he with
entreaties and the command he had over her forced her to take it, as it did
belong to her; for Lozia was an hundred times more honorable then he, who but a
younger brother, his mother was but mean, but his greatness proceeded from his
fathers side, who was a Prince of the Noble Blood of Spain, who took his wife
for her pulchritude and perfections; and though she was a Princess, yet not of
half so Noble Blood: therefore the Duke of Blanfort knew well enough what he
denied to his Niece. During dinner, Lozia, that she might fall in talk of her
Clerio, began to speak to Vincia of her Suitor, who, fitted for her humor,
answered her according to hearts desire, which she did on purpose to remove all
jealousies and suspicion of the frequent visitations of Clerio. The Duke of
Blanfort not knowing him, was very curious to know who it was: Lozia told him
he should see him after dinner, he will have a care not to fail; he requires
more courtesies of me then I can bestow upon him in order to his love, I wish
he would wed her, for he is an honest Gentleman; but what should I do if I lose
Vincia? I had rather he were dead. And then addressing her self to Vincia,
asked, Do you indeed love him very heartily? I do affect him as my Cousin,
answered Vincia, and honor him as a Gentleman of so much merit as you see in
him. Upon this there came in two Ladies to desire the Princess to come to the
nuptials of one of the fairest Virgins in all the Town, where there was a
Dance, and diverse young folk to run the Ring. The Princess, who knew her, and
was willing to pass away the afternoon in such recreation, promised them to go
thither as soon as she could after dinner. The Ladies went away very well
contented, as assured of the presence of the Princess. All the Lords and
Gentlemen of Quality being advertised thereof, either prepared themselves to
dance, or to run at the Ring. Vincia, a little after the fruit was served, rose
from the table, and making as if she would go into another chamber, ran
straightway down to the door, and beckened to one of Clerio's Gentlemen to come
speak with her, who came presently to her, and then she desired him to tell his
Master she would speak with him; presently he came down, hoping for some
wholesome counsel; so she took him by the hand, saying,

My Cousin, there is a Wedding to to day, where they are to run at the Ring,
and to have a Dance, thither is your Mistress to go, fail not, be sure to be
there attired with white and mallow-flower Colors, for she likes them very
well; you have time enough to do it, for she is not yet ready, because it will
be late before they run: I should attire you my self, but for fear it should be
known; but you know well enough how to invest your self with your
accoutrements; be sure to be secret in the design. Adieu.

My Cousin, quoth Clerio, I humbly kiss your hands, and believe not that I
shall be any more sick. Vincia, after she had made him a coursie, ran up again,
and commanded the Chambermaids to prepare and bring to her Mistress one of the
richest Gowns, that she might be most neat and glorious, and adorned with the
most precious Jewels that could be desired, that she might as well surpass in
glory as beauty the most honorable Lady of the Assembly. After Clerio had given
to a many Tailors an infinite number of pieces of Stuffs, with directions after
his own invention for the making of his Suit, which was after the Turkish
fashion, of white Silver Cloth, imbossed with precious Stones, with Studs of
Silver, his Buskins silvered to the middle leg; his Hat a pure Beaver, with a
Hatband of great Pearls, with his Hair curled full of Cyprus Powder, two ear
Jewels so fair and great, that they were worth six thousand crowns, in a word,
as fine as fingers could make him, his horse was a Spanish Gennet white, the
mane and tail fairly painted, with a great plume of Herons Feathers in his
forehead; his caparison of silver Cloth lined with Satin, and all other
accoutrements exceeding rich and graceful, his Mask had a Diamond at the mouth
worth four thousand Crowns, that it was impossible to find his Paragon, so
gallant and complete was he in every punctilio. Just as he went out of the
gate, he put himself under a Silver Cloth of State, born by six Nymphs, every
one having their horse caparison'd after the same manner as his, with a Page at
their sides to hold the horses bridles in their hands.

In the mean time his Mistress, after she was gloriously arrayed, went to the
Dance to enjoy some contentment by the sight of so many fair Ladies, which
sight was neglected to behold so gracious a Prince in so graceful attire. This
Sun of Love and Beauty, by taking away from them their vain glory, caused them
to contemn themselves: After they had danced a long time with Venus Viols, Mars
his warlike Trumpers sounded a different tune, which made these Ladies betake
themselves to the windows, to see those Cavaliers which were attired for to
excel in sumptuousness, and to assay to get their graces with the Ring. After a
number of them were passed by, behold Clerio came in his pomp with six
Trumpeters before him in the same Livery, who going from under the Cloth of
State, appeared to be the King of those Lords, and the Lord of the hearts of
those beauteous Queens, who seeing him so gorgeously accoutred, did assist his
courses and his loves with the desires of success from love and fortune. Then
when he came near Lozia, who as well as the rest earnestly desired to know him,
he bowed his Lance to the ground, then he lifted it up again, and made his
horse show a thousand pretty tricks, being as gloriously amorous of his new
Harness, as was Clerio of his Mistress who gave the ring. In his turn he set
himself on a career, with an incredible desire to bear it away, the which gave
to the Ladies as much hopes as desires of his good success: As soon as ever he
had got it, their shouting, joys, clapping of hands, did accompany the honor
and homage a thousand Trumpets rendered to his glory; of thirty which ran,
there were but two others which ran it in, who did expect they also should have
some part in the Ring, for which end they disputed with him, and all three set
forward on a second course; Clerio doubted he should lose it, and resolved to
accuse him, who should get, of somewhat or other, (as they have but barren
brains which cannot pick a quarrel when they intend to fall out,) but Fortune,
which fought for him, quickly put the question out of Controversy, and at the
third course he gained the Ring and the honor from his Rivals. This happy
Victors triumph happened to his hearts contentment, and to the desire of all
these Ladies looking upon him: Drawing near to his fair Princess, he made his
horse go on with most excellent curvets, to the admiration of her and all that
saw it; then coming under her chamber window, he bowed his Lance, and then
presented it to receive the Ring. Lozia and all the Ladies desirous to know
him, desired him to unmask himself; but he very nobly excused himself, and
after five or six curvets with his horse he kissed his Lance, and presented it
to her again. Lozia was so desirous to know who it was, that she knew not what
to do; but fearing she might anger him with her delay, drew a ring off her
finger worth two thousand Crowns, and putting it upon the end of his Lance,
said to him,

Noble Knight, if you are so gallant as I esteem you are, you will come at
night to my house to the dance with this ring upon your finger. He bended his
Lance down to his Page to have him take the ring off the end of it, which he
did amorously kiss before he put it on his finger; then turning to Lozia, said,

Fair Princess, I am sorry that I am not as worthy to wear this ring, as I have
been fortunate in the taking it from so many noble Gentlemen, and from your
gracious hands, which I honor more then any thing in the World, to put it upon
mine, which cannot deserve so special a favor and high an honor, before they
have drawn a thousand times a sword in your service.

Lozia valued this ready Reply more then the ring she gave him. Clerio, after
he had took his leave of her, rode to the Knights which attended for him, of
whom he took his farewell, after they had praised his merits, and congratulated
his prosperous success. As tenderhearted mothers bewail the loss of their dear
children, so did Lozia and these Ladies bemoan the departure of this Captivator
of their hearts with moist eyes and burning breasts. The night after, the seting
of this glorious Sun did soon possess its wonted darkness, which caused Lozia,
as afflicted as fair, to desire the Ladies to come to her dance, rather that
she might see her servant, then for any desire she had to dance: seeing
themselves honored so far by her as to be entreated, they could not refuse but
honor her with their company, every one desiring by amorous favors and
courteous behavior to win the love of this Knight, who forced them to affect
him, who being filled with glory and at liberty, acknowledged nothing to be the
Law of love but what came from his beloved Lozia. But Clerio, what have thou to
do with so many designs, parties, and amorous ambushes that these Ladies lay
for thee? How will thou hide thy self from those perceptive eyes which are
infatigably open to behold thy actions, graces, and noble deportment? Thou
shall be as much troubled to fire thy self from their importunate passions, as
contented to honor thine own, as inequal in the subject as in beauty and merit.
Clerio, I leave thee in the midst of thy new conquest loves and amorous
entertainments, and go to his Mistress, who having bid the Ladies Goodnight,
went alone into her Closet, where in the midst of her solitude she was
accompanied with sighs, sorrows, and a thousand love-despairs. Poor child, it
is not with dry eyes that I write those of thy cruel dolor, which draws a
pearly dew from thine eyes, those dainty Suns, notwithstanding their fires and
flames. It is observable, that Nature admirably in its variety is so straitened
in this, that she will never give any other entrance to affliction then that of
joy: for those sweet and delicate eyes which did lately give so much
contentment to this young Princess by the sight of her Clerio, those same eyes
now pour out brinish tears in his absence, and that noble Soul which did ere
while burn with a thousand ardent flames, is now in peril for the same cause to
be drowned in sorrow.

Vincia doubting that her Mistress might be in some amorous Paroxism, went to
her to take away all imaginations of her foolish fancy, which might distemper
her body, and to pacify her mind, discomposed with passion: After she had
looked upon her a little while, set in a Chair with her eyes in tears, those
tears in fires, those fires in sighs, those sighs in love, and love transformed
into a thousand cruel deaths, of which this fair Lozia did one day expect a
joyful life, she spoke, to make her a little forget her insupportable
afflictions, thus:

Madam, if I did know that my Cousin, whom I honor and affect with all my
heart, would have been the cause of your so long distempers, I should have been
very glad if he had never come into Spain: I do believe, that if he was not
ignorant of your passions, he would be too too sensible of them, to the peril
of his life: What reason have you thus to perplex your self? Do you desire what
you already have the possession of? Do you seek for a shadow, being already in
the shade? If you look but a moment upon him, he awaketh all night for your
service: If you do this honor to him as to love him never so little, he will
humbly adore your sweet beauty. Who has more cause to complain, either you who
have affected him but two or three days, or he which has been six months in
love with you, with a thousand fears and sad apprehensions of your dislike of
his earnest affections? You are the foundation of all his hopes, and the basis
of his building, and so if you fail him he is utterly undone; but inclination
only causes you to esteem him, who for more weighty causes does honor and
adore you.

Lozia answered her, Vincia, it is not all to be what I am; some among so many
fair and honorable Ladies will affect him as well as I, who being able with
more liberty and convenience to oblige him then I, can or will allure him by
their voluntary enforcements, and the hopes of a thousand liberties and
privileges he shall enjoy, and prerogatives wherewith he shall be invested.
Judge but how discontented he will be to come hither, when I dare not discourse
with him half the time of his stay: Do you think he will change his French
freedom into a Spanish thraldom? His countenance, actions and conditions carry
liberty writ upon the front of them in a legible character; but above all, this
has most of all troubled me, that I cannot work it out of my head, but that it
was not he that gained the Ring, which all the Ladies did so much admire: His
grace, habit and behavior give me more then a suspicion it was: After I had
given it him, he returned me thanks in the most eloquent words that ever I
heard, which all the other Country Sots could never have had the understanding
to invent: I discovered under the Mask almost his voice, his spirit, and his
eyes. Vincia, I pray thee take away from me this doubtfulness and hesitancy,
for I should be very sorry if it were another; but there could not be found
surely any which could so much resemble Clerio: It is the extreme pussion I
have for him which raises these scruples in me: Those excellent gestures of
his horse, those pleasant postures, and those delightful courses, those rich
habits, so delicately accommodated with his rich train, give me some assurance
that it was Clerio alone which was thus accompanied: But that I wonder at, is,
how in so small a time he has been able to prepare such Vestments, as fine as
those which have been this month providing.

It is true Mistress, said Vincia, that it was Clerio, and that Clerio only was
worthy to be honored with so happy a fortune and honorable a favor as was
that.

Vincia, quoth Lozia, I have requested him to come to the Dance to night, but I
hope the Ladies will not know him; for you know, though they saw him disguised
with his Mask, that yet they were exceedingly in love with him; then how ardent
will their affections be, when they see him as he is in his beauty, without the
dark lanthorns of his disguise?

Madam, my Cousin has so much knowledge of your greatness and of that honor
he shall have by being your humble Servant, that either you wrong your self by
esteeming him so highly, or him, to think he has so little judgment, as not to
be able and willing to conserve the honor of your good grace, on which hinge
hangs all his happiness. But whilst you are here, the Viols wait for you in
your chamber.

It Is well said Vincia, let us go eat a bit, else we shall not have supped
before the company come. I give you a charge of all, keep the honor of the
house, if you please: I would I had given away a thousand crowns rather then
invited these Ladies to come, my breast is all on fire within me: but it is a
fault, and saying these words, went and sat down at the Table. The Viols, as
soon as they saw her, played till the Music of her voice did silence them by
returning thanks to them, and welcome to an infinite number of Lords and
Ladies, who were come betimes to have place to behold the Dance: she was fain
to acco^modate her self to their humor, and convert her sorrow into a show of
joy, which of all actions the greatest persons can most closely simulate to
delights, even those which do displease them, by whose means with their amorous
discretion they often procure the establishments of their desires. This fair
Princess commanded her music to play some pleasurable tunes, and turning
toward the greatest Lord that was there, said, This will keep you from
thinking it long before the company comes. This rare consort of your sweet
words is as melodious harmony as the sound of the Viols. Vincia in the mean
while was busied in lighting perfumed candles for the Hall, and preparing seats
for the Ladies to sit down in; there were railes round about to hinder the
influx of unruly people, within which the Lords were, who intended to Dance:
there was on one side a place destinated for the Viols, made like a scaffold
very completely, and artificially built: a many precious things were burned in
this hall, the more honorably to receive this beautiful Goddess; who rising
from the Table, took with her an infinite number of Ladies richly attired, who
did admire at the excellent and delicate furniture of the Hall, the hangings
being all of silk and gold, pure and fair, excellently inamel'd with pearls,
and enriched with precious stones, the Lamps and candlesticks of gold of
Parvaim, the Wainscot was most artifically gilded, as likewise was the seiling;
the shelves most fitly fashioned by a dexterous artificer, the Chimney of
Marble and jasper. This splended greatness of a maid surpassed the
magesticalness of the purest French Lillies of King Henry the third, as
sumptuous as they were. When this fair Princess was set in her chair, all the
Ladies, Marquesses, Countesses, Viscounts, and Barons sat down in their places
according to their quality about her. Two of the Gentlemen, like Captains of
the Guard, hind rod the disorders; the Viols played diverse French Dances, which
Loxia danced very well, as likewise did the other Ladies, who learned by her
imitations. To put every one in order, she prayed the Prince of Dondonne to
lead her, and all the other Lords to take their Ladies; she Danced so
superlatively well, that her eyes, her beauty and her graces, did insensibly
affect the hearts of all the company. After the first Dance was finished, she
desired the rest to continue their delight whilst she sat down and rested her
self, only to have more freedom to think upon her servant, from whom she saw a
Page speaking to Vincia. A little while after she called Vincia to know what the
matter was. Vincia cold her, that her Cousin sent her the Bon soir, and desired
to be excused for his nonappearance, because he found himself not very well.
Lozia taking this for real truth, was very much troubled for his disease,
sympathizing with him in his sorrows, and for the frustrating of her
expectation of his presence. But the good Lord came not long after to dance a
most famous dance with a most noble company. As they entered into the house,
there was raised by the Lacquits and Pages a great noise, which was soon heard
by the company, who were much amazed to see their gallantry. They were all in
two Clouds extremely artificially made, in the one there was six clad like
Knights, with Silver Cloths, with their Mirasses completely made, and their
Plumes of Feathers, which Mars did lead; in the other were six arrayed like
Goddesses in white Silver Cloth, sewed with golden thread, in which were
interlaced the pictures of Lozia, with a thousand such delicacies, and this
same was lead by Clerio, who represented love, very richly attired with his
wings, quiver and arrows; twenty Viols and twelve Pages in Lozia's Livery, each
with two white perfumed Torches, entered before, and stood directly opposite to
Mars his party; two other Pages, which had as delectable voices as could be
desired, one clad in white, the other in blue Satin, played upon the Lute in
the middle of the Hall over against Lozia five or six tunes marvelously well in
the honor of Mars and Gupid: As soon as they had done, the Cloud of Mars,
covered with Trophies of Arms and Torches, which represented in their light all
sorts of Colors, began to flash out with Thunder, Lightenings, Thunderbolts,
notwithstanding the sweetest Melody of the Sackbuts, Harps and Lutes, with the
sweet voice of Love, which, full of Characters, Flames, and Trophies of Love
and Stars, did show exceeding delightful. Ceasing their dainty ditties, and
amorous noises, these two Clouds were opened to let every one of the Masquers
out; and when one was gone out of each, they instantly closed again, and began
their Flashings and Music until all were gone out after that manner, and then
they began their Dance in seven or eight different airs, with a world of
Characters and Figures interlaced, which caused them all to admire. As it was
done, Mars and Love fought, and after a world of blows, Mars perceiving his
eyes wounded with a bolt which Love had secretly shot at him, in stead of being
daunted by so sweet a wound, was rather madded and vexed that he should be thus
vanquished, and so fell on so courageously, that coming something near him, he
snatched away Cupids band, which blindfolding his eyes, caused him to strike a
many fruitless blows: But Love recovering his sight, the loss of which had made
him so often fail, took one of the sharpest arrows in his Quiver, and shot it
so directly, that piercing the very heart of his enemy, he gained his honor
and his life. The gods which were upon the Heavens of these Clouds, quitted
their divine Seat, and came presently to put the band again about Cupids eyes,
lest this divine Archer should see to dispeople the Heaven of gods, the Earth
of men, and that sharing in the Empire of Pluto, they should dwell together in
those obscure shades. Jupiter, as the greatest and also the most incensed of
them all, spoke thus unto them:

Mortals, who not being able to comprehend and dive into the reasons of divine
actions, offend us often by your rebellious ignorance: That it may not happen
to you to fall any more into this disobedience, know, that Love having taken
its original from Heaven, does yet retain some sparks of Divinity among you
earthly humanes; and that you are not to give him battle, but obedience: If we
bind up his eyes, it is not to blind his sight, but only make him a little more
submissive, and that we may set him free when any one is so foolish as to
disdain and contemn so great an infant, as to equal his strength to his. These
words ended, the gods returned into their proper places, and Jupiter, to
demonstrate his anger, suddenly did eclipse the glorious Sun, and in stead of
light, gave the company a sweet shower of rain, with hail of Pearls and
Sugarplums: Whilst the company was busy in the gathering of them, this
superbe Vanquisher receiving the Trophies and the Laurels that Mars had upon
his head, went to sacrifice them with his heart and liberty to the beauty and
graces of the fair Lozia, and kneeling unto this sacred Deity, after he had
kissed the border of her Gown, spoke as follows:

Fair Princess, I give unto your eyes all the honor of this glorious Conquest,
to whom I consecrate these Laurels, as an acknowledgment of this favor, and
these Mirtles, as the first homage after my new subjection: If their sweet
flames have inflamed my Soul with an amorous heat, their dainty darts, serving
themselves with my hands, have utterly extinguished it in mine enemies. I hope
this Mask has not given you any mistrust of my love; and believe, what I have
untertaken, has been to deceive this peoples eyes, and not yours, my fair
Princess: To which I wish, that the violent flames that I have received
therefrom these six months, and the entertainment which I shall keep always
ready for your service, may be as continual as is my countenance, which
carries both my love and heart upon the front thereof, as the most weighty
testimony of the truth of my words. And saying so, he plucked aside his Mask to
show Lozia his face, and put it on presently again for fear of being seen of
others. The Lord and Ladies supposed it to be some Country Gentleman, and his
companions thought he would tell her some tale, and so without suspicion he
deceived both the one and the other, and continued his discourse, saying; Fair
Princess (whose Sun may it never set) permit me this day to call you the
Mistress of my desires, and all my wills together, that I may have the honor
to receive the honorable quality of the most humble servant of yours, which I
shall esteem as great a favor as your beauty; your graces and merits making
you the noblest Paragon of all others, give me desires and knowledge of so great
an happiness, swearing to you by the faithfullest oaths a constant Lover can
make unto his Mistress, That I will rather dye then disobey the least of your
Commandments, and shall honor nothing more then the flames of love and passion
which your beautiful eyes have kindled in my breast: If love transformed into
your face, animateth my heart with the sweet heat of your eyes with an
impatient desire to serve you; the virtue under the sweet object of your
merits, much more ravishing by its admirable attractions, takes away, with a
thousand delectable transportations, my will from my will, to leave me nothing
but the inclination to honor you for ever as the Soul of my Soul, which gives
motion to my life by that of mine affection.

Fair goddess, were I to write thy delicate loves, I would not invoke, as did
the ancient Apollo, for his divine heat; but would come unto thy fair eyes, to
animate so effectually my spirit and my pen, that my discourse may be so
gravely sweet, that it may delight the most delicate ears of those which read
it, and so learnedly grave, that the most elevated spirits may highly esteem
it, who seek rather for the steeled points of weapons to satisfy their minds,
then the quaint and alluring sweetness of fair words to please their ears,
which is the outward bark of all unto generous spirits. Princess, I finish my
words to give beginning to those which you shall say to your servant.

Clerio, says Lozia, your noble spirit and your gallantry are sufficient not
only to oblige Lozia, but the greatest and graciousest Queen in the world, to
honor your love and merits: I perceive my self so happy in the amorous
assurance of your affections, that I ten times more esteem the possession of
your good grace, then of twenty Realms.

A Lady which sat somewhat near her, not dreaming of any thing less then of
these Loves, came nearer to hear their discourse, to whom Lozia, breaking her
discourse, said, without any appearance of alteration; Madam, you do me a
pleasure to come hither, for this hour has this same Maskman talked to me in
Italian, and I know not what he says, therefore I pray you be mine
Interpreter, and you will ease me of a hard task. This Lozia said, purposely
that Clerio, who speak perfect Italian, might quckly deride her for her broken
language, and drive her away for shame. He being of a quick apprehension knew
his Mistresses intentions, and so began to tell an hundred jests, which so
amazed this poor woman, that she knew not what to do, but that others did come
to participate of the pleasure, which Clerio seeing, stole away, and unmasked
himself, and went to his Cousin, with whom he discoursed till the Dance was
ended, of the contentment he had received by the honor Lozia did him to accept
his service with so much assurance of affection, that he esteemed himself the
most happy Gentleman in the world, Vincia had not spoke three or four words
before she was interrupted by Lozia, who was rose from the sport to go to bed,
who also thereby put a period to all the delights of that night. Clerio, like
an officious Cousin, and affectionate servant, led Vincia by the hand to
Lozia's chamber, to whom he gave the Bon soir of the day, that he had received
from her fair eyes in the midst of his obscure darkness; and so contented, he
withdrew with a living hope; and she contented, stayed in the midst of a
thousand desperate passions.

The Souls of these amorous Lovers floated all this night among an hundred
different irresolutions, which hope and despair did equally agitate, going from
the Port to shipwreck, from dangers into assurance, from assurance into an
amorous confusion, which those only that have been in the like labyrinth can
either comprehend or complain of.

Knights, for whom alone Love seems to have been lawfully instituted, which
others make use of rather by borrowing and a destinated necessity, then any
voluntary consent of Nature, which with an ambitious jealousy of it self
aspireth always toward perfection: Knights (say I, the eldest sons of Honor)
who by your honor and gallantry draw delight from the sweet frequentation of
Ladies, from whom you learn what you are, with a thousand delicious dalliances,
which are far from popular conversations, who bear from your birth the defense
of Ladies graven upon the ends of your swords with the hands of honor and
virtue; make proof of your merits, with a just acknowledgment of the
obligations which you owe to this Sex. Now when you see a numberless number of
indiscreet people, blame this beautiful and noble Princess, which love, not
delight, has so far engaged, who knowing that her kindreds obstinacy was
incompatible with her innocent affections, forgets her foolish ambitions to
marry her love with her contentment, and Clerio with Lozia, not in a
lascivious, but in a loving and legitimate Wedlock.

Brave Lovers, whilst I have discoursed with these Knights, the night is past
away; but I come with the Sun to you, to know, after I have given you a good
morn, what you will do all the day.

This fair Princess was no sooner awaked, but a Gentleman from the Duke of
Blanfort came to her to desire her to lend him her Music that he would have
played of after the Dance to a very fair Lady, with whom he was to baptize one
of his friends sons; that if she pleased to take the pains to go thither, the
Duke of Blanfort would accompany her. Lozia seeing that this was an opportune
occasion to entertain her servant at leisure, said to him;

Sir, I entreat you to tell mine Uncle, that I humbly kiss his hands, and that
I sat up so long yesterday, that I have been ill all night, and shall keep my
bed to day, but my Music and all I have is at his service if he command it.

As soon as the Gentleman was gone, she said to Vincia, Have not I done well?
Very well, Mistress, quoth she. Then said Lozia smilingly, I must see my
servant after dinner, I pray you make me very spruce, and attire me as neatly
as it is possible; for I shall never see any one whom I so much honor, or to
whom I desire to make my self so acceptable, as to him. I will, Mistress,
answered Vincia. And presently gave her her morning Gown, that she might go
attire her head by the fire side; Her Coif very handsome, with flexures in it
for her hair to pass out most completely curled, full of powder and
hair-jewels; she had two Pendants on her ears worth fifteen thousand Crowns, a
Chain of Pearls three times about her neck worth as much; Vincia gave her a
Cassock of white Satin, lined with a mallow color, with precious Stones sewed
therein, the Buttons of which were fair Beazils; upon the Sleeves she put two
admirable Chains of Gold, on the side a Box of Ammel covered with Jewels,
wherein was her Pourtraiture of an invaluable worth: up and down the Chambers
they set Candles and such things on fire, filled with Musk and Ambar, to
perfume the room: Her Bed was so richly hung, as likewise was her Chamber, that
one would have thought Love should have entered in there, or else that Love, in
love with the fair Lozia, did make his continual abode among those sweet
delights. Clerio, who likewise desire to render thy self acceptable to thy
Mistress, provide for thy ornament; her exquisite delineaments, her beauty, her
graces, her fair eyes, to defend thy liberty, rather then splendid habits to
ravish her of hers, which she has amorously sacrificed to thy merits and
gallantry, after her heart had insensibly deprived thee of thine, thine of
hers. Idle Migniards, you are so long attiring your selves, that dinner has
waited for you, till it is as cold as you are hot and full of fire: Go take
your refection of those delicates prepared for you, as needful for the
nourishment of your bodies, as that of love to your divinely inflamed Souls.

Lozia went to dinner presently, but none was suffered to come in but Vincia
and Charlotta to serve her, that the belief of her disease might exempt her
from importunity, and give her opportunity to entertain Clerio, who came in
presently after she had dined, and after he had saluted her, he spoke thus:

Fair Princess, my passion is so violent, that rendering to me the sight of the
fairest Ladies in the world as foul, the more ardently to honor yours, I fear
that mine in fine may be as displeasant to you, as that of yours is now
impatiently desired of mine impatient desires: But methinks in disanimating my
self of my Soul through mine eyes, you enliven me again with the sweet flames
of yours, which cause me to feel as many amorous burnings in mine heart, as
there are beauties and graces in your face, most fair, accompanied with a
thousand and a thousand dolorous or amorous sighs: After I had diligently
sought for my liberty and my heart in an hundred places, I came at last to find
it guided by my love in the middle of your graces and beauties; and if you are
not content with so honorable Trophies, I must look if I have not yet something
free from that conquest which you have made in my Soul, that I may conjure it
by your holy name to yield homage and adoration to you, that having nothing but
love in me, I may more honorably and humbly serve you.

Clerio, answered Lozia, you are too noble and gallant to enter into such
distrust of your self, and I too much affected with your love and merits to
keep you very long in the quicksands of doubtings. I beseech you to believe,
that although many Princes do me this favor as to affect me, yet that I honor
your love so much more, as it is more desirable then all theirs. Clerio, live
in the belief of this, that as you are the first, so the most faithfully loved
by Lozia in all the world: Fortune yesterday gave you this ring on your finger,
and Lozia gives you to day her heart and her pourtraiture, which is in this
Box, as an earnest of her true affection, wear it for my sake I desire you: And
giving it him, gave him likewise a kiss, which did so amorously conjoyn their
lips and loves, that from thence their souls and hearts were knit in an
insolvable knot.

This is not all, quoth Vincia, Mistress, to give such happy beginnings to so
firm amity, if withal you do seek out some ways to continue it; you know that
all the rest in the house depend upon your Uncle, and I only solely upon you,
who will rather dye then expend my life upon any other service; and so
necessary is our diligence in the pursuing of our affairs for to preserve my
life and safety with my Cousins, that our neglect to regard them will ruin us:
I know, if you will both be advised by me, how to actuate this present
business, as to finish it to our contentment: Those which are passionate, if
they are prudent, must be governed by the directions and dictates of those
which are exempted from it. Clerio, you must, as I have formerly hinted to you,
continue your simulation of loving me, I am neither so old nor illfavour'd yet
that none will credit it, that every time you are discoursing with my Mistress,
they may think it is to employ her in our loves: You must first collogue with
the Duke of Blanfort, and the Prince of Doudonne, because it is needful that
they should be first gulled who are most interested in the business. And my
Mistress, you must not make any show of sorrow; and if you cannot altogether
impede its entrance into your heart, yet let wisdom so curb your natural
inclination, that you discover it not unto your familiars, which that you may
the better perform, from henceforth make as if you loved reading, which will be
an excuse for that little alteration any one shall perceive, and still have a
little book in your pocket, which take out and read when you cannot rid your
self of those troublesome thoughts which break in upon you; and for my part,
leave me to act that without the advantage of instructions.

Lozia and Clerio concluded of this as their securest course, and intended to
pursue it, and so received reciprocal assurances of each others affections with
abundance of joy and contentment: That as those Lands which are nearest to the
Sun have their fruits soonest ripe and ready to gather; so these two faithful
Lovers equally passionate, did in the midst of their ardent flames approach so
near to love, that by the virtue of its vicinity, like the Orange trees, they
put forth in few days the leaves, flowers, and fruit. Hence-forward did this
superstitious Lover so dote upon his Mistress, that he kissed her hands now a
thousand times, which before he durst scarce look on. Consider noble Knights,
that Ladies sometimes cause you to pass beyond the narrow limits of your first
condition, honorably to enlarge them. Knights, I beseech you once again, as a
testimony of your birth and breeding, to respect Ladies, and think not you have
less honor for the honorable performance of this duty, then you should have if
it were freely tendered by the greatest of the world: They are capable of
making you more glorious and renowned then all your own perfections and
deservings: There is nothing in the world so persuasive as them, who with their
words and actions do inchant our wills, and deprive our senses of their proper
function, and with their eyes give life and motion to our spirits and desires:
We are the true Chameleons of their humors, who receive in our hearts all the
various and vive impressions of so fair and divine objects: These are those
glorious Suns, whose splendid light our eyes cannot any more remove, then can
our hearts the heat thereof, which they receive according to the disposition of
our minds, and not the strength of these divine and amorous beams: If there is
any spirit so agitated; that it never could see the dawning of a glorious day,
nor a sparkle of light as a pledge of future Sunshine, such must rather weep
for, and complain of, then any ways desire and expect a favorable aspect from
these frowning and malign Planets: Briefly, he who knows not this gallantry,
is accounted more fit for a Clown, then a Courtier, and a simple Sot, rather
then a Noble man: Thus far are we indebted to them, they give grace to our
actions, eloquence to our words, a day to the obscure shadows of our spirits, a
Soul to the hearts and spirits of those which have none. Fair Ladies, little
(but little indeed) gods upon Earth, who are the absolutest Commanders of men,
tyrannize not over Nobility, who alone knows and esteems your merits: Live
so discreetly with them, that none may ever go discontented from your company:
It is no graceful thing to make your selves pensive, on purpose to excuse that
sottish humor wherewith you are troubled in the company of those whose society
you do not affect: All those whom you see are neither your Husbands nor your
Cousins, that you should impatiently bear their imperfections. Cannot you
courteously entertain a Gentleman which will be gone within an hour, without a
discovery of rancor or malice, or at least contempt? Do not make signs to your
consorts, nor brabble and tattle with them without sufficient reason, whilst
any Gentleman is in discourse with you, which will make him think you do deride
him, rather if he be a Sot, then if a sweet-behavior'd and ingenuous Gentleman;
for foolish persons will expound all texts to their own disadvantage, and
thence proceed stinging words and netling speeches, which well-bred women
should avoid as a dangerous Precipice, which always brings fears or hurts:
Frequentation with foolish company is a contagious air, that will infect the
most perfect reputation, and taint the most unstained honor; this gives the
first motion of life to the calumnies and opprobrious speeches which active
men, fruitful mothers, and well-fed nurses do bring forth and hatch up. Thus
fair Ladies, to invite these unhappy accidents, I set your souls and hearts at
liberty from inthraldom to any, but honor all and above all the Nobility who
draw their swords in your service, who is of the same quality as you, your Sex
only making the difference, and those whose spirit and parts you do sometime
misprise, do often enter into your service advantaged by their means only. If
fire has neither the quality nor the name of fire, so long as it is contained
in the stone which conceives it; your virtue likewise is not truly virtue
because of the secret possession thereof, but because of the public
cognizance that there is had of it: Men have not the nature of gods, they know
not the cause but by the effects in view. Flatter not your selves, your honor
is not your own, if it is not in the mouths and hearts of those that frequent
you: It is an excellent Pourtraiture hung up for future memory, and painted
with the immortal hands of Virtue in discretion, like to that of the most
affectionate of your servants, which you amorously carry in a Box, as a Trophy
of your beauty, and a pleasant object for your eyes: But this divine Painter is
so jealous of this most exquisite piece of Manufacture, that he puts out theirs
who go about never so little to dispraise it. Therefore, Ladies, I desire you
to be others when you are in company, and ever your own when you are alone.
Adieu, my Ladies, for I hear Lozia calls me, and reprehendeth me as well as you
for staying so long to write the faults and defects of the most part of women;
I have stole this time from her to give it you, and shall not be sorry for it,
willingly taking all the reproach to my self, that all the profit of the
robbery may be yours.

Fair Princess, I went into the other chamber to discourse with the Knights and
Ladies, which durst not come in to you for fear of displeasing you; they have
embarked me so far in talking, that the night has come before the end of our
discourse began; therefore I entreat you to excuse me, if their pleasurable
society has stayed me longer then I intended and ought to have been there; I
did imagine that the sight of Clerio was so contentful to you, that you were
indifferent as to other objects. But, fair goddess, recite a little of the joys
and sweet transportations and ravishing ecstasies that your spirits have
received after the asswagement of the tempestuous Sea wherein you have been
tossed. When I think, that at the appearance of Clerio, Lord Paramount of thy
graces and beauties, thy eyes have poured out as many tears for joy, as they
had formerly done for trouble and despair; methinks I see the inhabitants of a
City take up their arms, as well to honor the arrival of their Prince, as to
frustrate the assaults of their adversaries. Lozia, dry up this pearly dew with
a sparkling beam from thy beauteous eyes; reassume thy former serene vizage,
which was enameled with so many beauties and graces; make calm the passions of
thy Soul, which were raised by the wind of the afflictions and sorrows of thy
Clerio. Will thou be willing it should be objected to him, that he prepares in
lieu of delights and contentments, dolours, sorrows, sighs and tears, for that
person whom he honors and esteems more then any person in the world? Let this
be enough, that he alone mingleth his life with his love; make for him with thy
delicate hands a Crown, as the chiefest of the most faithful and perfect Lovers
that ever was.

Whilst she was in these sad tears and sorrowful sighs, yet sweet
imaginations, Vincia came to tell her of the arrival of the Prince of Doudonne.
This unwelcom news did cause as great an alteration in her heart as in her
face: This antipathy of fire and ice did couple so perfectly well her beauties
and graces, her Lillies and Roses, her love and discretion, her smiles and her
frowns, that her Cousin could not discern any alteration in her countenance:
but she seemed so much more beauteous to him, as she was more then usually
richly attired, which did incite him to a more fervent desire to obtain her.
This poor Princess in this intestine conflict, between hatred and affection,
contempt and respect, overcame triumph a thousand times in a moment, enjoying
as much satisfaction from the contemplation of the gallantry and ingenuity of
Clerio, as she did trouble from the unwelcom view of her Cousin; who did so
vehemently importune her to speak of love, that she was forced to make as if
she was sick, that she might be rid of him. Vincia, who knew her Mistresses
design, said presently, Mistress, you having been sick all day, this talking
makes you worse. The Prince of Doudonne thinking that was the reason, returned
home presently.

My good Vincia, how tedious is it to an honest and modest woman to hear a Sot
talk of love, who will then most wilfully wait on them when they are most
shamefully repulsed and neglected by them? I had rather a thousand times dye,
then that my Cousin, who is as ignorant and as impudent as others, should
importune me so long with his irksom loves, which are as displeasant to me as
himself. What likelihood is there that without grace they should hope to obtain
gracious and graceful Ladies? without a noble and heroic spirit, they should
oblige their divine Souls to be obedient unto their desires? without beauty and
love, and those charms, allurements and delicacies in their eyes, wherewith the
Heavens and Nature do graciously endow some, they should win the love of those
Ladies in whom these and many other invaluable gifts of Nature are in a
superlative measure? Vincia, I entreat thee to make our souls and loves as free
as they are fair and divine: It is from thee only that I expect so great a
good, who art able to go forward with so high and perilous an enterprise.

Mistress, said Vincia, seeing you do me the honor as to command it me, I will
declare what I think most necessary; and I hope my counsel will be so
profitable, that our undertaking shall succeed according to our desires. I
should like it well, if you would tell every body, especially your Uncle, that
you will shortly complete our marriage, that the report of our nuptials may
give some repose to your loves, until some few days shall be gone; and when
they think least of it, you shall know how much I watch for your service: He
cannot long continue his constant repair hither, but either your own folks, or
the Duke of Blanfort will be suspicious: But in lieu of my nuptials, we will
solemnize yours in this manner as I will declare to you. You have an hundred
Villages where you have never been, the Priests whereof know you as little as
the great Turk; one of these days, making as if we went to walk for our
recreation with a Coach, we will take a time so fit for the purpose, that it
shall be almost night when we come into one of them, the Curate of which is as
blind as he is old, and by that means will not know you; and before we come to
the place, you shall go a foot to the Church door; the people presently will
assemble to see what is the matter, and therefore will I pray you to command
your Gentlemen and Damsels to stay without to stop this press of people, under
color of diverse ill accidents which fall out at marriages by this means; and
so being all alone, the Priest shall espouse you; during this time I will be
hard by veiled, making as if I were Lozia; and so for this time you and Clerio
must give me that reverence and respect as is due to me, that he might be the
more confident of his opinion, and be sure we will be gone with speed without
over many Ceremonies again into the Coach; and because I am taller then you, I
will get made for you a pair of Pattins, which render our highness and stature
both alike: and as I shall go to give you a Gown that morning, ask for one
without any taking notice of mine, which shall be such an one as mine is, which
I will have made purposely, lest the Priest should discover any thing by our
Vestments; and some days before you shall give your servants order to dress and
trim up the chamber at the end of the Gallery just against yours, that from
that time Clerio may lie with his wife, and not his Cousin; and you shall
entreat your Uncle to let you likewise entertain Clerio into your service, that
you may keep me, and that you cannot by any means part with me, and he will
easily agree to this for fear of displeasing you: and likewise to gratify me,
whom he supposes do employ my interest for his preferment, he will be very
glad to oblige Clerio and me, under hope of a remuneration of his courtesies;
but when the business is so far advanced, we will advise of a further progress.

Fair Ladies, who do here peruse the incredible proofs of affection that Clerio
received from his Cousin, call them not I entreat you by any other name then
what the honor of your Sex and her quality do oblige you to: Resemble not the
venomous Vipers, who cover good food in mortal poison: But taking in good part
these virtuous actions, remember, that if ever you were in love, you have
employed therein persons of less quality, dignity and deserts then she, who
has by legitimate nuptials rendered the marriage of Lozia honorable, and full
of Roses and sweet delights, amidst a world of thorns and perilous
apprehensions, putting her own discretion and affection as a Cloak under her
feet, that she might tread upon the most dangerous and dreadful difficulties
with more security.

As Lozia did expect the sequel of Vincia's discourse, which was as acceptable
as affectionate, she was suddenly affrighted to hear a great multitude of
people coming, who followed a Prince that came to see her and to serve her; she
could scarcely recall her self to her self, before he was come into the
chamber: The Prince his name was Don Allio, who was a very pretty and proper
person, having beauty proportionable to his bigness, and riches that exceeded
both, which caused Lozia to esteem him very much; and although his love was not
so delectable to her as Clerio's, yet because of his descent and deserts she
behaved her self so discreetly, that he hoped one day to enjoy the sweet graces
of divine Lozia. Whilst this Prince was in discourse with Lozia, Vincia like a
good servant went to tell the news of this new love to the Duke of Blanfort,
who, after he had overruled his anger, returned thanks to Vincia for this
courtesy, and said to her these words:

Mistress Vincia, I never doubted that my Niece could merit and meet with a
better person then my son: This belief, with the desires I have of her
advancement, wound me with as many mortal strokes, as I have lively
apprehensions of it: This lawful affection has so much effect in the hearts of
fathers, that there is no way which they leave unattempted, which may conduce
to the honor and happiness of their children: I have hitherto endeavored to
dispose my Niece to this marriage for her own and my advantage; but I honor
her so so much, that I will never oppose her will to fulfill mine. Vincia, I see
that in this I must bear my self up more with the hope of your affection to me
and my son, then to any other thing in the world: Had not you better assist me
who am of the house, then a forreigner who will carry away all, and not oblige
you so as I intend and will endeavor? Vincia, would thou forsake thine
ancient acquaintance whose affections are certain, to affect new ones which are
uncertain?

Sir, replied Vincia, I am so much honored with the honor of your love, that
I esteem my self more happy to be your humble servant, then to be a companion
with the greatest of this Realm: You would do me wrong, if you should judge me
to be the occasion that your Niece does not desire this marriage as well as
you; but she is yet so young, that she knows not what is for her advantage;
yet will it not be amiss to hinder new love from getting foot in her heart,
which has made me come hither to advertise you of it; I suppose you would do
well to take the pains to go see her, to interrupt the discourse of her new
servant; go before without any show of my following you.

Vincia having given him so hot an alarm, mocked him, for thinking her on his
side, of which she made a show, the more neatly to gull him. This Prince,
assured of her affection, undid himself by his credulity: for Vincia could not
lay a more firm foundation to her designs, the^ what should be raised on the
ruins of the Duke and Prince, which cannot be effected in the midst of so much
suspicion without the aid of dissembled affection, which is the best of all bad
things when we do use it toward indifferent persons, for the utility of those
to whom we are engaged. Vincia was no sooner come, but Don Allio took leave of
his Mistress, and then Vincia related all the discourse she had with the Duke,
which excited sweet smiles in the face of Lozia, to hear how her Uncle was
outwitted: Vincia following her discourse, said thus:

Madam, this new love of Don Allio is the fairest occasion that we could desire
to gull the Duke of Blanfort, who persuades himself that you bear affection to
this new Lover; and I think it best that you use him kindly, to increase his
jealousy; and he puts great confidence in me, but his skill in the end will
fail him.

No sooner had Vincia said these words, but the Duke of Blanfort entered with a
very sour look; and Lozia seeing him in this estate, and remembering what
Vincia had told her, could hardly forbear laughing, but however she refrained
therefrom. The Duke of Blanfort, after he had asked her how she fared, said to
her:

My Niece, seeing that Don Allio (who is an indifferent person to you) seeks
for your good liking, I desire you not to take it ill at my hands, if the
desire which I have for the conservation of our house makes me rather wish this
fortune for my son, then leave it to a stranger: I am confident that you are of
so good a nature, that this ambition will be no ways disagreeable unto you, and
that you will rather make this natural election to conserve the honor and
greatness of your Predecessors, then the other, whereby you will lose it,
disuniting the good affection to your blood, which obliges all those that have
understanding and honor to retain some sweet heat, which rather animates their
hearts to this lawful devoir, then to so unnatural a hatred. I have always been
hindered to speak to you by the respect which I bore you, lest I should anger
you; and if I had not feared you would have carelessly esteemed of my
discretion, I would have attended until your own judgment and humor had given
you the same desire to oblige me, and to bestow on my son the inestimable good
of your favor, whereby we might serve you through the whole course of our
lives: and if this is not your own pleasure, do not in any wise think that it
will be mine, but that to the contrary I will employ all that could be to my
own particular good to render you more free, to the end that the loss of the
hope of my fortune and contentment may give you the possession of yours, which
I hold a thousand times more dear then whatsoever may happen to me in the
world. Lozia, after all these fair speeches, smiling, answered him:

Sir, my birth and education teach me to honor all those whose merits and
quality render them worthy to do this favor to love me. If Don Allio came to
see me, his sight no more then others is not so full of charms, that it has
power insensibly to violate my Reason and Soul to any thing that is contrary to
my will: My condition does sufficiently enough exempt me from so religious a
constraint, and my honor keeps me religiously enough within the free bonds
of virtue, without your entering into this opinion, that the first view causes
love in me. The same youth that makes me desire the agreeable conversation of
honest people, endues me with a mortal hatred of these foolish passions, as the
honorablest tortures of fairest Souls; and when this humor shall come on me, I
have vanity and glory enough to overreach the ambition and greatness of my
Predecessors. But Sir, in stead of mine let us commune of the nuptials of
Vincia, which I shortly intend; this will be a means to stay her in my service,
provided that Clerio will come, for otherwise I shall do nothing: Vincia is my
second self, without whose company I cannot live; I pray Sir, use your utmost
endeavor to cause him to live with me, not so much to serve me, as that I may
thereby enjoy the company of Vincia.

My Niece, quoth he, you have good reason, for you shall hardly find such
another; I will earnestly entreat him, and I am persuaded that for your own
sake or mine I shall persuade him to do it; but he has too many servants,
which he will rather increase then diminish, and this is the worst.

No, no, Sir, answered Lozia to him; if he had as many more I would defray all
charges, and I shall think it an honor to have such a Gentleman so near me; I
am more afraid that he will not come, then of the charge: Vincia says, He is
very rich, and it very well appears so, for he keeps as great a Port as any.
Lord of this Country. At these words Clerio entered, whereupon they all
laughed, that he should come so opportunely. After the Duke of Blanfort had
embraced Clerio, who came to salute him (to oblige his Niece) prayed him to do
him the favor to promise him one boon. Clerio feigning his ignorance, promised
him to perform what ever it should be his pleasure to command him. Then said
the Duke, That which I entreat of you is on the behalf of my Niece, to oblige
her and my self not to take Vincia from her; and because it will be
inconvenient for you being married to live apart, we pray you and all your
train to come live here, and my Niece will defray their charges; you shall be
no more constrained then if you were by your self; you and Vincia shall sit at
her own table, and your Servitors shall be equal unto hers: I pray you do this
for my sake; and if I can for the future do you any service, I will do it with
as much affection, as if it were for my own children. Sir, answered Clerio to
him, the greatest honor which I ever hoped for, was to be in the service of so
great a Princess, and commanded thereunto by that Prince, who above all others
in the world I most honor, to receive this favor: but I find my self so
unprofitable for her service, and whatsoever people I have, rather serve for
charge then profit: nevertheless, Sir, seeing that Madam and you command me, I
will effect for you all that you request. The Duke of Blanfort infinitely
satisfied, took Clerio by the hand, and brought him to sup with him, where he
entertained him with all the delicates that might be, and swore to him an
eternal amity: After supper he showed him his stable, which was very
magnificent, and gave him one of his fairest horses, to oblige him to his part.
Clerio, after he had submissively gratulated him for the honor which he had
afforded him, took leave of him, and went to visit his Mistress, who passed
away the time with Vincia, at the dispense of the Duke of Blanfort.

Come, come, my Knight, said Lozia to him; now may I call you mine, seeing you
are given to serve me by my Uncle the Duke of Blanfort.

Madam, said Clerio, he is extremely liberal, for he has so much honored me,
as to give me one of his best horses.

It is very well, said she in laughing; he gives to take, but his liberalities
are unprofitable, for he shall lose both his present, and hope, if I do not
deceive my self.

I believe Madam, said he, that he has given it me rather for a design, then
induced by his natural inclination, not having done so much service, as to
oblige him thus to gratify me.

Doubt not, said Lozia, for he is fuller of inventions then any mortal
creature, and for all the good entertainment he seems to make to you and
Vincia, he wishes your deaths, but I hope he shall be as far from his account,
as I nigh to mine; but Vincia, what is thy opinion of it?

Mistress, when it pleases you all things are ready, and nothing is wanting,
but your Commandment. I leave all to your discretion, answered the fair Lozia
to her.

Clerio being instigated by an amorous impatience, said to his Cousin,
Festinate I pray you Vincia to consolate a Lover, who dies quotidianly a
thousand times by the refulgency of those sweet flames which proceed from the
fair eyes of her whom I satisfactorily adore: it is to imitate the Deities to
assist those who pray us: the moments in this furious passion are ages to me of
dolorous acclamations, yet are they as agreeable to me as this fair Princess
who animates you. My Cousin, there are six or seven days fully completed,
since I was first molested by these inquietudes for your fair Mistress, whose
beauty is the source from whence proceeds my impatient passion.

Vincia answered, The hope of acquiting so happy and so nigh a possession might
mitigate the impatiences of your Soul; but the amorous are excusable, who
relinquish reason as an ignominious charge, giving the reigns to their desires,
to pursue more lightly their passions, to which by force they give themselves,
rather then by discretion, seeing themselves exempted from knowledge, loving
better to have a blind guide, then to remain alone in the middle of such savage
deserts as our senses alienated from admiration.

Lozia interrupting Vincia, said to her servant Clerio, I love being so
amorous: And obliging him by this honor, she gave him her fair hands within the
curled hairs of those of love; it is idolatrous for him to bend this knot
before so many graces and formosities, of which he shall soon be Possessor,
having with desires, dying a thousand times by her for many ardent flames: As a
Cork sometimes elevateth it self, and then submergeth under the water; so this
humane, full of vanity, forgetting his first estate, left himself to be
ambitiously transported above so many courtesies and amorous submissions of so
great a Princess; and to testify to her his violent passion, commended his
elocutions by a profound suspiration.

Fair Mistress, whom I reverence as the most holy and sacredst of all terrene
Deities, and to whom alone quotidianly I offer a thousand secret sacrifices
from my heart, I conjure you by your fair eyes, the most capable puissances, to
move you to accord to me the request which I will make you in the behalf of
your Clerio, which might furnish me with so many amorous dispences, as these
eyes, graces and beauties make by their so long sojourn at my heart: It
behooves that I now pay by my death a thousand amorous Creditors; if those
agreeable hosts of my Soul take not pity of him, who for the more honorable
reception has engaged his liberty and his life, this would be to pick a Rose
before the time with rigorous hands, without their being vulnerated by the
thorns of compassion.

Clerio, my friend, what would thou that I do? Thy loves and thy merits have
so much power upon me, that I cannot denegate any thing unto thee which is
agreeable; when thou will, I will give thee the beauties and sweet
delectations, which this young bodypossesses with so entire possession, as that
which thou had of my heart, of my loves, and my Soul, since the first day
that I had the honor to see thee. Clerio, go on in this credence, and I entreat
thee not to handle me so rigorously, unless you intend to make me dye cruelly;
but cause thou that Vincia accord our contentments with our amorous cupidities,
and then thou may know that my speeches are as veritable as my passions.
Vincia extremely satisfied, said to her, It shall be then after to morrow. I
consent to it, said Lozia, from the voice of these two hearts, which have but
one will and one soul; and that one passion which was equally in two, is
equally both in the one and the other. I am of opinion Mistress, that when it
does advesperate, you send one of your Gentlemen, to pray Mounsieur de Blanfort
to come to morrow to dine with you, and your Cousin to come with him; when he
rises, entreat him to assist at our nuptials after dinner; if he is astonished
at this inopinate novelty, you may tell him that you never could obtain this
favor of me before this time; but seeing it is now my humor, you will not give
me the leisure to repent, and because it is already late, go retire your self,
that you may rise betime in the morning. Clerio following her counsel, gave the
Goodnight to his Mistress, and received from her a thousand new loves, in
exchange of the which, he entertained her all that night, hindering her from
sleeping; the day being come, he went to find Mounsieur de Blanfort, who booted
himself to go see his Hawk fly two or three hours, where being come, the Duke
made him good entertainment, and after some speeches of meriment, said to him,

Sir Clerio, I pray you be of the party, if you are not nigh your nuptials.
Madam, my Niece, yesternight sent to me to pray me to dine with her; I pray you
kiss her hands on my part, and tell her, that I shall be there at my return,
and seeing it is for your honor, my son shall be there also; and if you will,
because you are not of this Country, I will bring thither some Lords my friends.
Clerio said to him, Sir, you very much oblige me, I cannot refuse the honor of
these fair offers. After some other speeches he took his leave, and the Duke of
Blanfort mounted a horseback: Clerio went soon to find his Mistress, who was a
bed, where he went to render her his common service: this fair Princess had as
yet her hair carelessly dispersed, where love that night took his release, as a
Bow far bent might go with more impetuosity and violence to wound the fairest
Souls with some, as a But to so gallant an Archer, whom he puts from one to
another with his mortal jaculations, whereby he arrested the eyes of those who
saw him, under the form of a fair vizage, or would harken unto him under the
charming dulcitude of a fair reputation: This color, these eyes, these
smilings, these hands, these graces, this neck, this throat, were a Scylla and
Charybdis, where the gallant'st hearts after their naufrage were amorously
caught: In the mean time these two Lovers entertained themselves: Vincia sent
to search for the Violins, to pray the Ladies to put them in tune; then she
went to see whether the fair Lozia was yet dressed, which this day put on her
richest Vestments, as she who had the most interest in the feast; she had not
curled her hair, and powdered her locks, before Mounsieur de Blanfort arrived,
and with him the Prince of Doudonne, and some other Lords, that he had
entreated to come with him, who being hungry, by reason of the venation, went
into the Kitchen, which was so good, that he stayed there so long till Lozia
was habilled, to the end they might put the Partridges in a dish, of which they
had only seen the feathers in the air. Clerio descended also to entertain the
company, attending this fair Princess, who festinated rather to see her
servant, then those: I have so many times said, that she was as agreeably fair
as you might imagine; that the Artifice (which is the husband of this fair
woman, that is, Nature) had made her attain the perfection of Pulchritude. They
passed all this day in feasting, dancing, musicks, and a thousand different
sorts of pleasure, and consummated the nuptials of Clerio and Vincia, who was
very well accountred, falt, young, and of good grace, who had had the quality
of Lady of Honor (which was given ordinarily but to ancient women) rather for
merit then age. The night being come, all retired themselves, being in general
very well satisfied to have so well passed their time, and leaving these two
Lovers in their desired solitude, who seeing themselves thus bereft of all
society, entertained themselves in a joint entertainment. Fair eyes which
speak in your sweet regards, wherefor do you deprive the Readers and my pen of
its function, and so many fair Ladies from the agreeable pleasure of your
amorous discourses; which I cannot recount amorously enough: I not having had
the honor to be an auricular or ocular testator of their co^munications: you
are cause that a world of honest men make uncivil quarrels to my spirit, which
might not very diliciously be delivered of the divine conceptions of your
amorous souls, that you have hidden from it under your silence: but one thing
consolates me which writing not but for your fair ones, who have a million of
Cavaleers slaves to your beauty; you discover in an instant these amorous
characters, that the learned passion has often explicated if the sots and the
deformed rail against the misprizal that I make of it, fair ones remember you
defend me, or make retreat to your gracious beauties and my spirit, which
should be of the rose and lillies, and my pen of thorns for the conservation of
both: I cannot accompany my book every where to assist it, but I hope this good
office from your grace and beauties which sill all the world with respect and
honor, and which from their amorous beams discipated the insupportable
indiscretions, as from the nocturnal obscurity which troubled the furtherance
of their society.

These Lovers were not at all troubled to give to their eyes the self same
pleasure they had a thousand times received, if Vincia had not in a manner
separated them by force and caused this fair Princess to go to bed, that she
might not be sick on the next day. The night was soon passed. And Lozia
according to the designs of Vincia espoused her Clerio, as I have already told
you most happily: It was somewhat late when they returned, which was the cause
that these damsels being surprised with so sudden nuphials, did rather think
of preparations to bed then to supper, for Vincia who demeaned her self like a
married woman, and Clerio did use the like fallacy to deceive these poor
Damsels.

So as the Chamber was made ready Lozia commanded Vincia to go to bed, who
seemed unwilling, and in the end she answered her, Madam, I will not go to my
bed until I have had the honor to see you in yours: Lozia who well understood
her design, soon accorded thereunto, to the end that the Damsels might no more
return into her chamber, unless it were one whose name was Charlotta, who came
out of Fance with Vincia, and was well acquainted with their actions: Vincia
gave the good night to her Mistress and accompained with Damsels went to bed,
the Damsels after they had seen her in bed did all depart, to give place to
Clerio; who in stead of going to bed to his dear Cousin (to whom he was so much
engaged) kissed her and went to his Spouse who extremely desired his company.

These two passionate Lovers ravished with their ravishments, being in bed
together remained dumb, to give audience to their loves, in the middle of a
thousand sweet kisses: which perfectly united their hearts, their eyes and their
mouths. Thus these two amorous souls remained captivated in one another arms
all this night; until the morning: When as the radient beams of Phoebus golden
light provoked them both to arise from their beds.

Ladies, I shall not here relate at large the several pastimes and exercises
that were diurnally practiced during the continuance of this wedding, which
lasted for the space of eight days with great magnificence for the honor of
Clerio; but I shall return to Don Allio who continuing his amorous suit, and
the Duke of Blantfort perceiving that Lozia regarded him with a pleasing
aspect, thereupon began to doubt that his purposes would have no good end, and
therefore he resolved to carry her away violently and marry her to the Prince
of Doudonne his son, that he might be exempted from those continual alarums
which he dreaded. Wherefore, he came one day in the company of thirty men to
visit Lozia; but principally to put his horrid design in execution. Lozia was
astonished to see so many men, and did not know what to imagine, and the Duke
of Blantfort approaching uttered this discousre to her.

My Neice, I have been advertised, that Don Allio should espouse you on this
day, and therefore I (shall be much blamed if it shall so happen) having the
honor to be entrusted with the care of your person: If this evil had happened
to you, I should have died for grief, and therefore so soon as ever I was made
acquainted herewith, I came to you to offer my Castle unto you as a place of
safety: and if you will honor me so much, as to let me have your company
therein, I will desire no greater office during your abode there, then to be
your keeper. These honest Gentle men have done me the honor to accompany me,
that you may retire your self in greater State. Lozia dissembling her design
returned an answer to him in these terms.

Sir, amongst all the Obligations, wherein I am bound to you I account of this,
as the chiefest, and because I will make appear unto you, that I greatly desire
any thing that thou shall think convenient; I will instantly go dress my self,
to go with you, and therefore I would entreat you (if so be you shall think it
good) to take a turn or two in the garden until I am ready, which shall be very
suddenly: The Duke of Blantfort did accordingly, and she presently sent for
Clerio, to whom she said;

Clerio, now is the time wherein there is need for you to show your courage and
affection toward me; can you suffer this Villain to snatch me out of your
arms: Go now (if you love) to Don Allio and both of you gather together the
most of your friends that you can, and kill this Cuckold and his followers, who
will not be sufficiently assured to defend themselves, and let it suffice you
that you have Lozia and her love for your fortune and guide. There were six of
her Gentlemen at that time present, wherefore she caused them to be called to
her, to whom she used these speeches; Sirs, the assurance of your fidelity and
the desire I have to do you good, is the cause you are Gentlemen of my
household, which place many do importunately desire; will you not then dispute
my liberty and your fortunes against this Traitor the Duke of Blantfort, who is
below to carry me away prisoner? They all answered yes: Go then my friends said
she, and do what Clerio shall desire you: at your return every one that does
well shall have 2000 crowns. They all presently departed with this resolution,
that they would fight courageously: Lozia then called Clerio and said to him,
my Dear, let me once more kiss you and bestow a Ribbon on you, that you being
filled with love and fortune may be invisible.

Fair on (answered Clerio) if your fair eyes have bestowed life on my love,
ought I not to hope that your favors will give vivacity to my honor; which with
a million of Charms hidden under this Ribon, will render me invincible. When he
had spoken these words to Lozia, being full of ambition, valor and love; he
went from her and resolved with these six Gentlemen of Lozia's and two of his
own, to set upon the Duke of Blanfort who had 30; and he would not call Don
Allio, least he should have buthalf the honor of the victory. He went into the
Armory of Lozia's deceased father, and there he caused these Gentlemen to take
each of them a Cuyrase, lest the thought of so many men should astonish them,
and before he departed he said to them.

Sirs, to testify the care which I have of your lives, and the desire which we
have this day to do good service to our Mistress, has been the cause that I
have prayed every one of you to arm your selves. There is never one of us who
carries notwritten in his front, the death of ten of these Rascals, who are
come not with a courage to fight, but with a pernicious design to rob us of our
mistress and our fortune, which wholly depends on her. Consider Sirs, the cruel
affront which these slaves give us, and the shameful reproach which we shall
receive of all the world: where shall we find shadows obscure enough to hide
us from this Reproach? Can there be a better design for us to show our courages
in, then in defense of our Mistress? Our devoir invites us thereunto, our
ambition carries us thither, and our honor obliges us thereunto. Then I pray
Sirs let us go, and you shall soon see those people in disorder: Let us
dispatch then, said they all with one voice. Clerio and his small company went
presently into the place where the Duke of Blanfort was, accompanied with his
followers; and advanceing before the rest of his Company with his sword in his
hand, he set upon them, and in the end he himself killed the Prince of
Doudonne, who for a time defended himself with much vivacity: his Companions
likewise behaved themselves with so gallant demeanor, and showed so apparently,
that their carriages were excellent, and in short time they killed a good part
of them, and put the rest to flight. The Duke of Blanfort fled with them, and
they could not follow them so swiftly as they desired, by reason of their
armor, Lozia, who saw this tragedy out of her window; being extreme glad of the
happy success of her Clerio, went before and embraced him, and his followers
one after another: She gave Clerio a Picture worth 50000 crowns, and to each of
the others 1000 crowns, and a Spanish horse worth 500 crowns. The Duke of
Blanfort being enraged at this affront, and dissparing for the loss of his son,
caused twelve of Lazia's towns to revolt against her service.

But this great and courragious Princess, who had three or four Millions in the
Coffers of her deceased father, in stead of being amazed laughed at this
foolishnes, and soon gave commissions to raise forces, provided munitions of
war, and levied foot, with such diligence, that within fifteen days she had
1000 horses, 15000 foot men and 20 pieces of Cannon; her Army being raised, she
gave the charge thereof to Clerio, and gave him money to pay six months wages
to his soldiers. She took an oath of fidelity of all the Captains, and prayed
Clerio to go and besige the place where the Duke of Blanfort was retired, with
express charge to bring him alive or dead.

Clerio took leave of this fair Princess after a thousand sweet and dear
embracements, a thousand kisses and a thousand tears, a thousand sights and a
thousand joys, which Mars and Cupid equally drew from their hearts. Whilst he
conducted his army, Don Allio being advertised of the need Lozia had of her
friends, without saying a word raised 5000 horsemen, and six thousand
footmen, with eight pieces of Attillery, and in this equipage went to visit
his Mistress; who being informed of his coming, went before in her Coach that
she might see his Troops. He himself being mounted on a fair Spanish Geniet,
went before all his Troops; and no sooner had he heard that his Mistress was in
the Coach, but he dismounted to go kiss her hands. Lozia understanding hereof,
in sign of favor caused her Coach to be opened, and kissed him in recompense of
his service and affection which he bore her. After Don Allio was seated in the
Coach with her he said.

Fair Princess I am much vexed that I was not with you to aid you, at the time
that the Duke of Blanfort came to you so well accompanied; and if Clerio had
the life of my Rival, I might at least have had his fathers for my part: But
seeing that my cross fortune hindered me in so good an occasion to render you
good service; I humbly entreat you favorably to receive my friends which I
offer to you: who are no less affectionate to your service then your Allio, who
has as much passion and love for your service, as your beauties and eyes have
fire and flames for my ruin, they burn me and command me with so amorous and
sweet Tyranny, that my obeisance and servitude are more honorably agreeable,
then the most absolute commandments and most free liberties. Fair one, we are
come hither to render this first homage of our affection, to receive the honor
of your commands. Lozia answered him thus.

Sir, I find my self much obliged to you for so much courtesy and charge, as
you have put your self to, to testify your affection to me. I know not how to
refuse these fair Troops, who seem to be sull of triumphs. I have already made
Clerio General of my army, to recompense him with the honor of so fair a
charge, for the honor which he has acquired in doing me so special a service.
But as for your troops, you are so gallant, that I will not have them be
commanded by any other General but your self.

Madam, (said Don Allio) I am not come to you in hopes to be General of an
Army, but to render you my service; and if Fortune will favor me so much as to
make my service profitable to you, I shall be much honored. When he had said
thus, he asked Lozia to give him a favor, she being desirous to pleasure him,
took off one of her garters which was bordered at the ends with pearls, and
tying it on his arm she said: I desire that it be as happy to you, with as good
a will I give it you. He mounted on horseback, being extremely contented, and
departing to his Soldiers who staid for him, he sent all his Captains to do
reverence to Lozia, who because she would oblige them to her service, gave them
her hands to kiss, which was an extraordinary favor. Don Allio departed and
went to join his forces to those of Clerio's, who went before to meet him, and
offered him the Command of his Army, but he thanked him for this honor; and
said to him, I give my self and friends to you; then Clerio embraced him, and
told him that he was his servant, and Clerio asked him if he would lead the
Rear, or the Van guard. Don Allio desiring to fight often, desired to have the
conduct of the Vanguard. Then Clerio set his Army in battle array, and went to
besiege the Duke of Blanfort, who was in one of the best places in the Country,
which the deceased father of Lozia had caused to be fortified as the most
assured place of retreat. The fortifications of this place were so strong, that
it was in a manner accounted impregnable.

When Clerio aproached, the Duke of Blanfort issued forth, but was forced to
retire; but in the end he was so blocked up by sea and by land, that it was
impossible for a Lackey to come forth; and they had some quotidian bickerings
with the enemy, and the Duke of Blanfort in the town did much damage to
Clerio's Army by his pieces of Cannon, but Clerio did timely prevent it with
much diligence, notwithstanding all his endeavors he continued in the siege so
long, that in the mean time, the Queen of England sent a great Army into Spain,
which landed without any repulse, and the King being surprifed, lost many towns
before he could fortify one. The Captain General of the English Army sent two
Lords to Clerio, to treat of peace with him, or at leastwise a Nutrality: At
the same time the King of Spain sent to his Cousin Lozia to aid him with her
forces. Clerio gave the charge of the Siege to Don Allio and went to his fair
Mistress, to ask counsel of her, after their accustomed imbracement Clerio said
to her,

Mistress, I remember that I have read a Fable which says, that whilst two
great Mastiffs fought for a piece of flesh, a little dog got it away. You may
here see the like occasion, that whilst these two puissant enemies fight with
one another, it will be an easy matter for me to triumph over them both, they
both call me to their aid, but this siege serves as a fair excuse, which I
think best (if you think good) to continue until opportunity serve to execute
our design, and in the mean time to remain as Neuter.

I know well Clerio (said Lozia) that you have a courage and understanding
admirable; go forward with your design; Lozia, and what means she can procure,
shall assist your ambition, even to the end. Having said thus, and having tears
in her eyes, she further said. Clerio my friend, I pray write to me often, to
the end that being deprived of your presence, I have your spirit continually
before my eyes. She then called the Gentle man who came from the King of Spain
and said to him; Sir, go with the General of my army, and treat with him, for a
young Maid as I am, cannot understand the mannaging of affairs, and assure the
King that I am his most humble Servant. This Gentleman took leave of Lozia, and
went to the Army with Clerio, who so soon as he was arived, writ this Letter to
the King of Spain.

Sir,
YOur Majesty has not a more affectionate servant in this Kingdom then I am,
who never had so much sorrow for any thing as that I cannot testify it in so
good an occasion, so soon as I desire, my honor and the good of my Mistress do
so much depend on this Siege, which I cannot raise unless I lose one or the
other: But soon after the taking of this town, which will be suddenly as I
think, I have commandment to go find your Majesty, to render to you all the
good services I shall be worthy of.

Yours, CLERIO.


When the King had read this excuse, he was angered; nevertheless the hope which
he had of soon having this aid, did extremely content him.

In the mean time the English lost no time; for he surprised places, he
besieged good towns, became Master of the field, and sent new Ambassadors to
Clerio, with fair and rich presents to desire his Company. Clerio returned them
this answer:

Sirs, I cannot honestly fight against my King, this duty hinders me to enter
into League with you, but however I will not refuse the affection of so great a
Queen as is yours; you see that six thousand men are not sufficient to take
this town, and with the twenty thousand more which remain, I shall but
incommodate your Army: Nevertheless I promise you not to remove any thing until
I have taken it, which will not be suddenly; and then I shall see what I have
to do.

These men being thus satisfied, returned to their General, who was very glad
that Clerio showed himself to be indifferent. In this time Clerio's Lacquies
never left carrying of Letters between him and Lozia, and if they all gave
consolation to her mind, yet one proved unfortunate, for a bullet of a Cannon
flew against the window of Clerio's Chamber, and killed a Gentleman, whose
bones gave Clerio such a blow, that he fell down for dead as he was a writing to
his Mistress. The Lacquey seeing what had happened, took the letter half
written, and carried it with this sad news to Lozia, who being wholly
transported to see this Paper, took it of him, and before she had read it,
being impatient asked of him, if Clerio were dead: who answered yes, at this
word she fell down in a swoon; Vincia presently sent away the Lacquey, and took
so great care of her Mistress, that she brought her to her senses in a quarter
of an hour; when she read these words which Clerio had written:

FAir Princess, you could not more honorably renderme slave to a thousand and a
thousand amorous wishes, of the beauties and graces which Heaven and Nature
has bestowed on your soul and Visige, then in making me Leader of so fair an
army; who having the honor to command it, am deprived a thousand times in a
day, of the honor to obey you: So full of displeasure and love, Fair one I die.


At these last words, she cried out, Oh disastrous Lozia! (then being
interrupted with a violent grief, she lost her speech which love soon made
rendition of unto her:) Lozia, no, but the miserablest living, seeing that in a
moment thou have lost the possession of the gallantest Cavaleer in the world;
whom Nature had formed the most perfect and most reserved that she had to
render an amorous marvel of Virtue and Honor; Clerio, dare I any more in this
misfortune pronounce this fair name, which I religiously honor? who in his life
time has given me a thousand sweet deaths: and in his honorable deaths, a
thousand unhappy lives. O my eyes, weep until your cold tears of grief
extinguish with my life their deadly flames, which have sometimes served as
fire of joy to honor at housand and a thousand amorous triumphs, which you have
made of the liberty and heart of this brave one. Then she transformd these
their amorous mortal parols into sighs and tears.

Vincia on the other side cried bitterly for the loss of her Cousin, and had
much ado to keep her self from swooning; but she knowing that her Mistress had
no other comforter but her, did earnestly entreat her to have patience.

Ah Vincia (said Lozia) am not I unhappy, to have innocently sought for the
death of him, who with the perils of his life has preserved mine, from the
hands of this cruel Tyrant, who is the cause of my ill hap?

Wherefore do not I go into some corner of the world, to waste away the rest of
my days? Vincia, read a little this letter, where you shall see an incredible
amorous passion; and these last words which serve as a prophecy for our il
hap. At this instant she heard some knock at the door; Is not their yet enough
said she, what ill fortune? Vincia arose, and she had hardly opened the door,
when Lozia espying a Gentleman of Clerio's, said to him, my friend, your Master
is dead, and I see him dead in dying. Dead! (said he) Madam, behold a letter of
his which he has commanded me to bring to you. What is not Clerio dead? (said
Lozia) No Madam (God be thanked) (said he) he was only a little astonished at
the blow: and for fear you should be frighted, he has expressly sent me to you,
to assure you that he is well. Is not Clerio dead! (said Lozia) ought I or can
I believe it: Vincia is it possible? Madam (said she) you have more reason to
give credit to a Gentleman then to a Lacquey.

Then this great Princess being transported with pleasure, cast her self on the
neck of this Gentleman and kissed him: but she soon came to herself, and
excused her self with these speeches; Now my friend thou may report that thou
have had a kiss of Lozia, in recompense of so profitable news, whereon depends
the conservation of my State: and then taking the Letter she read it, the words
whereof were these.

FAir Princess, I think that this Gentleman will have need of confession in the
other world, who has failed after his death to make a cruel homicide. I had a
thousand times more lamented the life of a world of innocent loves (which I
hold in possessing your graces and fair eyes) then mine: whose loss would have
been as honorable as happy for your service: But it seems that the heavens have
been willing in my preservation, to witness more good then in my loss. No ill
bath happened unto me in this strange accident, (God be thanked) but only my
arm a little hurt, which in two days will be capable to give three blows with a
sword for your sake; this absence is nothing else but an imperfect table of my
memory, which in the middle of my most pleasant and desired dotings, represents
the best that it can, your spirit, your beauties and your graces, where I
decipher a thousand times in a day, my most divine and most amorous conceptions.

CLERIO.


Vincia led this Gentleman into another chamber, to give him the collation, and
time to her Mistress, to make these new regrets. Lozia (quoth she) how soon an
alteration has this unlooked for news caused in my breast! Vincia having spent
some time with the Gentleman, returned with him unto Lozia, who said to him:
Sir, I pray you tell Clerio that I am so lazy that I know not how to write to
him; and I pray let him not know that I was informed of his death: let him send
me word in what estate the Army is in, if he hopes to take the town soon or no,
or if he needs any thing. The Gentleman departed and went to his Master, who
had planted his Cannons in the Trench. In the mean time the English executed
his affairs so well, that he had already possessed himself of the third part of
Spain.

Clerio fearing that the number of places would render him so strong, and his
often victories so redoubtable, that it would be hard to defeat him; set upon
his own enemies so rigorously, that in eight days he constrained the
Inhabitants to yield the Town to him, because they would not be pillaged; and
the Duke of Blanfort who began to premeditate of his flight, was so astonished
at his rising to see so great a number besiege his house, that he had pains
enough in the midst of so many perils, to make choice of the least; and all the
ambition of this poor Prince was, in the ballancing of his life and honor,
metamorphosed in a base desire to be slave to his enemy, and serve as a triumph
to him, into whose hands he might with the loss of his honor, hope for some
assurance of his miserable life. These cogitations having possessed him, he
resolved to yield, which he did; and being brought to the Army, Clerio honestly
received him; and having him at his side he entered as a glorious Master of the
Town and Governor. So soon as he had appointed a sufficient Garrison of
Soldiers therein, and left money to repair the ruins thereof he departed, and
led the Duke to his Mistress to abide her doom. This fair Princess was at that
time as much possessed with choler as joy, to see her spouse and her enemy,
the one full of honor and glory, and the other of disdain and shame; to whom she
said these words. I wonder that I see you in any other place then on a Scaffold
wicked one as thou art, who have dared to enterprise on my person; and
practiced a Rebellion in my estate: but assure thy self that I will be revenged
of thy perfidiousnes with so much justice, and the subject which I have, that I
will render thee the miserablest that ever was; if thou do not between this
and to morrow, yield up all the places which thou hold, I will cruelly kill
thee. Then turning her self toward Clerio she said. I pray take this man from
my presence, his only sight puts me into extreme choler, and above all things
in the world have a care that he be strictly guarded. He would have spoken but
the Princess because she would not hear him, went from thence into another
chamber to entertain Clerio, who went unto her and remained with her all that
night, and had remained there all his life time in such agreeable delight, if
Mars (at his rising) had not placed a sword at his side to go combat the proud
English, who already thought themselves Masters of Spain, whose whole hopes of
liberty was staid in the only valor of Clerio, who having besieged the best
place which they had with forty pieces of Ordnance and 30000. footmen, staid
not there but eight days before it was delivered; and thus continuing his
sieges and Victories, he took one by one all the Towns which the English held,
always leaving the field free. When he had placed Garrisons in the places
which he had taken, he took the field and pursued the English so quickly, that
he constrained them to fight, and they had no sooner given Battle but they
lost it, where poor Don Allio was slain, who despairing in his love, had not
above two hours before sent a Letter to his Mistress.

This happy Victory gave so much reputation to Clerio, fear to his Enemy and
jealousy to the Spaniard, that the one fled, and the other assured himself of
his suspicion. The apprehension of death could not give the English so swift
wings to save themselves, as the ambition and honor of Clerio to take them.
And because I shall be too long in describing the Arms, the Horses, the
spoils, and money which the Soldiers gained, it shall suffice to tell you
that this glorious happy vanquisher lead the General to the fair Lozia, who at
one time made two superbous Triumphs of vanquisher and vanquished. This fair
Princess who desired nothing so much as the honor of Clerio, left all to his
discretion, and he who had more ambition then avarice, in stead of placing him
in surety in some strong Hold, and treat of Ransom, said to him; Sir, fortune
has given me enough advantage over you without my searching any new subject of
affliction, if your Soldiers had had as much courage as you, I had been very
like to be in the same danger; I pray you do not think that I detain you here
as a prisoner of War, but as one of my very good friends, and in stead of
Ransom I only ask yours and your Queens favor: your shiping are all
separated and lost, but when you think good to depart you shall command mine.
This Lord was so astonished at this French courtesy, that after he had made a
million of offers of service he extremely thanked him, and advowed that it
appertained to none but Clerio to oblige the Queen and him for this unparalleld
favor; and after he had kissed the hands of the Princess Lozia, he embarked
with a world of fair presents which were given him.

Whilst he makes his Voyage let us return to the King of Spain, who attended
for Clerio to redeliver those places which he had taken, and for that purpose
he sent a Gentleman unto him to treat about this affair: but Clerio who
dreamed of nothing less then the rendition of them, made this answer.

Sir, I know not why the King has so much distrust of the fidelity and
affection which I have sworn to his service. I think that I have given him a
sufficient testimony, having ruined so powerful an enemy, who every day (as you
know) desired me to join with him, offering me the moiety of all that we should
pretend to: but (God be thanked) I never had a will to do so great a disservice
to my Prince. I think it strange, that having had this cognizance, he thinks me
not capable to conserve those Towns which I have been worthy to take. I cannot
suffer it, that taking from me the Government of these places, he gives the
honor of my honor to another, which I have merited with the peril of my life,
and all my friends, who I think will not depart, although I pray them; for
their entertainment serves in recompense of the good services which they have
done to his Majesty under my conduct: I humbly pray you Sir to represent to the
King all these rational Reasons, and assure him of my most humble service.

This Gentleman being departed went to the King, who having heard this
discourse, entered into council to know what course was best to be taken: some
were of advice to declare war against him, others to go seize on him, but one
amongst them who was more sage then the rest spoke in this manner.

Sir, Seeing that your Majesty has done me the honor to confide in me, I
should think my self culpable of a thousand invincible crimes if I should
wander from my opinion to flatter you. Clerio has done a great good to your
Kingdom, what subject soever has caused him, as a close Enemy, that fear and
peril are lesser, then if we had the other, who might have had continual
supplies from the Queen his Mistress. Clerio is in your Country, who we can
easily render odious, he has no strange alliance: I plainly see that he dares
not declare war against you, attending for some slight pretense which you will
put into his hands, with which he will so effectually serve himself, having a
fair and puislant Army, a quantity of places, and means, that he will cause a
great trouble to your Kingdom, and a very great weariness to your Majesty. If
he had once given this beginning to his design, and blur to his ambition, he
would become so extremely odious, that your Kingdom would not suffer him:
furthermore, his Army strengthening daily by his fortune, the King of France,
(although there is a League between you) would secretly assist him. This
weakening of your Estate Sir, would give courage to your Enemies, disobedience
in your Subjects, and happiness to Clerio, who has already a beginning good
enough.

Likewise, if as your Servant he has worthily served you, you will do him a
great affront in taking from him those places which he has (in a manner) made
conquest of, to give the glory of his honor to another: this will offend him
so much, that he will have a lawful excuse to make war against you. You are so
unprovided of men and money, you ought to take this into consideration. My
advice is, that your Majesty let things alone in the estate they are in, until
your Vessels come from the Indies, you will by little and little augment your
Army, and then it will be a seasonable time to demand of him what part he
holds.

Although these reasons were fair and profitable, yet could they not hinder the
Kings declaring war against Clerio, (although it was but coldly) who because he
would not give bad impressions of his ambition, dared not to encounter with
him, but desired nothing so impatiently, as to vanquish in defending himself,
which was as easy for him to accomplish, as it was for a strong Man to beat a
sick man, who offends him more through malice then force. He soon drew his Army
out of Garrisons, and besiedged Madrid, in such manner that no Victuals could
be carried thereinto.

The people who were impatient, seeing themselves among so many continual
alarm's, their hands, their teeth, and their shops unprofitable, asked for
nothing more then to place these people from their former exercises, to agree
their Prince with Clerio, and peace with their stomachs, who had not digested
war: The King fearing some sedition or revolt, was persuaded by his Council,
and forced by necessity to demand truce of Clerio, who dared not to refuse it,
least his Arms should be reputed more tyranous then just. They therefore agreed
on a truce for six months, each of them designing so well (whilst it should
last) to prepare their business that it being ended, he might easily triumph
over his enemy.

Clerio went soon after to see his fair Lozia (being accompanied with an
honorable Train) who kindly welcomed him. Whilst he was in this Company, he
resolved to make his public wedding; And for that cause he sent a Gentleman
to the King, to entreat him to do him the honor to be present: And although he
was much angered thereat, yet he seemed to be glad: and because he would obliege
him further, he went with all his Court. Great was the resort thither of
Ladies and Knights, and at the Kings entrance there was a fair Tragedy, whose
subject I will be tacent of. When he was arived, Lozia after many humble
salutations, and respectful embracements, said to him.

Sir, Although the valor and merits of Clerio render him worthy, not only to
espouse me, but the greatest Princes in the World: nevertheless, by reason that
he is a stranger, and has not the quality of a Prince, which is rather left to
us, then acquired by us: I know that you will think it strange that I have
contracted secret matrimony with him, and that reported, has gone to have been
with Vincia, But Sir, you know that being under the tyrannical subjection of
the Duke of Blantfort, and honored with the honor I had to appertain to you,
I could not at that time do otherwise: I am glad that his fortune and courage
have rendered him so great, that he deserves one of my quality, and that my
election be worthy of my love. The King interrupting her, said to her, Cousin,
it is better to be Son of fortune, then of a Prince; and embrasing Clerio, he
said to him, Cousin, I will be at your nuptials, and believe me that I make as
of you, that I esteem your alliance more then of the greatest Monarch in the
World. Clerio after he had most humbly thanked him for the honor which he did
him, said to him,

Sir, Your Majesty obliges me so much, to render you service, that there shall
not be a day in all my life, wherein I shall not have the same desire. I very
well know that I am unworthy of the honor of your alliance, and that not I
alone but the greatest of this Kingdom: therefore I rather hold this good
fortune of fortune, and your favor, rather then of any thing in the World. But
seeing that the Heavens and you render me worthy of this good, I will endeavor
to render my self so agreeable and profitable to your Majesty, that you shall
never have cause to repent you self of doing me this Honor. After these
speeches the Company assembled, and were assistant at the espousals of Clerio
and Lozia, and Clerio left nothing undon that might conduce to the contentation
and pleasure of these fair Ladies.

Clerio was so pleased with the honor of so agreeable Hostesses, these fair
Ladies and the King of Spain in these delicious pastimes, that the one would
not have been wearied with these magnificient expenses, nor the other with
receiving so good entertainment, if the Estates had not called the King away to
practice an ill office to him who had made them so welcome. His departure gave
such a trouble to this amorous Assembly, that I cannot represent unto you the
sighs and sad tears which this harsh and mortal separation gave to the hearts
and eyes of those who possessed the favors of their Mistresses, nor the sighs
of hope which others had of this good. This is a Tragedy of Love, which love
himself represented, whilst that they were a drying up of tears for so sad a
departure; let us return to Lozia, who now dares call Clerio her Husband, whom
she before called her Knight, her Servant and General of her Army. This young
Cavalier was now exalted to the top of fortune, who but lately was but an
ordinary Gentleman, and now he dared to claim one of the richest and fairest
Ladies and Princesses in all the World to be his Lady and espoused Wife. Soon
after this the King prepared his Army for the field, and Clerio was no whit
idle in the mean time; but having made fit preparations for war, met the King
his enemy in the field, many bloody fights and encounters were daily, which I
shall omit; but only thus much I shall inform you of, that in one fight, our
brave victorious Champion, not only subdued his enemies, but hand to hand
encountered the King and led him away prisoner in despite of all his enemies,
and won the field and day. Clerio having the King at his pleasure and mercy,
scorned by that means to make a base peace, or to get treasure for his Ransom;
but showing his heroic mind and disposition, he freely and in safety sent him
away into his own Camp. But this perfidious traiterous King conceived such
hatred against Clerio, that he resolved to be revenged not openly, but with a
Revolt and secret Treason, he having secretly given moneys into the hands of
that perfideous Spanish Nation, in such a manner, that one day all the places,
Holds, and Forts that Clerio had in his profession revolted and declared
against him, except that which he had taken from the Duke of Blantfort: the
Soldiers that were garrisoned there being Gascoigns, who rather looked to
their honor then wealth. Thus poor Clerio was taken with so unlooked for
treason, that he had no sooner the possession then the knowledge of his ill hap,
neither had he time to remedy it, but only he resolved rather to die (in
defending himself and his Lady) honorably, then to yield to the mercy of his
merciless enemy. Lozia having had the cognizance of this ill hap, was amazed at
the novelty, and astonished with fear, not for the loss of her estate and life,
but for that of Clerio, who she was sure, was of so undanted a spirit and
courage, that he would rather die then let his honor die, or diminish one jot
in yielding himself to his enemy: wherefore she made all haste possible to the
place where he was, she found him in a sharp dispute with his enemies,
maintaining with the point of his Sword, and all conquering and invinsible Arm,
a breach which his enemies had made in the wall; resolving rather to leave his
life in the place, then suffer any of those perfideous Currs to enter therein.
But Lozia's coming hindered him of his design; for she so far prevailed with
him, that she drew him (although unwillingly) from the place, and afterward
made such lamentable and pitiful speeches to him, that he whose courage was not
to be overmastered with the sword of the bravest enemies, was now wholly
subdued, vanquished, and conquered by her tears, in such manner that for grief
he swooned in the place, she taking this oppertunity, soon conveyed him a
Shipboard, and having provided her self sufficiently with Jewels and treasure
embarked likewise with Vincia and some others, and having a fair wind
presently set sail, leaving the Town to the mercy of this merciless and cruel
enemy. The Ship had sailed a good space of time ere Clerio recovered his
senses; but when he had recollected himself, and understood how all things had
happened, he much wondered at so sudden an alteration, and being much angered
and tormented with himself, he complained against his fortune and destinies,
and was enraged to think that he should in so sad a condition leave his fellow
Soldiers, who had so bravely and resolutely defended his fortune and their
own. But Lozia who with her charms was at any time able to subdue him, did at
last so far prevail that she made him rest contented in outward appearance,
though not inwardly in his mind, and now the ship having sailed sometime, they
began to consider what part it was best for them to take. Clerio knowing that
Lozia had so well provided for wealth resolved to spend the rest of his life in
peace and tranquillity, and to that intent and purpose, he commanded that they
should sail directly toward the great River Nilus, which place was then
inhabited by Christians, they had not long continued in this their course, but
they espied Land, which caused gladness and joy to spring in their hearts. The
Ship being come near the shore, Clerio commanded the Ordnance that were in the
ship should be discharged, which made such a resounding Echo in those parts,
that the Inhabitants flocked to the Sea side, that they might understand the
cause of this so sudden a novelty, where they were no sooner arived, but they
might see our Hero and Heroesse landing, and they were so stricken in
admiration at so ravishing a prospect, as was that of Lozia, that they thought
the Gods and Goddesses were come to visit them; but they soon changed their
opinions, having had the happiness to hear the Tongues of Lozia and Clerio
speak to them. These Inhabitants seeing the courteous demeanor of these new
come strangers, offering them all their assistance in helping their
necessities, but they kindly thanked them. These strangers being now come,
Clerio with all expedition caused workmen to build a fair Palace, wherein he
and his beauteous Lady might consummate the remaining parts of their lives,
which being built, they passed their time therein, entertaining themselves
always with their loves, and they caused little windows to be made, whereby
they might have a prospect to Nilus, and other Rivers and Islands there
adjoining. And thus in the middle of these delights, they deliciously passed
away many years, exempted from vanity, fear, and ambition, receiving more
pleasure in their misfortune, and in the possession of so little Land, then
they ever had in their tryumphs, victories, and happy success, with a world of
good fortune. Here was a continual Melody of Birds, and all the delights that a
Rural Habitation could afford.

Clerio would have ended his days in these loves, if Mars jealous of his good
had not raised the Turk against the Christians, but honor and Religion obliged
him to defend them, they having chosen him for their Captain and Leader. This
unhappy War snatched him from the arms of his fair Lozia, who being extremely
afflicted at his resolution, took him aside, and used many persuasions to cause
him not to go through with his enterprise; but he considering that his honor
and Religion depended chiefly thereon, would by no means condescend to her
desires, but having given her a thousand Kisses and sweet loving embraces, he
departed from her, leaving her to her solitudes, and leaving for her comfort
her Damsel Vincia, who for the sake of her Cousin Clerio enterprized any thing
to conduce to his happiness and good, and to remove her Mistress from
solitariness, using all the comfortable expressions that her capacity afforded
her. Whilst Vincia and Lozia remained at home, Clerio gave battle abroad to his
enemies, which added such luster to his person in that he always remained
Conqueror and Master of the field, that in few days his valor gave an
incredible reputation to the Christians, and an extreme fear to the Hearts of
these Barbarians. Always persuing his Victory and fortune, he remained Master
of the field, Cities and Towns were rendered to him, some voluntarily, some
through fear, and others by siege: he founded Hospitalls, instituted Religions,
and builded Churches. The Christians had kept the Levant in the knowledge of
God, and under their authority even unto the end of the World, if they had not
been defeated by themselves, with a foolish ambition, which gave advantage to
the Turks, who having an unequal number, soon vanquished his enemies.

This happened between two Lords, who having like command in the Christian Army
during the absence of Clerio, who was gone to visit his Mistress. One of these
was so wicked and perfideous, that he turned Turk, and revenged himself on his
own soul, and all the Christians together.

This Treason was so utilious to this Barbarian, and so prejudicial to ours,
that he easily defeated the Armies, and in the midst of this disorder, retook
the Towns.

Clerio being filled with courage and despair, could not put order to so
confused a confusion, and do he what he could, he could not possibly gather
together above ten thousand men, who with so good a Leader performed their
parts so well, that the Enemy was greatly incommodated. He gained one Battle
where he took the Bassa, and with this handful of men performed a world of
gallantries. The Turk seeing the courage and fortune of Clerio, raised another
Army of 100000 men, and pressed so near to Clerio, that he foreed him to fight,
where he and his were vanquished with victory, having all the day long killed
so many, that their weariness was the cause of their defeat, not the valor of
these Dogs. Clerio yet rallied 1000. or 1200 men, who for his last refuge he
carried to his house. This Tyrant followed him, besieged him, and set him so
furiously, that if his courage, by his often scouting forth, had not somewhat
hindered them, they had taken it that very same day. The next day this Turk
renewed this assault, and at last made a breach where the poor Princess Lozia
being no less courageous then amourous, kept Company with Clerio all the day on
the breach, and defeated as many enemies with the sweet admiration of her
beauty, as Clerio with the bloody blows of his Sword. But these two Lovers
being in the end wearied with their ill hap, went a little to rest themselves
on a Bed, to gain some new strength to their now feebled force, in this sweet
sleep they suffered the mortal Crises of their lives and fortunes: for the
enemy persued them so sudainly, that having gained the bass Court of the
Castle, he would within two hours have been Master thereof. But the god Cupid
thinking that their shame would have been his, let loose his wings, and
carrying the poison with him, (wherein he was wont to temper his mortal darts)
presented it to Vincia, and said to her,

My friend, if you love so much as you ought the honor of your Cousin, and
this fair Princess, put this Nectar into their mouths, which the gods have
sent them to render them immortal, to the end, that by this means they may be
freed from this Tyrant. You shall in one instant see them so divine and so
fair, that in the twinkling of an eye, they will vanish from these barbarous
Troops, as Clouds from the sight of so clear and divine Beams. Vincia being as
much ravished with the beauty of this fair Messenger, as persuaded with his
persuasion, and desired desires, imagining her self to be already some little
Saint in the Paradise of these looked for deities, took this sole dissolving
poison from the deceitful hands of love, and with hers being innocent put it to
their lips.

These two Lovers feeling the mortal effects of this poison, at one time both
awaked, and after a thousand kisses and dear imbracements, Clerio finding
himself at the end of his fortunes and life, took his leave of Lozia in many
sad and dolful speeches, and calling for his Gentlemen he said to them. Sirs,
excuse me I entreat you, If I have not yet done any thing for you to disingage
me from the obligation which I owe you, it very much grieves my soul: come I
pray you that I may embrace you, and take with this my last adieu all my money
and jewels. Go my friends treat with this Barbarian for the conservation of
your lives and estates, and for the honor of your Master who dies.

These poor Gentlemen retired in tears and sighs not having power to speak one
word.

Clerio hearing the sighs of his Cousin, and the just reproaches which she gave
to Love, for having so cruelly deceived her; comforted her with loving
speeches, but she refusing all comfort resolved to die with them, and therefore
she took the rest of that portion which remained that Clerio and Lozia had not
drunk.

Lozia likewise finding her self ready to expire, turned toward Clerio and
gave many a pitiful sigh, and uttered many words in tears, and at last
embracing one another in their arms, and both making a sigh at one time, these
two souls confusedly carried on the wings of one sigh went to the Elisian
fields, where Love who attended them in the company of a thousand and a
thousand Lovers went before them, and with honor gave them the honor of the
most honorable place, as they who were most worthy. A thousand Crowns honored
their heads, a thousand Loves their Loves, and a thousand Triumphs their
Victories. Let us here leave these two Lovers in their new delights, and come
to Vincia, who having perceived this mortal separation, embraced Clerio and
Lozia, a thousand times one after another, and in the middle of these tears and
sighs, drew these speeches from her heart, with most impatient passions of her
soul.

Clerio art thou dead? And thou fair Lozia? Alas, I yet feel some warmth on
their amorous cheeks! Your fair souls, have they already left these perfect
beauties, which the heavens and nature jealous of this fair work, jealously
honor? Alas! must I close these fair eyes, which amorously kills after death
those who have the honor to see them; and this dilicate mouth, which with a
thousand fair discourses, seasoned with the grace and sweetness of speech,
annimateth souls with ravishment? Fair hands, must mine render yours this last
office of duty and affection, closing you under this sheet, with all the
beauties and graces together? Alas! pardon me for your death fair Mistress,
which I have innocently procured; by the artifice and treason of this
Perfidious: But I do ill to accuse him, it was not reasonable that this royal
Majesty, these beauties, these sweet, these pretty, these amorous members should
serve for a Trophy to this Barbarian, who to honor his Trophies, would have
publicly dishonored them: and to the end, that my eyes may lose the honor of
seeing you, losing theirs also in the middle of these tenebrosities, fair one I
follow you; and pronounsing these speeches, she fell down dead at the feet of
the fair Lezia.

In this mean time, the Turk accorded with these Gentlemen what they desired:
and knowing that Clerio and Lozia were sick, had yet this respect (in despite
of his cruclties) that he caused the fattery to cease, and he made this answer
to those who brought him the news of their death, demanding permission to build
a monument to bury then in.

I will not refuse this honor to so great a Prince and his Wife; but I will
spend one hundred thousand Crowns to render them worthy the bravest Cavalier
and the fairest Princess that ever was, and I would it had cost me two millions
that they had lived.

He entered into the Castle, and seeing Clerio and Lozia under a Cloth of Gold,
covered with a sheet, he commanded that they should be uncovered, and after he
had honored the memory of the valor and merits of this Prince, turning his
eyes on the fair Body of Lozia, he one by one looked over her beauties and
Graces, who seemed rather to be in a sweet sleep of love then death, which this
barbarous heart received with one thousand regrets, and two thousand so living
sighs, or rather so mortal flames, that he served as a victim to himself to
expiate his cruelties.

The tears and sighs of the vanquishers and vanquished, were in such manner
mingled together that grief and victory were equal in their inequality. In this
time the workmen finished the Tomb which was of Jasper, mingled with Pearls
and precious stones, so fair and so rich, that better could not be, where these
Gentlemen with a thousand sighs, and a thousand tears, honorably buried Vincia
and Clerio, and the fair Lozia. Fait Ladies, let us leave these Gentlemen in
their Voyage, and these Levers in their rest.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Na. Brent.
May 8. 1652.

