A LETTER FROM Sr MARMADVKE LANGDALE, GENERAL of the Northern Forces; TO Sir
CHARLES LVCAS: CONTAINING A clear Relation of all their proceedings in the
North: With an hopeful assurance of a speedy Relief to COLCHESTER.

After the Original Copy, truly transcribed.

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1648.

A LETTER FROM Sir MARMADUKE LANGDALE General of the Northern Forces, TO Sir
CHARLES LUCAS.
SIR,
YOur gallantry in resolution and action during that fierce and furious Siedge
of Colchester, has already confirmed in us that noble opinion which we ever
retained of you in all your undertakings, both for spirit and knowledge. Valor
acquits it self best in extremes: Of this your loyal prowess has given an
ample testimony. We here, who truly love and honor you, and who with some of
our best and choicest Forces hope in a very short time to Relieve you; could
not retain less then a deep resentment of the diversion of those
nobly-disposed Royalists, who engaged their Persons for your Succor: with the
pre-mature fall of that active Spark of true Native Honor, the Lord Francis
Villers: upon whose Surprised and dis-armed Body, report informs us, that such
inhumanity by a Mechanic hand was committed; as Barbarism it self would
conceive Horror to be an Actor in a Subject of such cruelty. But what shall
either you or we collect from these tragic overtures, but the implacable hate
and heat of an odious perfidious Foe, flaming from a furious desire of imbruing
his treacherous hands in the blood of all Such as profess themselves faithful
Servants in defense of their Princes honor, safety of their Country, her just
and ancient Liberties! for which we Fight: and for preservation of which, we
shall ever hold it a devotionall loyalty to engage our persons, fortunes, with
whatsoever is most dear unto us. The cruelty they show to ours, might prescribe
us a Rule what to do, when it shall please God that we be (which we hope ere
long to be) Masters of the field. But revenge in actions of cruelty shall ever
be as far estranged from our thoughts: as theirs, since first these Civil
unnatural Wars were broached, have been from harboring loyalty or compassion.
Mean time, these men's designs, who push at nothing lower then Crowns, may
afford both you and us, who stand in defense of a just Cause, and no private
Interest, as God is our witness) this useful Lesson, Rather to sacrifice our
Lives to a noble and memorable fate; then to submit to an imperious merciless
Foe.

Hold out, brave Sir; continue your resolution; pursue your Sallies: let not
their numerous Recruits amate you, (give me leave for the true zeal I bear to
your Cause, and love to your person, to enforce this needless advice:) you
need little doubt, but if Skippon's power of inlisting men be abridg'd, as we
hear it is: that these recruits or fresh supplies cannot continue long.
Sedition, have it never so specious pretenses, nor powerful Favorites; it
will at one time or other be unmasked, and show its own deformity; which shown,
those who followed her, and foolishly fawned on her, will become much ashamed
that their mis-guided judgments should be ever taken with so deceiving a beauty.

Now to enliven the hopes of all that brave and honorable Cavalry there with
you; Think every Evening, how we are one days March nearer you then we were in
the Morning: and that our heartiest wishes go along with you; as we are very
confident within few days, with our hands to assist you. And to confirm the
apparancy of these hopes, you may be pleased herewith to receive an Abstract of
our proceedings, together with the Order we observe, and Success we receive in
our March toward you; which you may with assurance communicate to my L.
Goring, my L. Capell; to whom, I beseech you present my affectionatest Service,
with all others of concern.

Having divided our Army into two several Bodies, both for accommodation of
Quarter, as also to reduce such Neutrall Counties in either Division, as upon
appearance of a visible Force were easily to be made Ours: it was my Charge
with sundry other English Co^manders of eminent quality and under my Conduct,
to march Northwest; His Excellence, High Lord General of the Scottish Forces,
North-east. In our March we found an opposing, but no considerable Party ready
to encounter us near Appleby; but they were quickly driven to a speedy retreat,
and in such confusion, as their fear enforced them to make choice of such a
place for their Quarter, as of all others, was most incommodious for relieving
Soldiers. Their retreat to that part of the Country made was for their ruin;
being to encounter afresh with the Scots, by whom they were, though not totally
routed, fearfully distressed.

Since which time, Scarborough a Port-town of main consequence; with the
Castle, a Fort of impregnable strength, have declared for the King.

In our address to Kendall, we found the Town generally well-affected: Such as
had been before Officers and active Instruments for the Public; upon remove
of some principal Fomenters of Sedition in those parts, because wholly Ours.
These we received, and conferred Places of employment and Command upon them
according to their qualities, and capacities of managing them.

We apparently found, during our short abode there; that nothing had so much
infected the affections of the people, as the seditious doctrine of sundry
Sectaries and Non-conformatists in those parts, who bestowed their oil in
laying adulterate colors upon the face of Rebellion.

But their fear of danger has caused them to leave their pasture: By whose
absence and apprehension of their own errors, their deluded Flock is now
brought back to the fold of Loyalty. So clear we left that part, or angle
rather, of the County.

In our March to Lancaster, we met with no opposition. For the Town, it is
rather Neutrall then cordially Loyal; howbeit, the Inhabitants pretended
themselves Ours: for these, much like the popular affections of most men in
those parts, move and remove just as they see our Forces move. Some will wonder
why we made it not our work in our March, to take in the Castle, being a place
of such strength and convenience for receiving and entertaining Garrisons to
keep those parts in awe and subjection; which otherwise, by the factious advice
and practice of Incendiaries, (of which number there is no County but it has
one corner or other sufficiently stored) might break out into open Rebellion;
or such dangerous innovation, as it might highly trench upon the safety and
welfare of those adjacent parts. But my Answer is, as there is at this time no
considerable Force within the Castle; which concludes it less formidable: So
our times of Speedy marching are no convenient seasons for besieging. Let us
first do the work we came for in the County, and all these Forts will find
hands to open their Gates to us cheerfully. There was no report which we
received with more acceptance then the reduction of some Commanders in those
parts; who, weary of engaging their lives, estates, and liberties, in so unjust
and disloyal a quarrel, became firm and faithful Cavaliers: and being persons
of quality, drew others by their example, to the like practice of obedience and
loyalty. I shall not need to instance them; their personal employments will
witness so much for them.

In this our March toward Preston, we fear no overtures. Heavy taxes and
grievous quarterings have made many already shake off the insupportable yoke of
their slavery. The father we go, the more confident we are. Cheshire hears of
our advance with much cheerfulness. The like success we receive by Letters
from his Excellence.

Dear Sir, hold out but a little, a very little space; your friends will visit
you, and bring you off with honor: and with joint embraces congratulate you,
for making loyalty your object of valor.

Sir, Your most constant Servant, M.L.


