THE RESURRECTION Rescued from the Soldiers Calumnies, In Two SERMONS Preached
at St. Mary's in oxon.

BY ROBERT JONES D.D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lownds at the White Lion in Paul's Churchyard, near
the little Northdoor, 1658.

The Stationer to the Reader.
IT being the constant Custom to usher all sorts of Books into the World with a
Preface, I thought good to give this short Account of the two following
Sermons: Their Author Dr. Robert Jones (a man sufficiently eminent for his
extraordinary parts) was appointed to preach a Resurrection-Sermon on
Easter Day in St. Mary's Church in Oxford; which be performed with very great
applause and satisfaction. Yet having delivered something in the
Repetition-Sermon which did not please the nicer Palates of some of his
Auditors, he was obliged by the Principalls of the University, to make a
Recantation-Sermon; which how ingeniously he performed, I leave the intelligent
Reader after a serious perusal to judge and censure.

Farewell, R. L.

THE REPETITION SERMON.
MAT. 28.13. His Disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept.


What Is the best News abroad? So we must begin: It Is the Garb ( les novelles)
the grand salute, and common Preface to all our talk. And the news goes not as
things are in themselves, but as mensfancies are fashioned, as some lust to
report, and others to believe: The same relation shall go for true or false,
according to the key wherein men's minds are tuned; but chiefly as they stand
diverse in Religion, so they feign and affect different News. By their News ye
may know their Religion, and by their Religion foreknow their News. This week
the Spanish Match goes forward, and Bethleem Gabors Troops are broken; and the
next week Bethleem Gabors Troops go forward, and the Spanish Match is broken.
The Catholic is of the Spanish match, and the Protestant of restoring the
Palatinate; and each party think that the safety of the Church and success of
religion depends upon the event of one or other, and therefore they cross and
counter-tell each others news. Titius came from London yesterday, and he says
that the new Chapel at St. James is quite finished: Caius came thence but this
morning, and then there was no such thing on building. False news follows true
at the heels, and oftentimes outstrips it.

Thus goes the Chronicle-news, the talk of the factius and pragmatick; but the
Christian news, the talk of the faithful is spent in Euangelio, in hearing and
telling some good news of their Savior: and now all the talk is of his
Resurrection. The Christian current goes, News from Mount Calvary, the
sixteenth day of Nisan, in the year thirty four, old style; as the three holy
Matrons deliver it at the eighth verse of this Chapter. But since there are
certain Soldiers arrived, and they say there was no such matter as the
Resurrection, 'twas but a gull put upon the world by his Disciples; for it
fares with spiritual news as with temporal, it is variously and contrarily
related, till the false controls the true. And as our modern News comes neither
from the Court nor the Camp, nor from the place where things are acted, but is
forged in Conventicles by Priests, or in some Paul's Assembly, or such like
place; and the divulge committed to some vigilant and watchful tongue: So it is
with the News of the Nonresurrection; it came not from Mount Calvary, but the
Priests are the Authors of it, at the eleventh verse; and at the twelveth, they
frame and mould it to the mouth of the Watch. The Divulgers, men of double
credit, they know the truth, for they are of the Watch, and they will not lie,
for they are Soldiers; nay, they will maintain it, for they are Knights,
Milites, Knights of the Post, they are hired to say, saying, and they did say,
His Disciples came by night and stole him away whilst we slept.

The words so plain, they need no opening. May it please you that I make three
Cursories over them; One for the Soldiers, another for the Disciples, and the
third for our Savior. In the two former we will beat the point pro and con,
and in the latter reconcile it, for that is the fashion also. No error so absurd
but finds a Patron, nor Truth so sound but meets with an Adversary, nor point
controverted but the opposite tenent may be reconciled; be they distant as
Heaven and Hell, as incompatible as Jew and Christian, yet they shall meet with
a Moderator, and a cogging distinction shall state the question on the absurder
side. First then for the Soldiers, whose Cursory has no parts, that is not the
Soldiers manner, but yet is sprinkled with absurdities, that is the manner of
the Watch. They speak partly as they fight, voluntarily, and partly as they
watch, supinely. And thus they begin their talk:

Ye men and people of Judah and Jerusalem, This Jesus of Nazareth was a very
Jugler, a neat Compiler of Impostures, pretended title to the crown of Judah,
made himself the Messiah and the Son of God, brought such strange opinions as
would turn the whole world out of bias; having no proof from sense or reason
for his Novelties, he would needs confirm them by miracles; and in the worlds
eye he seemed to do wonders, though his works were indeed but mere delusions,
wrought by slight of hand, hocus pocus. All which was so manifestly discovered,
that to stop the current of such false coin, my Lord President was forced to
nail him to the Cross for a Counterfeit. His Master-trick was that of the
Resurrection, whereof he forespake in his lifetime: for he was no ordinary
dealer, but would make his Cunning to survive his person, and durst fore-say
so. To put this piece in Execution, he entertained a rabble of Ruffians, whom
he termed his Disciples, as all Plotters have Partners: These he instructed in
the game while he lived, and they were to play it when he was dead. The list of
his Disciples consisted of Men and Women; for in all crafty carriages there
lies a Woman's part. The men were to perform all manner of fact, and the women,
whose activity lies in their tongue, were to report the miracle.

The Highpriests and some of the Sanedrim being wise to apprehend, and wary to
prevent the dangerous consequences hereof, procured a warrant from the
President to seal up the Tomb, and place a Watch there; and we were the parties
appointed to guard it. The Charge we underwent required good service, for his
Disciples were common Night-walkers like their Master, notable Cutters, and
carried as much courage as cunning; such tall fellows with their weapons, that
they made it but a slight either to withstand or assault a whole multitude,
and durst do any thing in their Masters behalf. The other night, when we
apprehended him in Gethsemane, we were most of the lustiest fellows in
Jerusalem, and pretty well appointed, yet they stood to it stoutly, made a tall
fray, and sometimes put us to the worst: At the first Onset we were all
knocked down, and at our Recovery, Rabbi Malchus, a follower of the Highpriests
company and our Captain, was singled out by one of their side, a Sayler he
seemed, who with his whinyard lopt off one of his ears, and had the blow light
right, it would have cleft him down to the twist. Nay they were all Bravers,
and their bloody mind was seen upon Judas Iscariot, one of their own company,
who because he was our Bloodhound to sent their Master out, they persecuted the
poor wretch till they had paunch'd him; for not far from their walk he was
found hanged with his guts about his heels. And for their bloody pranks that
way, the place begins to bear the name of Aceldama, the bloody field.

For the exploit of his resurrection, they had the assistance of their fellow-
she-disciples, night house-wives too, for they were hovering about the
Sepulcher from the dead of the night till the morning, and were as the
Counter-watch to give notice of some advantage to the Disciples, who lay not
far off, some where above ground, while their master was under it. All the
daytime they stir not for fear of Passengers, frequenting to and fro in the
gardens and walks about Mount Calvary; it being both Sabbath and Passover; but
in the night they took their opportunity by this means: We had been extremely
over-travell'd, both to apprehend and guard him, first, to the Highpriest, next
to the President; from him to Herod, and back again; then to his arraignment,
then to his Execution and ever since at his grave; so turbulent the man was,
that his very dead body would not lie still and be quiet. This over-watching,
seconded with the darkness of the night, and coldness of the air, cast us
into a heavy sleep; thereupon the women give the watchword to the Disciples,
who immediately do exhumate his body; and while they translate and bury it
elsewhere, the women trot into the Town, and bruit it abroad that their Master
is risen.

And the credulous City is partly inclined to believe the Legerdemain; they are
willing to frame their faith and build their salvation upon a flying gull,
raised by three way-going women, gadling Gossips that came from Galilee; One of
them notorious, so divellish that there came seven devils out of her, how many
staid behind God knows; it is like she was so full, there was room for no more;
and by her ye may guess at her companions. Consider of it; the matter is of
moment, a main point of State, that concerns your own Nation: We are but
strangers, and no farther interessed then for the truths sake to speak it; and
therefore be advised whether ye will rely herein upon the word of a woman, or
upon the faith and reputation of a Soldier. And here the Soldier puts up, he
sheaths his malicious and blasphemous tongue, more sharp and deadly then his
sword, and gives our Savior a wound more mortal far then those upon the Cross;
they did but put him in a trance, suspend his life for a day or two, at the
most but kill his Humanity; but this would murder his Divinity, and dead his
Immortality, it would nullify the Gospel, and frustrate all our Faith: for, If
Christ be not risen (says S. Paul) then is our preaching vain, and your faith
is also vain. And therefore I come to my second Cursory, For his Disciples
stole him away by night.

Herein we will deal Christianly and civilly, not give the lie to the
Soldiers, foul words to the Watch: But yet we may say, that their tale has no
truth in any point of it, but a mere saying, Saying, say ye. They say not of
themselves, but as the Priests taught them; they knew they said false, and
therefore our saying to the contrary will easily obtain. And therein we follow
not the Random of their roving, but take the sum of their saying, as it is here
set down by the Holy Ghost, giving it order and parts. The words then may
easily be taken Judiciarily, in form of an accusation, and then Morally they
are Calumny; the Soldiers either not heard, or not practiced the doctrine of
John Baptist, Accuse no man falsely. Or they may be taken popularly, in form of
a report or rumor, and then morally they are a mere gull or slander. In what
sense soever, there are three parties wronged in them; The Disciples, our
Savior, and the Soldiers themselves. The Disciples here are taxed of theft,
that they - should come by night, and steal away their Master: Our Savior of
Impotency and Imposture, that he neither could nor did rise from the dead, but
was conveyed away by his Disciples: And the Soldiers of capital negligence,
that they were asleep. In the Cursory then for the Disciples, may ye please
that I lay down three plain Contradictories to the words of the Text, as they
lie in order: First, the Disciples came not hither by night. Secondy, he was
not stole away. Thirdly, the Soldiers were not asleep. For proof of each
whereof there are no cogent demonstrations in nature Quod sint; single
voluntary actions that leave no evident effect, admit it not. We preach not
before Jews and Infidels, to whom this doctrine is scandalous and fool shness;
but the simplehearted Christian, the willing hearer shall have rational
probabilities, and persuasive arguments, sufficient to convey belief into a
heart illuminated, and prepared by grace for it. For the first then, His
Disciples came not by night.

The body moves not voluntarily, unless the motion be grounded upon the Will;
so that when the influence of the Will upon the external members is either
intercepted or frustrated by any foreign accident, the body hardly admits of
going and coming. The heart, and first mover of the Disciples, was now mated
and set up by a Lease of impetuous passions. All those Violents of the Soul
which have mischiefs for their Objects, and are immediately distractive to the
Patient that endures them, as sorrow, fear and despair, did now wholly possess
them: Extreme sorrow for their Masters present sufferings, as much fear for
their own future danger, and their like despair for their fore hoped
happiness. Their senses seel the sorrow, their fear torments their fancies,
and their memory maintains their despair; their whole soul so assaulted, that
there wanted nothing but a Fever to make them quite frantic. And Peter came
near to that, so distracted, that for his Masters sake first he will needs
fight, then he flies away; anon again he follows after him, at length he
forswears him, and in the end goes out and cries. In this mode he is carried up
and down, till he lays a clog on his conscience, that would hold him work
enough without coming to Mount Calvary. The case of his other fellows might be
as bad, or worse, although the Scripture be therein silent. Thus far they go
all with Peter, that they sleep, and fly, and follow after off.

But when their Master was past all recovery, then each passion played his part
to hinder all humor from coming to Mount Calvary. Their sorrow contracts, and
closes them up in Jerusalem: Sorrow loves to be private and lurk in a corner.
Fear kept them within doors: Fear dare not go abroad, especially in the night,
if she do, it is to fly a danger, not to invite it. And to Despair all
business must yield: despair will not stir in her own behalf, unless to do her
self a mischief, but of any other she is quite careless. To say then they came
by night, makes it but the more unlikely. They could not watch one hour with
him in Gethsemane when it concerned his life, while there was yet hope to
vindicate him from the Cross; and can they now watch with him a whole night
when he was dead and buried? If they were for a nights exploit, they would have
done it the night before, when there was a fairer opportuuity, and greater
security. They now had no more means this night, but more danger. When they
they went to Gethsemane, they had but two Swords in all, and were there
disarmed of them; but one coat apeece, and some stripped of that; no weapon to
assault, nor armor to defend. Fit furniture, and fair voyage for poor
Fishermen to make to Mount Calvary in a dark night, to affront the Roman Watch.
And to what end? if their Master could rise again, what need they come hither?
if not, they did him no wrong to abandon him.

But why mention we the Resurrection? they came not thither, not to a thought
of it. He had indeed foretold them of it, but they understood it not: they
could not prosecute what they never apprehended; could they hope to make others
believe what they could not imagine? Could others grant that feareable, which
they esteemed impossible? or had they once belief, yet they forsook it when
they forsook their Master. They were beaten from it in Gethsemane, where but
one of the Jews received any loss, and he but of one of his ears, and that
restored again; but they all lost every one his faith, they lost their Savior,
and their Souls to boot. They were now as faithless as their fellow Judas, as
faithless in their Master as he was to him. The Resurrection quite forgot, not
only the thing it self, but their Masters mention of it: and therefore they
embalm his dead body, and do entombe it as forlorn. The Priests themselves
believed more then the Disciples: they feared it, and therefore fortified the
Sepulcher; but the Disciples did not so much as hope. And when he was risen de
facto, they could not believe it, though the women avouched it: (...), the
women's talk seems an old Wives tale, when they tell the Disciples of the
Resurrection. Thomas will not trust his own eyes though he see, and his ears
though he hear him. Had they any by-intent, they would have been very forward
to report and spread the fame; but they stood mute at it, and began to spread
themselves each man what way his fancy led him: the fame of the Resurrection
did not fright them. And how came the news abroad? who told it to the high
Priests? not his Disciples, nor the women, but the Soldiers here themselves.
But why stand we to defend the Disciples in a fact never committed? no such
thing done as they objected. He was not stole away at all; My second
Contradictorie.

Nor by the Disciples, nor by any else, unless men were mad, or weary of their
lives. The advantage of the Act could no way recompense the danger. The Laws
so strict for meddling with Sepulchers, that they could expect no less then to
incur the crime of Sacrilege; which may be seen at large in the Digests de
Sepulchro violato: which Laws, though since compiled, yet for the most part
were then and there in force, the Jews being under the Roman Jurisdiction. And
though they should plead that they did only translate the body, not abuse it,
yet they could not avoid the Objection of dolus malus, and so incur an
arbitrary censure, which would be laid very heavily upon them, things running
as they did against our Savior. What fair Interpretation could they look for
on his behalf, when he himself was charged with Treason, for asking a penny to
pay tribute? Or if some had the will to steal him, yet none had the power or
means to perform it. The Watch there, termed Soldiers, were of a middle
nature between Soldiers and Hangmen; Spiculatores, they carried a spear in
their hands, but a halter at their girdles, always ready for any deadly
service. They were (...), Satellites, a Guard to the Governor; and Custodes,
Jaylours, Warders for Prisoners; and Vigiles, Watchers for their bodies who
suffered: the common Executioners of corporal punishment, whether it reached
only to sense, or forward to life. To express their Roman nature home, the
Eastern Nation borrowed Language from the Western, the Greeks from the Latin,
Custodia; and the Syriaque, as Master Fuller observes, from Quaestionarij,
Officers ad quaestionem and inquisitionem, Questioners or Inquisitors,
Tormentors, or Sergeants of the Rack, to extort Confessions in criminal
Examinations. At the peril of their life it was, if the party under their
execution did not endure the extremity of the Law. If the Prisoner escaped with
no punishment, or with less, or in ultimo supplicio recovered by his life, or
his dead body otherwise disposed then the Laws ordained or permitted, then
were those Soldiers to take the room of the Prisoners, to be wasted and spent
out upon the same punishment whereto the Prisoner was liable; Ejusmodi paena
consumendi, the very words of the Law. Could any man now imagine the Watch
could now be either so careless, or such Cowards as to let our Savior to be
stole away? Men durst as well have fetched him from the Cross as from the Grave.

But say that they were such maimed Soldiers, as that they had neither eye to
watch, nor heart to ward; yet the Sepulcher it self was so impregnable, that it
alone would secure the body. There could be no burglary, nor breaking it up, no
undermining; The Soil was Pick-axe proof, a firm Rock spread out of the Roots of
Golgotha, gabion'd and rough-cast with flint. No removing of the Tombestone;
that besides its weight and sullennes to give way, was rib'd and clasped down
with Iron bars and bonds; the closure souldered with the Seal of the
Sanedrim. Their (...), and (...), their fortifying the Sepulcher, and sealing
up the Stone, says it was so, in the latter verse of the former Chapter. For
though he should revive, yet the high Priests never meant he should rise more,
either by his own, or by the strength of others. The Watch was but a stale to
color their pretense, and to lead their request to Pilate. The Women's, Who
shall roll us away the Stone? was a matter more then they imagined, a task
above the strength of a man. A whole set of leavers could not lift it: no
rolling it away but by the force of an Angel.

And now look into the Grave, see the remains of the Resurrection, the
impartial witnesses and silent sayings that he was not stole away. The Linen
and Grave-Clothes wherein he was involved, lined and laden with a compound of
Myrrh, Aloes and Mastick, gums and spices Arabique, unguents and balms of
Gilead, a Seare-cloth both costly and massy, (...), to the worth or weight of
an hundred pounds, somewhat unwieldy to be handled: the Kerchief so wrapped and
displeited, as though yet it had not been used; and yet so laid aside, as
though he would have come again. What manner of men would leave these things
thus? His friends would not for shame have stripped him, and carried him away
naked. His soes would have esteemed the Linen and embalming Compounds far
beyond his body. Friend or Foe, or Newter, they durst not stay to flea the
glewy Seare-cloth from his skin, and give a diligent folding to the Kerchief.
But if notwithstanding he was stolen away, why was not search made to recover
his body? no Hue and Cry to pursue the Malefactors? no Proclamation out for
their attachment? why were not the Women apprehended, or taken upon suspicion?
why not so much as questioned? Questioned! about what? The Soldiers knew well
enough he was not stolen away; for they sat by, and marked it; they were the
Watch, and they did watch, they were not asleep; which is my last Contradictory.

Hitherto they talk like soldiers, of coming by night, and stealing away; now
like Watchmen, in saying they were asleep. So sottish and unreasonable is
malice, that to burn his neighbors house, he will set fire on his own; to
bring in an accusation on Christ and his Disciples, they make confession of a
crime in themselves: they gull and befool themselves, and say that the Watch
was asleep. It may be as Watchmen they durst sleep, it is ordinary; but they
durst not so as Soldiers, their discipline too strict, and the penalty thereof
too severe. He that forsakes the watch, capite punitur, it is death (says
Paulus) in law 9. in Excubias,. de re militari; and some good captains
interpret sleep equivalent to absence; what ever were the Letter of the Law,
practice made it so. And Polybius tells us it was so put in excution. If any
man of the Watch be found asleep, (says he) (...), he is put to the Bastinado,
a capital punishment, and reached to the head: For the then Bastinado was Fuste
caeditur; and as they now pass the Pikes, a thousand to one but the party died
under it. A whole Squadron of men being to do execution, one back-friend or
other would pash out his brains, as now one pike or other would broch him
through. The Roman Discipline extreme dogged, and so professed it self,
especially toward the Watch. The Ban-doggs of the Capitol, because they barked
not that night when the Gauls surprised it, had their legs broken, and were
split alive upon a two-forkt stake set up in public; and in memory thereof
(says Livie) some dogs were yearly so used, for examples sake to make
Watchmen beware.

And the Rounders so impartial herein, that they would make execution ipso
facto. Epaminondas walks the Round, and finding one soldier asleep, some of
the Corrounders entreat for him; well, says he, for your sakes I will leave
him as I found him, and therewithal he stakes him to the ground with his
Halbert: he found him in a dead sleep, and so he left him. Some dim prints of
that Discipline are seen to this day in our modern wars, where sometime the
Rounder will clap a musket shot through a sleepy head. But anciently they durst
do no other; for to wink at the fault, or delay the punishment, was in the
Governor Patrimonii and aestimationis damnum, a loss of lands and honor; and
in Underofficers capitale supplicium. They durst not then sleep wilfully, and
they had no need to sleep, they were not over-watcht. How the Day-watch stood I
have not yet read; but for the Night-watch, all the World knows it was divided
into four equal parts, each containing three Planetary hours, or one quarter
of the night, how long or short soever. And the turn came about but every third
night, and then every third hour they were relieved by putting in a fresh
Watch. It was now past the Vernal Aequinoctial, no one Night-watch sat full
three modern hours; so three hours over in above threescore would bring no
over-watching. Seeing then they neither durst nor did, why yet do they say they
were asleep? The reason is, they are of the ragged Regiment, mercenary
Soldiers, hired to it by the Priests with a large piece of money. The
Provantman will undertake to say any thing, yea, to do any thing for money; for
tengroats a Week tug at a Wheel-barrow, and fo a stiver more serve the enemy,
and for a Piece pistol a Prince; suffer any thing for money, for a Dollar take
the Strappado; for a brace, draw at a decimation. Thus the Priests dealt with
the silly Soldiers, as they did with Judas, only put them upon hanging. An
old trick of the Priests, and much in use at this day, saving that now they
practice it one upon the other, and so let them; good speed may they have.

But for all this they might be asleep, whether our Savior were stole away or
no. Somewhat the begging Soldiers would have, and they shall, his stealing away
we can by nomeans grant. The Resurrection, an article of our Creed, the very
groundsel of all our Faith: his Resurrection the pattern and pledge of ours,
the tenure where by we hold our title to salvation. But for their being asleep
we will not much contend; it is credible they were so, the contrary being
neither implied, nor expressed in the Scripture. But yet their sleep is no
proof of their saying. They know the things were done just as they say, for
they were asleep the while. A right Roman reason, a proof put from a Priest to
serve a sleepy Soldier. If they were asleep, how could they say he was stolen
rather then risen? or if they suppose him stolen, how knew they his Disciples
did it rather then other men? This must needs argue in them either calumny to
accuse a party without cause, or levity to lay the cause upon a wrong party;
either way folly to alledg so senseles areason. All our knowledge is either
from Sense, or Reason; from Reason they could not have it, that has made
against them all this while; from any sense they could not, for they were
asleep, in sleep all sensation is intercepted. They could neither hear, see,
smell, taste nor feel the Disciples coming, or his stealing; if they did, they
were not asleep. If some one were awake, and perceived it, why did he not give
an Alarm to the rest? if they understood it afterward from others, why do
they not produce authentic witnesses? If the Disciples themselves confessed
it, why were they not punished, and order taken to stop the rumor of the
Resurrection? There is no way now left, but to pretend the Spirit, as our
Enthusiasts do, and to say, that while they slept they had it in a dream by
revelation. But that is refuted by retortion of the same, for by revelation
every Christian knows the contrary; God reveals it unto him.

But why do the Soldiers produce this reason? the reason is, they took it upon
trust from the Priests. It is an old error (let us not contend for the age) to
believe that the Priest cannot err. But why are the Soldiers got thus to
argue against themselves? the reason is, no body else durst do it. In those
times the soldiers bare all the sway, assumed all power to make Kings and
Emperors. But since the Priest has done the like, putting the Soldier by.
And now the Peasant thinks it is come to his turn, under pretense of his
privilege in Parliament: he would dispose of Kings and Commonwealths, and
rather then return it to the Priest from whom he has taken it, would cast the
course back again upon the Soldiers. Nothing now contents the Commonalty but
War and Contention; he has taken a surfeit of peace, the very name of it
grows odious: Now to give the Soldier his Pasport, we sum up four
exceptions against his saying; First, it is not verisimile, the unlikelihood of
it has appeared in every Contradictory. Secondly, They were ignari rerum, had
no information of what they affirm; neither eye, nor ear-witness of what they
say, for they confess themselves asleep. Thirdly, Their saying is contrary to
what they had said before; in the morning they told another tale, at the
eleventh verse of this Chapter; if that were true, this is false; if that were
not true, why should we believe this? or who will trust men in contrary tales?
Lastly, the parties were corrupted, hired with a large sum to utter their
saying, at the twelfth verse. These two latter lie without the Text, and
therefore I wholly forbear them, especially for the point of corruption: It Is a
crafty crime, and commonly hard to prove. We also forbear the lie to the
Soldier, because he abhorres it. But to the Priests who put this lie in their
mouths, and to their Disciple-Priests who at this day practice lying, and allow
it to be lawful, we would mend the old saying, A Liar should have a good
memory, and rather require in him a good Wit. His memory serves but to avoid
contradictions of himself, but his Wit to prevent the contradictions of others,
that an untruth seem not also unlikely. If therefore the Priests would have
lied wisely, and with credit, like Satan himself, the Serpent whom they served,
they should, as they did formerly, have laid our Savior to Satan's charge, and
have said, that the foul Fiend came by night and fetched him away; leaving out,
whilst the watch slept, and instead thereof have argued from the descent of
the Angel, and the earthquake: this could not so easily have been discovered;
but it might even as easily, where Faith had a Fortification; Humane reasons
urged against it are but as Papershot. Carnal wisdom working against God is but
dirt and rottenness. Our counsels are confounded, when carried against Christ.
And so I come to my third and last Cursory, upon the word of our Savior.

Hitherto we have cleared the Disciples, but we must also give the Soldier
content. There is no such difference, but the matter may be reconciled, and the
question stated on the Soldiers side. Said I not, it was the fashion? The
Soldiers then are in the right, their saying very sound and Christian; A
Disciple of his did come by night, and stole him away, and the Soldiers were
asleep. A Disciple of his, and his most beloved Disciple, his humane soul came
by night, was united to his body, raised it, and withdrew it from the Sepulcher
by stealth, while the Soldiers were so between sleeping and waking that they
perceived it not. Of this Cursory very briefly, as the words lie in order,
declining all emergent Controversies, for that our present quarrel lay only
with the Soldier.

We term him a Disciple, who receives knowledge and chastisement from another.
As our Savior was God, his soul was: (...), the truest and most proper
Disciple that ever was: it had received both knowledge and chastisement, as
never man had, knowledge of all manner, both Divine and Humane, infused and
acquired: but whether it had no Ignorance, we leave it to the Catholics. And
all manner of chastisement, both exemplary, and satisfactory, for all Mankind;
the chastisement of our peace was upon it: but whether it satisfied for
Reprobates, we leave it to the Arminians. His soul came, it could move, for it
was separate; the soul was from the body, though neither from the Godhead: as
all the rest of the Disciples, it forsook him on the Cross, and now it came
again: but it came not as it went, it went by violence and foreign force, the
Jews expelled it from him, although he also willing it should go; but it came
purely voluntary, by a domestic agent: but whether by virtue of the Godhead,
or its own motive faculty, we leave to the Schoolmen. It came then, not as
poor Lazarus soul came to Abraham's bosom, carried by Angels, but single upon
its own force, and without any help of others: But whether attended and waited
upon by a troop of Angels, we leave it to the Fathers. For the time, it came by
Night, not for fear of the Jews, as Nicodemus came to him, but for love of his
promise, that he might rise the third day. He came the second Night, the Night
second to his Passion, but third to the day of his Resurrection, some time
between Midnight and Morning; but at what time, we leave it to the
Chronologers. The Unde of its coming was from somewhere else, from a distant
Ubi, for it was not come before it came: but from whence definitively, whether
from Heaven or Hell, we leave it to the Calvinists. The Quo or Term of its
coming was the Grave, he subsisted there; but the end of the Comer, was the
Reunion to the body, to make his real presence there: but whether thereby he
became omnipresent, to be every where while he was in the grave, we leave to
the Lutherans. His final intent, not to organize the body, it was not
dismembered, nor any way corrupted, not so much as in fieri, no not
dispositively, but to animate those members, and to raise the body from the
grave, in which action both the body and the soul had their mutual efficiency,
each co-elevating other to make up the Resurrection: but whether these two
Agents imply several operations really distinct, we leave it to the Nominalists.

The manner of his resurrection so miraculous and ineffable, that bad words
express it best. In a moral relation to the Jews, it is here termed stealing:
not to show what our Savior did in his rising, but to intimate what the Jews
had committed by their crucifying. Things of a super-eminent nature are fain to
borrow words of an inferior signification, when they are related to a low
capacity; so God gives himself attributes, not as he is, but according to the
weakness whereby man apprehends him. And here the action of our Savior is set
down, not as it is done, but according to the wickedness that the Jews had
done. The active signification of stealing belongs to our Savior, but the
moral evil of it reflected upon others. The Law says, he steals who
fraudulently takes away something of another, with intent to get the thing it
self, its use or possession; if this definition be true, his resurrection was
stealing. His body was now cadaver puniti, the carcass of one that had
publicly suffered, and thereby forfeit to the State; no man might meddle with
it further then to bury it, nor that without special permission; it was now
none of his, his right and possession of it both gone; tradiderat, he had made
delivery of it, dispensed and passed it away to Pilat: Pilat disposed his right
to bury it, to the Watch to detain it, and now it was theirs. When therefore he
took it from the Grave, he stole it: his repossession of it defrauded all the
Prae-detainers. Said they not also he was a Deceiver? But whether the Angel
that rolled away the stone, were necessary or ministerial, we leave it to the
Hermonists. By natural relation his body was his own, as being the essential
and proper counter-part of his soul, prae coexistent with it in one person; but
morally it was not so, or if it were, yet he might steal it for all that. A man
may steal that which is his own, by interverting that right in it which has
been transferred to another: and what kind of Theft this was, we leave it to
the Lawyers. God forbid we should lay other Theft to our Savior, then that he
attributes to himself, in saying, He came like a Thief in the night, (i. e.)
secretly and unawares: so was his conveyance from the Grave, close, without the
consent and notice of those that were present; such a carriage we commonly call
stealth. We steal away from a room, when we depart without the knowledge of the
Company: But whether he could convey himself so closely, as to pass thorough
the Tombestone, we leave it to the Philosophers.

Yet so close it was, that the Watch perceived it not, for they were asleep;
they were set to watch it, but they did not. Not to watch is all one with not
to be awake, and that with to be be asleep. We commonly call him sleepy that is
negligent or careless of what passes, as the contrary we term vigilant: so
the Watch was fast asleep, they never gave heed to the Resurrection; that so
far from their belief, that they had no opinion of it. But if death be a kind
of sleep, he is soundly asleep that lies for dead, and so did the Watch, in the
4th verse of this Chapter, (...), for fear of the Angel they fell a shaking,
and became as dead men. His presence gave them a strong Dormative, it wrought
beyond sleep. Sleep reaches but only to a Ligation of sense; but in them all
motion ceased, they were examinate: but whether that fit held them only by way
of Syncope, or did determine in a Cataphora, or soporiferous passion, we leave
it to the Physicians. Fearful and Cowardish Soldiers, more womanish than
women! At the presence of the Angel the Women stand upright, but the Soldiers
fall in a swoun. Help them good Women, unbutton the Soldiers, ye need not fear
their Halberts. There Is work for you and your Spices, your odours to comfort
and recall their Spirits. Bestow that Charity on the dying Soldiers which you
intended on your dear Savior; for he is risen, and needs them not, but they
may benefit the Soldiers. The Soldiers used to such fits, they had one of
them the other night in Gethsemane; but whether these dejections were sins in
the Soldiers, we leave to the Casuists. Thus they were (...), laid as men
asleep; for it signifies rather the reclination or posture of one asleep, then
the affection of sleep it self. He that lies still without sense or motion,
whether he be in a sleep, or trance, or dead, we say (...), and we call the
Churchyard (...), because the dead lie there as if they were asleep, they stir
not. And so we must all be laid: There Is no Dormitory. Our case somewhat like
the Soldiers: We are appointed here to watch our Savior; and as we do it, we
are subject to the Soldiers infirmity, apt to be cast asleep, and become as
dead men. Yet let us not be subject to their fear, our death is but like their
swouning, that is the worst. We are liable to rise again, and our Resurrection
shall be like our Saviors: His and ours make a mutual Aspect; His the
Specimen, and ours the Complement. What he practiced on himself he perfects in
us: He will come again by night, and steal us to glory, while we lie sleeping
in the Grave. Even so come Lord Jesus.

THE RECANTATION SERMON.
The PREFACE before the SERMON.
Personal Prefaces are commonly unpleasant, mine is to me: It is nomine
poenae, it requires my patience, it entreats yours. I never came here sponte,
sometimes upon request, but now upon Command: to which my obedience is very
voluntary, as willing to give satisfaction as any to receive it. I never stood
here to show my self but now, and now not for worth, or wickedness, but yet for
weakness, in not discerning the three vital circumstances of a well ordered
Action, Person, Time and Place. For it I am now Prisoner to censure, the
Spectacle of submission, and Petitioner for pardon. It is good to be humble, I
like it very well, and use it more then some men think I do. My present
business is not to repeat that Sermon which the Repeater condemned, and left
unrepeated in the forenoon. I call it that, for now it is none of mine: It has
been censured publicly and justly; and so let it suffer, the whole for some
bad parts: as usually the pravity of one member is destructive to the whole
body. If ye will please to let it die, I will substitute another in the room;
whereto (though enjoined by Authority) my self does most willingly condescend.
My Text was also imposed, and delivered in these words, (...). In prosecution
whereof, I humbly crave a fair construction, and a favorable acceptance.
First, for my offense past, that my readiness to acknowledge it may go for one
degree of satisfaction, and sudden recantation for another. What it wants in
ripeness is supplied in sincerity, though in this the more mature, because the
more timely. Secondly, for my present memory, I have had no time to furnish it:
it is a dull and drowsy faculty, a great deal of do to make it ready; and
besides, it is somewhat cowardly in point of danger. It dares not show it self,
the least agitation makes it run away; and my self has partly spared it for
your sake and the University. My present Sermon is but a Brief, I would desire
you to hear it read. You may please to turn to the Text; Its written Acts 2.1.
the latter part, They were all with one accord in one place.



Man cease to be Man, if we conceive him all-sufficient; God only is so, He
only is all-sufficient who is only Almighty. Man's being and his good is
indigency and want: his chiefest business is to contend against it, and his
happiness to abolish it. Private want is an occasion of difference and dissent;
but common want the common cause of Concord, the Parent and procurer of moral
unity and all humane societies. So all our Assemblies are grounded upon want,
sometimes to give thanks that the past has been supplied, but commonly to
supply the wants present. The reason is, that when a Plurality of Agents are
united in their efficacy, the operation is far more effectual then if each
wrought single: and what the single members cannot obtain apart, they may
acquire jointly, being incorporate into one body. This also is the case of
Christ's Disciples, the want of their Master collects and imbodies them in
together. They want him twice, once on Mount Calvary; there they want his soul;
this gathers them close in Jerusalem; and the door is shut on them, but the
place not specified.

The second time he forsakes them on Mount Olivet, at the 9th verse of the
former Chapter, then they want his person: that puts them together again at the
13th verse, in the upper room; there they consider of another want, means to
perform their Ministry. Judas the Traitor has hanged himself, at the 18th
verse, his Bishopric is void, and they will choose another in his room, at the
22th verse; there they prick two, then pray and draw lots; and at the last
verse Matthias is elected and consecrated. All this being finished, they yet
find another want, variety of Languages to utter their Embassy to several
Nations, where they were to be employed. For this there is another meeting upon
a set day, the fifth from the Resurrection, and the tenth from the Ascension;
and then, as it is in my Text, They were all with one accord in one place.

In which may it please you to observe three Circumstances;

1. The plurality or number; they were all. 2. Their unanimity or moral union
of soul; with one accord. 3. The unipresence, or local union of body; In one
place. Of these in their order, as the time has scanted, and God strengthened
by weakened thoughts. We begin with the Plurality or number; They were all.
The Expositors run much pro and con, about the persons of these all, whether
therein the Virgin Mary and other Women were included: But for the most, they
go by conjecture, and either affirm, or deny it to serve their own purpose; and
seeing the Scripture declares neither, we may exclude them to serve ours. They
might be in presence, but not as part of the Assembly, and partakers of the
benefits. The reason of this conjecture is, though the Women otherwise might
receive many gifts and graces, yet they were not fit vessels to be filled with
the holy Ghost in this kind, to speak with diverse tongues. The sub-reason is,
they might not exercise the functions for which these Tongues were ordained;
they were for prophesying in the Church, from which St. Paul debarres the
Women, 1 Cor. 14.24. Let your Women keep silence in the Church, for it is not
permitted unto them to speak. Let us not be thought overweening for casting
now and then a conjecture diverse from the common current. We are free Denisons
of Christendom, and may challenge the liberty of our thoughts as well as
outlandish men. Let their learning not out-look us, for where the Scripture
leaves us, all learning lies lame, and her two truths are Criticismes and
Conjectures. What persons soever excluded, the Disciples will not: they are
ordered in this (all;) for the Consistory-Cardinalls will be in no order; for
they make the Canons hold, that the Clause, All manner of persons, does not
include a Cardinal.

The number is universal; not collective, but representative for the whole
primitive Church, who was all there, not in their own single, but in the
persons of these (all:) who were there for the acceptance of the holy Ghost,
according to the gracious promises of our Savior; or happily, all relatively
too, the number specified in the Assembly for the election of Matthias. The
total sum of that all was about 120. at the 15. verse of the former Chapter:
the major part was the 12. Apostles. 12. the major part of 120. not in number,
but in power, and therefore the better part; though some think otherwise, and
thereupon infer, that every ordinary man is as good as a Bishop. The number
here is 12. not unsignificant: the 12. Disciples answering the 12. Patriarchs;
for so it pleased God, that both the Testaments, the new and old, should be
founded upon dodecadies; as the Church of the Jews under the Law sprung from
the twelve Patriarchs, so the Church of the Gentiles under the Gospel from the
twelve Apostles.

The Fathers and after-Divines, both ancient and modern, do much descant upon
the number of the 12. Apostles, in relation to the 12. Fountains in Elim, and
12. Stones in Aarons breast plate, the 12. Stones of the Altar, the 12. loaves
of Proposition, the 12. Levites that carried the Ark, the 12. spies sent to
search the Land of promise, the 12. gates of Jerusalem, the 12. Signs of the
Zodiac, months of the year, and hours of the day, with many more the like;
some whereof are pious, others but fancies. Yet in each they frame out a
resemblance, as ye may see at large in Palmeron, and diverse others. With the
twelve Apostles the rest of the Disciples made up one hundred and twenty.

Hereon St. Austine moralls in his one hundred and sixteenth Sermon de Temp.
that the holy Ghost was given ten-fold to the twelve Apostles, because that ten
multipiled by twelve makes up the product one hundred and twenty. But the
moral of St. Gregory in his 35. Moral, and 3d Chapter, is too mystical, if not
merely Pythagorical: he would have 120. partly to signify things temporal,
partly eternal, by this deduction; an hundred and twenty by Arithmeticall
progress arises from one to fifteen; and because the components are seven and
eight, things temporal are conceived by seven, and eternal by eight: of this I
conceive not the ground, nor find it approved in Arithmetic. If thus to break
numbers were rational, a man might deduce 600. mysteries from the number 120.
St. Jerome prefigures this number in the age of Moses, whose years were full
one hundred and twenty. With modesty be it spoken, St. Jerome might have
pretyped it by the age of man in general, Genesis 6.3. when God says of man, that
his years shall be one hundred and twenty. Then put Moses and Man together, and
the resemblance will be rational: Moses a type of Christ, the Scriptures both
say and show it.

As the Law descended first from God upon Moses alone, and after him to the
people; so the descent of the holy Ghost, first from God upon Christ alone, and
after from Christ upon all the Disciples, whose utmost number was about one
hundred and twenty men, and from them communicated to the utmost of mankind,
whose utmost age is but 120. years; but for the purpose, this member is more
precisely typed in 2 Chronicles. 5.15. at the latter end of the verse, by one
hundred and twenty Priests sounding on Trumpets, whereas it came to pass that
the Trumpeters and Singers were all one to make one sound: so here the
Disciples, though 120. in number, yet but one accord; which is my second
circumstance, the unanimity or moral union of soul; with one accord.

(...): what the word means is showed in the fourth Chapter following, at the
thirty second verse, (...), They were of one heart and one soul; not Physically
but Morally, an union and moral identity of souls, not the apprehensive soul,
understanding or sense. Accord consists not in assent of opinions, or points of
speculation; for to him that affirms the Sun bigger then the earth, my assent
or dissent neither makes nor marres one accord: The reason is, for that the
judgment in such cases proceeds from natural reason, and by consequence from
necessity; but in accord it springs from the will, from a voluntary choice and
free: for true accord is an union of the motive soul, (...), an union of the
Will and affections; not the faculties themselves, though much at discord, but
in unanimous actions and operations resulting from the faculties, when our
Velle's and Nolle's are one and the same, either concerning the end it self, in
the same fruition or intention, or concerning the means that led us to that
end. In the sum, council and consent, they savor choice and use: and all
this not in matters trivial, but things of moment, where there lies a sensible
commodity to a good community.

Thus was the unanimity and accord of the Disciples; first, for the end, they
have one accord for the fruition of the Gospel, and intent to publish it;
especially the point of Resurrection. Secondly, for the means; one accord for
counsel and consent, and one for choice and use of them. And yet their one
accord stands not here, but descends ad^cor: it signifies a co-heartedness, an
unanimity or concurrring in affection; one accord in love and hatred, in desire
and dislike, in joy and sorrow, and so in other passions irascible; yea there
most of all, for where there lies a (...), there is most properly (...): where
all these agree in one, there is truly one accord. To this if we superadde a
quantity of Impetus, a vehemence to conquer all impediments or difficulties of
the action, we hit just on the nature of the thing; for then we are (...), when
our agreement is the same, and has the same degrees in operation; where we
have a propense and earnest concurrence jointly to prosecute the same good, or
shun the same evil, doing either action the same way. And thus were the
Disciples in their affections (...), the same love, desire and joy concerning
the publishing of the Gospel, and good news of salvation; and the same hate,
dislike and sorrow for any evil that might oppose it. Their affections, which
before were irregular, and cast on infirmities, as Ambition, Incredulity,
Apostasy, were now rectified and directed to their right object. It was not
any rude accord, where the worst do rule; neither was it a dissembling accord,
with a league in the mouth, and discord at the heart; neither was it a wicked
accord, as of the Ephesians for their idolatry; but of good men with a good
mind and to a good end. Thus were the Disciples to receive the Holy Ghost. This
accord had God to its efficient; for as God only makes the heart, so he only
seasons it, and gives it grace. It had God for its author, and God for its end,
and therefore brings to one place; which is my third circumstance.

In the same place; Not the same place numerically, but relatively, in the same
room. This place was a high place; it was an upper room and comely. We should
do all religious exercises in a decent place; the paring away of ceremonies do
but take away the Churches ornaments. Then it was a high room: at all spiritual
exercises we should ascend. Now it is called in Latin Coenaculum, a room to
supp in: All religious exercises should be begun with the Supper of the Lord;
and that must be common too, not for one only: this room (some say) was
belonging to Nicodemus; yet this proves not for Conventicles: for if we have
the like authority, we will release our Canon. What if we say, this is
Solomon's Porch? for there were sixscore persons, and it was noised about by
and by, yea by nine of the clock Peter was in his Sermon: This therefore is
like not to be in a private chamber: but were not this, yet the other was,
verse 46.

God would have them join together to receive the Holy Ghost; for where the
hearts are together it is much, but where they are together, and their body in
one place, there is all the good place can afford. Thus we came from the
plurality to the unanimity, and from the unanimity to the unipresence; the
first without the second is but confused, and the second without the third is
but singularity; but these altogether make a complete Parliament.

And now for application of what has been said to our Parliament; In the
Disciples a spiritual want was the cause of their assembly, in the Parliament a
temporal want. The event in the one was good; God grant it be so in the other.
The time of that was after the resurrection, and so is it of this. The persons
are all alike, Men all, no women, they are too talkative. The number alike,
those, all the Primitive Church; these, all the Commonwealth. Of them both our
opinions are alike; the one we honor, and the other too, a true Lawgivers.
They were unanimous and unipresent, and so also is the Parliament; they had one
Counsel, so have we; their accord was good, and so is ours; perfect, to cut off
all bad accord. Their accord resolves a spiritual welfare, and so is our
accord, to maintain our selves by war. So of these our opinions are alike;
the one would be without war, were they not provoked thereto, but now it is
needful: so is our war also. That was an upper room, high and stately, so is
the Parliament; that was in the suburbs of Jerusalem, this of London. Now let
us praise God for them, and pray for them, that there be not opposition between
them. Let the King be the Head, they the Heart, we the Members. Let it be like
the Parliament in Mount Sinai, the King and subjects as God and Moses, and we
like the Israelites. Let God say to the King, that he will help him, and
destroy his enemies: Let the King say to the people as David to the Gibeonites;
and let the people say to him as Israel to David, We will serve and obey thee
only, and do what thou command us: and let me pray for them, that they may
stand fast in the Faith: and let us all say of them all that be of Israel, as a
Congregation of one mind, that this union may be ruled by order, and that like
this spiritual one, let us pray there may be one God, one Mind, one Spirit; and
let all the people say, Amen.

Here remains as yet a personal conclusion. If I heretofore seemed to deliver
any Doctrine contrary to this I now deliver, I utterly renounce it. The last
time I had these words, Now the Peasant thinks, etc. I I had also these words,
Nothing contents the Commonalty but war and contention. I there I did very ill,
forgetting that of Solomon, There is a time for war, and a time for peace.
For another erroneous thing I require your pardon. A word once spoken cannot be
recalled, it may be stopped. In the same place where the blot was made I am come
to wipe it out. My last Petition to you is for patronage from further trouble.

FINIS.

