THE Tythe-Takers Cart. Overthrown.

OR, THE DOWNFALL OF TITHES.

Proved that they are not to be paid now, either to the Appropriate or
Jmpropriate Parsons or Persons.

Penned for the General Satisfaction and Easement of all the People of England.

By D. LUPTON, Servant of Christ Jesus in the Work of the Gospel.

They all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter.

ISAI. 56.11. London, Printed by J. M. for R. Harford at the Bible and States
arms in Little Britain. 1652

THE Tythe-Takers Cart Overthrown.
MAnifold have been the Petitions (and not without just cause) for the putting
down and taking away of Tithes, and some men have already set forth their
Judgment in print against them; so that (methinks) I hear these Corn-takers
bewail their unstable condition, and to cry out, as once the Silver-Smiths did
at Ephesus, that this their Craft is in danger to come to naught; and indeed
they may more earnestly lament, because by this Craft they have their wealth;
and to lose their beloved adored Silver Diana, their Wealth, this cuts deep.
Now there be two sorts of people who both stiffly pretend a right unto Tithes,
viz. the Appropriate and the Impropriate Parsons and Persons. The first of
these will persuade men (if they please to believe them) that they are true
Levites, and that they have their right even from Melchizedec, or at least can
prove their title from Aaron; and to speak truth, they savor a little too much
of the Jewish Condition and Profession; and these have (partly by peoples
ignorance, and partly by their false alleging of Scriptures, with the strength
of secular Authority hitherto for confirmation of their demands) forced a
conceit in many men's opinions (nay and Consciences too) that it is a damnable
sin to refuse to pay Tithes.

The second sort which are the Impropriators of whom we may say justly, that
they are known to be hard men, reaping where they have not sown, and gathering
where they have not strawed, Mat. 25.24. And these challenge a Right also unto
Tithes, partly by Royal Donation, partly by a long continued Purchase, ever
since Henry the eighth dissolved the Abbeys and Monasteries, who either gave
them to such as first begged them, or bought them at his and Courtiers hands: so
these hold all to be their own which was by Prerogative given them, or what
they or their Ancestors easily purchased or laid hands on; and hereupon these
as eagerly as the other press and oppress the poor Commons of this Nation for
the payment of Tithes, and do run to and fro, and grudg if they be not
satisfied, or if they get not what they come for; and this Trade they have long
set up, and grown fat and rich by it also, almost without control: But now of
late men's wits and wills are both set against them, people begin to grow wiser,
by paying too dear for their own goods and hard labors, and thousands of
pious, solid, and well-affected Subjects of this Land are resolved (and have
good hopes to see them effected) to do their best to remove this Antiquated
Jewish or Popish Relic (for better it is not) clear out of this Nation. To
the helping forward of whose desires and satisfaction, this Subject took
courage to give both Appropriate and Impropriate a Memento, and a little to try
and question their proceedings, and to show to all men upon what a weak and
sandy foundation their long and seemingly strong Tythe-taking has been erected
and upheld: We intend to handle both these sorts, as well the Appropriating
Tyther, as the Impropriate: And because the first of these stands like another
Goliath, and scorns and bids defiance to all Encounters, and hopes that Moses
and the Prophets, the Canon Law, Civil Law and common Law, the Casuists and
Schoolmen, will all warrant them to take Tithes without doubt or scruple; we
will therefore first say unto them, 1. That the pretending Levites, Priests,
Presbyters, or Ministers, have not any just claim or right unto Tithes. 2. That
Tithes (though they conceive themselves lawfully called, and sent into their
Function) are not now (in genere suo) in that kind to be paid or demanded. 3.
That sundry and manifold are the Evils, Abuses and Inconveniences by paying
Tithes. 4. Ministers in other Reformed places have none, nor did Christ or his
Apostles demand any.


For to begin with the first, it is known, Posito fundamento ponitur fundatum,
and sublato tollitur; the Foundation is all in all, no building without it
either safe or comely: We call them pretending Ministers and Presbyters,
because they seem, and are not: Therefore seeing they glory much, and hold all
their Interest to Tithes, quatenus tales, (i.e.) as such men, as Ministers of
Christ and his Gospel, we demand therefore of them,

That before they take men's Corn and Goods, etc. under that notion and term of
Tithes, due to them by virtue of their Calling, whether or no it be not just
and fitting, that they first prove themselves the men lawfully called and
lawfully sent unto, and into that Office and Employment, that there may be no
mistake of the person, for the mistaking in this is the miscarriage of all: We
doubt that all these who so receive Tithes, are not the Servants of Christ: We
know, that though a debt be due to be paid to another, yet he that pays it will
be sure that he pays it to that man only who has a sole, proper, and just
right unto it, and in it. Now in this case, though Parsons lay claim to Tithes
as a due to them as, they say, they are Ministers, yet the doubt and question
still is, whether they be the Ministers of Christ, or not?

And we do desire them not to be offended that this scrutiny is made, seeing
they are bound to satisfy the weaker Consciences in any scruple they can, and
therefore specially in this; for if they be not such men as they profess, it is
not fiting they should longer deceive men under such a pretense, and so render
themselves obnoxious to scandal, if they make not this first doubt free from
doubting. 'Twas a question put to John Baptist almost to this purpose, Who art
thou? Now he did not deny to give a speedy answer, I am not the Christ; and so
upon further demands gave further satisfaction, by not assuming to himself
either a false Office or a feigned Person, but manifested from the Word of God
who indeed he was, and to what Office he was by Divine Designation laid out
for. We desire these Parsons to take some pains to vindicate their Authority
and Office also (if they can) from Gods Word; 'twill make men a great deal the
more willing to allow them a liberal Maintenance, were they thoroughly satisfied
who put them upon this Employment, and by what Authority they do these things;
for either they assume it to themselves, or else it is given; if the first of
these, then it is Arrogance, unrighteous and unlawful, No man takes this honor
unto himself, says the Apostle, Heb. 5.4. If the second, then by whom? If only
from other men, and corrupt too, then, as our Savior speaks it, how can ye
believe who receive honor one of another, Joh. 5.44. If from Christ, and his
blessed Spirit of Truth, and the Apostles, they themselves plead not their
Visible Succession of Presbytery, or Ordination of Ministers, so high as from
the two first: but from the Apostles times, by the Imposition of hands of the
Presbytery from Paul and Titus, and other Disciples, they hold out, and make
the World believe, their perpetuated Visibility and Ordination of Ministers,
made from time to time, and so even to this time, by one another. And by this
Rule their Ordination came in corrupted times and by corrupted persons into the
hands of the Popes of Rome, which Gangrene spread it self by the Popes policy
into all Kingdoms, for the Kingdoms of the World have been made drunk with her
fornications; and so the Popes Doctrine and Discipline advanced it self into
our Nation, and so our Archbishops and Bishops, and other Ministers, had
Ordination by the Popes Power and Keys, and these from them. Behold we pray you
all good people of England, the Claim and Title our pretending Presbyters lay
hold on to prove themselves lawful Ministers of Christ, and so cry out, that
Tithes, all Tithes, are due to them, as such Ministers and Presbyters. Now that
their Claim to Tithes may be of no force or virtue, we shall lay down some
Conclusions against their Calling, which being found true and undeniable, they
cannot have the face to lay claim any longer, or to take and rake that which is
not their own.

1. First, Therefore we say, That their Ordination it self by a visible descent
and grant from one to another, is corrupted, and against divine Truth. How can
a clean thing come out of an unclean? or a straight from a crooked? A corrupted
Fountain cannot send forth pure streams, nor a rotten Root sound Branches.
These Parsons come out of the loins of the Bishops, and they from the Popes
Authority; these men themselves were the pullers down of the Bishops Power as
Antichristian, which had they been lawful, why rejected? if unlawful, how can
our Presbyters be good who proceed from them? And then,

2. Secondly, Their Ordination of one another as they say from the Apostles
times, holds up a Visibility of the Ministry, and by consequence a Visible
Church too, which is not only Popish, but opposes Christ's Spiritual Kingdom; My
Kingdom is not of this World: And we believe the Communion of Saints now.
Faith, says the Apostle, is of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. He himself is called
the King Invisible, his Kingdom, his Office, his Ordinances and People are all
Spiritual and Invisible, and Godliness it self is called a great Mystery, and
yet our Presbyters and pretending Ministers will be visible and worldly; how
can light and darkness agree? But,

3. Thirdly, The Prophets of God were called by God, and extraordinarily
endowed, not with titles only, but with gifts and graces, and sent immediately;
Behold, I send THEE, even THEE, to the house of Israel, says God unto the
Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 2. And after them the Apostles were all called, and then
sent by Christ; Behold, I send you as sheep among Wolves: But are our
Presbyters thus called or sent, or are they sent at all? Nay, they seek places,
desire places, solicit for Preferments, do all they can to procure fat Livings,
and the best Benefices; Do not these run, (think you) and God sends them not?
Yea, they climb by Craft and Ambition, and come not in at the door, Joh. 10. We
may know who they are, and to whom they do belong. And yet further,

4. Fourthly, Their works and fruits show they are not of this flock or fold;
if they be lawfully sent, let them show forth the works of him that sent them;
the tree is known by his fruits: Can we find in these men, though they so much
cry up Reformation, any true Reformation at all? Oh could we but with Lanthorn
and Candle find an Humble Presbyterian Minister, a merciful One, a
liberal-minded One, a meek One, endued with the Spirit of Love, and but even
Obedience to the Civil Magistrate! But alas! the Pulpits are filled, and the
Commonwealth too, with ambitious and proud Parsons, with covetous and
contentious, seeking not, as the Apostle says, you, but yours, your Goods, your
Tithes, not wearing Christ's Motto, Hereby ye shall be known to be my Disciples,
if ye love one another. We appeal to all England, and further too, to their own
Consciences, if this be not so: We may say then and conclude with the Apostle,
Are ye not carnal? Are not these men in their sins? And then how can we imagine
and conclude these men to be not only Followers, but true Teachers of Gods Word
also, whose Actions are diametrically opposite unto those of Christ? It Is said
of him, Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.
Is he a Lamb, and must these be Lions? Did he take away sin, and shall these
keep it, and live in it? Oh it is time to distinguish them; they have wore their
hoods and vails long enough, it is time to unmask them. We proceed on, and say,

5. Fifthly, These Presbyterian Ministers confess so much themselves, That
there is a twofold Calling to the Ministry, one Immediate, another Mediate: now
say they, the Prophets and Apostles were indeed called Immediately, but they
only Mediately: what have they then (we pray you) but what any man might have
had for money as well as themselves? And what is this their Mediate Calling
(for more they dare not say in truth they have) but an Outward Art, as a shadow
to a body, or as sign to the thing it self, nothing worth without the Inward?
Or have these men the Influences and Assistance of Gods holy Spirit more in
them then others? Or is it promised or given to them more then to others who
have not that outward Calling? As for their parts and Arts, their seeming gifts
and shifts too, they are by study and other helps acquired, their degrees in
Schools humane, not divine: Now this is no safe Conclusion, but rather indeed a
mere Delusion, to say, because such and such are Ministers in Arts in a
University, and have some knowledge in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and have by
Friends and Moneys too, if not by making Feasts or Banquets for some of the
Classical Rabbis, that therefore if some of these shall lay hands upon them,
that therefore they are true Ministers of Christ, and from that time forward
chiefly, if not solely, they may set their heart and affections to try all ways
possible to enjoy a good Parsonage, and then demand and command Tithes, as true
Orothodox and godly Ministers of Christ. Oh falsehood! Oh these men to be laid
in the balance will be found too light: And for all this it may yet be asked
them, Friend, how came you in hither, not having on the wedding garment of
faithful Laborers in Christ's Harvest? These are the things we put to our
Appropriate Parsons, and many more might be added; but we desire them seriously
upon cold blood, without spleen or anger, to sit down and think upon these
arguments, and not to blind the Farmers and Husbandmen any longer with
comparing themselves with, and stiling themselves (if we would any longer
believe them) in their Panygy-rick Sermons, the Ambassadors of Christ, Watchful
Shepherds over the Flock, Stewards of the Mysteries of Christ, Gods Husbandmen,
and fellow-Laborers, and fellow-Builders, Watchmen, and Angels; all which they
were, were they but the parties they do pretend to be: And though we know that
God has such and will have such to accomplish the Mystical Body of Christ, and
for the gathering together of his people; for he will not want, he has hidden
ones, and despised ones, who shall confound the wise and the learned too, and
by the foolishness (as it is adjudged) of their teaching he will finish his
Work, his great Work: But to assume these glorious Titles unjustly, and without
due right, and under these to Lord it over Gods people by commanding Tithes, is
oppressing Ambition, and base Hypocrisy. We wish them to take heed, that what
was contemptuously objected to our Savior, be not, or may not be, truly said
unto them; But as for this man we know not whence he is: They said they knew it
not, for who could declare his generation? He was from above, and 'twas their
shame not to know him: But we know these Rabbis long enough, and whence they
are too. Look to it well, O ye pretending Priests and Presbyters, and take no
more Tithes, except you had a just title unto them: Remember the Prophets
words, Woe to him that covets an evil Covetousness to himself, to heap together
that which is not his. That is for our first Demand, to show their right
Calling to the Ministry, or else for shame to leave off that antiquated trade
of Tythe-taking any more.

That Tithes (though by our Ministers proving themselves to be true Teachers)
are not (in genere suo) in their kind to be paid or demanded.
Where are we now (good People,) under the Law, or under Grace? Shall we groan
still under this burden, which neither we nor our forefathers were able to
bear? The Pope you see intended to have his Chaplains better fed then taught:
It Is no marvel they are so willing to uphold him, since he allows them such fat
and large Revenues: But we pray who pays it but the oppressed people of
England? We shall therefore do our utmost endeavor to set them free at last
from this grievous yoke under which they are; great hopes there are to set this
Nation in Freedom, in which (we hope) they will stand: we only intend their
Freedom in this, the taking away of Tithes, which indeed are not nor ought to
be now paid in their kind either to the Appropriate or Impropriate Gatherers.
And because our Intention may prosper the better, and the more solidly stop the
mouths of the Gainsayers, for we know we shall not want enough who will grudg
and repine at us for this our labor, though just in it self, and high time to
come to light, and though we set it not out to do any man wrong, as God knows
our intentions; but if possible to convince and to convert (though it be hard
yet it is not impossible so to do) those whose gains come in this way, from
going any further in this same course; and however we speed amongst men we will
discharge our conscience toward God: a Truth is not to be concealed because of
opposition, and we are sure were these that take Tyth's in our Case, they would
be as glad of Freedom as our selves, What ye would that men should do unto you
even so do unto them, Luke 6.31. we wish every man to be well persuaded in his
mind herein, for the Receivers are the most guilty, they cannot but know that
to take other men's goods in an indirect way, must needs be sinful; and
therefore to convince these our Tythe-takers that they may lay down and leave
this practice for time to come, or the acting it still against the light of
Conscience and Knowledge, it will heighten and augment their condemnation, we
lay down these Arguments following to prove our Assertion to be just, viz.

That Tithes are not now to be Paid, or Demanded.
Argum. 1. First, there is a change of that Law by which Tithes were
established and commanded, and of the Priesthood too; both are changed, both
are disanulled, as we have it, Heb. 7.12. The Priesthood being changed there
is of Necessity (says the Apostle) a change also of the Law; the change of the
one of necessity brings a change of the other, there is such a Relation betwixt
them that the one cannot be or stand in force without the other: what a change
of the Law? of what Law (we pray) but of the Ceremonial Law, of the Levitical
Law, by virtue whereof the Jewish Priests and Levites did receive Tithes? now
that there was such a change of the Priesthood appears, for there arose
another Priest after the Order of Melchizedec, and not called after the Order
of Aaron, Heb. 7. v. 11.15. and therefore says of him, That he was not made
after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an endless life,
Heb. 7.16. and again he says of Christ, But this man because he continues for
ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, v. 24. But this man, not Aaron but
Christ, by way of distinction and excellency too; and speaking fully in cap.
6. v. 20. of the change, says, even Jesus, who is made a Priest for ever after
the Order of Melchizedec, and further, who sprang out of Judah, and pertained
to another Tribe, v. 13, 14. Who is an high Priest over the House of God, Heb.
10.21. This being infallibly true, it follows, that the Law is changed also: So
that if our Ministers shall plead for Tithes from Moses and Aaron, or the old
Law, we must tell them, that herein they show themselves to be old Jews,
denying that Christ is come. Let them consider it well, for this has been
their strong Opinion and Determination, and this they have held out to the
people as a sure desence, when alas it is a plain argument against them, but it
passed for current in times of Ignorance and Popish Superstition. That Is our
first dart against Tythe-takers. But,

Argum. 2. Secondly, Tithes by the Levitical Law were but carnal Ordinances,
and but mere shadows and figures, Heb. 10.1. and to last only until the Time of
Reformation, Heb. 9.10. until Christ: Now that time being come, and the
Reformation in practice, shall all things, and persons, and services be
reformed, and shall we still retain and uphold this Antiquated Jewish Levitical
Ceremonial Relic amongst us, and rely yet upon mere figures and old vain
shadows? hold more love to Aarons Ordinances, weak and vanishing, then we will
unto the Commandments of Jesus Christ? Pause hereupon we pray you who take
Tithes. Yet,

Argum. 3. Thirdly, That Law of Tithes was made only to bind that Nation, the
Jews, and Gods Commandment was, that they should be paid to their Levites,
Numb. 18.10. I have given thee the tenth, etc. and the people that failed in
the payment of them were accursed, even that whole Nation, as we have it, Mal.
3.8, 9, 10. It Is true indeed, That Nation, but it is not said, All Nations: We
are Gentiles, not Jews, not under the Law, but under Grace, not of Jewish
Extraction, and therefore not subject to their Ceremonial Law of Tything: If
our Tythe-takers will have Tithes paid them, let them show their Genealogy from
Aarons Loins, and produce their Succession legally; and yet if they should,
which they cannot perform, we might tell them plainly, We are of another
Nation, and therefore they demand Tithes of a wrong people. We insist upon this
the more strictly, that they may see their Error the sooner, and show by what
Law they lay claim to Tithes. Therefore,

Argum. 4. Fourthly, Moses Law will not defend their Action, for, as the
Apostle says, those Ordinances wax old, I will make (says God) a New
Covenant, not like the first, which had Ordinances of Divine Service, and a
worldly Tabernacle, Heb. 9.1. Mark, he says, a New, so that the first is made
old, Heb. 8.13. Now says the Apostle, That which decays and waxed old (as
the Priesthood and Levitical. Law of Tithes did even in his time) is ready to
vanish away, Heb. 8.13. What was the Law of Sacrifices and Offerings, and of
the Jewish divine Service and of Tithes (in the Apostles time, by the power of
Christ's Doctrine and Spiritual Law) ready to vanish away? Was it old, decaying,
faulty too? (as the Apostle speaks,) for had it been faultless, 'twould not
have been abolished, Heb. 8.7, 8. And shall we of this Nation go still and
creep upon old, decaying, Jewish props and crutches? And can you who take
Tithes by this Levitical Law think any otherwise, but that by the Act of this
Custom you are faulty, old, decaying, and vanishing too, and hinder the people
of this Land from the Knowledge of Christ, by your preaching up Gods Law to
Moses, as you pretend, and so to your selves too for taking of Tithes? and who
resists you, resist the Ordinance of God. Take heed we say, you uphold not
that, which Gods Word says is old and vanishing. Further, to this point we say;

Argum. 5. Fifthly, The Payment of Tithes now, what does it but keep us under
the Law, and so hinders us from being Children of Faith, of the Spirit, and of
Grace: for as the Apostle says plainly, Gal. 5.4. Who are under the Law, are
fallen from Grace: Now we conceive that the Apostle does not so much mean the
Moral Law, for that is perpetual and obligatory; but the Ceremonial and
Levitical Law, which contained under it the Payment of Tithes. Now there were
false brethren crept in, who did, amongst many other Errors, hold up
Circumcision, and other Jewish rites and ceremonies; and why not the payment of
Tithes also? for they were greedy and covetous in this particular, as we may
see by that Woe which Christ denounced unto them for this act, Luke 11.42. Woe
unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for ye tithe mint and rue, etc. they would not
lose the least thing Tythable: even much like our Tythe-masters, not an Egg or
an Apple should escape: nay, they used rigor and force too; for we read of
Eli's sons, that if they saw any thing better then other, they would have it,
and if the people would not give it them, they would take it by force, even the
best, the fat, 1 Samuel 2.15, 16. and the best of all the Offerings of the
children of Israel, verse. 30. Such are too many of our Rabbis, they will have
it, rather then not: some have used force and violence to the poor of the Land,
and too many of them have been and will be their own Carvers; what does the
upholding the Ceremonial and Levitical Law debar us from the freedom of Grace,
of the spirit of Grace, and from Faith: certainly we have good reason to
abandon and shake off such a Jewish Schoolmaster, Galat. 3.24. Especially when
they would make us to learn such lessons and laws which Christ has freed us
from; we wonder how our Presbyterian Ministers can ask Tithes of us, knowing
that if they keep and hold that Law, they are fallen from Grace, and are under
the curse; and therefore seeing that by the Death of our Savior all that Moses
commanded concerning Legal rites and ceremonies had an end (for they were all
fulfilled in him,) why is tythe-taking so eagerly upheld by these men, who
pretend to Christ's and not to Moses Law? However, if they shall continue so
corrupt for their gains sake (as who knows not what a strong influence gold and
gains have upon corrupted spirits?) yet let the godly and spiritually-minded
people of our Nation do their utmost, not only to discover their deep policy
in this particular, but labor also to abolish and overthrow it; for though
Moses was a faithful servant, yet Christ is Lord and our God blessed for ever.
Yet a step or two further; we proceed, and say,

Argum. 6. Sixthly, That as our Ministers have held Tithes to be their due Jure
Divino, and so to that purpose have quoted diverse texts out of Moses Plutat^
and the Prophets; we reply, That none were to have Tithes so but the Jewish
Levites and their Priests: It seems then, and concludes so too directly, that
they are the Priests and Levites, or else to hold up this their gains would be
such; for why Tithes, where there is no Priest to sacrifice, and other
Oblations? then let us have Circumcision, and a Tabernacle, an Altar too, or
else a Solomon's Temple again erected, and so consequently killing of Bullocks,
and Sheep, and Lambs, yes, and Pigeons and turtle Doves also. Oh see what ill
Consequences follow in upon the payment of Tithes in this manner. We must have
an Altar of Incense also, which will not be a sweet savor in Gods Nostrils.
But what need of these, or the whole Levitical Law or Priesthood, seeing nor
the one, nor the other, nor all the blood of bulls and goats can possibly take
away sins? Hebr. 10.4. and what is more, the same Apostle says, that there is
verily a disanulling of the Commandment going before; and why so? he gives
sufficient reasons for it, for the weakness and unprofitableness of it; for the
Law (i. e.) the Levitical Law, made nothing perfect, Hebr. 7.18, 19. So then,
if the Levitical Law, nor the Priests, could not take away the sins of the
people, but were themselves sinful men, and dyed, Heb. 7.23. and the Law it
self weak, unprofitable, imperfect, faulty, old, decaying, and vanishing away;
and the Oblations termed vain and abominable, Isai. 1.11, 12, 13. What faces
have our Presbyterian Rabbis to fly unto this for shelter and maintenance? for
their taking of tithes of the People now in these Reformed Times? Well, we hope
we have removed their old confidence from this Law of demanding tithes. Next in
order:

Argum. 7. Seventhly, We having them now upon pursuit, let us not leave to
follow them a little closer; If we will believe them, though they can get
little or no comfort from Moses or the Prophets, yet they have other holds, as
from the Canon Law, the Civil, the Casuists and Schoolmen: Is It possible that
these men who profess Christ so strictly, and Reformation too, and exclaim
against the Pope and his Adherents, will yet flee unto Rome to a Conclave or
Consistory of old musty and rotten superstitious Writters, who to uphold their
Seat and their State patch up their Tenets with Judaism, or the Turkish
Alchoran, who to please their Father, subscribe all their Judgments to his
Verdict, and either will not or dare not print directly what is truth, for fear
of his Excommunications and thundering Anathema's? But must we be kept
hoodwinked still, and must be forced to have their sayings obtruded upon us,
and pinned upon our sleeves for truths, though never so false? Who knows not
how they have juggled with the Text it self, terming it fabula, a fable? What
great Confidence in or from these men? What hopes to find truth in the very
Chair of lying and seducing? What if they say Tithes are due Jure Divino, and
threaten all such with Bell Book and Candle who dare speak or write against it,
are they therefore so? In such a case as this is must Antichrist be chosen Judge
and Umpire. Oh ye Ministers of England, if yet ye be so, may we not tell you
herein, as our Savior told that young man, who said he would follow him
whither soever he went, The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
nests? Have you yet lurking holes from the Popish Canonists, and nests too
amongst the Popish Lawyers? Alas, Priests we know have but little skill, and of
late as bad success, in making and trusting to Canons: It must not be the
Civilian nor the wrangling sophistating Schoolmen who must be Judges in this
Point; and therefore knowing and hoping you will not foul your mouths with
these Rabble of Deceivers, we tell you we appeal in this particular to Gods
Word, if they speak not according to that, it is because there is no truth in
them, Isa. 8. We are not willing to mention this dissembling Crew and politic
Cheaters, who to uphold Peter's old Chair, and to fill their own bellies and
purses too, will say and unsay any thing; yet for conclusion, this point in
agitation amongst us at present is yet unheard of and untouched amongst them at
Rome: We therefore intending to be as brief as may be, go on and say,

Argum. 8. Eighthly, There is not one Iota or line directly for the payment of
Tithes in kind not in all the New Testament. We Will deal plainly with the world,
there are some which carry a show which we intend to answer, because some have
made use of them contrary to the meaning of them that spoke them. The first is
in Mat. 8.2, 3, 4. concerning the Leper, unto whom Christ said, Go show thy
self unto the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a Testimony
unto them. Some concluding that Christ stood for payment of Tithes himself
according to Moses Law; but let us a little examine the matter, and it will make
nothing for our Tythe-takers now; for first, Christ was not then glorified,
secondly, the Jewish Clergy was then in power and being, though miserably
corrupted; and that party who was healed of that Nation, and so liable to
payment, and therefore Christ's Injunction was both equal and righteous at that
time. Another Text too is used for payment of Tithes, and that is in those two
men who (as our Savior says) went into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee,
and the other a Publican; amongst other particulars which the Pharisee boasted
of, this was one, that he gave Tithes of all that he possessed, Luke 18.12.
See, say our Tythe-takers, the very Pharisees did not deny Tithes; and so hold
out to plain people, that those who deny to pay Tithes are worse then the
Pharisees. We reply, Did he pay Tithes? 'twas his duty to the Command then
being in force, and he a Jew, and one that pretended to be the strictest
Observant of the Law: Now as the Apostle Paul says, Thou that boastest of the
Law, through breaking the Law, dishonorest thou God, Romans 2.23. It had in him
at that time been not only a breach simply of the Law, but also a dishonoring
God; and yet we have but his own bragging and boasting word; and some suspicion
may be moved concerning his doing as he said; for, for all his boasting, this
did not justify; but in the last place, this was not a real history, but a
Parable, for the text says, And he spoke this Parable, Luke 18.9. So neither
of these does any thing help the cause of Tithes at this present.

Well, we come now to the main Refuge, that large and copious Text of the
Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 9.7, 8, 9. to 14.) wherein, say our Tythe-Takers, the
Apostle has sufficiently warranted tithes even now under the Gosel: we will
take some pains therefore about the true opening of this Text: The Apostle
vindicates indeed his own liberty and power, though he says he used it not at
all, verse. 15. He speaking of eating and drinking, and leading about a sister,
a wife, verse. 4, 5. forbearing to work at his Trade, verse. 6. Urges his
lawfulness of doing from three similitudes: 1. from going to warfare at a man's
own charges! 2. from planting a vineyard, and not eating the fruit: 3. from
feeding a flock, and not eating of the milk of the flock, verse. 7. Brings an
Argument from Moses Law too, from muzling the ox that treads out the corn,
verse. 9. fetches confirmation of this from plowmen, threshers, and seeds-men,
verse. 10. proves his doctrine from an Argument called a Majori ad Minus: If we
sow to you spiritual, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things?
verse. 11. from the practice of others, v. 12. therefore as well to him as to
others: proves it also from those who ministered about holy things in the
Temple, and waited at the Altar; both lived of and by it; and so concludes this
subject, that so has God ordarned, that they who preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel: an Argument a pari; if they lived on that; these on this,
and this is Gods Ordinance. We have not omitted any thing, we would not
willingly in this large Text of Scripture, which seems to be the Tythe-Takers
safest and uncontrollable Argument, if it be not thoroughly examined. But we
shall make it appear, that this Apostle, even in this place, does not so much as
mention Tithes; nor can our Ministers fetch or alledg truly any Authority for
their Tithes now from hence. And therefore first for his liberty and his plea
for maintenance for Preachers: 1. He was an Apostle, Am I not? verse. 1.
justifies his mission; could our men do so too? 2. His freedom in preaching,
not chargeable; Are our Ministers of this stamp? we fear they are not. 3. His
privilege, seen the Lord, verse. 1. not only in spirit, but Christ appeared to
him: Have our Ministers this spiritual happiness? 4. His effectual operation in
their conversion, v. 2. O happy man, worthy indeed of allowance, and liberal
too! But can ours show their seal and evidence to men's consciences, that they
have wrought their conversion? we wish they could. 5. His confirmation of them
in Grace: O where are such Ministers to be had 6. Eating and drinking; and
leading about a sister, a wife; the two first things indifferent, and allowed
by Christ, Eat and drink such such things as are set before you, Luk, 10.7. v.
4, 5. Here Is only meat and drink, an Apostles allowance; and yet he had
learned to be content and thankful too. What will our Presbyters plead to this?
whom meat and drink, moneys and all will scarce please? for his leading about a
sister, a wife, no ways obnoxious to scandal; a sister by professing the same
faith; a wife, and so constant, and as diligent to minister to them in their
journeying. Diverse women of affection to Christ, followed him, being so taken
with his doctrine, Luke 8.2, 3. He was put upon this employment by Christ
himself, his warfare, planting and feeding, ( Acts 22.14, 15.) Ours put
themselves upon it, and thrust into it for gains and means. Rich Parsonages
need not cry out for want of Pastors; they strive who should get into them
first. His comparison from the muzling of the Ox; This creature is laborious,
and a pattern of a good Minister, v. 9. For his Argument from the greater to
the less, 'twas true, verse. 11. He did sow, (i. e.) preach spiritual things;
Ours too too many of them preach carnal things, as for maintenance by Tithes,
nay and contention too, and preach themselves, and for themselves, he not. And
so also for his plowing he performed it spiritually; so of threshing and
sowing, this was his task; it is good to have a Calling, not to run without a
Call: and moreover observe his labor in the Gospel; I, says he, labored more
then they all, (1 Cor. 15.) A good example to all that undertake this
profession, to be true Laborers in Gods Harvest and Vineyard: His fetching
Authority for Ministers means from their practice under the Law, verse. 13. for
in his time the Law of Moses was not quite decayed; The Light of the Gospel did
spread, but yet then the Jews Law was not down, it decayed by degrees: but now
it is no plea for our Ministers, it being now vanished as old, Hebr. 7. In the
last place, at verse. 14. from Gods Ordinance we say so too, it is Gods
Ordinance, we know, that the Laborer is worthy of his hire: the Apostle says,
they should live of the Gospel, but does not mention a word to confirm the
taking and raking after Tithes: and all this he, good man, did only persuade,
forced it not, railed not against them, accused them not, did not prosecute
them at Law, neither did he threaten any of them: And now to sum up all this,
What makes all this for Tithes in kind? not a word, nor one syllable. When we
consider this man's admirable gifts, and his constant employment of them; his
patience in troubles, and wants too; how he only craves and persuades, not for
any superfluity, but only to live; what mean and laborious names he takes to
himself, even of a private Soldier, of a Vine-dresser, of a Shepherd, of a
Plowman, of a Thresher, and of a Seeds-man, Titles not of honor, but of labor
and pains, and all these with persecution too, and only to live, to preach to
live, and live to preach: Look upon this Example O Ministers, and then blush at
your Pride, Contention, Debate, Envy, Idleness, and Imperiousness: He
persuades, but you will command; he only to live of the Gospel, you to lord it
over your Brethren and the People too; Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of
Levi, Number. 16.7, 8. He converted Souls, and confirmed them in the Faith; Oh
could you but show such seals of your employments! and yet for all this
demanded no Tithes at all, only peoples liberality. We would not, do not,
debar a good maintenance to you, though you be far inferior to the Apostles,
only be not your own Carvers: Allowance we say is fiting, but not in this kind
by Tyth-taking. We would not be tedious upon this subject, only give our
Ministers notice that they exact too much upon Gods people by Tithes. Further,
to convince them in this particular, we say,

Argum. 9. Ninthly, Seeing that Moses and the Prophets, nor Canonists,
Civilians, Casuists, nor Schoolmen, nor yet the Word of God in the New
Testament, will or do uphold them in their practice; they retire to the common
Law of the Land, because confirmed by several Acts of Parliament; and this is
it indeed that bolsters them up, and swells them so, that they think all is their
own, and that nothing can hinder them from their Right, as they hold it. Well,
Is the whole matter come to this? from Jure Divino to Jure Humano? Is all their
pretenses and clamors and bustleings for Tithes all this while summed up in
this? Tithes are settled to our Ministers by Act of Parliament: This is but a
weak plea for them; for we say, first, what the Parliaments of this Land did in
this particular, was out of indulgency to encourage them in their profession,
not to heighten them in pride; for Alimony, not for Covetousness; their
intentions were honorable, the worse is the abuse; but yet those that sat then,
and ruled in chief, had dependence on the Pope; the Houses were filled with
Popish Prelates and Abbots: nay, most, if not all in both Houses, were zealous
Papists, and had no further knowledge, held it a meritorious Act, and the
business put on by the Archbishops and Bishops of the same tribe that the
Ministers were of: and so indeed Tithes came in. But we hope many other Acts of
Parliament in after times have been repealed; and when it pleases God to stir
up the spirits of this honorable Parliament to put their Power into execution
in this particular, it may be speedily effected, without either any prejudice
to their Consciences, or violation of any man's just Right, but to the general
and universal Freedom of this Nation from Jewish and Popish Thraldom, for which
purpose there have been sundry Petitions from several parts and persons, all
desiring this one thing (as a great grievance) may be taken out of the way: And
certainly as 'twas said of Henry the eight, that he broke the Popes shins when
he pulled down the Abbeys and Monasteries in England; so it may be said of
taking away of Tithes, that being done, he will be crushed to pieces, his bones
will be broke, and his body thrown fully from amongst us in England. We proceed
to another Argument against Tythe-paying, and hasten to an end. Therefore,

Argum. 10. Tenthly, The gross Abuses, Inconveniences, Troubles, Lawsuits,
Quarrelings, Contentions, Strifes, Debates, Hatred, Heart-burnings, Suspicions,
Wrongs, Vexations, Murmurings, Grudgings, and Mischiefs, which have and do
daily arise betwixt the Tythe-takers and the Tythe-payers, as they are not to
be numbered, so it is pity they should not be extinguished, the one think they
take too much, the other think they have not enough: What Parish, Hamlet, Town
or City in all England, which either is not, or has not been quarreled withal
by their wrangling Tything Ministers? What Term has not been filled with
Complaints one against another? What Courts have not, and yet do not even swarm
with Suits one with another, to the great charges, loss and vexation of the
good people of this Land in traveling and journeying to London about Lawsuits
for setting out and paying Tithes? How are the Justices and Committees toiled
and wearied at their Meetings and Sittings in hearing Causes, one party against
the other, even with bitterness of spirit, and all for Tithes? We could weary
the Readers, and relate such stories of quarrels in this kind as are not indeed
worth the naming, and yet have been prosecuted with all vehemence and virulency
of spirit: How can such Ministers teach the Word of God in meekness, who are
filled with rancor and ill will for want of their due in Tithes, merely
conceiving so to themselves, not being so in truth? What base Informations and
Suggestions, with indirect Intelligence too, are brought to their ears, of men's
stealing, pilfering, and carrying away more then they should, which inflames
their spirits so high and so deeply against their Neighbors and Parishioners,
that they are not fully and truly reconciled to them during their whole lives?
How are they distracted from their Study and spiritual Employments? What Weeks
and Months are wholly consumed in looking after yours, your Goods, your
Tithes, more then after you, and your Souls? How do the hopes of great Tithes
render them Mercenary? How do they chop and change their Flocks, as often as they
can by any means procure better and fatter Livings? Oh what true care of Souls
can these tything Presbyters have! How can they say as Paul did, Acts 20. I
have coveted no man's silver, nor gold, nor apparel, or with the Apostle Peter,
Silver and gold have I none, since these men aim at nothing else? Behold the
special fruits of Tything. In the last place we say,

Argum. 11. Eleventhly, That all the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, as
those of Geneva, of Basil, of Bern, of Zurich, of Schafhausen, those of France,
with the Low Countries of Holland, Zealand, etc. those likewise of Germany and
of Denmark have no Tithes, and yet they live peaceably, quietly and contentedly
with and amongst their people. Our Savior himself when he sent his Apostles to
teach the Gospel, gave not the least direction or precept concerning Tithes;
nor did the Primitive Christians demand any: And have our Ministers any juster
claim or right unto Tithes then any or all these think you? Thus much
concerning our Appropriate Tythe-takers, the pretending Ministers: We come now
to the other fort, which are the Impropriate Tythers: Now for certain if these
who labor in the Word cannot yet show their lawfulness to take Tithes, the
other who labor not at all can have nothing to plead for themselves, yet to
convince them, because they are many who practice it, and great ones too, we
say to them, First, Argum I. against Impropriators.

1. Their Parsonages were either freely given to them or to their Ancestors,
and therefore may be the freelier surrendered again, or else easily purchased,
even then for so little as is not worth reckoning for now.

2. They have had a long and a quiet possession of them, and in all that time
and years have had Tithes paid them without any opposition; so that long since
they have not only got in and recovered the principal laid out, but have
moreover above that procured great Estates and Means to themselves and heirs
for their moneys then disbursed.

3. Their not laboring in teaching the Word, but what is more, their not
allowing any Maintenance to Preachers (except now of late for fear,) for
Impropriations of 200 li. 300 l. or 400 l. per annum, have sinall Vicaridges
inclusively laid to them, or else in policy the Impropriators have themselves
parted with the smaller Tithes to a Preacher, either because they are in many
places scarce worth the labor in gathering, especially with so many ill wishes
of the people who pay them (if not with curses too,) or else because by this
Act they take off the peoples hatred from themselves, and transfer it upon the
poor Vicars, who must either get them in, or starve in their places; and
however this Act of theirs does still and quiet the people, and blind them too,
so that they sit down (as yet without complaining against their Impropriators,
who usually take Tithes with power, especially if they be (as in many places
they are) both Landlord and Parson too,) for then the poor Tenants dare not
resist their Actions, for fear of being dismissed their habitations.

4. Their Livings were either given to them, or else purchased from the Crown;
and if so, reducible whenever and to what Uses soever Parliaments in after
times shall think best, they having and always had power, not only to call in
Crown Lands but also to dispose and employ them, especially in great abuses, or
public Exigences and occasions.

5. Their purchases for the most part acted in times of Popery and dark
superstition; so that in later times many gentlemen in this Land have in their
own consciences been convicted of their Tenure, and have laid down of
themselves; some others have been persuaded to part with their Title for a
little money by certain Feoffees in and about London, who did recover some of
them, and did maintain Lecturers and Schools with them. Now since God has
given more light, let our Gentry and others, who hold such, consider well of it.

6. Their Tythe-taking against Gods Word: He that labors not (says the Apostle)
let him not eat; and he that sows not, why should he reap? besides it hinders
the teaching of Gods Word in such places: for Impropriations are commonly in
the greatest and fattest places and parishes; and yet hereby these Towns are,
or have been, destitute of Teachers, or else they themselves must and have
procured one, and yet paid Tithes beside; for the Vicars (if any be) are kept
so poor, that they can scarce live, though they have labored hardly and
constantly.

To the Impropriators, who have purchased their Parsonages of late, we say,

First, 'Twas Covetousness, and hopes of quietness of the times, and wealth by
their purchase, which induced them to buy.

Secondly, These could not but know that they ventured upon Titles that were
hazardable of Tenure, and so did or might have precautioned in their bargains
restitution of Moneys, if they should be deprvied of them.

Thirdly, Gave for their purchase little or nothing; some perhaps three or
four, few not five years purchase.

Fourthly, That Power by which they had them (viz.) Kingly Power is now
extinguished and abolished; and then how can their Tenures be valid and good?

Fifthly, Particular Interests are not to be held up against a general good,
especially when as a considerable satisfaction shall be made to the party
surrendering, the loss (if any be proved) being not tota, but partial.

Sixthly, By their giving up they are sure to have the peoples love and
goodwill, and blessing too; whereas the keeping them may procure, and does
cause, the peoples ill will and hatred, if not curses too; And it is a happiness
they have enjoyed Tithes so long without disturbance, and yet what further is,
they may reap benefit and Salvation of their Souls too, by placing an able man
to teach Gods Word in such places.

These are some of those many Arguments, may be used to convince as well the
one as the other of our Tythe-takers to leave off that trade and course. We
leave the issue to God, and to the pious judgments and discretion of our
supreme Magistrates, the Parliament of England, praying for Gods blessings upon
their proceedings, Amen.

FINIS.
Page 17. lin. 19. read Act ^.31.1^7. ^^^tateuch.


