The last great and BLOODY FIGHT BETWEEN The English and the Dutch, on Thursday
morning last near the Downs: With the particulars thereof, the number of men
killed and wounded on the Parliaments side; and the taking, burning, sinking,
and dispiersing of five and forty Sail of the Hollanders by Sir George Ayscue:
With his pursuing of Van-Trump to the Coast of France; and 24 of his Men of War
shipwrackt near St. Mallows; Also, a gr^a^ Victory obtained by G. Blake; the
number of ships taken; and a general Rising of the Dutchmen; their choosing of
a new Admiral; and all persons to die without mercy that will not engage. SEnt
in a Letter to the Parliament of England, and the Council of State, on
Sabbath Day last; and printed according to order.

depiction of a ship or galleon with many guns or cannons, flying a flag with a
cross

London, Printed for G. Horton, 1652.

Another bloody Fight at Sea between the English and the Dutch upon the Coast
of Holland: With the desperate engagement of the English Redcoats; the boarding
of the Flemmins; the dispersing of the Navy; and the re-inforcing of diverse
gallant ships into their Harbors.
SIR,
HIs Excellency Genesis Blake having divided the Navy into two Squadrons, resolved
with the one to strike sail for the North Coast, to fight and attend the motion
of 300 sail of the Dutch, in those parts, leaving sir G. Ascue to command the
rest of the shiping in the Downs, which consisted of 30 gallant Men of War;
Vantrump having received intelligence thereof, drew forth 40 select and choice
ships, and on Thursday about five of the clock in the morning, our Scouts made
a discovery of his approach near the Channel, who giving notice thereof to the
Navy, great was the preparation made to receive them; and in pursuance thereof,
sir Geo. Ayscue, with the Fairfax and Triumph, bore up to them, before the head
of the Fleet, and gave them 50 Guns, but was answered with the like salute from
Vantrump, and Vice Admiral Wit, who upon hanging forth their bloody flags,
was the signal for the rest of their Captains to fall on; insomuch, that a
bloody fight began, and after 700 broad sides exchanged, they came to grapling,
with a resolution to board each other; but it proved a work of extreme
difficulty; for no sooner had we assailed each other decks, but immediately the
small shot flew so thick from the murdering pieces, that both parties were
often repelled and beaten off; and the victory for a long time seemed dubious,
til at last sir George and Cap. Lawson with the Rainbow and Fairfax, bore up to
the head of the Vantrump, and his vice admiral; and after several desperate
Onsets on both sides, vantrump declined dispute, and with much difficulty
hailed off; the viceadmiral was sunk with two more; after which, the Redcoats
of Col. Goffs Regiment, that were aboard the Speaker, being engaged with four
of the Hollanders, seeing no ways possible to free themselves, resolved to
purchase their liberty, with the price of their bloods, otherwise to sink by
their sides; in order whereunto, they played their Grenades and fireworks,
which did great execution, and at last fired one of their ships; the other
three perceiving this sad disaster, declined engagement; and soon after the
whole Navy began to be in a Chaos of Confusion; for diverse of the English
Frigates bearing up close to their great ships, gave them three shot for one, in
which action they performed singular service; and amongst the rest, the Rubey
came up, and gave them a broad side with ten Guns: the Dutchmen answered him
with the like salute: No sooner had they exchanged four broad sides, but
immediately came up the Star-Frigat, presenting ^^^m with seven broad sides one
after another: and coming to grapling, the musketeers on both sides, maintained
the Dispute with great gallantry and resolution; till at last, the English
Red-coats, consisting of Col. Ingoldsbys Regiment of Foot, played so fast upon
them with small shot and hand-granadoes, that they soon cleared the Decks,
fired the Misle and Main-sail; and afterward boarded two of the Hollanders,
killing 47, and surprised about one hundred and twenty: Many there were that
leapt out of the Port-holes into the Sea, and drowned themselves, by reason
that they bid defiance to the English, and chose rather to sacrifice their
lives in the merciless Ocean, then yield obedience unto them. The rest of the
Hollanders, being eleven in number, after a sharp fight ran themselves on
ground near Newport, and are since ship-wrackt.

Our whole Fleet was engaged for the space of 7 hours, during which time Sir
George Ayscue performed singular service; and at last sunk their Vice Admiral,
carrying 40 Guns, but not without loss; the Triumph, Speaker, Victory, Garland,
Fairfax, Tiger, have been deeply engaged in the Commonwealths service; and have
deported themselves with singular dexterity against Van-Trump, who, after a
bloody and great engagement, was enforced to decline, and get off, to the
protection of their Forts and Sconces; but not without great loss, for we have
received advertisements, that Genesis Blake has taken seven, sunk two, and fired
three, with the loss of one ship. Vantrump is preparing for another engagement
and shipping from several Ports and towns are coming to him: He has also
double manned his ships, both with Seamen and Land-men, who has taken an Oath
and Protestation to live and die together, and to fight it out to the last man.

The General has sent for six more fireships out of the Downs, and is resolved
to fire and destroy the Enemy in their Harbors. Since which time his Excellency
has taken two Merchants ships, richly laden, and two men of War; Sir George
Ayscue has likewise taken seven, sunk three, burned one, and dispersed 45;
about 24 took a desperate Resolution, and ran themselves a ground on the Coast
of France, and are said to be shipwrackt and sunk between St. Mallows, St.
Quintin, and Porto Rieux, Port-Towns upon the Coast of Britaign. The rek that
escaped, are sailed toward Cortoy and St. Valerii, in Picardy, and Caen in
Normandy; but Sir George is in pursuit of them with 20 sail; and has taken
five gallant merchantmen.

We hear that there is a general Rising from 16 to 60; and those that do refuse
to to engage, are to die without mercy. They are setting forth another great
Fleet of 200 sail, and the Zealanders have chosen a new Admiral. In our last
engagement, our loss is esteemed killed and wounded about 300. The Enemies far
greater.

From aboard the Assurance, in the Downs, July 3. 1652. The Parl. are setting
forth more shipping; and 700 foot soldiers are boarded.



FINIS.

