Speculum Patrum: A LOOKING-GLASS OF THE FATHERS, WHEREIN, You may see each of
them drawn, Characterized, and Displayed in their colors.

To which are added, The Characters of some of the Chief Philosophers,
Historians, Grammarians, Orators, and Poets.

BY EDWARD LARKIN, Late Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, and now Minister
of the Word at Limesfield in Surrey.

LONDON: Printed for H.E. and are to be sold by John Sprat Bokseller near the
Sign of the Castle in Norwich. 1659.

To his most Honored Friend, Marmaduke Gresham Esquire of NEWHALL at Limesfield in
Surrey.
Most worthy Sir,
GReat favors do oblige to great acknowledgments: You have been abundant to me
in the one, and I should appear vilely ungrateful, should I be defective to you
in the other. Wherefore, though it is not within the sphere of my power
proportionably to requite your goodness, yet it shall ever be within the
circumference of my will to remember it. Pertinax sit memoria debentium, was
excellent good advice, though from the mouth of a Heathen: Hence Seneca
compares the Graces to youthful Maidens, and the reason of that parallel he
says is this, quia non debet beneficiorum memoria senescere, because the
Records of benefits conferred, must never wax old. That was a good expression
of one in Euripides, (...). I hate the thanks of such friends as wither with
^^e.

For this cause therefore have I presented your fair hands with this small
Treatise, to let the world know of your engagements on me, and my readiness to
make such requital, as my poor capacity enables me to return. Reddit beneficium
qui libenter debet.

Sir, I doubt not of your kind acceptance of this mean Missive, with us much
generous indulgence, as my heart offers it with cordial alacrity. And what is
wanting in my short and straightened compensations, I shall beseech God to
enlarge and make complete by his blessings. It is symmachus his expression, Pro
beneficiis si non simus solvendo, coelestibus delegamus virtutibus: So that I
hope I may say with Ausonius, Tibi coepit Deus debere pro nobis.

Sir, I shall not trouble you with more words, only give me leave to add
this, That I am yours in a thousand bonds, and must ever remain bound to
reverence your Person, and love your Virtues. This is the Resolution of

Your unfeigned faithful Servant, Edward Larkin.
Limesfield, November. 29. 1658.
SPECULUM PATRUM, A LOOKING-GLASS OF THE FATHERS, Wherein you may see each of
them characterized and displayed in their colors.
Of Dionysius the Areopagite.
THE Apostles being all withdrawn from the Church Militant, and made free
Denisons of the Triumphant, our Savior now reigning in heaven, raised up many
eminent and burning Lights, whereby he spread his glorious Gospel through all
the parts of the Universe: Amongst which Dionysius the Areopagite is to be
taken notice of, as one of the first Stars which appeared: He had that name
given him, in that before his conversion he was a Judge of criminal causes at
Athens: He was one of St. Paul's Auditors, from whom, as his Nurse, he sucked
the milk of Christian Religion, at what time the good Apostle was at the
Academy of Athens disputing with the Ethnic Philosophers, as his Lord and
Master had done before with the Jewish Rabbines and Doctors.

Eusebius and Nicephorus write of him, that he was Bishop of Athens, from
whence he was afterward removed, if we may give credit to Baronius, to the
Bishopric of Paris in France. This grave man being full of days, and as full
of divine Grace, was crowned with the laurel of Martyrdom, not in Domitian's
time, (as some think) but in the reign of the Emperor Trajan, of whom it may
be said, that he was a good Prince to all but his Christian Subjects, whose
holy profession seemed to the worlds eye, therefore, to be the more odious,
because so just a Prince as Trajan seemed to be, did not forbear to persecute
it.

When this Dionysius was in Egypt, whither he withdrew himself for the study of
Philosophy, and had there taken notice of that miraculous Eclipse, which
happened at our Saviors Passion, whereof he could find no natural reason, he
cried out, Aut Deus Naturae patitur, aut mandi machina dissolvetur: Either the
God of Nature suffers, or the whole frame and fabric of the world will be
instantly dissolved.

Nicephorus and Suidas give us a catalogue of this man's Works, which Baronius
labors to justify, but other learned Writers, such as Laurentius Valla, and
Erasmus: Luther, Cajetan, and our English Whitaker, prove them by many
arguments to be supposititions and counterfeit.

His received Works we have printed in two Tomes at Antwerpe, with the
Scholiasts of Maximus, and the Paraphrase of Pachimaera in the year of Christ
1634.

I meet with two Eulogies given to this Father, the one is from Trithemius, who
calls him. Virum eximiae sanctitatis, and incomparabilis doctrinae; a man of
transcendent sanctity, and incomparable learning.

The other is from Sixtus Senensis, who says this of him, Quod divinae and in
mysteriis absconditae sapientiae admiranda volumina graeco, and sublimi eloquio
doctissime conscripsit; That he wrote in sublime Greek language admirable
volumes of divine and mysterious wisdom: And so he gives you a Schedule of all
his works, as they were approved by the third Council of Constantinople.

Campian the Jesuit in his fifth Reason, page 32. speaks thus of this
Dionysius his Hierarchy, Dionisii Areopagitae Hierarchia, quas classes, quae
sacra, quos ritus edocet? And out of the same book this Jesuit proves both
Purgatory, and their Romish Ecclesiastical Hierarchy: But that work is none of
this Dionysius's, though it bear his name; and this you have justified by
Sixtus Senensis, and several other learned Writers.

Ignatius.
THe next to Dionysius is Ignatius, the second Bishop of Antioch after Peter,
as Eusebius and Nicephorus relate: He had that name given him, ab igne
charitatis, from the fire of charity wherewith he burned. He was also called,
(...), and (...), either because he was born of God, or else in regard of his
bearing God in his pure and holy heart. This eminent Champion was thrown to
hungry Lions in that persecution which Trajan stirred up against the Christians.

Scaliger gives him this commendation, Vir (quod in orientis partibus per-rarum
est) singulari eruditione; A man (which is very rare in the Eastern parts) of
singular erudition.

Eusebius mentioning him writes thus, Ignatius amongst most men famous.

Neander in his Geography, part 2. most highly extols him in these or such like
expressions, Ignatius, Antiochenae Ecclesiae praefuit, vir magni spiritus
sidei, and zeli; Ignatius was Bishop of Antioch, a man of great spirit, faith
and zeal.

Baronius speaking of the Epistles which this man should write, he styles them,
Copiam Apostolicarum traditionum apothecam, fortemque adversus haereticos
armaturam; A copious storehouse of Apostolical traditions, and a strong armor
against heretics.

This Father was wont to say (when he spoke of our Saviors death and passion)
that his Love was crucified. Ireneus gives us an account of his Martyrdom, and
sets down the very words he should utter a little before his sufferings, which
were to this effect or sense: Inasmuch as I am the wheat of God, I am to be
ground with the teeth of beasts, that I may be found pure bread, or fine
manchet. His Epistles were printed at Oxford, 1644.

Polycarpus.
POlycarpus (whose name signifies much fruit; was the Disciple of St. John the
Apostle, ordained by him Bishop of the Church of Smyrna) he went to Rome in the
reign of Antonius Pius ( Anicetus being Prelate at that time there) where he
reduced to the true faith those which were bewitched by the heretics Marcion
and Valentinus:

It happened, that wicked Marcion there meetting him, thus spoke to him,
Know thou us, O Polycarpus? To whom forthwith this grave and holy man most
disdainingly answered, I know thee to be the firstborn of the Devil.

This godly Professor was in the days of Antoninus the Philosopher, and Lucius
Verus, Roman Emperors, tied to a stake in the midst of the Amphitheater, and
there devoured by the merciless flames, as Volaterrane and Eusebius have
written; but others yet say, that he could not burn, the Lord from Heaven
restraining the natural violence of the fire by a miracle, and thereupon they
slew him with the sword at Smyrna, in the year of our Lord, 167.

In this man's time Egesippus the Jew was converted to the Christian Faith, who
afterward wrote in five books, the History of the Church from Christ to his own
time. This Polycarpus writ an Epistle to the Philippians, so says Jerome, and
another to great Dionysius the Areopagite; so Suidas.

Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History tells us, That this man did communicate
with Anicetus the Roman Bishop, though he differed in opinion from him, about
the celebration of Easter. Ireneus commends that Epistle of his to the
Philippians in his third book against heresies, saying, That it is so full
furnished to this, that out of it all those, which have any care of their
salvation, may know the character of faith, and the doctrine of truth. Eusebius
recites the Prayer which this holy and devout man did conceive and utter
immediately before he was martyred; it begins thus, O Father of thy beloved and
blessed Son Jesus Christ, by whom we have knowledge of thee --

Ireneus gives this eminent Saint this following commendation; Hic docuit
semper, quae ab Apostolis didicerat, and Ecclesiae tradidit quae sola sunt
vera; This man always taught that which he had learnt of the Apostles, and
delivered to the Church those things which are only true. It Is Dalleus his
Blogy of him, Quo viro post Apostolos, quorum familiaris fuit, vix ullus apud
Christianos unquam fuit sanctior, ant divinior; Then which man after the
Apostles (whose familiar companion he was) there was scarce any one among the
Christians more holy and divine.

Eusebius gives us an account of his martyrdom by an Epistle of the Church of
Smyrna, inserted in his History, wherein we have many remarkable passages; one
is a Voice speaking to Polycarpe from Heaven, and saying thus, O Polycarpe be
of courage, and play the man, even then when he was standing before the
Judgment Seat. Another is the stout Reply, which he made the Proconsul, when
he tempted him to deny the Lord Jesus, which was much to this effect, Fourscore
and five years have I served him, neither has he ever offended me, and how can
I revile my King, who has hitherto kept me. A third is, that when his body was
burning, it seemed to the senses of them that beheld it, to send forth a sweet
and fragrant smell, as of Frankincense, or such like odoriferous perfume.

Justine Martyr.
IUstine Martyr fiourished in the reign of Antonius Pius, and so was
contemporary with Polycarpe. Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical history speaking of
him says, that this man was famous in the Christian Doctrine a little after
the times of the Apostles: He was the son of Priscas Bacchus, born at Flavia, a
new City of Syria Palestina, so he himself tells us, in one of his Apologies.
Its said, that the Emperor upon his reading of this man's Apologies, which he
had dedicated to him, wherein he pleaded the righteous cause of poor distressed
and calamitous Christians, that he gave order for the ceasing of the
persecution. Tertullian and Suidas do speak great matters in the honor and
praise of this Champion. He wrote against the Heretic Marcion, whose venom
(it seems) had spread it self far and wide in his days.

He was a notable Philosopher, and in his Dialogue with Trypho he says, that
he had been an Auditor of all the Sects of them, of Stoics, Peripateticks,
Pythagoreans, and Platonicks. Jerome tells us in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical
Writers, that he did, habitu Philosophico incedere, walk in the guise and habit
of a Philosopher. He was beheaded at Rome, says Eusebius, in the reign of
Lucius Verus, but according to Epiphanius, it was before, even in the time of
Adrian. His death, whenever it was, was promoted and procured by the malice
and revenge of Crescens an ungodly Philosopher, who being worsted by him in his
excellent disputations, never left till his malignancy had brought to pass
this pious Martyrs destruction: whence you have this or the like passage from
his own mouth in his Apology, relating to his persecutor Crescens; I look for
no other thing then this, that I be betrayed by some one of them called
Philosophers, or knocked in the head by Crescens, no Philosopher indeed, but
only a proud self-conceited boaster -- and so he goes on in that Apology.

This Father records of himself, that he was prevailed withal, and won to
embrace the Christian Faith, through the cruelties of heathen Tyrants against
the Saints of Christ, and their courageous patience under them. We meet with a
worthy character given this man, in the Bibliotheca of Photius, which is as
follows, or much to that sense; Est vir ille ad Philosophiae tum nostrae, tum
potissimum profanae summum evectus fastigium, multiplicisque eruditionis and
historiarum copia circumfluens; That man is an eminent proficient both in our
Christian Philosophy, and also in profane, and overflowing with abundance of
various learning and histories. Pareus says this of his works, quod ejusdem
scripta etiamnum cum fructu leguntur; That his writings are now read with
benefit. Epiphanius calls him, Virum sanctum, and Dei amantem, a holy man, and a
lover of God. Tatianus in his book against the Gentiles, styles him (...), most
admirable.

Yet this man, though he did apologize for Christianity, had his errors. In his
Dialogue with Trypho he shows himself an Abetter of the opinion of the
Chiliasts; and the barbarous Gentiles he did entitle to salvation.

A thenagoras.
A Thenagoras a Philosopher of Athens turned Christian, and flourished, if we
may believe Bellarmine, in the year of Christ, 142. when Antonius Pius was
Emperor, and Telesphorus the Roman Bishop; though Baronius will not have him
to appear till the year of our Lord 179. which was the time, when Aurelius sat
in the Throne, and Soter or Eleutherius in the Chair. He was a man of very
gteat esteem with the said Prince for his vast abilities and profound learning;
he wrote an Apology in the behalf of his fellow Christians, and likewise
undertook an Embassy, that he might speak as an Advocate for them to the Roman
Majesty.

He published a golden book (as one calls it) of the Resurrection, set out and
interpreted by Andreas Gesner. Epiphanius cites this man's Apology in the
Heresy of Origin, where he relates the words of Proclus out of Methodius.
Bellarmine in his book of Ecclesiastical Writers says, Scriptorem hunc carere
suspicione; That this Writer is without suspicion, and yet he is constrained to
confess, that he was over-passed both by Eusebius and Jerome.

Varro says; that this Author writ also some books of Husbandry: How he dyed I
read not, what is now extant of his Works you have printed in one volume with
Iustine Martyr.

Irenaeus.
IRenaeus flourished, say some, about the 160. year of Christ, others the 180.
when Aurelius Antonius and Commodus were Emperors, and in that he says, that
in his childhood he converst with Polycarpus some of the learned think, that he
was born either at Smyrna, or not far from it, that he was a Greek his name is
their warrant to conjecture it.

Eusebius says, that he succeeded Pothinus in the Bishopric of Lions, where
he governed the Church (say some) for thirty years, others say more: Some which
have written Martyrologies, speaking of his death, do tell us, that he was
butchered by the Tyrant Maximinus, who was a great persecutor of the Saints and
people of God. Bargnius says, that he was martyred with almost all his people
of Lions, in that horrid storm, which was raised against the Christians by the
Emperor Severus.

He wrote against the heresies of those times, which Satan had spread abroad,
on purpose to eclipse, if not altogether to extinguish, the sunshine of the
Truth. He was at Rome with Eleutherius, where he endeavored the conviction of
Blastus and Florinus two notable Schismatics, and to allay that malignant
spirit of error which their stinking breath had raised. He also sharply
reyroved the Roman Bishop Victor, for that he had injuriously excommunicated
the Asian Churches, so says Eusebius.

Erasmus thinks that this Author wrote in Latin, and not in Greek, and being
skilled in Greek, he therefore uses Graecismes: But Rhenanus judges the
contrary, because Jerome reckons him among the Grecian Writers. Tertullian does
bestow on this man this following admirable character; Irenaeus, omnium
doctrinarum curiosissimus explorator; A most exquisite and curious searcher
into all manner and kind of learning. Epiphanius calls him, (...). Most blessed
and most holy Ireneus.

Erasmus in an Epistle of his thus sets him forth; first he commends him from
his name, Magnus ille Ecclesiae propugnator, pro sui nominis augurio, pacis
Ecclesiae vindex; and then he goes on, highly extolling his writings, spirant
illius scripta priscum illum Evangelii vigorem, ac phrasis arguit pectus
martyrio paratum, habent enim Martyrs suam quandam dictionem seriam, fortem
and masculam; That great defender of the Church, for the divination of his
name, a maintainer of the Churches peace; his writings breath that ancient
vigor of the Gospel, and his phrase argues a heart prepared for martyrdom;
for Martyrs have a certain serious expression, valiant and masculine.
Bellarmine speaking of the books which this man wrote, says of them, Quod
pleni sum doctrina and pietate, that they are full of learning and piety.

Yet notwithstanding this great Light had his eclipses, as appears by somewhat
that is unsound in his own writings. Particularly he was entangled with the
snare of Papias, who was the Father of the Chiliasts; this Eusebius does charge
him with, as we find it in the third book of his history, the six and thirtieth
chapter, against which opinion of his, Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria is said
to have written somewhat in confutation, so says Sixtus Senensis. He was
likewise once an allower of free will in spirituals, though afterward he
expressed himself to the contrary, saying, Non a nobis, sed a Deo esse bonum
salutis nostrae, that our salvation is not from our selves but God.

There was one strange opinion more to which he was addicted, and that was,
Animas a corpore separatas habere hominis figuram and characterem corporis, ut
etiam cognoscantur, That souls departed and separated from the body, have man's
figure and form of his body, so that they may be known by it.

Pantaenus.
PAntaenus was of the School of Alexandria, where at first he professed the
Philosophy of the Stoics, but afterward became very eminent in the profession
of Christian Divinity. Its said of him by learned Pareus, Quod primus scholam
ex ethnica in christianaem mutavit; that he was the first which changed an
ethnic school into a christian. He was sent from Alexandria by Demetrianus the
Bishop thereof, into India, to establish that church in the sacred Truth, which
the Apostles of our Lord Jesus had there planted; where meeting with the Gospel
of St. Matthew written in Hebrew, and left there with those Eastern people by
Bartholomew, he brought it thence (say some) to the City of Alexandria. though
Eusebius tells us, that it remained there, even in his time.

He was the Master of that famous Scholar Clemens Alexandrinus, he flourished
under the Emperors Severus and Antonius Caracalla, about the year of Christ
200. he left behind him some certain Commentaries on the holy Scripture, which
are not now extant, though Jerome had in his time the knowledge of them.

Eusebius styles him, a famous learned man, and one in great estimation, lib.
5. cap. 9. and Senensis speaking of him, tells us, that he was eminent, propter
tam secularis literaturae, quam sacrae eruditionis gloriam, as well for the
glory of his secular learning as his sacred erudition.

Clemens Alexandrinus.
CLemens Alexandrinus, (So called, because he was a Presbyter of Alexandria)
preached the Gospel both at Jerusalem, and at Antioch; he was the master of
Origin, and moderated in the School of Alexandria after Pantaenus. He
flourished in the reign of Severus and his son Antonius. He wrote many learn
books, Eusebius calls him, in Divinis Scripturis exercitatum, one exercised in
the Divine Scriptures. Causabon, inexhaustae Doctrinae virum, a man of
unexhausted learning. Henisius Penu eruditionis, and Seientiae. The granary of
Erudition and Science. Caussinus Plutarchum Christianum, The Christian Plutark,
Dempster, gravem and disertum authorem, A grave and eloquent author, but the
Centuriators of of Magdeburg are full and large in his Character, which we have
from them as follows; Fuit in hoc homine omnino Ingens discendi cupiditas,
ingenium acutum, tenacissima memoria, Fervens Zelus, Gloriae Dei, and
Religionis Christianae, ut ex suis Scriptis conspici potest, maximae
eruditionis, Zeli, facundiae, ac proinde etiam authoritatis, sed etiam Scriptis
tum toti Ecclesiae sui Aevi, tum etiam posteritati in perpetuum profuit. There
was in this man altogether a vast desire of learning, an acute wit, a most
tenacious memory, a fervent zeal of Gods glory and the Christian Religion, as
may be seen out of his writings, of very great erudition, zeal, eloquence, and
so also of authority; neither did he only advantage his Auditors by his voice,
but likewise by his writings, both the whole Church of his age, as also
posterity throughout all ages.

This man with his Master Pantaenus, is reported to have been the first
founders of public Academies, for they delivered the fundamentals of Heavenly
truth, not by sermons to the people, but by Catechisticall doctrine to the
learned in the Schools. S. Ierom says this of this man's Works; Feruntur ejus
insignia volumina, plenaque eruditionis, and eloquentiae, tam de Scripturis
Divinis, quam de secularis literaturae instrumento.

Yet this man had too high an esteem of Tradition, whereby it happened, that he
fell into various, errors, amongst which, he affirmed, That afterour calling
to the Knowledge of the truth, possibly God might grant to them that have
sinned, a recovery into their former state for once, or twice by repentance,
but if they should fall oftener into sin then so, there is no more restitution
to be expected or hoped for, but a fearful looking for a final judgment. And
yet afterward forgetting this his assertion, he says in his fourth book of
Strom. That Whenever sinners do repent, whether here in this world, or else
in the next, they may be received to Gods mercy. In which passage of his, he
seems to insinuate that men may repent, and so find favor at the hands of
God, after that this present life is determined. Then which Position, there is
nothing more contrary to the Scripture, and likewise to his own forementioned,
and foregoing expression.

Moreover, he delivered, lib. 7. Strom. That the law of Moses, was sufficient
to the Jews, and to the Heathens or Gentiles, their Philosophy before Christ's
coming, to salvation. In his first Book, you have these words touching the
Justification of the Gentiles, (...), Philosophy heretofore did of its own
nature justify the Greeks. You have an enumeration of all this man's errors
from Chemnitius in the first part of his Examen, page 78. He dyed at Alexandria
where he taught, so says Baronius.

Origenes Adamantius.
ORigenes Adamantius, flourished (say some) under Gallus and Volusian, others,
under Galienus, and Valerian. He was the son of Leonides, and disciple of
Clemens of Alexandria, he first taught by way of Catechizing, when he was but
aged eighteen years, and says one of him, Quemadmodum docuit, sic vixit, and
quemadmodum vixit, sic docuit. As he taught so he lived, and as he lived, so he
taught; When he was but a child, he encouraged his father to continue constant
in the Christian cause, himself being forward to seal it with his own blood, if
his mother had not (as Eusebius records) prevented him in it. Jerome in his
Catalogue of Illustrious Writers, relates this of him, in commendation of his
great learning, that he read public Lectures in these following sciences:
Logic, Geometry, Arithmetike, Music, Grammar, Rethorick, and other
Philosophical disciplines.

When he was but a youth, he would search very narrowly into the sense of the
Holy Scriptures; which his father Leonides observing, would now and then gently
reprove him in these or the like expressions; Nequid supra aetatens quaeras.
Dive not into that mystery, which is out of the reach of thy youthful years to
comprehend: And yet coming to his bedside at night, and uncovering his breast,
he would kindly kiss it, judgeing himself most happy in this, that he had so
gracious a son? Some write that he made himself an Eunuch for chastities sake.
Epiphanius records of him, that he wrote 6000. volumes; Opera ejus ascendunt ad
sena millia librorum, and it is Ieroms; Quis nostrum tanta potest legere, quanta
ille conscripsit. Which of ours can read so much as he has written.

Its an ancient observation concerning this Father. Origenes ubi been Scripsit,
nemo melius; ubi male, nemo peius. Where Origin wrote well, (...) wrote better,
where ill, none worse. Whence for some errors he is reckoned by some Authors in
the number of Heriticks. Vincentius Lyrinensis tells us, Errorem Originis
propter ejus tum doctrinam, tum zelum, magnam in Dei Ecclesia fuisse
tentationem; That the error of Origin, both for his learning and zeal, was a
great temptation in the the Church of God.

He was called (...) from the number of the books he did compile and set out,
which he ever writ standing. Gregory says, that all the latter Doctors of the
Church were much furthered by this man's works; whence it is said (as it is in
Suidas) (...). Origin the whet-stone of us all.

Jerome styles him, Sacrorum omnium expositorum victorem, the victor of all
sacred Expositors. Erasmus, Theologorum sine controversia principem, of Divines
the chief without controversy. And Possevinus speaking of his works, says of
them, In qua part probantur, neminem post Apostolos habuit aequalem, in them,
which are approved, he had none after the Apostles his equal: Yet however, some
there be, that do debase him. Basil charges him, that he had not a sound
opinion of the Holy Ghost. Jerome calls his opinions, Venenata dogmata, and
aliena Scripturis, and vim facientia Scripturis, invenomed opinions, erring
from the Scriptures, and doing them violence: Causabon will have him accounted
a Platonic Philosopher, rather than a Divine. Ribera styles him, Arii patrem,
and aliarum heresew radicem, the father of Arius, and the root of all heresies,
out of Epiphanius. He dyed at Tire in the year of his age 69.

Tertullian.
TErtullian of Carthage in Africa first studied Philosophy, and the Civil Law,
but afterward addicted himself to the study of Theology; he was the son of a
Centurion, called Florens, from the habit or garb of his body; he was a man of
admirable parts, and most piercing wit, excelling in the knowledge of the Greek
and Latin tongues; he flourished when Alexander Severus and Antonius Caracalla
were Emperors. At first he was a Priest at Rome, where he continued to the
midst of his years, and then being driven thence, he returned to Carthage,
where for a time he maintained the damnable opinion of the heretic Montanus,
but at last, some say, that he recanted and renounced it.

He waged many disputes with the Jews, and with those detestable instruments of
Satan, ungodly Marcion, Valentinus the Gentile, wicked Hermogenes, and Praxeas;
he lived till he was very aged. So admired (says Jerome) he was of Cyprian,
that not a day passed without his reading some portion of his works, it being
his usual speech, Da mihi Magistrum, give me my Master. The learned have
afforded him many excellent Eulogies: Omni literarum genere peritus, says
Lactantius, skilled in every kind of learning. Yertullianus mihi certe, ter
Tullius, and Rosa est, says another; and it is Lypsius his commendation,

Quis post Tertullianum inter sacros scriptores doctior? who amongst the sacred
writers was after Tertullian more learned? And as another of the Critics
speaks, eruditissimus, and quantum patitur aetas illa and patria Africa,
eloquentissimus, most learned, and as much as that age, and his country
Afric does permit, most eloquent.

Yet this man was carried away with strange errors, whence Jerome could say, in
Tertulliano laudamus ingenium, sed damnamus Haeresin, we commend Tertullians
wit, but we condemn his heresy.

He attributed a body to God, he condemned second marriage; he asserted that
the son had a beginning, tempus fuit, cum filius non fuit, are his own words,
in his book against Hermogenes, not far from the beginning; which is the very
phrase of Speech used by the heretic Arius. After baptism he allowed but
only one repentance; he gave too much to the power of man's will, he asscribed
remission of sins to humane satisfactions, and lastly he was a Chiliast, no
wonder then if his authority be so little set by of many. Bellarmine rejects
his testimony, and undervalues his authority in many of his writings: in one
place this he says of him, Tertullianus haeresiarcha fuit, Tertullian was a
principal, or Arch-heretick; in another, this, Eusebii, and Tertulliani, parva
autoritas; Eusebius and Tertullians authority is but small, and besides
Bellarmine, Lirinensis styles him, universalis ac vetustae fidei parum tenacem,
ac disertiorem nullo, quam fideliorem, one that has little hold of the
universal, and ancient faith, and much more eloquent then faithful! and Austin
says, that he was the head of a new sect, which were called Tertullianists:
some tell us, that he was desirous of Martyrdom, but of what kind of death he
dyed, no author does certainly report it.

Gregorius Thaumaturgus.
GRegorius Thaumaturgus, this man had another name, Eusebius calls him
Theodorus brother to Athenodorus, he was drawn from the study of the Greek and
Roman discipline, and from the love of Philosophy, to the study of the holy
Scripture, that true divine Philosophy indeed, by the ministry of Origin, of
whom he was a zealous auditor, whilst he with many others flockt to him,
preaching at Caesarea.

Eusebius tells us, that he, and his brother were ordained Bishops of certain
Churches in Pontus, he usually passes under the title of Episcopus
Neocaesariensis, the Bishop of Neocaesarea; they say that he wrought many
miracles, whence he had the name of Thaumaturgus.

He was present at the council of Antioch against Samosatenus, that
Arch-heretick, as Pareus calls him: he was eminent in the reign of the Emperor
Severus, he wrote an oration in the praise of his master Origin, styled by
Sixtus Senensis, (...), a Panegyric of gratitude, of which oration Pamphilus
the Martyr does (as Socrates reports) make mention, in his books written in
Origens defense.

Its said of this holy man, that he blessed God, when he was Bishop of
Neocaesarea espe^ially for this mercy, that when he first undertook that great
charge upon him, he found not above seventeen Christians, and when he left
them, he had not in all his jurisdiction so many unbelievers.

Basil says of him, that he was styled by the enemies of the truth, another
Moses, and Ierom calls him virum apostolicorum signorum and virtutum, a man of
apostolical signs and virtues, and Barthius thus dignifies him too, while he
writes him, virum apostolicarum virtutum, he died (say some) when Aurelian was
Emperor.

Sixtus Senensis makes mention of his Metaphrase, which he writ on
Ecclesiastes, which Suidas calls very short but admirable; this was first
printed under his own name, but afterward it came forth under the name of
Gregory Nazianzene, but Jerome expounding the fourth chapter of Ecclesiastes,
and making use of this Gregory's paraphrase upon some passage thereof, he does
ingenuously discover the right Author in these following words, vir sanctus
Gregorius Ponti Episcopus, Originis auditor, in metaphrasi Ecclesiastis ita
hunc locum intellexit, A holy man, Gregory the Bishop of Pontus, the auditor of
Origin, in his metaphrase of Ecclesiastes, thus understood this place: the
works of this Father in Greek and Latin, together with what is now extant of
Macarius of Egypt and Basilius of Seleucia were printed in one volume at Paris
1622.

Cyprianus.
CYprianus Presbyter of Carthage, being yet a Gentile, was a master of
Rhetoric, which he publicly professed with great admiration and repute, he
also studied the Magic Art, but being afterward converted to the Christian
Faith, he gave that study over, and applied himself to the study of the
Scriptures: he was set over the Churches in Spain, and in the East, where to
his great praise he did execute the Office of a laborious Bishop.

In the writings which this man has left behind him, there appear the
Symptoms of a learned headpiece, and yet they are not altogether p^re, and
free from error; for he asserted that rebaptizing of Heretics was necessary;
this champion contended with the heathens, and the Jews, as also with Novatus,
and many other heretics; for which cause being grievously persecuted by his
enemies, he stepped aside from their fury for the Churches sake, whose peaceand
tranquillity his presence did at that time seem to prejudice.

Demster calls this Praelat, insignem authorem, interdum floridum, a famous
Author, and sometimes thetorical and floury: but Lactantius speaks more loftily
of the man in these following words, Cyprianus Episcopus Martyr, unus
praecipuns, and clarus extitit, qui and magnam sibi gloriam ex artis oratoriae
professione quaesivit, and admodum multa conscripsit in suo sacro genere
miranda; erat enim ingenio facili, copioso, suavi, and (quae sermonis maxima
est virtus) aperto, ut discernere nequeas, utrumne ornatior in eloquendo, an
peritior in persuadendo fuerit: Cyprian the Bishop, and Martyr, was a man very
eminent and famous, who acquired to himself great fame and glory by the
profession of his Art of Oratory, and he wrote very many things in their sacred
kind admirable, for he was of a facil wit, copious, sweet, and (which is the
greatest virtue of speech) open, that you cannot discern whether he were more
fluent in speaking, or more skilful in persuading, instit. lib. 5.

Sixtus Senensis in his Bibliotheca speaking of his phrase of speech and style,
says this of him Quod multa piissima opuscula elegantissimae phraseos and
Ciceroniano candori proximae ad aedificationem ecclesiae scripsit; that he
wrote many most pious works of most elegant phrase, and near Ciceroes candor
to the edification of the Church, he was an extreme charitable man, for as soon
as he was turned from gentilisme to christianity, he gave up all his substance
to the support of poor Christians.

Jerome writing to Paulinus, says of this Father, Quod instar fontis purissimi
levis incessit, and placidus, that like a most pure fountain he ran light and
pleasing: he wrote a famous treatise of mortality, on purpose to comfort men
against approaching death in the time of a fearful pestilence. Among all his
writings, that treatise of his de unitate ecclesiae, of the unity of the Church
is most set by and advanced.

Erasmus in an Epistle thus commends this man, inter Latinos ad apostolici
pectoris vigorem, ubique sentias loqui pastorem, ac martyrio destinatum. And
again says he, In Cypriano spiritum veneramur apostolicum, we reverence in
Cyprian an apostolical spirit: it is Austins in the second book against the
Donatists. chap. 1. non me terret autoritas Cypriani, quia reficit humilitas
Cypriani the authority of Cyprian does not terrify me, because the humility of
Cyprian does refresh me.

A Deacon of his, by name Pontius, wrote the History of his life and Martyrdom,
he was martyred under Valerian and Galienus.

Arnobius.
ARnobius, was a famous Rhetorician in Afric, the master of Lactantius, of
whom Eusebius Pamphilus reports, that being a teacher of Rethorick, and a
Gentile, he was constrained through sundry dreams to believe the glorious
Gospel, and yet the Christian Bishops would not receive him to their
Fellowship, till he had written, and published those excellent Books of his
against Gentilisme; wherein he confuted that vain Superstition, and Idolatry,
whereof he had been before so great a Patron, and Advocate? He wrote but seven
books in number, and the eighth which is thereto added, is none of his
compiling, but as some say, the Author of it, was Minutius Felix. He is said,
besides these books to have written Commentaries on the Psalms; But they are
(as Bellarmine well observes) the works of some later Author, which he proves
by their making mention of the Pelagian Heresy; which was not broached, till
the time that Austine lived, which was many years after Arnobius; and besides
Salmeron speaks of another Bishop of the same name, to whom he ascribes those
Expositions.

This man flourished about the year of Christ Christ 300. He is not without
some special Characters; Barthius says this of him, Si non extaret, Densa nox
foret in Superstionibus veterum. If this man had not been living, it had yet
been right in the Superstitions of the Ancients. Dempster calls him, virum
reconditae eruditionis styli asperioris. A man of deep learning, of rougher
style. But Henisius above all others does advance him; Ille Patrum praesul
optimus, ille Christianae Varro maximus eruditionis. That president of the
Fathers, that Varro of Christian Erudition, but yet in some respects Jerome
does depresse him. Arnobius inaequalis, and nimius est, and absque operis sui
partitione confusus. Arnobius is unequal, and too much, and without partition
of his work, confused.

Lactantius Firmianus.
LActantius Firmianus, whom Alstedius styles by the name of Cicero
Christanorum, the Christians Cicero, was the Disciple of Arnobius, who being
eminent for eloquence in the reign of Diocclesian, taught Rethorick at
Nicomedia, and and wrote those elegant books against the Religion of the
Heathens, of whom Jerome said; Lact antius, quasi quidam fluvius eloquentiae
Tullianae, vtinam tam nostra confirmare potuisset, quam facile aliena
destruxit: Lactantius, as it were a certain river of Ciceronian Eloquence, I
would to God he could as well have confirmed our own, as he he did destroy the
Religion of our Adversaries.

Lodovicus Vives having occasion to mention him, says this of him; Septem
scripsit volumina elegantissima, and acutissima, nec est ullus inter
Christianos scriptores tam vicinus dictioni Tullianae; He wrote seven most
elegant, and acute volumes, neither does any among our Christian Writers come
so near the speech of Tully: Pisecius styles him, Lacteum, and mellitissimum
Scriptorem; A milkie and most honey writer. And Amesius too speaking of hm, in
his Book entitled, Bellarminus Enervatus, thus says: Quod inter omnes Patres
audit Ciceronianus. That among all the Fathers he is the Ciceronian.

I shall add but one Elogie more to him, and it is that of Henisius. Quid
Tertulliani porro vim ac lacertos, Quid Clementis variam prope incredibilem
scientiam, aut Hilarii Cothurnum, aut Chrysostomi digressiones melle dulciores,
aut acumen Augustini, aut diffusam and cum solo Cicerone conferendam Firmiani
eloquentiam commemorem? What should I commemorate the force and strength of
Tertullian; Why the incredible Science of Clemens, or the stateliness of
Hilary, or the digressions of Chrysostom, more sweet then Honey, or the
acuteness of Augustine, or the diffused eloquence of Firmianus, who alone is
comparable to Cicero?

And yet he is charged by Bellarmine with many errors, whose words are these,
Lib. 1. de Sanct. beat. Cap. 5. circa fin. Lactantius in plurimos errores
lapsus est, praesertim circa futurum seculum, cum esset magis librorum
Ciceronis, quam Scriptur arum Sanctarum peritus. Lactantius fell into very many
errors, especially about the world to come, seeing he was more skillful in the
works of Cicero, then in the books of the holy Scriptures. Hence Chemnitius
discourages us from reading of him, saying, Non multum potest juvare Lectorem,
He cannot much profit the reader. Jerome particularly notes this in him, that
he denied the Holy Spirit to be a substance, or person: and beside this error,
he adds another, whilst he attributes reason to brute creatures. lib. 3.
instit. cap. 1.

He wrore his book of Divine Institutions under Dioclesian, as himself
expresses it in the fourth Chapter of the fifth book; and he published it in
the Reign of the Great Constantine, to whose Imperial Majesty he does direct
his speech in it. He was called Firmianus from his Country Town Firmii,
situate among the Picens in Italy, and Lactantius, as one well notes, a Lacteo
eloquentiae flumine, from his milkie river of Eloquence. He was in his old age
Tutour to Crispus, the son of Constantine; how he dyed, I read not.

Eusebius.
EUsebius was Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, he flourished about the year of
our Lord 320. He was looked on at the first, as the principal man of the Arian
faction. Chemnitius de lect. Patr. styles him apertissimum propugnatorem Arii:
A most open defender, or abetter of Arius. Baronius styles him with Tertullian,
manifestum Hereticum; a manifest Heretic. Ierom in both his books, which he
wrote against Ruffinus, does not only call him Arianum an Arian, but likewise,
signiferum and principem Arianorum, The Standard bearer, or Ensign of the
Arians.

Yet certainly at the Council of Nice this man brake off his compliance with
that Heretical party, and from thence forward joined himself in fellowship and
society with the Orthodox. Nay, he is conceived by some Authors, to have been
the compilers of the Nicene Creed. He wrote in ten books an Ecclesiastical
History, from Christ's time to the year 325. Jerome says of him, quod pulchre
contexuerit Historiam Ecclesiasticam. Basil calls him (...), Worthy of
credence, and Chemnitius comparing this authors History with that of
Nicephorus, he says: Major est gravitas in illius historia, quam in Nicephori.
There is much more gravity in his History, then in that of Nicephorus.

Besides this work, he writ also a Panagyrick of the life of Great Constantine,
which comprehends Acts done in the Church for the space of thirty years,
together with the Laws and Edicts that the Emperor had made, relating to the
Christian faith. He refuted the Ethnicks and Jews in his Books of Preparation
for, and Demonstration of the Gospel, he left behind him a Chronology from
Abraham's birth to the 326. year of our Lord, which does in all contain 2347.
years.

He condemned that pestilent fellow Arius with his own hand in the Nicene
Council, and yet further to clear him from all suspicion of favoring that
wicked Heresy and Heretic, Socrates has written an Apology in his behalf,
which you will meet in his history. He died about the year of Christ, 340. He
was called Pamphilus from the affection and singular love he did bear to
Pamphilus the Martyr, with whom he was most familiar and intimate.

Bibliander gives him this Character. Eusebius, inter Graecos Theologos
Antesignanus. Eusebius among the Greek Divines the principal. Causabon calls
him virum long doctissimum, and in omni literarum genere exercitatissimum, A
most learned man, and most exercised in all kind of literature. It Is Ludovicus
Vives his description of him, Vir fuit immensa lectione, and proinde summa
eruditione. He was a man of immense reading, and for that cause of very great
erudition.

Scaliger commends him in one respect, and in another disparages him: as
appears by these words of his; Quo (speaking of this Eusebius) nullus
Ecclesiasticorum veterum plura ad Historiam contulit Christianismi. Then whom,
none of the Ancient Ecclesiastic writers has contributed more to the History
of Christianisme. There is his commendation; Nullus plura errata in scriptis
suis re liquit, Nullius plures hallucinationes extant. No man has left more
faults in his writings; No man has extant more errors. There Is his
disparagement.

The Arrians having unjustly procured the deposition of Eustatius the Bishop of
Antiochia, they desired, that his Office might be supplied by this Eusebius:
but he refusing it, the Emperor Constantine so far commended his modesty
therein, that he said of him, He deserved to be made Bishop of the whole world.

Jerome observing in this man's Commentaries on the Prophet Esaias, that he
swerved from his purpose, and promise, whilst in many places, he imitated
Origens Allegories; He said this of him; Ita separata consociat, ut mirer cum
nova sermonis fabrica in unum corpus lapidem, ferumque conjungere. He so unites
things which are separate, that I wonder he does in his new Fabric, and
Structure of speech join together into one body, Stone and Iron.

Athanasius.
AThanasius, worthy to be immortal in his fame, as his name imports, was
born at Alexandria, and consecrated Bishop of that City in the room of
Alexander deceased: this honor was conferred on him in the year 325. at which
time the Churches of God were most grievously infested, and distracted with the
Heresy of Arius; so that this holy man saw he was to sail in a very stormy
and tempestuous sea, which made him desirous at the beginning to decline that
high advancement, whereunto he was preferred. His life was not unlike unto a
Comedy, his five banishments being fitly resembled to the five Acts thereof;
the chief cause of his troubles (say some) was Eusebius the then Bishop of
Nicomedia, a principal member of the Arian faction. For when Arius condemned by
the Nicene Council, had made his appeal to great Constantine with promise never
to disturb the Churches peace again, and thereupon was licensed to return unto
his charge at Alexandria, where he was a Priest; This Athanasius did refuse to
admit him thereto, and wrote unto the Emperor an account of his refusal, which
was to this effect, Nempe quod semel damnatum haereseos ab ecclesia, non fas
esset recipere, absque legitima cognitione ecclesiae, that it was not lawful to
receive an heretic condemned by the censure of the Church, without the
cognizance of the Church, especially when there appeared no outward symptoms
of repentance and amendment from him. Now this reply from Athanasius gave the
Emperor great discontent, so that he most sharply menaced the holy Bishop, if
he did persist in his denial; and now Eusebius thinking this opportunity very
lucky to his design, he so far improves it, that good Athanasius is most
strangely traduced, many scandalous matters laid unto his charge, as if he
imposed intolerable burdens on the Churches of Egypt, and as though he
practiced treason against the life of his sovereign: but at length being by a
Warrant fetched to Constantinople, he so wiped off all these foul aspersions,
that he returned with apparent testimonies of a spotless innocence; Caesar
himself dismissing him, not without honor and applause.

But yet his enemies bearing toward him implacable malice, and not satisfied
with this public trial of his Christian sincerity, do not give over their
furious chase, but further accuse him of other misdemeanors, as witchcraft,
and murder; but the Judge appointed to hear his cause, acquitted him of all
those calumnies, and once again the Emperor commends his integrity, and
exhorts him to vigilance in his episcopal function.

But yet at length these Arians prevailing, through their importunate slanders,
procured his exise to Trevers in France, where he hid his head for the space of
two years and four months, with the Bishop Maximinus, neither did his
sufferings end with the death of Constantine, but his two sons swaying the
Scepter after him, he was much persecuted, through the influence his enemies
had upon Constantius, of whom they effected that he was three times banished,
first to Rome, then into the remote corners of the east, and lastly into the
deserts of Lybia.

Thus indeed was this excellent Prelate tossed to and fro, finding no rest for
his peaceable feet; no not in those halcyon days of the good Emperor
Constantine, much less in the reign of Constantius, who being also removed by
death, Julian the Apostate succeeds in the empire, one which at first favored
both the person and cause of Athanasius, restoring to him his liberty, and
attendance on his office; but in the end, he persecuting the truth, was
likewise stirred up to thunder out a banishment against him: however God
brought him peaceably to his haven in the days of the good Emperors Iovian
and Valentinian, who were an Asylum or refuge not to him only, but likewise to
all the persecuted people of God. This godly Father lived to the seventh year
of Valentinian, and then rested in the Lord, anno Christi. 371.

This was a familiar speech of his, Verberari Christianorum propium est,
flagellare autem Christianos Pilati and Caiphae officia sunt, Its proper for
Christians to be beaten, but to scourge them is the office of Caiphas and
Pilate: he was Bishop of Alexandria forty six years, of whose most excellent
endowments Gregory Naziane is the Trumpeter, who speaks thus of him in his
funeral oration; Athanasium laudare idem esse, ac virtutem ipsam laudare, to
commend Athanasius is to praise virtue it self. Indeed no Doctor of the Church
ever endured so sharp disputes, and so bitter afflictions for the truth as he.

Photius the Archbishop of Constantinople writing to his brother Tarasius,
concerning the works of this pious Father, he thus expresses him, Athanasius in
sermonibus ubique locutione clarus est, and brevis, and simplex acutus tamen
and altus, and argumentationibus omnino vehemens, and in his tanta ubertas, ut
admirabilis sit. Athanasius in his Sermons is clear in epxression, and short
and plain, yet acute and high, in his arguments altogether vehement, and in
these so great fertility, that it is admirable. Theodoret calls propugnaculum
veritatis, the fortress of truth. Nazianzen, lumen ecclesiae, the light of the
Church. Epiphaneus, latrem rectae fidei, the Father of the Orthodox Faith.
Others, orbis oraculum, the Oracle of the world. Bishop Andrews of Winchester
styles him, Athanasius the Great; great in many respects, but especially great
for the Creed he compiled.

His writings against Apollinarius do excel for grace and ornament, as also
those Epistles of his, wherein he does excuse his banishment. Possevinus says
of him, Athanasius fuit tanquam columna ecclesiae adversus omnes haereticos,
Athanasius was as as it were the pillar of the Church against all heretics.
And another calls him haeraeticorum Malleum, The beetle of Heretics, as one
which knocked them at head by his solid and substantial reasonings; When Julian
the Emperor had by his Imperial Edict banished him from Alexandria, he
comforted his people, and friends, whom he found lamenting his condition. Bono
animo estoto filioli; Nubecula est, brevi evanescet. Be of good courage, my
sons, its but a little cloud, and will vanish instantly.

Sixtus Senensis tells us, That Gregory a Divine, did set forth the life of
this Father in an excellent Oration.

Hilarious Pictaviensis.
Hilarious Pictaviencis Episcopus, Bishop of Poicttiers, did shine most brightly
in the Reigns of these following Emperors, Constantius, Julian, Iovinian,
Valens, and Valentinian. He was an eloquent Preacher, and a notable Disputant;
he did by his solid writings establish the dispersed Churches of Illyria,
France, and Italy. We read that he was banished with many other Orthodox
Bishops, by the power and Policy of the Arians, of whom he was a mighty
opposer, and Antagonist; but at length prevailing with the Emperor Constantius
for his return, he came back to his Charge at Poictiers in the year 360. Where
he found all grievously distracted, and miserably afflicted with the Arians
leaven; so that like a good and skillful Surgeon, he labored to bind up
the wounds, and to heal the distempers.

He wrote twelve books of the Trinity, wherein, as Ierom observes, in an
Epistle of his, Ad Romanum Oratorem; quod Duodecim Quintiliani libros and stylo
imitatus est, and numero. That he imitated the twelve books of Quintilian both
in style, and also in number. And in that work of his he confuted the
blasphemous doctrine of the Heretic Arius. Jerome tells us, that he died in
the year of Christ, 372. when Valerian was Emperor: and he bestows on him
this worthy Character: Hilarious Gallicano attollitur cothurno, Eloquentiae
Latinae Rhodanus. Hilary is lifted up with his Gallican buskins, the Rhine of
Latin eloquence. And elsewhere, the same Father styles him, Latinae Sermonis
tubam, The Trumpet of the Latin tongue.

Some say, he wrote on the whole book of Psalms, which work of his is extant in
Spain: being a great reader, and studier of Origin, he is said to make use of
Heliodorus a Priest, who was better skild in the Greek tongue, then himself;
Hence some do impute his misinterpretation of the Psalms (whilst in some places
he leaves the Grammatical sense, and turns it into one that is Allegorical,
and Anagogicall) merely to his ignorance in the Hebrew language.

Sixtus Senensis, Speaking of that work of his, and of that on St. Matthew, he
gives us this account of the style of them; Stylus absque ulla artis
affectatione pressus, interdum subobscurus, and ob id a simplicium fratrum
lectione procul est. His style short, without any artificial affectation,
sometimes dark, and obscure, and for that very reason not to be understood, or
read by unskilful and illiterate men.

It Is a commendation which Erasmus gives him. In Hilario grandi materiae parem
grandiloquentiam, atque ut ita dicam, cothurnum admiramur.

This Bishop took such great pains to purge the Churches of France of the
Arian Heresy, and so far prevailed by his unwearied labors; that Ierom
resembles him to Deucalion, who both saw the flood of waters overflowing
Thessalie, and the abating of them also: Even so this Hilarious saw in his time
both the growth, and the decay of Arianisme in France.

One Fortunatianus a successor of his, wrote his life in Hexameter verse,
being Bishop of Poictiers in the year 570.

Didymus Alexandrinus
Was an excellent Grammarian, and for his eminency in that Art, was elected
Governor of the School of Alexandria. Jerome so highly extols him in his 65
Epistle, that he says there, Se quod nescivit, didicisse a Didymo, quod
sciebat, illo docente, non perdidisse. That he learnt, what he knew not, of
Didymus, and that he preserved what he knew, by his instruction. Nicephorus
does seem to eclipse him with a report of some errors, that he should seem to
adhere and cleave to: But Socrates in his History gives him this credit, That
he was a chief Maintainer and Patron of the Nicene Faith. And Zozomene informs
us, Arianis in Aegypto nihil fuisse integri, quamdiu Didymus in ea floruerit.
That Arius had no hold at all in Egypt, so long as Didymus flourished there.

This man was a great acquaintance, and an intimate familiar of Ieromes,
insomuch, that that Father was greatly delighted with his society. He tells us
this of him, That although he was blind from his younger days, yet he proved
an excellent Geometrician, which chiefly requires the Instrument of sight, to
the wonder of the whole World. He wrote a heavenly Book de Spiritu Sancto, of
the Holy Ghost, which the said Jerome translated into the Latin Tongue, and is
now mingled with his Works. He lived to the 83 year of his age, and was almost
all his time desirous of privacy and retiredness.

Jerome says of him, Se in multis Scripturae locis difficilibus, eo magistro
usum. That he made use of him, to help him out in the explication of many hard
Texts of Scripture. And further speaking of his Writings, he gives him this
Elogie, Certe qui hunc legerit latinorum furta cognoscet, and contemnet
rivulos, cum coeperit haurire de fontibus; Imperitus Sermon est, sed non
Scientia, Apostolicum virum ipso stylo exprimens tam sensus lumine, quam
simplicitate verborum. Truly he that will read him, will know the thefts of
the Latins, and he will despise the rivulets, when he has begun to drink of
the fountains; he is in Speech unskilful, but not in Science, in his very style
expressing an Apostolic Author, as well in the light of his sense, as in the
simplicity of his words.

Antonius a Monk, traveling in company with him to the City of Alexandria,
used these or the like words to him, (as Sixtus Sinensis delivers them) Nihil O
Didyme turbet te corporalium oculorum jactura, talibus enim destitutus es
oculis, quibus and Muscae, and culices videre possunt, sed laetare, quod oculos
habes, quibus Angeli vident, and Deus consideratur, and lux ejus apprehenditur.
Let not the loss of thy corporal eyes trouble thee, O Didymus, for thou art
deprived of such eyes, wherewith Flies and Gnats can see; but rejoice thou that
thou have eyes by which Angels do behold, and God is considered, and his light
is apprehended. He flourished under the great Theodosius.

Optatus
BIshop of Milevita, appeared glistering in his Orb about the time that
Valentinian and Valeus were Emperors. Morn. lib. 1. de Euchar. cap. 6. says,
that he lived paulo ante Augustinum magni in Africa nominis; a little before
Augustine of great fame in Africa. He was a man well skilled in most kinds of
Literature, his life was pious, and his doctrine sincere and sound. He showed
himself a notable Antidonatist, and thereupon he wrote six Books for the
confutation of Parmenianus; So Jerome: But now they are numbered seven, the
seventh consenting in all respects with the six, so that Ierome's number is
conceived to be erroneous.

Barthius calls this man Pium, elegantemque scriptorem, and quod in eo dignum
honor summo, summum argumentandi artificem: A pious, and elegant writer, and
which is praiseworthy, a most exquisite artist in arguing and disputing.
Paraeus thus expresses him, Vir fuit instructus multiplici eruditione,
constanti pietate and doctrina sincera. He was a man well furnished with
various learning, constant piety, and sound doctrine. Mr. Leigh in his Treatise
of Religion and Learning, calls him that learned Bishop of Milevita.

Whereas the Donatists of old did assert, that the Church of God was no where
else, but only among them, limited unto and shut up in a corner of Africa,
where their Heresy prevailed; this excellent man confuted that opinion by that
of the second Psalm, where God says in a promise to his blessed Messiah, Ask
of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession: Which Scripture does evidently
demonstrate the Church of the Gospel to be spread all over the whole world, and
not to be restrained, as these Donatists did vainly imagine, to a particular
Region.

And whereas they affirmed likewise, That the Ordinance of Baptism was
altogether ineffectual, unless some of their Ministers were in place to perform
it: He, to confute them, replied, That when God made the world at the
beginning, the presence of the glorious Trinity was powerful enough in
operation to create Water, though none of the Donatists were then in presence:
Even so (says he) the blessed Trinity can work effectually in Baptism,
although not administered by the Donatists; yea, and that it was God, the Author
of Baptism, and not the Minister, which did sanctify, a cording as it is
expressed by the holy man David, Psalm. 51. Wash me, and I shall be whiter than
snow.

Basilius Magnus.
BAsil the Great was Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, his father was of the
same name, and a devout Christian, his brethren were Gregory of Nyssa, and
Peter of Sebasta, who conformed to him both for purity of doctrine, and piety
of conversation. He was brought up at Athens, the School of the Philosophers,
under Libanius his Master, where he fell into acquaintance with Gregory
Nazianzen. But after a while leaving Athens, he returned to Caesarea; where
being called to the Pastoral Function by the Bishop of the place Eusebius, he
expounded some places of Scripture with that gravity and accurateness, that he
was had in great admiration for his abilities and gifts; but at length there
arising some difference betwixt him and Eusebius, he discreetly withdrew
himself, on purpose to prevent a greater combustion.

However, in the end he was constrained to return, through the Faction of the
Heretics, that he might strengthen the hands of the Bishop against them. But
Eusehius after a few years deceasing, this Basil was by the general consent
chosen Bishop in his room. And now he was no sooner entered on his charge, but
he met with many violent and tempestuous storms, raised by that tyrannous
Emperor Valens against him: For he coming to Caesarea, would have forced this
holy man to have closed with the doctrine of Arius, threatening his refusal with
banishment and death. But Basil was most resolute, and courageous, as appears
by this his gallant answer, Pueris (inquit ille) ista terriculamenta proponenda
esse, sibi vero vitam eripi posse, sed confessionem veritatis eripi non posse.
Those affrightments (says he) should be proposed to children: Life indeed
might be taken from him, but the confession of the truth could never be taken
away from him.

It is reported, That when he was at his devotions in the Temple, the Emperor
coming with his Guard to apprehend and seize him, he was himself on the sudden
surprised with such a Vertigo or dizziness, that he had fallen immediately, if
one of his servants had not supported him.

Socrates tells us in his Ecclesiastical History, ( Chap. 21. of thefourth
Book) That this Emperors Son, by name Galeates, falling sick of a dangerous
and desperate disease, and being given over by Physicians, Dominica his Mother
told her husband, that the same night she was fearfully disquieted with
horrible shapes, and dreadful visions, and that the child was visited with
sickness, because of their ill usage of Basil the Bishop. The Emperor well
marking the words of his Wife, at length sent for that good man, and because he
would know the truth, he reasoned thus with him: If thy Faith (he meant of one
substance) be true, pray that my Son die not of this disease. Then Basil
answered, If thou will promise to believe, as I do, and to bring the Church to
Unity and Concord, thy child without doubt shall live. When the Emperor
refused to yield to this; Let God, says Basil, deal with your son as it
pleases him: and so the child presently died.

This Father lived till the beginning of the reign of the good Emperor
Theodosius, and was thought to have been the Author of Monastical life. The
commendations are high, which his friend Nazianzene gives him; as who styles
him, Luminare in Mundo, Doctrinae Palatium, and unus Sol inter Syderea: A Light
in the World, a Palace of Learning, and as the Sun among the Stars. Suidas
calls him Verum celeberrimum, and ad summum omnis doctrinae fastigium
progressum. A man most famous, that had climbed up to the highest step of all
Learning. Caussinus says, That Libanius, though his Master, did prefer him
before all other Authors: Erat illi unus pro centum millibus in eloquentia
Basilius. And this says Erasmus also of him, Basilius, dilucidus, pius, sanus,
suaviter, gravis, and graviter suavis, nihil habens affectate loquacitatis.
Basil is clear, pious, sound, sweetly grave, and gravely sweet, having nothing
in him of affected loquacity.

Gregorius Nyssenus.
GRegorius Nyssenus, Brother to Basil the Great, called Nyssen from the Church
of Nyssa, whereof he was Bishop, but when he was consecrated, it is not with
any certainty resolved. He joined with his Brother Basil, and Gregory
Nazianzen, against the Arians, whom both with their word and pen they notably
confuted. Neither was this Father more backward and slack in opposing the
Heresy of Eunomius: and if we will take the word of Reverend Theodoret, this
Doctor ever showed himself zealous in withstanding that, whatever it was, which
was contrary to the rule and power of godliness.

Nicephorus tells us, in his 12 Book, and 13 Chapter, That in the General
Council of Constantinople, this man did supply that, which was lacking in the
Nicene Creed, this clause being by him added, And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord
and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with the
Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified.

Suidas does bestow upon him these two Characters: Gregorius Nyssenus, omni
doctrina refertus, in multum profecit, and illustris evasit, ut quisquam
veterum. Gregory Nyssen being stuffed full with all Learning, profited so much
therein, that he was judged as famous as any of the Ancients. And again the
same Author calls him, Eloquentissimum, and multiplici eruditione praestantem:
Most eloquent, and excelling in variety of Learning.

And Caussinus gives him this following Elogie, Quid Gregorius Nyssenus, and
Caesarius? Number ipsi Gregoriorum fato aureum flumen orationis fundunt? This man's
Brother Basil, being prevented by untimely death from finishing his
Commentaries on the six days works, Socrates tells us, That this Gregory
completed them, and made them perfect.

These were the eminent and remarkable sayings of this Father: He said
concerning Sin, That although the Serpents which stung us were not here slain
outright, yet their venomous stings could not mortally wound us. And concerning
Pilgrimage, he said, That a Pilgrimage from the Lusts of the Flesh to the
Righteousness of God, and the Sanctification of the heart, was only acceptable
to God, and not a journeying from Cappadocia to Palestina; and that God would
give a reward in the world to come, only to things done in this world by the
warrant of his own Commandment. Leo the Emperor called this Father Dulcem and
illustrem Ecclesiae fontem, The sweet and illustrious fountain of the Church.
He was elder Brother to Basil, but died after him.

Gregorius Nazianzenus.
GRegorius Nazianzenus, was born at Nazianzum, a town near to Cesarea in
Cappadocia, where Basil the Great was Bishop, who out of a desire he had to
learning, went to Athens, to employ his time there in the study of the Arts;
whence returning home, he was Baptized about the twentieth year of his age, and
after that giving himself up to the study of the Christian Religion, he was at
length urged by his father to take upon him the Ministry, and to assist him
being then aged in the execution of his pastoral charge.

Yet his parents after a while deceasing, he left his Country for some years,
and lived private; but coming afterward to Constantinople, he preached in the
Church of Anastasia, all the other Oratories of the City being taken up, and
filled by the Arians.

And here is one thing to be noted, that though so eminently learned and pious
a man, as was this Nazianzene, was then present, yet the General Council held
there at that time, preferred one Nectarius, a Noble man of Cilicia to the
Bishopric of Constantinople before him: a man which was at that time but a
Catechumenus, and never before advanced to any Ecclesiastical preferment,
overpassing this great Doctor, and overlooking this great light.

And here it was, that he fell into controversy with Apollinarius the
Heretic, who was so impudent, as to accuse Nazianzene of sedition before the
Magistrate, but the Bishop did very fairly acquit himself of the crime. It is
said of this grave and holy man, quod solus post Johannem Evangelistam,
Theologi nomen meruit. That he only after John the Evangelist merited the
eminent title of Divine.

There happening dissentions amongst his fellow Bishops, he withdrew himself
for retirement to his Fathers Country Farm house, as being weary of all
public congressions, whereof he seldom saw any profitable issue, by reason of
the ambition of the disputants.

He lived all his life time unmarried, and dyed not under the 90th. year of his
age, in the year of Christ 384. he wrote much against those Heretics, which
either did impugn the Divinity, or Humanity of our Lord, and he was likewise
most vigorously active against the Heathenisme of the Gentiles in those two
invectives of his, wherein he chastises that Apostate Julian, who would needs
be a restorer of Paganism.

Ierom owns this holy Father for his Master, (...) quo Scripturas explanante
didicit; From ^om, as his interpreter, he learned the Scriptures. And ^s this
learned man did admire Basil, so did Basil him, as appears by this Elogie he
gives him. Vas electionis, and puteus profundus os Christi Gregorius. Now for
this man's speech, it seemed (as Suidas says) to come near to Polemons, or to
Isocrates, so says Erasmus, as also it was not unlike to Ambrose.

Erasmus speaking of his piety, he tells us, that it did ex aequo propemodum
certare cum facundia; It was even as eminent, and illustrious as his eloquence;
and the commendation which Bellarmine gives him, is, quod sapientiam mirificie
eum eloquentia copulavit. That he marvellously coupled his wisdom with his
eloquence.

Epiphanius.
EPiphanius, Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus, was instructed in learning by
certain Monks in Egypt, from whence he went into Palestine, living there a
Monastical life, and improving his time in the study of Philosophy, so that in
few years his proficiency therein was mightily increased, and advanced.

He wrote a book in confutation of no less then 80. Heresies, which is called
his (...), wherein is also comprehended, a History from Christ even to his own
times. He flourished in the reigns of the Emperors Valens, and Gratian, being
Contemporary with those grand Lights of the Church, Basil the Great, Gregory
Nazianzene, John Chrysostom, with the latter of which, he had a sharp
contention about the writings of Origin, which Epiphanius would have condemned
as Heretical at the Synod of Constantinople, but Chrysostom withstood it: in
which bickering of theirs, this happened worthy of admiration; That one was a
true Prophet to the other: Epiphanius presaging the deposition of Chrysostom,
and Chrysostom the sudden death of Epiphanius, both which were accordingly
accomplished; the one being afterward deposed, and the other dying in his
return to Cyprus. Suidas says thus much of this man's works: Quod a doctis ob
res, ab indoctis propter verba leguntur: and Ierom said the like. That they are
read of the learned for their matter, and of the unlearned for their words.

His Panarium is styled by another, Vniversae antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae
promptuarium, A Cellar, or Storehouse of all Ecclesiastical Antiquity. He was
master of five learned tongues, and thence it was that Ierom honored him with
this Epithet, (...). Augustine adds this Elogie, Apud Graecos inter magnos
habitus, and a multis in Catholicae fidei sanitate laudatus. With the Greeks he
was reputed among the great ones, and commended by many for his soundness in
the Catholic Faith.

And yet Drusius fastens many an error on him. lib. 4. observat. cap. 21.
Epiphanium scimus omnes in multis graviter hallucinatum. We all know that
Epiphanius grievously erred in many things.

Ambrosius Mediolanensis.
AMbrosius Mediolanensis Episcopus, the Bishop of Millain, being Leiutenant of
the Province, was chosen Bishop of the City by the unanimous consent of the
people, and therein confirmed by the Emperor Valentinian; he was high in the
affections of five most noble Princes, Valentinian the elder, Gratian,
Valentinian the younger, Theodosius the great, and Honorius: he was a man of
great fame amongst the eastern Churches, and very intimate and familiar with
Basil of Caesarea, and other eminent and famous Doctors, even as the
inscriptions of his Epistles to diverse of them, do insinuate.

He baptized Augustine, and was likewise his master: before he was Bishop of
Millain, he governed Liguria, he wrote many excellent books, which deserved
those characters that the learned have given him. Erasmus says thus of him,
Ambrosius juxta nomen suum vere coelesti manat Ambrosia, dignus quisit, quod
dicitur Ambrosius, hoc est immortalis, non solum apud Christum, sed etiam apud
homines. Ambrose according to his name does truly flow with heavenly Ambrosia,
who is worthy to be what he is called, Ambrosius, that is immortal, not with
Christ only, but with men also.

Its Augustines commendation of him, ejus eloquia strenue ministrant adipem
frumenti divini, and laetitiam olei, and sobriam vini ebrietatem, his eloquent
speeches do stoutly administer the fat of divine bread-corn, and the joy of
oil, and of wine a sober drunkenness; one of the Latin Poets speaks his worth
in this following distich. Cedite doctores Romani, cedite graii
Nescio quid majus nascitur Ambrosio!


Theodosius the Emperor being suspended from the Sacrament by this excellent
Prelate, because he came to it with the guilt of blood upon his soul, (for
being angry with the inhabitants of Thessalonica, he had caused seven thousand
of them to be slain, having drawn them together for that end to a Stage Play)
he said of this Ambrose, Neminem se nosse, qui vere sciret episcopum gerere,
praeter unum Ambrosium, that he did not know any man, that truly knew how to
behave himself like a Bishop, besides Ambrose. He dyed in the year of the Lord
398. aged 64 years.

Hieronymus.
HIeronymus was brought up at Rome in the time of Pope Damasus, and flourished
in the Church about the year of Christ 390. providence so ordering, that there
should arise such shining lights at that time when the Church was pestered with
the heresies of Arius and Pelagius, there being no less then ten or twelve,
which in that short tract of time presented themselves to oppose them, among
which this Father was one of the chiefest.

He was a great traveller, and had compassed the greatest part of Europe, that
he might have conference with the learned of that age; at length returning to
Judea, he seated himself about Bethlehem, where he composed most of those works
we enjoy at this day, and there he dyed full of days, in the year of Christ
416. and in the 12 of the reign of Honorius.

The learned of latter times have highly extolled his repute and fame.
Hieronymus blandum facundiae nomen, and summis in omnibus artifex, says
Caussinus, Ierom a pleasant name of eloquence, and in all things the best
artist: Barthius gives him this Elogy, Hieronymi ingenium hoc fuit, ut conscius
sibi profundissimae eruditionis paucis dicere plura, and salem quendam acuminis
relinquere velit in animo legentis; this was Ieroms wit, that being conscious
to himself of his deep learning, he would speak much in few words, and leave a
relish of his ingenuity in the mind of the Reader. Augustine is very spa^ing of
speaking in his praise, because he lived in his time, and was his scholar.

But Henisius does of late break out into admiration of him, Quo tandem modo,
aut quibus ego verbis (tuam maxim Hieronyme) ingentem simul pietatem ac
facundiam describam! After what manner and with what words (O most great
Jerome) shall I describe thy vast piety and eloquence; how shall I express and
declare thy skill, which was so admirable in all tongues, and in all antiquity
and Philosophy; this Henisius speaks, and much more of him in one of his
orations: they write that this man of all the Fathers only had knowledge of
the Hebrew tongue.

When he was at Rome he grew into acquaintance with some of the honorable
Ladies there, as Marcella, Sophronia Principia, Paula, and Eustochium, to whom
he opened many difficult and knotty texts of Scripture, for he was then a
Priest: after he left Rome, as he journied to Palestine, he acquainted himself
with those three Doctors, Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, Nazianzene and Dydimus,
yet he was more addicted to an Eremetical life then to society.

Erasmus in his Preface to Hilarious, having made mention of this Father, he
subjoynes this testimony, quo viro nihil habet orbis latinius, and doctius vel
sanctius, then which man, the world has nothing more Latin, and more learned,
or more holy; Austin also speaking of his elegant speech, says thus, cujus
eloquium ex orient in occidente instar lampadis resplenduit, whose eloquence,
like a Lamp, did shine out of the east into the west.

Yet this Father was not altogether free from errors. Concerning the worlds
creation, it was his opinion, that the Angels those spiritual creatures were
made long before the visible world, and where he writes against Iovinian, he
does not entertain so honorable thoughts of marriage as does become him, for
he seems there to dislike of second marriage, which the Apostle allows of,
because the bed is undefiled, and also an expedient against unlawful burning.

Aurelius Augustinus.
Aurelius Augustinus, the most doctrinall in his writings of all the Ancient
Worthies, was an Affrican by birth, whereupon the learned Bishop Andrews calls
him, Decus Africae, The glory of Africa. He is not to be accounted as the last
of the pious Fathers; who having been instructed in Rhetoric at Carthage, was
at the beginning a complier with the Manachees. His life for the greater part
of it, is written by his own pen in his confessions. Afterward being baptized
by Ambrose, he returned into the right way, and succeeded Valerius in the
Bishopric of Hippo, about the year of Christ, 390.

The coversion of this man was in this manner. Having read the life of Antonius
the Eremite, as well as heard the Sermons of Ambrosius, and being therewith
wonderfully moved, and affected, he began to disrelish his former conversation,
which he had wasted in the vanities and pleasures of sin, and going into a
Garden with his friend Alipius, there he fell to bemoan with tears the
abominations of his youthful days, wishing the time now at hand, that his
soul should be watered with true converting grace: And as his heart was thus
melting into penitential sorrows, he heard a voice say to him, Toll and lege,
Take up the book, and read; and again, Toll and lege, Take up the book, and
read, for he had his Bible in the Garden with him, and seeing no body there, he
then perceived, it was an admonition and a word to him from Heaven, whereupon
he opened the book, and the first place he lighted on, was Romans 13.13, 14. Not
in gluttony and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife
and envying, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. At the reading whereof,
he was so far transported, that he resolved to become a convert, and so to
live, as to show forth the fruits of a good reformation.

He maintained Disputations with very many Heretics, as the Arians, the
Manichees, the Donatists, and the Pelagians, whose unsound devices he gravely
confuted, and so stood up for the defense of the Christian Truth, as if he only
of all men were called to that employment.

When the city of Hippo was straightly besieged by the Vandals, he was therein
enclosed, but yet dyed peaceably before it was taken, in the third month of
the siege, and in the year of Christ 433. being aged 76. years. I shall not let
him pass without his deserved Encomiums. Erasmus speaks thus of him; Eximius
Pater inter summa Ecclesiae ornamenta, ac lumina Princeps. An excellent Father,
amongst the great Ornaments and Lights of the Church the chief. And thus does
also Sarisber: Doctor ille Ecclesiae, cujus nemo satis memor esse potest. That
Doctor of the Church, of whom no man can be enough mindful.

And not to omit that of Ludovicus Vives, Fuit in illo vira studium uberrimum,
cognitio Scripturarum Sacrarum exactissima, Iudicium acre, ac extersum,
Ingenium ad miraculum arctum. He is so deep in some of his works, that Jerome
in one of his Epistles does not stick to call him the most obscure Expositour
of the Scripture. Yet this man, that he might descend to the capacities of the
unskilful, and rude multitude, he would frequently speak Barbarismes, having
this expression often in his mouth, Malo ut me reprehendant Grammatici, quam ut
non intelligant populi, I had rather Grammatians should reprehend me, then the
people should not understand me.

Our learned Whitaker speaking of him, says, quod magnum est ejus in Ecclesia
nomen. That his name is great in the Church. There is one thing which he
himself would have all readers to observe in his works, It Is the fourfold
distinction of Time, wherein they were written. Some of them he wrote when he
was Catechumenus, and so are inflated, and puffed up with with secular learning.
Others, when he was but newly baptized, and but a beginner in the study of
Theology: others, when he was Presbyter, and therefore more exact then the
former; and lastly, others, when he was chosen Bishop, and so most elaborate
and excellent of them all. These distinctions of Time would this Father have
every reader take notice of, that they might thence see his proficiency in
Sacred learning, and thereby might be the more easily induced to excuse him,
seeing he makes amends in his latter works, for the imperfections of his former
ones.

Of all his works, his Retractations and Confessions do bring most honor to
him, the one being a meek acknowledgement of his Errors, or Lapses of
judgment, the other a confession of his Falls, or Lapses of his life.

Of all his Commentaries on the Holy Scriptures, those which be has written
upon the Psalms are most disliked, whereupon one of the learned says of him,
nunquam infelicius in Scripturis Sanctis versatus, quam in psalmorum
enarratione.

Cyrillus Alexandrinus.
CYrillus Alexandrinus, so called, because Bishop of Alexandria, and in
distinction to another of the same name, Bishop of Jerusalem: He flourished
about the year of Christ 433. in the reign of Theodosius the younger. There was
great strife and contention about choosing of this man Bishop; some were for
one Timotheus, and the p^incipal man or head of that party was Abudatius, the
Captain of the Garrison, who labored might and main to cross the choice of
this Cyrillus, and to further the election of Timotheus.

Yet notwithstanding all opposition, Cyrils party prevailed, and carried it;
who being invested with his Episcopal Jurisdiction, did take more state upon
him, than any of his Predecessors ever did before him: For there happening a
combustion betwixt the Jews and the Christians in that City, this Cyril would
not stoop so low, as to make his complaint to Orestes the chief Governor, and
to crave justice of him against the wrong doers, but usurping to himself the
Office of a Magistrate, he set upon those Jews, and spoiled them of all their
goods, which caused a great breach betwixt the Deputy and the Bishop, insomuch
that five hundred Monks of Nitria came out of the Wilderness, to side with
Cyril their Prelate; and one of them, by name Ammonius, wounding the Governor
in the scuffle, was thereupon apprehended, and forthwith condemned and
executed: whom Cyrillus enrolled for a Martyr, and changing his name, called
him thenceforth (...), that is, Wonderful.

He contended against Nestorius the Bishop of Constantinople, whom the Council
of Ephesus had condemned for an Heretic. He refuted the Errors of the Arians
and Eunomians. He died in the year of our Lord 444. after he had sat in the
Chair of Alexandria 32 years.

Nicephorus tells us, That this Cyrillus did exercise an hostile hatred against
Chrysostom, for no other cause, but because he did dissent in his judgment
from the opinion of his Uncle Theophilus. Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 27. Anastasius
calls him, (...), The Seal of the Faith of the Fathers. Leo the Emperor equals
him to Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen, Nyssen, and Chrysostom, for eminency of
exploits, as their fellow, Constit. 88. Nicephorus in his 14 Book and 14
Chapter, speaks thus of him, Ad certamina natum, nullam prorsus haeresin
grassari passum fuisse. That being born for conflicts and debates, he would not
suffer any heresy to spread. Bellarmine affords him this Elogie, Cyrillus vir
fuit sanctissimus, and doctissimus, at praesertim circa mysterium incarnationis
Dominica a Deo doctus. Bell. de Script. Eccl. page 210. Cyril was a most holy
and most learned man, but taught of God especially about the Mystery of our
Lords Incarnation.

Johannes Chrysostomus.
Johannes Chrysostomus, whom Montacutius calls Patrum disertissimum, and in
Scripturis enarrandis Graecorum principem, The most eloquent of the Fathers,
and in the unfolding the Scriptures, of the Greeks the chief, was born at
Antioch of a Noble Family, his Parents names were Secundus and Anthusa; so
Sixtus Senensis tells us. He learnt Rhetoric of Libanius, and Philosophy of
Andragathius, and Theology of Diodorus the Bishop of Tarsus. He was a great
admirer of Aristophanes, whose Comedies he would usually put under his Pillow;
whence, some say, he sucked his admirable eloquence.

He made so great progress in his Studies, that he was the wonder of all that
heard him. After he was baptized, he altogether spent his time in searching the
hidden sense of the Scriptures, and first he was appointed Lecturer at Antioch,
and last of all Bishop of Constantinople, having with that many Churches of
Thrace, Asia and Pontus committed to his jurisdiction.

He used great freedom of speech, as one that would neither seek the favor,
nor dread the power of any. He was much envied and hated by the false Brethren,
who made it their work to load this zealous man with slanders and reproaches,
especially Theophilus the Alexandrian Bishop, who was indeed the cause of the
dissension betwixt him and Epiphanius.

He was likewise persecuted by the Empress Eudoxia, which prevailed with her
husband for his banishment; but being recalled again by Arcadius, when it was
expected he should become much more sparing, and less bitter in his Sermons, he
persisted still in his reproving of the Empress; whereat her husband much
incensed, exiled him again to Pontus, where being surprised with an headache,
and falling ill of a Fever, he concluded his life in the year of Christ 407.

The Elogies of this Father are transcendent. Suidas thus applauds him, Lingua
ejus Nili cataractis uberior, nemo certa ab omni aevo tanta dicendi copia
affluxit quanta solus ille abundavit; and solus absque fuco aureum and divinum
illud nomen est consecutus. Numerum scriptorum ejus recensere, non est hominis,
sed Dei potius, omnia scientis. His tongue more plentiful than the sluices of
Nilus; never did any in all ages flow with so great a stream of eloquence, as
he alone has abounded; and he only has without falsehood obtained that golden
and divine Name. To reckon up all his writings, it is not in the reach of man,
but rather of God, who knows all things.

Caussinus styles him, Theatrum quoddam divinae eloquentiae, in quo Deus abunde
videri voluit, quid possit vitae sanctitas cum vi dicendi conjuncta: A certain
Theater of divine eloquence, in whom God would abundantly manifest, what
sanctity of life was able to effect, being joined with the fo^e of clocution.
Another allows him this Epithet, (...), Golden-word Chrysostom.

Theoderet in Photius his Bibliotheca, thus elevates this man, O egregium post
mortem ducem! O Tristem etiam hostibus post sepulturam militem! O Lyram omni
harmonia praeditam morte jam solutam! O Theatrum tanto Tibicine or batum, etc.
O egregious Captain after death! O Soldier, sorrowful to thy enemies after
burial! O Harp, endued with all harmony, now broken by death! O Theater,
deprived of so great a Minstrel, etc.

Sixtus Senensis speaking in the commendation of his Tongue, he tells us, That
Libanius himself, the Master of this Chrysostom, did exceedingly admire the
fluency and grace thereof; and to that purpose he presents us with a shor^
Epistle written to him by Libanius, wherein he highly extolleth his Attick
eloquence.

Leo Primus.
LEo Primus was by Nation an Italian, born i^ Thuscany, and chosen Pope about
the 3^ year of Theodosius, and the 16 of Valentinian He sat in the Chair near
21 years. He procure a Council to be called by the Emperor Theodosius against
the Heresy of Eutyches, which had in that age spread it self, and infected the
Church of God: but yet it so fell out by the subtilty of Dioscorus the present
Bishop of Alexandria, that this foul error was rather strengthened in that
Council, than weakened, and rather ratified, than suppressed.

Among this man's Canons, and Papal Decrees, none is more worthy of praise, than
his Edict against self-seeking ambitious men, who affect continually
superiorities and advancements. He ordered, that such should be deprived of all
manner of dignities and preferments, as well Offices of lower degree, as higher
and more sublime; of inferior ones for their pride, because they had so
scornfully despised them; and of the higher ones for their presumption and
ambition, because they had so greedily affected them.

Sixtus Senensis styles this man, In divinis Scripturis eruditissimum, and in
declamandis homiliis facundissimum, Most learned in the Scriptures, and most
eloquent in his Homilies. He wrote many Epistles, some to the Emperors, others
to Councils, others to the Churches of diverse Provinces; but of them all, that
Epistle which he wrote to Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople, wherein he
impugned the blasphemous opinion of the Heretic Eutyches, is preferred for its
singular excellence.

Pareus speaking of his writings, says thus of them, In scriptis ejus elucet
summa vis Ingenii, and mira in repellendis haereticorum ictibus dexteritas:
There sparkleth in his writings a notable vigor of wit, and a wonderful
dexterity in repelling the strokes of Heretics. He labored (as many of his
Predecessors had done before him) for the Primacy of the Roman Chair, but with
much more craft and cunning; whence Chamierus gives him this suitable
character, Leo Magnus primus fuit Episcopus Romanus, and quidem ambitiosissimus.

When Attilus King of the Hunnes fell in upon Italy, and wasted most part of
it, and was approaching with his bloody Army to Rome it self, with a full
purpose to destroy it, this man with one of the Consuls, and part of the
Senate, wen^ forth to meet him; and so far he prevailed by his insinuating
Rhetoric, that he persuaded him to spare the City, beyond the expectation of
all men.

And after this, when Gensericus, that Tyrant of the Vandals, and great
persecuter of such as were sound in the Faith, came with his displayed Banners
against Rome, being wooed thither by Eudoxia, to revenge the death of her slain
husband Valentinian the late Emperor; he so wrought upon him by his conquering
eloquence, that he was content only with the spoils and plunder of the City,
altogether abstaining from slaughter and bloodshed.

No marvel then, if Trithemius style this Pope, Primum Ecclesiasticae dictionis
Tullium, sacra Theologiae Homerum, Rationum fidei Aristotelem, Autoritatis
Apostolicae Petrum, and in Cristiane pulpite Paulum. The first Tully of
Ecclesiastic speech, The Homer of Sacred Theology, the Aristole of Reasons of
Faith, the Peter of Apostolical Authority, and the Paul in a Christian pulpit.

In this man's time those horrible earthquakes were assuaged, which had ruined
so many eminent Towns and cities. The Papists do attribute some miracles to
him, as they have done to some other Popes before him.

Theodoretus.
THeodoretus, the Bishop of Cyrus in Syria, was the Scholar of Chrysostom, of
whom he was instructed both in Philosophy, and Theology: he wrote an
Ecclesiastical History, comprizing the beginnings of the Arian Sect, and the
contentions of the Church, from the first year of Great Constantine to the
beginning of the Reign of Theodosius, which in all contains the space of an
hundred and five years.

He had conflicts with the Heretic Eutyches, not only with voice, but with
style also. It Is reported that his Mother being aged, and as it were past hopes
of having a child, the Monks of Syria prevailed by their prayers for his
Nativity, who, as soon as he was borne, was forthwith consecrated to God;
Caussinus joining him with Clemens and Cyrillus, thus speaks of him Clemens
Alexandrinus, Cyrillus and Theodoretus inter eloquentes sum docti, inter
doctos sum eloquentes. Amongst the Eloquent wonderously Learned, amongst the
Learned wonderonsly eloquent.

This man was Anathematized by Dioscorus of Alexandria, and unjustly deposed
from his Bishopric, because he consented with Flavianus of Constantinople in
the condemnation of the Eutichian Heresy; he is said to have written a
deprecatory letter to Pope Leo for his restitution unto his Episcopal
jurisdiction.

Dalleus styles him, virum sui seculi eruditissimum; The most learned man of
the age he lived in. Illyrius says of him, Quod instructus Ingenio
excellentissimo, and ad omnis generis disciplinas percipiendas capacissimo
fuit, that he was furnished with a most excellent wit, and most capable of all
manner of learnings.

He was Cyrilli (...), Contemporary with Cyrillus, with whom he had some sharp
disputes, about the acts of the first Council of Ephesus, wherein he was
present; and afterward he was called to the Council of Chalcedon. Pareus
says, that he dyed not very Aged; but Sixtus Senensis tells us, That he was a
very old man before his death, his dissolution happening about the year of
Christ, 450.

Junilius Afer.
IUnilius Afer, was a Bishop in Africa, the cities name is not known certainly,
where he exercised his government. He lived (says Sixtus Senensis) under the
Reign of Theodosius the younger, about the year of our Lord, 440. he was
intimate with Primasius the learned Bishop of Vtica, and the Disciple of
Augustine. By whose persuasions, and encouragements, some say, he did collect
those Explanations upon Genesis, for the instruction of such, as were
unskilful and unlearned in the Scriptures, which work of his he dedicated to
the said Primasius. Some report that he wrote other Treatises, but Trithemius
makes mention that the never saw any other but this.

I meet with two Characters bestowed on this man, the one is from Trithemius,
who styles him, Virum in Sacris Scripturis valde doctum, inq secularibus
disciplinis sufficienter instructum, sensu profundum, eloquio dulcem, and
ornatum. A man very learned in the Holy Scriptures, and sufficiently instructed
in humane disciplines, deep or profound in his sense, sweet and comely in his
expression.

The other Elogie, and much of the same sound, is from Sixtus Senensis, who
calls him, virum bonis artibus in seculo eruditum, and in Scripturis Sanct is
peritissimum, eloquio brevem, and sensu acutem. A man learned in the liberal
arts, and most skillful in the sacred Scriptures, short in expression, and
acute in Sense.

Some say, that that little Commentary on the first Chapters of Genesis is
none of this Iunilius his, but that reverend Beda is the author thereof,
because it quotes Gregory, and is reckoned among the works of Bedae. Bell. de
Scrip. Eccles. in Iunil. p. 246.

Salvianus.
SAlvianus was Bishop of Marseilles in France, styled by Sixtus Senensis,
Episcoporum sui temporis Magister, The Master of the Bishops of his time: he
lived about 460. years after Christ, or as some others will have it, 480. It
was about the time, when the Northerly people of Goths came down into France
and fearfully overrun it, which sad opression cansing the people of those parts
to doubt of Gods Heavenly Providence in the worlds government, gave occasion to
this learned Prelat to write that good and excellent book of his, De
gubernatione Dei, wherein he shows that it is a just, and tighteous thing
with God to punish sinful men, which knowing well what they are to do, are yet
negligent performers of their duty; which little work of his he dedicated to
Salonius, who was at that time Bishop of Vienna.

Trithemius calls this man, Virum in divinis Scripturis eruditissimum, and in
secularibus literis sufficienter instructum, A man most learned in the holy
Scriptures, and sufficiently skilled in humane and secular learning; agreeing
with that of Sixtus Senensis, Divina and humana literatura copiose instructus.

The foresaid Historian speaking of his Epistles, says of them, that they are
Sale sapientiae conditae, seasoned with the salt of wisdom.

And Sixtus Senensis, in reference to all he has written, tells us, Quod
scripsit Latino candido and succincto sermon, multa laudatissima opuscula;
That he wrote many commendable works in the Latin Tongue, both heartily and
succinctly. He was the Master of Veranius and Salonius, both of which were also
Bishops: So Gennadius reports in his de viris Illustribus.

Prosper of Aquitain.
PRosper of Aquitain, so called, (not as some think from his Bishopric, for he
was Bishop of Reimes, but from the place of his nativity, he being an Aquitain
by birth) lived about the year of Christ 460. in the Reign of Leo Augustus; he
wrote excellent Tractates, his Sentences are met with among the Works of
Augustine. He showed himself a most fierce and sharp impugner of the heresy of
Pelagius. Besides his Theological writings, he was the Author of a Chronology,
mentioned by Gennadius. He succeeded in his Episcopal See to the Bishop
Faventius.

Trithemius thus w^ites of him, Prosper Episcopus Rhegiensis, vir in divinis
Scripturis eruditissimus, and in secularibus nobiliter doctus carmine
excellens, and prosa, eloquio disertus, sensu profundus, ingenio subtilis,
assertione nervosus, vita and conversatione sanctissimus apparuit. Prosper the
Bishop of Rheims, appeared to be a man most learned in the divine Scriptures,
and nobly instructed in things that were Secular, excellent both for verse and
prose, eloquent in speech profound in sense, subtle in wit, sinewous in
assertion, and holy in life and conversation.

He wrote a book de Ingratis Of Unthankeful men; by which name he always meant
the Pelagians, which sprung up out of the ashes of that Arch-heretick Pelagius:
So Bishop Usher writes in his eighth Chapter de Primord. Britan. Eccles.

Bellarmine says this of him to his honor, Quod multa praeclara scripsit pro
gratia Dei contra Pelagianos: That he wrote many excellent things for the grace
of God against the Pelagians; Seque Augustini discipulum, and defensorem
acerrimum demonstravit; and proved himself to be a disciple, and most sharp
defender of Augustine.

Sixtus Senensis styles him, Virum acris ingenii, dictionis pressae, and
nervosae, and elegantis; A man of a piercing wit, of a brief, sinewous, and
elegant elocution.

Petrus Chrysologus.
PEtrus Chrysologus was Archbishop of Ravenna, born of Noble Parentage, styled
by Sixtus Senensis, Vir tam vitae sanctitate, quam omni eruditionis genere
excellens, A man excelling as well for sanctity of life, as for all kind of
learning. He was instructed in Christian literature by Cornelius a certain
Bishop, and advanced by Pope Sixtus the third, to that eminent dignity at
Ravenna.

In this man's time, there were two Councils summoned; the one by Coelius
Symmachus the Pope, the other by Theodoricus the King of the Ostrogoths; the
one sitting at Rome, and the other at Ravenna. This Prelate was called to both:
And besides, he delivered Letters to the Council of Chalcedon against the
heretic Eutyches; which Letters are yet extant. He had the name of Chrysologus
given him, because he was so near in conformity to Chrysostom, there being in
both of them par phrasium majestas, a like majesty of phrase.

In the Epistle prefixed to this man's Sermons, you have this commendation
bestowed upon him, Si cum hoc quosdam Neotericos, aut commentatores conferas
Pigneum Atlanti comparare videaris: If you confer any of your Neotericks or
late Commentators with this Author, you may seem to compare a Pigmy to Atlas.

Sixtus Senensis, speaking of those hundred two and twenty Sermons preached by
this Prelate, he does thus express them, Breves quidem, sed sensus gravitate
venerandes, candore sermonis, venustisque verborum flosculis amaenos, argutis
quibusdam sententiolis naturali quadam facilitate fluentibus jucundos, and
validis quibusdam affectibus interdunt verbis tragicis expressis admirandos.
Short Sermons indeed, but yet for the gravity of sense, venerable; for candor
of speech, and beautiful flowers of words, delectable; and for witty sentences,
flowing with a natural facility, pleasant; and for strong affections, expressed
sometimes with tragical words, admirable.

He dyed about the year of our Lord 500. when he had governed the Church of
Ravenna 60 years.

Fulgentius.
FUlgentius an African, and a Citizen of Carthage, appeared soon after Prosper,
about the year of Christ 500. He was Bishop of Rusp in Africa, and in his time
had hot contentions with the Arians, condemned long before by the General
Council of Nice. He confuted those which asserted the doctrine of Free Will,
approving himself a puissant maintainer of the servitude of man's will to Sin
and Satan, which he had received from Augustine, or rather from the Scriptures.
He was Bishop of that Church near twenty five years, and dyed piously in the
year of his age 65. He flourished under Anastasius the Emperor, and
Thrasimundus the King of the Vandals.

In his life he shined with transcendent humility and sincerity, detesting
nothing more, than pride and luxury: He abstained from flesh, feeding
altogether upon herbs and eggs. He did wear only one garment both in Summer and
Winter; this being a usual saying with him, Corda potius quam vestimenta
mutanda esse, That men's hearts were rather to be changed than their garments.
He was so far from harboring of wrath against any of his enemies, that being
extremely injured by one Felix an Arian, and thereupon counseled by his
friends to seek a remedy at Law, he sweetly replied to them, Christiani esse
non ulcisci sese, Deum enim ulturum injuriam suis illatam: That its the
Christians duty not to avenge himself, for God is the avenger of his children.

In the time of his sickness, his Physicians advising him to bathe much, he
replied, Putatisne balnea hominis mortalis fata impeditura? Do you think that
baths will hinder the death of a man by nature mortal? And he would have these
words very often in his mouth Domine hic da mihi poenitentiam, postea
indulgentiam, Lord give me here repentance, and afterward indulgence.

Vossius calls this man, in allusion to his name, Fulgentissimum Ecclesiae
sydus, The most brightsome star of the Church. Its said of him by Gomarus, Quod
sententiis Augustini adeo delectatus erat, ut eas pluribus in locis, non tam
imitatus sit, quam expresserit, That he was so far forth delighted with the
sentences of Augustine, that he did not so much imitate them, as to the very
life express them.

One takes notice of some of his writings, that they are thorny, sharp, and
piercing, quasi aculeos in verbis inservisse visus esset, as if he had
implanted stings in his words. This is noted chiefly in his Mythologie: whereas
(as the same author well observes) alia pie quidem, and Christian scripta non
tam horrida sunt, other of his Works being piously and Christianly written, are
not so rough.

He was banished with an hundred more African Bishops into the Island of
Sardinia, by Thrasimundus the King of the Vandals, which might be the occasion
of so much gall in some of his Treatises.

Gregorius Papa.
GRegorius Papa, called Gregory the Great, he was constituted Bishop of Rome
after Pelagius, drawn (as it were) into the Chair by constraint. He was a Roman
by birth, the first of the Popes (says one) that discovered an humble and
lowly mind, who would be called Servus servorum Dei, The servant of those
which serve God. He was wonderfully averse to that great and proud Title of
Ecumenical, or Universal Bishop, boldly saying, In istud scelestum vocabulum
consentire, nihil aliud esse, quam fidem perdere, That to agree to that wicked
denomination, were nothing else, but to destroy the Faith. He ever did
acknowledge himself the Emperor Mauritius his Subject. He maintained disputes
with the Jews, and against Heretics. He confirmed by public Decrees, these
four Councils, of Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, and of Chalcedon.

He sustained many afflictions by the Longobards, who had with violence entered
Italy, and wasted many of the Churches. He wrote many books, which were
consumed after his death by them that hated them, a few only being preserved
through the intercession of Petrus Diaconus. He dyed in the year of Christ 606.
he is said to have countenanced Images in Churches, although we find no such
toleration in the writings of former Fathers: but no wonder, if being a Monk,
he was a Patron of Superslition and Idolatry; yet Barthius gives him this
character, Ejus Homiliae mirifice bonis rebus plenae, and exemplar sequentium
seculorum doctoribus, His Homilies are wonderfully full of good things, and as
a copy set for the Doctors of the following ages to write after. Nay, Erasmus
calls him simplicem and pium. And again says he, In Gregorio pluram nulloque
fuco picturatam sanctimoniam agnoscimus; We acknowledge in Gregory pure
sanctimony, and painted with no false deceitful color.

But Martin Luther does not without some colorable grounds disparage him,
whilst he has this passage in the 49 Chapter of Genesis, Gregorium admodum
tenuiter cognovisse Christum, and verbum Evangelii: That Gregory knew Christ,
and the word of his holy Gospel very slenderly. The successor of this Pope,
Sabinianus by name, out of spite and spleen to his memory, endeavored the
destruction of all his Works: Of which Sabinianus we read, that he was the
first Inventer of the use of Bells, and of Lamps perpetually burning.

Isidorus Hispalensis.
ISidorus Hispalensis lived in the year of the Lord 630. and dyed in the reign
of the Emperor Heraclius: Gesner says, that he wrote a Commentary almost on
all the Scripture, besides he wrote a book, De ortu, and obitu Sanctorum, Of
the birth and death of the Saints, and of the Nativity, Passion, and
resurrection of our Savior, together with many Philosophical Treatises; as of
Astronomy, Cosmography, and Grammatical learning; moreover he wrote two books
of Epistles, to several persons contemporary then with him. John Gerson does
affirm that the acts of the Councills were collected by this Isidore.

Sixtus Senensis says, that this man was conceived to have been the Disciple
of Great Gregory. Our Bishop Downham having an occasion to mention him, tells
us, that he was Archbishop of Sivill in Spain, and one of the most learned
writers, which have been in the Church within these thousand years. He is said
to have culd, and gathered out of the immense writings of the ancient Fathers,
innumerable volumes of all Arts, and Sciences. To him in regard of his great
Sanctity of life, Annual honors on the sixteenth of January are decreed.
Hildephonsus composed a Catalogue of his works. This Isidore was called Isidore
Iunione, or the younger Isidore, in distinction to another of that name, called
Isidore Pelusiota, who flourished about 450. years after Christ, and was the
disciple of John Chrysostom.

He wrote a hundred and thirty Greek Epistles now extant (as some write) in the
Vaticane Library, wherein he did explain the deep mysteries of the Christian
Religion. Cardinal Baeronius has inserted into his Annalls an Epistle of this
man's, written to the Emperor Theodosius, in whose Reign he flourished.

Suidas does thus advance him, telling us, quod una cum simplicitate veritatem
amaret probaret, and sine omni simulatione loqueretur. That he loved the Truth
with simplicity; That he approved of it, and would speak it without
dissimulation or hypocrisy. And Demster gives Hispalensis Isidore this
following Elogie, Grammaticus necessarius in que pleraque quae nusquam alibi; A
needful Grammamarian, in whom there are many things no where else to be met
with.

Beda.
BEda was an English man by birth, call Venerabilis, venerable for his great
learning, and gravity, and yet he was miserably ensnared with Popish errors,
which in those times had overspread like a Gangrene every Nation, wherein there
was a possession of Christianity, so that it might be said, that as the whole
world was once called Arian, so then it might have been styled Antichristian.

Yet this man, though corrupt in his opinions, and judgment, was very zealous
in the duties of his calling, fervent in prayer, laborious in reading, writing,
and preaching of the Gospel. But there is nothing makes more for his
commendation then his noble patience, in bearing those heavy and fearful
agonies, which he underwent immediately before his death. He was of great fame
in the Reign of Justinian the second of that name, about the year of Christ,
690. He lived as some reports, Vitam longissimam, till he was very aged. He
dyed under Leo the third in the year 731. so some say, but others 734. His
works are set out in eight Tomes. His Commentaries on Paul's Epistles, he
gathered out of Augustine, as himself does insinuate by these words in the
preface of them, In Apostolum quaecunque in opusculis S. Augustini exposita
Inveni, contra per ordinem transcribere curavi; Whatsoever I have found
expounded on the Apostle, in the works of S. Augustine, I have taken care to
transcribe them in their order.

Durandus writes of this Bid, that being blind by reason of his great Age, he
caused himself to be led into the villages by certain guides, that he might
preach the Word unto the people: and when on a time they carried him into a
valley full of stones, and his leaders deluded him, saying, that there was a
throng of people met together, whereas indeed there was not a man come to hear
him, he began to preach very zealously, as was his manner, and when he had
concluded his Sermon with these words, per secula seculorum, instantly all the
stones cried out with a loud voice, Amen, Venerabilis Beda, Amen, whence it
was, says this Durandus, that he was ever after styled Venerable Beda.

Johannes Damascenus.
Johannes Damascenus was a superstitious Monk, the disciple of Cosmus,
contemporary with Bid, who appeared in the West, as he did in the East. He was
for a time mingled with the Saracens, and for fear of death committed Idolatry
amongst them, worshipping (as they did) the bones of Mahomet. He stood stiffly
for Imagery, whereupon he was excommunicated in the General Council assembled
by Constantius Copronymus. He was much conversant in the books of the ancient
Fathers, as appears by his Treatise de Orthodoxa Fide; but if he had been as
narrow a searcher of the holy Scriptures, he had not fallen into those Popish
snares.

He was the first man that brought Christian Religion to a certain method; in
imitation of whom, Peter Lombard, styled The Master of the sentences, did the
like. He flourished under Leo Isaurus and Constantius Copronymus, about the
year of Christ 730.

Suidas does commend him in these words, Damascenus vir doctrissimus aetatis
suae nulli eorum, qui doctrina illustres fuerunt, secundus: Damascene a most
learned man, second to none of his age, that were accounted learned. Baronius
censures him for a vain, empty, light, and lying Writer. And Bellarmine, lib.
2. de Purgator. cap. 8. does disparage and extenuate this man's authority, and
yet he makes use of a book of his to prove his Purgatory.

Those Orations, which this Author did write concerning Images, this is
Baronius his judgment of them, Fidem illius scripti in multis vacillare, and
compluribus scatere mendaciis. Tom. 2. Annal. ann. 31. 675.

Rabanus Maurus.
RAbanus Maurus, by Nation a German, was the fourth Abbot of Fulda, and from
that degree advanced to the Archbishopric of Ments, being the sixth Prelate
which possessed that Chair. He was sometime scholar to that famous English man
Alcuinus. All the while he was Abbot, his Monks hated him, because they saw him
so intent upon his studies, and so neglectful of worldly advantages and
interests: Whereupon he left them, and went to Lewis the Emperor, and would
not return any more unto his Abbey, though much importuned by those his Monks
to come, God so ordering it for their downfall and destruction; for no sooner
was he advanced to his Archiepiscopal See of Ments, but their confusion
immediately followed.

While he lived in his Monastery, some say that he compiled Commentaries on all
the Scriptures, being encouraged thereunto by the Emperors Lewis and
Lotharius; which he gathered out of the Latin Fathers from Jerome to Venerable Bede, evermore holding to their sayings, sentences, and senses; and in those
places wherein he did not meet with the Expositions of those foresaid Fathers,
he made supply with his own: yet withal for distinction sake, that the Reader
might know and understand, which was his Explanation, and which theirs, he
always set the Authors Names to their Annotations.

Trithemius in his Catalogue of famous men bestows upon him this Elogie, In
omni eruditione tam secularium, quam divinarum Scripturarune long doctissimus
evasit, cui similem suo tempone non habuit Ecclesia: He was esteemed most
learned in all manner of erudition, as well sacred as secular: The Church had
not his fellow or equal in his time.

And Sixtus Senensis speaks as full, as much in the praise of this man, who
styles him, Virum omnium disciplinarum cognitione absolutissimum, Rhetorem,
Poetam, Astronomum, Philosophum, and Theologum, cui nullum in illo seculo
Germania habuit parem. A man most absolute in the knowledge of all disciplines,
a Rhetorician, a Poet, an Astronomer, a Philosopher, and a Divine, to whom
Germany in that age could not find a Peer. Helvieus says, that this man
flourished in the year of Christ 814. others 840. Bellarmine calls him Virum
aeque doctum ac pium, a man equally learned and pious.

Haymo.
HAymo a Monk of Fulda, and near kinsman of the Reverend Bedes, was one of
Alcuinus his scholars, and school-fellow together with Rabanus Maurus: He was
chosen Bishop of Halberstade, about the year of our Lord 840. He wrote
Commentaries on the Scriptures, which he gathered out of those that were before
him. He was of the Romish Church, but yet he is not altogether so erroneous, as
other Popish Writers both before and after him: Besides his foresaid
Commentaries, he published in ten Books a compendious Ecclesiastical History.
He continued in his Episcopal See about thirteen years; some say he died in the
year of Christ 853. and that he lies buried in that Cathedral.

Sixtus Senensis styles him virum sanctitate, and eruditione insignem, a man
famous for his sanctity and learning; and the same Author speaking likewise of
those good Commentaries this man put out, he gives them this following
commendation, Pietate, brevitate, dictionis simplicitate, ac perspicuitate
laudandos, To be praised for their piety, brevity, simplicity of expression,
and perspicuity. And further he says of this Expositor, Quod versatus est
ferme semper in allegoricis, and anagogicis sensibus, quos velut spiritualis
apicula, ex omnium antiquorum hortis, ac pratis florentissimis excerpsit, quo
legentibus esset parata saluberrimi mellis copia; He was almost always
conversant in allegorical and anagogical senses, which as a spiritual Be, he
gathered out of the most flourishing gardens and meadows of all the Ancients,
whereby there might be provided for them which read him, plenty of most
wholesome honey.

And Trithemius in his Catalogue of illustrious men, thus pourtrayeth him, Vir
in divinis Scripturis eruditissimus, and insecularibus literis nulli suo
tempore secundus, ingenio acutus, sermon disertus, vita and conversatione
devotus, in declamandis ad populum Omiliis celeberrimis industriae fuit: A man
most learned in the Scriptures, and for secular learning second to none in his
time; of an acute wit, eloquent in speech, devout in life and conversation, and
in declaiming of Homilies to the people, he was of a most transcendent industry.

And yet Erasmus does somewhat diminish him in these words, Haymo non uno and
altero loco deliravit; Haymo has doted more than in a few places.

Theophylactus.
THeophylactus was Archbishop of Bulgaria. There is difference among Writers
concerning the time when he lived: Gerhard in his Patrologie tells us, that he
flourished when Alexander was Pope, and Diogenes was Emperor, about the year
1071. though Baronius and Bellarmine say it was in 880. and others 990. and
Eutropius 760. But its likely, because he was the instrument that converted the
Bulgariaus, that he appeared sooner than some will have him. He wrote
Commentaries on the Gospels, on Paul's Epistles, the Acts, and on some of the
Prophets, all in the Greek Tongue, which were translated by Montanus and some
others.

He was an imitator of Chrysostom: Hence says Sixtus Senensis of him, that he
was in Chrysostomi lectione diu multumque versatus, ac detritus, much worn, and
a long while conversant in the reading of Chrysostom. Nay, all his Comments
are reputed nothing else but an Abridgement of the Writings of that excellent
Author, and so the foresaid Senensis intimates in these words, Redegit in
breve, and apertum compendium, quicquid admirabilis ille pater ex aureo suo
ore, veluti ex abundantissimo font, in exponendis scripturis sanctis
effuderat: He did reduce into a short and open Compend, whatsoever that
admirable Father had, in expounding of the holy Scriptures, poured out of his
golden mouth, as it were out of a most abundant fountain.

He did sharply refute the Heretics of old, but for the errors of the Roman
Church in his own time, he did too much indulge to. He had an honorable esteem
of Marriage, and was of opinion, that Antichrist should then appear, when the
Roman Empire did begin to sink. Erasmus gives him this Elogie, Bulgarius
Interpres Graecus recentior, sed haud quaquam malus mea sententia: The
Bulgarian Bishop a more late Greek Interpreter, but not a bad one in my
opinion. It Is Luther's, Augustinus, Hilarious, Theophylactus excellunt: In Coll.
Men's. cap. 30.

Bellarmine proves this man schismatical, because in the third Chapter of John,
he reproves the Latins for believing the holy Ghost to proceed also from the
Son.

Oecumenius.
OEsumenius was a Greek Writer, as well as Theophylact; but when he likewise
flourished, its controverted by many Authors: some say be lived about 900 years
after Christ, others 1000. Sixtus Sinensis tells us, that it must be after the
800 year, in regard of those Authors he makes use of in his Works.

This man collected out of the Commentaries of the Fathers Expositions on the
Acts, the seven Canonical Epistles, and all Saint Paul's, which were rendered
into Latin by Maximus Florentinus. Its said, That after this man had set out
his Comments, Theophylacts were not so highly valued; the one being so much
preferred in that way before the other; and he also borrowed most of his
Expositions from Chrysostom.

Sixtus Senensis speaking of this Writer, calls him Graecum autorem, valde
doctum, a Greek Author, very learned; and further he adds, In explicandis
divinis scripturis brevis, apertus, and elegans, in unfolding or expounding the
divine Scriptures, brief, clear, and elegant. One Theodulus, a Priest of
Coelosyria, has some Annotations on the Epistle to the Romans, but they are all
taken out of this Oecumenius.

Lanfrancus.
LAnfrancus an Italian by nation, borne at Papia, was Archbishop of
Canterbury, and in great esteem for his profound learning, with our William the
Conqueror, he was Berengarius his great Antagonist, and writ against him,
maintaining the error of Transubstantiation, which the said Berengarius had so
stiffly opposed: he was one of those 113. Bishops which were convened by Pope
Nicholas the second at Rome, for the rooting out of that Sacramental truth
Berengarius had published.

Its a thing observed by the Orthodox learned, that before this age of
Lanfrancus, the Doctrine of Augustine was universally received, and followed,
first published by Egyppus, Fulgentius his equal, afterward by Fulgentius
himself, then by Primasius, all of these being African Divines, and eminent for
their learning. And so it continued to be maintained by Isidore Hispalensis,
Maximus Taurinensis, and Prosper of Aquitane. Nay ratified it was likewise by
Council, as the Aurasicane, and the sixth Constantinopolitane, and before that
Charles the great governed the Roman Empire, it was stoutly defended by Bid a
Saxon and his Disciples, Alcuinus, Claudius, Rabanus Maurus, and by many other
learned Doctors, for the space of 500 years and upwards.

But now began men to swerve from that good and pure doctrine of Augustine, and
especially about that Article of the Sacrament. Satan by his instruments
promoting (as Pareus expresses it) immanem illum Transubstantiationis errorem,
infinitorum aliorum fontem, that huge error of Transubstantiation, the
fountain of many others.

This Lanfrancus, though he had so great an interest in the favor of the
Conqueror, as that he ordered all his Affairs both in Church, and State, yet
when Rufus came to enjoy the crown he had not that influence, for the Nobles of
the Realm, out of emulation and envy, had alienated the young Kings affections
from him; which occasioned his sickness, whereof he soon dyed.

Ranulphus relates this of him, that it was his serious, and frequent desire,
he might dye of no other disease then a Fever, or Dysenterie, because in those
distempers the use of speech would continue to the last breath; he sat in his
Archiepiscopal Chair about nineteen years, and dyed in the third year of the
Reign of King Rufus.

Sixtus Senensis calls this man, omnium suitemporis, in omni literarum genere
doctissimum, of all men of his time the most learned in all kinds of learning:
and speaking of those works which he has written, he says this of them, Quod
inter alia praestantis ingenii monumenta, reliquit pios atque eruditos in totum
psalterium commentarios. That among many other monuments of his excellent wit,
he left behind him pious and learned Commentaries on the whole book of Psalms.
He flourished when Henry the third enjoyed the imperial diadem, about the year
of our Lord 1060. So says Sixtus Senensis.

Anselmus.
ANselmus succeeded Lanfrancus in the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury, who
for a Popish Writer was a man of great fame in the times he lived, and of no
mean repute for his learning, even in the reformed Churches. He was by birth a
Burgundian, and advanced from an Abbot to that eminent Ecclesiastical dignity
by William Rufus then King of England, betwixt whom, and this Bishop there
happened afterward hot contentions, because the King had put up in his coffers
some rents of Defunct Bishops, which the Prelat would ever have peculiar, and
appropiate to the Church; hereupon he was twice banished out of England, but at
last returning upon a solemn friendly invitation from the said King, he was
received by the people with high acclamations, and great joys.

This Bishop was very much against the marriage of the Clergy, which it seems
was in use till his time in England, and he is said to attribute the honor to
the Virgin Mother, as he did to our Lord her Son. He fell sick at Edmondbury,
and and on the 28th. day of April in the year of Christ 1109. being aged 76
years, he dyed at Canterbury, whether he had been removed in the time of his
sickness, and was buried at the head of his Predecessor Lanfrancus. Though
afterward he was taken up, and interred in the eastern part of the said
Cathedral, which he had in his lifetime adorned with a most sumptuous structure.

This man, because by his notable writings he had advanced the Papal Tyranny,
and depressed as much on the other side the Kingly Sovereignty, therefore did
Pope Urban Order and Decree, That he and his successors should sit at his right
Foot in every General Council; and thus it was proclaimed, when that place was
given him, in the open Assembly, Includamus hunc in orb nostro, tanquam
alterius orbis Papam.

Sixtus Senensis thus describes him, Anselmus vir tam divinis, quam humanis
disciplinis nobiliter excultus, stylo mire simplici, and puro, sed non in
jocundo? His life was written by his intimate friend Edinerus. He wished, when
he was dying, that he might have had a little more time here allowed him, till
he had perfected that most obscure Problem of the Souls Original, which it
seems he had in his lifetime taken in hand to determine; but says one of him,
Hoc tempus datum ei non est, ut majus bonum in aeternitate ei daretur: This
time was not given him, that a greater good might be given to him in Eternity.

Bernardus.
BErnardus Abbot of Claraval, flourished in the time of the Schoolmen, and yet
is reckoned as one of the Fathers, for his sanctity of life, and soundness of
Doctrine.

Chemnitius says of him this, Recentissimus est, vixitque post confirmatam
Episcopi Romani Tyrannidem: He is the latest Father, and lived after that the
Tyranny of the Roman Bishop was established: Yet he did much inveigh against
the impiety of the Pope, his Cardinals, Bishops, and all that Antichristian
Clergy.

Bishop Carleton says, Utinam tales papistas multos, imo vel unum talem hodie
haberemus in toto regno Pontificio, qualem Bernhardum fuisse constat. I would
to God we had this day many such Papists, nay but one such, as it is manifest
Bernhard was. ^e solidly disputes, (as the foresaid Bishop further does
observe) of the chief Fundamentals and Heads of Faith, as of the Scriptures, of
the Church, of Man's Misery, of free Justification, of Grace, of New Obedience;
all of these against the Fables of the Trent Council. And, says Carleton, Is
he a Papist, that follows the Catholic Church, and the consent of the ancient
Fathers, against the Jesuits, and the Trent Impostors?

Hence it is, that many Princes made use of him for decision of controversies,
and composing of contentions in the Church. This was he, which advised Count
Theobald, when he saw him at great expenses in the building of Temples, that he
would rather supply the household of Faith, and build up the living Tabernacles
of the most High: He died in the 64 year of his age.

This is Erasmus his character of him, Bernhardus festivus, jucundus, nec
segnis in movendis aeffectibus: Bernhard is pleasant, sweet, and not slow in
moving the affections. And again says the same Author, Bernhardus vir and
Christian doctus, and sancte facundus, and pie festivus, in cap. 1. Romans p.
243.

This is Bishop Mortons Elogie which he gives him, In atro Romanae Ecclesiae
nocte, fere solus ^ffulsit Bernhardus, qui tam doctrinae, quam vitae fuae
lumine in multis articulis tenebras pontificias dispulit; In the dark night of
the Romish Church, almost only Bernhard shined forth, who as well by the light
of his doct^^^e, as his life, has in many Articles scattered the Popish
darkness.

I will add no more, but that of Sixtus Senensis, who says thus of him,
Oration ubique dulcis, and ardens, ita delectat, and ardenter incendit, ut ex
suavissima lingua ejus mel, and lac verborum fluere, and ex ardentissimo ejus
pectore ignitorum affectuum incendia erumpere videantur. His speech everywhere
sweet and ardent, does so delight and fervently inflame, that there do seem to
flow from his most sweet tongue, honey and milk of words, and out of his most
ardent breast, fires of burning affections to break out.

FINIS.

