The last Will and Testament of Father Peter's: As it was found Quilted into My
Lord Chancellors Cap, with a Letter directed to his Lordship, etc. and his
Prayer to the Blessed Virgin of Loretto.
Meritorious Sir,
UUnderstanding that you were to be my Successor in these Houses of Clay, I
thought it would not be amiss to leave you my Exceutor, who next my Reverence
have done the King the best service in the Nation, and consequently must be no
Stranger nor Enemy to Fa. Peter's. I have now laid a side the Sword of the
Spirit and betaken my self to an Arm of Flesh, and having converted my
Apostolical Robe into the Whore of Babilons die, am resolved to visit Fa. Le
Chaise, and send over the K. of France with 30000 Men. I need not put you in
mind of the terrible blow that shall come and none see who hurts them, nor any
other private Juggle for having made room for your admittance to his Majesty's
ear; there is nothing can fall betwixt the Cup and the Lip. It would be
superfluous to tell you that innumerable Prayers and Indulgences for you and
your Posterity after you, are together with this my Sanctuary, conferred upon
you; I wish England do not grow too hot for you in a little time, However, I go
to prepare a place for you. Be not troubled, your Merits and my Beads will
never let you lie long in Purgatory, should all hopes fail, and therefore be
secure of a future Happiness; be of good Courage and your Faith will save you.
This I am sure of, and all the World knows it, that you have made to your self
Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, so that you are like to feed well as
long as you live in this World, and as for the other let not one melancholy
thought make you soak your Guts one Bowl the less, for i will warrant you my Works
of Supererrogation helping out your Defects, I shall have nothing too much, nor
you too little to bribe admittance into Paradise; St. Peter and I were Old
Cronys, and as long as I have but an evidence of his own hand writing to
produce, he cannot for shame but out of good mannets let Me and my Friend in.
However, Go on Bravely, Thou Son of Perdition, and fill up the measure of thy
Iniquity, till thou grow ripe for Translation and Roman Calander. Divine Bard,
and Reverend Impostor, into thy Hands alone I commit my English Spirit, and my
last Will and Testament to be disposed of according to my appointment, together
with an Inventory of what goods I have left in those Lodgings for your use; and
a private Prayer to be said over 17 times a day, and the Blessed Virgin hear
thee in the day when thou call upon her, and make the works of thy hand
prosperous, and thy Counsels like Hamons, or good Achitophels.

Thine Eternally, PETER'S


I Give my Soul into the Hands of the B. Gabriel, to be translated into
Purgatory; and there after two turns of the Spit, and one winding up of the
Jack, which is enough for the Purification of any Jesuit, and from thence to
carry it to the Lap of his Mistress the B. Virgin of Loretto, who I serve, and
whose I am.

Let my Heart by dried and beaten to Powder, and so divided into several Drams,
to be drunk by all the new Converts in England, in a Glass of a Heretics warm
Blood.

Let the K. Q. and Pr. of W. take a Mornings-draught of my Spleen, prepared
after the same manner as my Heart by his H.

My Gall should be at the French Kings service, but they have more need of it
in England, therefore let that fall to Sunderland's share.

My Brains have overgrown me this last three or four Years, and therefore shall
be divided amongst pluralities, Peterborough, Huntington, Bishop Chester,
Smith, and Chapman.

Chester, not content with my Brains, snaps at my Kidneys, by St. Francis he is
the likeliest Man to make good use of them, let him take them.

Let my Scull be carried to S. Omers, and Tipped with Silver, to be drunk in upon
the Solemn Day that is Consecrated to my Name: and being filled with Blood,
upon the Admission of every Novice, to be turned off by all the Brotherhood, at
the time of the Administration of the Holy Sacrament.

My wanton Eyes I bequeath to the Nuns at St. Bridgets, and to those Objects of
Charity that the Kings Alms were bestowed upon.

My Tongue, to the Earl of Winchelsea, because he has so little.

My Ears, to Penn, Ferguson, and the rest of that Tribe; or Titus Oats, that
courageous knaw-post.

My Nose, to the P.O. who has scratched his out of Scipio's Grave.

My Teeth, to Harry Hills for Beads; or, to polish the Rosary; or, instead of
it, Aretine, Tully and Octavia, Rochester, School of Venice, etc.

My Throat, to the Earl of Essex, to be shaved.

My Breasts, to the Q. who lost her own with longing for a Box of the Ear of
the Princess, and Sausages made of Heretics Dripping.

My Issues, to Queen Dowager, who they say has 20; ten to my knowledge.

My Instrument of propagation, otherwise called the Carnaledge, part to my Lady
Salisbary, or Stonehorse Spencer.

My Prolifick Juice, to the Q. and my Blessing, together with all the Hairs of
my -- to make a Perriwig for my Son --

The strength of my Back, to the K. together with all my Merits; some one will
be apt to say, Your merit, quoth he, That Is a Halter. Good Mr. K. if you will put
up the affront, I will, or else my intent being well directed I am clear.

My A -- to the great Button-maker of England.

My Deputy Hair and my Aldermans Hat, to Alsop, and the rest of the gang,

My Razor let Jeoffreys shave himself with, and cut his Throat when he has
done. My Breeches I recommend to the Q. use, to get her with C -- without the
help of a Man; and the smell of my Stockings to make her fair. How beautiful
upon the Mountains, etc. Let my Corpse be buried in the Room where Sir Edmund
Bury Godfry was murdered, to fright his bodily appearance, and I Will to the
Devil to choke his Ghost. 20000 l. for Swords, Knives, Powder, Fireballs, etc.
10000 for him that Stabs the P. O. 2000 for the French Dragoons, to be paid by
F. La Chaise, for their good Service. 100 for him that Kills a Heretic: 1000
for the Col. of St. Ignatio, to invent and provide all manner of Tortures. 2000
to the Chapel of the B. V. of Loretto, to be converted into a Golden Chamber
Pot. All this last to be paid by the K. as soon as I have sent him Money from
France.

An Inventory of the Goods that I left in my Lodgings, to the Lord Chancellor,
with their value set upon them.
1. A Piece of Adam's Figg-Leaf-Apron, together with an Apple of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil. 330000 l. 2. A Frog, a Louse, and a Locust, that
was upon Pharaohs Land, with Joseph's Coat, Sampsons Jaw Bone, and half Gideons
Fleece. 50000 l. 3. The Hoof of Balaams Ass, the Dart that killed Absalom,
together with the Stone that slew Goliath, and piece of Bathshehas Smock, pris'd
at 1000 l. 4. Three Chairs that Solomon sat in at Study, together with his
black Fur Cap; and a Table that St. Paul made use of when he wrote his Epistle
to the Hebrews. 2000. 5. The Parchments that the same Apostle sent for by
Timothy, with the Cloak; St. Agnas's Candlestick, and St. Winnefrids Ink-horn
3000. 6. St. Francis's Clock; St. Dennis's Fire-shovel and Tongs; a broken
Chamber Pot of the B. Virgin of Loretto: and a little Sawse pan for the P. W.
that Zacharias bought for his Son John. 30000 l. 7. St. Ignatius's Warming-pan;
the Nail of Loyola's little Toe; Pope Joans Placket; and Bellarmines
Close-stool. 10000 l. 8. A Sir-reverence of St. Clemens in a Silver box; St.
Ambrose's Glister-pipe; St. Austin's Almanac; valued at 1000 l. 9. St.
Cyprian's Basin; Cicily's Looking-glass, and Marmalade-pot: Coleman's Halter;
St. Katharines Tower and Curling-pin, with her Wash to beautify the Face,
which I have used this many years, and it wastes no more than the Widows Cruise
which I also have. 20000 l. 10. Some of Paul's fasting spittle in a Bottle,
sealed with his Coat of Arms, good for sore Eyes, and to restore even the
Blind; a Nail of Timothys Shoe; Q. Marys Ruff; and St. Margarets Scissars. 3000
l. 11. A board of the Ark; a feather of Noah's Dove; a grain of Lots Wise, took
from the Pillar of Salt; and the paper that saluted Lyass B -- 7000. 12. The
Dirt-pyes that the V. M. made when she was a Child; some of ^he Dung that fell
into Tobits Eyes; the Horns of Nebuchadnezzar when turned (...) Case of
Needl(...) ^^. The Nails that held our Savior to the Cross; the Spear that
pierced side; some of the Water and Blood that came out; the Inscription that
was over his Head, in Pilates own Hand Writing. 6000 l. 14. Judas's bag full of
Bread and Cheese; the piece of money that was taken out of the Fishes mouth for
Tribute; some of the Water that was made Wine. 7000 l. 15. A piece of our B. S.
Cradle; the Manger; the Key of St. Peter's back door into Heaven; his Slippers;
the Bill, Spurs, and Comb of the Cock that Crow'd when he denied his Master.
4000 l. 16. A part of the Nipple of St. Agatha; St. Margarets piss burnt
Garter; the Table-Cloth, Napkins and Knives that were used in the Institution
of the Lords Supper; the bed that Pope Joan pigg'd in; Pope Boniface's Cod-piss
buttons, and our L. prayer, in our S. own hand writing. 9000 l. 17. A drop of
the B. V. Milk which she gave to St. Biasio, when he thirsted in the
Wilderness.
A Form of Private Prayer used by Father Peter's.
O Blessed Mary, Mother of God, Queen of Heaven, Savior of the World, Giver of
Salvation, the Almighty Lady, Author of our Redemption, I beseech thee to hear
me. Bow the Heavens, and come down from that thy Throne, to hear the Petition
of thy Hunble Suppliant. By our Saviors Birth and Baptism, by the Manger in
which he was laid, by the Gifts the Wise men brought, by the Star that appeared
in the East, by the Swaddling Clothes he wore, by the Milk he sucked, by the
Tears he shed in his Agony, (...) the Kiss given him by Judas, by the Halter
with which Judas Hanged himself, and the Bag that he had to bear; by the Lance
that pierced our Saviors side, by the Water and Blood that came out, by the
Tomb in which he was laid, by the Spices with which he was Embalmed, by the
Ointment with which he was Anointed unto his Burial, by the Cross on which he
suffered, by the two Thieves that together dyed with him, by the Quire of
Angels at his Birth, and the Quire of Angels that were his Attendance at his
Resuarection, by the Superscription of Piiate, by the High Priests Ear that was
cut off, by the Name of Woman, with which Christ pleased to signify thy
pre-eminence over all Women, etc. I beseech thee to hear me. Let not the
Scepter depart from Analek, nor a Lawgiver from the Jebusites; nor a Cardinal
from England, nor a Peter's from the Court, so long as the Sun and Moon
endures. Pray for us, O Blessed Virgin, that all our Designs and Contrivances
may have good Success; and Command thy Son to be so careful of the good of his
Society, that it may be emplanted in all the Nations of the World; and
particularly in this wherein we live. Let the K. hearken to me, the Charmer,
who Charm Wisely; nor be as a Deaf Adder that will not hear; nor Stiff-necked
as his People, that will not Obey. Make him resolute in his Religion, and true
to the Cause which be has promised to maintain; and let the abundance of his
Merits wash away the many Religious Vows and Oaths which he has made and broke,
for the Honor of the Roman Church. We are thy People, and the Sheep of thy
Pasture; if thou had not been for us, we had been swallowed up quick in this
Heretical, Damnable, Prejudiced Kingdom, when they were so wrathfully
displeased at us; but thou have fought for us, and defended us. O go on to
perfect this work of thine, which thou have in some measure begun, and make us
all one Sheepfold under one Shepherdess, the Blessed Mary. Make Peter open to
all that will open the ^oors of their Hearts to thee; and Damn all those
Eternally that shall presume to refuse it, for thy Name sake, admine, the Lord
Chancellours, Salisburys, Chesters, Peterboroughs Merit, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

