THE Last Dying Speeches and Confession Of the Six Prisoners Who were Executed
at TYBVRN This 17th of September, 1680. WITH THE ACCCOUNT Of their Behavior in
Newgate, and at the place of Execution. With many remarkable passages worthy to
be observed.
The Names of the Executed persons are as follows, viz. George Cole, Tho.
Sutton, alias Brown, Tibia Hog, Mary Bucknall, Edward Willis, Edmund Dubber.


With the Account of their Crimes for which they suffered.

FIrst Thomas Sutton and Elizabeth Brown, pretended to be his Wife, were
Arraigned and brought upon their Trials, for Breaking and Robbing the House of
Mr. Richard King, a Mercer upon the Bridge, in the Parish of St. Olives
Southwark; the manner of the Robbery was as follows: The two persons
beforementioned, on the 8th of August last, being Sabbath day, as it is
supposed, having Intelligence that Mr. King and all his Family (except his
Maidservant, by name Joan Elge) was gone to Church, came and knocked at the
door; upon which, the Maid peeping through the Keyhole, demanded what they
would have? their answer was, That they were friends of Mr. Kings, and would
needs speak with him: the Maid replied he was not within: to which Sutton
answered, that his Wife and he were newly come out of the Country, and that
the Air was not agreeing with her, she was taken sick coming over the Bridge,
and that if she would open the door, they would stay till Mr. King come home;
upon which she opened it and let them in, they telling her that they were her
Masters Cozens, and seemed much to admire the Furniture of the House,
commending it above whatever they saw in the Country; the Woman still feigning
herself sick: and so cunning were they, that they would not believe the Wench,
though she several times affirmed there was none at home but her self; till
asking for a Vault, she told him, it was up stairs at the top of the House,
where going up, he staid but a very short time, and then coming down again,
went seemingly to kiss the Maid, and thereupon clapped his hands to her Throat,
saying, He came for Money; at which surpriz^ she crying out, the Woman cried,
God dam her cut her Throat, and thereupon both of them falling upon her, bound
her, and then searching for a Knife, at last found one, with which they
endeavored to cut her Throat; but she with struggling got her hands loose, and
wrested the Knife out of their hands, upon which they binding her faster, upon
promise she would no more cry out, left her, and went to breaking open the
Trunks and Chests, and got one Silver Basin, six Silver Plates, two dozen of
Spoons, two Tankards, one Sugar-dish; and then breaking open the shop-door, got
a hundred and ninety seven pounds in money; but in the time they were
plundering, the Maid got loose, though all bloody, shut her self into a Room,
and cried out Thieves, Murder; upon which several of the Neighbors coming,
broke open the door, but e're they came into the House, the now Prisoners were
got out of the Cellar-windows upon the Piles, where the Woman was taken, and
shortly after the Man, who was got off in a Boat; upon searching of him, there
was about fifteen pounds found in his breeches, the rest they only removed,
but had no opportunity of carrying it away Upon their Trials they pleaded both
guilty to the Felony, and were by the Jury brought in guilty of the same, and
received Sentence of Death. But Elizabeth Brown upon being asked what she
could say to stay Execution, pleaded she was with Child, the which by a Jury of
Women was found to be true, and she Reprieved till she shall be Delivered.
Sutton alias More, according to Sentence Executed; his Behavior was very meek,
and seemed to be very sensibly of his latter end, and with much bewailing of
his desperate and deplorable condition, continued till the Execution put a
period to his days.

Tibia Hog was Tried for stealing two pieces of Indian Silk from Thomas Sutten
Indian gown seller in the New Exchange in the Strand: she coming to his shop,
cheapned several parcels of silk, and thereby took the opportunity whilst they
were busy, to slip two pieces under her Coats, valued at ten pounds; but being
perceived by a youth that stood in an opposite shop, who told Mr. Suttel of the
same, he went to search her, whereupon she dropped the same. Upon her Trial she
denied that ever she touched, or had any such parcel of Silk; but the Evidence
was so plain, that the Jury brought her in guilty of the Felony. And having
been known to be a notorious shop-lift, received Sentence with the former, much
lamenting her hard fate, and exclaimed again her cruel d^stinies, for pushing
her headlong on such danger and utter ruin.

Edward Duffer was tried for breaking the Shop of Thomas Westwood a Barber in
Holbourn, and taking thence eight Razers, three pair of Cizars, three Napkins,
one pair of Beard-irons, one Perriwig, and several other things. The Felony and
Burglary were both proved against him by his former Confession, and by a
Witness whom he sold one of the Razers to, though Newgate had taught him the
impudence to deny his former asseveration; yet upon the testimony that was
given against him he was brought in guilty of the Felony and Burglary, and for
the same received Sentence. After which, for some time he seemed resolute; but
when he saw there was no hopes for life, his courage failed him, and he desired
the hearty prayers of several that came to visit him, and so continued till
death.

Mary Bucknal was tried for Murdering her Male Bastard-childe on the 24th of
August last; the manner of the Fact according to the Evidence was as ensues.
She living in the Parish of St. Sepulchers, and lodging with another woman,
about two of the Clock in the Morning found her pains come fast upon her,
arose, (the other being so fast asleep that she perceived it not, as she swore)
and was by her self delivered, but not so secretly but that the other Woman
heard some noise; whereupon she asked her what was the matter; to which she
replied, that she had bought the day before one pennyworth of Damsons, and that
by eating them she had surfeited her self, the which had caused her to Vomit;
upon which answer her Bedfellow went to sleep: she taking the opportunity
thereof, thrust the Child between the Bed and the Mat, where it was afterward
found: Upon Examination she denied that she any way made away with the Child^
but that it was still-born, which availed her not; for upon the reading of the
Act of Parliament made to prevent such Cruelties, she having none to justify
that is was Still-born, was found guilty of the Murder. And as the former, so
she received Sentence of Corporal Death, and seemed sorry during the intervene,
that she dyed her hands in her own Infants Blood, and that she should become
Murtheress of the Infant of her Womb; desiring all Women and Maids to beware
how they are tempted to lustful deeds, and unlawful desires, that may be
instrumental to bring shame and ignominy not only on them, but on their whole
posterity.

George Cole, of Bishops gate-street London, was tried for a Felony and
Burglary, for robbing his Lodging, breaking open the Doors and Desks therein,
and taking thence three or four pair of Flaxen Sheets, two Callico Pillowbeers,
two Tablecloths, several Curtains and Valens, besides Apparel, as Petticoats,
Scarfs and Hoods, as likewise Thread and Gimp, all to the value of seven or
eight pounds; this he effected one Morning before any of the house were
stirring, carrying them clear off without the least discovery, leaving one that
he pretended was his Wife in bed the mean while. And also several Pick-lock
Keys were found that would open all the House-doors, Trunks, Chests, and other
fastenings in the house; and was so impudent as not long after to send a
Messenger for them, and some other things he had by over-haste forgot,
whereupon by the directions of the Messenger he was apprehended, and now upon
Trial denied the Fact; but Mrs. Davis who lost the Goods, and several belonging
to the house, attesting he only had the Key of the Room and no body else, the
Jurors gave their Verdict against him as to the Felony; but upon enquiry, there
being a Record found of his formerly being burnt in the Hand, he was also
Condemned to Die, seeming to be very obstinate and careless for two days after,
as if stupefied or amazed with the sense he had of deaths near approach; but by
the persuasions of several pious persons who came to visit the poor afflicted
wretches, that then, no doubt, lay under Agonies, to think how dreadful the
King of Terrors was, he began to reflect upon Eternity, and was persuaded to
prepare himself for death.

Edward Willis being apprehended for Stealing several Sheep near Highgate was
committed to Newgate, where he remained till he took his Trial in the Old
Bayley, and there it was Sworn against him by a Felmonger, that he had bought
ten Skins of him, and gave him nine Pence a piece for each of them: And the man
that lost them finding his Mark upon the Skins, He Challenged and Swore them to
be his, so that the Prisoner being Cast, was upon his being found to be
formerly Burnt in the Hand, Condemned. He begged hard for his Life, but several
notorious things being alleged against him, he could obtain no Mercy, but was
Executed with the rest, behaving himself like a dying man, till he changed for
Immortality.

Thus may we see how the Devil deludes such as give credit to his wicked
Suggestions, but at last brings them into Misery, and then leaves them to
shift, when least able.

On the Eleaventh of this Instant, being Saturday, between three and four of
the Clock in the Afternoon, was Elizabeth Cellier brought upon her Trial, being
taken up the day before by a Bench-warrant, granted for that purpose by the
Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, for publishing a scandalous
Libel, entitled, Malice defeated in which was not only several private men
scandalized, but also the whole Government and Laws of the Nation. Several
Witnesses came in against her to prove that she was the Author of it, and that
she handed the Copy to the Press, paying ten shillings a ream for printing of
it. The Printer swore that he printed several of the Ssheets, in which were
contained the matter and substance of the Indictment, which was long, importing
that she the said Elizabeth Cellier, Wife to Peter Cellier, of the Parish of
St. Clement's Danes, had published in her said scandalous Libel, that Racks and
Tortures were used to make the Catholics confess a Plot when there was none;
and that Praunce and one Corrale a Coachman were so served in Newgate; farther
laying the inhumane Murder of his late Majesty to the charge of the
Protestants; and that the King's Evidence were Devils, and not men, with
several Reflections upon some Peers of this Realm: to all which she pleaded
Ignoramus, and that she was not the Author of the Book, though the day before
she had confessed and owned that she did it, but as to the proof of that, one
John Penny swore in Court, that he bought two of them of her at her own house in
Arundel-street in the Parish aforesaid, giving for the same the sum of four
shillings, and that she owned to him that they were her own, that is, that she
was Author of the Libel; upon which, after her having made a long Apology for
her self, the Court gave the Jury their Charge, who going out and staying about
half an hour, brought her in guilty of the Misdemeanour or Trespass, and she
was ordered into Custody under the jurisdiction of the Keeper of Newgate, and
all the said Libels that could be found in her house or elsewh^re appertaining
to her, were ordered to be secured.

She is Fined one Thousand pound to the King, to be kept in Prison till that be
paid; she is to stand Three several times in the Pillory, First, by the
May Pole in the Strand, Secondly, in Convent-garden, Thirdly, at Charing Cross;
her Books being to be Burnt in her view; and after to find Sureties for her
good Behavior during Life.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for T. Davies. 1680.


