The last BLOODY FIGHT At SEA,

Between the English and the Dutch, on Tuesday last, upon the Coast of Denmark:
The manner of the Engagement; the particula^s of the Fight; the taking of one
hundred and seven ships, and above two thousand prisoners; with the pursuing of
three hundred S^yl to the Coast of Scotland, and besieging of them in
Bressie-Iland; The resolution of the Dutchmen to fight it out to the last man,
and their preparation and proceedings thereupon. The c^ncluding of a League
between the States of Holland, the King of Denma^k; the Queen of Sweden; and a
Declaration of fourscore of the Swed^sh Men of War.

Naval battle

London, P^i^ted for George Horton, 1652.

Another bloody fight at Sea between the English and the Dutch, upon the Coast
of Denmark; the particulars of the Engagement; one hundred of the Hollanders
ships taken, and fifteen hundred prisoners taken, etc.
SIR,
AFter a long pursuit of the Hollanders upon this Northern Ocean, with great
difficulties (at last) we came to act the Theater of Europes Tragedy, and to
dispute the groundwork with fiery Arguments, and Canon Darts, which was with
great resolution performed both by the Assailants and Defendants. But after a
sharp fight, with some of their best men of War, (having taken five, and sunk
three) we bore up to them, with such Thundercracks, and shouts of joy, that the
lightning of our Canon, soon deaded the spirits of the Dutchmen, and in less
then half an ho: we became victorious, dispersing the whole Navy; upon which
achievement, we took seven gallant Men of War, one hundred of their fisher
Vessels, and about two thousand prisoners; the chief Officers whereof are
committed to safe custody; most of the private soldiery have taken up Arms for
the Commonwealth of England. In this conflict we had many killed and wounded;
but lost not one ship.

The Enemy declining Engagement, our General was the first that bore up to
them, in pursuit of Victory; the James headed the Resolution; and made up to
the Enemy, with the rest of the Fleet attending the motion; which the Enemy
perceiving, endeavored to recover the Sound, and accordingly effected the
same; but General Blake being advertised of their Design, sent a Message to the
K. of Denmark, beseeching his Majesty to prohibit sanctuary for any such
Assiniators. Whereupon he drew off from the Sound, to the end that he might
invite them to the Ocean; the Dutch having notice thereof, weighed anchor, and
then resolved to play out their Game; but our General (though an enemy to the
Card, played the Trump between Hanse and the Sound; so that 300 of the
Hollanders flew up, and descended at Bressies Bay (an Island) in Scotland, where
they are fortifying; and intrenching themselves, resolving to dispute the Game
with Us. But believe me Sir, if Mr. Vantrump receives such bussing after this
rate but a little while longer, his mighty Masters will hardly embrace him, for
his great pains in neglecting their unsatiable belly-timber.

Aboard the Garland July 20. 1652. At Anchor near Bressies Bay.

By an Express from Portsmouth it is certified, That on the 21 instant Sir
George Ayscue came upon the Western Coast with fifty gallant Men of War, and
intends to expedite after the eighteen sail of Dutch, sent from Vantrump to
convoy the East India ships to their desired Ports: the wind was very fair for
him, till he came near the Road of Portsmouth, but then turned full against
him; so that he stood in to the Bay for an hour or two, and then taking the
benefit of the Tide bore up again to Sea, and by that time it was dark got
clear of Bembridge point: indeed his putting in there, though not intended by
him, proved very providential for the Council of States Letters to Sir George,
coming an hour before night, were immediately sent to him: He still bears up
after the Enemy, and its believed a good account will be given of his heroic
Achievements very suddenly; for he embraces braceth all opportunities, and
exceeding vigilant in his motion.

The Zealanders have put to Sea a Fleet of Threescore sail, which lie hovering
about their own Coast to secure their Merchants and Fishermen, rather then to
engage further in the public service. Van here de Wit is Commander in
chief, and a great favorite he is to the Royal family, as appears by his
carrying on, and declaring for the King of Scots interest; who is expected
daily at the Hague, where great preparations are making for his reception and
entertainment; for indeed he has been much solicited by the Estates of the
United Provinces; and upon advice with his Council, it was determined; what the
issue will be, few days will manifest.

We have likewise received Advertisements, that the Queen of Sweden has set
forth fourscore sail of ships, all Men of War, but whether they are bound, they
are not pleased to declare, but ride on still with Commission in pocket, having
already passed the Zound.

The Dutch have made a League with the King of Denmark, and having hired the
Zound for 140000 Pattacoons, or dollors per annum, by which means the Swedes
will be enforced to pay Toll; yet notwithstanding they are in a League
defensive with Sweden against Denmark, and defensive with Denmark against
Sweden; they are also in a League offensive and defensive with France; and a
League de non offendo with Spain.

FINIS.

