THE LATE WILL AND TESTAMENT OF THE DOCTORS COMMONS. Showing how he has
disposed of his Commissioners, Doctors, Proctors, Surrogates. Messengers,
Examinors, Parators and Promootors, and the rest of his Attendants, With a
short deportment of his Legacies, and how he has bequeathed them.


I Doctors Commons, in the Parish of S. Benedicts Pauls-Wharf, London, being
very aged, and finding by general Computation, that my time draws to an end,
and likewise much shaken both in Body and mind with a Westminster ague, yet of
perfect mind and memory, to avoid all suits and controversies that hereafter
may arise concerning my estate, or any part or Parcel thereof, and to the
intent and purpose that my contentious days may be consummated and ended in
Peace, Do constitute, ordain, declare and make this my last will and
Testament in manner and form following, That is to say, Imprimis, for my
soele, I bequeath it to Gunpowder Makers, to be made into Gunpowder, which
shall be employed only for the discharge of the new Canons: Item, I bequeath my
body to the earth, from whence it came, decently to be buried, but not
sumptuously, in the Convocation house, in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul's,
London, aforesaid, according to the discrerion of my Executors hereafter named.
Item, for my personal estate (having never bin possessed of any lands, I
willingly bequeath the reverend Judges, Vicars-Generals, Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, Deanes and Chapters, and their surrogates, and also
all high Commissioners, Judges, Delegats, Advocates, and Legum Doctores
quoscunque, Og, the great Commissarie, alias Doctor Roan only excepted, to the
high Court of Parliament, there to be cherished according to their merits and
deservings. Item, I bequeath all my Registers, Deputy Registers, Proctors,
Examinors, and public notaries, to the court of Common Pleas, at Westminster,
to be admitted Attournies, (if no prohibition be granted to the contrary.)
Item, I will and bequeath all my fifty pound Clearks, to their Friends in the
Country, or to the Justices of the Peace and Quorum. Item, I will and bequeath
all my Journey-men Clearks, Hackney, and sub-hackney Clerks, to Chancery Lane,
and Brittanick S. Hugh Prestar, to the Star Chamber. Item, I will and bequeath
all my Pursuants, Apparators, Promooters, etc. to under-Sheriffs, but in case
they have no need of them, then I bequeath them to their ghostly Father, unto
whom they have most relation. Item, I will and bequeath all my writings and
records, as follows: my bonds to large measuring Tailors, my Bills,
Transmissions and the like, to retailing Tobacconists, my incontinent Articles
to Bloomesbury, Long-Acre, and other like places of good fellowship, my libels
of diffamation, to the penitential scolds, there to be ordered according to
their discretions, all my Commissions of Appeal to the parties appellant, for
they have the most right unto them, in regard they have paid for them: Item, I
will and bequeath all my large Books of Acts, to them of the Fortune
Playhouse, for I hold it a deed of charity, in regard they want good action;
my decrees to the courts of Chancery, in case they want any; My sentences to
those Orators that imitate Tullies quanquam te Marce sili, etc. for they are
something long; And lastly, I will and bequeath my Cannons, charged with etc.
to the Tower, to defend him that made them, and all the rest of my writings,
escripts, manuscripts, and superfluous papers whatsoever to Cooks, Bakers,
Grocers, and Chandlers. Item, I make the Scotch-men my Executors, (who I doubt
not) but with all diligence will see the execution of this my last will and
Testament, and desire they will see these my Legacies, paid and performed
immediately after my decease: In Witness whereof, I the said Doctors Commons
have hereunto set my hand and Seal this 26 of June, in the year of our Lord,
1641.

Signed, sealed, published, and declared in the Presence of W. C. R. P. B. K.



