depiction of nun praying Madame La Valliere


The Penitent Lady: OR REFLECTIONS ON THE MERCY OF GOD.

Written by the Famed Madam La Valliere, Since Her Retirement from the French
King's Court to a Nunnery.

TRANSLATED From the French by L. A. M. A.

The Second Edition.

A broken and a contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise,

Psalm. 51.17. London, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings-Arms in the
Poultrey, 1685.

The Preface.
IT IS a common Saying, confirmed by Experience, That Example is far more
prevalent than Precept; and the Reason is, because the one seems to be the
transcript of our Mind, whereas it is evident that the other is too often
biased by Interest, and an overweaning conceit of our own Sufficiency. For
Pride and Vainglory may incline that Man to recommend Mortification and
Repentance, and extol even the Stoicism of Cato, who privately hugs and
caresses his darling Lust and leads a Life more luxurious than Sardanapalus:
but he who in the vigor of his Youth and the full career of Pleasure sets
bounds to his inordinate Appetites, who retires from the World and its
Vanities, before they leave him; he plainly demonstrates, that there is some
more sublime Happiness he persues after, some more perfect Good which attracts
his Affections. And therefore one great end of our Saviors coming into the
World was to be a Pattern of Holy Living and Dying, to convince us, that
notwithstanding the Infirmities of our Nature, the most stubborn Lusts may be
subdued, the most alluring Temptations may be resisted, and Gospel-obedience
may be performed if we call in his Grace to the assistance of our honest
endeavors. God requires nothing of us but what is highly just and reasonable,
what he gives us power to perform; and in all Ages of the World he sets before
our eyes the Examples of some Heroic Souls, who bravely conquer those Armado's
of Temptations we are apt to fancy invincible, and prefer the ignominy of the
Cross, before the most luscious gratifications of sense. In the first rank of
these, I may place this Penitent Lady, the Authoress of these devout
Reflections, which I hope will find the better entertainment in our English
Nations, because Translated from the French; for since we are so foolishly fond
of the Apes and Peacocks, the Modes and Vanities of that People, I have no
reason to fear that their Gold will be an unacceptable Present. It may perhaps
be expected that I should give an Account of the former Life of this devout
Convert, but since that is already done in another The History of the Amors of
the French-Court.
Book, by a light and amorus Pen, I shall not intermix any part of it with so
grave and serious a Subject; besides, the Publisher of these Papers in the
Original, seems modestly to decline it. 'Twill more nearly concern us curiously
to pry into our hearts, to examine what sins we have been guilty of, to imitate
her Repentance, and seriously to Meditate on these Pious Reflections, which,
like the Nails in the Hand of Jael, may with the Assistance of the Holy Spirit,
fasten our Corruptions to the feet of Christ's Cross.

I foresee it will be objected that this Picture is copied from a Popish
Original. And truly 'twas this Consideration which for some time diverted my
Resolutions of making it public; but after I have several times carefully
reviewed it, I cannot discover the least stroke or Lineament of so Monstrous a
Parent, but rather stand amazed, that this precious Jewel should be found
amongst the rubbish of the Rom^sh Church. I am h^artily convinced, that the
Principles of that Persuasion tend to the encouragement of Vice, and the
promoting Debauchery, and therefore am astonished at this Miracle of Gods
Mercy, which from so corrupt a Tree has produced such Good Fruit. For my part,
I am inclined to think, that either her Mind was extraordinarily enlightened or
else that by the very light of Nature she discovered the pernicious Tenants of
rhat Church.

And this may serve to instruct us, that the influences of God's Holy Spirit
are not confined to so narrow a Sphere as some men's uncharitableness would
suggest, but that in every Nation he that fears God and works Righteousness
shall be accepted of him. Those who are of a contrary Opinion would do well to
transmit to Posterity some more eminent Examples of Penitence, and genuine
Instances of fervent Devotion. And in the mean while, let me beseech them to
look over these Papers, to conform their Lives to the Practice of the Truths
contained therein; lest at the last Day they should see Publicans and Harlots
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, whilst they themselves are shut out.

The Contents.
REFLECTION I. Upon our Obligations to Consecrate that Life to Gods Glory,
which we hold from his Mercy, and the Care you ought to take, lest we should be
Ensnared into sin. Fol. 1. REFLECT. II. She Prays unto God, to strengthen her
Resolutions, and to enable her to approach unto him with a pure heart. 4
REFLECT. III. Upon those Virtues which are necessary for our approaching unto
Christ; from the Example of the Canaanite, the Samaratan, and Mary Magdalen. 8
REFLECT. IV. Concerning the Constancy and Stability of the Faith, necessary to
a Penitent Soul. 12 REFLECT. V. The Thoughts of a penitent Soul, fearful of
being deceived by the Appearance of a False Conversion. 16 REFLECT. VI. Upon
the Opposition of a Worldly Life to the suffering Life of Jesus Christ, 24
REFLECT. VII. What the Hope of a Penitent Soul ought to be, 24 REFLECT. VIII.
What Effect a true Repentance ought to have upon our Couversations and what
kind of Guide she ought to enquire after for the conduct of her Soul, 27
REFLECT. IX. She prays that out of his Mercy he would be pleased to direct her
continually in the straight Way which leads unto him, and not permit her to
flatter her self, that she has repented, when she is running on still in the
broad way, 31 REFLECT. X. Motives of Trust in God, and Distrust of our selves.
Jesus Christ alone can confirm our Faith and strengthen our Hope, 34 REFLECT.
XI. She Prays to God for a New Heart inflamed with his Love, 41 REFLECT. XII.
If the Soul finds any thing in this World to settle its Affections upon: How
much the more earnestly ought it to fix them upon God after its Conversion, 44
REFLECT. XIII. That a Penitent Soul should not examine what Sins are Damnable
and what not, but avoid all appearance of Evil, every thing which may displease
God; lest indulging it self in lesser crimes, it relapse at last into Habitual
Debauchery, 48 REFLECT. XIV, She prays unto God instantly, that he would be
pleased to knock off those Chains which unite her Affections to the Creature;
to grant her fresh Recruits of his Mercy, and Grace to make the right use of
them, 54 REFLECT. XV What kind of Life that Person ought to lead who is under a
Necessity, of Conversing much in the World; that it is her Duty to resist
whatsoever is contrary to the Commands of Jesus Christ, 57 REFLECT. XVI. That
she should associate her self with those persons who truly fear God, and that
she ought not to entangle her self again in those things which the World calls
State, Riches, Fortune, and Grandeur, 63 REFLECT. XVII. That Charity to wards
our Neighbor obliges us carefully to avoid not only every Action which may be
injurious to his Life, Goods, and Reputation; but also detracting Speeches, and
foolish jesting, 69 REFLECT. XVIII. That she ought to desire of God the Gift of
Prayer? which is the only means the Soul can make use of to confirm its
wavering Resolutions, 74 REFLECT. XIX. What the Nature of Prayer is, and how
faithful a Penitent Soul ought to be to its Resolutions of constantly
performing this Holy Exercise. 78 REFLECT. XX. That the Misery to which Sin has
reduced us, ought to be the Subject of our Prayers, and that it is good to begin
them with the Considerations of the stupendous Mystery of our Savior's
Passion. 84 REFLECT. XXI, That we ought not to be weary of Praying, because we
do not find present Comfort, but that we should be faithful to our Resolutions,
and have recourse to this Holy Exercise, when we are wracked by the greatest
pains, and distressed by the severest Afflictions. 87 REFLECT. XXII. The in
dispensable Necessity of Prayer, without which it is impossible to have any
serious thoughts of our Salvation, 93 REFLECT. XXIII. She desires of God the
Gift of Prayer, that she may make Death, Eternity, and God's Judgments the
Subject of it; which are the proper means to season our Souls with the Fear of
God. 99 REFLECT. XXIV That she will every Day offer up unto God the Sacrifice
of Thanksgiving, for opening her Eyes and converting her unto himself. That she
will Write down these Resolutions which she made at the time of her Conversion;
to the end that she may be always mindful of these Obligations she has laid
upon her self, and by which she must be Judged at the Last Day, 105
AN Advertisement.
IT was the saying of a Father of the Church, That it is more easy to find out
a Man that has preserved his Innocence from his Baptism, than a sincere and
hearty Penitent; Because few are Converted as they ought to be: Nevertheless,
God, out of his infinite Goodness and Compassion, does from time to time turn
the Hearts of some Prodigious Sinners; demonstrating to the World, that he is
truly a God of Mercy, and that there is no Man who has been never so
desperately Wicked, but he will receive him, if he returns with a heart truly
sensible of his Offenses. He does not desire the Death of a Sinner, for he came
to lay down his Life for such, but only that they would be Converted and live.
Now if the whole Church stood amazed at the Conversion of a Prince whose
Devotion was not surpassed by the austerest Votaries of the times he lived in:
We have no less reason to admire this of a Lady, whom the Mercy of God singled
out from a debauched Age, the affluence of all sinful Pleasures, to be a
Miracle of Penitence. For it will be easy to judge by these Pious Reflections,
(which are now made Public, and were Composed after her Retirement from the
World, and Recovery from a dangerous fit of Sickness) that her Soul was deeply
affected with a Divine Love; and that by how much the more earnest she was in
the persuit of sinful Pleasures, and forgetful of her Eternal Welfare, by so
much the more she is at present inspired with the Love of God, and desires Life
it self, for no other purpose, than to get an Interest in her Saviors Merits,
and to blot out the Infamy of her former Life, by a sincere Repentance. Her
Name is concealed out of respect to her Modesty and Humility, which would never
have permitted these Papers to have been Printed, had they not been conveyed
away by a virtuous Lady, who esteemed it a great piece of Injustice to
withold so profitable an Help from those poor Souls who are desirous to
Reform their Lives and bid Adieu to their Vicious Conversations. For though
several Books have been writ on this Subject, yet she looked upon this as the
best Modeled and Penned with the most Divine and Moving Expressions that ever
she saw. God grant that they who Read these Lines may be Inspired with the same
Thoughts this Devout Soul was; That those (...) have been guilty of the same
Sins, may imitate her Repentance, and Husband that Time which the Mercy of God
has prolonged to them, in considering what will conduce to the advantage of
their Immortal Souls.

REFLECTIONS ON THE Mercy of GOD, In Form of Prayers.
REFLECTION I. Upon our Obligations to Consecrate that Life to Gods Glory,
which we hold from his Mercy, and the Care you ought to take, lest we should be
Ensnared into sin.
WHat shall I render unto my God, for giving me Life and Health, for Reprieving
me from the Gates of Hell and preserving my Soul; and in short, for all those
Favors which he has vouchsafed to me his poor Servant?

Shall it suffice, O my God, to acknowledge thy Benefits? will it be any
recompense, to employ the remainder of that time in thy service, which hitherto
has been spent in affronting thy Majesty? or will the divorcing those unlawful
Pleasures, to which I have been formerly wedded, satisfy thy Justice, and blot
out my Transgressions? In short, will it be sufficient to secure me from
Eternal Misery, that henceforward I will aspire after nothing but Eternal
Happiness, the fruition of thy self, and those ravishing Pleasures which are at
thy right hand for evermore?

Grant that thy Rays may enlighten my Reason, and that thy Grace may penetrate
my Soul; help me out of that deplorable estate into which I am fallen, and
inspire me with Faith to pray unto thee; and good God, suffer me not to fall
into such a Lethargy as may render me unmindful of my Souls health, or sleep
the sleep of Eternal Death.

Oh let me never forget that dreadful hour, when thou cald'st me to an account
for my sins; when I beheld Death ready to seize upon my soul and carry it into
everlasting torments; and let thy infinite compassion be deeply engraven upon
my memory, which in the midst of Judgment did remember Mercy, and rescue me
from thy fiery indignation.

Oh that the Joy which fills my Soul for the return of my Health may not Justle
out thy Grace, and Reconcile me to the World, that those vain Ideas of Sensua^
Pleasure, may be quite rased ou^ of my fancy, and neverre-assum^ the place of
those solid Truths which by thy Mercy are written there.

REFLECT. II. She Prays unto God, to strengthen her Resolutions, and to enable
her to approach unto him with a pure heart.
REstore unto me, O my God, the health of my Soul, and enable me to desire of
thee, above all things, that Holy Joy which the vicissitudes of these sublunary
things cannot deprive me of; I mean the Joy to see my self redeemed from the
slavery of sin, in a state of salvation, and led by the hand of thy Divine
Providence, to my Heavenly Canaan Season also my Heart with thy Grace, that
Spirit and Principle of Action, which, having-wash'd us clean in the Blood of
our Savior, furnishes us with strength to persevere to the end in the way of
his Commandments.

For alas! what will become of those Vows which I made unto thee, when I was
surrounded with Fear, and in danger of losing my Soul; I say, what will become
of them, unless thou, O Lord, out of the abundance of thy Mercy art-pleas'd to
imprint them on my mind, fix them in my thoughts, and enable m^ to conquer the
Temptations of my visible and invisible Enemies, who use all means possible,
either to terrify, or to decoy me into sin.

O Lord, who succourest the poor, and take pleasure in those that come unto
thee with Faith, and with an humble and contrite Heart; We acknowledge our
selves to be weak and miserable Creatures, and rely wholly upon thy Grace, the
proper Medicine to heal and comfort us. Search my Heart and try my Reins, and
grant me that infallible Medicine which dispels the most contagious fumes of
sin; which will sanctify my Soul, and preserve it safe unto Everlasting Life.

But grant me also, O my God that whilst I beg these Blessings of thee, I may
be endowed with such a frame of mind, and such other qualifications, as incline
thee to say, Amen, to my petitions.

Prepare your selves, O my Body, my Spirit, and my Soul, by the assistance of
God's grace, to appear before your Master and your God; to the end that he may
apply that Divine Medicine which will make you whole.

For how dare I approach the Holy of Holies, without preparation, and intrude
my self a most miserable sinner into the presence of my God?

Therefore, O Lord, make me sensible of my want and misery, and of thy Majesty
and Love, before I come to this Heavenly Banquet, where I shall eat and drink,
either my Eternal Health, or Damnation.

REFLECT. III. Upon those Virtues which are necessary for our approaching unto
Christ; from the Example of the Canaanite, the Samaratan, and Mary Magdalen.
TEach me in the trouble of my Spirit, and anguish of my Heart, with what
degree of grief my Soul ought to be affected for its Offenses against so great,
so good a God; and what Purity of Body and Soul is required, that it may be
filled with Divine shame.

How I may offer up a pure and agreeable Sacrifice too thee, having now a mind
too much delighted in the vanities of the world, and a heart too much led away
by them.

How I may lodge thee in the Temple of my Breast, from whence, with difficulty,
I have just now chased thy most inveterate Enemies.

In short, the Way for a Notorious Sinner, who is without Repentance and
without Love, to be made Partaker of that Christ who was crucified for him, is,
to defer coming to the Table of the Lord, until he is duly prepared, lest he
commit the most heinous Sacrilege. Inspire me then with such a hatred of sin,
as may confirm my resolutions to abstain from every thing that displeases
thee, and with Passionate desires to love thee alone.

Give me that humble and contrite spirit whose groans thou do never refuse; I
would say, Inspire me by thy Grace, with the self-same dispositions with which
the poor Canaanite prostrated her self at thy feet.

Look upon me, O Lord, whilst I approach unto thee, as thou did that humble
stranger. I would say as a poor Dog, who is sufficiently happy, when permitted
to pick up the Crumbs which fall from the Table where thou feastest thine Elect.

Look with compassion upon this poor sinner, who, like the Samaritan woman,
being inflamed with a sense of her sins, beseeches one drop of Living Water, to
quench the fervor of her soul, and thirst of sin.

But above all, incline me to Imitate Mary Magdalen; with that holy penitent,
let me wash thy Feet with my Tears, and by endeavoring to love thee much, in
some measure answer thy love in forgiving me much.

Deal with me as with these three Holy Women, whom thou have made the living
Witnesses of thy Mercy; that by these Examples I may be taught what trust ought
to be put in thy Goodness. Fit me, O Lord for the approaching thy Table, and
participating of thy Divine Mysteries. Give me a lively, humble and constant
Faith, which may produce an Universal Obedience to thy Law, the solid
foundation of my Eternal Welfare.

REFLECT. IV. Concerning the Constancy and St^^bility of the Faith, necessa^^
to a Penitent Soul.
GIVe me therefore, O Lord a lively Faith, which man animate all my Actions,
and notwithstanding my weakness, no^rish thy Love and thy Grace i^ my Soul. A
steadfast Faith, whereby I may sincerely believe the Holy Word, and when the
World allures me with its temptations put me in mind, that n^ man can serve two
Masters.

A humble Faith whereby I may discern that conformity to this World is the
greatest impediment of my conformity unto Jesus Christ.

In fine, an enlightened Faith which may render the Grandeur of this World
contemptible to me, and demonstrate that the fashion of this World passes away,
and that there is nothing solid and lasting, but God alone. For alas! my best
desires are fleeting and unconstant, like the flowers of the field, which to
day are, and to morrow are cut down and wither.

O Lord, who art delighted in acts of Mercy, and who alone can change the
heart, turn my inconstancy into a steady resolution of serving thee, and my
irregular passions into an earnest persuit of thy love.

Let it not suffice me, that I am disgusted with worldly things, or perhaps
estranged from them; this may proceed from a spirit of pride, or be the effort
of my reason. But direct my ways and purify my thoughts, that at the same time
I am convinced of the vanity and emptiness of earthly things, I may be also
assisted with thy grace to teturn unto thee; that my Heart being cleans'd,
instead of those Legions of Vanities, which have formerly possessed it, it may
be consecrated a Holy Temple, and dedicated to the Service of my God.

Preserve me from the sweet poison of the pleasures of this World, that
sunshine of Fortune, which sooner disrobes us of our Innocence, than the most
severe blasts of Adversity. Let me look up unto no other God or Providence than
thine alone.

Correct me, O Lord, but with the chastisement of a Son, which in the midst of
the most glittering prosperity afflicts and humbles us, brings our hearts home
unto thee, and convinces us that we are but Men; that is to say, weak and
feeble creatures, blinded by our passions, and subject to all sorts of misery.

Take away from me that inordinate love of my self, and that original
corruption, from whence springs all my Misery; it is from this that instead of
serving thee in Spirit and in Truth, instead of making thy Glory the end of all
my thoughts, words and actions, I pursue after nothing, but the gratification
of my irregular Lusts.

Let me be never so rash and so ungrateful unto thee, O my God, as to fancy my
self the Author of those Reflections, which I sometimes make, when I retire my
self from the hurry of this world, wherein an unquencheable appetite torments
the most happy persons, and renders them miserable slaves, even by the
accomplishment of their most earnest desires.

REFLECT. V. The Thoughts of a penitent Soul, fearful of being deceived by the
Appearance of a False Conversion.
WHat am I, my Lord and my God? what am I but a proud Atome, a poor, blind
creature, who continually goes astray when thou withholdst the Rays of thy
Grace. I deserve to be annihilated, if at any time I should attempt the
conversion of my self, by my own power, without the assistance of thy Grace.

Mortify in my soul all vain glory, every thing that tempts me to too good an
opinion of my self; but chiefly that frothiness of humor which serves only to
divert me from thy ways, to deprive me of the benefit of my afflictions, and
the sweet comfort ^f thy Holy Spirit.

Give me humility and distrust ^f my own reason? let me thirst after doing good
more, and car^al knowledge less; lest valuing (...) more than thy grace, I lose
my ^elf; and instead of becoming a ^ood Christian, become a Phi^osopher; better
acquainted ^ith the Maxims of Aristotle and ^escartes, than the knowledge ^f
the Cross.

O how vain and deceitful are ^he thoughts of man, unless go^ern'd by that
Wisdom which is from above, by that Wisdom which is Foolishness to the World,
because it is unacquainted ^ith it; by that Wisdom which ^od has concealed from
the ^roud, and discovered to the ^umble; by that Wisdom which ^aughs at humane
subtilty, and ^cts only according to the grace of Jesus Christ, In short, (...)
that Wisdom which is produc^^ by the Fear of God, and whi^^ is the beginning
and the end (...) all true Wisdom.

Permit me not, O my God, t^^ flatter my self, that I hate all si^^ because I
am perhaps restraine^ from Luxury and passion; Le^ me not flatter my self, that
(...) am taken off from loving the Creature, because my diversion^ are innocent.

Let me not flatter my self, tha^ I have mortified my passions; for I find them
revive with mo^^ strength then ever, and encli^^ me to self-love; which is the
more dangerous, decause by j^^ stifying these irregular motion^ it renders me
deaf to the dictate^ of my reason, and the holy in spirations of thy grace.

Let me not fancy my self to b^ without pride, ambition, sel^-love, because I
despise the World ^^d scorn to owe those Honors ^ortune has stripped me of, to
^^ything else but my own deserts.

Let me not so much deceive my ^^lf, as to think I am thoroughly ^^nverted, when
indeed I have ^^ly changed the sins of sense, ^^r those of the mind: A
pro^^ane, proud, and fensual Life, (...) which I was always tormented (...)
reflecting on my Crimes and ^^e remorse of my Conscience; ^^r a life in which
my whole en^eavour is to gratify self love, and enjoy the pleasures of the
World; and in the mean while, ^se my precious time, forget my ^od, hazard the
salvation of my ^oul, and obtain nothing but the Mo^ality of a Heathen, which
alone ^ill not save me at the day of Judgment: O state, truly deplorable, and
the more so, because I am ^ot sensible of my condition, but rest satisfied
without endeavoring after any other Repentanc^ or Conversion.

REFLECT. VI. Upon the Opposition of a Worldl^ Life to the suffering Life o^
Jesus Christ.
TEach me, O Lord, that thi^ sort of life is not the life of a Christian, and
that the end of Christ's Death and Incarnation was not to instate us in so
delicate and effeminate a life, as might gratify sense and indulge the flesh;
and that all Moral Virtues are but dead Works, unless enlivened by the Merits
and Virtue of Jesus Christ.

That unless the inclinations of our hearts are changed, it will nothing avail
a sinner to reform his outward conversation, to ^ate the World without love to
God, to do works of Justice, without sincere Repentance; and, as the Royal
Psalmist has it, ^o cease from evil without doing good.

At the same time, O Lord, that thou destroyest my sinful Habits, plant in my
soul such Graces, as may be fruitful to Good Works. Grant that by a lively
Faith I may meditate on the Mysteries of thy Life and Passion; That my soul may
be deeply affected with them, and that it may be my greatest pleasure to
contemplate those Sufferings which thou did willingly undergo for my sake.

That beholding the Divine infant lying on the Straw, and in a Manger, the
Treasures of Heaven veiled in the Poverty of the Earth? I may contemn all those
Riches which endure but for a moment, and endeavor to obtain those
incorruptible treasures, which Moth and Ruct do not corrupt, which will never
fly away.

That the consideration of that private life in which thou wast pleased to
disguise thy self from the eyes of the world, may create in me a desire to be
forgotten by it; that I may retire and employ my self only in the great
business of my salvation.

That the receiving of thy holy body and precious blood, those sacred pledges
of thy love, which thou wast pleased to leave us, when thou gave thy life for
our offenses; may produce in me a holy horror at the consideration of the
cause of thy Death, and a detestation of all sin.

That I may rejoice and be exceeding glad when I shall be disgraced and
contemned, remembering my Savior's humility, who was set at naught by Herod and
the Court, where he never appeared but once, and then on purpose to be despised.

That those Scourges which rent thy Sacred Body, those Thorns which pierced thy
Precious Head, may penetrate my callous heart, render me truly penitent, and
willing, for the love of thee, to undergo all those rigours of Mortification
and Self-denial, which are requisite for the subduing of our Lusts.

In fine, that the consideration of thy ignominious death on the Cross, on
which thou perfectest the work of my salvation in grief and misery, may be my
only hope.

REFLECT. VII. What the Hope of a Penitent Soul ought to be.
THis is the second Favor I desire of thee for the Merits of that precious
Blood which trickled from thy Sacred Wounds, and which thou did offer to thy
Eternal Father for the price of my Redemption.

That thou would be pleased to give me a true hope in thy Mercies: I say,
Lord, a true hope, because there is nothing more common, than to abuse thy
Mercy, by making it an encouragement to sin more securely; than for sinners to
hope in thy goodness, without so much as endeavoring to repent: and to go on
in their sins with confidence of impunity, though hereby they make God unjust,
and rather the refuge and confident of their Crimes, than the true Protector of
Innocence and Virtue.

Now whilst thy Thunder has awakned me, and thy Rod corrected me.

Now whilst I am sensible of the wickedness of my Life, the dangerous condition
of my Soul, and am convinced that there is a Heaven, a Hell, and an Eternity.

Now whilst I am sensible that those things which hitherto enchanted me, were
but lying Vanities, whilst I am inflamed more than ever with an ardent desire
of being sincerely converted unto thee. Teach me, O Lord, that as thou art a
God full of Mercy and Compassion to those sinners who hope in thy Mercy, and
return unto thee with all their heart: so thou art a terrible God to those who
presume on it, only that they may multiply their offenses, and after having
tasted the sweet comforts of the Holy Spirit, scorn and neglect it. For it is
not, Lord, of those miserable wretches, that thou say, to those that knock
it shall be opened?

Is it not of these Miscreants of whom thou have pronounced, that thou will
withdraw the Bowels of thy Mercy?

Is it not against these impious persons thou have threatened, that thou will
mock at their Calamity; and that instead of finding at their last hour the
compassion of a tender Father, they shall experience the Justice and Vengeance
of an angry God?

REFLECT. VIII. What Eeffect a true Repentance ought to have upon our
Conversations and what kind of Guide she ought to enquire after for the conduct
of her Soul.
THat I may avoid all the flatteries of Self-love, by which the Devil takes
occasion to rob me of thy grace; Grant, O my God, that instead of searching
into my corruption for palliating Remedies to skin over my Sores, I may place
my felf at the Tribunal of thy Justice, and there apply those Causticks which
are necessary to consume Gangrene and Rottenness of my Soul.

That is to say, Lord, permit me not to be deceived, or rather let me not take
pleasure in deceiving my self; in fancying that I shall make amends for such a
Heathenish life as mine has been, such criminal and scandalous passions, whilst
I continue in the same sinful Habits, the same Opportunities, the same
Pleasures, and, perhaps, the same Crimes too.

Let me not add this to the heap of my sins; to wit, the disbelief of thy
Gospel, the interpreting it according to my fancy, or adapting it to
countenance my Enormities.

Ah Lord! how do I dishonor thee by my works, whilst I praise thee with my
mouth; whilst I boast that I am a Christian, I act contrary to thy holy Law,
and every day renounce those Vows I made unto thee in my Baptism.

Ah Lord! who punishest my ingratitude, by suffering me to fall from one
Precipice to another, from a neglect of thy Grace, to error and hardness of
heart. Permit me not to pitch upon a Mountebank, instead of an able Physician,
who can apply proper Remedies to the inveterate Maladies of my Soul; I would
say, Lord, let me find a learned, prudent, and pious Guide, who can inform my
Judgment, and understands when to Absolve me; and not a blind or a deceitful
Guide, who corrupts thy Holy Word, bends the Rule to my lusts, rather than
conforms me to it, and endeavors more to please than save me; who, by a too
speedy administration of absolution, lulls me into a false peace, becomes the
partner of my sin, the cause of my Damnation, and an instrument of the Devil,
rather than the servant of Jesus Christ. For, O Lord, in that day, when all the
secrets of our hearts, and all the evasions of self-love shall be laid open;
thou will not then judge me by the Maxims of my ghostly Guide, but by thy holy
Gospel, and that light which thou have given me, which I have so often
rejected, not willing to have the darkness of my mind dispelled by it.

Thou will judge me by those truths, which notwithstanding my corruptions have
pierced to the bottom of my Soul, by that remorse which thou did mingle with
my most criminal pleasures, thereby to recall my heart; but alas! I always
stifled them, that I might the more freely abandon my self to my passions;
those lying Vanities.

And lastly, O my God, it is by the Book of my own Conscience, and not that of
my ghostly Guide, by which thou (my Sovereign Judge) wilt pronounce my
Sentence, at that terrible day, when thou will declare my ^ternal Doom.

REFLECT. IX. ^he prays that out of his Mercy he would be pleased to direct her
continually in the straight Way which leads unto him, and not permit her to
flatter her self, that she has repented, when she is running on still in the
broad way.
AH, Lord, since I have no way left to appease my Judge, and to avoid the
Sentence of Death, but to juge my self.

Grant that I may examine my self before the Tribunal of thy Justice. Grant that
by a sincere repentance and a hearty sorrow for my sins, I may appease thy
Vengeance; and suffer me not so to deceive my self in my repentance, and
thereby oblige thee to judge me a second time, and punish me in the day of thy
fiery indignation.

O Lord, inflame my heart with that spark of thy grace, which remains in my
soul; and which sometimes makes it sigh within it self; change my pleasures
into bitterness, my prosperity into affliction, that I may thereby be assured,
thou have changed thy hatred into love; and that I may not find in my sinful
estate, a more deadly tranquillity, than in misery it self.

What can be more fatal to us, than to be deceived in our Conversion, and in
those Maxims of corrupted Morality, which ruin more than Debauchery it self.

For what more dangerous sickness can there be, than that which makes us refuse
all Remedies? In fine, what more destructive, than a Reformation in appearance
only; which entices us out of the straight Way of Eternal Life, into the broad
Rode of Sin? Lord, once again, I beseech thee, chasten me not in thy
displeasure, as thou do those Reprobates, whom thou punishest with
prosperity, because they would not partake of thy holy sufferings.

Remember, O my God, that I am but dust and ashes, a fitter object of thy
compassion, than thy fury.

Have mercy upon me; O Lord, have mercy upon me; let thy mercy be proportionate
to the hainousness of my offenses, and thy infinite Loving Kindness, which has
no other object, no other bounds, but thy mercy alone; In fine, give me a
Pardon which may blot out all my offenses, render me worthy of the mercy of God.

REFLECT. X. Motives of Trust in God, and Distrust of our selves. Jesus Christ
alone can confirm our Faith and strengthen our Hope.
COrrect me, O Lord, but in mercy; considering my frailty and the byas of my
corrupt nature, which inclines me unto sin, and rivets my affections to the
things of this World.

Have compassion on my indigence and inconstancy, which divert me from any
thing that is good, and maugre the light of Faith, render tll my good Works
abortive. O God, who love us more than we can love our selves, and who out of
thy infinite goodness, have rescued me from a false hope, by which I should
have been flattered into final impenitence, and thus have saved me contrary to
my own inclination; Give me a solid hope in thy Divine Merits, let me consider
them as the only Object of my Trust, and principally when the Devil tempts me
to despair and employs all his artifices, by the interposition of my sins and
frailties, to eclipse the contemplation of thy Merits.

In this day of my affliction and distress (O my God) fix my eyes upon my
blessed Savior, dying on the Cross for my sins, and miserably torn by those
furrows which the Scourges made upon his back. Let me consider, that thou did
endure all this to obtain pardon for my sins, and to encourage me to the taking
up of thy Cross, upon which depends all my hopes of Salvation. Let me
contemplate in thy Sacred Wounds, the right I a notorious sinner have, to hope
in thy Mercies: Let the hope of a blessed Eternity, and the immutability of thy
Promises, take off my Meditations from the vain and fleeting Enjoyments of this
World, which hinder my Soul from aspiring to Eternal Felicity.

For thou know, O Lord, how little stability there is in my best Desires,
and how speedily the impressions of thy Grace on my heart are defaced by the
vain Idea's of worldly pleasure.

How the hopes of some trifle, some vain lust puffs up my Soul; how the Honors
and Applause of this World makes me giddy and drunk with the fumes of Vainglory.

In fine, Lord, thou know much better than I my self, how pliable I am to
receive any impression of evil, how averse to any thing which is good, and how
unstable in the ways of thy Commandments.

This is the reason, O Lord, that I put no confidence in my self; that my heart
converts it self to thee in all its wants and ^n the day of adversity. To thee,
O Lord, who enlightenest the darkest recesses of my mind, who possessest me
with patience under the severest afflictions, and art the Anchor of my Soul.

Here is, Lord, my Merit, my Riches, and my Refuge, when the consideration of
my wicked life terrifies me.

Here is, Lord, my comfort in this vale of Tears and Spiritual Warfare, wherein
my Soul is made the Scene of all sorts of passions.

In fine, This makes me hope more than fear; and rely on thy Mercies, rather
than dread of thy Justice,

Ah, Lord, since I know by experience, that thou art a sure Help to those that
trust in thee, Teach me to rely upon thee in my greatest Extremities, to
rejoice in thy Chastisements, and to look upon them as marks of thy favor;
Assist me patiently to undergo them, and assure me that thou will lay upon me
no more than I am able to bear; but wilt take thy Rod from me. when it shall be
conveucent for the health of my Soul.

Let me be fully assured that thy Grace will, in thy good time, remove all
Obstacles, which obstruct my Salvation, that my Sufferings, and the malice of
my Enemies will have an end, but that thy Mercies endure for ever; that after I
have fought the good fight here on Earth, I shall receive a Crown of ^lory in
Heaven: for thou ma^est the Rays of thy Grace to ^hine upon the just and the
un^ust, which at the same time ^elt down the humbe Soul into (...) sincere
repentance, and harden ^he habitual and obdurate sin^er; to the end that the
one should not be tempted to Presume, or the other to Despair, ^ut all remain
in a continual dependence upon thy Grace.

Let me not then, O my God, be in the number of those, who will be astonished
and confounded at the Great Day, because they have rejected thy Grace; for I
cast my self wholly upon thy Mercy, which is infinite, and knows no bounds,
without any reserve or confidence in my own merits.

But, O Lord, because Faith and Hope and all other Virtues will avail me
nothing, without Charity; because, though I could remove Mountains, and work all
sorts of Miracles, yet my works would be dead and sinful, unless seasoned by
thy Love.

Give me therefore in the third place that Charity which is the Crown of all
other Virtues, and the Soul of our Good Works. I would say, Lord, Give me a
fervent and a faithful Love to thee, whereby I shall easily overcome all
seeming impossibilities, and satisfy the thirst of my panting Soul, after a
sincere Conversion unto thee.

REFLECT. XI. She Prays to God for a New Heart inflamed with his Love.
FOr a Foundation of that Miraculous Work (which one very truly calls the
chiefest Work of thy Grace) Create in me, O my God, a New Heart; a humble yet
an resolute, steady and courageous heart, estranged from the World and its
Vanities, and in short, a true Christian heart; which may possess me with the
love of thee, enable me to expose my Life and Fortunes for the Confession of
thy Name, and render me Obedient to the Foolishness of the Cross, in the midst
of a crooked and perverse Generation, amongst whom it is esteemed a scandal to
be Religious.

A heart which will love thee in the midst of the severest Trials, resisting
the Concupiscence of the Flesh, mortifying its corrupt Appetites, and irregular
Desires.

A heart which will love thee, when I am called upon to evidence that love, by
loving my Enemies, and returning them Good for Evil.

A heart which for the love of thee, will deny it self when there is any
competition between the Creature, and the Creator; which will silence all the
importunities of Nature, that it may become more obedient to the voice of thy
Grace.

A heart which will love thee, when it must suffer for it; and will be content
I should sacrifice my reputation and honor to thy Glory, in imitation of thy
humble Life and opprobrious Death upon the Cross.

A heart which for the love of thee, will relinquish the favor of the Court,
prefer thy Service, before the Splendor of my Family, or whatsoever is most
dear to me; demonstrating hereby, that my love to thee surpasses that of the
World.

Lastly, Grant, O my God, that (...) may love thee not only for thy benefits,
when thou blessest me with prosperity and the abundance of good things in this
World; but also when I am in disgrace, poverty, or any other Affliction: Learn
me then to submit to the dispensations of thy Providence, and become more
conformable to thy Divine Will.

For, O Lord, what testimonies can I give thee of my love, which will in the
least answer thy love to me; nay, which are not infinitely surpassed by those
favors thou have been pleased to confer upon me.

REFLECT. XII. If the Soul finds any thing in the World to settle its
Affection^ upon: How much the more earnestly ought it to fix them upon God
after its Conversion.
LEt me ^ot, O my God, ha^^less Zeal, Gratitude a^^ Fidelity toward thee, than
(...) should have toward a Friend^ who had offered to lay down h^^ life for
the preservation of mine and to this superlative testimon^ of his love did
continually add^ thousand other benefits.

Since thou have been pleased (...) humble thy self, O my God, (...) making me
offers of thy Gra^^ and Favor, and loading (...) with thy Benefits; let me not
forget thee, doubt of thy Mercy, or wilfully shut my eyes, and neglect to pay
thee those acknowledgments of thy love and bounty, which in strict Justice is
but my reasonable service.

For is it just, that I who pretend to act upon Principles of Generosity, who
boast of my good Nature, Affection, Integrity and Gratitude toward my Friends,
should be defective only in my Duty toward God? living without Faith, without
Love, or so much as the Acknowledgment of his Benefits. Is it just, that I (a
poor miserable creature, who owe all that I have unto my glorious Creator)
should offer up to him only faint acknowlegdments, fickle desires, and in truth
the least part of my self?

Is it just, that I who have been so industrious to gratify my Idol-passions,
who never forgot any thing which might conduce to their satisfaction, should
complain of the difficulty and impossibility of placing them upon their due
object, and devoting my heart to the love of thee?

Lastly, Is it possible, that the soul which thou did create to be the Temple
of thy Divine Love, should not be persuaded to return unto thee, the center of
its happiness, after it has wandered a thousand and a thousand times from the
way of thy Commandments, unless thou art pleased to prepare its paths, and draw
it to thy self with the cords of thy Grace? No, Lord* this is not reasonable:
and therefore (maugre all the opposition I find in my corrupt nature in
submitting my self to the easy yoke of thy Commandments) thy love which
predominates in my Soul above the love of the world, the creature, or my self,
shall unite me inseparably unto thee by the inexhaustible love of jesus Christ.

By that love, which has taught me by experience, that there is nothing in this
World worthy my friendship, nothing but continual troubles, and base
ingratitude; which has discovered to me by these gentle Corrections, that thou
art a jealous God, and requirest the sacrifice of my whole heart unto thee, in
acknowledgment of thy infinite Mercies, my Infidelity, and the sacrilegious
misplacing of my Affections.

Ah Lord, since thou requirest nothing to prepare me for the pardon of my sins,
but the cultivating of my love and the conversion of my heart unto thee; Behold
here is a heart ready to receive thy Commands, ready to obey thee, which is,
truly to love thee; ready to undergo any thing, which conduces to the
advancement of thy Glory, or the salvation of my Soul.

REFLECT. XIII That a Penitent Soul should not examine what Sins are Damnable
and what not, but avoid all appearance of Evil, every thing which may displease
God; lest indulging it self in lesser crimes, it relapse at last into Habitual
Debauchery.
IF it is thy pleasure to make my Repentance in some measure answer my Crimes,
to prolong my life, and punish me in the same place where my Offenses were
committed; If it is thy pleasure to make my Sins my punishment, and those Lusts
which I have hitherto idolized the Executioners of thy Justice; my heart is
fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: Nevertheless, Grant that I may be preserved in
my Integrity thereby, that my present Aversion to sinful Pleasures may be an
Antidote sufficient to defend me from the infected breath of popular Applause:
that my Repentaance may be more pleasing to thee, and profitable to my self.

But, O Lord, let me not only be preserved from those Notorious Crimes which
this day render me the Object of thy Mercy; but grant also, that I may hate Sin
more for the Malignity of its Nature, than from the Dread of thy Vengeance; let
my Aversion to it, proceed rather from thy love, than any respect to my self;
that is, let me abhor it more for displeasing thee, than because it would be my
ruin.

Let me not with the greatest part of the World, nicely weigh how much Carnal
Liberty I may take, and yet continue in a state of salvation; but let me avoid
every thing which displeases thee, as well as those grosser acts of sin, which
will certainly damn my soul.

For what is more impious, O my God, than to say, I know that this Action will
displease thee, that this Temptation is alluring, that these Pleasures obstruct
the Emanations of thy Grace; and in short, that the Vanities of this World are
at enmity to the life of Godliness; and yet I am resolved to venture on them, to
disregard the all-seeing Eye of a jealous God, the Remorse of my own
Conscience: and all this because I am assured, that God is a merciful God, that
he loves me, and is willing to pass by my Offenses.

For is not this Way of Reasoning used by the greatest part of those servile
Souls, whose Religious Actions proceed more from fear of the Devil, than out of
love to God?

May not this Neglect of thy Grace, (which these Men esteem so small an
Offense) grieve thy Holy Spirit, and become the Occasion of their Eternal
Reprobation?

For the Devil, by tempting us at first to smaller Crimes, insinuates himself
into our Affections, and by degrees renders the most detestable sins familiar;
this he knows is the surest way to destroy us, for by little and little it
weakens the love and fear of God in our Souls, it gives him possession of our
hearts, and at last delivers them up unto him for a prey.

For who knows, but this variety of company, this vain and frothy conversation
which fills my heart with frivolous Desires, and weakens the Influences of thy
Grace, may in the end seduce me from the simplicity of thy Word, and the
observation of thy Holy Law?

Who knows but thou may leave me to my self, when thou perceivest that my
Disobedience and Ingratitude toward thee, proceeds from the abuse of thy Grace?

In fine, Who knows but the Splendor of Worldly Pomp, which is continually
before my eyes; which I behold with so much complacency, and those Maxims of
Carnal policy which are perpetually sounding in my ears; may at last render me
forgetful of those Solemn Protestations, which but a few days ago, I made unto
thee; when with Tears and Sighs, I so earnestly besought thee, to have Mercy on
me, and to deliver me from the jaws of Death.

REFLECT. XIV. She prays unto God instantly, that he would be pleased to knock
off those Chains which unite her Affections to the Creature; to grant her fresh
Recruits of his Mercy, and Grace to make the right use of them.
AH Lord, who art terrible only to stubborn and impenitent Offenders, let not
my Ingratitude divert the benign designs of thy Mercy unto my Soul; let not
that sickness (by which thou did intend to awaken me and bring me nearer to
thy self) harden my heart, and fill up the measure of my sins.

Let not the return of my Life and Health bring along with it those Vicious
Habits and that Inordinate Love of the Pomps and Vanities of the World, which I
so passionately renounced when the Terrors of Death were upon me, when the
Sight of my Sins and the Torments of Hell made all my Joints tremble, and my
Knees smite together.

Deliver me also, from my self, O my God, from that natural inclination of my
Will to all that is Evil, and that aversion to Good, which from time to time
prevails with me to put off my Repentance.

Make thy Arm bear and break asunder those Bonds which unite my Affections too
close to the Creature, and engage me too earnestly in the love of my self.

Hear me when I cry unto thee for fresh supplys of thy Mercy, and redeem me
from the vain conversation of the World.

But above all let that Grace, that Love, that Bounty, (with which I am almost
overwhelmed) kindly operate upon my Soul; and after they have made me sensible,
how much a stranger my heart is to those Resolutions, which the Terror of thy
approaching Judgments extorted from me; then let them accomplish those Gracious
Purposes, for which they were sent by thy Indulgent Providence.

Lastly, Let not the hardness of my heart constrain thy Mercy to give place to
Justice, let it not render thy Fatherly Corrections ineffectual, or provoke
thee to leave me to my self, and give me up to my Unmortifi'd Affections: Grant
me (with Tears I beseech thee) Grant me thy Love; for without it I have no
Strength, no Merit, and by its assistance I shall be able to surmount all the
Difficulties which obstruct my Conversion, and to persevere to the end in the
Way of thy Commandments.

REFLECT. XV. What kind of Life that Person ought to lead who is under a
Necessity, of Conversing much in the World; that it is her Duty to resist
whatsoever is contrary to the Commands of Jesus Christ.
ENlighten the Faculties of my Soul, O my God with that Divine Love, which will
show me the vanity of these transient Enjoyments, and enable me patitenly to
bear my DISGRACEFUL BANISHMENT.

Imprint in my Mind such lively Idaea's of thy Mercy, and such grateful
Resentments of thy Benefits, as may be always before my eyes, and produce a
real change in my heart; a sure sign of my amendment by thy healthful
Corrections: Let a Good Life be the effect of my earnest desires to give my
self up to thee, let me choose to die a thousand times rather than offend thee;
and let me be found, at thy coming, amongst those Wise Virgins who have trimmed
their Lamps with Good Works.

And though for the most part those persons who would pass from one Extreme to
another in a Moment, from the most degenerate Debauchery, to the highest Pitch
of Devotion, are unsuccessful in their endeavors, and finish nothing, because
they undertake too much; yet I cannot give bounds to my desires, I cannot but
wish to love thee as much as I am able: it is this which above all things I
thirst after; and to this end, I beseech thee, Enliven my Impotent Endeavors
with thy Grace.

I will not defer my Repentance, O my God, until the Night of thy Justice
overtakes me, when no man can work; but I will be up and be doing, as soon as
ever the day of thy Grace springs from on high, and endeavor to work out my
Salvation: I will not ask council of my Lusts, or deliberate with my self,
whether it is time to forsake my vicious conversation, and become a new
creature: Nor am I so vain as to think my self capable of great matters; For I
am conscious of my own Wants, my Sluggishness, and my inconstancy, and
therefore with eyes lift up to Heaven, I patiently expect the dawning of thy
love, and the gentle influences of thy Grace upon my soul.

I will begin to magnify thy Mercies amongst those who maintain a continual
Trafick of Sin and Vanity, with whom my Discourse used to be about Riches,
Honors, Pleasures, and Prosperity.

I will declare to those persons who worship nothing but their. Interest, that
thou art my God, the only Object of my Adoration; that in the enjoyment of thy
Favor, consists all my Riches, my Grandeur, and my Happiness; that all I have
is in thy hands, and that when thou have consummated the Great Work of my
Conversion, I shall be more happy, than if I had Conquered all the Kingdoms of
the World.

I will forsake that frothy and effeminate Company with whom I have lost so
much precious time; which I will endeavor to redeem by convincing them, that
the unprofitable, vain and idle course of life which they look upon as their
Privilege, will destroy the health of their Everlasting Souls.

If I cannot attain to be Eminently Religious, I will endeavor to be as good
as I can; if I cannot produce the testmonies of an ardent Affection, I will
dedicate to thee my Infant Love; if my Faith is not so Active as that of the
humble Centurian, (which inclined thee to give a present return unto his
Prayers) yet I will take advice of thy Ministers, and with united Prayers,
Implore the Augmentation of it.

That I may live up to those Religious Principles, which thou have planted in
my Soul, I will dread the Company of those debauched Wretches, who glory in
their Wickedness, and (as the Holy Scripture speaks) have not God in all their
thoughts.

Yea, Lord, I will break off all engagements with those professed Libertines,
whose society instilis Irreligion into our Minds, and is a blemish to the most
unspotted Reputation; who puff us up with such an opinion of our selves, as
justly merits the desertion of thy grace; and guild over their Monstrous Vices
with the specious Names of good Nature and Honor: Though their Persons and
Humor may be agreeable to me, yet I am resolved faithfully to perform these
Vows which I have made unto thee, O my God; and that henceforwards I will not
maintain any strict Correspondence, Familiarity or Friendship with them. For
certainly the hating of those who hate thee, is but a small acknowledgment of
thy infinite love.

REFLECT. XVI. That she should associate her self with those persons who truly
fear God, and that she ought not to entangle her self again in those things
which the World calls State, Riches, Fortune, and Grandeur.
O Lord, in whose hands are the hearts of men, and who turnest them whether
soever thou please; change the inclinations of my Soul, and sanctify my
Love, that in the choice of my Friends, I may regard more thy Grace, than any
Natural Endowments; rather the edifying of my self, and the seasoning my heart
with thy holy Truths, than my own Diversion.

For thou know, Lord, how insensibly those things which I frequently behold,
make impressions upon my mind; how conformable I am to the company with which I
converse; and how wonderfully good or bad Examples influence my Life and
Conversation.

Grant therefore, O my Lord and my God, that I may take delight in the Company
of Virtuous and Religious Men; that instead of talking about the World and it
vanities my discourse may be concerning Eternity, thy Grace, thy Greatness, and
those infinite Mercies which thou have been pleased to bestow upon my Soul; and
if those impressions which sin has left upon my mind, should for the present
render me averse to these innocent pleasures; if the taint of my corrupt Nature
should disrelish these Diversions which yield more solid satisfaction, than the
most sensual enjoyments of this World; then I beseech thee, to enlighten my
Understanding with thy Grace and strengthen my Faith, to withhold me from,
gratifying my inordinate Appetites, to work in me a repentance for those sins
which render me incapable of the sweet Comforts of thy Holy Spirit.

For, O Lord, if thou do not expect that I should exercise much Rigor on my
Body, it is because I should be more fervent in Spirit, and mortify my corrupt
Appetites the more? for a deep sense of thy Death and Sufferings, is absolutely
necessary to restore the health of my Soul.

Now seeing the best way to rectify my warped desires, is to bend them toward
the contrary extreme, Grant that the by as of my corrupt Nature may never
p^evail on me, to bestow so much as one favorable look on my divorced Lusts;
for it is but reasonable that I should punish my self for my too earnest
pursuits of sensual pleasure, by mortifying those Irregular Appetites, and
denying my self even Lawful Diversions; it is but just, that I who have trifled
away so much time on the Stage of the World should retire my self from those
pleasures, which are the fuel o^ my inordinate lusts; and den^ my self, the
World and all its pleasures, that I may be truly the Disciple of the Lord Jesus.

Let the certain assurance of a future Life, O my God, demonstrate to me the
Frailty and Vanity of those things which we call State, Wealth, Fortune, and
Grandeur; Let me not (with the greatest part of the World) engage all the force
of my Affections in the pursuit of them; as if there were no future Life,
Happiness, or Eternity: Let me esteem them according to their true value; but
let me place my Affections only upon that solid good, where true Joys are to be
found. For how can any real Contentment proceed from such empty Trifles? How
can any lasting satisfaction be built upon such fading Enjoyments? which make
themselves wings and fly away, when we think we have the surest possession of
them.

Lastly, Let me contemplate thy Works in the Government of the World; in which
(as in the Scene of a Comedy) Providence orders the Persons, disposes the
Riches and Honors, and lulls asleep the generality of Mankind; who being
roused up at the end of the Act, stand amazed, that they have been all the
while in a Dream, that the gaudy Apparitions are vanished, and nothing left but
dust and smoke. Yea, Lord, I confess that after I have thoroughly ransacked all
the stores of sensual Enjoyments, I cannot find any real satisfaction or
lasting pleasure; but only in thy Love and thy Service.

REFLECT. XVII. That Charity toward our Neighbor obliges us carefully to
avoid not only every Action which may be injurious to his Life, Goods, and
Reputation; but also detracting Speeches, and foolish jesting.
O That my Soul might be inspired with thy Love, O my God; that it might be my
only Treasure, my Glory, and my Delight; that those chaste and Divine Pleasures
which flow from it, might enlighten my Understanding and allure my Will ^o
cleave unto thee; that it might work in me a hearty sorrow for my past
Offenses, and a holy fear of thy Divine Majesty; that it might take possession
of my Soul, and not endure the most darling lust to lurk therein. O that my
love to my Neighbor might in some measure answer thy love to me, that I might
love his Soul above my own Life, and never be prevaild upon, for the gain of
the whole World, to wound my Conscience, by injuring him either in estate, or
good name.

But since generally nothing is esteemed a breach of Charity toward our
Neighbor, but such open Violence, or abusive Language, as a sober Heathen
would blush at; since few persons make a conscience of those Jears, which touch
a man to the quick, those Genteel ways of lessening his Reputation, by
insinuating his Frailties, and ridiculing his Humor, because it is done in
sport, and for diversion of the Company: Therefore, I beseech thee, O Lord,
open my eyes, and convince me, that these sins (which I am apt to call
pardonable Infirmities) displease thee the more, in that they are agreeable to
our corrupt Natures, and the genuine off spring of self-love.

Let me heartily detest this mischievous diversion, to which I have been too
much given up; let my sorrow for this sin in some measure equal the pleasure I
took in it; and let that which was the great Incentive of my Guilt, produce a
Fountain of Tears to blot it out.

For is it not highly reasonable, O Lord, that I should bewail that Mirth
whereby I have injured my Neighbor, and undone my self; and that Laughter
which has cost me my Soul, and the Favor of my God? Is it not just, that
seeing I cannot make any extraordinary demonstrations of my Repentance and Love
to thee; I should testify the sincerity of my Intentions, by abstaining from
every thing which gratifies my Natural Corruption; that by a discreet
reservedness in my discourse for the future, I should endeavor to make amends
for the former lavishness of my Tongue; and by casting out all those sins which
have offended thee, invite thy return into the Temple of my Soul?

Whenever therefore, O my God, I have any desires to conform my self to the
World, to gratisie my depraved Appetites, or to show the gayety of my Humor;
whenever these sinful delights come into my mind, and begin to blow up the
sparks of my corruption; whenever I perceive these motions of complacency
toward my self, and envy against my Neighbor, these ferments of my passions,
and melancholy distemper of my mind, which if in the least encouraged, will
easily get the better of me: Then let me consider, O Lord, that if I do not
carefully suppress these first motions to sin, I resign up my Soul to its most
inveterate Enemies: and on the contrary, if I nip them in the bud, if I
sacrifice my passions and my pleasures unto thee, I shall incline thee to have
Mercy upon me, and to blot out my Offenses, I shall give thee the Homage of a
contrite and penitent Heart, In which thou art well pleased.

Show me therefore, that these are the Fruits worthy of Repentance; these are
the Restitutions thou requirest of me, and the choicest Victims my love can
offer up.

REFLECT. XVIII. That she ought to desire of God the Gift of Prayer? which is
the only means the Soul can make use of to corfirm its wavering Resolutions.
O God, who take delight in rewarding that servant, who has been faithful in
a few things, supply the indigency of my love out of the abundance of thy
goodness; Let its shallow streams be swallowed up in the vast Ocean of thy
Divine Charity, lose themselves in it, and be mixed with it, that so it may be
always conformable unto thine.

For I confess my frailty, that my Heart is an ungrateful and barren Soil,
producing nothing but Briers and Thorns, unless cultivated by thy Grace; Water
it therefore, O Lord, with the Dew of Heaven, which gives fruitfulness to the
Plants, and paints the Flowers; which inclines our wills, and affects our
hearts; which after it has produced in our Soul, Works worthy of Repentance,
protects them from those scorching beams, the flames of our lust, and preserves
them safe unto the Harvest.

This is the comfortable hope and earnest desire of thy poor servant, that
which sustains him in this tedious Pilgrimage, whilst he languishes with
expectation of the Beatifical Vision.

But that thy Inspirations may have the desired effect upon my Soul, that I may
receive them with suitable affections, that I may prepare my heart for so great
favors which thou art pleased to bestow upon it. With my eyes and hands lift
up to Heaven, I will meet these Blessings, I will forsake every sin which
unfits me for them, and do all the good thy Grace shall enable me to perform.
And that the streams of thy Mercy may never fail me, a poor thirsty sinner, I
will continually increase them with my Tears; that is to say, Lord, by an
hearty repentance and an affectionate grief for having so often offended thee.

And since Prayer is the Channel by which thou conveyest thy Grace and thy
Light into our Souls, since it is the most fragrant Incence I can offer up unto
thee, for obtaining of fresh Mercies; teach me to Pray unto thee with
Reverence, with the Adoration of all my Faculties, and with my whole Heart.

And that I may the more devoutly perform this Duty, show me the Necessity, and
the Advantage of it, take away their surprise, which the very name of Prayer is
apt to produce in me, and show me that it is not so difficult, so tiresom a Duty
as some persons represent it to themselves, who are ignorant that as in thy
House there are many Mansions, so there are different ways of conversing with
thee; some of which require only the sincerity of our Hearts.

REELECT. XIX. What the Nature of Prayer is, and how faithful a Penitent Soul
ought to be to its Resolutions of constantly performing this Holy Exercise.
It Is true, Lord, that the Prayer of a Devout Soul, (who has retired himself
from the World, and is filled with the Joys of thy Holy Spirit) is like a Box
of precious Ointment, which as soon as ever it approaches the fire, sends forth
a fragrant Odor: and that the Croans of a poor Creature, who lies grovelling on
the Earth, who only crawls on in the path of Virtue are like troubled Waters,
which must be distilled drop by drop, before they will afford any useful Liquor.

Nevertheress, O my God, it seems most reasonable (that since Prayer is only a
lifting up of our hearts unto thee, in which we lay before thee our Wants and
beg Supplies) I say, it seems most reasonable to me, that she who is tormoiled
with the Affairs of the World, who finds her self in a languishing Condition,
harras'd by a thousand Miseries, and surrounded with a thousand Dangers; is
under a more pressing necessity of Praying to thee, than the Religious person
who is hedged about with thy Mercies.

It appears highly reasonable to me, not only that she is under a greater
necessity, but also that she is better disposed to perform this Duty of Prayer,
than one who is more habitually devout; because she cannot choose but do it,
whether she thinks of it or no: For if it is natural for a poor man to ask an
Alms, for a sick man to bemoan himself, and for one in danger to lift up his
eyes toward Heaven; How much more natural is it for that Soul to pray unto his
God, who is continually pressed with these three Calamities; who is always
poor, always sick, and always in danger, the three chief hinges upon which this
Duty turns.

Therefore that I may delight my self in this Angelick Exercise, teach me, O my
God, that Prayer is nothing else but a pleasing converse between the Soul and
its Creator; a Torch which dispels the darkness of its understanding, and a
Glass which truly represents all its imperfections.

An Eloquent Preacher, who Imprints the Law of God in our Minds; a faithful
Guide, who conducts us safely through the strait Way of our Salvation; a sweet
Sleep, which gives the Soul repose in the Arms of God's Providence; a Holy Joy,
which renders sinful pleasures nauseous, and all senful delights insipid, in
comparison with those of the Cross.

A comfortable contemplation of our latter end, which tames our Appetites with
the thoughts of Death, which sweetens his approaches with the Expectation of
Eternity, and an ardent Desire of the Beatifical Vision.

Lastly, It Is the Crucifixion of our Passions, the Mortification of our
Self-love, and the Resurrection of the Grace of Jesus Christ in our Souls.

Prepare therefore the Palate of my Soul, O my God, that it may relish this
delicious Manna: for the only way to persevere to the end in thy Commandnients,
in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, to slight the World and all
its Vanities, and to love thee above all things, is to converse with thee by
Prayer, not only as with our Father and our God, but as with our most
affectionate and familiar Friend. I would say, Lord, the only way to lay before
thee all those Passions which tyrannise in our Minds, all those terrible
Objects which fright us, all those Frailties which humble us, all those Sorrows
which consume us, all those Griefs which rend us; and to delineate all the
confusion of our Minds, is to come unto thee, (as holy David did) and lay all
our Affictions, all the burden of our Souls, and all our Prayers at the
Footstool of thy Throne.

For alas! if our Self-love takes so much pleasure in relating our Afflictions
to our impotent Friends, who can do nothing but hear and pity them; how much
greater comfort should it be, that we are encouraged to pour out our Wants
before a God, who, if he pleases, can help us; who is oftentimes more delighted
to see a Soul humbled by its Misery, than elated with the Eminent Instances of
its Virtue.

Incline me therefore, O my God, to spend some moments every day at the
Footstool of thy Throne, and let me not lie poring on a Picture, or repeat my
Prayers from a Book which I do not understand; but let the Subject of my
Devotions be, my own Wants, and whatsoever may render me more humble. For I am
too sensible of my own Imperfections, to distract my Mind with other Objects,
besides my own Misery and the infinite Mercy of my God.

REFLECT. XX. That the Misery to which Sin has reduced us, ought to be the
Subject of our Prayers, and that it is good to begin them with the
Considerations of the stupendous Mystery of our Savior's Passion.
ALas! how can I meditate on my Vileness, who am puffed up with Pride, who can
only Pray unto thee, to break off my Ambition and Vainglory, which like
unmanagable Horses, precipitate my Soul into the Abyss of thy fiery Indignation.

How can I hearken to thy Word, or taste the sweet Comforts of thy Holy Spirit,
who am surrounded with a thousand Passions, a thousand Vanities, which distract
my thoughts, when I come to appear before thee? What can I do more, than Groan
within my self, when, as the Royal Psalmist has it, my feet are hurt with the
fetters of sin, and I am in Captivity to my Unmortified Affections; until the
gentle Influences of thy Grace create in my heart a love to thy Law.

How can I lift up my self to Heaven, whilst my Affections are grovelling on the
Earth? How can I contemplate thy Greatness and thy Excellencies, whilst my mind
is distracted by its own Miseries, and astonished at that imminent danger,
which only gives me space to beg thy Mercy, and to say, with the Apostles,
Lord, save us, or we perish.

Nevertheless, O my Lord, since the remembrance of thy bitter Passion ought to
be deeply engraven upon my Soul; Grant, O my God, that the beginning of my
Prayer may have a respect to that adorable Mystery, that my heart may be
mollifi'd by the consideration of thy sufferings, rendered more susceptable of
the impressions of thy Love and thy Grace; and Meditate with more benefit on
its own Vanity.

REFLECT. XXI. That we ought not to be weary of Praying, because we do not find
present Comfort, but that we should be faithful to our Resolutions, and have
recourse to this Holy Exercise, when we are wracked by the greatest pains, and
distressed by the severest Afflictions.
OH! that I could be so constand in my Resolutions, as every day to prostrate
my self at the Footstool of thy Throne, at that set-time which I have
consecrated unto thee, when thou art pleased to give me Audience; and that
nothing might divert me from performing this one thing necessary.

Let me constantly throw my self at thy feet, in whatsoever condition my Soul
may be; to the end that when distractions and barrenness of mind hinder me from
fixing my thoughts upon thee, or speaking of any thing, but those Vanities
which have taken possession of my heart; then the labor which I undergo, those
painful pangs which I endure, and those irksom attempts which I make to pour
forth a Prayer, may render it more acceptable unto thee.

Let me not fancy, that thou have abandoned me, because my mind is sometimes
overwhelmed with the load of my Corruption, because at such a time as this I
cannot form so much as one good thought: For I will still look up and pray unto
thee; I will say with that great King, the holy David, I am like a beast before
thee, without spirit, without speech, and without consideration.

Though I cannot perform this Duty with a steady intention of mind, yet I will
not depart from the Footstool of thy Throne; I will pray unto thee with my
Heart and with my Will, I will put my trust in thy Goodness; and though thou
may not for the present unite my Soul unto thy self, by the sweet influences
of thy Grace, yet thou will accept of my endeavor in this deplorable
condition, and esteem it as a testimony of my sincere affection, that it
cleaves unto thee, as well when thou art pleased to withdraw thy Comforts, as
when it enjoys thy ravishing Consolations.

But, good Lord, let me not only Pray unto thee with my Understanding, and with
my Tongue, but also with my Heart; Let me not only Pray unto thee in my Closet,
and in the Church, where the consideration of thy Divine Presence inspires me
with Devotion; but grant, O my God, that by Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, I
may consecrate unto thee, the Oratory of my Heart; in which I will offer up the
Sacrifice of Prayer; For the Devotion of a true Christian is not confined to
Words, but extends it self unto his Thoughts and Actions, in all Places and
upon all Occasions.

I will do this in the midst of my Wordly Business, nay in the midst of my
Diversions, when retiring my self into that Closet of my Breast, which is
dedicated to thee alone, where no eye but thine sees me; I will address my
prayer unto thee.

When I find my self most exposed to Temptation, when I have the greatest sense
of my own Weakness; when Self-love most Tyrannizes over me, and the svveet
poison of pleasure most allures my Soul; then will I sigh most fervently unto
thee, and without waiting for a suitable place, or more convenient time, I will
presently lay open the Wounds of my Soul and implore thy help.

This shall be at the beginning and end of all my Actions, in the Morning and
at Night; in the midst of my Journeys my heart shall take thee for its Polar
Star; it shall rely upon thee in every condition, yield it self up to thy
Conduct, and implore the succors of thy Grace. And this will be done with the
greater ease, because I shall better express my own wants and my entire
dependence on thy Mercy, by one single sigh, which proceeds from the bottom of
my Oppressed Heart, than by the most prolix Devotions.

I will join with thy Saints, and praise thee in thy Sanctuary with my Lips
and my with voice; but I will also Pray unto thee with Sighs ahd Groans
unutterable; in my greatest dangers, and under the most violent pains I will
look up unto thee, and in all the actions of my life, with holy David, I will
have thee always before my eyes.

REFLECT. XXII. The indispensable Necessity of Prayer, without which it is
impossible to have any serious thoughts of our Salvation.
WHat is that Soul, O my God, who lives in this World without Prayer? I speak
not of those persons who only mind their Pleasures, and providing for their
Bodies, who are Christians in Name only, and may be more fitly ranked amongst
brute Beasts, than reasonable Creatures.

But I mean those who frequently reflect upon themselves, who consider to what
end a Rational Soul was given them, and dominion over the rest of the Creation.

Who consider that there is a God; I mean, are convinced, that none but Fools
doubt of it.

Who consider how it comes to pass, that those persons who believe the
Histories of Alexander and Caesar, yet question that of Jesus Christ.

Who consider whether that Faith which was propagated by twelve poor Fishermen,
and confirmed by an infinite number of Miracles wrought in the sight of all
nations, can now reasonably be called in question.

Who consider whether that Army of Martyrs, who sealed this Faith with their
Blood, are not a sufficient cloud of Witnesses to evince its Truth.

Who consider whether all those Prophesies in the Old Testament, concerning the
Coming and Kingdom of the Messiah which have been punctually accomplished,
ought to pass for Fables.

Who consider those incomprehensible Mysteries, the Effects of the Omnipotent
Grace of Jesus Christ, and his infinite Love toward us his poor Creatures.

Lastly, Who consider all God's wonderful Works upon their Souls, that
admirable Conduct, which at the same enlightneth our Understandings, by his
Fatherly Corrections, and preserves us, which by his Divine Providence orders
all things for some end best known unto himself; and makes every thing tend to
the welfare and advantage of his Elect.

It Is for these persons (who having the clouds of their Understandings
dispelled by the light of these indubitable truths, yet are presently blinded
by the vanities of the World) it is for their Good, as well as my own, I
consider, That a Soul in this World, without Prayer, without reflection, and
without Reliance upon God's Providence, is like a Ship in the midst of a
Tempest, without a Pilot, like a Man who fancies himself wonderfully enlightened
and yet is blinded with the think Mists of Ignorance and Error.

He is like that person who fancies he knows God, has Faith, Hope, and Charity,
and yet adores his Idol-passions; he is like a Traveller in a strange Country,
without either Guide or Compass, who the faster he walks, the farther he
wanders from his Home.

He is like that person who being tumbled into the bottom of a deep Pit, yet
will not make use of the Cord which is let down to draw him up.

Lastly, He is like that foolish builder, who endeavors to erect a Magnificent
Palace, without a Foundation.

For how can he work out his Salvation, who has not God in all his thoughts?
How can he observe his Laws, and obey his Commandments, who never thinks on
them? How can he bridle his Tongue, and all his headstrong Passions, without
the assistance of God's Grace? And how can he obtain this Grace, who will not
be at the pains to ask it? How can he avoid falling into Despair, who goes on
in a sinful course of life, which he knows will end in the Damnation of his
Soul? Who either uses the most preposterous means imaginable to quiet his
Conscience; that is, by putting out of his mind the thoughts of another Life,
an Eternity, and a God; or else does not place his trust in him.

In fine, How can he be a good Christian and love Jesus Christ, who does not
know him, does not consider that he died for us, does not meditate on his Life,
his Actions, or his Holy Gospel?

REFLECT. XXIII. She desires of God the Gift of Prayer, that she may make
Death, Eternity, and God's Judgments the Subject of it; which are the proper
means to season our Souls with the Fear of God.
AH Lord, since I am convinced, that Prayer (which is nothing but the lifting
up of our Souls unto thee, our continual endeavor to pluck down the
strongholds of Satan, and establish the Kingdom of Jesus Christ) is so easy,
so necessary and so Profitacle a Duty.

Since I am assured by thy Holy Word, and the Examples of Holy Men, that it is a
floating plank which will bear up my Soul in all the storms of this life, and
convey it safe into the blessed Haven of Eternity; that is, to the Heavenly
Jerusalem which is above, where all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes,
and we shall enjoy those pleasures which are at thy right hand, for evermore.

Give me an earnest Desire and Delight in Praying to thee; let it be as
pleasant and familiar, as ever the Vanities of the World have been, for which I
have so often hazarded the Salvation of my Soul.

But since Death is the end of all things, and the most profitable Subject of
our Meditations; Grant, O my God, that I may daily consider my last end; when
(to speak in the Words of the Holy Scripture) my breath goes forth, I return
to the earth, and in that very day my thoughts perish.

That Time which will come like a Thief in the Night, and seize upon our Souls.

That Time after which there will be no more space for Repentance.

That Time for which we ought to be prepared all the days of our life, that we
may not be surprised thereby.

That Time on which depends the Happiness or Misery of our Souls to all
Eternity.

O Death! how dreadful are thy Approaches to those persons who never thought of
thee, who placed all their Happiness in the Goods of this World?

O Death! how terrible art thou to those men unto whom thou art, the end of
their Happiness, and the beginning of their Sorrows.

In short, By which they are deprived of all the Enjoyments of this World, of
that Body which they so much Idolized, of a Voluptuous Life and the
gratification of their Inordinate Appetites. I say, How terrible art thou to
those, who never knew God, but only to offend him?

But then how much more amazing is the Contemplation of Eternity, to those men
who never pursued any other Happiness, but what this life affords; who never
thought of Repentance and forsaking their sins, until they were unable to
pursue their Lusts, and rendered incapable to receive the impressions of any
other Passion, but Fear?

O Eternity, Eternity! how exquisitely Tormenting are the thoughts of thee to
that person, who beholds Hell ready to receive him for the punishment of their
sins, who dares not Hope in God's Mercy, but would think himself sufficiently
happy, could he but have the same end with the Beasts that perish.

And finally, O Eternity! How dreadful are the thoughts of thee to that person,
who at his last hour, finds that he cannot Love God, and yet cannot choose but
Fear him.

But, O blessed Eternity! how comfortable art thou to that person who has led a
good Life, and mortified his Corruptions in this World.

To a Sinner who is Converted, has Repented of his Sins, and has a good
Foundation of Hope in thy Mercy.

To him who is accustomed to die daily, and has forsaken the World and its
Vanities, before he is compelled to it by the unalterable Law of Nature.

In fine, to him who sincerely loves God, and enjoys in this life the earnest
of Eternal Happiness.

REFLECT. XXIV. That she will every Day offer up unto God the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving, for opening her Eyes and converting her unto himself. That she
will Write down these Resolutions which she made at the time of her Conversion;
to the end that she may be always mindful of these Obligations she has laid
upon her self, and by which she must be Judged at the Last Day.
AH! Lord, who in working thy Miracles do always regard some great end, Have
thou not restored my Health, that thou may accomplish the blessed purposes
of thy Grace upon my Soul, that by a thorough conversion of my Heart unto thee,
I might pass from this state of death, (or as the Royal Prophet speaks) from
the Terrors of Hell, to such a Religious course of Life, as those Devout Souls
led, who now sleep in the Lord; who did not presume on thy Mercy, and from
thence defer their Repentance to the last Moment?

Yes, Lord, I acknowledge thy Mercy in the midst of thy Judgments, and the
constant protection of thy Providence in all the Accidents of my life.

For this is the Reason why thou have so much Afflicted me, so much distressed
me, so often changed my Desires and my Resolutions, that hereby thou may
wean me from my self.

And therefore that I may maintain an inviolable Fidelity ty toward thee for
the future, that I may serve thee, that I may love thee, and rather die a
thousand times than return again to my former Vain Conversation; I have Writ
this Paper with my own hand, as a Register of thy Mercies, my most Intimate
Resolutions, and all thy Adorable Truths: That if at any time I should forget
my self, I might hereby be put in mind of my Duty, and that Model of Holy
Living I have resolved on; if my Faith should falter, my Hope should languish,
or my Charity grow cold, and my Corruptions begin to struggle in my Soul; the
reading of these Prayers and the contemplation of thy Bounty and thy Grace,
might reduce them to their former temper.

That if at any time I should forget that Agony which the consideration of thy
Justice produced in my Mind, when like a condemned Malefactor on the Scaffold,
I was impatient to be freed from the Terrors of Death; I might recollect my
self by reading of these Reflections, which I writ upon this self-same Bed,
where the Ministers on one side, and the Physicians on the other, gave me
little Hope of my Life, or my Salvation; where I lay helpless, like a poor
Beast, and could do nothing in this Great Work.

O thou God of my Salvation! in whose hands are my Soul and my Eternal
Happiness, who did reprieve me from the Grave, and did crown me with thy
Mercies, and fill my Soul with Holy Desires, who have renow'd my Age, as that
of an Eagle; who have promised, that thy Anger shall not endure for ever
against those who fear thee; that thou will not punish them according to their
deserts, but wilt put away their Offenses as far as the East is from the West;
who assurest us, that like as a Father pittieth his Children, so thou will have
compassion on us; because thou know our weakness, and that we are but dust;
that our most steady Resolutions are but as a Traveller who tarrieth but for a
night, and as the morning dew, which soon passes away.

Lastly, Who workest good out of the evil of our sins, and who alone can
convert me: I beseech thee therefore to turn my Heart.

Because my Soul is humbled and overwhelmed with shame and grief for
displeasing thee.

Because my Soul puts its trust in thee; and languishes after the enjoyment of
thy presence.

But above all, O my God, hear my humble Supplication, because I have made thee
the only Object of my Love, and because thy Mercy rejoices over all thy Works.

Finally, Lord, have pity on me, because I am poor and miserable, and thou art
Infinitely Rich and Merciful.

THE END.
Advertisemenas.
A Week of Soliloquies and Prayers: with a Preparation to the Holy Communion.
And other Devotions added to this Edition. In two parts. By Peter Du-Moulin, D.
D.

A Golden Chain to link the Penitent Sinner unto GOD. Whereunto is added, A
Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul.

The History of the Amors of the French Gourt, viz. Of Madam de La Valleire,
Madam de Olonne, Madam de Chastillion, Madam de Sevigney, with several other
Persons of great Quality, in the Palace-Royal. In four Parts. Translated from
the French.

Sold by Dorman Newman at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry.


