The True Copy of a LETTER Written by a Gentleman in BRUSSELS, To his Friend
in LONDON, Giving him a Brief Account of the State of those Provinces, in
Relation to the WAR. As also some Remarkable passages Relating to his Grace
JAMES Duke of Monmouth Since his Arrival in those Parts.
SIR,
ACcording to your Request, which with me are Esteemed no less then Commands, I
have from time to time given you as near the Truth as possible, a particular
Account of the Transactions in these Provinces, as to Martial Affairs,
especially Impartially Relating them as they came to my knowledge, without the
least alteration either in affection to my Country or prejudice to the Enemy,
who indeed has wasted the Fruitful part thereof with so great a Devastation,
that the Revolution of many years cannot restore the face of things, as they
were, nor have we as yet any certain hopes of a Peace, with our too Potent
Neighbor the most Christian King, the Increase of whose Army daily fills us
with new fear; The Villagers for the most part bordering upon the Province of
Luxemburg, have disserted their Habitations, and retired (with the little
Substance that remains) into Walled Towns and Fortresses of great Strength, as
not being able to pay the unreasonable exactions of the French, which by way of
Contribution they demand as Dependants on that Subjected Province, nor is our
Army as yet in a capacity to enter upon any considerable Action though greater
Rigor should by the Enemy be Imposed upon, the Suffering People who groan
under the oppression. The French Horses Eat up their Hay and Corn, and the
Soldiers all that comes to Hand, yet if they comply not with their Demands
their Houses are Fired, and the poor Possessors turned out Naked to wander in
the Fields and Woods, where some of them are compelled to Feed on what the
Bushes and Wild Trees affords, or else Miserably Perish for Hunger, and indeed
such is our wretched State, that we Endure the extremest Miseries attendant on
a Cruel War, yet hope e're long (if matters conclude not in Peace, which is to
be preferred before the Justest War) we shall be able to Retalliate our
Misusages, or at least put a stop to the further Progress of the Enemy. Our
worthy Governor the Marquess D'Grana omitting no diligence to forward things
to be best advantage, and indeed had not the Province of Holland etc.
unexpectedly withdrawn their Forces, Luxemburg that Famous City, so bravely
Defended by the Heroic Valor of the Renowned Prince De Chimay, and other
worthy Persons had not fallen to the share of the Enemy; But however our Forces
daily Increase, especially by the coming of many Voluntary Gentlemen of most
Nations, Christians, but especially English, in whose Valor we have not a
little confidence, but are more especially encouraged, by having amongst us the
Heroic Pattern of true Valor, and Conduct James Duke of Monmouth, whose brave
Achievements at Monse are not, nor never will be Raced out of our Memories,
his Name being there such a Terror to the French, that past doubt next Heaven,
it mostly contributed to that Happy Victory; as yet I cannot learn that he is
Inclinable to take upon him any Public Command in the Army, though it is
strongly Reported some advantageous Overtures have been made, and his Grace
highly pressed to accept them, the which that he would do, is the wish of most;
Since his A^rival diverse of our Nobility have been to Visit him, and pay their
Respects to a Person so highly descended, and he in Complement heart. Returned
their Visits, Behaving himself with such a Noble mean, so well becoming a
Person under his circumstances, that both the Gentry and Commonalty Respect him
with a Sarrow compounded of Love and Pity. His Retinue is but small, by reason
he has no certain place of Residence, but is therein mostly accommodated by the
Gentry of the Country; having since his Arrival been to view diverse places, and
especially such as are of strength, observing the Works, and Curiously taking
notice of such parts and places as are defective, showing himself therein not
only a Soldier but an expert Enginere: And when he is not so Employed, he
recreates himself with Racing and other Noble pastimes beseeming his Character,
not appearing inclineable to return for England till the Campaign is over,
which induces us to believe that he will at last be prevailed upon to take a
Command if the War continue, and Peace puts not a Period to its dreadful
Progress: it is further reported that his Grace before his departure intends to
pay a visit to their Highness, the Prince and Princess of Orange, and that
suddenly he will be at this place to Complement our Governor upon his return.

As for the Discourse, that his Grace had a Challenge sent him by an unknown
hand with some reflections on him, supposed to be sent by Count Charles John
Cuningsmark, it proves altogether a false and groundless Report, as far as the
most ^gent inquiry into that Affair is capable to define.

Sir, thus, having, given you a Brief Account of the State of Aaffairs in these
Provinces, I take my Leave till the next opportunity of serving you in the like
Nature and Subscribe my Self

Brussels, August the 10th Stila Nova, 1684. Sir, Your Humble Servant P. L.


