THE LAST VOTES FROM THE ARMY: June 26. 1647.

Communicated To the Commons of England, and the Citizens of London.

Wherein they declare, Their full Resolutions, concerning their marching up
toward the Suburbs of London.

As also, their last Reasons and Propositions, touching the over-awing power of
diverse persons, against the faithful Worthies of England, assembled in
Parliament, and their besetting and shutting up of the Doors against them.

London, Printed for Thomas Watson, June 28. 1647.

THE LAST VOTES FROM THE ARMY
Kind Sir,
THese are to certify you, that your present proceedings at this instant in
your great and spacious Metropolis, does not a little perplexe the hearts of
diverse within the Army; and the most hard and cruel censures which we now
undergo, does not a little stir up our spirits, to be spectations and
Auditors of the innumerable s^r^ of tongues, whose mouths a^^ open against our
present proceedings; yet nevertheless, we doubt not, but to make it appear to
all the world, our candid intentions, and resolutions, for the preservation of
his Majesty's Royal Person, the Being and Privileges of Parliament, the
Liberty and Propriety of the Subject, and the good of the whole Kingdom in
general; And although there be many false aspersions cast upon the army,
concerning our nearer approach toward your City, by saying, that we come for
the lucre of gain, more then for the Kingdoms good; and that we have many
amongst us, whose aims are, at the rich plunder of the City.

But I can assure you, these inveterate suggestions are utterly false, such
barbarous actions we detest and abhor; and I dare say this, in behalf of the
Army, that there are none amongst us, but would willingly sacrifice their lives
for the good and preservation of that famous City, having sundry times engaged
with them against the common-enemy of this Kingdom.

But we hope our future actions will make it evident, that all our former
proceedings tended only to the peace and tranquillity of this Nation, and that
our actions and endeavors were only for the stating of his Majesty in his
Royal Rights, and preservation of the peace of the Kingdom.

And therefore the Army thought it meet to declare against such members, whom
they found enemies to the peace thereof; but we do begin to discern some
obstruction in the said business, which is the only cause of the publishing of
the ensuing Reasons, touching the said party, viz.

That since the same difficulties or prejudices lie yet in their way (as to the
particular charging or proof of those things against the Members and the
Parliament) though so often put upon it in our former Papers, yet through the
powerful interest of the persons guilty, has not taken any cognizance, what
Members or others have so abused them, to draw the Parliament to such dishonor
and inconveniences, We cannot but again more fully and clearly assert (as we
have in former Papers, and shall yet more particularly, if need be,
remonstrate) That diverse things lately done and passed from the Parliament
against the Army, as particularly the order for suppressing the Petition, that
high Declaration against it, and against all that should proceed in it,
putting the faithful Servants of the Parliament and the Kingdom out of the
Protection of Law, and exposing them as Enemies to the State, etc. to the
forfeitures of the Estates, Libe^ries, Life and all, but for going about in an
humble, peaceable, and inoffensive way, to desire what was undenyably their
due, and dearly earned, and many other such like proceedings, both against the
Army and others, do carry with them such a face of Injustice, Oppression,
Arbitrarinesse and Tyranny, as (we think) is not to be paralleld in any former
proceedings of the most Arbitrary Courts against any private men, but has
boought in insufferable dishonor upon the Parliamentary Authority and
Ptoceedings, which we are, and others ought to be deeply sensible of, has
tended to disoblige all men, especially Soldiers, or Subjects, and has
conduced to all other the sad effecta and worse consequences expressed in the
Charge, an^ gives us other cause to conclude, Than those Worthies who have
formerly acted and carried on things in Parliament for public good, Right and
Freedom, are now awed or overborn by a prevailing party of men of other
private Interests crept in, and that neither we, nor any other can reasonably
e^pect Right, Freedom or Safety (as private men) of to have things acted in
Parliament for publicpve good, while the same parties continue there in the
same power, to ab^se the Name and Authority of Parliament, to serve nd p osecu
e their priva^e Interests and passions, and (under the privileges of
parliament) to shelter themselves under the worst of evils or mischiefs they
can do, though to the Ruin of the Kingdom.

And lastly, considering the mul^itudes of Reformadoes and oath Soldiers
swarming about the Ci^y (whom the persons we have charged and their complyces
have at their beck to bring up to Westminster when they please, and that by
their frequent in ^ultuous confluences thither, besetting and sometimes blocking
up the Parliament doors, threatening, and offering violence, to the persons of
the most faithful Parliament Men, the just freedom of parliament seems to be
taken away, or at least for the present abridged, insomuch as those Members who
have served the Kingdom hitherto with most faithfulness, diligence, and
integrity, for the public good, many of them dare scarce come to the House, or
if they d^, they come in fear and peril of their lives; and when they are
there, are awed, discouraged, or disabled from discharging t^eir Consciences,
or doing their duties to the Kingdom.

A great part of our army quarters about Uxbridge, and a party of horse are
marched up further from us. It is said, the Kings Majesty lay at the Earl of
Salisburies house upon Thursday night last. We are in great expectation of an
answer from the Parliament to the late Remonstrance presented to both Houses.
Thus, for the present, I remain

Vxbridge June 26. 1647. late at night. Yours, to his power, WI. L GIB

The Desires of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax to the Army.
J do hereby strictly charge and command all Soldiers of the Army. Horse and
Foot, and all others whom it may concern, not to offer any violence, or do any
prejudice at all to any country man or other whomsoever (in their persons, or
goods) either in quarters, or upon their March through the Countries
respectively, as they tender the honor of the Army, and as they tender the
avoiding of the severest punishment that may be inflicted upon such offenders
by a Counsel of War.

Tho: Fairfax.

FINIS.

