Some Pity on the Poor: OR, A way how poor people may be supplied with labor
and relief, without begging; particularly intended for the Town of Marlbrough
in the County of Wilts, which occasioned another short form concerning the
three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with an appeal to the
Parliament to encourage the work.
Dan. 4.27. Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor. Psalm. 41.1, 2. Blessed is the man that considers
the poor, the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble, the Lord will keep
him and preserve him alive, he shall be blessed upon earth, and thou will not
deliver him into the will of his enemies. Phil. 4.8, 9. Whatsover things are
true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report, think on these things: those things do, and the God of peace shall be
with you.
To the Inhabitants of Marlbrough in the County of Wilts, and Country near
adjoining.
FRiends and Neighbors, it is more shame to be negligent and idle, then to be
poor, but to strive who shall be first in a good work is honorable: There is
some reason why this particular way of showing mercy toward the poor should be
first in practice, where it was first in question, though the number of poor be
many, the work great, and means small, yet nothing is hard to God: when his
hand has done it where it is so hard, it may encourage others; where it is
more easy, none can object the charge, because it will be less, nor injustice,
because it is more equal, and for the pains, what can be done without: if the
work be hard, it is not impossible, for all things are possible to God, and to
him that believes: Let us go on with courage, diligence and constancy for the
glory of God, the good of the poor, and the peace of our consciences, for it is
our duty, T.L.

T: L. his propositions to the inhabitants of Malbrough, he having formerly
employed the poor of that town 24 years, has seen much the ground of their
misery, and something of the remedy, and being deeply sensible of their sad
condition, and greatness and daily increase of their numbers that beg, their
manner of living, and not like to be otherwise, in discharge of his conscience
toward God and man, does offer as follows, That if he shall receive an order
and authority from the Governoure of Marlbrough, with consent of the
Inhabitants, and assistance of the keeper of the workhouse, with whom Tho:
Laurence, or whom he shall appoint, may use means the poor may be provided for:
That there be not a beggar in the streets. As first to take notice how many
householders, sojourners and inmates there be in Marlbrough, and of what
calling. 2. How many persons beg about the streets and Inns. 3. How many of
them are able to work. 4. How many old, impotent, and young children. 5. How
many work to the Workhouse. 6. How many laborers that are not in constant
work, and settle them as much as may be. 7. To take notice out of the former
numbers, of such as are fit to work, and of them that should bring them into
work according to order. 8. To enquire in any house, whether any beg, how many
persons in that family, and how employed 9. To meet the Officers that collect
and bring in the money, and the keeper of the workhouse, every sixth day at the
middle of the day, to set in order the work. 10. To use some diligence about
settling a poor man's office, first where laborers and handicrafts men that
want work, and such as want workmen may enquire. 2. Where some boys that would
or are fit to be Apprentices, may be informed of masters, and some that wants
servants in City or Country, or whom they have spoken to may enquire. 3 Where
maids that would or a fit to be Apprentices or Covenant servants, or some as
want such, may enquire, but none to be put to service until they be first
taught to knit, spin, sow, learn some trade or way of livelihood, lest in after
times they can do nothing for themselves. 4. Where any poor people that may
have work, and are known to live idly, may be informed of, and course taken
with. 5. Where tradesmen who at some times have more work for customers then
they can do, and others of that trade want, way be informed and advised to help
one another, and so improve their trades, and not increase poor families. 6.
Where any in distress, having just cause to complain, may make their several
conditions known, that course may be taken to supply their wants, as money can
be had. 7. Where any well affected may inform of work, or advise in whatsoever
may be for a general good, that poor people having work constant, may yearn
more at a lower rate, then they that work only three or four days in a week at
a higher rate; and until this work be effected, Tho: Laurence does agree to act
all on his part at his own charge, if the Governors and inhabitants of
Malbrough shall on their part consent and agree first, that all that have paid
one penny a week add one half penny a week more, and all others accordingly to
help children that are to be taught, and to dispose of them when they can work
well. 2. To require the keeper of the workhouse that he provide wool to set on
work from time to time sixty persons of the Town, if more want work, then they
to have work provided also, and the keeper of the workhouse to be paid for that
as can be agreed, and to pay wages as others pay for the like work, being as
well done, and to have money allowed him to buy working instruments, to teach
such to work at the workhouse who cannot work non have friends to teach them,
and every one to pay for their tools and teaching, and when they can work well,
to be disposed of, and others put in their places. 3. That the Governors
appoint the Wardsman, or some other Officer, to send in every morning such as
are appointed that none fail of their days work, and to allow as formerly, all
such to take alms as are in necessity, until some good course can be taken for
their relief, and whatsoever things or persons are not rated being rateable, be
equally rated and paid to the poor, and that all extraordinary charges, as by
pestilence, or the like, be not paid out of the collection money; and that
there be a poor man's box in the Office, to put in what money any one shall
freely give for his information and advice, or any other charitable person for
the use of the poor. 4. That the Officers that collect and bring in the money,
the keeper of the workhouse, and Tho. Laurence, meet at the poor man's Office
every sixth day, at the middle of the day, to dispose of the money collected for
children, and such as justly complain of want, and to settle laborers and
handicrafts men as much as may be in constant work, and the old and impotent in
most convenient places, and that the Officers of every ward desire work of them
that have it, for laborers and handicrafts men, being required by them that
want work, and that there be a provision of firing at the best rate in several
places of the Town, for poor people to have at hand for their money as they
have occasion. 5. If any one concerned in this Covenant, through any occasion
whatsoever, shall fail of his duty for the public good, then Tho. Laurence is
to choose another in his place, or act himself by the same power. 6. That not
only Governors, but all inhabitants also join in one to advance the public
good, by setting aside work for times of want, as wood cleaving, threshing,
hedging, gardening, digging, weeding, gathering herbs, or any work, and inform
at the Office what work they have, and how long they can stay. 7. Not only the
rich, but poor also be provident to get work for themselves, and not live idly
and disorderly, causing their own misery, but labor and eat their own bread,
this is that the Apostle warned, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. If any man would not work, he
should not eat: The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, and
drousiness shall cloth a man with rags, Prove. 23. and stripes are for the back
of fools, Prove. 19, 20. and a deceitful person shall be famished, Prove. 19.15.
8. If not only the Town, but the Country near adjoining shall say, they
suffer much by the poor of Marlbrough, if they will contribute, then their
doors, woods, hedges, and other goods may be more free: and if any person shall
be found to have stolen any thing from them that contribute, that then
restitution be made by them that stole it, according to the Law; but if the
Country shall take no notice, neither may the Town. 9. When the streets are
cleansed of all beggars that are able to work, then they who paid three half
pence a week, pay one half penny a week more, and all others accordingly, to
maintain the old, impotent, and young children, these are some pointings, but
the knowledge is in practice 10. That all householders in Marlbrough meet at the
Town Hall to give their consent. If some will say. They will give their charity
themselves; so they may, for this public collection is paid, not given,
neither does this hinder any to give money, food, raiment, or send gifts to the
poor, according to Scripture. 11. That whatsoever things are just, and for the
good of the Town, though not mentioned in this form, be performed by every
particular inhabitant. 12. That six of the Governors, and six of the
inhabitants in the behalf of the whole Town, set their hands and seals to this
agreement, and that this work begin at the end of harvest, which is the best
time, and until that time it may be considered of, and then if the Governors
and inhabitants of Marlbrough will enter into this Covenant, Tho. Laurence does
agree to act all on his part till the work be effected, at his own charge. At
the first he judged it might deserve 100 l. for his pains and charge, but his
conscience bearing him witness, that gain was not the mover, and fearing the
Inhabitants would stumble at the same, T. L. is free to act without money. 13.
After consideration of the numbers at present charge, and there may be many
more, besides others in danger, and the most are old, impotent, and families of
children that are very small, and of them that are well able to work, but a
very little number: If therefore the Governors and inhabitants of Marlbrough
shall consent and agree, that after trial the former rates are found too little
to maintain the poor, that then every one who pay one penny a week, pay one
farthing a week more, and all others accordingly, and when the poor can be
maintained with less, and children are grown, the Town may by consent take
their rates lower.

In tender heart love to my neighbors and Countrymen I wrote this short form,
the same love in truth reaching to the Creation. I have written another, and
directed it to the Parliament, to whom these three Nations are to be subject in
all just commands. To the Parliament.
THat there may not be a beggar in England, Scotland, nor Ireland, it is
desired, That you would give order that every Parish under your Government
provide two able men fearing God, with whom they may agree to act as follows;
(in case none shall undertake it freely) First to take notice how many families
there be in that Parish. 2. How many beg. 3, How many old, impotent, and young
children. 4. To take notice how many are able to work, and of such as should
set them to work according to order. 5. To meet the Officers that collect and
bring in the money, one day in every week at the time and place appointed, to
set in order things concerning the poor.

6. To settle a poor man's Office, to set down first where laborers and
handicrafts men that want work, and such as want workmen, may enquire. 2. Where
boys that would or are fit to go Apprentices, may be informed of Masters, or
such as want servants in City or Country, or whom they have spoken to may
enquire 3. Where maids that would or are fit to go Apprentices or Covenant
servants, or some that want such may enquire, but none to be put to service,
until they be first taught to knit, spin, sow, learn some trade, or way of
livelihood, lest in aftertimes they can do nothing for themselves. 4. Where any
poor people that may have work, and are known to live idly, may be informed of,
and course taken with. 5. Where any poor that are in distress, having just
cause to complain,, may make their conditions known, that course may be taken
to supply their wants, as money can be had. Sixthly, Where any well-affected
may inform and advise for the public good, that poor people having constant
work, may earn more at a lower rate, then those that work only three or four
days in a week at a higher rate: And as the men entrusted are to act as
aforesaid, so the Officers and Inhabitants of the Parish to act as follows.

First, To raise a stock or gather money to provide work for them that are able
to work, and to supply their old, impotent, and young children by collection,
and also help those whose work will not maintain them, though the money may
trouble some, yet the charge may be much less, and more equal then giving
victuals; besides, consider the ill breeding, wicked life, and bad end that
many come unto by idleness. 2. To take the best course they can for the manner
how to set them to work on silk, wool, hair, cotton, hemp, flax tow, wick, or
any other matter; if there be 20 persons in a village that live by begging,
being able to work, then the Parish to agree with some clothiers, Throwster,
stuf, or stocking-maker for 5 pound a year; or as the thing is or can be
agreed, to furnish the 20 persons with as much work constantly as they can do,
and pay as others pay for the like work being as well done; so in great Towns
or Places of clothing, one Clothier may take 20. another 20 as before: so in
great Cities where is much trade on silks, wool, hair, cotton winding, weaving,
button making, or the like, every Parish or Division agree with some Tradesman
to provide work for 20, as aforesaid, and so may rise to hundreds or thousands
by the same rule; so the poor may have work to do, Tradesmen their work done,
and money also; so in places where poor are increased, and have no Trade; or
where some great Trade is wholly decayed, some other is to be sought for with
discretion; but where Trade at present is dead, there some persons only to be
set to other work, or put to other places for a time, and not hanker after
masters for work, when the Trade is so dead, and hurt both. 3. That all
Officers in the Parish assist the men entrusted, as need requires, and they
that collect and bring in the money, and the men entrusted meet at the poor
man's Office one day in every week at the time appointed to settle the work, to
dispose the collection money to children that learn to work, and such as are in
want, to settle laborers and handycraft men in constant work, and old and
impotent in convenient places; and whatsoever they can do for the good of the
Parish, though not mentioned in this form. 4 That not only Officers, but all
Inhabitants join in one to advance the public good, by setting aside work for
days and times of want, and inform at the Office what work they have, and how
long they can stay. 5. Not only rich, but the poor also in every parish be
provident to get work for themselves, and not live idle and disorderly, causing
their own misery, but labor, and ^^t their own bread; this is that the Apostle
warned 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. If any would not work, he should not eat: The drunkard
and the glutton shall be poor, and drowsiness shall cloth a man with rags,
Prove. 23.21. and stripes are for the back of fools, Prove. 19.29. and a
deceitful person shall be affamished, Prove. 19.15 6. If the country also shall
contribute to populous Towns, then the^r doors, woods, hedges, and other goods
may be freed from them, and then public notice be given that none of the Town
enter upon the ground of any person or parish that contribute, for they have
given so much by the year, and whosoever shall be found to have stolen any
thing from them that contribute, are to make restitution according to the Law;
Gods law was, that whom the Judge should condemn, was to pay to his neighbor
double, or fourfold. 7. That all householders in every parish meet in some
convenient place where this form may be read, and the whole Parish with the men
in trust enter into covenant to perform all that is herein, and all else that
may be for the general good, and all the Officers of the parish, and as many
more of the inhabitants in the be half of the whole parish, set their hands and
seals to this Agreement. These are some pointings, but the knowledge is in the
practice: Now that words may come into practice for the public good, it is
desired that the Parliament would give order that this short form be read by
the Minister of every Parish under their Government (it may be done as easy as
to proclaim a Fast) it will prevent idleness, leudness, drunkenness, theft,
etc. and so break the bands of wickedness, and let the oppressed go free, the
true Fast which God has chosen, proclaim it abroad, it is honorable) and then
to be delivered the Officers for the poor to take notice how many beg in every
parish, what course they have taken to supply them with labor and relief, and
to give in their accounts to any one who is appointed Justice of the Peace for
the County, one month before the Quarter Sessions, and the Justices of every
County to peruse the accounts, and give them in to the Judge of the Sessions to
be considered of as is need; if any Officer fail of his duty, or any of the
Parish shall oppose, or not assist, that then both Officers and others so
failing, pay at every Sessions to the use of the poor, double their rate for
their neglect: and if any have just cause to complain, he may appeal to the
Officers of the poor, or to the Justices of the County, or to the Judge of the
Sessions, or to the higher powers, to which every soul is to be subject.

And what shall be laid upon Superiors if they shall neglect the trust
committed to them?

When the deceit of such is laid open before the higher powers, I leave to
their judgment, knowing that all, both high and low must give an account to
God; nor do I desire to burden any man's conscience or estate, but to ease them
rather, and to stir up the minds of wise men to act for their own profit, to
complete by practice and experience what is briefly pointed at in words: just
men in trust a just account, and a penalty upon the unjust justly executed, are
as sinnews to the body of this work; but if there be no man in trust, no
account nor penalty, the work will fail, Gods judgments have been long upon
these Nations, great differences and discontents have been seen, great
bloodshed and burdens have been felt, great counsels and undertakings have
failed, who knows but it has been much for the cause of the poor, there have
been often fastings and long prayers; who stop their ears at the cry of the
poor, shall cry themselves, and not be heard; that there may not be a beggar in
Israel: no beggar in England, Scotland, or Ireland, is the desire and hope of
one, who has no intentions of evil in any, but wish the good of all.

T. L.

Reader,
I Have not written to hinder others, but to stir them up, who may know more
variety of places, trading, and commerce: I have considered of Cities, Towns,
and Villages, but no place have I found where some part of this Platform may
not be suitable with little alteration; great Cities may be divided into
convenient parts, that the poor, impotent, and laborers that live in
Out-streets, and Alleys, may be supplied with labor and relief from the rich
Tradesmen, and Merchants, having several Offices of Information, where poor
people may make their several conditions known, that means may be used for
their relief, and not perish, as many have done; to supply the poor wi^h money,
and not with work and government, may bring the rich to poverty, and the poor
to idleness: none can serve God themselves, nor their generation better then in
some honest employment.

Object. 1. Where shall work be had for all beggars, seeing they that would
work have not enough?

Answ. Is no more work to be found? Is all work improved? May not some planting
of Hemp, and Flax, and spinning of Linen be when Woollen fails for a time?
Must we keep other Nations in work on Hemp and Flax, and our Wool also? What
makes Cloth and Wool a Drug in England? And is not much work done by
Horse-mills, Water mills, Frames, Engines, etc. that might be done with hands,
and one rich man beggar others of that trade, where one will do as much as five
or ten, and hand-works also deceitfully done with half work, the goods hurt,
the buyer deceived.

Answ. 2. If man cannot find a way, God can: Israel at the Sea could not find
their way, yet God made one; Hagar could not find water for the child, yet a
Well was near; in every City, Town, and Village there is work enough, and money
enough to be found, but neglect and selfishness has blinded the eye, that men
grope and cannot see the means though presented to them.

Object. 2. The work is great, and had need be set forth more large and plain.

Answ. This short way will set many men a talking, and many small sticks may
make a great fire.

Object. 3. There are many Laws and many Officers concerning the poor already.

Answ. But where is the execution? The proverb is fulfilled, That which is
every bodies business, is no bodies business: But where is the man in trust
that does not fail to order the poor, the Tradesmen engaged to find them work,
the penalty and just execution if any fail, or higher Powers to redress all
just complaints?

Object. 4. Bad people will spoil men's work that are engaged.

Answ. The Yarn may be as good as the Wool or Flax; pay justly what they earn,
abate for what they spoil, and they will mend; but whosoever bates more, they
are the bad people.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF any man would know how such a great work may be effected, that none perish,
that none want food convenient, no beggar in Israel, then every particular set
us upon the practice, that what as yet lays hid, in after times may be
manifest, good works are in least esteem with bad men; honest undertakings may
find more neglect and opposition then encouragement; but what is of God shall
stand over all opposition and opposers, who are to be in this the Lord's day
first discovered, and then confounded; Gods ways are not like man's; he does
great things by small means for his own glory, that vain man might not boast;
what entertainment truth has with heathen; the like I have received in this
undertaking, questioning questioning and talk themselves out of the thing; one
objecteth one thing, another another thing, others fling at all, and say, it is
impossible, Powers will not do, Parishes will not do, it will never be; like
the ten Spies, raise an ill report; sons of Anak are there, Giants are there,
what shall we do with our little ones? But the little ones went into the good
land, but their carcasses fell in the Wilderness.

The End.

