THE WOLF STRIPPED of his SHEEPS CLOTHING OR The Antichristian Clergyman turned
right side outward.

Wherein is briefly discovered and laid open their subtle and wicked ways and
practices to deceive and destroy not only private people, or particular
Societies, but whole Nation and Kingdoms, and all under the plausible vizzard
of Reformation, Church Government, punishing of Heretics and Sectaries.

By R. LAVVRANCE Marshal General.

JEREMIAH 23.16. Thus says the Lord of hosts, hearken not unto the words of
the Prophets that prophesy unto you: They make you vain, they speak a vision of
their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1647.

TO The cruel, wicked, Antichristian, blood-thirsty Clergy, by what name or
title soever dignified or distinguished.
SIRS,
AS ye are men, or as ye are learned men, I have no prejudice against you; but
if that were the worst fault ye had, I could both love and honor you, the one
bearing the image of God, and the other being the chief natural excellency of
that image, but as you do exalt your humane natural excellencies, and set them
up above and against the divine and spiritual excellencies of Jesus Christ: And
have brought in all your humane learning and wisdom so varnisht and colored
over into the Church of God, that the world has taken it for spiritual; and
thereby have deceived and deluded millions of poor souls for this many ages:
Who thought, when they had attained to read and say their Catechism, Creed, and
the Lords-prayer by heart, they had been Christians good enough, because it was
all their Parsons were able to teach them: so that all they have learned from
you has been only the history of Christ: and both you and they have been
altogether ignorant of the mystery of Christ, which has been hid from ages and
generations; which the wisdom and learning of this world, in you, have always
been at enmity against; So with that faith which gives life they lived and dyed
ignorant of, and so perished in their sins; whose blood will be required at your
hands, which led them on in their ignorance, and told them they were
Christians, and had faith, when there was no such matter.

And as you have thus been and still are the professed enemies of Jesus Christ in
his people, the great dark black cloud which has shadowed those glorious
spiritual shinings of that sun of righteousness in the Gospel upon the world;
which have not only been at enmity against it in your selves, but have
indeauoured with all your Antichristian power to suppress it, wheresoever you
have found the least glimmerings of it in others, under the name of Heresy and
Schism: So that Christ himself has pronounced a woe against you, Math. 23.13.
But woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for you shut up the
Kingdom of heaven against men, for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer
you them that are entering to go in.

So thus considering of you as the great subtle wicked cruel adversary to the
glorious spiritual power of Jesus Christ in his people; therein I must declare
to you I am your professed enemy: and shall say unto you, as the Prophet said in
the same case, Shall I not hate them which hate the Lord; and am I not grieved
with them that rise up against thee? yes, I hate them with a perfect hatred, I
count them mine enemies, Psalm 139.22.

And let me tell you what all your trade is, almost at the best; your work is
almost at an end: you may continue some years, but not many ages: For if
Antichrist be once down in the world, whose destruction draws nigh, you will
not be up: If once Antichrist be thrown out of the Church with all his humane
traditions; I am sure you must not be in it. And truly his time is very short;
he is breathing his last gasp: the stormy night of afflictions is almost past
with the Church, the flowers begin to appear on the earth, the time of the
singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land:
Though you, like bloody wretches, are telling the powers of the world, that
these turtles are birds of prey; to the end they might set you awork to shoot
at them and destroy them: but let me tell you, the hairs of their head are all
numbered, they are of more value then many sparrows: You may shoot your bolts at
them but ye shall not hurt one of them further then their heavenly Father shall
see it good for them. Ye may do, as your bloody predecessors did, in the Marian
days, overcome and destroy the bodies of some thousands of them: for the
devil, having but a short time, will have great wrath: but they have an eternal
spirit in them, you shall never overcome: they have learned not to fear them
which can but kill the body, and then can do no more: nay, you shall destroy
your selves instead of destroying them: The little stone cut out of the
mountain without hand, cannot be broken in pieces with your hands: Christ, in
his people, shall only be a stone of stumbling to you, and a rock of offense;
till you have filled up the measure of your iniquity; and then the stone, which
you builders have refused, shall become the head of the corner: Then shall you
see and be ashamed of all the ungodly deeds which you have ungodlily committed
against the poor Saints of God. And let me tell you they can suffer with more
rejoicing then you can persecute: and this shall be the increase of your
present torment, to see that all you can do against them will be but like pitch
thrown on the fire; it will make them shine the brighter, and your selves the
more odious.

Many a precious spirit, which sits silent in the dark corners of this Kingdom,
when once stirred up by your journey-men-persecutors which begin already in
many parts of this Kingdom to dance after your pipes, will then hold forth the
glory of God by witnessing a good confession, They will then tell of the loving
kindness of the Lord, in the land of the living; that the dead may hear the
voice of the son of God and live. They will then come to know what it was
that made Paul and Silas sing in prison: that made Stephen when he was a
stoning say, he saw the heaven open and the Son of man standing at the right
hand of God: That made Paul say he was not only ready to be bound but to dye at
Jerusalem: that the sufferings of this life is not worthy to be compared to the
glory that shall be revealed: that he desired to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. These breathings have been but slow and cold in the Saints of God for
many years, especially these five or six last years, since their persecutors
have had no leisure to look after them.

Persecutors are as useful to the Saints as the rod is for the child: but as
there is a time for the father to correct the child; so there is a time when he
will burn the rod too: I say no more, but as ye are men, whom Christ has shed
his blood for, and thereby has opened a way for mercy for all that come to God
by him; but that the Lord would be pleased to open your eyes and let you see
the evil of your doings: that ye may no longer go on to deceive and destroy
those whom Christ has paid so great a price for: that they may be no more so
hateful in your eye, which are so precious in the sight of God: that ye may not
hereafter be so cruel to those whom God is as tender over as the apple of his
own eye: that ye may not be so forward to destroy and spill the blood of those
whom the Lord Jesus Christ was so forward to give his own blood to save: and
that the Lord would give you hearts to confess to the world how they have been
deceived and deluded by you: tell them you are not the men they have so long
taken you for: that you are, and ever were, as subject to err as other men:
and that the more of your humane learning you have had or made use of, the more
you have been subject to err and be misled: If they will not believe you, wish
them to consider what is become of the consultations and results of all your
learned Counsel and holy Synods that ever sat to the beginning of this
Parliament: and whether the most purest of them all were not determined
Antichristian by the most pious and learned Assembly that ever sat? And tell
them again that these are but men subject to the same infirmities the former
were, and then counsel them to have their thoughts pitched upon something above
Counsels and Synods for their spiritual teachings and building up in the faith
of the Gospel. And thus doing ye shall do but your duty: So desiring your
acceptance, I rest, as much your professed enemy as you are Jesus Chrst's, and no
more.

R, L,

The Wolf stripped of his Sheeps clothing: OR, The Antichristian Clergyman
turned right-side outward.
IT has ever been the sad condition of the Church of God in all ages to suffer
and receive most injuries and unkindnesses from those who have pretended
greatest love, and have seemed to have nearest relation to them: especially,
when any such have had opportunity to gain place or power over them. This we
find began in Cain against Abel, and went on in Ishmael against Isaak; so in
Esau against Jacob, the ten Brethren against Joseph: and after the Church of
God came to be a corporated people, and had a Temple with Ordinances and
Officers, then it was pestered with false Prophets, wicked and idolatrous
Priests: thus ye find Isaiah complaining, Isa. 28.7. so Jeremiah, Chap. 2.8,
26. and 5.31. and 26.7. to 11. so chap. 16.13. and 9.10. and 23.11, 21, 22. and
25.26. so the Church in the Lamentations, chap. 4.13. Hos. 6.9 so Ezekiel. 22.26.
and 34. the beginning: and in diverse other places ye find the sad complaints
of the Church and people of God against the wickedness of their false prophets
and wicked priests.

And as it is the practice of our false Prophets and wicked priests, not only
to deceive and delude the multitude, and lead them into superstitious
idolatrous practices and worships, and take them all in to be their disciples;
but likewise to set up themselves, and use all the interest they have in the
people in opposition to the true Church of Jesus Christ, to persecute and
destroy them: So was it of old. Thus ye find the 400 false prophets all
against Micaiah, and Zedekiah that false prophet smiting him on the cheek for
speaking the truth to the King, 1 King. 22.24. This was the condition of the
Church of God in Elijah's time, 1 King 18.19 to 23. when there were 850.
prophets in Israel; and yet says Elijah to the people, ver. 22. I, even I only
remain a prophet to the Lord: so 1 King. 19.10.

Thus if you please to observe in Scripture, wherever ye find the Church of
God before Christ's incarnation in apostacy, or declining from the true worship
of God to Idolatry and superstition, the original cause of it arose from the
lying spirit in the mouths of their false prophets which led them.

And so ye find, when the Lord Jesus Christ himself came in flesh to bring the
word of Reconciliation to us, to make them that were afar off nigh by his own
blood, and to break down the partition wall betwixt Jews and Gentiles; to
abolish or take away the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in
ordinances, Ephesians. 2.13, 14. who were then his greatest opposers? were they not
those whom he might have expected to have been most welcome to? namely, the
Jews, who were then a people who had been in covenant with God for many ages;
a nation whom God had chosen to himself out of all the nations in the world to
be his peculiar people, Deuteronomy. 14.2. yet these were the people which were the
most cruel persecuters of Christ in the flesh. The first news that ever they
heard of him put them all into an uproar, Herod and all Jerusalem was troubled,
Matthew. 2.3. and the Lord Christ, the Savior of the world was forced to fly
into Egypt, to a people that were aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers to the covenants of promise, to save himself from his own people:
which makes the Evangelist sadly complain, He was in the world, and the world
was made by him, and the world knew him not; he came to his own, and his own
received him not, Joh. 1. ver. 10, 11. So Christ himself sadly complains, I
have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me: the
ox knows his owner, and the ass his Masters crib, but Israel does not know
me, my people does not consider, Isa. 1.23.

It is needless to give you a relation of their carriage toward Christ in the
flesh, the four Evangelists being but a brief history of it; of their
persecuting him from one City to another, of their cruel mockings and
scourgings; of their haling of him before Magistrates, and at last crucifying
of him: and all this he suffered from them as an evil doer, as a sower of
sedition, a destroyer of their Temple and Law, as a blasphemer etc. And among
these poor blind z^alous Jews, who were the chief ringleaders of them, and
stirrers of them up against Christ and his Apostles but the priests? or,
according to our Popish distinction, the Clergy, the Learned, the
University-men, those which were best read, and most knowing in the law;
namely, the highpriests, Scribes and Pharisees: these ye shall find at all
times, and in all places endeavoring to render odious to the world the
precious Gospel of Jesus Christ, calling the word of Reconciliation sedition,
the very truth of God himself heresy and blasphemy: following of Christ from
place to place, to stir up the people against him to destroy him; this ye find
Matthew. 26.3. and 16.5, 21. and 15.1. and 20.18, 21. so Mark 8.11, 31. and 14.1,
43. so Luke 5.21. and 6.7. and 9.22. and 20.1. and 22.2, 66. and 23.10. And
since the time of Christ's finishing his work in the world, which he did upon
the cross, John 19.30. since the Captain of our salvation has been made
perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2.10. Whereby he has given all that are his,
sufficient testimony, that if they will follow their Lord Christ, they must
take up his cross, Luke 19 23. and All that will live godly in Jesus Christ
shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. that In the world they shall have
tribulation, but in him they shall have peace. For (says Christ) the disciple
is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord; it is enough for the
disciple to be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord. If they have called
the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his
household? Matthew. 10.24, 25. I say, since this chaste spouse of Jesus Christ the
spiritual Church of God has been left in the world, as the Ark of God was
among the Philistims, as Daniel in the lions den, or as Jonas in the whales
belly, void of all hope and help in the world, as far as sense and reason, or
any thing below faith was able to apprehend, the flesh, the world, and the
Devil has ever since proclaimed open war against Christ in his people, though
the gates of hell could never yet, nor ever shall prevail against them, Matthew.
16.18. For no sooner had they done crucifying Christ, but presently they began
to persecute the Apostles and Saints at Jerusalem: And they were all scattered
abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the Apostles, Acts
8.1. and they which were scattered abroad went everywhere preaching the word:
and the Apostles did not go about to stir up Jerusalem to petition the
Magistrate against them then: but what was then the duty and practice of the
Saints, is now punishable by our learned Presbyters for Schism and Heresy; and
because they have neither precept nor practice, neither Scripture nor good
reason to convince their differing Brethren, therefore are they procuring
laws. and ordinances, that then they may cry out to the Magistrate as the
Jews did to Pilate, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die.

Those who are the drivers of this design, let us pray that the Lord would not
lay this sin to their charge; but that he would open their eyes, and let them
see the evil of their doings, that they may put it far from them; and take
this into their consideration, that England has too much innocent blood upon
its score already, which has cost it very deer lately. God has given our
Nation blood to drink in great measure, as if he would tell us every drop of
the blood of his saints which this Kingdom for many years has been destroying
and banishing, should cost us a fountain; and has so dispersed and scattered
all our former persecutors, as if he were minded to let them see how good
persecution and banishment were; or to make them as forward to fetch those home
again whom they have formerly banished and forced out of the Kingdom, as he did
the Egyptians, to thrust the Israelites out, whom they did formerly force to
stay in their Kingdom. I shall here only use David's words in the very same
case, In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my soul.
Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief
by a law? They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous,
and condemn the innocent blood. But the Lord is my defense, and my God is the
rock of my refuge: And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall
cut them off in their own wickedness; yea, the Lord our God shall cut them
off, Psalm: 94.19, 20, etc.

It has been the sad condition of the Church of God for above a thousand years
last past, ever since the falling away spoken of 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. to suffer by her
enemies as an evil doer; truth has ever since been persecuted for error,
light for darkness, Christ for Belial: and therefore this last has been the
most cunning and cruellest way of persecuting that ever the adversary attained
to; therefore says Christ, prophesying of this last and greatest adversary to
the Church, Beware of false prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves. So, Behold, I send you forth as sheep among
wolves; be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. As much as if
he should say, ye have a subtle and cruel adversary to deal withal, therefore
arm your selves with wisdom and innocence. Or thus, Ye have been formerly
persecuted by open enemies, such as have not been ashamed to appear against you
in, their own likeness; but now your enemy shall be your pretented friend,
such as shall be in your own likeness: they will be wolves still, but they
will be in sheeps clothing, Matthew 7.15. They will still kill you, but they will
pretend to do God good service by it, John 16.2. Christ further prophesies of
the Saints sufferings under the Gospel by this wicked cruel devouring
adversary, Mark 13.19. For in those days shall be afflictions, such as were
not from the beginning of the creation which God created unto this time,
neither shall be: And then if any man shall say, Lo here is Christ, or lo there
is Christ, believe him not: for false Christ's and false prophets shall arise,
and shall show signs and wonders, to deceive, if it were possible, even the
very elect. And if ye will believe the Scripture, those false Christ's and great
deceivers spoken of so much, are not such kind of creatures as we are, crying
out against poor illiterate mechanic fellows, as we call them; for such were
Christ and the Apostles esteemed of by the world; Is not this the Carpenters
son? Matt. 13.55. Mar. 6.5. So in Acts 4. when the Apostles Peter and John were
brought before the high priest and his kindred to be examined: When they saw
the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived they were unlearned and ignorant
men, they marvelled, and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with
Jesus. These priests had more goodness in them then many of our priests; for
they will not take notice of any whom they call unlearned and ignorant men, to
have been with Jesus, if they have any Christian boldness in them; but call it
audaciousnesse, and out facing Authority, meaning their own Antichristian
power: as if there were no coming to Jesus but by Rome, the same way by which
themselves come. But those false Christ's and false Apostles spoken of in
Scripture are not unlearned mechanic fellows; but such as have in them all
the humane learning and wisdom the world can afford: not such men as are
forced to run up and down the Country, sculking here and there in private
places to broach their opinions to some poor despised people; for there is no
possibility that these men, if deceivers, should be persecuters too. But these
deceivers have in their hands all the power the earth can afford, to stir up
Nation against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, to bring before and
deliver up to Counsels, to beat you in their Synagogues, to hale you before
Kings and Rulers, Matthew. 10.17, 18. Mark 13.8, 9. These deceivers are of that
man of sin, that son of perdition spoken of 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Who opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that
he as God sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God, ver. 4.
These deceivers are they whose coming is like the working of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness.

Now those deceivers which the Church of God has been troubled withal for
these many ages are such kind of deceivers as these are, men of great places
and high esteem in the world, having had all the power of the world to back
them, which never were able to carry on their business with any strength of
argument, the Scripture has been so point blank against them, and therefore
they have made use of the power and strength of Emperors and Kings; and where
the Magisteriall power has faild them, they have made use of the Military, and
have stirred up Emperors and Kings to war one with another, and by this means
these bloody deceivers have been the cause of thousands of millions of
Christians lives to be lost, and their blood to be spilt to maintain their
Antichristian power and domination over the whole Christian world. And all this
has been done under the pious pretenses of Reformation, Church order,
punishing of Heretics, etc. pretending zeal to Gods glory and the Churches
good in the most bloody enterprises that ever they undertook.

They have always pretended to reform the Church of its Heresy and Schism,
etc. and on the contrary, have deformed it into formality, superstition, and
idolatry: And when their wicked practices and false worships have begun to
appear so visible to the eye of the world, that the very light of nature has
been ashamed of their abominations; then for fear that the mystery of iniquity
should fully discover it self to their utter ruin, they have again transformed
themselves into some other likeness or shape, thereby to deceive the world, and
make them believe they were a reforming themselves and the Church, out of their
zeal to Gods glory, when they always staid in their old Idols Temple, while it
were ready to fall on their heads, and then built themselves another of the
same materials, only painted over with some other colors: And this ye shall
find to be the center of all Synodical Reformations to this very day; never
countenancing nor suffering more of the power of godliness in any, where they
could suppress it, then what would serve them for a stalking horse, to destroy
their dissenting Brethren by. And as they have sought the exaltation of their
own glory, the establishment of their own power, and the manifestation of their
own humane wisdom and learning in all their undertakings, and have despised,
the wisdom, power, and glory of God in his people, because God has hid that
treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. because it is the good pleasure of the
Father to hide those things from the wise, and prudent, and reveal them unto
babes, Matthew. 11.25. because not many wise, not many mighty, not many noble are
called, but God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the
wise, 1 Cor. 1.27. Therefore has God likewise refused them, and has given
them up to the pride, and deceit of their own heart: Therefore has God
pronounced a woe against them, Isaiah 30.1. Woe to the rebellious children, that
take counsel, but not of me, that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit:
So in the 29. of Isaiah 13. Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people
draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have
removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the
precepts of men: Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous work
among this people, even a mavelous work and a wonder: the wisdom of their
wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.
Is not the sin and punishment of the Prince of Tire met in our days? Ezekiel
28. Is it not visibly discovered to us, that our learned Wise men, such as have
endeavored to confine all the true knowledge of God, and the mysteries of his
Kingdom to their learned capacities have ever been our deceivers, and seducers:
Such as have been our leaders into all manner of Superstition and Idolatry; may
we not well say with the Apostle, Where is the wise, where is the scribe, where
is the disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world? 1 Cor. 1.20. Does it not appear, That Christ is made by God alone unto
us wisdom? 1 Cor. 1.30 Have not those which have called themselves the Reverend
Clergy, the Learned Tribe of Levi, the Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of
Christ's Church, been for above a thousand years, to the beginning of this
Parliament, the great deceivers, the grand Sectaries, the chief sowers of
Sedition, the very Throne and Body of Antichrist, and the proudest enemies to
the Church of God?

Let us leave England a little, and observe the greatest part of the World,
called Christendom, as Italy, Spain, France, Germany, etc. and do they not at
this very day, generally live in the very darkness of Popery, making it their
very Religion to maintain the Popes supremacy, the authority of the Church, and
a few idolatrous Superstitions Ceremonies; and are other-wayes altogether as
ignorant of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, as the very Heathens? And who are
the Leaders of these people in their ignorant superstition, and idolatry? Is it
not the Clergy, the Learned, the University men? Is it not they which are their
Popes, Cardinals, Jesuits, Friars, Monks, etc? Is it not they which has
broacht, and imposed all those damnable Heresies, and Errors, now in the Church
of Rome? And have they not to fill up the measure of their iniquities, caused
to be presented, and put to death many thousands of Christians, for not
believing, and receiving their damnable Superstitious Errors? Nay further, has
it not been they which throughout all Christendom for these many ages, have
been the chief and only contrivers, and ploters of all the bloody barbarous
plots, wicked insurrections, and traitorous rebellions, against Kings and
Kingdoms? Has it not been their constant practice to stir up Nation against
Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, under pretense of Holy War, to the
destroying and ruinating many thousands of good Christians: the whole Histories
of Christendom being but a brief story of the bloody wicked barbarous practices
of these blood-thirsty Clergymen; there would be no end if I should come to
particulars, whole Volumns not containing them. But thou may object and say,
We know the Romish-Clergy are bloody deceivers, cruel persecuters of good
Christians: We have heard often of the Spanish Inquisition, and the bloody
massacre in France, etc. But what is this to us? we have had a Learned, Pious
Clergy in England for many years. Let me entreat thee to consider a little,
what pious men they have been; where shall we begin? in Henry the eights time,
or in Queen Mary's days? For till those days they were all as Romish as the
other are now. Let me entreat thee to peruse well the Chronicles of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, Master Fox his Books of the Acts and Monuments of the
Church, his History of Martyrs; and when thou have done, then tell me, whether
the Clergy of England has not been more wicked, bloody, and cruel, then all
the Clergy of Christendom besides: How many thousands of precious Christians
have had their blood spilt, and been put to cruel torments, such as ye hardly
read of in any other story by our cruel bloody English Clergymen? And this is
chiefly observable in them, wherein they have exceeded all others, That they
have not only been as Popish, superstitious, and cruel, as others in other
Kingdoms, when the stream has run that way; but that they were never true to
their own principles, wherein they have been always a shame to their cloth;
for as their Popish Superstition and Idolatry, has declared them to be not
Christians, but Antichristians: so their turning like the weathercock, with
all winds, has declared them unworthy cowardly people, as they are meet
natural men. Thus ye shall find them in Henry the eights days, when the
Kingdom was under the height of Popery, they were all cruel Papists; when the
King denied the Popes supremacy, and went about to demolish the Abbeys, and
Monasteries, which they all knew was not out of any pious zeal he had for
Reformation, but out of wrath, pride, and coveteousness; yet how did they all
fide with him, except the Cardinal, and the poor Friars, and Monks, that were
all undone, and beggered by it? Then in the days of Edward the sixth, by reason
of the Kings pious disposi^ion, though young, they feared a turn, and presently
a great part of them fell a Preaching against some particular points of Popery;
and such as defended them, did as if they had not greatly cared what Religion
they were on: but in the mean time, the Lord Protector, with several others,
were resolved to reform the Church; and presently abolished the Mass with most
of the Popish Service, and caused the Common Prayer Book to be read in English
to the people; and presently all the Clergy were zealous Protestants, great
Common Prayer Book men, except some four or five of their chief Bishops, as
Gardener, Bonner, Toustal, and Day; and about three or four years after, at the
most, when Queen Mary was made Queen of England, they presently all turned
about again, except such another number, as Cranmer, Rogers, Hooper, Ferrer,
Ridley, and Latimer, and grew more cruel throughout the whole Kingdom against
the poor Saints then ever they were; Bonner being then Bishop of London, did
drive the very same trade Master Edwards is about now; for if ye observe it,
the first officer Antichrist entertains when he is beginning a new design, is a
good Scout-master General, to keep a correspondency with all the rest of the
wicked Clergy spread abroad over the Kingdom, as ye may see by those many wicked
Letters, and accusations, which daily he received from all parts of the
Kingdom, against one poor man or other; so that friends durst not talk together
for fear some words should slip, and Bonner should come to hear of it, which
was the bloodiest minded man that is upon record, for persecuting the poor
Saints, and inventing punishment for them, or I hope we ever shall hear of, if
God keep but Master Edwards and his ungrateful bloody faction out of authority:
And in this rage did those wolves continue devouring the poor sheep of Christ
all the days of Queen Mary; and how many thousands of good Christians were
destroyed and banished by them, would make a Jews heart bleed to consider off;
and all those suffered by them as evil doers, as Heretics and Schismatikes;
and themselves then, as they do now, assumed the name of Christ's Ministers, and
Ambassadors: Then after Queen Mary was dead, and Queen Elizabeth swayed the
Scepter, in six months the whole tribe of them, except some few of their
Bishops which had gotten money enough to live upon any where, and so did not
care much for their trade, turned quite about again, and all turned
Protestants: in which shape, and under which visage, they have continued to the
beginning of this Parliament; who then presently discovered to the whole
Kingdom, that they had been as deceitful, and as cruel in this shape, as ever
they had been in the former; that they had only got on sheeps clothing, but
were all inwardly ravening wolves: they had got a trick to call all their
Antichristian practices, and Popish ceremonies, the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England; and all their Antichristian proud Prelates, with the rest of
their superstitious dumb Priests, must be called the Bishops Stewards, and
Ministers of Jesus Christ; and all the true worshippers of God in the Kingdom,
they were all scattered abroad, silenced, and persecuted under the name of
Heretics, and Schismatikes, etc. Every day growing worse then other, bringing
in some new invented Popish ceremony or other, to the end they might have
further advantage against such as could not submit to them: sure it will be
needless for me to give you any particulars of their insolent proud wicked
carriage in our times; it must needs be fresh in your memory; their
encroachments upon the Civil power; their oppressions by their wicked Courts in
all parts of this Kingdom; their superstition and idolatry, which they were
every day inventing and bringing into the Church; their insolency and pride in
setting themselves up with, if not above the Nobility of the Kingdom; their
wicked and damnable plots, tending to the ruin of both Church and State; does
not all the blood, both of England, and Ireland stand upon the stone of these
bloody men? have not they been the great fomenters of this bloody war amongst
us, by stirring up the spirits of wicked cruel men, against the poor Saints of
God, in the three Kingdoms; and was there ever any wicked plot discovered,
either against Church or State, but these men have had a great hand in it, if
not the chief contrivers of it? If a Deputy of Ireland be in fault, ye may be
sure of an Archbishop of Canterbury: How did they flock to the Kings party at
the beginning of this war, that in some Garrisons, as Oxford, Newark, York, and
several others, there were whole Troops and Companies of black-coats? and where
ever the greatest flocks of these learned Deceivers were resident, there were
the people most disaffected to the Parliament; as witness the Universities and
Cathedrals, which appeared to be the very nests and cages of unclean birds: If
the Parliament should have forborne to have given them the tenth of the
Kingdom, till such time as the tenth of the Clergy had been of their sides, the
Ordinance for Tithes might yet have been unpast. If I should go on to
particulars, of their Malignant speeches and actions, which they have spoken,
and done against the Parliament, and their proceedings since this war begun,
you would not have the patience to read them; of their villifying the
Parliament and all that adhered to them, under the names of Rebels and
Traitors; frequently charging them of sacrilege and robbing the Church of her
ancient Rites and Ceremonies; extolling the Book of Common Prayer, calling it
the Divine Service of God, thereby to render the Parliament odious for taking
away such holy things; with abundance more of this nature; so that all these
things well considered and laid together, I wonder who will appear the great
Sectaries, the grand Heretics, the factious Fellows, the sowers of Sedition,
and destroyers of Religion in the Kingdom? whether the Laity or the Clergy? and
who we have now most cause to stand in fear of? whether those which are now
discovering the superstitious blindness, and wicked practices of the Clergy, or
the Clergy themselves? which are driving on their old designs in a new shape,
that are building a new Babel out of the old rubbish, that are giving that
great skarlet whore, a new dress, thereby to make the world once more wonder
after her, that they may once more hear that voice, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians; but let me persuade thee not to fear them, neither it is enough for
their servants, their vassals, such as stand and fall with them, to live in
fear of them: But if thou best one of those which follow the Lamb, wheresoever
he goes, Rev. 14 4. that art willing to carry the cross of Christ, as well as
wear his Crown, that art willing to suffer with him, as well as reign in the
day of their great calamity, When they shall drink the wine of the wrath of
God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his Indignation, and
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy angels,
and of the Lamb, Revel. 14.10. Then shall thou stand with the Lamb upon mount
Sion, verse the first. Then shall thou sing a new song before the throne, Verse
7. Then shall you sing A^leluia, salvation, honor, and power, unto the Lord our
God; for true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great
whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the
blood of his servants at her hand, Revel. 19.1, 2. Therefore be not now at all
troubled, when thou see the day begin to grow dark; it is but a cloud that is
arising, it will be no more night with the Church; if they have a dark hour,
the sun will shine through the cloud; For lo, the winter is past, the rain is
over-gone, the flowers begin to appear on the earth, Cant. 2.11. It is now
springtime with the Church, and though there may be many a cold blast, and
stormy shower, yet they are rather to be desired then feared. They will cause
the fig tree to put forth her green-figs, and the vine with the tender grape to
give a good smell, Cant. 2.13. What though Truth be yet called Error, and Light
darkness, the Saints and faithful servants of God, Schismatikes, and Heretics?
etc. let not this trouble thee; it is no new thing that has befaln thee, they
never were called by other names yet by this generation of men, called Clergy;
and Paul was not ashamed to confess to Felix, that after the way they call
Heresy, he worshipped the God of his Fathers; and if thou best ashamed to
confess that now, thou may come to be ashamed of Christ, and Truth, and so
deny both; Therefore do not thou mind so much what men cry up for truth, and
tread down for error; for all is not error that is voted so: It has been the
lot of truth in most counsels, if not in all, to have the fewest voices; and
thou may be sure, they themselves that put truth upon vote, are not
themselves satisfied what truth is, till they have done voting: But if they
were the sons of truth, or had any love to, or high esteem of truth; if they
had ever tasted of that word of truth and righteousness; if they had ever
received the truth in the love of it, it would be more precious to them, then
to be ventured at one stake:

But this does fully declare to us they hold the truth in unrighteousness,
Romans 1.18. These are such as Isaiah speaks off, Isaiah 48.1. Which are
called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah,
which swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but
not in truth nor in righteousness. These men never followed Christ for the love
of Truth; it is the loaves more then the miracles that they mind. These Simon
Magus's which have purchased their Apostleships by their money, love their
wages better then they do their work: The first thing they mind, is how to get
a Gospel-maintenance, and then they never fear a Gospel Ministry; they know by
experience, the former begets the latter. These are not of the race of that
true Shepherd, for his work was to save men's lives, Luke 9.56. But the business
of these has been to destroy men's lives: He came to lay down his life for the
sheep, John 10.15. These come to take away the lives of the sheep, John 10.10.
His work was to feed the flock, John 10.9. These take the fleece, and starve
the flock, Ezekiel 34.2. His disposition and expression to the flock, are full
of love and tender bowels, He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall
gather the Lambs in his arms, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently
lead those that are with young, Isaiah 40.11. But these like those wicked cruel
shepherds, are on the contrary nature. The diseased have you not strengthened,
neither have you healed that which was sick, neither have you bound up that
which was broken, neither have you brought again that which was driven away,
neither have you sought that which was lost, but with force and with cruelty
have you ruled them, Ezekiel. 34.4. These are of those thieves Christ speaks off,
John 10.10. that come not but for to steal, to kill and destroy: but I am come
that ye might have life, says Christ, and that you might have it more
abundantly. These are not only of those hirelings, whose own the sheep are
not, which only flee when the wolf comes, and leaves the sheep to the wolf,
John 10.12. but these are rather those wolves which Christ forewarned the
Church of, Matthew. 7.15. These are of that sort Paul prophesies of, Acts 20.29.
For I know that after my departure, shall grievous wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the flock: These may be fitly compared to Jerusalems false prophets
and wicked priests, Ezekiel. 22.25, 26. There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in
the midst thereof like a roaring lion, ravening the prey: they have devoured
souls; they have taken the treasure and precious things; they have made her
many widows in the midst thereof: Her Priests have violated my law, and have
profaned my holy things; they have put no difference between the holy and
profane, neither have they showed difference between the unclean and the
clean, and have hid their eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
Her Princes in the midest thereof are like wolves ravening the prey, to shed
blood, and destroy souls, to get dishonest gain. And her prophets have daubed
them with untempered mortar, seeing vanity, and divining lies unto them,
saying, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord has not spoken. If there were but
such a noble spirit in thee, as those Beareans had, Acts 17.11. to search the
Scriptures daily, whether those things be true or no that men hold forth to
thee, how soon would the vanity and simpleness of these learned deceivers be
discovered to thee? If thou would but take the Apostles for an example, not
to have regard to the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy
Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.13. If thou
would not believe every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God
or no, because many false prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1. How
would light break forth to thee, and darkness flee away? but we have been more
fearful to scruple or question the testimony of men, and their subtle
intricate interpretations of the Scripture, then we have been to question the
testimony of God himself, and the plain sayings of the spirit in the Scripture;
and the Laws and Ordinances which these men have procured, and caused to be
established against Heresy and false Doctrine, did never run in the defense of
the Scripture, as it stands penned by the Spirit of God, but as it were
interpreted by them (not thus) If any man shall declare or hold forth any
doctrine or opinion contrary to the Scripture, or contrary to the form of sound
words delivered by Christ and his Apostles: (but thus) by the Papists, If any
man shall hold forth any doctrine or opinion contrary to the holy Catholic
Church, or shall deny the supremacy or infallibility of our holy Father the
Pope, etc. And among the Protestants thus, If any man shall hold forth any
doctrine or opinion contrary to the present government established, or contrary
to the doctrine or articles of Faith, received by the Church, etc. he shall be
proceeded against as an Heretic, etc. and accordingly, If any have been
accused of Heresy or Schism, etc. why they have been proved Heretics, etc.?
by those Laws and Ordinances, and not by the Scripture, nor by Christ's precepts
and practice, as they stand upon record from his mouth; neither will it avail
the accused to plead in his defense any testimony from Scripture, to maintain
the lawfulness of his practice; but his adversaries will cry out, we have a
law, and by our law he ought to die; and thus has these men, like those wicked
Pharisees Christ proves, Matthew. 15.6. made the Scripture, and Law of God of
none effect by their own traditions; they have been always striving, and
contending with Kings and Parliaments for Laws and Ordinances, pretending them
against Heresy and Schism, and has ever turned the edge of them against the
very power of godliness: this being their very way and means, whereby they have
destroyed so many good Christians, as you see they have done in all ages; so
that they have not been satisfied to persecute and destroy good people
themselves, but have hereby imbrued the hands of Emperors, Kings, and
Parliaments, in the blood of many millions of Gods people, to the ruinating of
themselves and their Kingdoms; besides the loud cry of blood to God for
vengeance against them, which he will surely require at their hands; and when
he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar, the souls of them that
were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held; and they
cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Revel. 9.10. And I
heard the angel of the waters, say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and
wast, and shall be, because thou have judged us; for they have shed the blood
of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink; for they are
worthy, Revel. 16.5, 6. When the Lord shall once come to make inquisition for
blood, it is not a pretense of building up Sion, and establishing the peace of
Jerusalem that shall satisfy his justice; no, he will avenge it on all hands.
Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and princes of the house
of Israel, that abhor judgment and pervert all equity. They build up Sion with
blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. The heads thereof judge for reward, and the
Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money; yet
will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can
come upon us. Therefore shall Sion for your sake be plowed as a field, and
Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house, as the high places
of the forest, Micah 3.10, 11, 12. And do but compare the practice of these
men, to the practice of Christ and his Apostles, and see what little agreement
there is betwixt them, and then choose whether thou will serve God or Mammon;
for no man can serve both, Matthew. 6.24. Ye shall find Christ himself, which
was not only the great, Prophet and Teacher of his Church, Acts 3.23, 24. but
likewise their great King and Lawgiver, Isaiah 33.22. one that has all the
power of heaven and earth committed to him, and yet did he never use any
arbitrary power over, or in the Church; but says he, All things that I have
heard of my Father, I have made known unto you, John 15.15. It was his Fathers
business, not his own, that he came to do, Luke 2.49. John 4 37. and 17.4. His
Fathers will, not his own, that he came to fulfill, John 5.30. Mark 14.36. And
in his Fathers name, not his own, did he do all that he did, John 5.43. and
17.6, 26. And so the Apostles which were chosen and ordained by Christ himself,
to the work of the Ministry, which had in them an infalliable spirit to guide
them, and yet you never find them speaking or doing any thing in their own
name, or in the name, or authority of any other, but Christ himself, producing
his precepts and practices for all their words and actions, That which we have
seen and heard, declare we unto you, 1 John 1.3. so Acts 4.20. For we cannot
but speak the things which we have seen and heard (they do not say the things
which we have considered and and agreed upon.) So ye read in the first of the
Acts and verse the second, That Christ by the holy Ghost had given commandment
to the Apostles, whom he had chosen; and in obedience to those commands of
Christ, did they act, and do all which they did. This was the doctrine Peter
preached, Acts 10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to
testify, that it was he which was ordained of God, to be judge of quick and
dead; and when Peter and John were commanded to preach no more in this name,
Acts 4.19. Peter and John answered, and said unto them, Whether it be right in
the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more then unto God, judge ye. And as
they did not decline the preaching in the name never the more for being
commanded to the contrary; so would they not have preached it ever the less or
more, for being commanded to do it by any but Christ, who had alone power to
enable them to obey his commands; therefore says David, I will run the way of
thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart, Psalm. 119.32. If men could
enlarge hearts, as well as give commands, there might be some hopes of their
forcing to believe in Christ, and to walk in the way of his commandments. But
in vain do ye worship me, says Christ, teaching for doctrine the commandments
of men, Matthew. 15.9. Though the commandments which those Pharisees take for
doctrine, were commandments of men, to worship the true God, and that after the
most strictest manner, according to the Law of Moses, as they judged, Acts
26.5. and yet this was then vain worship, how comes it now to be orthodox? and
so you find Paul, that great Apostle, called and chosen to the Ministry by
Christ himself, Acts 9.5, 6. and to that end was filled with the holy Ghost,
Verse 7. of a contrary spirit to the Apostles and Ministers of our times: when
there was several divisions and opinions in the Church of Corinth, he did not
side with one or two of them, to see if he could suppress the other; he did not
countenance those that cried up Paul, no more then those that cried up Apollo,
nor those that were for Cephas, less then those that were for Christ; but his
design was to have Christ advanced above Paul, Apollo, and Cephas two; he
included them altogether, and writ to them all as Brethren, 1 Cor. 1.10, 11.
and the thing which he propounded to them was not, whether any of the rulers,
or of the pharisees believed on him, as they did, John 7.48. but, Is Christ
divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were you baptized into the name of
Paul? Verse 13. threw himself down that Christ might be set up: He does not
direct his Epistle to them under the names of their several opinions, as they
stood divided, neither does he call them Sectaries nor Schismatikes, though
they were as really such, as most that are so accounted of among us; but to the
Church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be Saints, etc. Verse 2. Neither does he charge the cause of their
divisions, upon their illiterate, mechanic Teachers, though such they had,
Verse 26, 27. for if he had, they might have said to him, Paul thou art but a
Tent-maker; but all that Paul pressed at, was to tread down, and that with
detestation, all humane wisdom and learning; and let them know, it had no
share, neither in him, nor in Christ, as you may see in the three first
Chapters of this Epistle, which would have been useless at that time, if that
had not been the cause of their mistake; they did not know that God would
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the
prudent, V. 19. That the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness
of God stronger then men: For ye see your calling Brethren, how that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called; but God
has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; and God has
chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things which are mighty,
and base things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen,
yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things which are. They did
not consider, that God would have no flesh glory in his presence; that Christ
was made alone by God, wisdom, and righteousness, to his people, Yerse 29, 30.
But so far have these self-exalting, vainglorious Clergymen been, from using
any of these Arguments, or Scriptures, against divisions and opinions, that it
is little less then Heresy with them, for any to read or make mention of these
Scriptures to them, if it cross their designs: that if Paul were now alive
amongst us, and should preach such doctrine as this (...) were enough to fill
two or three Gangrena's: but though they have hitherto, and still may deceive,
and delude the world with their humane inventions, and vain imaginations, so
shall they not do the Church; For the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out
of temptation, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished, 1 Peter 2.9. And though the Wolves and Goats may follow them, because
they are all of one nature and spirit, yet the sheep of Christ will follow him;
For they know his voice, and a stranger will they not follow, but will flee
from him, for they know not the voice of strangers, John 10.4, 5. Neither shall
the time of their deceiving last always, Only he who now lets, will let,
till he be taken out of the way; And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom
the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the
brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8.

FINIS.

