LAWS OF WAR AND ORDINANCES of the SEA, Ordained and Established by the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England;

For the Regulating and better Government or the Navies, Fleets and ships of
War, and Armies by sea of the Commonwealth of England, And all and singular
persons, ships and Vessels thereunto belonging; to be put in Execution
according to an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for
constituting Commissioners for Ordering and Managing the Affairs of the
Admiralty and Navy; and to be observed and duly obeyed by the Vice-Admirals,
Rere-Admirals, Commanders, Captains, Lieutenants, Masters, Mastersmates, and
all other Officers, Mariners, seamen and soldiers, and all others whomsoever
these Laws and Ordinances may concern, under the pains and penalties therein
contained and expressed.

Saturday the 25th of December, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That these Articles be Printed.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

LAWS OF WAR AND ORDINANCES of the SEA, Ordained and Established by the
PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth OF ENGLAND.
ARTICLE I.

II. Unlawful and rash Oaths, Cursings, Execrations, Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
and other scandalous acts in derogation of Gods Honor, and corruption of good
Manners, shall be punished as the Council of War shall think fir.

III. All such as shall give, practice, hold or enterrain Intelligence, to or
with any State, Prince or other, being Enemy or Rebel to this Commonwealth by
any manner of means or slights; or have any communication with them, without
direction or leave of the Parliament, Council of State, the Commissioners of
the Admiralty, Generals at Sea, or Commander in Chief of the Squadron, shall be
punished with death.

IV. If any Letter or Message from the Enemy, or on their behalf, be conveyed
to any Inferior Officer, Mariner, Soldier or other in the Fleet; and the said
Officer, Mariner, Soldier or other as aforesaid, do not instantly acquaint the
Superior Commander with it; or if a Superior Officer, being acquainted
therewith by an inferior Officer, Mariner or other, or himself in his own
person receiving a Letter or Message from the Enemy, reveal not the same
forthwith to the Generals, Admirals, or the chief of his Squadron; All such
Mariners, Officers, Soldiers and others, shall be punished as Traitors with
pains of death.

V. No person or persons of the Fleet shall relieve the Enemy with Money,
Victuals, Powder, Shot, Arms or Ammunition, directly or indirectly, upon pain
of Death.

VI. None shall harbor or conceal any Enemy, or known Delinquent or Rebel on
Shipboard, nor carry, or endeavor to Transport any such beyond Sea without
License, upon pain of Death, or other punishment as a Council of War shall
adjudge.

VII. None shall presume wilfully and wittingly to injure or wrong at Sea the
known Friends or Allies of this State, either Members of this Commonwealth or
Strangers, not in Enmity, upon pain of such punishment as the nature and
circumstances of the Offense shall require; nor in visiting any Ships or
Vessels, either take Goods forcibly, or by force or terror extort them, upon
pain of Death, or other punishment, according to the nature and circumstances
of the Offense.

VIII. All the Papers, Charter parties, Bills of Lading, Pasports and other
Writings whatsoever, that shall be taken, seized or found aboard any ship or
ships which shall be surprised or seized as Prize, shall be duly preserved, and
not torn nor made away, but the very Originals sent up entirely and without
fraud to the Admiralty Court, there to be viewed, made use of and proceeded
upon according to Law, upon pain of loss of all the shares of the Takers, and
such further punishment to be inflicted upon the Offenders therein, as the
quality of their offense and misdemeanors shall be found to deserve.

IX. None shall take out of any Prize or Ship, or Goods seized on for Prize,
any Money, Plate, Goods, Lading or Tackle, before Judgment first thereof pass
in the Admiralty Court; but that the full and entire Account of the whole
without Imbezilment shall be brought in, and Judgment pass entirely upon the
whole without fraud, upon pain of such punishment as shall be found by a
Council of War or the Court of Admiralty (as the case may happen) to be just;
excepting, That it shall be lawful for all Captains, Seamen, Soldiers and
others, serving as aforesaid, to take and to have to themselves as pillage,
without further or other account to be given for the same, All such Goods and
Merchandises (other then Arms, Ammunition, Tackle, Furniture or Stores of such
ship) as shall be found by them or any of them, in any ship (they shall take in
Fight as Prize) upon or above the Gun-deck of the said ship, and not otherwise.

X. None shall imbezil, steal or take away any Cables, Anchors, Sails, or other
of the ships Furniture, or any of the Powder, or Arms or Ammunition of the
ship, upon pain of death, or other punishment, as the quality of the Offense
shall be found by a Council of War to deserve.

XI. If any Foreign ship or Vessel shall be taken as Prize that shall not fight
or make resistance, That in that case none of the Captains, Masters or
Mariners, being Foreigners, shall be stripped of their clothes, or in any sort
pillaged, beaten or evil entreated, upon pain to pay and make good double the
damages; but the said Foreign ships, and all the Goods so taken, shall be
preserved entire, to receive Judgment in the Admiralty Court, according to
Right and Justice.

XII. Every Captain and Commander, upon Signal or Order for Fight, or view or
sight of any ships of the Enemy, or likelihood of Engagement, shall put all
things in his ship in a fit posture for fight; and cause the Lieutenant, and
Gunner, and Quartermaster, and other Officers to fit themselves, and Quarter
the men according to the number and quality of Men and Ordnance, with a
competent number to ply the small shot, and likewise to manage and trim the
sails; And every Captain and Officer shall in his own person, and according to
his place, hearten and encourage the Seamen and common Men to Fight
courageously, and not to behave themselves faintly; nor to yield to the Enemy
or to cry for Quarter, upon pain of death, or such other punishment as the
Offense shall deserve.

XIII. Every Captain and Commander of any Ship, Frigot or Vessel of War, shall
duly observe the Commands of the General at Sea, or his Superior or Commander
of any squadron for the Assayling or setting upon any Fleet, Squadron or ships
of the Enemy, or joining Battle with them, or making defense against them, upon
pain to suffer death, or other punishment, as the quality of his neglect or
offense shall deserve.

XIV. Every Captain, and all other Officers, Mariners and Soldiers of every
ship, Frigot or Vessel of War, that shall in time of any Fight or Engagement
withdraw or keep back, or not come in to the Fight and Engage, and do his
utmost to take, fire, kill and endamage the Enemy, and assist and relieve all
and every the ships of this Commonwealth, shall for such Offense of Cowardice
or disaffection be tried, and suffer pains of death, or other punishment as the
Circumstances of the Offense shall deserve, and the Council of War shall judge
fit.

XV. Whosoever, either through cowardice, negligence or dif-affection, shall
forbear to pursue the Chase of any Enemy or Rebel beaten or flying, or shall
not relieve or assist a friend in view to the utmost of his power, shall be
punished with death or otherwise, as a Council of War shall find just.

XVI. When at any time Service or Action shall be commanded, no man shall
presume to stop or put backward, or discourage the said Service and Action by
pretense of Arrears of Wages, or upon any other pretense whatsoever, upon pain
of death.

XVII. All Captains, Officers and Seamen, that either have or shall betray
their Trust and turn to the Enemy, and either run away with their Ship, or any
Ordnance or Ammunition, or Provision, to the weakening of the Service, or yield
the same up to the Enemy, shall be punished with death.

XVIII. All Captains, Officers or Mariners that shall desert the service or
their employment in the Ships, or shall run away or entice any others so to do,
shall be punished with death.

XIX. All Captains of Ships, having once taken any Commission for taking of
Prizes, according to any Act, Ordinance or Order of Parliament, or served as
any private man of War, or received any Pay or Impress, or been otherwise
employed from or under the Parliament, that shall either turn to the Enemy, or
declare themselves against the Parliament, or wilfully set upon, Fight with,
surprise, or take any Ship or Vessel standing in Obedience to the Parliament or
any of their Adherents, or shall turn Robber, and use to exercise Piracy,
either upon or against any Merchants or other ships, shall be punished with
death.

XX. All persons whatsoever that shall come or be found in the nature of Spies,
to bring any seducing Letters or Messages from the Enemy, or shall attempt or
endeavor to corrupt any Captain, Officer, Mariner or others of the Navy or
Fleet, to betray his or their trust, and yield up any Ship, or Ammunition, or
turn to the Enemy, shall be punshed with death.

XXI. None shall utter any words of Sedition and Uproar, nor make or endeavor
to make any mutinous Assemblies upon any pretense whatsoever, upon pain of
death.

XXII. No person shall conceal any Mutinous Words, or any Words spoken by any
to the prejudice of the present State or Government, or any Words tending to
the hindrance of the Service, but shall reveal them to his superior, that a
meet proceeding may be had thereupon, upon pain of such punishment as a Council
of War shall find to be just.

XXIII. None shall presume to quarrel with his superior Officer, upon pain of
severe punishment, nor to strike any such, upon pain of death, or otherwise as
a Council of War shall find the matter to deserve.

XXIV. If any find cause of complaint of the unwholesomness of his Victuals,
or upon other just ground, he shall quietly make the same known to his
Superior, or Captain, or Commander in chief, as the occasion may deserve, that
such present remedy may be had as the matter may require: And the said Superior
or Commander is to cause the same to be presently remedied accordingly; but no
person upon any such or other pretense shall privately attempt to stir up any
Disturbance, upon pain of such severe punishment as a Council of War shall
find meet to inflict.

XXV. None shall quarrel or fight in the ship, nor use reproachful or provoking
speeches, tending to make any quarrel or disturbance, upon pain of
imprisonment, and such other punishment as the Offense shall deserve.

XXVI. None shall use any words tending to the death of the Admirals or
Generals, upon pain of death.

XXVII. Every Captain shall keep the number and complement of men allowed to
his ship full and complete, and take care to have a full proportion of Mariners
and Seamen, and to get and keep such as are able and healthful, and fit for
service, and not Boys nor infirm persons, that so the ship may be well manned
for fight, and not be pestred with Idlers and Boys, upon pain to be punished as
the quality of the Offense may deserve.

XXVIII. That there be no wasteful Expense of any Powder, Shot, Ammunition or
other Stores, nor any imbezlement thereof, but that the Stores and Provisions
be carefully preserved, upon such Penalties, by Death, Fine or otherwise upon
the Offenders, Abettors, Buyers and Receivers, as shall be by a Council of War
found just in that behalf.

XXIX. That care be taken in the conducting and steering of the ships, that
through wilfulness, negligence or other default none or the ships be stranded
or run upon any Rocks or Sands, or split or hazarded, upon pain that such as
shall be found guilty therein, be punished by death or otherwise as the offense
may deserve.

XXX. None shall imbezle any part of the ships, Tackle or Furniture, or of the
Arms or Ammunition, upon pain of death.

XXXI. All persons that shall wilfully burn or set fire on any ship, or
magazine, or store of powder, or ship-boat, ketch, hoy or vessel, or tackle or
furniture thereto belonging, not appurtaining to an Enemy, shall be punished
with death.

XXXII. No man shall sleep upon his Watch, or negligently perform the duty
imposed on him, or forsake his station, upon pain of death or lesser
punishment, as the circumstances of the case shall require.

XXXIII. All Murders and wilful killing of any persons in the ship shall be
punished with death.

XXXIV. All Robbery and Theft shall be punished with death or otherwise, as the
Council of War (upon consideration of circumstances) shall find meet.

XXXV. The Captains, Officers and Seamen of all ships appointed for Convoy and
Guard of Merchant-ships, or any other, shall diligently attend upon that charge
without delay, according to their Instructions in that behalf; and whosoever
shall be faulty therein, and shall not faithfully perform the same, and defend
the ships and goods in their Convoy, without either diverting to other parts or
occasions, or refusing or neglecting to fight in their defense, if they be set
upon or assailed, or running away cowardly and submitting those in their Convoy
to peril and hazard, shall be condemned to make reparation of the Damage to the
Merchants, and Owners, and others, as the Court of Admiralty shall adjudge; and
shall also be punished criminally, according to the quality and quantity of
their Offenses, be it by pains of death or lesser punishment: And that no
Captain, Master of other Officer of any ship belonging to the State or in their
service, shall demand, receive, or take from any Merchant or other, whose ship
or goods he is appointed to Convoy, any Fee, Gratuity or Reward in respect
thereof, upon pain that such Captain, Master and Officer shall for such Offense
be cashiered.

XXXVI. No Provost-Marshal belonging to the Fleet shall refuse to receive or to
keep any Prisoner committed to his charge, nor dismiss him, nor suffer him to
escape, being once in his custody, upon pain of being liable to the same
punishment which should have been inflicted upon the party dismissed or
permitted to escape, or such other punishment as the Council of War shall think
fit.

XXXVII. No man shall presume to use any braving or menacing Words, Signs or
Gestures while the Court Martial is sitting, upon pain of Fine and Imprisonment.

XXXVIII. All Captains, Officers and Seamen shall do their endeavor to detect,
apprehend, and bring to punishment all Offenders, and shall assist the Officers
appointed for that purpose therein, upon pain to be proceeded against and
punished in the Court-Marshal at discretion.

XXXIX. All other Faults, Disorders and Offenses not mentioned in these
Articles, shall be punished according to the Laws and Customs of the Sea, and
according to the general Customs and Laws of War.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

