The Copy of a Letter from Min Here T. V. L. to Min Here H. V. C.
Faithfully Translated from the Original.
SIR,
Though I have a great deference for your Judgment, yet can I not give way to
those Fears, which you tell me you so mightily apprehend. On the contrary my
Opinion is, though what you suggest should prove true, yet would the Prince, our
States, and the Confederates, be considerable Gainers by the Expedition.

What I say may seem a Paradox to one who runs, as you do, upon so high a
strain, in your apprehensions of seeing all our Designs ruined by King James's
regaining the Possession of His Kingdoms; but yet I doubt not but in few words,
to make the matter clear to a much meaner Capacity than yours.

You know Sir, as well as I, that the first Design of the Confederates, was not
the Security of the Protestant Religion, in England, nor the hindering their
Laws from being changed, nor the Birth of a supposed Prince of Wales; but
principally to oppose the King of France's Power, and suppress his Growth. You
know Sir also, that it was looked upon as impossible to make the late King of
England a Partner in that Undertaking, or to have kept it secret, if it had
been Proposed to him; and therefore it was thought necessary, either to
constrain him to take part with the Confederates, or else to reduce him to such
a state, that it should not lie in his Power to do them harm by lending his
Assistance.

This made our States urge the Prince to hearken to the Proposals of the Male
Contents in England; and the hopes they had of compassing those great Ends,
together with some smaller concerns of their own, were powerful Motives to
furnish him with Men, Money, Ships, and other Necessaries answerable to the
Greatness of the Attempt.

Now what I affirm, is that though the Prince of Orange should be at last forced
to quit England, yet would neither he, nor any of the Confederates, nor our
States of Holland be frustrated of their hopes, but would sufficiently obtain
their Ends.

1. Not he; For you know that according to his Declaration he did not at first
aim at the Crown of England; but when he saw it ready to drop upon his head, a
far less Ambitious Man than he, would have scarce refused it. It was his
Natural Antipathy to the King of France, and the desire of Glory, which pushed
him on to make that Attempt, which we must needs say, Nature would have
otherwise abhorred. And the hopes his Soldiers had to have laden themselves
with the Spoils of a Country which a long Peace, Prosperity and Trafick, had
not only made Rich, but Luxurious and Effeminate, made them follow him with Joy
in that Expedition. And you may assure your self, let what will come, they will
accomplish their first Designs; and if he be Beaten off from his other Attempt,
it is because he went farther than his Commission.

I say, he will gain his first ends, and instead of either losing his Honor,
or wasting his Treasure (as you suggest) will no doubt, both enrich himself and
his Companion, and gain a due esteem amongst all the Confederates, by providing
so effectually against the common Enemy.

For should it happen (as you fear it will) that the late King James by the Aid
of the Irish and Scotch, should enter into England and find that People, who
are strangely changeable in their Humors, ready to embrace him again for their
Sovereign, and like a wanton Steed, cast their Rider before he be well seated
in the Saddle, yet can you not in Prudence think, that he who has the actual
Possession of all the Forts and Magazines, and by consequence the Strength and
Riches of the Nation in his hands; and that he who Commands the Ports and Navy,
and has put what Officers he pleases in every Station, will go away empty
handed, or leave the Nation in a Capacity to do either him or his Confederates
any mischief.

Assure your self Sir, he will not go till he has Fleeced that Proud and
Pampered Nation. The Forts shall be first, if not dismantl'd, at least rendered
useless by withdrawing all the Cannon and Ammunition from them; some pretenses
or other will be found out to drain the Exchequer, to melt down the Plate, to
be Master of the Richest Jewels, to remove the most Stately Furniture, to
borrow immense Sums, and by this means, if he cannot keep the Crown, he will at
least enrich himself; and the free Plunder of the City of London, will be a
sufficient recompense for his Soldiers, if they find they must be gone.
Neither can you doubt of his being able to carry all this off, when you
consider that he is not so unpolitick a Prince, but that he will take such
effectual care to secure the English Fleet from doing him any harm, that on the
contrary, he will certainly bring the Chiefest Vessels into Holland with him.

2. This will fully Answer all the Expectations of our Confederates; for all
that could have been hoped for from England, would have been either to make
them sit still, or lend the Assistance of their Fleet, with some few Regiments:
And as for sitting still, they must necessarily do it when they are so
impoverished, and the Augmentation of our Fleet by those Vessels, will make us
formidable to the French by Sea; neither will he want as great an Army of
English, who will be forced to fly with him as he could have sent, had he
continued a Peaceable Possessor of the Crown.

3. Our States of Holland will be the most considerable Gainers in this Affair;
For it is manifest, the Three Kingdoms will be so impoverished, that they will
not be able to recover it 100 years of Peace; but you may assure your self, we
shall not permit that neither; for having once got them under, we should be
Fools if we did not labor to keep them so, and let them have neither Commerce
abroad, nor Peace at home, but what we shall think good to allow them.

Thus Sir, you see I am so far from heing of your mind, that this Expedition of
the late King JAMES will be the utter ruin of our Affairs if it succeed, that
I can scarce hinder my self from wishing Him all the Success He hopes for,
being persuaded that otherwise we cannot expect to impoverish that Nation, nor
humble it to such a Degree, as I hope the Prince of Orange's Return will do. I
am

Min Here, Your most humble Servant, T. V. L.
Amsterdam March the 15th. 1689.
I hear some persons doubt of the Truth of this Letter; but I think no one that
sees the Transactions at present, can be of so Incredulous a Nature. It Is
manifest that almost all the Arms and Ammunition are sent out of the Tower, and
other Magazines to Holland; not to Ireland nor Scotland, as we are made
believe. The Exchequer is already drained. French Hugonots are underhand Armed
with an Encouragement of a free Plunder of the City, if things succeed not to
their minds. The Soldiers and Seamen whose Loyalty they mistrust, are, or
must be Shipped away for Holland, and from thence to the Indies, where they are
like to Expiate their Treachery to King James with a severe Punishment, a
perpetual Slavery. The Royal Plate is Melted down. Money is endeavored to be
borrowed, if the Citizens will take a Tax, which is not likely to be Raised,
for their Security. What will become of the Jewels Borrowed for the
Corronation, let them that lent them find by Experience. And as for ruining our
Trade and Commerce, our Merchands find that Dutch Bottoms can now Import
Merchandise into England without control. So that nothing is now remaining to
be effected, but the Demolishing our Forts, Burning or Sinking our Ships,
Plundering the City, and Scampering.


