GOSPEL-SEPARATION Separated from its Abuses; OR THE Saints Guide IN
GOSPEL-FELLOWSHIP.

WHEREBY They may be directed not only to preserve the Purity, but withal the
Unity of GOSPEL WORSHIP:

By a well-wisher to Sions Purity and Unity, R. L.

Mercy and Truth have met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each
other, Psalm. 85.10. Therefore love the Truth and Peace, Zach. 8.19. Imprimatur.

JOSEPH CARYL.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black Spread Eagle at the West end of
Paul's, 1657.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY Charles Fleetwood Esquire Lord Deputy of IRELAND.
My Lord,
THough the Truth asserted by this little Treatise have but few Friends
(amongst whom you deserve to be numbered in the first rank) yet is it able to
plead its own cause; for wherever its absence is, there wants no Arguments to
prove the worth of its presence; for as the Purity of the Gospel may be
esteemed in the mystical Body of Christ as its life blood; so its Unity may be
next esteemed as its health; and strength; and life without health, is but a
lingering death; but I am persuaded I need not spend time to beget in you a love
to this Truth; you have evidenced the sincerity of your love thereto, and
therein I hope have tasted of that fruit of righteousness which is sown in
peace of them that make peace, Jam. 3.18.

The reason why Contention and division have been more natural to Gods people
then union in all ages, is, because it is more naturally suitable to their
unregenerate part; therefore those duties and graces that most cross the lusts
of the flesh, must necessarily be attended with most difficulty and opposition;
but to balance that, they are also attended with proportionable inward comfort
and peace; and therefore (my Lord) though imposing, oppressing principles and
spirits do cry out against you, as the injurious Israelites did against Moses,
Exodus 2.14. yet cease not to plead with them, Ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong
one another; though it may cost you dear at the present, yet consider the Lord
that made it up to him, is able to do so to you.

Among the rest of those excellent principles the Lord has born an approving
testimony unto in the day of his glorious power, none have been attended with
more signal evidences of his presence with, and delight in then this pleaded
for. Most disowned instruments that have tendered their service to the Lord in
the Work of this Generation, have professed and declared a love to Gods ways and
people; but therein have confined their care and affection to a part if not the
least spiritual part of them, which the Lord took so unkindly at their hands,
that he visibly removed the Tabernacle of his presence from among them, and
chose the same people despised and slighted by them, to be the instruments of
his praise and glory, in the great work he has done for his people in these
Nations; And easy it is to demonstrate (if it were not too large a discourse
for an Epistle) that as those persons so singularly owned by the Lord, have
declined and abated in this principle, so has the Lord withdrawn from them,
and left them to that destraction and miserable confusion they are at this day
involved in; as if the Lord should say, if you withdraw your equal respect and
affection from any of my people, I will withdraw mine from you.

And do but well weigh and consider the visible principles, and frame of spirit
of such persons, who are vehemently driving on the interest of some part of
Gods people (under some peculiar notion they have received of the truth or work
of the Generation) in opposition to the rest; (that are not like-minded. And ye
may observe a visible inconsistency in their principles and practices, to the
obtaining or securing the very things they pretend for.

That my Lord, it is not only your praise, but your mercy, that your heart is
kept in an even frame toward all the Lords people in this day in which so many
eminent Professors are through temptation and stumbling blocks laid in their
way by the weakness and frailties of some of the Lords people, growing weary
and faint in their minds, as to the steadfast practice of, and impartial respect
to Saints as such; and to be good in bad times, is the best testimony of
goodness from a good principle. Therefore as your discouragements and
opposition increase, labor to increase in your confidence and diligence; though
you may have War without, you may have Peace within.

And of all dangers be most watchful against heart-risings, and alienation of
affection toward such who are contrary-minded to you herein; that is the stone
many at this day are stumbling on. They measure out their respect and affection
to Saints proportionably to that respect and affection they or their principles
receive from them, whereas the chief excellency of this principle above others
lies in this difference, that it can extend respect to others upon the account
of duty to Christ, though disrespect on the account of different opinion be
returned to them again; for uniting principles must be attended with the
exercise of uniting Graces, if they intend to be successful in uniting work.

That the Lord may guide you in all your streights, support you under all your
burdens, and render into your bosom plentiful returns of all that kindness you
have shown unto, and weaknesses you have over-looked in his people, for his
Image sake upon them, is the earnest prayer of the most unworthy of

Your Excellencies sincere Servants in Ireland, RICH. LAWRENCE.

The Author to the Churches of Christ in the Dominions of England, etc.
To them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1.1.
And to all the faithful in Christ Jesus; with all that in every place call upon
the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Beloved in the Lord,
HEre is a Treatise presented to your view, which stands in much need of your
favorable consideration, as to the weakness, and imperfection in the writing
thereof; but if you can overlook them, the Truth endeavored to be held out
thereby is worth your studying, and enquiring after; It is a Truth that has
many Hangers-on, but few faithful Servants; many Gospel Merchants have been
trading for this goodly Pearl, but few have been willing to go to the price of
it; they have had Peace in their mouths, but War in their hearts, like those
Micah speaks of chap 3.5. They bite with their teeth, and cry peace; but if
thou would obtain the precious unity of Saints, thou must not only seek
peace but pursue it, Psalm. 34.14. not stand still, and call it to thee; but
follow after the things that make for peace, Romans 14.19. If the peace of God
once rule in thy heart, it will guide thy feet into this way of peace; this
work of peace will surely attend thy soul with the comforts and joy of peace;
nay, the Lord himself shall give you peace always by all means, as in 2 Thessalonians.
3.16. If thou would have thy soul prosper, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem,
they shall prosper that (so) love her; nay, if thou would have Sion prosper,
say Peace be within thy walls, and (then) prosperity shall be within her
Palaces (and therefore) for thy brethren and companions sake say, Peace be
within thee; (and) because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy
good, as in Psalm. 122.6, 7, 8, 9.

If after you have perused this Discourse you shall observe there are many
considerable Objections against the thing pressed unspoken to; that I admit; I do
not expect these few weak Lines should answer all Objections in a controversy
of this weight, neither do I judge my self able to answer them, but am assured
there are well wishers to this Truth, that are able to proceed. Therefore if
these Lines may but tend to awaken and stir up the people of God to enquire
after this Truth; and to allow that the laboring after Saints Union, is not
only a Duty, but a great and weighty Duty, and to be numbered in the first
Rank of Christian Duties, I have my aim; for that would prepare the hearts of
Saints for Unity, and make the work of removing obstructions, and resolving
particular cases, much more easy.

For many of Gods people do already, and more will be daily discerning the
inconsistency of the principles they walk by to Gospel-prosperity; unity does
as naturally fore-run Glory to Christ's Church, as health does strength, or
light heat.

Therefore the main design of Satan at this day is to prevent Gospel-Glory, by
obstructing Gospel-Unity; but the more the spirit of strife and division
struggles against this work, let it provoke you the more to set to all your
strength to promote it; the Lord does not only require that his people should
be faithful unto, but valiant for the Truth upon earth.

Shall Quakers and such like rigid censorious dividing principled people
compass sea and land, and consume their estates to make common purses in order
to the promoting and carrying on their ridiculous principles of division and
confusion? and shall those who pretend the Espousing the universal interest of
Saints as such, be Ephraim-like, a silly Dove without heart? as their diligence
and painfulness do now upbraid us, so I fear it will in the great day rise up
in judgment against us.

It was good Mr. Buroughs complaint in his time, when the spirit of division
was but in its infancy, That there were many would cry Lo the Thief, but who
stopped him? So saints are many at this day will bemoan such divisions, and make
sad complaints of it one to another when they meet; but how few have set
themselves to study and propagate uniting principles; which I trust the Lord
will set upon the hearts of some who he has so eminently principled and
qualified for the work; that the friends of this precious Truth may not have
cause above all the rest of Truths Favorites to complain with the Prophet in
its behalf; There is none to guide her among all the Sons whom she has brought
forth, neither is there any that takes her by the hand, of all the sons which
she has brought up, Isa. 51.18. Nay, is there not rather cause for this Truth
to take up the Lords complaint, Isa. 1.2. I have nourished and brought up
children, and they have rebelled against me.

This Principle has been dealt withal by some of its Favorites, as Saul dealt
with David, who honored and embraced him in his camp, and hated and banished
him his Court; yet blessed be the Lord there are some Jonathaas to stand up and
say, What evil has he done? whose souls are knit to this principle, as the
soul of Jonathan was to David, who will not be afraid to answer imposing and
dividing principles as Moses answered Pharaoh, Exodus 10.9. We will go with our
young and with our old, with our Sons and with our Daughters, with our Flocks
and with our Herds will we go, for we must hold a Feast unto the Lord.

Pharaoh would have put off Moses with the liberty and freedom of some part of
Gods people, Go you that are men to serve the Lord (says he) ver. 11. No says
Moses, Church deliverances from bondage and opression must be universal
deliverances; otherwise how should we hold a feast to the Lord? can part of us
rejoice in our Liberties as long as other part is under bondage and oppression?
No, we must either all go together, or all stay together; all rejoice together,
or all mourn together; therefore we will not leave a hoof behind us, ver. 26.
Now this spirit in Moses, is the true nature of this Gospel-principle; it will
not own any deliverance from oppression and imposition of conscience contrived
and proposed by men, to answer the design of Gods deliverance to his people,
until it include the common Gospel Liberty due to all Saints, and that in all
their necessary concernments, though it may out of tenderness with David, 1 Samuel 30.10. leave some of the weak and feeble behind in the work of War and
danger, yet all must have an equal share of the spoil, whether the Sons of
Belial will or no, as in ver. 24.

It Is the faithfullest and impartiallest Steward to trust with the Saints
common stock that can be found on earth: there shall be no cause of complaint
so far as its power reaches; every one of Sions children shall have an equal
share of those common mercies and privileges their Heavenly Father appoints
for them: And therefore whatsoever opinion or way thou art of, consisting with
sobriety and holiness, this principle, if thou do promote it, will take equal
care, and make equal provision for thy Christian liberty and encouragement,
that if thou be a favourer of Saints prosperity, labor to be acquainted with
this common friend of theirs, it will teach thee how to observe and own the
shining beauty of grace in Saints through the darkest cloud of those common
errors and mistakes that the opposite principle renders them so unlovely and
deformed one to another by.

And let not the homely and mean attire this Truth salutes thee in, make it
less acceptable; if the Author had had better, it should not have worn so bad;
but Beauty is Beauty though clothed in rags. The ensuing Discourse is rather
intended to tell thee there is such a Principle accommodated with such
excellent Qualifications, and to provoke thee to enquire after it, and endeavor
acquaintance with it, then to give the an exact description of it; But I shall
submit what follows to thy favorable censure, and close with the words of Paul
to the Philippians, c. 2. v. 1, to 6. If there be therefore any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels
and mercies: Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded having the same love,
being of one accord, of one mind: Let nothing be done through strife or
vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better then
themselves. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Chrst Jesus. In
whom I rest

Your Friend and Brother in the Unity and Purity of the Gospel. R. LAWRENCE.

THE CONTENTS.
TRuth seldom found in extremes. p. 1. Searchers after truth must suspect
danger of erring on each hand. p. 1. 2. As the door of the Church may be opened
too wide, so it may be shut too close. p. 2. That since God has had a Church
on earth, its separation from the World, and unity in its self, have been
required by him as an equal duty. p. 3. All the Reformed Churches justify
separation. p. 4. The General notion of a competent knowledge and suitable
conversation are to intricate and uncertain rules to be the visible bounds of
Gods visible Church. p. 5 6: The Lord has always preserved to his Church a
visible undisputable bound betwixt them and the World p. 6. 7, 8. Circumcision
and Abraham's seed in the Type and Antitype was foreordained and established to
be the infallible and everlasting bounds of Gods visible Church on earth. p. 8,
9. It continued so unquestionable until Christ came; who only changed the Type
for the Antitype. p. 9, 10. Believers ought to make the same use of the
Antitype under the Gospel the Type served for under the Law. p. 10, 11. The
Antitype of Circumcision and Abraham's seed is visible Grace and Holiness. p.
11. Which Paul affirms to be the visible bound of Gods Church, and mark of Gods
children, to Rome and Galatia etc. p. 11, 12. Antichrist set up his Kingdom by
laying waste these Gospel Bounds, and Christians open the door to all division
and confusion by not repairing them. p. 13. 14. Gods Church must not only be a
City of righteousness, but a City with Walls. p. 15. All Churches of Saints
ought to own one another as true Churches of Christ and fellow members of his
body. p. 16. Seven General Heads, from whence the arguments to prove the duty
of Saints union, as such, are drawn. p. 17, 18. 1. From the choice and
approbation of the Father. p. 19. Prooving that such as the Father has
manifested his visible Choice and approbation of, to be his Children, believers
ought to admit and choose to be their Brethren. p: 9 Christ and all Saints have
but one Father, for which cause he was not ashamed of their infirmities. p. 20.
21. 2. General head, is from the choice and approbation of God the Son. p. 22.
Christ a perfect Emblem of union in his person. p. 22. Christ had no helper in
his work, nor no partner in his relations to his Church, that Gods design of
union in him might be visible. p. 22. Christ's chief design in assuming our
nature was a work of union. p. 23. Christ walked by uniting Principles, pressed
uniting duties and commended uniting Graces most to his People. p. 23, 24.
Christ owned all visible gracious persons to be members of his body; therefore
ought all Saints to own them so. p. 25. The 3 sort of Arguments is drawn from
the visible choice and approbation of the holy Spirit. p. 26. The most
infallible rule to choose Church Members by, is to follow the track of the
Spirits choice. p. 27. The sanctifying effects of the spirit in Saints ought to
be admitted as sufficient testimony of the Spirits choice. p. 27. No believers
without some visible mark of the Spirits choice. p. 28. Prooved that this
choice of the spirit instates a Believer in all Gospel relations and
Privileges both in the Kingdom of grace and glory. p. 29. The 4 general head
from whence arguments are drawn, is from the visible choice and approbation of
the infallible servants of God in all ages. p. 30. They made the choice of the
Father Son and Spirit their choice. p. 30. They laid more weight upon the duty
and mercy of the Churches union, then upon most others duties and mercyes. p.
31. Paul laid more to heart, and endeavored more to preserve the Churches
union, then all other errors to reform. p. 32, 33, 34. The Argument for Saints
union from the whole. p. 35. The 5 general Head from whence Arguments are
taken, is from the several Metaphors and Similitudes the Church is compared
unto in Scripture. p. 35. 1. From that of Believers being Gods Children, and
thereby of his Family, the householder of faith. p. 36, 37. 2. From that of the
membership of the same body, which relation is inconsistent without union. p.
38, 39. The 6 general Head is from the sad consequences and effects of our
present divisions. p 40. Division is usually the forerunner of destruction, the
former preparing the way for the latter. p. 40. Directions to be observed in
heart searchings for the cause and cure of Saints divisions. p. 41, 42, 43. The
spirit of division sometime imployes our graces as well as our Corruptions to
divide by. p: 42. Knowledge and Zeal much imployod at this day by the spirit of
division in dividing work. p 42. 43. The sad effects and consequences of our
divisions. p. 44. 1. They have obstructed and hindered reformation. p. 44. 2
They have opened the door and let in upon us that overflowing flood of Errors,
heresies and blasphemies which many Professors among us are carried away with.
p. 45. And the continuation of them will make that disease uncurable. p. 46.
They have been the cause of that great decay in the life and power of Religion
amongst us p. 46. They have rendered the power and life of godlyness
contemptible in the eyes of Formalists and the carnal multitude. p. 47. 5. They
have rendered the power and purity of Religion, and the professors of it
unacceptable in the eyes of authority, and several persons in eminent place. p.
48, 49. 6. They have brought scorn and contempt upon the glorious cause of God
in these Nations, and have stained the glorious presence of God with his
People, that had once stained the pride of all the Glory of the World. p. 50,
51. They have been the cause of the removal of many eminent worthy Instruments
from their Public Stations, and thereby made way for others, no ways spirited
nor principled for the places they stand in. p. 52. 8. They furnish wicked
Magistrates and Ministers with plausible excuses, in the exercise of their
oppressing persecuting principles, p. 53. 9. It is from this spirit of
division, so many eminent gracious persons in Authority are disabled from doing
that good in their places, they have otherways an opportunity for. p. 53, 54.
The argument for union from the whole. p. 55. The 7 General head from whence
arguments for Saints union is drawn, is from the evident and great good it
would be attended with to Gods Church. p. 55. 56. 1. Unity would renew its
strength, and make it terrible to its enemies. p. 56. 57. 2. Unity would renew
its purity. p. 57. 3. Unity would repair its reputation and esteem. p. 57, 58.
4. Unity would renew its growth and increase. p. 59. 60. 5. Unity would
abundantly renew its joy and comfort. p. 61. The Argument from the whole. p.
62. From whom objections may be expected. p. 63. How the objections are stated
to the Reader. p. 64. 1. Object. Against the admission of erroneous persons,
answered: p. 65. And wherein is proved that persons holding greater errors then
Generally Saints now separate upon, were admitted communion with the Primitive
Churches. p. 65. 66. Much more reason for Gods Ministers, and Churches to
permit Erroneous persons into communion, now then then. p. 67. 2. Object. That
this Principle admits all Errors and heresies in Gods Church, answered p. 67.
In which answer is shown what sort of errors or erroneous persons Gods Churches
and people ought to withdraw from. p 68. to 77. 3. Object. Raised from the 2 Thessalonians 3.6. concerning disorderly walking and disobedience, answered from p. 77.
to 83. 4. Object. Whether the power of Religion can consist without the true
form, answered. p, 83. 84 5. Object. From the inconsistency of unity, with
Principles directly opposite one to another, answered. p. 85. 6. Object.
Against the too general stateing the case, and not coming to those particular
points, wherein the difference lies, answered. p. 86. 7. Object. From the
unpossibility of Gospel union until the fulfilling of the glorious promises,
relating to the later times, answered. p. 87. Wherein is proved, that there is
as much reason to deferr our endeavors after the increase of knowledge and
purity as after unity. p. 87. 88. Unity must precede Glory to Christ's Church.
p. 88. Division lies as much in the way of Christ's glory now, as unbelief did
formerly in the way of his grace. p. 89. The promises of the Churches glory,
hold forth an universality of peace, purity and glory to all Saints. p. 89. The
union we are capable of attaining, is not to proceed from the agreement of our
understandings, wherein we differ; but in the exercise of Grace one toward
another, while thus differing. p. 90. The Lord has supplied his Church with
special uniting graces, as the means; to assist them in this special uniting
duty as the end p. 91. They that begin the work of Saints union by disputing
and reasoning them into the same understanding, begin at the wrong end. p. 92,
93. Saints too apt to be p^aring upon each others infirmities. p. 94. Object.
From the prejudice that is in Christians, against each others opinions and
principles, answered. p. 95. Directions to such as shall set upon the work, of
Saints union. p. 96. 1. Direction, to labor to inform themselves of the worth
of the mercy and weight of the duty. p. 95. 2. Direction to arm themselves
against all discouragements and dificulties they must expect to meet with
therein. p. 96. 3. To take heed of exercising any of the Spirit of divisions
weapons in the Spirit of unions cause. p. 96. 97. 4. Labor to obtain a
Compassionate tender frame of Spirit. p. 97. 5; Set thy affections on those
things in Saints, wherein the Image of Christ is most visible. p. 99. 6. Labor
to abound in uniting graces. p. 99. 100. 7. Labor to preserve a proportionable
growth of of grace in thy soul. p. 100. 8. Be most exercised in those duties,
thy place and abilities most call thee unto and fit thee for. p. 102. 103.
Further directions to Gospel Ministers in order to Saints union. p. 103. 104 1.
To be sensible of the sad effects of the divisions amongst themselves. 104.
105. 106. 2. Then to study all holy ways of furthering the work of union. p.
107. 3. To change their sharp censurings and blamings into intreatings and
beseechings. p. 108. 4. To commend what is good, as well as condemn what is
evil in those differing from them. p 109. 5. To lay no more stress upon the
errors reproved, then the Scripture does. p. 110. 6. To take heed of so
intailing errors one to another as to charge upon persons holding some lesser
error, with others they detest the thoughts of. p. 111. 7. To beware in so
opposing errors controversall in some, they do not thereby commend errors
fundamental in others. p. 112. Christians of all hands are too apt to manifest
more indignation against some holy persons for controversall errors, differing
from them, then against visible ungodliness and open prophanness in them that
in opinion close with them. p. 113. 114. Little help to be expected in the
work of Saints union, from such as have much engaged themselves in the evil of
Saints devisions. p. 115. Therefore those that have the evil of Saints
divisions upon their hearts, ought the more to labor for unity. p. 116. 1. By
being much in prayer together, and apart for Saints union. p. 116. 2. To study
to propagate the principles of this truth, p. 117. 3. To set up some beginnings
in Gospel fellowship, upon this Gospel principle. p. 117. 118. Object. From
the aversness of particular Churches, and from thence the danger of further
divisions, upon the promoting this principle, answered. p. 118, 119, 120.
Object. From the inconsistency of persons not agreeing in judgment, to walk
together in fellowship, without obstructing the mutual edification of the
whole answered. p. 121, 122. Object. From the disadvantage that some
controverted despised truths might receive thereby, answered. p: 123. 124.
Object. From the opposition that may arise from such of the godly, as are
against all separation, answered. p. 126 127. Object. From the difficulty of
walking toward such whose Conversion though hopeful, may be very doubtful
answered. p. 128. 129. A censorious Spirit, and provoking carriage toward any
professing Christianity, though not visibly gracious, is blameable and
hurtful. p. 130. What cases may give a dispensation from the present promoting
this or any other precious truth among some people. p. 131. What the dross and
rubish of Christians principles and spirits are that hinder them from uniting,
which Gods Ministers should be laboring to remove in order to unity, when they
can do nothing else toward it. p. 132, 133. Christians usually more curious
about the dish the Lord presents the bread of life to them in, then the purity
and spirituallness of the bread it self. p. 134. Impossible for Saints ever to
come to an union wherein they differ, until they come to a communion in what
they are agreed. p. 135. The Spirit of division never speaks good of differing
Christians one to another. p. 136 The Spirit of division confines the hearts of
Saints, in prayer and praises, to a few of Gods people, and ofttimes sets them
in opposition one to another at the throne of grace. p. 137, 138. This evil
principle leads to a wresting and misapplying the precious promises and
precepts of Christ, and to misguide us in our obedience to God, and duty
toward our Brethren. p. 139. What the Author drives at in all he has spoke
to Gospel Ministers. p. 140
ERRATA.
PAge 7, l. 1. r John 17.3. p. 17. l. 8. r. which, p. 26. l. 24. for the, r.
that. p. 44. l. 12. for care, r. Core. p. 60. l. 19. r. unseasonable. p. 66. l.
21. r. quoted p. 32. 33. 34. p. 72. last line, for peace, r. place. p. 85. l.
16. r. p. 68. p. 98. l. 8. r. aflictions. p. 101. l. 10. for time r. kind. p.
104. l. 11. r. as it is. p. 116. l. 11. r. p. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35 p. 119. l.
1. for which r. such.

GOSPEL-SEPARATION SEPARATED From its Abuses: Wherein is asserted the Duty of
Gods Churches, separating from the World.
AS it is a Principle in Moral Philosophy, that virtue is usualy found in
mediums and Vice in extremes; so may it be admitted in a great measure that
Divine truth is found in mediums, and Errous in extremes; For the Lord was not
in the Wind, nor in the Earthquake, nor in the Fire, but in the still small
voice. 1 Kings 19.11, 12. And therefore the way of truth in Scripture is held
forth to be the strait-way: Psalm 5.8. Isai. 40.3, 4. and 42.1^. Matthew. 3.3. in
opposition to the crooked ways of Error, Psalm. 125.5. Prove. 2.15. Therefore
they that would walk in the strait-path of truth and peace, must take heed they
avoid the Errors of the right hand as well as the left: Deuteronomy. 5.32. Josh. ^.7.
2 Kings 22.2. Prove. 4 27. Jsai. 30.21. all which Scriptures evidence to us that
there is danger of running into Error of both hands, which many Christians not
duly considering have run into sad extremes, like those people Amos
mentions, that fled from a Lion, and a Bear has met them, Amos 5.19.

And as this sad evil of extremity has had its influence over most
controversal points at this day amongst the rigid sticklers for them; so in
especial manner has it produced sad effects in the point of separation;
wherein as on the one hand several professing Christ, not duly weighing the
bounds the Lord has set in distinguishing the Precious from the Vile, have
opened the door of the Church too wide; so many others under pretense of
separating the sheep from the Goats, do shut the door too close, and reject
those that God has chosen, and keep such sheep out of Christ's fold as have his
own mark upon them: And he that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns
the just, even they both are an abomination unto the Lord, Pro. 17 15.

And therefore that the truth may be found out in this weighty case, I shall
make an enquiry after the rule of Christ in Church-separation from the world;
and shall therein occasionally discuss the several principles and practices
which those that err in the extremes of either hand are stumbling in: that
betwixt both, the strait and narrow (yet sweet and pleasant) path of purity
and unity may be found out and walked in.

And for the more distinct handling of this matter, that the truth I plead for
may be as well discerned, as the Error pleaded against, I shall state these
two general Positions.

First, That it has been in all ages wherein God has had a visible Church on
earth, a duty required by the Lord from such his Church and People, to separate
themselves in matters of his worship from all the rest of the Nations and
People of the world. For proof, read Exodus 19.6. compared with 1 Kings 8.53. so
Ezra 10.11: and 6.21. Exodus 23.16. Lev. 20.23, 24, 25, 26. so Neh. 9 2. and
13.3. Romans 1.1. 2 Cor. 6.1.

Secondly, That it has been also required by the Lord as an equal duty from
his Church and People so separated to walk together in the practice of all
those duties of worship and service required at their hands; without dividing
or separating from one another. Deuteronomy. 5.1.3. and 18.6. and 1 Kings 8.55.62. 1 Chronicles. 13.5, 6, 7, 8. and 28.21. and 2 Chronicles. 30.1. and 35.3. Ezra 10.5. Psalm.
31.23, 24. In which Scriptures consider the word ALL Israel and ALL Saints; and
so Ephesians. 4. to the 14. Cant. 6.9. Psalm. 133. Hosea 10 1, 2. Romans 16.17. and 1
Cor. 1.10. and 3.3. and 11.18.

But these two Positions thus generally stated, I judge will be agreed unto by
most, if not all sober Christians, and therefore I shall spend no time in the
demonstration of them in this place, but referr the Reader to the Scriptures
quoted, and to what shall be spoken in the ensuing discourse to the several
particulars relating to them.

And first I desire you to note, if the first Position be true, then the
difference amongst Christians about separation is rather about the manner or
extent then the thing; for that the church of God in the world should be a
separated People from the the World in matters of Gods worship, would be
ridiculous to deny.

Therefore the difficulty lies in a right distinguishing betwixt the World and
the Church, wherein some would have that part of the World called the Christian
World, to be the universal Catholic Church; and only the Nations of the
Jews, Turks, Pagans etc. to be the World; but I hope the most vehement against
separation among the reformed Churches will not admit this extent (if they
should, it would be a difficult thing for them to clear themselves from those
brands of Separatists and Schismatics cast upon them by the Papists) which if
they do not, they then assent that a separation may be lawful from a People
making an outward profession of the Christian Religion.

But say others when there is not only an outward profession of the Christian
Religion, but also a competent knowledge of the Doctrine of the Gospel and a
suitable life and conversation thereto, there are the bounds of the true
Church; but the terms of this Qualification will admit of so much difficulty in
their explanation that the generality of Christians will be as far to seek for
their satisfaction in this point as before.

For first, some will interpret that term of a competent knowledge of the
doctrine of the Gospel to be a bare ability through education to answer to
questions given them in a Catechism, which a child of six or Seven years of
age is usually more capable of and expert in then persons of grown years;
which if that be admitted, then repentance from dead works, and faith toward
God, Heb. 6.1. with all other Gospel qualifications attending the work of
conversion and regeneration may be spared as to Church fellowship on earth: But
as various as men opinions are in the several points of Religion at this day in
controversy, so various are their explanations of a competent knowledge of the
principles of Religion, each making those points wherein they differ from
others in, and separate upon part of those points of Doctrine, which the
knowledge of is necessary to a Churchmember, the discussing of all which would
take a Treatise by it self.

Then for the other term of a suitable conversation, that will admit of as much
controversy as the former; for say some, They that are not of a scandalous
conversation are of a suitable conversation; and if so, then many Papists, nay
Jews, Turks and Pagans are of a suitable conversation; for abundance of all
them are free from scandal in their lives, and do walk very unblameably; Paul
before his conversion, was according to the Law blameless: the Pharisees made
clean the outside of the Cup and Platter; and therefore sure a Suitable
conversation to the Gospel must be more then a mere moral conversation: but if
all persons of the several persuasions walking by these Rules that admit of so
much variousness and uncertainty, were put to give their several meanings in
these qualifications, they would leave the enquirer after truth at a greater
uncertainty then they found him.

But surely the Lord has not left his People in this great and weighty Case at
so evident an uncertainty; and therefore to spend no more time in this
labyrinth of different Opinions in this Case,

Let us consider what light the infallible word of the Lord will afford us
therein; For as the Lord knows who are his, Jo. 10.14. and is known of his,
Col. 1.10. so has he left to his Church and people a rule of knowing one
another from all the people of the world: Psalm. 4.3. But know that the Lord
has set apart him that is godly for himself.

And since the day that the Lord put an enmity betwixt the two seeds, Genesis
3.15. there have been visible marks and rules of distinction to know them by:
After Abels death we read nothing of a visible Church, or Gods visible worship
upon earth until the days of Seth, who was given in stead of Abel, whom Cain
slew; and after his posterity began to increase in the earth; that is, after
Enoch was born; then began men to call upon the name of the Lord, Genesis 24.25,
26. in whose seed the Church of God continued until the Flood, at which time
the Church and people of God polluted themselves, and corrupted the holy seed
by mixing themselves in marriages with the seed of the world: For the Sons of
God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and took them wives of all
which they chose; at which the Lord was greatly provoked, and said, My Spirit
shall not always strive with flesh, Genesis 6.2.3. and after the Flood the holy
seed was again revived in Shem, Genesis 9.26, 27. in whose line the visible Church
continued until Abraham's time, with whom the Lord again renewed his Covenant,
and made another separation betwixt the two seeds, Genesis 12.2, 3. who again
reformed and revived the visible worship of God, Genesis 12.7.8. Genesis 13.4. After
which God did at several times not only renew his Covenant of Promise, but in
the seventeenth of Genesis did declare more fully then before, the Condition of
his Covenant; for as before he usually said, my Covenant will I keep with thee;
he here says, my Covenant thou shall keep with me, verses 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14. And God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou, and
thy seed after thee, in their generations: This is my Covenant which ye shall
keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee: Every man-child among you
shall be circumcised. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskins, and
it shall be a token of the Covenant between me and you. And he that is eight
days old, shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations;
he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is
not of thy seed. He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy
money, must needs be circumcised: and my Covenant shall be in your flesh for an
everlasting Covenant. And the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his
foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he
has broken my Govenant. In which words the Lord does ordain and establish a
new pale or bound to his Church, which was never again to be altered; for
Abraham's seed and circumcision in the type, or in the Antitype, in the flesh or
spirit, shall ever continue to be the true bound of Gods Church militant: which
Covenant we find was renewed again to Isaac, Genesis 26.1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 9.7.
Gal. 4.28. Hebr. 11.1. And after that to Jacob, Genesis 28.13, 14, 15. from whose
time this Covenant of distinction was usually repeated to be the Covenant made
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Exodus 2.24. Lev. 26.42. and that for an
everlasting Covenant, 1 Chronicles. 16.16, 17. compared with the thirty fourth verse.

Which Rule of Church Membership, or visible bound of Gods Church, continued in
the type unquestionable until the coming of the promised Messiah, Luke 1.59.
and 2.21. And therefore the Pharisees in the 8th of John, thought they made a
good plea to Christ, verse 33. We are Abraham's seed; and verse 39. Abraham is
our Father; which our Savior admits to be true, verse 37. I know that ye are
Abraham's seed; And this privilege Paul pleaded, Romans 11.1. Has God cast away
his people? God forbid; for I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham: And
so against those false teachers in the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 11. Are they
Hebrews? so am I: are they Israelites? so am I: are they the seed of Abraham?
so am I: By all which, and much more of that nature that might be added, it is
a truth out of controversy, that the Condition of the Covenant made with
Abraham, etc. was the standing unalterable bounds of the Church of God until
Christ came, who did not at all disannul this Covenant, as it was a
distinguishing Covenant, nor alter the least Condition of it, but fulfilled it;
that what our Lord says of the Law in general, may be truly applied to this
particular: Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets; I am
not come to destroy, but to fulfill; for verily I say unto you, till heaven and
earth pass, one jot or one title shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all
be fulfilled, Mat. 5.17, 18. And so Paul argues, Romans 3.31. Do we then make
void the Law through Faith? God forbid; we establish the Law: So that we must
not seek for another Rule to know Gods Church and people by under the Gospel,
then what was under the Law: But to enquire after that Legal Rule Gospelized;
that what the seed of Abraham, and Circumcision under the Law, were Types of;
under the Gospel, that must we enquire for, and make the same use of the
Antitype now which the type then served for.

Now the seed of Abraham in the Flesh, typed out to us the seed of Abraham in
the Spirit; the Carnal seed under the Law, was the type of the Spiritual seed
under the Gospel, Romans 4.11. to the end, Romans 9.10. first verses; so Gal. 3.14.
to to the end, concluding with these words, if ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise; and in the 7th verse, Know you
therefore that they which are of Faith, the same are the children of Abraham.

And for the Antitype of Circumcision, it is evident to be the inward work of
grace in the heart: In whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made
without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the Flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ: and so Romans 2.28, 29. Romans 4.9, 10, 11, 12. and diverse
other places.

Now that which I desire you to observe, in order to the finding out the
everlasting infallible bounds of Gods true Church, and Character of his true
children on earth, is, that these Anti-types of Abraham's fleshly Seed and
Circumcision, are made use of in the Gospel, and pleaded for the same end.

That the Types themselves were under the Law, as you may read at large in the
Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, the chief drift and scope of those
Epistles being to convince the Jews, that what they formerly enjoyed by virtue
of Abraham's Covenant, were now made out to believers by Faith in Christ,
pleading with them, that now all partition walls betwixt Jew and Gentile were
broken down, Ephesians. 2.13, 14. And showing that in Jesus Christ neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by
Love. Ga. 5.6. And so Peter, Act. 10.34. said, Of a truth I perceive that God
is no respecter of Persons: but in every Nation, he that fears him, and
works Righteousness, is accepted of him; and if you do but consider the
Apostles Arguments in the aforesaid Epistles, to prove the Gentiles to be
fellow-Heirs with the Jews, and of the same body, partakers of his promise in
Christ by the Gospel, as in Ephesians. 3.6. you shall find he proves it by proving
that they are Abraham's seed: Romans 4.15, 16, 17. and Romans 9.7, 8. Gal. 3.16, 29.
And therefore heirs according to promise: Romans 8.17. Gal. 3.29. Ephesians. 3.6. And
that they were not of the uncircumcised, but were the true circumcision; Romans
2.25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Romans 4.9, 10. and 1 Cor. 7.19. Phil. 3.3. Col. 2.11. From
all which Scriptures, and abundance more that might be added of like tendency,
it is evident that the distinguishing Character of Gods People and Church in
Abraham's Covenant continues the same; and ought to be observed by Gods
Ministers and People, to the end of the world, to be the true unalterable and
infallible bound of Gods Church, and mark of Gods Children: The swerving from
which has led into all those confusions and divisions which are at this day in
Gods Church, most particular opinions and persuasions, laying waste those old
Church bounds, and clipping off Gods ancient Sheep mark, would confine the
place of his flock to their own Folds, and own none to be his Pasture sheep,
but such as will receive their by marks, against whom the Sons of the Church of
Christ may justly take up that complaint Labans sons made against Jacob, Genesis
31.1. He has taken away all that was our Fathers; And of that which was our
fathers has he gotten all this glory. Some on the one hand wholly breaking down
this hedge about Gods Vineyard: they will not so-much as admit of an inward
work of grace and regeneration of heart, of being born again (which is the
undoubted type of Circumcision and Abraham's seed, as before) to be the visible
bound of Gods visible Church, and mark of visible Saints, but content
themselves with a bare profession of the Christian Religion; and some others
there are as we minded before, will add some further uncertain disputable
qualifications of knowledge and suitable conversation; But doubtless, this
unsound Principle has Antichrist set himself upon his thron by, and laid Waste
the mountain of God by, and trodden under his Feet the holy City by: This has
let in the Boar out of the wood, and the wild Beasts out of the Field to
devour, that it is time for the Church to cry out against this Principle, with
the Prophet Isay 64.10. Sion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation; and to
plead with the Lord in the words of the Psalmist, Why have thou broken down her
hedges, so that all they which pass by the way do pluck her? the Boar of the
forest does waste it, and the wild beast of the Field does devour it: Psalm.
80.12.13.

For it is evident that Antichrist, if you do but observe the History of the
Churches declining state, made his way into Gods Church, and ushered all his
train of false Prophets, and false Doctrines, by laying waste the Churches true
fence and bounds; and by laying the garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12. into an open
field, in which every unclean beast may make his den, and pass through, Psalm.
80.12, 13. And as these ancient bounds of Gods Church are again discovered and
made up, that our spiritual watchmen may keep their guards upon the towers of
these holy walls, so shall the Churches purity and unity be recovered.

But now there are some other Christians that admit visible grace and holiness
to be a distinction; nay, the chief and main distinction betwixt Gods Church
and the world, believers and unbeleevers; but they will not admit it to be the
only distinction, but will add some other private mark, according, to their
particular opinions and persuasions; some doctrine or practice that they have
attained to some different understanding in from the rest of Gods people, must
be as a post of their own set up by Gods post, as in Ezekiel. 43.8. in the bounds
of his Church. Now though this be not so dangerous as the former, in regard it
preserves holiness, and visible grace as the main rule or bound; yet the effect
of this error is very sad; for this was the apparent inlet of all those
divisions and carnal contentions that happened in the Church of Corinth, and
the rest of the Churches in the Primitive times, and that continues and
increases the same at this day, even to the hazard of the total ruin and
destruction of the Church of Christ, as we shall more at large prove when we
come to speak of the particular evil consequences of it: For Jerusalem must not
only be as a City of righteousness, an holy City, Isa. 52.1. Isa. 1.26. but as
a City compact, Psalm. 122.3. A City with walls, Psalm. 51.18. Lam. 2.8, 18.
Cant. 5.7.

Now the way to avoid both these extremes, is to observe the bounds and marks
that God has set about his Church, to walk about Sion, and go round about her,
and tell the towers thereof; mark ye well her Bulwarks, and consider her
Palaces, that ye may tell it the generations following; the right observation
and preserving of which would make the Church to be comely as Jerusalem, Cant.
6.4. God would then be known in her Palaces for a refuge, Psalm. 48.3. we should
then behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together
in unity, Psalm. 133.1.

But for the first and worst of these two extremes, which disownes visible
grace and holiness to be required in persons, in order to visible membership,
or Church State, I shall say no more to that point, it being already so largely
spoken unto, and fully cleared by several of the congregational way; and
especially that late eminent discoverer of the ancient and infallible bounds of
Gods true Church, Mr Jo. Cotton in that little Treatise of his, (besides
several others) entitled The holiness of Church members: for I am far from
pressing an unity of Church State with any that make not visible Grace and
holiness the main mark of visible Faith and Church Membership; but what union
is to be desired, and endeavored with the godly of that judgment, I shall
give my opinion in its place; and shall now chiefly insist upon the second
general Position, That all true believers congregated together, and separated
from the world and mixed worship, to serve the Lord in the beauty of holiness,
ought to own and esteem one another as true Churches, and Saints, giving the
right hand of fellowship to one another, and walking together as children of
the same Father, Jo. 11.52. Members of the same body, Romans 12.4, 5. sheep of
the same fold, Jo. 10.16. in observance of all those joint duties required by
the Lord at their hands, without dividing, rending or separating from one
another.

Object. The Terms of your Position so generally stated, may admit of several
constructions, and thereby give little light to the cases in controversy,
though you should prove it; if not more particularly explained.

Answ. I shall have occasion to explain the terms, in answer to several
objections that will arise in the ensuing discourse; and therefore for brevitie
sake shall pass them by here, and shall next proceed to the several sorts of
Arguments to prove the Position with Arguments I shall chiefly draw from these
seven general heads following.

First, From the visible choice and approbation of God the Father, proving,
that such as the Father has visibly manifested his choice and approbation of,
to be his children, believers ought to choose and approve of to be their
brethren.

Secondly, From the visible choice and approbation of God the Son, proving,
that such as the Lord Jesus Christ has manifested his choice and approbation
of to be members of his visible body and Church on earth, all his ought to make
choice and approve of to be fellow members with him of the same body.

Third, From the evident choice and approbation of God the holy Ghost, proving,
that such as the spirit has manifested its visible choice of, by the holy
inspiration of its quickening, and sanctifying Grace, believers ought to make
choice, and approve of as such who have an equal right with them to a mutual
participation in the privileges, gifts and comforts of the same spirit.

Fourthly, From the choice and approbation of the infallible servants of God,
his holy Prophets and Apostles, etc. in all ages, proving, that such as the
infallible servants of God in all ages of his Church have made choice of, and
approved to be their brethren in the Lord, and fellow members with themselves
in Gods visible Church, ought to be so approved of and chosen by all his
servants to the end of the world.

Fifthly, From the several Similes and Metaphors the Church of God is compared
unto in the Scriptures, whereby their mutual interest in an union with one
another is held forth from thence; proving, that what unity is required, and
interest is given to members of the same body, branches of the same root, sheep
of the same fold, and under the same Shepherd, children of the same Father, and
fellow-heirs of the same inheritance, etc. that the same interest is given
unto, and union required in the several members of Gods Church, which is so
fitly compared thereto, and lively set out thereby.

Sixthly, From the evident sad consequences that attend the Church and people
of God, though their dividings and separatings from one another, and uniting
together upon other principles then this of visible grace; arguing from thence,
that such principles and practices as open the door, and let in upon the Church
of God such destructive, uncomfortable consequences, should be of all evils
labored against, and avoided.

Seventhly, From the evident, and unspeakable good, both to the outward and
inward man, the union of Gods Church upon such Gospel lasting principles, would
be attended with; arguing from thence, that since the unity of Gods Church,
upon such a binding and abiding principle as this of visible grace, would so
exceedingly tend to the unvaluable good thereof, it ought to be sought after,
and prayed for above all things, by every true member thereof, next to an
interest in Christ, and visible grace it self.

Now from the first head (viz) the visible choice and approbation of God the
Father, I argue.

1. Those whom the Father has manifested his visible choice and approbation
of, to be his children. 2. Believers ought to manifest their choice and
approbation of, to be their brethren.

But the Father has manifested his choice and approbation of all visible
believers, and grations holy persons to be his children.

Therefore ought Believers to choose and approve of such to be their Brethren.

1. The Major, or first Proposition, is evident from the very light of nature
and reason; yet since prejudice against truth does ofttimes put out all light,
I shall add the light of some Scriptures to the clearing up this truth: And
first that of our Savior in Matthew. 23. verse 8. compared with the 9th. Says
the word in verse 8. All ye are Brethren, which he proves in verse 9. For one
is your Father which is in Heaven; and so Heb. 2.11. For both he that
sanctifies, and they who are sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is
not ashamed to call them Brethen: from which Scripture, I gather, that the Lord
Jesus Christ was not ashamed to own all Saints for Brethren, though they were
attended with abundance of imperfection and uncomliness, unsutatable to his
most holy nature and course of life; because himself as head, and they as
members, were all of one Father; that since his Father was not ashamed to own
them all as Sons, verse 10. therefore he was not ashamed to own then all as
Brethren, verse 11.

Now it is a sad thing, that fellow- Brethren, who are all subject to like
infirmities, Jam. 5.17. who do all see but in part, and know but in part, 1.
Cor. 13.9, 10, 11. should be more high-minded in this case, and sooner ashamed
of their Brethren, upon the account of their infirmities and weakness, then
their elder Brother, who was free from all imperfections, and stood in no need
of their bearing with him; he bore all their sins, not only in the punishment,
but in the shame of them, Heb. 12.2. thereby setting them a pattern to bear the
shame of each others infirmities: for so argues Paul, Romans 15.1, 2, 3. We then
that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please
our selves; for even Christ pleased not himself: but as it is written, The
reproaches of them that reproached thee fell upon me: and that this is not
only a duty, but a special duty to all Saints, See further, Ephesians. 4.6. 1 John
1.3, and 2, 13. Mal. 2.10. John 4.21, 23. John 6.45.

2. For the Minor, or second Proposition, none can deny, that does not deny the
Scripture; consider the first Epistle of John 3.1, 2. compared with verse 10.
Galat. 3.26, 27. Isaiah 62.12. Deuteronomy. 28.9 Isa. 13.3. Act. 20.32. with a
multitude of other places; it is hard to read a Chapter that affords no
evidence to this truth.

So that I conclude, this Argument in every part of it fully cleared.

I might draw from this head many more Arguments of equal strength, as from the
Fathers visible Covenant, with special promises unto the Saints, positive
precepts for this union of Saints, upon the principle of visible grace, etc.
But I shall leave them to the Readers meditation to enlarge, and come to the
second head.

2. The visible choice and approbation, with the personal qualification of God
the Son, who as he has set himself a pattern of all grace to his people; so in
an especial manner of this glorious state of Gospel union, he became a perfect
pattern of holy union, by uniting the humane and divine nature in his own
person; God and Christ, and Saints, must all be made one in in the mystical
union, Jo. 17.21, 22. which though it cannot be perfected until the state of
glory, yet it is to be begun, imitated, and pressed after, in the state of Grace:
And therefore God the Father would have but one Son to be his dearly beloved
Son, Mark 1.11. Luke 7.37. he must have no equal, Col. 1.18. nor no partner,
nor help in his work, Isaiah 63.3.5. He must tread the winepress alone; of the
people there must be none with him.

And so Saints must have but one Savior, Acts 4.12. one Redeemer, Revel. 5.9.
one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. one Head, Ephesians. 1.22. one Husband, 1 Corinthians. 11.2.
one Chief Shepherd, John 10.16. one Captain of their Salvation, Heb. 2.10. all
which lively holds forth to us the unity of Saints, and in him alone; Christ
must not be divided, 1. Corinthians. 1.13. neither in his headship, nor in his
members; but they must grow up into him in all things, which is the Head, even
Christ, from whom the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working in measure of
every part, makes increase of the body, to the edifying it self in love,
Ephesians. 4.15, 16. From whence we may observe, what a perfect pattern of union
the Lord Jesus Christ is, both Head and Body; as if not only the Glory, but
the very Essence of heavenly things depended on unity.

And so the main design of Christ, in his assuming our nature, and doing and
suffering all for us, was chiefly a work of union and reconciliation, Col.
1.20. to reconcile God and man, 2 Cor. 5.20. to break down partition walls
betwixt Jew and Gentile, bond and free, Ephesians. 2.14, 16. that in the
dispensation of the fullness of time, he might gather together in one, all
things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in
him, Ephesians. 1.10.

And so we find him in the whole course of his ministry, walking by principles
of union, commanding those duties, and commending those Graces most which were
the uniting Duties and Graces. The first Gospel that was preached on earth, was
in these words; Glory to God in the highest, and on earth Peace and good will
toward men, Luke 2.14. himself is called the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6, 7.
Heb. 7.2. His Gospel is called the Gospel of Peace, Romans 10.15. Ephesians. 5.16.
his people are called the Sons of Peace, Luke 10.6. his ways are called the
ways of Peace, Luke 1.79.

And as Peace, so Love is held forth in the Gospel of Christ as a Cardinal
Grace; A new commandment give I unto you, that ye Love one another, as I have
loved you, John 13.34. And so we might proceed to the Graces of Humility,
Meekness, Patience, Mercifulness, etc. which are all uniting Graces; and by our
Lord commended unto us above all Graces; they are conditional Graces, unto
which promises are annexed; above all things, says the Apostle, put on
Charity: in the description of which Grace all these are contained, 1 Cor. 13.
from all which, and indeed from the whole scope, and tendency of the Scripture,
I argue;

That the duty which is most lively held out unto us by our Pattern, and
required of us by our Lawgiver the Lord Jesus Christ, should be most upon our
hearts to imitate and obey him in.

But the Duty of uniting the Saints to one another, next to that of uniting
them to himself, was the greatest duty held forth by our Lord and Master to us;
and required by him of us; therefore the unity of Saints with one another ought
to be most upon our hearts next unto their union with Christ.

Object. But say some, we do admit, all Christ's Members ought to be united
together in his worship, but the doubt lies who we should own as his members.

Answ. Those whom the Lord Jesus Christ owns as Members of his visible body
here on earth, ought all to own one another, as members of the same body.

But the Lord Jesus Christ owns all true Believers or visible gracious persons
to be members of his visible body on earth.

Ergo, All such ought so to own one another.

2. Answ. Those for whom Christ prayed to the Father that they all might be
One, as he and the Father were One, John. 17.11. ought to walk in union one
with another.

But it was for all the Father had then visibly given him, verses 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12. And that should afterward be converted by their doctrine verses 20,
21. for whom he prayed.

Ergo all such ought to walk together in union.

We might draw arguments of union from all the Metaphorical relations the
Scripture holds forth Christ to stand in to his People, as an head, Col. 1.18.
an husband, Isai. 54.5. A King, Revel. 15.3. a Shepherd, Psalm. 23.1. a Root,
Romans 11.17, 18. the very essence of which relations consists in union; and the
main end of them in Scripture is to hold forth the necessariness of union in
the Church and People of God: hut I shall speak to them under another head.

Arg. 3. From the visible choice and approbation of God the holy Ghost. The
Spirit of God though it fill all things, Ephesians. 4.10. yet is but one Spirit,
verses 3, 4. the same spirit that fills Christ the head with all fullness. Col.
1.19. and 2.9. fills all his members out of the same fullness, Ephesians. 1.23. They
all receive out of his fullness grace for grace, John 1.16.

And as the Spirit of God that fills whole Christ, head and members, is but one
spirit: so the chief business of this own spirit, and tendency of its operation
is unity, Ephesians. 4.3. And next to that betwixt head and members, Christ and
Saints, it drives on the design of the Saints union with one another in all
truth, Ephesians. 4.13.

It can neither be divided, nor deceived, but must speak the same thing at all
times to all persons, Heb. 13.8. Men may have different apprehensions, and
understandings, and from the variety in them may put a various interpretation
upon the Spirits teaching, 1 Cor. 12.3. but yet the spirit remains the same
spirit of truth, it leads into all truth; Jo. 16.13. And though this variety
be in the spirits operation, in the work of illumination, and directing the
judgment from the variety which is in the capacities and apprehensions of men;
yet in the more certain properties of the spirits work upon the hearts of
Believers, as in the works of mortification and sanctification etc. there is no
such variety; for though there may be difference of degree, yet the least
measure of the spirits work in those things bears a divine stamp: that fruit of
the Spirit, which is in all goodness, righteousness and truth, Ephesians. 5.9. is of
the same nature and complexion in all Saints; from whence I argue,

That the most infallible Rule Saints can walk by in their choice of gospel
brethren or Church Members, is, to follow the tract of the Spirits choice, to
choose where it has chosen before them.

But the visible tract, or evidence of the Spirits choice is its manifesting
its indwelling through its operation in carrying the Soul out to the exercise
of Grace.

Therefore the visible operation of the Spirit of Grace in persons, is the most
infallible Rule for Believers to make their choice by.

Object. But may some say, how shall we know the Spirits operations, and
thereby its choice in such a day of delusion as this is: when the spirit of
Error that new reigns, has transformed it self to so near a likeness to
the Spirit of Christ?

Answ. Whatsoever is held forth to be the visible fruits and effects of the
Spirit of grace in the hearts and conversation of Believers by the word of
truth, ought to be admitted by them as sufficient Testimony of the Spirits
choice, Acts 11.17.

But the effects and fruits of the Spirit are clearly testified to be Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness and
Temperance, Gal. 5.22.23. Therefore such persons whom the Spirit of the Lotd
has so qualified, ought to be admitted, and owned by Believers as such of whom
the Spirit has manifested its choice.

For what may be further objected against this Argument from the various
understandings, and different minds of several visible gracious persons; and
from the gross Errors held by several persons seemingly gracious and
spiritual; I shall have occasion to speak to, when I come to answer to such
general Objections, as will include many of those particular Objections that
might be made against every Argument.

I might add many Arguments more drawn from the fruits of the Spirits choice:
But let all that long for the union of Saints, first resolve to make the
Spirits choice theirs: and then they shall hardly read a Scripture, but will
afford them some Characters of the Spirits choice; for our heavenly Father has
not a Child, nor our chief Shepherd a Sheep (that are visibly such) but his
holy Spirit has set his seal on them; either less or more visible, 2 Cor.
1.22. Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30. Therefore I shall conclude this head with one
Argument more, and leave the remain to the Readers meditation.

That qualification or State which gives us free access to and acceptance with
the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. and 1.6. by which we are made his adopted Sons, Romans
8.15. unto which he has annexed the performances of his preitious promises, 2
Peter. 1.4. wherein he seeks and desires us to worship him, Joh. 4.23. by which
we are joined unto the same body of which Jesus Christ is the head, 1 Cor.
12.13. and whereby we are made partakers of the same grace, 1 Col. 12. heirs
with him of the same Kingdom, James 2.5. or inheritance, Ephesians. 1.11, 14. and
partakers with him of the same glory in heaven, Col. 1.27. and 3.4. nay wherein
the perfection of, shall be their State in glory, John 17.23, 24, Ephesians 4.13.
when all other qualifications and additional rules of distinction shall cease,
1 Cor. 13.8, 10. is doubtless the most infallible rule, and qualification for
Gods Church and People to own and join with one another in the worship and
service of God by. But the qualification that gives us right unto and interest
in all the former particulars is a participation of a spiritual work of grace
upon the heart, as the Srciptures annexed with abundance more that might be
added, do sufficiently evidence.

Therefore it is the most infallible rule for Gods Churches and People to make
choice of Church Members and Gospel Brethren by.

The fourth General head from which we shall argue, is, the choice and
approbation of the infallible servants of God in all ages, whose fellowship and
communion with persons as Gods Church, and People, is recorded for our Example
in Scriptures; who in their several generations, and ages of the Church they
lived in, made this duty of preserving the Churches union and peace within it
self, the great and weighty duty; unto which most other duties when they come
in competition must give place unto. And they did always make the declared
visible choice of God their choice.

For those whom God had chosen to be his people by his visible Covenant with an
especial grace unto -- they owned to be their brethren and fellow members in
his Church -- excluding none of them -- nor admiting no other; which point I
suppose has been sufficiently proved in my discourse of the true Church-bounds,

That until I meet with one instance at least out of Gods word of a person or
persons visible which in those Church-bounds before mentioned (viz. Abraham's
seed and Circumcision in the type and Antitype) was kept out or not esteemed
one of Gods Church, not scandalous or unexcommunicated, I shall for bear
further speaking to that.

And shall chiefly from this head insist to observe the weight that the holy
servants of God in all ages have laid upon the Churches peace and unity.

When the Church consisted of Jacobs family, how careful was Joseph to
preserve union among his Brethren, though they had little deserved it at his
hands! yet the great and chief charge he lays upon them, is, see that you
fall not out by the way, Genesis 4.5.24. So Moses reproves his Brethren the
Hebrews for striving one with another Exodus 2.13. in in these words as Stephen
quotes it, Acts 7.26. Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong one another? So
for the Divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart, Judges 5.15,
16. So David, Behold, how good and how pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to
dwell together in Unity, etc. The whole Psalm is a compendium of the blessings
and excellencies of the Churches Unity.

So observe Solomon's description of a sower of discord among Brethren, Prove.
6.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. verses, compared with the 19th verse, and you will judge
he loved unity well. And so David again in Psalm. 122.6. Pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love her, verse 7. Peace be within thy
walls; and verse 8. For my Brethren and companions sake, I will now say, peace
be within thee.

Many Examples might be added, but I shall end with Paul, who was an eminent
example, both to Ministers and Christians in the Church- uniting work: If we
should consider him no further then the Church of Corinth, he approved himself
amongst them a skillful Physician, furnished with healing medicines, which he
tenderly administered to that sad divided erroneous Church; from whom he had
received so much hard measure, and ungrateful usage; and yet it is evident,
the peace and union of that Church was more upon his heart to preserve, then
all its other errors and miscarriage was to reform, though they were very
great ones, and were minded by him in their due place too.

But the whole being under the profession of visible Saints, he writes unto
them as fuch, without distinction, Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth,
to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, Called to be Saints, etc. as in
the first chapter and second verse.

And after he had finished his Preface, in the 9th verse, begins with that
which was most upon his heart, verse 10. Now I beseech you Brethren by the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be
no Divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment: for it has been declared unto me of you, my
brethren, of them which of are the house of Cloe, that there are contentions
among you, ver. 11. Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul,
I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ, ver. 12. is Christ Divided? was
Paul crucified for you, etc. or were you baptized into the name of Paul? ver.
13. But if you please to observe the main scope and drift of this holy Apostle
in the 1, 2, 3, 10, 12, 13, and 14. Chapter of this first Epistle; they all
drive at union, teaching uniting principles and pressing uniting practices;
affirming to them, that whatsoever pretenses or arguments they might have to
justify their Divisions, etc. yet they must necessarily arise from carnal
principles, Chap. 3. verse 3. And in the 12th Chapter, he commends to their
consideration unanswerable uniting Arguments; in the 13th Chapter, he presses
them to uniting graces: in the 14th Chapter, directs to uniting Duties;
videlicet, orderly improving their gifts to the Churches Edification.

So to the Church of Rome; Mark them which cause Divisions, etc. Romans 16, 17.
So to the Galatians the 5. and 6. Chapters, But if ye bite and devour one
another, ye shall be consumed one of another, Chap. 5.15. So to the Ephesians
the 2, 3, and 4. Chapters, especially Chap. 4. verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. I
therefore the Prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that you walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meckness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love; endeavoring to keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace: there is one Body, and one Spirit, even as
ye are called in one Hope of your calling: One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism,
One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all:
So to the Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. especially the first verse. If there be any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels and mercies; Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the
same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through
strife, or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better
then themselves. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on
the things of others. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus:
So to the Colossians, Chap. 3.12, 13, 14, 15, verses: Put on therefore (as the
elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindeness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering, for-bearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if any man has a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so
also do ye. And above all these things put on Charity, which is the bond of
perfectness. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye
are called in one body, and be ye thankful: And thus we might track him
through all his Epistles; he has sometimes more or less of this doctrine, as
the state of the people to whom he writ required.

By which exhortations, and earnest persuasions, you may observe how much the
unity of Gods Churches and Saints were upon the heart of this blessed Apostle,
having doubtless that Maxim of our Savior much upon his heart; that a Church
no more then a Kingdom, or house divided against it self could not stand,
Matthew 12.25. From all which I Argue;

That if the union of Gods Church, and preventing divisions and separations
amongst his people, were upon the hearts of the most holy and faithful
servants of God in all ages and sttates of the Church, as a principal and
special mercy to labor the attaining of; it then ought to be of the same
esteem and weight with all his now.

But that is evident by what has been said before; Ergo, the union of Gods
Church, etc. ought to be principally upon the hearts of the servants of God now.

5. The fifth general Head from whence we shall argue, is, from the several
Similitudes and Metaphors the Church of God is compared unto in Scripture;
whereby their mutual interest in, and union with one another is so lively held
forth, of which I shall only mention some few, by which the Reader may make
use of the rest to the same end.

First, From the Similitude of Believers, being Gods Children, Gal. 3.26. and
thereby of his houshsld, Gal. 6.10. Ephesians. 2.1. from whence I Argue;

That all persons who stand in an equal relation to God as children, and are
thereby all equally of Gods family of the housh^ld of faith, Gal. 6.10. have
all an equal right unto and interest in the privileges and provisions of Gods
house proportionable to their place therein; nay though prodigal children if
they will return, may encourage themselves so to do from the consideration of
that interest they have in the plenty of bread in their Fathers house, Luke
15.17. but all visible gracious persons, or true believers do stand in an equal
relation to God as Children, and thereby of his household: Ergo, they ought all
to be equally admitted by one another to the free participation in the
privileges and provisions of their Fathers house.

The second Argument; If it be a sin in men who are trusted by earthly parents,
with the care and guardianship of their Children until they come to Age, to
withold from them that part of their portion appointed for their maintenance
in their nonage, to the hazard of the starving or ruin of the Orphants; then
it must be a greater sin in Gods ministers, and Churches whom God has
entrusted with that part of his Childrens portion which the Father has
appointed them for their spiritual maintenance in their nonage of this life, to
withhold or detain it from them: But is a grievious crying sin in the former
Case; Ergo in the latter.

Third Argument. If it would not consist with true natural affection, and the
fatherly Care and wisdom of an earthly father only to make provision for his
most healthful strong and lovely Children, and leave the sickly, weak and
deformed in a starving Condition, much less can it consist, with the affection
wisdom and care of the most merciful and heavenly Father, ( who knows how to
pity his children, Psalm. 103.13. who much more knows how to give good things
to them that ask him: Mat. 7.11. who when his childen ask bread, will not give
a stone, verse. 9. who though a mother may forget her sucking child, etc. yet he
cannot forget his, Isa. 49.15.)

To make provision for the strong, and healthful, and lovely, and to leave the
diseased, weak, and unlovely in a perishing state: But it would not consist
with the former;

Ergo not with the latter.

Nay, the Scripture holds forth a more special extraordinary care in the Lord
of sick and weak souls, then of strong and healthy: The whole needs no
Physician, but they that are Sick, Luke 5.31. He shall feed his flock like a
Shepherd: he shall gather the Lambs in his Arms, and carry them in his bosom;
and shall gently lead those that are with young, Isa. 40.11.

And the contrary unmercifull disposition in his people he severely reproves,
Ezekiel. 34.4. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that
which was sick, neither have bound up that which was broken, neither have ye
brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was
lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them; compare this with the
tenth verse, from which Scriptures it is evident, That our heavenly Father is a
merciful tender Father to all, but especially to the weak; they stand in more
need of Church guidance and feeding then the strong does; And therefore for any
one to deny the benefit of Church Priviledges and provisions to such as are
visible believers, and sincere in the main, and walk close with God according
to the light received by them, upon the consideration of lesser errors and
weaknesses, then what by a visible Rule unsaints them, or brings them within
Church censures, as they have no Authority, so have they no example from the
Lord for it: The weak and diseased of Gods children are not only provided for
by him, but most especially upon his heart to be taken care of, and therefore
not to be denied the privileges and provisions of his house.

The second Metaphor whereby the necessity of the Saints union is lively held
forth, is their membership of the same body: now of all relations, this is
least consistent without unity; if they be living members, though some may be
lame, and others weak; yet the other members will not despise, nor cut them off
whiles there is any hope of cure; but rather take more care for the
preservation and recovery of them; and therefore says the Apostle, If one
member suffer, all suffer with it, 1 Cor. 12.26. in which Chapter he does fully
speak to the duty of unity amongst members of the same body, proving that the
eye cannot say to the hand, nor the head to the feet, I have no need of thee;
but that the Lord had so ordered the State of the body, that the most feeble,
and uncomely members should have their office in and care from the body, the
comely and useful have, verse 21, 22, 23, 24, That there might be no Schism in
the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another, verse
25. From whence I argue;

That if all the members of Christ's body have a right unto the privileges, and
benefits of their membership, and have upon them a mutual duty of care, and
service to one another,

Then ought no members to exclude each other from their right of membership in
the body.

But all Christ's true members of his visible body, have an equal right to the
priveledges and duties of their place in the body, 1 Cor. 12.

Ergo, None ought to exclude each other from their right of membership.

To which might be added that of branches, of the same Root, Sheep of the same
Fold, under the same Shepherd, Plants in the same Garden, besides their holy
fellowship, 1 John 1.3. in the fellowship of the Gopel, Phil. 1.^. Fellowship
of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. Fellowship of the spirit, 2 Phil. 1. so fellow-Citizens,
Ephesians. 9.19 Fellow Heirs, Ephesians. 3.6. Fellow Servants, Matt. 18.28, 29. and chap.
24.49. Fellow Soldiers, Phil. 2. 25. All which relations implie mutnall
interest in the public Stock of their fellowship, and would afford plenty of
Arguments to prove this duty of the unity of Saints in all their joint
privileges and duties as such. But I shall leave them to the Readers own
meditation; and shall proceed to the sixth general head.

The sixth sort of Argument, shall be drawn from the evident sad consequences
that attend the Church and People of God, through their separating and dividing
from one another; and their uniting together upon other principles then that of
visible grace.

The many and great evils that enter in at this door (if former ages had left
us without presidents) the age in which we live will afford us sad experience,
that the old Machivilian principle, divide if ye will destroy -- has much
truth in it; and therefore when Jacob would pronounce a curse against Simeon
and Levi for their iniquity he says; I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter
them in Israel. Gen 49.7. And so the Church complains, Lam. 4, 16. The anger
of the Lotd has divided them, he will no more regard them.

Division is an evident forerunner of destruction, the former being usualy
inflicted upon a people as a forerunning Judgment to make way for the latter;
and from thence was the force of our Saviors Argument, Mat. 12.25. Every
Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation, and every City or
house divided against it self cannot stand; implying that division prepares a
kingdom for desolation, and removes the strength by which the united City or
House stands; And therefore for the divisions of Reuben, Jud 5.16. there were
great searchings of heart; partly to find out and remove the cause, and partly
to prepare and arm themselves against the necessary and sad consequences that
might attend them: which Duty the division of our days among Gods people loudly
calls for: which to speak a word unto, I shall make a little digression; which
is to entreat all who desire in sincerity to set upon this work of
heart-searching in order to find out the cause and avoid the cosequences of the
sad Divisions amongst us, to consider the following directions.

1. Search thine own heart and way thoroughly; for this cursed spirit of
Division may have hid it self under such plausible pretenses of good; that
whilst thou seek for it among thy temptations and corruptions, it may be
close hid in several of thy best duties, and religious qualifications.

And therefore if thou find him not amongst thy temptations of pride of mind,
self conceit, affecting Singularity, a desire to seem some body amongst those
with whom thou walk -- a loving pre-eminence, over thy Brethren, or in a
froward, rash uncharitable spirit etc.

If thou searchest thy heart thoroughly, and find him not dwelling there under
the Covert of these or the like temptations, or corruptions; then proceed to a
further heart searching; as to the trial of thy graces, and religious duties:
for this spirit of darkness knows how to transform it self into an angel of
light. If thou be one that has attained to an eminent knowledge, and has
found out the mind of God, in some special truths that many other of Gods
people are dark in: then search whether thy knowledge has not pufft thee up,
as in 1 Cor. 4.18.19. 4 chap. verse 8. Col. 2.8. and begotten in thee an high
esteem of thine own things, Phil. 2.4 and a low esteem of the things of
others, Phil. 2.3. Whether thy gifts, graces, and religious endowments have not
been more employed by thee in promoting and propagating of disputable points,
and doubtful questions, Romans 14.1. tending rather to strife about words, 1 Timothy 6.4. and 2 Timothy 2.23. and vain janglins. 1 Timothy 1.7. then to godly
edifying, 1 Cor. 14.26. Whether by thy knowledge thou have not laid a stumbling
block in thy weak brothers way, Romans 14.13. by pressing upon him more remote
dutys, while the immediate duties of his present state in grace have been
neglected, contrary to that of our Savior who had many things to say, but
could not say them then, because the Disciples could not bear them, John 16.12.
And to that of Paul, who could not speak to the Church of Corinth as spiritual
but unto carnal, even unto babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 1. And therefore fed them
with milk; and not with strong meat, verse 2. I say search and examine whether
thy knowledge has not been employed by this Spirit of Division in some such or
the like failings which has so visibly tended to the promoting the dissentions
and divisions among Gods People.

But secondly, Art thou one that has attained to an extraordinary zeal for
God, his ways and truths, that thou think thou could say with the
Psalmist, The zeal of thy House has eaten me up, Psalm. 69.9. then search and
try thy zeal, for fear this spirit of division has not hid it self there: the
Jews misguided zeal, mentioned Acts 21.20. provoked them to cry out against
Paul; verse 28. Men of Israel, help! this is the man that teaches all men
everywhere against the people, and the Law, and this place, etc. It was Paul's
misguided zeal before conversion, for the tradition of his fathers, Gal. 1.14.
that provoked him beyond measure to persecute the Church of God, and waste it,
verse 13. and so Phil. 3.6. And therefore when thou art zealous, be sure it be
in a good thing, Gal. 4, 18. It is dangerous being exceedingly zealous for
points of Doctrine, or practice in matters disputable, and much controverted
betwixt both godly and able Christians; least whilst like those Pharisees,
Luke 11.42. thou be zealous in Tything Mint, and Rue, and pass over Judgment,
and the Love of God.

For as holy zeal rightly managed, is the most excellent grace among
Christians; so misguided is the most dangerous; and thus in thy searchings of
heart, for the divisions among Saints, go on by the same rule to search and try
every grace and gift in thee, lest thou missest of thy care in searching the
wound.

Now for the sad effects and evil consequences flowing from Divisions among
Christians, I may say they are unmentionable; for it is very hard to name an
evil, that at this day the people of God, and this Commonwealth groans under,
that our Divisions has not had an hand in, if not the main cause of.

Is there cause to complain; the much prayed for, and expected reformation has
been obstructed and retarded?

Why, consider whether Division hindered it not; if the generality of the godly
could but agreed on good things, to have proposed them, or jointly desired
them, we have not wanted an Authority to have granted and confirmed them: but
the several opinions and persuasions in Religion have had every one a
Reformation to promote; wherein an equal provision of liberty, and
encouragement for all that are truly godly, have been declined, and the
extremes of each of their different persuasions insisted on, like the cruel
harlot Solomon gave judgment against, they have rather chosen half a dead
child, then their opposites should enjoy a living one.

2. Is there cause to complain of the spreading of Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies, etc.

Why, Division opens the door for them; for every one making their particular
opinions a particular different Religion; and separating thereupon, has given
a kind of reputation to ^^^aration, though it be from the most pure Churches,
and holy people; so that if any make shipwreck of Faith and a good conscience,
and suck in principles inconsistent with grace and godliness: And observe, they
will not be born among the people with whom they then walked; why, it is but
separating, and setting up for themselves, and they have field-room enough to
sow their tares in.

Whereas were the people of God, who are sound in the Substantials of Religion,
united together within the bounds before mentioned, and exercising that
discipline God has set in his Church, it would bear an Authority, that as the
Apostle says, 2 These. 3.14. Tit. 2.8. The offending person would be ashamed,
which now it does not; for now the personmarked, Romans 16.17. or withdrawn from,
with all others observing him not of the same way or fellowship with them that
past the censure, do but look at it, as a censure past by a few Christians upon
the account of opinion, and from thence heed it not: That I may say the solemn
Ordinances of Christ, for the healing and recovery of the diseased and infected
of his people, are become contemptible, which nothing but the union of his
Church (that the censure of one congregation may be the censure of the whole)
will remedy.

And then if the walls of our Gospel Jerusalem were again repaired, the gates
might be kept shut against all that is Infectious, as well as the Unclean,
which whiles the one lies waste, the other will stand open.

3. Is there cause to complain, that Religion is sadly decayed, the Professors
of it are generally abated in their zeal for it, life or liveliness in it, and
love unto it?

Why, it is evident Divisions are the main cause of that too; for the great
noise that has been made amongst the Professors of Religion in general about
their different judgments (nay in most particular Societies of the same way,
there has not wanted so much difference of mind amongst them, as to occasion
much debates, disputings and vain janglings) has converted the time and pains
of such who should have labored in the teaching and holding forth
heart-searching, quickening words to the people, into controversies and
unprofitable Subjects not tending to spiritual edification, and from the same
cause the generality of Professors have had their heads filled with notional
Religion, and their hearts with discouraging impertinent scruples and doubts;
thus striving about the shadow until they have lost the Substance, contending
about the true form until they have lost the true power.

4. Is Religion in the power of it become contemptible with formal Professors
and the carnal multitude, and most faithful Preachers in many places little
followed nor esteemed, whereby the work of conversion has little success, etc?

Why, in these evils, Divisions has had the greatest hand; for what will
formal Professors and carnal people say to you, if you ask them, why they take
up in the form, and reject the power of Religion, and scorn and oppose the
Professors of it? why, they will answer; we know not which of your new
Religions to choose; when you can agree among your selves which is the right
way, and what Religion you will be of, then you shall know more of our minds;
from whose answer you may plainly perceive, that they judge all the difference
betwixt them and others that profess the power of Religion, is the difference
in opinions; whereas were opinions less heeded, and Religion more placed in the
power and life of godliness; if Christians would use the same Arguments
aagainst such as David did ( Psalm 4.2.3. Oh ye sons of men, how long will ye
turn my glory into shame; how long will ye love vanity; and seek after leasing.
Selah. But know that the Lord has set apart him, that is Godly for himself)
they would not bless themselves in the evil before mentioned, as they do.

5. Does Religion, as to the power and spiriality of it, begin to grow daily
less and less in request with many persons in Authority? That whereas formerly
Religion and gracious qualifications in persons were most enquired after, an^
first approved of, its now with them little set by, unless the person to be
admitted be of the same opinion with the Admittor; or at least of that opinion
which shall add something to his reputation and interest to be a favourer of:
but to show respect and countenance to a religions man as he is a religious
man, which was the principle owned by the instruments God chiefly chose to
carry on his work by in its low estate, this much decays.

Why, Divisions about opinions in Religion, has been the cause hereof too. For
at that time when Religion was so much in request with most persons in
Authority, it was before Religion was so much dissolved into disputes and
opinions, as it is now; and it is evident that reputation which a gracious
humble pious disposition and conversation gave religious persons generally once
in the eyes of Authority, and several persons of eminency in place, the
contrary frame of spirit and conversation, that have since overspread so many
professing persons about different opinions has lost it so far as it is
diminished: and I must say of all persons, the hot contenders about opinions,
of all hands, have the least ground to be offended at this; for I know few of
them, if they had power in their hands, would reform it. But it is evident that
so far as there may be ground for this complaint, the contentions, strifes, and
vain janglings about opinions in Religion has caused it, by being stumbling
blocks, and cause of offense to several in Authority, not able to bear it, nor
to distinguish betwixt the weaknesses and offenses of some violent promoters of
an opinion they dissent from; and the innocence or truth of the opinion it
self, or the generality of people professing it, which with the discouragements
put upon many truly gracious, for their judgment sake, by some rigid froward
persons in Authority in several places, I desire the Lord may make those in
chief Authority in time sensible of, whose hearts I hope are yet preserved
sincere to God in this matter, if they had but a right understanding of cases,
which for want of, they may too slightly pass over.

6. Is that glorious cause of God in these Nations so wonderfully owned, and
prospered by him in the hands of his people, for so many years past, wherein he
has so eminetly manifested his subduing overturning power against his enemies,
and with all his assisting and strengthening power with his people to whom that
gracious promise, Levit. 26.7. has been fulfilled, And ye shall chase your
enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword. And five of you shall
chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight, etc.
From whence all the Nations round about have been put to silence, and made to
confess with the Heathen, Psalm. 126.2.3. The Lord has done great things for
us: is this glorious day of Gods presence overshadowed with clouds of scorn and
contempt from enemies both at home and abroad, that there is cause to fear our
Sun will set at noon? why consider what a great hand our Divisions in Religion
has had in this; for this carnal spirit of Divisions in the things of God has
been the mother of all our Divisions and Factions in civil things; for several
particular opinions in Religion have dissolved into particular Factions and
interests of State, wherein the mutual common good of all good men has been
declined, each party laboring to set up it self above the rest, and has only
prevailed in this, to keep those things down, wherein the mutual good and
benefit of the whole consisted, and to weaken the hands of such whose hearts
were sincere and uprightly disposed to the common good, that they have been
constrained to throw much of the richest loading of the ship of this new
Commonwealth overboard in this storm, in order to save the whole from sinking:
from whence has also proceeded those obstructing oppositions that have been
betwixt good men, with those uncharitable reflections and aspersions they have
one endeavored to cast upon another, to the laying open and publishing to the
view of their common Adversaries all, (nay, more then all) their frailties and
weaknesses; from whence they have taken encouragement from time to time to
strengthen themselves in their evil principles; concluding that a people thus
divided and disunited could not long preserve themselves, much less protect
them, if they should have inclined to a peaceable acquiescence in their present
condition under them; and from thence they have taken encouragement to attempt
what they have done, and even to make use of some of our selves to carry on
their treacherous, and wicked disigns by: and to an eye of reason, unless the
Lord do speedily unite all or most good men jointly to agree, and stand by one
another in the promoting of, and preserving the common good of the whole, it
will not be possible long to bear up against such an united and potent
adversary with such a miserable divided, distracted people, as our divisions
render us to be; that if the glory of God, and the good of his people should be
of no weight with us, yet if we were not stupefied with this spirit of
Division, self-preservation might be sufficient to stir up all sober-minded to
labor for union among all good men, lest whiles we strive for that we cannot
obtain, we lose what we do possess. I might proceed to mention the loss of all
those eminently worthy instruments, both military and civil, that our divisions
has laid aside, even of several judgments, and prevented their generation in
a great measure of the benefit of their abilities and graces; besides a great
number of mean-spirited and uncertain-principled persons, who are thereby crept
into places of power, wherein they carry themselves much to the discouragement
and grievance of several precious to the Lord, and the increase of whom even
threatens the return of all those hard measures to Gods people they have been
by a mighty hand of his for several years delivered from, there wanting nothing
but a supreme Magistrate to countenance or permit such to oppress and
persecute; and if any person branded with a nickname of Religion, should
discover or speak his sense of this thing, or of any person so qualified, it
would be answered, he is not of your opinion, and therefore you esteem him not.

That let any person in power have never so much manifest prejudice in his
heart against godliness and a pious life: why, he has by our divisions an
opportunity to exercise it under the vizzard of opposing errors and heresies,
etc. without being discovered as an enemy to godliness; and the same
opportunity has any carnal principled or froward spirited preacher to
stigmatize and wound holy persons and principles, and incense Authority and the
rude multitude against them, and to crush the power of Religion in their
parishes, by exalting some pleasing form of it to the people; and by the
advantage of the divisions among the Godly can put a plausible vail over all
this; It is only against Schismatics and Heretics, etc. they speak.

Nay, further, if we take a view of all the hard measure that any gracious
tender spirited persons in Authority have met with, to the weaking their hands
from professors of Religion, it proceeds generally from this cause: such of
them as have endeavored to bear an even hand toward all they judge Godly, and
to extend an equal encouragement to all that fear God without respect to
opinion; why presently that spirit of jealousy and emulation, this spirit of
Division has begotten, will suggest apprehensions of their want of Love to
Religion and Gods people and truths, such are presently esteemed men of loose
uncertain principles, favorers of Heretics and Schismatics, discountenancers
of public worship, and obstructers of Reformation, etc. on the one hand; and
yet at the same time esteemed lukewarm Laodiceans, carnal Politicians, and
complyers with carnal principles, and interests, time-servers, etc. on the
other hand, when all the matter is, they do not give a special or peculiar
respect to the private opinion of such persons as find themselves grieved
above other their brethren, equally godly; by which means the hands of some in
chief places have been weakened, and their hearts discouraged in the work of
their generation; and some others who have for a long time professed an equal
respect to all the godly, have been offended, and stumbled; and from thence
have withdrawn their countenance from some of the godly, and thereby
strengthened the hands of Dividers and insulting principles and spirits; which
poor Ireland at this day has sad experience of.

I might further mind that general dejection of spirit that seems to be upon
many godly Magistrates and people in the work of their generation, with that
increase on the other hand, of confidence and height of spirit in opposers and
malignant Adversaries.

But to conclude, it is hard to name an evil of a public nature, either in
Church or Commonwealth, that divisions among the Godly has not had a great
hand in, if not been the chief cause thereof.

From all that has been said to this head I shall argue;

That that evil which is the inlet and supporter of such a multitude of other
evils, must needs be a very great evil, and of all other evils to be avoided
and labored against.

But it is evident such is the evil of Saints Divisions; Therefore it ought of
all evils to be avoided and labored against.

7. The last general head from which I shall argue, is from the evident and
unspeakable good both to Church and Commonwealth, and Soul and Body, the union
of Saints upon such Gospel stable principles would be attended with.

Whatsoever has been observed before as the evil of Divisions, union must
necessarily be the remover of, which I shall not need again to repeat, but
shall leave the Reader to observe and satisfy himself in by meditation: For
the most happy Commonwealth, City, Nation, Family, or Society of men, it is
evident to the very light of nature and reason, that union in their communities
is the preservation of their happiness, nay the perfection of union is part of
the Glory and happiness of heaven; And therefore of the Church of God on earth.

Those precious promises in Scripture foretelling the glorious estate of Gods
Church on earth do declare the Excellency of it shall be its union and peace,
as Isay 11. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb; and the Leopord shall lie down
with the Kid, and the Calf and the Young Lion and the Fatling together, and a
little Child shall lead them, verse. 6: And the sucking child shall play on the
hole of the Aspe etc. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain
etc. verses 8, 9.

The Envy also of Ephraim shall depart etc. Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor
Judah shall not vex Ephraim, verse 13. and so Ezekiel. 37.22. And I will make them
one Nation in the Land upon the Mountains of Israel, And one King shall be
King to them all, and they shall be no more two Nations, neither shall they be
divided into two Kingdoms any more, and David my Servant shall be King over
them, and they all shall have one Shepherd, so Zech. 14.9. And the Lord shall be
King over all the earth; in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one.
But more particularly,

1. This glorious union of Gods Church would renew its strength, that though
now in its divided shattered state it shows it self like Israel scattered
abroad throughout all the Land of Egypt to gather stubble, Exodus 5.12, in which
state every Petty task-master of Pharcah can exercise Tyranny over them, ve^s.
14. but if once united, they would then be in the sight of their enemies, as
Israel gathered together was in the plains of Moab, terrible for their enemies
to look upon, Numb. 22.3. their beholders then, instead of cursing, of them
would say: How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel!
Numbers 24.5. He has as it were the strength of an Unicorn; he shall eat up
the Nations his enemies, and shall break their bones, and pierce them through
with his arrows, verse. 8. The Church in its united State, is like a City with
walls and bulwarks, Isa. 26.1. In that day shall this song be sung in the Land
of Judah: We have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint for walls and
bulwarks. Beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, Terrible as an Army with
Baxners, Cant. 6.4, 10.

2. The renewing of the Churches unity would renew its purity; when there shall
be One Lord, and his Name One, Zach. 14.9. Every Pot in Judah and Jerusalem
shall be holy unto the Lord, verse 21. The way of the Lord shall then be called
the way of holiness, Isay. 35.8. compared with the 9th. The Gates of the holy
City might then be shut, that there should no more pass through the
uncircumcised and unclean.

3. The Churches unity would repair its reputation and esteem; the precious
sons of Sion more precious then fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen
Pitchers in their scattered divided State, Lam. 4.2. The Church may then truly
complain; how is the gold become dim, the most fine gold changed; the stones of
the Sanctuary are poured out on the top of every street, verse 1. they are
despised as the Common pibbles of the Brook; every vile abject, every mean,
base, vile-spirited man, can look upon precious Saints, if but branded with a
nicknamed Religion, as a meaner creature then himself, of which the Church
complains, Psalm. 44.11. Thou have given us like sheep, appointed for meat* and
have scattered us among the heathen; and from thence in the 13th verse
complains, thou make us a reproach to our neighbors, and a scorn and
derision to them that are round about us; thou make us a byword among the
heathen, and a shaking of the head among the people. But when Sion comes to be
a City with Walls and Towers, Psalm. 48.12, 13. then Beautiful for stituation,
the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion, verse 2. then the abjects and base
people shall be so far from scorning her, and shaking the head at her; That lo
Kings, when assembled, and pass by together, shall see her, they shall marvel,
and be troubled, and haste away; fear shall take hold upon them, and pain as on
a woman in travel, verses 4, 5, 6.

4. The renewing the unity of the Church will renew the growth and increase of
the Church; it is a sad and just complaint of many of the godly in these days,
that converting work cease, we are spending all upon the old Stock; Why, what
hinders, as a second cause, so much as our divisions? I am persuaded, that
never since the ascension of him that ascended up on high to give gifts unto
men, and the cessation of extraordinary gifts, there has been such a measure
of spiritual gifts given forth as this day affoords; never more painful
Laborers sent into Gods harvest; nor more able faithful Pastors and Teachers
given to his Churches, of all persuasions, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians.
4.11, 12.

But this overflowing spirit of Division, like a sweeping rain in harvest,
carries all the fruit away; or like the frosts in spring, nips all in the bud.

This spirit may well be reckoned as the chief of those little foxes that
spoils the vines; for our vines have tender grapes, as Cant. 2.15. for no
sooner is a soul brought to a sense of his lost estate by nature, and begins to
enquire after Christ, to say with the Jailer, What shall I do? but forthwith it
meets with, from this spirit, such a multitude of needless, or at lest
unseasonable questions and doubts in its mind, about some of the points in
controversy, that dissolves all its beginnings of heart-work into head-work;
that most of Christ's new born babes at this day, instead of desiring the
sincere milk of the word to grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. will at first begin to
drink wine, and feed on strong meat, which they being not able to digest, fall
into spiritual surfeits, from whence proceed spiritual loathings of heavenly
things, spiritual sicknesses, and diseases of all sorts, which so many poor
Professors at this day lie languishing under; whereas if once the Lord should
unite his people upon the principles of visible grace, all would then be
jointly concerned chiefly to propagate those principles of grace and godliness,
upon which they were united; and though most of the points in controversy
might remain of weight upon the hearts of all that sincerely hold them, to be
faithful to their consciences in walking up in the practice of them; yet there
would be an holy tenderness of troubling the heads of young Converts, or weak
Christians, with unreasonable scruples; but each sober mind would take the
Apostles advice, Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the faith, receive you, but not
to doubtful disputations. And with the Apostle Peter would exhort them, to add
to their faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance;
and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness,
brotherly kindeness; and to brotherly kindness, charity; 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. and
to tell them, if these things be in them, and abound, they shall neither be
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, verse 8. That
the unity of Gods people in principles of visible grace and godliness, would
much tend to the increase and growth of Gods Church; therefore in the glorious
day of the Churches Union, Isa. 60. when violence shall no more be heard in the
land, nor wasting, nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shall call thy
walls Salvation, and thy gates praise, verse 18. Then shall Kings come to thy
light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising, verse 3. then shall the
Abundance of the Sea be Converted unto thee, verse 5. It shall be then said,
who are these that fly like a Cloud, and as the Doves to the Windows, verse 8.
The Sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending to thee, and All
they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and
They shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Sion of the holy one of Israel,
verse 14. That whereas in thy divided disunited State, thou have been forsaken
and ha^ed, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal
excellency, a joy of many generations, verse 15. the whole Chapter is spent in
seting forth the mighty increase of Gods Church in the day of its Unity.

5. The renewing of the Churches unity would abundantly tend to renew its joy
and comfort; The ransomed of the Lord shall then return, and come to Sion with
songs and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness;
and sorrow and sighing, shall flee away, Isa. 35.10. compared with the 8. and
9. verses, which speaks of the Churches Unity; So Psalm. 48.1. Let mount Sion
rejoice; let the Daughter of Judah be glad, etc. compared with the 12. and 13.
verses; which speaks of Unity; if for the divisions of Reuben there were such
great searchings of heart, surely for the healing of the divisions of Reuben
there must flow in great Comfort and Joy of heart; and therefore says David,
who had great experience of the evil of divisions among Gods people, the sense
he had thereof, made him cry out, Psalm. 133. How good, and how pleasant it is
for Brethren to live together in unity! Its like the precious ointment upon the
head, that runs down upon the beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the
skirts of his garments, as the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended
upon the mountain of Sion, etc. He could not think of things excellent enough
to compare the sweetness and comfortableness of union unto.

I might further proceed upon this Head, as to the increase of the Peace and
all other outward prosperity with the increase of all spiritual graces, both
in the enjoyment and exercise of them: but I shall leave the rest to the
Readers enlargement and close up this head with this following Argument.

That that mercy which would prepare the way for, and bring in with it such a
multitude of other precious mercies, must needs be it self a glorious mercy,
and of all other mercies inferior to it, to be labored after and prayed for.

But such is the mercy of the Saints union as before; Therefore it ought of all
mercies inferior to it to be prayed, and labored for.

I shall now proceed to the answering of such Objections as I can remember to
have met with, or have ground to believe will be made against the several
forementioned heads and arguments drawn from them, which I have deferred for
this place rather then to annex them to the head or argument they may most
properly oppose, in regard several of them are so general, that they will
include the several particulars that might be made against each part, thereby
avoiding prolixity. Now the persons from whom the ensuing objections may be
expected, must be either from such as do err in the extreme against my first
proposition, in not approving of a separation betwixt Believers and
Unbeleevers, or visibly gracious and visibly ungracious persons, or otherwise
from such as do err in the extreme against my second general position of the
duty of all true Believers, and Churches separated from the World etc. to walk
together in the performances of all Religious worship and services without
separating or dividing from one another.

Which two sorts of persons will include the contrary-minded to this truth in
both extremes. And being desirous to avoid all names of distinction that might
be offensive, earnestly wishing that those Nicknames of division among Saints
might be like those names of Baal^m, Hos. 2.17. taken out of our mouths, that
the old good names of Believers and Unbeleevers, or godly and Ungodly might be
again revived:

I shall state the objections in a general way, leaving the reader to choose
such as are his own, and consider the Answers to them as to himself
accordingly; for I judge there will be several objections that would be jointly
made by persons of several persuasions, and from several Principles, which to
answer to distinctly would be a means to multiply many words to the same thing.

Object. 1. We do admit all true Believers, and holy gracious persons to have
a right to all Gods Ordinances, and to be admitted as true members of his
Church. But they which only seem to be such, and are poisoned with Errors and
Delusions; with which they would infect the flock of Christ, th^se we only
reject and speak against as Schismatics and Heretics etc.

Answ. Such as the Errors, and delusions may be, your rejection may be just;
but the generality of Christians so rejected, and stigmatized with nicknames
by you are not of that sort; but generally holds the foundation points of
Doctrine, and substance of Religion with you, the difference lying in things
very controversal.

Now in the purest times of the Church, there were believers tainted with
diverse errors of a dangerous nature, who yet were not rejected, as
incommunicable, nor reproached with the odious names of Schismatics, etc. by
the rest of their brethren, though several of them erred in points of great
weight; as denying Justification by Faith, without the works of the Law;
against whom Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans and Galatians; the chief
scope of which Epistles being to prove the erroneousness and danger of those
Doctrines, with which you may observe the Ephesians, Colossians and Philippians
were also tainted; which error, as it was held by those Christians, I judge was
of a more dangerous tendency, then the generality of those controversies,
Christians in these days usually separate upon: and in the Church of the
Colossians there were several deluded with Philosophical errors, and Heathenish
opinions and customs, as worshipping of Angels, etc. Col. 2.8. compared with
the 16, 17, 18, 19, verses. And further, what sad errors and schisms was the
Church of Corinth infected with? there were contentions, strifes, and vain
janglings, 1 Cor. 1.10. and 3.3, 4. contradiction and contempt of their
Ministers, 1 Cor. 1.12. even of Paul himself, whom God had used as the
instrument of their conversion, 1 Cor. 11.12. 2 Cor. 10.1, 10. given to
vexatious, Law suits, to the shame of the truth among the heathen, chap. 6.
verses 1, 2. and abusing of their Christian liberty, to the hazard of the
destruction of the Faith of their brethren, chapter 8. Errors in the
administration and receiving of the Lords Supper even to the profaning that
holy Ordinance, Chap. 11.

Yet the Apostle in all he wrote against these great errors and miscarriages,
gives not a word of Command or direction to the more sober and sound, to
separate from those corrupted, nor cast them out of the Church, nor to esteem
them as Schismatics, etc. but labors by sound Doctrine and holy example, to
convince them of their errors; and withal, presses them to unity, and warns
them against their divisions, as the worst of their errors; as it is evident
from those Scriptures quoted: From whence I argue;

That if the Apostles and infallible penmen of Scriptures, who were able to
judge of matters of controversy without mistake, did for the Churches peace
sake, permit persons holding and maintaining many great and dangerous errors to
abide in the Church; and there own them as fellow-Brethren, whilst they
manifested visible sanctity in the main, and retained the substance of true
Faith, and that in the most pure time of the Church, when the erroneous persons
could not receive those errors by tradition and education from Christian
Ancestors or Teachers:

Then much more ought the Ministers of the Gospel, and with them all Gods
people now (being themselves fallible in judgment, and exceedingly disagreeing
among themselves about the points in controversy, (even the able and gracious
of them) and especially considering the time we live in, is but the dawning of
the day of Gospel light, and knowledge out of a long dark night of
Antichristian error and pollution, through which many of themselves, not long
since were groping in the dark about several Gospel truths, in which the light
of Christ has since more fully informed them) to walk toward one another with
all tenderness and charity, putting in practice that rule of forbearing one
another in love, Ephesians. 4.2. And thereby endeavoring to keep the unity of the
Spirit, in the bond of Peace, verse 3.

But it is evident, the Apostle and holy Penmen of Scripture, did so walk in
like cases, when there was not the like Reason.

Therefore Gods Ministers and people ought so to walk now.

Object. 2. Then you are for the permitting of all Errors in the Church; for if
we must not separate from Errors of this nature, what shall we separate from?

Answ. To make a particular discrimination by name of all Errors, or to
determine the degree of any particular Errors that shall render the erroneous
person incommunicable, is too hard a task for me to undertake; I shall only
propose some general Rules and Cases which the Scriptures seems to countenance,
and shall submit them to the judgment of judicious Christians.

First, That Churches and Believers ought to withdraw from, and deny Communion
with all such, who though they profess the true form of godliness, yet deny the
power of it.

Secondly, From such, who though they make a profession of the power as well as
the form of Religion, by holding regeneration and visible grace to be necessary
qualifications for visible members of Gospel Churches; yet when they are so
corrupt in judgment, that their Errors are first, contrary to godliness; or
secondly, inconsistent with true Grace; or thirdly, destroy the foundation
Doctrine of Salvation, they ought to be withdrawn from.

For the first, By persons denying the power of godliness; I mean such, who
though professing of, and practicing the true external Acts of Gods worship, as
they may be generally professed, and practiced by the generality of sound
Christians; yet in their declared principles and conversation disown the inward
life and power of it, expressed by the visible effects of true Grace, (as the
work of regeneration, and being born again, Jo 3.3. with all other visible
signs of Repentance from dead Works, and Faith toward God, as Hebr. 6.1.) to
be necessary qualifications for Gospel-fellowship, which may be discerned,
either by their palpable ignorance, as Nicodemus, Joh. 3.4. or otherwise by
their apparent enmity to, or scorn of gracious qualifications in others, by
deriding the godly, as holy brethren and sisters; or by the scorning the spirit
in its gifts and graces in the Saints.

Now such, though they may profess the form, do visibly deny the power of
godliness, from whom we have an express rule to withdraw, 2 Timothy 3.5. From such
turn away; and from such doubtless the Apostle presses the Corinthians to
separate themselves, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. Be ye not unequally ^^aked
together with unbeleevers; for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what commmunion has light with darkness? And what concerd
has Christ with Belial? or what part has he that believes with an Infidel?
And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for ye are the Temple of
the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and
I will receive you.

2. Second sort of persons, that the Scripture is clear, the Churches and
Servants of God are to separate from, is from persons holding opinions, or
living in Practices contrary to Godliness, I mean such opinions as tends to a
denying of God to be a pattern of Life, in his revealed communicable
qualities, manifested by his word, and by the Life of Christ, who was the
express Image of his Father, Heb. 1.3. and the lives of his holy Prophets and
Apostles, concerning which Paul to Timothy gives an express command, 1 Timothy,
6.3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
Godliness etc. from such withdraw thy self; and further in the first Chapter,
and 1 verse; But thou oh man of God, fly these things, and follow after
Righteousness, Godliness, etc. Nay the same Apostle to Titus makes this the
distinguishing Character of the true faith, Titus 1.1. Paul a Servant of God,
according to the faith of Gods Elect, and the truth which is according to
Godliness, So in Titus 2.11, 12, verses, for the grace of God which brings
salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly. righteously, and godly in this present
World, and by well considering the scope of those three short Epistles, you may
plainly observe what the Apostles meaning was by doctrines according to
Godliness in all persons, of what State of condition soever, as in People
toward Magistrates, 1 Timothy, 2.1, 2, 3. Titus 3.1. In Ministers in their places,
Chap. 3. Chap. 4.6.12. verse. 2 Timothy 2.15.24. Chap. 4.2. Titus 1.6, 7, 8 9. in
private Christians toward their Ministers, Chap. 5.1. 17, 18, 19. In Servants
toward Masters, Chap. 6.1, 2. Titus 2.9.10. In rich toward the poor, Chapter
6.17, 18, 19 verses. In aged men, Titus 2, 2. In aged women, Titus 2, 3, 4. In
young women, Titus 2.4, 5. In young men, verse. 6.

Teaching us by all those Scriptures with all other of like tendency in the
Word of God, that then are Opinions to be esteemed contrary to the truth which
is according to Godliness, when they tend to break the Bonds of natural and
Civil relations, and to slight the duties of them, and fill the Heads and minds
of Christians with loose Notions of carnal liberty, which the Apostle calls
perverse disputings of men of Corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, 1 Timothy
6.5. and doting about questions and strife of words whereof comes envy,
Strife, raylings, evil, surmizings verse. 4. which he again presses them to
avoid, as profane, vain bablings, verse. 20th.

Now from such the Word of God is clear, though they walk with never such a
show of holiness and profession of spiritualness, they ought to be avoyed and
withdraw from as ungodly persons

3. Third sort of persons I judge Churches and Saints ought to separate and
withdraw from, are persons so corrupt in Judgment, and tainted with such gross
impious Errors in opinions, as are evidently inconsistent with true grace;
such was Hymeneus, Alexander and Philetus mentioned, 1 Timothy 1.2. compared with
2 Timothy 2.17. who had made Shipwreck of faith, and a good conscience; such does
the Apostle mean by an Heretic, Titus 3.10. Such opinions the Apostle calls the
Error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3.17. which implies more then a wicked Error;
which a holy Christian through weakness or temptation, may be drawn into as
Peter and Barnabas was, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. verse. such are said to err from
the Faith, 1 Timothy 6.10. which is more then to err in the Faith; for those
Errors were contrary to the graces of Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love,
Patience, Meekness etc. which the Apostle in the next verse exhorts Timothy to
follow in his flight from the foresaid Errors.

Such are said to err from the truth, James 5. 19. viz. the Body and substance
of saving truth; for he that converts such a sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a Soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, verse. 20.
which clearly implies the erring from the truth in that peace is meant such an
erring as putts the Erroneous person out of a saveable state: they are said to
live in Error, 1 Pet. 2.18. which is more then to have Error live in them: In
which Chapter he fully describes what sort of erroneous persons he there means,
from the tenth verse to the end; John calls it the Spirit of Error, 1 John 4.6.
by which he means more then an errring spirit. Jude calls such sensual
separatists, Jude 19. such as had no appearance of the grace of God in them,
but were ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and
denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: the whole Epistle is
spent to describe those sort of Separatists; now from such sort of Erroneous
persons as these are mentioned, and fully described, least we should mistake,
doubtless the Church of God and Saints ought to separate from, and reject.

4. The fourth sort of Erroneous persons, which I judge holy Churches and
Saints ought to separate from, are such as err in fundamentals, or foundation
points of Religion, holding opinions, that lay the Ax to the Root of the Tree
of Life.

Now as these sorts of Errors are most dangerous to be permitted: so they are
most difficult to single out: for though it be a thing out of doubt, that there
are foundation Doctrines, which the Church of God ought to prefer, in order to
its Being, before its Peace and Unity; yet it remains very doubtful, whether
several of those precious and substantial truths that are highly to be prized,
and much contended for, and are by several godly and sound Christians esteemed
foundation points, be so or no: that is, so to be esteemed foundations, as the
persons not believing them, or holding Error contrary to them, (and are
otherwise in the main gracious) be thereby made incommunicable: But as in the
former cases, so in this, I shall decline coming to particulars, as a work
above my capacity; and shall only tender my thoughts in some few general Rules;
and so leave it to them who are more able to add.

1. First, I judge that Errors against the foundation points of Religion, must
be of such a nature and tendency, as do strike at the very root of
Saving-Grace, and tend to unstate the the person holding them from a
possibility of Salvation, he living and dying therein; for so Paul argues, 1
Cor. 15.14. concerning the resurrection of the dead; If Christ be not risen
then is our preaching Vain, and our faith is also Vain. And also verse 17.18.
And if Christ be not raised, your Faith is Vain, ye are yet in your Sins. Then
they also that are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished.

2. I judge they must be Errors contrary to the general tendency and scope of
Scripture, and to the Doctrines of Salvation, plainly and evidently therein
expressed, which all true Believers concur and agree in: And therefore says the
Apostle, if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 3.3. and
so chapter 11.3. But I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve
through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ. For if he that comes preaches Another Jesus, whom we have
not preached, or if ye receive Another Spirit which ye have not received, or
Another Gospel which ye have not excepted, etc. ye might well bear with him.
And so Gal. 1.6, 7, 8. I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that has
called you into the grace of Christ, unto Another Gospel: Which is not Another;
but there be some which trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ.
But though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach another Gospel unto you, then
that which we have preached, let him be accursed.

Now it is evident that that bringing in another Gospel was a joining
Circumcision and the works of the Law with Faith in Christ in Justification,
contrary to the very Essence of Gospel Faith, as they held it.

Object. Why, how did they hold it? did not you before number this among one of
the Errors Paul permitted in the Church of Rome, etc. and pressed the Church to
union, without separating from it?

Answ. They held it rigidly, imposing it upon others, as of necessity to
Salvation, chap. 2.14. and 6.12. For where the same Error was held more
moderately, as we observe before in the Church of Rome and Corinth, etc. the
Apostles deals milder with it; there he says, Circumcision is nothing, nor
uncircumcision is nothing, 1 Cor. 7.19. Is any man called being circumcised;
let him not be uncircumcised, verse 8. But when they come to hold it imposingly
and positively, as in this verse, he then changes his voice: then O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth? etc.
Chap. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. then, Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall Profit you Nothing; For I testify again to Every Man
that is circumcised, Christ is become of None Effect unto you, Chap. 5.2, 3, 4.
So that the manner of holding an Error, alters the case of its fundamentalness
much: It was Peter's separating from the Saints differing minded, and
dissimulation, rather then his Error, Chap. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. that made Paul
withstand him to the face, verse 11. But it is my opinion, most other
fundamental Errors are included under the three heads foregoing; and therefore
I shall not venture any further upon this difficult work of distinguishing
fundamentals; but conclude my Answer to this Objection, with this one Argument.

That if those Errors and Heresies the Scripture mentions, as dangerous and
unsufferable in the Church of God, which the Churches and Saints of God are
only exhorted to reject and withdraw from, was all either of a scandalous
profane nature, denying the power of godliness, on the one hand; or contrary
to a godly life, inconsistent with true grace, or striking at the foundation of
Saving Faith on the other hand: Then the Churches and Saints of God, who desire
not to be wise above what is written at this day, ought only to reject and
withdraw from such.

But the Errors and Heresies the Scripture mentions as dangerous and
insufferable in the Church of God, whom the Churches and Saints of God were
exhorted to reject, and withdraw from, were only such: Ergo, the Churches and
Saints at this day ought only to reject, and withdraw from such.

Object. But there are several commands, or rules in Scripture to withdraw
from, and note persons for offenses, that seem to be of a different nature from
these general Rules, proposed by you, as for disorderly walking, 2 These. 3.6.
Now we command you brethren in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, etc. and and
so for disobedience, verse 14. If any man obey not the word, by this Epistle
note that man, etc.

Answ. I do admit all offenses and disorders, coming within the rules of Church
censure, to be incommunicable after the Church censure is past, so far as such
censure extends to excommunicate; and consequently, persons living in such
disorders, and not manifesting repentance, and resolution to reform, ought to
be refused admission into fellowship, if they should tender themselves, and
none other: It being my opinion, that whatsoever is sufficient to unqualifie a
person for a Church state before admission, would also be sufficient to cast
him out, or withdraw from him, if he were already in: But the cases quoted,
with all other of that nature, I judge, come clearly within the second rule
laid down, of opinions and practices contrary to the Doctrine which is
according to godliness: For if you observe these two verses, quoted with what
the Apostle says betwixt them, by way of explanation, we shall not need to
search further for his meaning, by these two rules, which are indeed but one,
intending both the same persons, and the same things; which was not Errors of
judgment or opinion, but Errors of life and conversation; as ver. 11. For we
hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all,
but are busy bodies; now such we command, and exhort by the Lord Jesus Christ,
that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread: By which we may
discern, there were some members of this Church, that were idly disposed,
living in the neglect of their callings; and not only so, but busying
themselves about matters they were not called unto; tending not only to the
burden and charge of the Church, 1 These. 2.9. 2 These. 3.8. but to the
disturbance and disquiet of it, 1 These. 4.11. And also to the scandal of the
Gospel to them that were without, verse 12. which sort of persons are only
meant here by the Apostle; and of the like disorder he further complains, 1 Timothy 5.13. And they withal learn to be idle, wandering about from house to
house; and not only idle, but tatlers also, and busybodies, speaking things
which they ought not; and therefore this cannot concern any persons who are of
holy, blameless conversations, for their Error in judgment, not within the
former rules proposed.

Object. But is there not an Order, that God has appointed his Churches to
walk in, which such as refuse to observe, ought to be excluded and withdrawn
from as Disorderly persons?

Answ. Yes, there is an Order God has appointed, which such as refuse may be
withdrawn from, as disorderly persons; yet all disorder does not arise to that
height of offense, as to be liable to that censure; and therefore we must
consider disorderly walking amongst Christians, chiefly to consist of offenses
against one of these two Rules.

First, either against the Rule of Gospel conversation, or,

Secondly, Against the Rule of Gospel visible worship.

Against the first of these Rules did all those offend, which we observe the
Apostle to Timothy writes against; and those idle busybodies, mentioned by
Paul to the Thessalonians, as in the former Objection; of such Peter
prophesied, 2 Pet. 2.2. By reason of whose pernicious ways, the way of truth
shall be evil spoken of; So Paul to the Philippians, Chapter 3.18. For many
walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they
are the enemies of the Cross of Christ. Now these sort of disorderly persons, I
hope all that are gracious will agree to disown.

But the difficulty lies in the second head of disorders against the rule of
Gods visible worship; the controversy about which has produced more rents and
divisions among Gods people, then Doctrines of Faith, or inward qualification
of grace has done; for such as never were able to contend for the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, Jude verse 3. nor to understand the mystery hid from
ages and generations, Col. 1.26. such as never had acquaintance with the power
of godliness in their own hearts, have been very able to plead for the form of
it, from rational conclusions out of the History of the Gospel, with which they
have filled their heads; and therefore it must be admitted, that not only
carnal Christians, but even Jews, Turks, and Pagans, that are capable of
reading the Scriptures, are capable of discovering, and observing the outward
form of Gods worship; for what men are rationally capable to oppose, they are
rationally capable to judge of and observe.

But Atheists, Jews, and Turks, etc. are rationally capable to oppose:
Therefore rationally capable to judge of, and observe the visible written rule
of Gods worship; and therefore though the visible rule, and true form of Gods
worship laid down in Scripture, ought to be highly valued by all sincere
Christians, and by them all faithfully observed; yet when through the general
Apostasy of Professors of the true Religion, or the corrupt estate of the
Church, the visible form of Gods worship becomes corrupted, and from thence
controversies arise, about the Primitive pattern, betwixt persons equally aiming
at purity in it, there ought then to be much of tenderness, and caution in
such, about their striving for the right form, lest thereby they stifle and
destroy the true power, which is the end and substance of the form, and ought
to be proportionably preferred before it; and therefore we find the Lord
despising, and pouring contempt upon the true form, when it has been so
abused, as to set up it self against or without the true power: To what purpose
is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me, says the Lord; I am full of your
burnt-offerings of Rams, and the fat of fed beasts: I delight not in the blood
of Bullocks, nor of Lambs, or of he-goats: when you come to appear before me,
who has required this at your hands, to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain
oblations; incense is abomination unto me; the new Moons and Sabbaths, and
calling of Assemblies I cannot away with: It is iniquity, even the solemn
meeting. Your new Moons, and appointed Feasts my soul hates; they are a
trouble to me, I am weary to bear them; so Isa: 29.13. Ezekiel. 33.30. Yet all
these particular performances were the required instituted Acts of Gods visible
worship, which he blames them for the neglect of, Isa. 43, 21, 22, 23, 24. Mal.
1. 8. compared with the 13, 14. But when his people become carnal observers of
his visible worship, crying as those carnal Jews did, the Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.4. without manifesting a due regard to the life
and power of Religion, which all outward acts of worship are but the shadow and
form of, Then behold, to obey is better then Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.12. He will
have mercy then, and not Sacrifice, Hosea 6.6. Mat. 9 13. Then to do Justice
and Judgment, is more acceptable to the Lord, then Sacrifice, Pro. 21.32. as
the Scribe replied to our Savior, Mark 12.3. Well Master, thou have said the
truth; for there is one God, and none other but be, and to love him with all the
heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the
strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more then all whole
burnt-offerings and sacrifices: and when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly,
he said unto him, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God; in which reply, the
Lord places a great deal of weight in persons, esteeming the power of Religion
much above the form of it; And from all these Scriptues I would infer, that in
our strivings about the true forms of worship, we should have a tender regard
to the preserving, and propagating the true power before it, if they come in
competition, in regard the Lord has so evidently in his word declared his
well-pleasedness in the power, when mentioned distinct from the form; but never
to the form, when mentioned distinct from the power.

Object. Do you think the power of Religion can consist without the true form?

Answ. If by true form is meant a sincere desire after the true form, and a
conscientious walking up thereto, so far as the soul is convinced, or persuaded
of the truth thereof, I answer, no:

For I do not judge the power of Religion can consist in the wilful and settled
neglect of the least of Gods Commandments, even in his visible worship, when
nothing comes in competition therewith of more immediate concernment to Gods
Church and Glory.

But if you mean by true form, the perfect unerring Observance of the outward
Acts of Gods worship, without the mistake of the Rule given in his word; Then I
answer it may, in regard the most understanding and sincere Christian is
fallible and subject to mistake; for the proof of which, our own sad experience
speaks loud; for I hope there is none so uncharitably rigid of any persuasion,
retaining gracious qualifications, but will admit, that amongst such as are
godly differing from them, there are some that are both able and sincere, and
that if they were convinced of their duty in the matter wherein they are judged
to err, would practice it, and in that case, I judge it is against all the
rules of spiritual and natural Reason as well as Scripture, to compel a
conformity to a visible Act of worship, before the conscience be convinced of
its duty therein, or at least unprincipled in Judgment and Conscience, against
the Act required; which all that separate from, or reject gracious persons for
not conforming to such Acts of worship before conviction, do evidently do.

For I judge, there can be no higher impulsion upon conscience in a gracious
person, their anonstating of him from his visible interest in, and privilege
with the visible Church of Christ; which surely sincere Christians do value
above their Liberty, or the greatest outward good they enjoy; yet this they
must lose if they will not conform to Acts of worship against their judgment
and Conscience; and these violations of conscience are often practiced by such as
most cries up Liberty of Conscience; as if the imposing of practices and
principles upon gracious persons, conscientiously dissenting from them, were no
violation of Conscience.

Object. But there are some differences of opinion betwixt such as are Godly
about the visible worship of God, that are inconsistent to unity in Gospel
Order; for where some are possitively for, and others positively against the
same thing, how can such agree together to walk in one fellowship.

Answ. Either those positive contraries must be about things of that weight
that one side must come within some of the Former Rules before minded, page 17.
or otherwise of less weight, for which there is no visible rule in Scripture
to separate and withdraw from: If the former, the sound in Judgment has there
an evident rule to withdraw and separate from; If the latter, then to walk
tenderly and charitably toward each other; then the strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please themselves; then Paul's rule, Philip.
3.15, 16. comes in, Let us therefore as many as be perfect (or sincere) be thus
minded; and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this
unto you Nevertheless, whereto we have already attainted, let us walk by the
same rule; let us mind the same thing.

Object. But you would do well to be more particular as to those controversies
amongst the Godly, about the power of the Keys, the extent of Christ's death,
Baptism, etc.

Answ. Though I do judge as those and the most of such like controversies are
held by the generality of the Godly of each persuasion; the erring party
wheresoever it is, is not incommunicable; nor the differences about them of
that extent as to be inconsistent to an Orderly and comfortable walking
together in the fellowship of the Gospel, and therein each enjoying both the
purity and liberty of his conscience, they walking tenderly, and humbly toward
each other therein; yet I shall decline a particular speaking my thoughts at
present, having reason to be sensible of my own insufficiency and disability
for that work, and being in hope the Lord may draw out the heart of some more
able to engage in this controversy against controversyes, whereby I shall avoid
that disadvantage to the truth pleaded for my weak handling of it may
administer, and content my self with some few more general Objections, and so
conclude with some directions to such whose hearts are groaning under the
Divisions of Saints.

Object. Though this comfortable State of the Churches unity in Gospel Worship
be a desirable thing, yet it it not possible to be attained until the glorious
estate of the Church, the time of fulfiling those promises of unity, quoted by
you. page 56.57. and therefore to labor to attanie to impossibilities in an
uncomfortable work.

Answ. The same objection might have been made in the Apostles time, and in the
primitive State of the Church; and yet you find they pressed and labored after
the Churches unity, and so far prevailed as we never heard of more universal
Churches Christ had on earth but one, though in that Church several different
opinions about several weighty points, yet they preserved an union in
Church State, and did not unchurch nor unsaint one another until these latter
days, wherein the Spirit of division has been in its reign and strength.

And there is as much reason to object against all our endeavors after all
other graces and spiritual seize, because the perfection and fullness of
them is reserved for that glorious day; for until then our knowledge will be
but darkly as through a glass, 1 Cor. 13.9.12. but then we shall know as we
are known, we shall then see face to face verse. 12. then shall knowledge cover
the earth as waters do the Sea, Esaias 11.19. we shall all then know the Lord
from the least to the greatest Jer. 31.34.

And so holiness and purity is now very imperfect: We are now all the Sons of
God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be; but when he shall appear we
shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. the way; of the Lord shall then be called the way
of holiness the unclean shall not pass over it, Isa. 35.8. In that day there
shall be upon the bells of the Horses holiness to the Lord, Zach. 14.20. then
shall Terusalem be holy, there shall no stranger pass through her any more,
Joel 3.17. Yet I hope none will object from these Scriptures; knowledge and
holiness is reserved for the glorious state of the Church; and therefore, why
do ye press to an increase of it, until the fulfilling of those glorious
promises.

Therefore though the perfection of the Saints union be reserved for the last
and glorious times of the Church, yet the laboring after the measure of the
present day, is to not be omitted, but rather to be labored for, as a mercy
that must forerun many other precious mercies the Saints seem at this day to be
in expectation of; that I may say in this case, as was said of our Savior,
Mat. 13.58. Mar. 6.5. he could not do many mighty works among them, because of
their unbelief; so the Lord cannot do many works amongst us, because of our
divisions; and therefore we should esteem the unity of the Saints a mercy, that
would make way for abundance of other mercies: for those glorious promises,
relating to the glorious estate of Christ's Church, in the latter days, are to
be fulfilled to all the Saints, whether of Paul, Apollo or Cephas.

And therefore Isaiah stirs up all Gods people to gladness and rejoicing at
that day, Isa. 66. 10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, All ye
that love her: rejoice with joy with her, all ye that mourn for her: That ye
may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation; that ye may milk
out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory: And so Isa. 4.5. The
Lord shall create upon every dwelling place of mount Sion, and upon her
assemblies, a cloud, and smoke by day, and the burning of a flaming fire by
night; for upon all the glory shall be a defense. So Zach. 14.5. And the Lord
my God shall come, and All the Saints with thee. And so the generality of those
precious promises, relating to the last and glorious state of the Church, does
hold forth an universality of peace, purity, and glory, to the whole Church, to
all Saints, which the divided State of the Church is incapable of receiving;
and therefore such whose souls long for the day of the Churches glory, should
take heed that therein they do not hurry the Saints besides, or beyond the
means of its present Unity: for the obstructing the latter, is an eminent means
to hinder the former, and such as will defer the work of the Saints Unity,
pressed for, until that glorious day, shall never have an oppotunity of casting
their Mite into that Treasury; for the Unity of that day shall stand in no need
of their help; The Lord alone shall be exhalted, as the Uniter of his Church,
in that day; there shall then be no night there; and they need no candle,
neither light of the Sun, for the Lord God shall give them light, Reu. 22.5. It
would be taken for a very strange answer from a Physician to a sick person that
desired his help, that when he was well he would come and cure him; since the
whole needs no Physician, but those that are sick; which Answer agrees much
with this Objection.

Which I have been the larger in answering, in regard I have often met with it,
from the most moderate against this Gospel union; who though they have seemed
to be convinced of the duty, yet would quiet their consciences in the neglect
of their uttermost endeavor to obtain it, from the consideration that it was
not to be expected until the last and glorious times: That until there was an
unity of knowledge and judgment, there could be no unity in Church Fellowship,
alleging that Scripture; How can two walk together unless they be agreed?
which Scripture, and others of like tendency are evidently mistaken, when
applied in this case; for such an agreement, as to have no difference of
understanding among Saints, and that in considerable weighty points, was never
yet on earth; yet Gods Church has preserved its unity.

And therefore it is to be considered, that the union we are capable of
attaining unto, and ought to press after in this day of our imperfection, is
not to proceed from the perfection of our understanding in the same things; but
from the exercise of grace one toward another; whiles thus differing; to which
purpose the Lord has supplied his people, with several special graces, which
are chiefly applicable in this special duty; and there fore ye may observe,
that generally exhortations to union, as the end, do provoke to the exercise of
such graces as are proper thereunto as the means; as for instance, Ephesians 4.1,
2, 3. That ye walk worthy of the vocation whereunto ye called, are with all
lowliness, and meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in love,
verse 2. And further let all bitterness, wrath, and anger, and clamor; and
evil speaking be put away from you, with all malice, and be ye kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ sake
forgave you, verse 31.32. here was the means then, verse 3. endeavoring to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, here is the end: so the same
Apostle to the Philippians, Chapter 2.2. that ye be like-minded, having the
same Love, being of one accord, of one mind: here he expresses the end, then,
verse 3. Let nothing be done through strife, or vain janglings; but in
lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better then themselves: so verse 4.
Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others: thus he directs the means; so that the great mercy of Gospel union, is
not to be expected, but in the exercise of the great means of suitable Gospel
Grace; and why Believers should be more discouraged in endeavoring the
Churches unity, then its purity, I know no ground; for there is no difficulty,
attending the one, but what attends the other; even the corruption of our
hearts and principles, which Paul affirmed to be the cause of the divisions in
the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 3.3.

And therefore they that begin in the work of Saints, union to dispute and
reason them into the same understanding and practice, begin at the wrong end.
The first step to unity is humility, and therein the exercise of the graces of
patience, meekness, charity, long-suffering, and forbearing one another in
love, etc. The principal and main use of those graces in their exercise would
be little needed, if all the Saints had once attained to the same understanding
in all things;

And therefore if through the rigid froward contentious disposition of some
Christians, unity of Church State in some places could not be obtained; but
Christians should continue to walk in several distinct societies, according to
their several persuasions; yet therein they might, be through the exercise of
the foregoing uniting graces, and unity of brotherhood, by giving the right
hand of fellowship to each other, as Gospel Churches, and exercising all
Brotherly and Christian affection toward each other, and in extraordinary
cases, where the joint advice, or the assistance of the Eldership or Presbytery
of the several societies, may be required in things wherein they are all
agreed, they might make use of, and submit unto the help of each other therein,
which would prepare the way for a more perfect union:

For as nothing more tends to divide, then a frequent controverting of the
cases in controversy amongst Saints; so nothing would tend more to unite, then
a frequent partaking of each others gifts and graces, in those things wherein
they agree; for in the one, they only come to discern the unsoundness of
judgment, and weaknesses of each other, by passionate unpleasing expressions,
which the best of Christians are subject unto in disputes; whereas in the other
they would come to observe the soundness of judgment, and strength of grace in
each other, which would exceedingly tend to endear and unite: for if godly
persons were better known to one another in their spiritual excellencies and
graces, and less in their defects and weaknesses, their union would not be so
difficult a thing, as at present it seems to be; and therefore what the Church
says, Cant. 1.5. concernning her afflictions, might be repeated by
different-minded societies of Christians one to another, to the weaknesses of
their judgment, or supposed Errors on each hand; Look not upon me, because I
am black; for as a good man observed in a discourse upon Hebr. 12.1. Christians
are the exceeding apt to be poring upon the dark side of the cloud; prying into
each others infirmities and weaknesses; judging of one another according to the
sight of the eye, and the hearing of the ear, which he that shall judge
righteous Judgment will not do, Isa. 11.3. for it is the natural disposition
of the Churches enemies, to be so exercised; they say, Let her be defiled, and
let our eye look upon Sion, Mich. 4.11. which sin in Saints is near kin to the
sin of Ham; Genesis 9.22. whose sin did not lie in the seeing of his fathers
nakedness, but in not covering it, and his publishing it to his brethren
without; and therefore to expect union of Saints whiles we live in the exercise
of all dividing practices, is to expect it by way of miracle; but to expect it
as before in the exercise of uniting graces, is to expect it in a way of means,
unto which the promise of blessing is only annexed.

Object. But although the union of Saints as before be a mercy of that worth,
and a duty of that weight you press it, yet the present sad divided State of
Gods People in these Nations seems to render it so difficult, that endeavors
to unite may tend further to divide; there is such a spirit of prejudice in
Christians against the opinions and principles they are contrary unto, that not
only the opinions of each other, but the very persons holding them are ofttimes
unacceptable, and burdensome to each other for their opinions sake.

Answ. I would I could say there is no ground for this Objection, but
doubtless there is: The work is like to be attended with much difficulty and
opposition, both from good and bad men, but especially where this spirit of
Division is predominant, it will exceedingly rage, it will there like those
unclean spirits our Savior cast out, Mark 1.26. Chap. 5.2, 3, 4. tear those
it possesses, and cry with a loud voice before it come forth; but be not
discouraged; the spirit of power and love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7.
shall prevail against this carnal spirit of contention, strife and vain
iangling, which thus begets and increases Divisions amongst Gods People; but
the better to enable thee to employ thy talent and opportunities in this good
work, consider the following directions.

In general to all persons of what degree or condition soever, labor to inform
thy self not only that the unity of Gods Church is a mercy, and the
endeavoring of it is a duty, but that it is a duty and mercy to be prefered
before many others, nay most others when they come in competition therewith;
for the consideration of the worth of a mercy, and the weight of a duty does
much enlarge the heart toward it, and carries the heart in earnest prayer for
it, which is the first and chief duty I shall press thee unto, to pray for the
peace of Jerusalem.

2. Being satisfied of the worth and weight of it, and thereby seeking
frequently the Lord with fervent prayer for it, labor to arm thy self against
all discouragements and difficulties that may seem to lie in the way of it,
that though its likely thou may come to bear the reproach of a lukewarm
Laodicean, a person of no setledness in judgment, that is filled with notions
of unpractiseable things, and much worse then this; yet heed it not, but know,
this spirit of division is best discerned by its uncharitable censoriousness,
and that is the air it breaths in; and therefore you may observe, with what
people soever this spirit is predominate, they esteem not of any that own the
same points with them, wherein they differ from others, unless they be sticklers
for them, they dare not lay more weight, or place more religion in a
controverted truth, then their conscience tells them the Scripture does; they
do little less then deny it in some men's opinions.

3. As thou must expect opposition and discouragements; and ought to be
armed against them; so take heed thou do not employ any of the carnal weapons
of the spirit of division in the spirit of unions cause: some men will oppose
the spirit of division by a dividing spirit, that is exercising the same carnal
contention, and proud wrath with uncharitable censoriousness, etc. against
divisions, as dividing spirits promote them by; now this comes under Jobs
reproof, Chapter 13.7. Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for
him? if we had no better Physicians then these, we might tell the Church with
Jeremiah, Chap. 30.13. thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is grievous; thou
have none to plead thy cause, that thou may be bound up; thou have no
healing medicines; And therefore Paul being sensible how apt the best
Church-healers are to apply the wrong plaster he gives to Timothy a special
direction, 2 Timothy 2.24. The servant of the Lord must not Strive, but be Gentle
unto all men, apt to teach, patient; in meekness instructing those those that
oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance, to the
acknowledging of the truth; I must say the contrary spirit in healers has
added much inflammation, and thereby corruption to our wound.

4. Labor to obtain a compassionate tender frame of spirrit, even toward those
whom thou art least in love with, upon the account of their Errors in
judgment. If Christians would mourn and sigh more in the sense of Saints
divisions and delusions, and fret and rage less, our healing would not seem to
be so far of, as it does.

There is a kind of religious hard-heartedness, and cruelty overspread the
hearts of many Christians in these days; that we have cause to complain with
the Church, Lam. 4.5. Even the Sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck
to their young ones, the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the
Ostriges in the wilderness: Christians can as easily, and with as little
reluctance hear or speak evil of others that are gracious, if they be but
judged erroneous by them, as carnal malicious persons can do of one another;
nay, some be ready and zealous to stir up the rude carnal multitude against
others; and even take contentment in each others afflections: Oh! where is the
bowels of good Jeremiah, that lived in a day when he could say of his people,
They be all Adulterers, an Assembly of treacherous men, they bend their tongue
like a bow for lies, Chap. 9.2, 3. and yet he cries out! Oh that my head were
waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for
the slain of the daughter of my people: and so Isaiah he mentions the Sins of
Gods people to be very great, Chapter 22.8, 9, 10, 13. And yet when he
considers their suffering, verse 4. he cries out, Look away from me, I will
weep bitterly; labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the
daughter of my people: But the like bowels and compassion in Gods people
toward one another is not found, which until the Lord afford thee, thou will
be very unfit for healing work.

5. Labor to set thy affections on those things or qualifications in Saints,
which most lively and evidently demonstrate the powerful work of Grace in
them, and the sincerity of their Love to Christ: many Christians will more
esteem of their own image in their brethren then Christ's; their closing with
them in judgment, in some particular controverted opinion, will answer the
defect of a great deal of more precious grace, when much grace in another will
not answer the defect of their differing in that opinion; it is an easy matter
to love them that love us; the worst of men can do that, Luke 6.32. but Paul
sets us a pattern of another manner of Love, 2 Cor. 12.15. And I will very
gladly spend, and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the
less I am beloved; it was this love in Paul that enabled him to bear all those
hard measures from the Corinthians, and to labor for their union and peace,
whilst they made war against him.

Now without this Love, that will cover a multitude of infirmities, thou will
never be able to receive this truth in the love of it, nor to bear with
patience all those discouragements thou will meet withal in this work.

6. Labor to abound in all other uniting graces, which the Apostle mentions,
Col. 3.12. he having spoken of the union of Saints, verse 11. he then comes to
commend as a means to fit them for it, verse 12. Put on therefore (as the Elect
of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, forgiving one another, if any
man has a quarrel (or complaint) against any; even as Christ forgave you, so
also do ye; and above all things, put on Charity, which is the bond of
perfectness; and let the peace of God rule in your hearts, unto which also ye
are called in one body, and be ye thankful; let the word of Christ dwell in
you richly, in all wisdom. etc. It is the want of putting on and exercising of
these graces that hinders Saints from Gospel union, more then all their
different understanding does; for if all men were of one mind, in the things
wherein they differ, the want of these uniting graces, and living in the
exercise of the contrary dividing vices would doubtless disunite, and divide
the people of God from one another; for I am afraid there is little of that
union among Saints at this day, even among those of the same judgment, that)
deserves the name of Gospel union, either from the nature, grounds or degree of
it; but generally a kind of an outside heartless formal union, that the very
union of carnal people in carnal things, seems to be more strongly founded,
which proceeds clearly from the want of the enjoying, and exercising those
precious graces; for Christians united upon the Account of opinions are only
united in the head; but Gospel-union, upon the account of visible grace, would
be an uniting of hearts together; such was the union the Saints enjoyed, Acts
4.32. And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, ane of one
soul.

7. Labor to preserve a proportionable growth of grace in the soul; all grace
in the exercise of it must preserve an harmony; otherwise it will sound like an
Instrument out of tune: some Christians seem to be all affection, and no
judgment; others all judgment, and no affection: some have zeal, but want
knowledge; others have knowledge, but want zeal; whereas light and heat goes
together, if grace be of a true growth. Now this time of unevenness in thy
graces will much disinable thee for uniting work; for herein thou will be like
the foolish Physician who has but one sort of medicines for all diseases and
constitutions, whereas that which cures some kills others: and therefore Job's
friends, though good men, applying the wrong plaster to his sore, he esteems
them to be Physicians of no value, Job 13.4. How forcible are right words?
(says he) but what does your Arguments reprove? that is, words rightly applied
suitable to the condition of the person or people unto whom they are spoke, and
seasonable to the time, and place, occasion; therefore says Isaiah, Chap.
50.4. The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know
how to speak a word in season, etc. so the wise man, Prove. 25.11. A word fitly
spoken, is like apples of gold in pictures of silver, and as an earing of gold,
an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear.

Now until thou have a spiritual judgment, as well as spiritual affections,
thou will not be capable of Understanding the season of a duty, nor the right
way of performing, and applying it.

8. Be most conscientious, and diligent in performing that duty, in order to
this good work, that is most properly thy own, unto which thou art most clearly
called by that place, or condition Providence has set thee in, either in
Church or Commonwealth, and thy abilities and gifts in such thy place do most
fit thee for; the want of a due regard thereto amongst Christians, has greatly
increased and promoted their Divisions; for order of Place is necessary to
union and harmony in all things, whether natural, Civil, or Spiritual; for what
a confusion in nature would it be, for the hands to be performing the work of
the feet, or the feet the hands, or the eye to usurp the office of the ear, or
the ear of the eye? which Metaphor the Apostle makes use of in 1 Cor. 12. to
teach the divided Corinthians, that order of Place was necessary to union of
Saints, which he proves, first in regard all had not the same gifts; verses 8,
9, 10, 11. 2 in regard all had not the same Place, or office verse 28, 29. God
has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing, helps of governments,
diversities of tongues; are all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all Teachers,
are all workers of miracles? etc. wherein he does not only preserve
distinction, but also degree of place, which he does not say himself set in the
Church, though that might have been of sufficient Authority, but God has set
them in his Church, least the Ringleaders of Division in that Church, should
have broken the Order under pretense of the insufficiency of the Authority it
were appointed by; and so the same Apostle observing the inclination of the
same People to be expecting changes in their outward condition, after they
professed the Christian Religion, answers several particular Cases, 1 Epistle
Chap 7. And least any others from the like temptation or mistake, should not
think themselves concerned in those Answers, he lays down some general Rules
or precepts to answer all Objections against this truth, as verse 20. Let every
man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called; and so verse 24. Brethren
let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God: therefore of all
duties labor to be performing those duties, thy present place and calling
requires at thy hands, in Order to the union of Saints; and when the Lord of
the harvest finds thee like a good and faithful Servant, faithfully improving
thy few Talents, he will trust thee with many Talents, Matt. 25.23. And
therefore I shall speak a word to the Ministers of the Gospel (by whom I intend
not those carnal scandalous dumb dogs, who seldom open their mouths, unless it
be to bark at the precious flock of Christ, for to expect better from them
would be to expect grapes of Thorns, and figs of thistles, but I mean such as
are gracious holy men, solemnly set apart to serve the Lord in that work of
what judgment or persuasion soever, as to the present contoversies among the
Godly;) who are not only to be Fellow Laborers, but Master Builders in this
work of Saints union; And it is my opinion they have had the first, and
chiefest hand in Saints Divisions; so it is my earnest prayers they might be
owned and fitted by the Lord in the first and chief place in this work of
Saints union: Now that which I shall propose to them is;

First that you Labor to be sensible of the sad effects of those sad Divisions
that have been amongst your selves, and from thence those unbrotherly,
untender, and uncharitable carriages in your public writings and speakings one
toward another; that I am assured many private Christians of the same
persuasions with you have been grieved, and ashamed to read and hear, though
the generality of Christians are too apt to be pleased most with such of their
teachers as are most vehement against those contrary minded to them; and from
thence has that general overflowing spirit of division and dissentions which
we now complain of, received its life and nourishment: That the Lord has cause
to complain, as in Isa. 4.12. O my people, they which lead thee caused thee to
err, and destroy the way of thy paths; if the leaders of the people go before
them in a froward contentious uncharitable spirit toward one another in
matters wherein they differ; no marvel if the generality of their followers
tread on each others heels in that crooked path.

Therefore if no other Argument be prevailing, let the consideration of the sad
divided condition of Gods Church and people, produced by your example affect
your hearts, that you cannot with that comfort and authority repeat that
exhortation to the Saints under your charge, that Paul gave to the Church of
Philippi, Chap. 3, having in the 15, and 16. verses exhorted them to union, and
directed them how to preserve it, he exhorts in verse 17, Brethren be ye
followers together of me, and mark them which walk, so as ye have us for an
ensample; so he exhorts Timothy, Chap. 4. after he had spent the former part of
the Chapter in Instructions to him concerning the Errors and Divisions that
were in his Flock, he then exhorts him, verse 12. But be thou an example of the
Believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in
purity; and so Peter in his first Epistle, Chap. 5.3. he exhorts the elders
that were among them, not to be as lords over Gods heritage, but to be examples
to the Flock: I am far from saying, that none of Gods Ministers at this day
have been examples to their Flocks in this great duty of a holy tender spirit,
and humble brotherly carriage toward others differing from them; for I know my
self many that have so walked; but I fear, if there was a due search, the most
have not so done, but there have been more hands dividing and rending, then
have been binding up and healing, or else the disease would not have grown so
Epidemical, as it is this day, that the Lord has just cause to take up the
complaint against them he did against his Shepherds of old, Ezekiel. 34.4, 5.6.
The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was
sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought
again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost;
but with Force and with cruelty have ye ruled them: And they were scattered,
because there is no Shepherd; and they became meat to all the beasts of the
field, when they were scattered; my sheep wandered through all the mountains,
and upon every high hill; yea, my Flock was scattered upon all the face of the
earth, and none did seek or search after them: And therefore until the Lord set
this great evil upon your hearts, that you have trodden under your feet, and
scattered abroad so much of Gods precious wheat, by your inordinate and
unseasonable striving to be plucking up the tares, there is little hopes of
your setting your selves to this work of laboring for the unity of Gods
Church, with such desire and endeavor to accomplish it, as may promise much
success.

2. You having once the sad divided condition of the people of God set upon you
hearts, with a due sense of what furtherance you have given thereto, as
aforesaid; then begin to study all holy ways of furthering the work of union;
then imitate the chief and good Shepherd, Ezekiel. 34.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. For
thus says the Lord God, behold I, even I will both search my sheep, and seek
them out. As a shepherd seeks out his flock in the day that he is among his
sheep that are scattered: so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them
out of all places, where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.
And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the countries,
and will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of
Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the country, I will
feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel there shall
their fold be; there shall they lie in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall
they feed upon the mountains of Israel. I will feed my flock, and cause them to
lie down, says the Lord God. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again
that which was driven away, and I will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen that which was sick: but I will destroy the fat and the strong, I
will feed them with judgment. For until then you will not be able to bear the
contradiction and opposition you must expect to meet withal in this work, not
only from bad, but from good men; till then the meekest Moses will be in
danger to lift up himself over his poor deluded murmuring brethren, Numb.
20.10. and smite the rock oftener then he ought to do in his anger, verse 11.
but if once the Lord bring your hearts under an holy sense of equal guilt,
there will then be a spirit of sympathy with your poor weak brethren: then you
will know how to feed your flocks like a shepherd, and to gather the lambs with
your arms, and carry them in your bosom, and gently to lead those that are with
young.

3. I would propose to you, to change your sharp severe censurings and
blamings, into affectionate beseechings and intreatings; that was Paul's way,
Phil. 2.1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies; fulfill ye my
joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind. And so Ephesians. 4.1. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you,
that ye walk worthy of the vocation whereto ye are called, with all lowliness
and meekness, with all long-suffering, forbearing one another in love:
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, etc.

4. In all your preachings or writings against Errors and Divisions, etc.
labor to distinguish betwixt the chaff and the wheat, the dross and the
silver; do not only condemn what is evil, but also commend what is good in the
same people or persons; that is, the method Christ observed to the seven
Churches of Asia, Rev. 2. and 3. Chap. as to Ephesus, Chapter 2.2. I know thy
works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not bear them that
are evil, and thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not,
and have found them liers: and have born, and have patience, and for my Names
sake have labored, and have not fainted. And then he tells them of their
faults, verse 4. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, etc. And so to
Pergamus, verse 13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where
Satan's seat is, and thou hold fast my name, and have not denied my faith,
etc. then in verse 14. he tells them of their evils, but I have a few things
against because thou have them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, etc. And so he
proceeds to Thyatira, Sardis, and Philadelphia, etc.

Now if this method were observed by you in your preachings and acting against
what you judge Error, it would tend much to unity, and also to the furtherance
of the truth you contend for: for by the contrary practice you usually
prejudice and incense the persons holding the Errors you reprove against the
reprover, by your so far extending the Error or Errors they hold, as to
blemish, and render undiscernable all the graces and precious truths retained
and professed by them.

5. In your opposing of Errors, lay no more weight upon the Errors reproved,
then the Scripture does; the contrary extreme of all hands, tending much to
Division: such as are rigid against separation, they have one sort of general
exclamations against all sorts of persons they judge Erroneous, separating from
them, jumbling them all together usually in their Invectives, under the odious
names of Schismatics, Heriticks, etc. And such as are rigid for separation,
answer them in the same extreme on the other hand; they cry out against them as
Idolaters, false worshippers, superstitions Formalists, etc. by which
unchristian and unreasonable deportments one toward another, not only the
godly on both hands are incensed and prejudiced one against another, but even
carnal wicked people, observing these passages, and hearing such expressions,
they are hardened in their unbelief, and impiety; they presently stand up with
the Pharisee in the Temple, and cry out, Thanks be to God, I am not as other
men are, not as this false worshipper, or Formalist, nor that Heretic, or
Schismatic, etc. then they think they are religious enough; for a great deal
of the Religion of this day dissolves into negatives; men are better able to
tell you what they are not then what they are in Religion.

6. In your laboring against Errors, take heed of false accusations, of
charging persons tainted with one or some Errors, with many others of a
dangerous tendency, which they profess a detestation against; this evil
practice has much tended to Division, and establishing some persons in their
Errors they hold; for when they have heard that point wherein they are said to
be deluded, opposed, and spoke against by a slanderous tongue and uncharitable
spirit, they have concluded it to be a truth from the Error and evil of the
spirit opposing it, and have been so much moved to observe false witnesses to
rise up against them, who laid to their charge things that they knew not,
Errors that their souls abhor, that they never heeded the Arguments against the
chief point in controversy, but are hereby further prejudiced against the
truth, pressed upon them by the falsehood and slanderousness of the mouth
pleading for it, concluding, the same fountain cannot send forth both sweet
water and bitter; and hereby this erroneous way of opposing Error, does serve
some of the main designs of the father of Error and Lies: for next to the
corrupting of the judgment, he endeavors in order to lock them up in Error,
to incense their hearts, and prejudice them in their affections against the
truth, and the professors of it: which this untruth-like spirit and carriage of
the pretended friends of truth does exceedingly promote.

7. In your opposing Errors controversal, and of lesser moment, take heed you
thereby give not countenance and encouragement to Errors more weighty and
fundamental, least whiles you are pulling a mote out of the eyes of some, you
do thereby put a beam into the eyes of others; some on the one hand so rigidly
opposing Error in those of the separation, that they harden and confirm others,
erring against the main truths of the new birth and regeneration, settling poor
carnal people upon the Lees of their formal profession and outward privileges,
in the neglect of sanctifying grace, and spiritual qualifications, whereby
thousands of poor souls are led blindfold to perdition, yet made believe they
are the only Orthodox true Christians, because they are free from some lesser
controversal Errors, some holy persons may be infected with, when in the mean
time they are ignorant of the main points of salvation, and void of the very
power and life of godliness; yet by this sinful daubing of some Preachers with
untempered mortar are persuaded of themselves Laodicean like, that they are
rich, and have need of nothing, and knows not that they are wretched and
miserable, poor, blind, and naked, the blood of whose souls will be required
at such Preachers hands by the Lord, Ezekiel. 33.8, 9. Solomon says, Him that
says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse: and if so,
then, surely, him will not the righteous God bless; he who would not have his
childrens bread cast to Dogs, would much less have Dogs accounted Children,
whilst his Children are accounted Dogs, which is a crying sin at this day
amongst some such as would be loath not to be accounted godly Ministers, who ye
shall observe carry themselves toward some poor Christians in their Parishes,
who differ from them, as toward the worst of men, and in their Pulpits are
more vehement and harsh against them, then against the most profane impious
persons and practices; and in the mean while administer the precious sealing
Ordinances of the Gospel to a mixed multitude, many, if not most of which being
ignorant, scandalous and profane persons, common scoffers at Religion, common
swearers, drunkards, Sabbath Breakers, etc. yet all those (saving some general
admonitions against sin, and general exhortations to duty) shall be spoke of
and to, and walked toward as the Church of Christ, and people of God; and if
there be some more sober person or persons who are free from the forementioned
scandals, and have attained to some Historical knowledge of Religion, and close
but with them in the way of worship they are for, especially if by their estate
or interest they be able to serve their designs, why such men must be esteemed
of, and cried up for eminent godly men; when as to any inward sanctifying work
of grace in their hearts, there is no more appearance of it, then there was of
Gospel in Paul when he was Saul the persecutor, or of the work of regeneration
in Nicodemus, when he came to Christ by night: Now what is this less then
justifying the wicked for a reward, and taking away the righteousness of the
righteous from him? Isa. 5.23.

And the same sort of evil is to be discerned, though not in so great a measure
in them that are rigidly for separation, and particular opinions; many of them
will be ready to have a huge good opinion, and show a singular respect to
persons that favor them in their particular persuasions; though otherwise
loose notional frothy persons, void of any savor or power of Godliness, and in
the mean time have a slight esteem of persons both sober and gracious, that
differ from them, against whom they will be ready to take up an evil report,
and join with carnal loose people in reproaching them, whereby the minds of
such carnal Incendiaries are settled in a loose frothy notional frame, against
the gravity and purity of Religion; now these practices of all hands, though
they may be veiled under pretenses of zeal for Truth against Error, or for
purity of worship against the Traditions and customs of men; yet they are
impious and evil in themselves; besides, exceeding prejudicial and destructive,
both to the purity and unity of Gods people, and ought to be avoided and
witnessed against, as the worst sort of ungodliness in godly persons.

But though I could not omit the giving these cautions to all that pretend a
Love to Jerusalem's Peace, yet little is my expectation, as to the furtherance
of this blessed work, from such as have engaged themselves far in these carnal
contendings for spiritual things; for evils clothed with good and plausible
pretenses, are not easily reclaimed: therefore I shall direct my self chiefly
in what I have further to say, to Gospel Ministers, to those few names in
Sardis, that have not defiled their garments with these contentious dividing
practices; for many there are I hope, that for the Divisions of Reuben have
great thoughts of heart, whose souls long for Sions Peace; who with Jeremiah
could wish their heads were waters, and their eyes fountains of tears, that
they might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of their people:
Now to such I have these following directions to propose.

Though you do not think it convenient to engage your selves in the
controversies of the times as they tend to estrange the hearts and alienate the
affections of good People one from another, yet to engage your selves in a
controversy against controversies, managing of it with a spirit of love and
tenderness, which may so much tend in the fruits of it to the endearing, and
uniting of the hearts of Saints one to another, that may be worth your engaging
in. If you observe what is said, page 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. you will there see
how all the servants of God in all ages contended against the contentions in
the Church, and labored to preserve union amongst Saints as the main duty.

And therefore in the first place I would beg of you, to stir up your own
hearts with all the Saints near you to be much in prayer for this mercy; set
special times apart to meet together to wrestle with the Lord about it: this is
a difficult and a great work, and prayer has done many such; all those late
great mercies that God has bestowed upon his People in these Nations [which
they are now so unable to agree about the dividing of] were all by many
gracious and eminent instruments received and acknowledged to be the returns of
Prayer: I shall close this request with Joels exhortation, Chap. 2.17. Let the
Priests the Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let
them say, Spare thy People O Lord, and give not thy heritage to reproach, that
the Heathen should use a byword against them; wherefore should they say among
the People, Where is their God?

2. Give up your selves to study and propagate this truth; for among the
multitude of books that this day has produced, I have found few, though I have
diligently enquired and sought for them of this subject; And had I not been
wearied with long delayed expectation, I should not durst to have made an Essay
upon this work; but I hope if it be of no other use, it may serve to provoke
some of you to lay your hand to this plough, least such unskilful ones as my
self is, should spoil a good cause by badly managing it.

3. Set upon some beginnings in Gospel-fellowship upon this Gospel principle; I
am persuaded the Lord would prosper and bless it, against this Spirit of
division, as the house of David against Saul's; it shall grow stronger and
stronger, and the other weaker and weaker: the Lord seems to be withdrawing his
good spirit of his quickening, sanctifying, comforting grace from the People,
with whom the spirit of division is most predominate, even pouring upon the
head of dividers what he threatened to back-sliders, Prove. 14.14. even to fill
them with their own ways, that they are even wearied with the multitude of
their divisions and contentions; and such as are sincerely sensible thereof,
are ready to cry out with David, Psalm. 120.6 My soul has long dwelt with him
that hates peace; unto whom your feet will be beautiful, that bring good
tidings; that publish peace, Esaias 52.7. when they shall observe by your Order
and spiritual concord, how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to
dwell together in unity, as Psalm. 133.1.

If you have already the charge of a particular Church, labor to instruct them
in this precious truth, which when they have received, endeavor to manifest it
and make it known to all the Godly round about, that you are in charity, and
desire to be in fellowship with them, and all the godly or visible Believers in
the World; But if you be not engaged to any particular Church at present, then
make known your judgment to all that fears God near unto you, and press them to
their dutys, to congregate themselves together and to have fellowship one with
another in all Ordinances so far as the Lord has enlightened them therein,
which when obtained, proceed as before.

Object. But in case the Churches, or at least a great part of them over whom
the Lord has set us, be so averse to this truth that the promoting of it among
them may hazard a breach betwixt us, or at least a division in the Church,
show should we then walk in the prosecution of this duty?

Answ. Either such an aversness must proceed from a conscientious godly fear,
that some other truth of Christ they have received may be prejudiced thereby.

Otherwise from a contentious unruly frame of spirit, not being able to bear
the sincere and savory advice and instruction of those the Lord has set over
them; If from the former, a great deal of tenderness, and Christian patience,
ought to be exercised toward them, and endeavors used to satisfy them; that
your main aim and intendment in promoting this duty is to take away the cause
from whence all grievances of that hand come, and to provide that an equal
provision of Liberty and opportunity may be to all conscientiously professing
or practicing any controverted point without the least discouragement or
restraint, which is as much as any sober mind can desire. If from the latter,
less weight is, to be put upon it says Paul, if any man seem to be
contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churhes of God, 1 Cor. 11.16.
And so to Titus, There are many unruly and vain talkers, whose mouths must be
stopped, Titus 1.10, 11. Rebuke them sharply that they may be sound in the
faith; verse. 13. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority;
let no man despise thee, Chapter 2.15. when Christians contain not themselves
within the bounds of a sober gracious spirit, whether the matter they strive
about be truth or error, their pride, passion, unruliness ought to be reproved.

But if in case they all should agree to dissent in this matter, and will
retain their former rule of separation, yet if they be willing to allow that
liberty to others that they desire to enjoy themselves, separate not from them,
but the rather abide with them as with a Church of Christ that most needs your
help: For Christians, much more ministers should not so much consider where they
may walk to enjoy most comfort and Christian liberty etc. but rather where they
may be most serviceable to the Lord, and the weak diseased of his People; for
the whole need not the Physician.

But though I do judge you ought to condescend to the weakness of your
Brethren, and to walk with all Christian and brotherly affection toward them,
yet not herein with Peter, Gal. 2.12, 13. to dissemble the truth, or to suffer
any of the same society to be imposed on by them; but your selves withal
like-minded to manifest your charity toward, and desire of fellowship with all
the Saints on earth, and as your occasions give you opportunity, to evidence
your principle by your practice.

Object. But in case the Church with whom we walk should be so offended as
they should proceed against us, and withdraw from us upon this Account.

Answ. Having as before walked with all tenderness and unblamableness toward
them, let not that offend you; that is their Sin, so to abuse an Ordinance of
God; it is not yours; the fear of this punishment kept many a believing Jew
from publicly owning the Gospel, John 12.42. Nevertheless among the chief
rulers also many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees durst not
confess him; least they should be put out of the Synagogue; so John. 9.22.
Acts. 22.19.

Object. But would not this be a means to foment and increase a great deal of
contention and strife in every particular Church? for where congregations do
consist of persons so different-minded each enjoying an equal liberty of
professing and practicing their different persuasions, this must necessarily
tend to a frequent begetting disputes and controversies amongst them, whereby
the mutual edification and comfort of the whole would be endangered.

Answ. Without doubt the different persuasions of Christians walking together
in the same fellowship, will be attended with many difficulties and hazards,
which the mercy of unity of understanding would remove; but put them all in the
balance with the forementioned evils which their dividing and separating from
one another as at present is attended with, and then judge which is the
greatest; for where a necessity of evil is upon us, one in competition with
the other, it is our duty to admit the least, that which least dishonors God,
and tends least to the ruin and desolation of his Church and people; and sure
I need not bring the evils attending each of these cases in competition, to
find out which is the greatest; but when you find such Errors or Erroneous
persons singled out; the admitting of whom into the Church of God, or giving
the right hand of fellowship unto, would be attended with equal evil, either
as to Gods dishonor, or to the damage of his Church, that our present
Divisions are attended with; then and not else, I judge you ought to assent
thereto: But if once union of Saints had that weight upon our hearts which it
ought to have, I do not judge differences of judgment amongst Members of the
same Church could be so inconsistent to its Peace and Edification: For,

1. The Church must allow an equal liberty to all controversal points, either
in doctrine or practice, and withal must provide an equal rule to limit, and
restrain the extremes of unseasonable, unsober, and troublesome promotions of
them, or oppositions to them of each hand, so that the mutual edification and
comfortable walking of the whole, in the practice of those main duties, wherein
there is a mutual agreement, may not be interrupted; for God is not the Author
of confusion, (says the Apostle) but of Peace in all Churches of the Saints, 1
Cor. 14.33. And James does not say, Where difference of understanding is, but,
where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work; and
therefore, do but make an equal provision against carnal contentions, and
disorderly promotions of controverted points, and then the holding them, or
sober preaching and practicing of them, could not be inconsistent to union in
the same Church.

Object. But would not this be a means to prejudice, and block up the way of
some despised controverted truths, which much the least part of the people of
God have received, and the generality is very much prejudiced against? And this
way would subject the Saints, professing them, to the united Church power of
such as oppose them, and thereby bring such truths of God, and the professors
of them, under great discouragements and contempt.

Answ. Whatsoever the rule of Christ directs us unto, in order to the promoting
controverted despised truths, is the best way to promote them, howsoever to our
reason it may not seem so to be; and when we lay our hands to any part of Gods
work, we must be careful to keep our feet in the way of his paths; and though
controversies and differences of understanding have been in all ages in the
Church; yet produce one Instance out of Gods Word to justify Separation
thereupon, before you plead for the practice of it; but this Union would not at
all tend to the prejudice of any particular truth that may be at present under
reproach amongst the generality of Christians; for nothing more tends to the
damage of an opposed despised truth then the reproach and dishonor brought
upon it by weak, self-conceited sticklers for it, whose unseasonable and
unsober contending for it does so much offend, and stumble the contrary minded,
that they take a prejudice against the truth for the promoters sake, whereas
were Saints united in Church Order, there might be special times and places
appointed for the most able and sober of each different persuasion, to hold
forth their grounds for their judgment either Doctrinally, by way of
Preaching, or otherwise, by a sober and Christian conference betwixt such as
the brethren of each different persuasion should make choice of, where all
might have liberty to be present, and to make their sober Objections against
what should be delivered as they see cause; and this might be done without the
least disturbance of the peace, and with mutual edification of the whole as a
Church which would also exceedingly tend to remove those discouragements on the
one hand, which lie in the way of despised Truths, and those encouragements on
the other hand, that are given by our divisions to several applauded Errors:
For when the Judgment of any person made him neither more nor less esteemed,
nor advantaged; Christians would then receive or reject controverted points
singly to answer a good Conscience toward God in obedience to his will made
known to them, whereby doubtless Truth would much prevail against Error; for a
sincere sober Conscience no ways biased seldom miscarries in its judgment.

And so in our present divided confused state, several controverted Truths may
suffer much prejudice by the many Errors they are accompanied with in the
Professors of them: and ofttimes so inter-woven and entangled in their
practice, that such as may have a desire to profess the Truth are discouraged,
and kept off thereby; whereas this Union upon Gospel principles removes all
that, and leaves every Truth single and pure without any addition or
detraction; thou may then take up such a trampled on pearl, though it be
found among Swine, and add it to the Bracelet of thy former graces or duties,
without wallowing with them in the mire to enjoy it or perform it.

Object. But there are many whom we judge godly, both Ministers and private
Christians that will be opposite to us in this work upon the account of our
separation from the carnal multitude and visible unbelievers, they admitting a
bare profession of the Christian Religion with some other additional
qualifications, not evidencing conversion nor visible grace to be the rule of
Church Membership, etc. now how should we walk toward them?

Answ. As in the former Cases, so in this there must be a great deal of regard
had to the disposition of mind and nature of the Principles from which such
persons dissent or oppose; for that may much aggravate, or extenuate their
evil, and thereby much differ the Rule of your walking toward them; for if
such opposition or dissent proceed from that common Principle and Spirit of
opposition and contempt which generally the Popish and Prelatical people walk
in against holy qualifications and purity of worship pressed after by the Godly,
then to walk toward them as persons holding only the form of Religion, but
denying the power of it, but if such dissent, or opposition proceed from a
conscientious mind charitably disposed toward the godly, thus walking, only
differing in judgment as to the Rules of Church Membership, then such a
conscientious dissent and charitable mind on the one hand requires a suitable
deportment on the other; then though you ought not to own them, nor join with
them in an union of Church State, in regard their Principles and practices may
wast the visible bounds of Christ's Church (viz. Regeneration and Sanctifying
faith) yet to walk toward them with all Christian tenderness and charitable
respect, owning what is good in them, as well as rejecting what is evil, that
though you cannot own them in the state in which they stand as true Gospel
Churches, in regard the Principle by which they walk opens the door to all
material pollution, and the body of the matter of which they are built are not
living stones, yet you may own their persons whiles in that State as Gospel
brethren, and perform toward them all duties of Gospel brotherhood which they
are capable as particular Christians to receive, and are willing to accept of
at your hands; and such of them as the Lord has by his Providence, called and
by his graces and spiritual gifts qualified for the work of the ministry, they
making it their maine business to convert Souls to Christ, and to press their
hearers to sanctification, and Godly life; they ought doubtless to be highly
esteemed for their works sa^^, and to be frequently prayed for, that God would
give them utterance, that they may open their mouths boldly to make known the
mystery of the Gospel, as in Ephesians. 6.19. and the success of their labors to be
as much prized; and thanks to be as duly returned to the Lord for it as for the
success of those in Gospel Order; herein Christ set us an example, Mark 9.39.
showing this reason for it; he that is not against us is on our part, verse 40.
And so Paul, though some preached Christ of envy and contention, Phil. 1.15.16.
yet says he, what then notwithstanding every way whether in pretense or truth
Christ is preached, and I do therein rejoice, yea and will rejoice therein,
verse 18. so that I do judge, though there cannot be an union of Church State
with such, yet there ought to be a tender and charitable deportment toward
such as visible Saints, and Gospel Brethren.

Object. But there are many who will be excluded amongst the number of common
professors, that though there be nothing appearing in them that evidences a
work of grace or true conversion, yet they are not profane scandalous persons,
nor despisers nor raylers at Godliness, but seem to be sensible of their own
ignorance, and desirous to be further informed in the power and mystery of the
Gospel. Now how ought we to walk toward such? must we esteem them as Idolaters
or Heathens, because they are not visible Converts, and walk in a false way of
worship?

Answ. As I do judge the grace of Christ in Saints where it has its kindly
work, dos naturally tend to humble and lay low Saints in their own eyes, and
makes them vile in their own sight; so it does as naturally tend to work in
them a tender heart and charitable affections toward all others in whom the
least appearance of love to Christ is found, rather directing them to err (in
matters in the least doubtful) in charity, then in Severity; for that great
Gospel grace of Charity which the Scripture so much magnifies and gives the
pre-eminence above all other graces unto, 1 Cor. 13. is only then useful when
the case is doubtful; for where certain evidences of things are, there needs
not Charity to Chancellorize; for then our understanding and judgment of
themselves are able to determine; which being defective, and subject to err,
in doubtful cases the Lord has provided Charity to be Chancellor in the
Conscience, whose business is when the severity of a rule tends to oppress, to
moderate and prefer mercy and equity before severity and exactness of rule;
therefore wherein the case may be in any measure doubtful, Charity must then
supply the defect of visible evidences, at least to suspend thy judgment on
the severe hand:

And therefore I answer, you ought not to esteem them either Heathens or
Idolaters, but Christians, though their conditions were much more doubtful
then the qualification in your objection states them to be; for I do judge a
sense of ignorance with a sincere desire after further knowledge in the mystery
of the Gospel, are (if not signs of the new birth) yet evident signs of
spiritual pangs that prepare for it, and ought instead of being so vilified and
slighted, to be taken into the Churches care, and watch, who is in that case to
perform the part of a compassionate, tender, and spiritual midwife, by using
all means to encourage, strengthen and comfort such souls, lest there shall
want strength to bring forth; yet not administer the Seals until there be
Evidence of a new Creature for first God must subscribe the evidence, you must
be able to read his hand in a visible work of grace before you ought to apply
his Seals, which are to be a visible confirmation of the new Covenant,
agreement between God and the soul.

But doubtless not only in these cases, but toward all professing
Christianity, Gods people ought to demean themselves with all tenderness, and
respect; and avoid all provoking and harsh carriage, either in word or deed,
that shall tend to the hardening and incensing of them against the precious
ways of God; and to show out of a good conversation their works with meekness
of wisdom: Paul fearing the spirits of the Saints in this case, exhorts the
Collossians to walk in wisdom toward them that are without; and that their
speech should be always with grace, seasoned with salt; that they might know
how they ought to answer every man. Chap. 4, 5, 6. And so to the Thessalonians,
studdy to be quiet, and to do your own business, etc. that ye may walk honesty
toward them that are without. etc. 1 These. 4.11.12.

But if Christians were more exercised in considering the riches and freeness
of Gods Grace to their poor souls, and of their own vileness and unworthiness
of the least part thereof, if they would more look unto the Rock whence they
are hewn; and the hole of the pit whence they are dug, they would be less
in offensive terms, and scornful carriages toward poor carnal professors;
they would rather say as Paul argues, 1 Cor. 4.7. who makes us to differ from
others? what have we that we did not receive? Unto whom I shall conclude with
Paul's reply, Now if you did receive it, why do ye glory as if you had not
received it?

I might multiply many more Answers to Objections, that may lie in the way of
this duty of making beginnings in this blessed work; but I hope the prosperous
success of some, whose hearts the Lord shall engage in the practice hereof,
will be more convincing arguments, to prove that gracious holy persons of
different judgments, may comfortably walk together in Gospel fellowship,
edifying each other in their most holy faith, without being offensive or
grievous one to another in their different minds, then I am able to add; and
therefore I shall conclude what I have to say to Gospel Ministers, as to their
propagating this precious truth with this one direction.

4. If providence has placed your present residence amongst a people so
frowardly bent to dividing principles and practices, that the laboring to
promote this Gospel union, might be so ill resented by them, as might render
your present ministration unacceptable, and thereby unsuccesfull amongst them
that you have cause to take up David's complaint, Psalm. 120.7. I am for peace;
but when I speak they are for war.

Then it is my opinion, you ought to suspend earnest pressing the practice of
this Gospel union; and say as the Lord did John 16.12. I have yet many things
to say, but you cannot bear them now. But yet not to close with such in their
rigid dividing principles as Peter and Barnabas did, Gal. 2.12, 13. but to be
daily laboring to remove them; for take but away the rubbish and dross of
Christians principles and spirits, and then like hewn stones they will unite of
themselves.

1. By the rubbish and dross of their spirits that hinders union, I mean those
sinful distempers of spirit, that are contrary to the uniting graces before
mentioned, as Pride and Passion, self conceit, Envy, Hatred, Emulations and
the like; for if these were once removed, and the opposite graces strengthened,
inclinations to union would become as natural to them, as now inclinations to
division are; for remove but the cause and the effect cease; and if you
should convince them of the evil of their dividing principles, before their
dividing spirits were subdued, they would be no more capable to practice this
Gospel union then a drunken man would be capable to go without staggering; and
therefore if nothing else can be done toward this work, be preparing the
spirits of Gods people with uniting graces. 2. By the rubbish or dividingness
of their principles, I mean such notions and tenants as naturally tend to
division, which Christians of most persuasions have received by tradition from
their fathers, as I may say, that because former good men of the same opinion
with them, and the people all along professing the same way with them have so
done, therefore they conceive they must do so too, of which sort of dividing
principles are,

1. A confining their Christian relation, affection and duty within the limits
of their own judgments, allowing God to have no visible Church, nor judging
themselves to owe any special duty to Christians as Brethren beyond their own
rule of fellowship, which principle is usually the nurse, if not the mother of
these following practices.

From hence proceed all those scruples which hinder Saints from a free
participation of each others gifts and graces; on the one hand such as are
rigid against Separation, will neither hear nor join with any but such as are
of their own Principles; they will either have Objections against their Call
and Ordination; or otherwise against their judgment and qualifications; and
thereby often deprive themselves of a soul-searching powerful instruction, and
stand picking the bones of a dry, sapless, Historica Discourse set off with the
trimming of some humane excellency; that the other might want more minding what
the dish is the Lord presents the Bread of life to them in, then the purity and
spiritualness of the Bread it self, when the Lord does usually put this
treasure of his graces, and spiritual gifts into earthen vessels, that the
glory might be of God, and not of man, 2 Cor. 4.7. He often times hides these
things from the wise and prudent, when he reveals them to babes and sucklings,
Mat. 11.25. I having observed some whom I judge godly, to rigid upon this hand,
that they have rather chose to hear where the Speaker has been a visible
ungracious person, or stay at home, then to attend a powerful heart-searching
Godly Preacher contrary-minded in some things to them.

And on the other hand many poor Christians do run into the like extreme; for
as the former makes humane defects the Rule of Rejection, they go near to make
them the Rule of Election; and so by both the true Rule of gracious
qualifications and spiritual gifts wherever found are declined, and set light
by, and put in competition with every circumstantial thing; whereas if
Christians would make that which tends most to answer the ends of hearing, (
viz. the nourishment, edification and comfort of their souls the rule of
hearing these things would not be; and nothing would more tend to further the
Saints union, then the removal of these hindrances in their providential
Communion in things wherein they are agreed; for if gracious persons
different-minded, did but sometimes meet to pour out their Souls to the Lord
together in prayer, for their joint concernments, and to taste the preciousness
of each others experiences, and graces by a mutual communication of spiritual
gifts, it would much tend to remove uncharitable jealousies; and endear their
hearts one to another: that was the Argument Peter used to convince the
unbeleeving Jews, that the Gentiles were pertakers with them of the same grace,
Acts 11.17. Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gifts as he did unto us,
who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ; what was I that I could withstand God,
unto which Reason they assented, v. 18. When they heard these things they held
their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life: From which Scripture you may clearly gather that
it was both Peter's and the believing Jews opinion, that such ought to own and
esteem each other as fellow-brethren in the Gospel of Christ, whom God had
granted the same precious gifts and graces unto. And I may say, it is
impossible for Christians ever to come to an union in things wherein they
differ, until they come to a Communion in things wherein they agree; for while
Christians be at the utmost distance one from another they can never come to
acknowledge (of any thing that is obliging or uniting) for we may truly say of
this spirit of Division, as Ahab said of Micaiah, 1 Kings 22.8. It does never
speak good of me that is, of Christians differing in judgment to one another;
It will not want its Spies at every Christian meeting or Sermon to gather up
all offensive dividing expressions, and passages, and carry them up and down as
fuel to the fire of contention, that if ye observe it, there is not the least
secret mis-carriage among Christians but shall be known, talked of, and
stretched out to the utmost, by others contrary-minded to them.

But Christ wants his Intelligencers to publish and tell of those expressions
and passages which would tend to unite and endear differing Christians one to
another, and if any out of a desire to beget love amongst Saints should take
upon them that Office, they would find it a very unthankful one, where this
spirit of Division has found entertainment, though there it is most needed;
and therefore until ye open the door of a free participation of gifts and
graces among Saints, expect no union.

And as this principle of confining the Church, etc. within our own limits,
thus nourishes dividing practices, and hinders a free communication of gifts
and graces; so it tends to beget and nourish the saddest of inward delusions of
heart that Christians can be possessed with, tending to the Corruption of our
best duties to God, and to make all our solemn sacrifices have an ill savor
before him; as

1. It confines our petitions and the desires of our hearts in prayer to a few
of Gods people, excluding the rest; for no further then our principles carry us
to own Gods Church, and people to extend, can our petitions to the Lord for his
Church and people intend; nay hereby sometimes our prayers becomes opposite to
Gods designs of mercy to his people, when they appear before him at the
throne of grace in opposition to one another; and justifying where he
condemns; and condemning where he justifies; it would make a considerate heart
tremble to appear before him that knows all hearts in Prayer; and there to
repeat such general petitions as these. Do good in thy good pleasure unto
Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. Psalm. 51.18. and in their hearts
exclude the generality of the Lords people, or to utter such complaints as
these: Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Sion, etc. Psalm.
129.5. and intend hereby amongst others, such as are gracious persons,
differing-minded to them, only for opposing some controverted point of Doctrine
or practice which they have received, and maintain as carnally as the other
opposes it. I say, thus to do is to provoke the Lord against us all, by
engaging him as much as lies in us, in our carnal contentions and divisions,
that the Lord has just cause to take up that complaint against us, Psalm.
50.20.21. Thou sit and speak against thy brother; thou slaunderest thine
own mothers son; these things have thou done, and I kept silence; thou
thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self; but I will reprove thee;
and set them in Order before thine eyes. This is very near kin to the sin of
that evil Servant, Mat. 18.31. whom when his Lord had forgiven him many
Talents, to take his fellow servant by the throat for one.

And as it thus misguides the heart in prayer, so in praises; this contraction
in our hearts of the extent of God Church, will tend to put us upon rejoicing
and praising, when we should weep and mourn, and put us upon mourning when we
should rejoice; how has this ungrateful principle, robbed the Lord of the
glory due unto his name, for all the great mercies he has bestowed upon us in
these Nations of late years, which before this spirit of division overspread
us, had weight upon our hearts; that the people of the Lord did then seem to
say with the Church, Psalm 126.1. When the Lord turned again the captivity of
Sion, we were like them that dream; then was our mouth filled with laughter,
and our tongues with singing; then said they among the heathen; the Lord has
done great things for them; the Lord has done great things for us, whereof we
are glad; but now we have cause to complain with the Church, Lam, 5.15. the
joy of our heart is turned into mourning, the Crown is fallen from our head;
woe unto us that we have sinned; now little but murmuring and complaining is
heard in our streets; what we yet want, seems to make all we possess not
worth being thankful for.

As this confineing Principle byasses our hearts in prayer and praise, so it
tends to put us upon a wrestling and misapplying the precious promises and
precepts of Christ, in the Scripture, to misguide our obedience to God, and
duty toward our brethren; for all we exclude out of the pale of the Church, we
thereby exclude from an interest in the promises; they are thereby made as far
as it is in our power Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to
the Covenant, and promises, and also thereby we excuse our selves of all those
special duties we owe to one another as Christian Brethren, that ye shall
receive it as an Ordinary answer from some Christians, if ye press them to
Christian duty toward such as are not of the same fellowship with them; what
have we to do with them that are without? but I am well assured that will not
be admitted for a good answer at the last day to the Lord.

And thus I shall conclude what I have to say to Gods Ministers as to their
part in this work of Saints union, hoping the Lord will stir up the hearts of
some of them to set their shouldiers to it, that that precious promise of the
Lord to his Church, Esaias 60.17, 18. may be fulfilled in them, I will make thine
Officers peace etc. violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, wasting and
destruction within thy borders, but thou shall call thy walls salvation, and
thy Gates praise.

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, at the black-spread Eagle,
at the West End of St. Paul's.
REnodaeus his dispensatory, containing the whole body of Physic; discovering
the natures, and Properties, and virtues of Vegetals, Minerals and Animals: in
folio. The History of Diodorus Siculus, containing all that which is most
memorable and of greatest Antiquity in the first ages of the World, until the
war of Troy: in folio. Doctor Pordages Innocence appearing through the Dark
Mists of pretended guilt: in folio. Cornelius Aggrippa; his occult Philosophy
in 3 Books in quarto. Henry Laurence Lord President his book Entitled, Our
Communion and War with Angels, in quarto. Christopher Goad his Sermons
Entitled, Refreshing Drops, and Scorching Vials, in quarto. William Dells
works in quarto. Samuel Gorton, his Exposition on the fifth Chapter of James,
in quarto. Samuel Hartlibs of Bees and Silkworms, in quarto. Cotton, his Book
called the Bloody Tenet of Persecution for cause of conscience, in quarto.
Doctor Gells Sermon Entitled Noah's Flood returning, in quarto. A Taste of the
Spirit of God and of this world, by Robert Bacon in quarto. Several Pieces of
Christopher Blackwood, now public Teacher in Ireland, in quarto. Jacob Behem,
his Signatura Rerum, or Signature of all things, in quarto. His Epistles
explaining many things written in his other Books, in quarto. Of Election and
Predestination in quarto. His Book Entitled Aurora, or the dayspring lately
printed in quarto. Several Pieces of Jsaac Penington Junior, in quarto. Biggs
of the vanity of the Craft of Physic, or a new Dispensatory in quarto. Averies
Scriptures Prophesies, in quarto. An Apology or Plea for two Treatises against
Infant Baptism by John Tombs, in quarto. William Sedgwicks his leaves of the
tree of life for the healing of the Nation, in quarto. Collier his Pulpit-guard
routed, in quarto. His Font-guard routed, in quarto. Simon Hendon his key of
Scripture Prophesies in quarto. Mr. Parker his Answer to the Assembly, in large
octavo. Several pieces of Thomas Collier, in large octavo. Tillom on the
eleventh Chapter of the Revelations, in large octavo. Henry Laurence Lord
President his Book of Baptism, in large octavo. Cobs Sermons entitled the
Straight-Gate, in large octavo. Several Pieces of H. N. in octavo, namely,
Prophecy of the Spirit of Love. Revelatio dei, or the Revelation of God.
Introduction to the Glass of Righteousness* Evangelium Regni, a joyful message
of the kingdom, Spiritual Tabernacle. The first Exhortation. The Apology for
the service of Love, all in octavo. Samuel Hartlibs Chymicall addresses in
octavo. Several Pieces of Joshua Spriggs in octavo. Several Pieces of Jerrad
Winstanley in octavo. The Marrow of Modern Divinity in octavo. Thomas Butler,
his little Bible of the Man, or the book of God opened in Man, in octavo.
Crooked Paths made straight, or, the ways of God made known in lost sinners, by
A. Yeomans, in octavo. Simmons Saints like Christ, in octavo. William Sedgwick
his Eleven sermons Entitled some Flashes of Lightnings of the Son of Man, in
octavo. A Word of Peace from the Prince of Peace, by J. Hatch, in octavo.
Mysteries unvailed, wherein the Doctrine of Redemption by Christ is handled, by
Robert Gardner, in octavo. Edward Hide Junior, his book of the Mystery of
Christ in us, in octavo. Purnels Weaver Shuttle, in octavo. His good tidings
for Sinners, great Joy for Saints, in octavo. Biscos Glorious Mysteries in
octavo. The confession and Fame of the Rosy Cross, by English Philalethes, in
octavo. Several Pieces of Joseph Salmon in octavo. Peytons History of the Rise;
Reign and Ruin of the house of Stuarts, in octavo. Larkhams Sermons in octavo.
Bacons Catechism in twelves. Corporations vindicated in their fundamental
Liberties by Charles Hotham, in twelves. John Saltmarsh his book of Free Grace,
in twelves. And his book Entitled Sparkles of Glory, or some beams of the
morning Starr, in twelves. Dawnings of Light, in twelves.

