THE LAWFULNES OF THE LATE PASSAGES OF THE ARMY (Especially of the Grounds laid
down for their JUSTIFICATION in their late DECLARATIONS of June 14. 1647.)

EXAMINED by one who has long been a Friend to the ARMY, and desires
Satisfaction.

London, Printed in the Year 1647.

The Lawfulness of the late Passages of the Army, especially of the grounds
laid down for their Justification in their late Declaration of June 14, 1647.
examined by one that has long been a Friend to the Army, and desires
satisfaction.
IF the late Declaration from the Army, of June 14, 1647, had given
satisfaction to all their friends (as it seemed to promise in the first line) I
should then have been silent, who have ever (until some of their late
proceedings) not only had the Army in great esteem and honor, but have
studied, and andeavoured (according to my abilities and place) to be
serviceable to them: But now all my glorying in them is turned into shame, and
all my prayers and praises to God for them, into mourning and astonishment, To
see that under the Generals notions and colors of Gods glory, and good
intentions to the Liberties and Peace of the people of this Nation, the late
actions and practices of the Army in disobeying and opposing the Parliament (if
persisted in) will appear to be contrary to the Laws of God, and the Kingdom,
and to their duty, trust, and engagement to the Parliament of England, by whose
Commission, only, they are an Army; and are but a tumultuous number of men,
when they act, or do any thing that is not in order too, or within the limits
of that Commission, which I take to be the utmost bounds of their calling as an
Army: And when any man (or number of men) step out of their calling, or (if in
their calling) run out into by and unwarrantable ways, they can upon no good
grounds either look for protection, or expect a blessing; and however such
proceedings (being backed with policy and power) may have success at present,
yet they are sure to be bitterness in the end. Therefore I shall ever wonder
at any, who (if they have good aims and intentions) will go the devils highway
to them, because (it may be) it seems to be over at next. For my part, I will
not judge that the Army have evil ends; but being altogether unsatisfied with
their way, and with all they say in the defense of it, which coming from the
Army in general, and not from any particular person, or number of Officers,
from whom I might have defired private satisfaction; and being exceedingly
oppressed with the sense of the dishonor to God, the scandal (if not the
ruin) to Religion, the insultings of the enemies to the Parliament, and the
great danger threatened to the whole Kingdom, all eminent if the Army should
persist in their present course: I could have no peace within my self, until I
had in this plain style (fittest for a mournful Subject) declared the grounds
of my dissatisfaction, hoping that for the future the Army will either submit
to their lawful and undoubted Governors, or show better cause to the contrary
then any I can yet find in their public Declarations and resolutions. And
that I may not wrong them in repetition, or darken their reasons, I have set
down at large in the margent all I can find of theirs upon this point.

Nor will it now (we hope) seem strange or unreasonable to rational and honest
men, who consider the consequence of our present case, to their own and the
Kingdoms, (as well as our) future concernments in point of Right, Freedom,
Peace, and safety, if (from a deep sense of the high consequence of our present
case, both to our selves (in future) and all other people) we shall, before
disbanding, proceed in our own and the Kingdoms behalf, to propound and plead
for some provision for our and the Kingdoms satisfaction and future security,
in relation to those things, especially considering that we were not a mere
mercenary Army bired to serve any arbitrary power of a State, but called forth
and conjured by the several Declarations of Parliament, to the defense of our
own and the peoples Rights and Liberties; And so we took up Arms in judgment
and conscience to those ends, and have so continued them, and are resolved
according to your first just desires in your Declaration, and such principles
as we have received from your frequent Informations, and our own common sense,
concerning those our fundamental Rights and Liberties, to assert and vindicate
the just power and Rights of this Kingdom in Parliament for those common ends
premised against all arbitrary power, violence, and oppression, and against all
particular parties or interests whatsoever. The said Declarations still
directing us to the equitable sense of all Laws and Constitutions, as
dispensing with the very letter of the same, and being supreme to it, when the
safety and preservation of all is concerned; And assuring us that all authority
is fundamentally seated in the Office, and but ministerially in the Persons.
Neither do or will these our proceedings (as we are fully and in conscience
persuaded) amount to any thing not warrantable before God and men; being, thus
far, much short of the common proceedings in other Nations, to things of an
higher nature then we have yet appeared to; and we cannot but be sensible of
the great complaints that have been made to us generally in the Kingdom from
the people where we march, of Arbitrarinesse and Injustice, to their great and
insupportable oppressions.

And truly such Kingdoms as have according both to the Law of Nature and
Nations appeared to the vindication and defense of their just Rights and
Liberties, have proceeded much higher, as our brethren of Scotland, who in the
first beginning of these late differences associated in covenant, from the very
same grounds and principles (having no visible form, either of Parliament or
King to countenance them) And as they were therein justified and protected by
their own and this Kingdom also, so we justly shall expect to be.

We need not mention the States of the Netherlands, the Portugals and others,
all proceeding upon the same principles of right and freedom; And accordingly
the Parliament has declared it no resisting of Magistracy, to side with the
just principles and Law of Nature and Nations, being that Law upon which we
have assisted you, and that the Soldiery may lawfully hold the hands of that
General who will turn his Canon against his Army on purpose to destroy them,
the Seamen the hands of that Pilot, who wilfully runs the ship upon a rock, (as
our brethren of Scotland argued,) And such were the proceedings of our
Ancestors of famous memory, to the purchasing of such Rights and Liberties, as
they have enjoyed through the price of their blood, and we (both by that and
the latter blood of our dear Friends, and fellow Soldiers with the hazard of
our own) do now lay chain unto.

Nor is that supreme end, (the Glory of God) wanting in these cases, to set a
price upon all such proceedings of righteousness and justice, it being one
Witness of God in the world, to carry on a Testimony against the injustice and
unrighteousness of men, and against the miscarriage of Governments, when
corrupted or declining from their primitive and original glory.

In answer whereunto I must affirm, that, although as particular English men
you may petition or plead for what you think makes for the right, freedom,
peace, and safety of your selves, or of the Kingdom; yet you cannot do it as an
Army, for that relates only to those uses (for which it was made) limited
within its Commission.

For your affirming you are not a mercenary Army, I will not spend time to
dispute it, yet every one sees you insist much upon your wages, wherewith the
Scripture charge Soldiers (that would be saved) to be content, Luke 3. 14.

For what you speak of the arbitrary power of a State, and of violence,
oppression, particular parties, and interests, if you apply it to the present
case, to justify your not obeying the Parliament (and otherwise it signifies
nothing) then I must say it is exceeding unjust when you do not instance in any
one action wherein they are willingly guilty of any such charge. It is true
that those who have a legislative power cannot have an altogether limited
power; but that is no more in this, then in all Parliaments; And that so long
as the calamities of the times did necessitate Armies, there must needs be
burdens laid upon the people, even to more then ordinary pressures: but was
that the Parliaments fault? or those that did oppose them? And that those
burdens and pressures must still be kept upon the people, is it the fault of
the Parliament, or the Army that will not disband?

For that you say you were called out by Declarations to the defense of your
own, and the peoples Rights, and Liberties; And that you (as an Army) will
assert and vindicate the just power, and rights of this Kingdom in Parliament.
It is not denied but the Parliament (to whom it belongs) having judged that the
Forces raised by the King, were to invade the people Rights, and Liberties, and
the just Power and Rights of this Kingdom in Parliament, did publish it in
Declarations, and thereupon did raise both you and several other Armies to
oppose and resist those Forces: But how these Declarations give you a right to
judge what these Liberties, just Power, or Rights are, either of the
Parliament, or people, is (I think) past all humane understanding to conceive,
neither the Laws of God, nor the Laws of the Kingdom having made you Judges,
nor having put any of the weights or measures of Justice on the behalf of
others into your hands; you can only do it by the length of your Swords, which
can be no good Standard, for it will still be liable to alteration when a
longer Sword comes: And when the people of this Kingdom have understood and
considered this, it is not likely that they will leave the settled course of
Law, and Justice in the known Courts of the Kingdom, to be judged by any one
that can raise the greatest tumult; which must needs follow, if they allow this
Army, (suppose it 14000 men to be Judges now) then any 150000 in the kingdom
may judge the Army, and a greater number judge them ad Infinitum: by which it
does appear that the Army making themselves Judges in these cases, does
overthrow and take away the Ordinance of God and Magistracy; then which amongst
men, I cannot imagine what is a greater impiety.

Besides their refusing to obey the Parliament (under whose Command they are,
or ought to be) is against many particular precepts and directions in the Word
of God, as you Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Jud. v. 8, 11.
may find them laid down in the Margent.

For the great Complaints that have been made to you, although it were false
that is reported (as I have cause to believe) that men are sent from the Army
to get hands to Petitions unto themselves, thereby to draw the eyes of the
people after them; yet I do conceive such Petitions ought not to be received
by any who either by Protestation or Covenant have sworn to mean the Just
power and privileges of Parliament, to whom of right it does belong to hear
and determine all the grievances of the People not remediable in other ordinary
Courts of Justice; and there they may be heard without the forceable
recommendation of an Army; who although they thrust on those things that upon
serious debate have been rejected as prejudicial to the Public, yet it will
be in vain to those who do truly make conscience of their duties; for they
will not be frighted into other men's fancies against their own judgments. Yet
if the Army will give encouragement unto such Petitions, and so set up
themselves as a new Tribunal, I believe they shall have work in all places
where they come; for there, men will be glad to do that which may please them,
although they had no cause of complaint.

For the examples of Scotland, Netherlands, Portugals, and some proceedings in
this Parliament, which you urge for your warrant, I must answer in general,
that presidents are poor proofs to justify actions, and if admitted, there is
nothing so bad that might not obtain such a justification: it is a warrant from
some Law that must make every action lawful. Yet all those instanced in, comes
far short of your case, for it can be said of none of them, That they acted
supreamly by their own power, having no Civil power or Magistrate to declare
with them, or for them: And although my business be not to search into the
grounds, or proceedings upon which other Nations have taken up Arms; yet, being
called to it, I must clear the misapplication to Scotland, and especially to
our selves in this Kingdom. For Scotland, I may affirm, that although in the
beginning of these late differences (to which the Declaration does refer) the
common people there, did first oppose those illegal impositions, and
innovations, strongly endeavored to be thrust upon them; yet they did not
enter into any Covenant, nor raise any Army, until the Civil powers in that
Kingdom had declared it to be just, and according to the Laws and Customs of
that Nation; nor did their Armies act but by the same supreme Authority and
Command: And although both the first and last Armies raised in that Kindom,
were strong, and knew that the State had no other considerable Forces to oppose
them, nor were able to maintain such other Armies against them; yet when they
were commanded, they did disband, without imposing any condition at all upon
the State.

For the proceedings of this Parliament and their Declarations, I much more
wonder how they can afford you any color of justification; you knowing that we
have a mixed Government in this Kingdom, consisting of three Estates, One of
these (which was the King) withdraws himself from the Government, and raises
Forces without the consent of the other two: whereupon both Houses of
Parliament (which are the other two Estates) carries on the Government, and
(having power so to do) judge the Kingdom to be in danger, and raise Forces for
their defense, the defense of themselves, and to bring Delinquents to condign
punishment, then which, nothing can be more just. And upon this occasion, and
just quarrel, they raise several Armies, wherein were men of very great
honor, power, and interest in the Kingdom; but (blessed be God) never any of
their Armies (except what has been done by you) did refuse (that ever I heard
of) to obey, when the Parliament (for the good and ease of the Kingdom, nay,
although it were to lay them aside, and raise others in their room) commanded
them to disband. And how any thing in this case reaches to justify the acting
of an Army against that power that raised them, and should command them, I know
not.

For those instances of the Soldiers holding the hands of the General, when
he would turn his Canon against his Army, and the Seamen the hands of the
Pilot, who willingly runs the Ship upon a Rock; I must say, That in those and
such like cases of surprizall or extremity, where there is none to judge, nor
no time or place for judgment, the danger being eminent, and the evil
intention evident, the Law of Nature does teach and justify opposition to the
unjust and tyrannous power of Superiors: but it is no ground for a Rule where a
judgment may be had, or expected, as now in the case betwixt the Parliament
and Army. These instances might have been more colourably to the Point, if the
Parliament had drawn out Forces against the Army, to have cut them off; then,
notwithstanding the obedience they owe to the Parliament, they might possibly
have defended themselves against such Force: But if the matter of Fact be truly
stated, it will be far from your purpose; for the Army advanced upon the
Parliament when they had not drawn out any Force at all against them. And that
is much liker the Soldier turning the Canon, or drawing his Sword upon the
General, for which I never yet heard of any justification.

For the last thing alleged (although it be very darkly expressed, yet as
understand the Argument) That the Armies proceedings may be justified, when
against injustice, unrighteousness, and miscarriage in Government: If that
were granted, and the Parliament were guilty in all, (which I am most confident
can never be made good by clear instances, that they are guilty of any course
of injustice or unrighteousness, though all the world and the accuser of the
brethren to help, should set about it,) yet that would not come up to
justification of the Army, because God has not made them Judges for the people
of the Kingdom, either of Justice or Injustice, right or wrong; Nor is the
judgment of the whole Army equivolent to the Sentence of the meanest Judge in
the Land, much less to the judgment of Parliament, wherein both the Army and
all the people of the Kingdom are represented, therefore the people are not to
account any thing unjust, unrighteous, or amiss in the Government, because the
Army has judged it so; but when they conceive any thing to be amiss, it is
their duty to represent it to those whom God has appointed to the office and
place of Judgment.

But if the meaning of this last part of it be, That God has made the former
successes and present power of the Army a Testimony to its opposing the
pretended injustice, unrighteousness, and miscarriage of Government, Then the
Turk may have the same Argument to justify his title to all he has gotten in
Christendom. But the Wise man teaches otherwise, That no man knows love or
hatred by all that is before them, Eccl. 9. 8.

Having thus considered all that the Army has offered to the world (that I can
hear of) for the justification of their late actions, of which I must needs
say, That the oftener I weigh it, the lighter I find it, and therefore the
more I consider it, the less I am satisfied: (Although the Declaration be
offered in Print, by your selves, to judge or answer) Yet having heard that the
particular desires in it are before the one or both Houses of Parliament, I
shall not assume the boldness to frame positive answers to any of them, or to
interpose my poor judgment what were fit to be done: And in general (I may
say) I have heard, That in many of the particulars, the Parliament have much
more reason to complain of the Army, then the Army of the Parliament.

For that part concerning Ireland, If upon examination it does appear, that the
Houses never offered any thing to the Army for the Service of Ireland, (though
larger then to others that accepted the imploiment) but it was by some of the
Army plotted against and opposed, and that your not dealing clearly therein (at
the first when if they would have refused, there were others ready to undertake
the Service) has much endangered that Kingdom, especially now that it is
seconded with this distraction in the Army, which hinders all preparations and
proceedings in that Service; then the Parliament has cause to complain.

For that part which concerns your demand for all the Soldiers in the Kingdom,
if that be a thing you know is not in the power of the Parliament to do, it
being conceived that all the Treasure in the Kingdom would come far short of
present pay; and we see now that little less will give satisfaction: And that
the consequence of this (in hope to get a s^rong party to your selves which
would be your disadvantage if you mean Peace, because the more you are, the
less able the Parliament will be to give satisfaction) must endanger the
raising all the Soldiers of the Kingdom against the Parliament, and tear all
to pieces in a horrid mutiny; then the Parliament has cause to complain.

For that part concerning the Members, If the House of Commons have done much
more to purge the House and put their Members, to trial, then ever any did
before them, making a Committee eight or nine months since, to receive all
complaints and accusations against any Member of the House, and this Committee
commanded to sit every Thursday in the Exchequer-chamber, and this posted up in
the most eminent places about Westminster, that all might take notice of it,
and accordingly the Committee did fit for several weeks and no complaint was
brought. And if for those that are unduly elected (wherein the Army and their
party have by much (as I hear) been most guilty) the ancient and only course
in Parliament of examining them at a Committee of privileges, be still
observed, and they fit so often as the great businesses of the House will give
leave: Then the Parliament have cause to complain of this Complaint.

For that part which concerns the accusing of Members of the House of Commons,
although I should desire that the charge might be received and heard, (which by
the way may at least be thought hard to be done by an Army, and they the
accusers, informers, witnesses, and yet it appears not how far they will make
themselves Judges too, when it is their own case, in relation to those Members
whom they say are their enemies) they have put a hard judgment upon. But if
upon a general accusation, before any thing be proved, you would have them
sequestered from the House, may you not by the same rule sequester a hundred the
next day after? and if the House should grant it, in the case of two or ten,
were it not injustice to deny it for a hundred? And if something in the matter
of these accusations should be (as by your printed accusation it appears to be)
for things done, or spoken in the House of Commons; then to admit it, were the
utter overthrow of all free Parliaments in this Kingdom; where all things that
are spoken, or done, are only questionable by themselves that see or hear
them, and at the same time the offense is committed, (unless the fact be then
agreed upon, and it be referred to themselves to question afterward by consent
of the House) otherwise they themselves cannot question any such things, though
it were the next day; but in no case at all can be questioned by any without
the House; and if it were otherwise, no man would dare to speak freely in
Parliament, which must needs prove the ruin of the Kingdom; although I shall
never plead to excuse the offenses of any, especially of those that are in
public Employment. Yet if this appear to be the very engine whereby the
Prerogative has endeavored, from time to time, to beat down Parliaments, then
this Parliament has great cause to complain that this Army should make use of
it.

For that part which concerns the putting an end to this Parliament, and the
choosing new ones; so soon as it can be done, I am most confident it would not
only be agreed too, but the greatest part of the House (especially of those
who have fitten the longest) would account it the greatest happiness that ever
befell them; for although they have taken unwearied pains day and night, run
the greatest hazards, and suffered the most eminently in their estates of any
people in the Kingdom, many of them to the ruin of themselves, and their
families; yet their reward from some of those for whom they have done and
suffered all this, is nothing but reproaches, and seeking some weak grounds to
fast n false aspersions upon them, As in that (which is most commonly spoken)
That the Members of the House of Commons have gotten much of the Kingdoms money
to themselves. I have made enquiry into this business; I am confident that no
Member of the House has had a penny out of any Taxation, Contribution, or
Imposition upon the Kindom: there are (it is true) some who have been eminent
in their sufferings, or services, that have had money given them arising from
some Delinquents Estates, as others have had in the like cases that are no
Members of the Houses, and some very few have had Offices or Places bestowed
upon them. But this, I dare say, that, Divide the House into twenty parts, and
there is nineteen of them that have not had a penny given them: and let all
that has been given to the Members be strictly cast up, and it will not appear
that they have had so much amongst them (except those of them that have had pay
as Soldiers) as so many Ensigns on foot, nor half so much as they ought to
have had by the Laws of the Kingdom for their wages. And now the Houses have
taken from those few Members of the House of Commons (that had them) the
benefit of all Offices, and Places, and Gifts, with a Resolution, That they
shall not have any thing given them, nor any reparations, until all the Debts
of the Kingdom be paid. Therefore the Members of the House of Commons have
more reason then the Army to desire an end of this Parliament, that so they may
be put into as good a Condition as other people of the Kingdom. Yet, why the
Army should make it a demand at this time, when by their own subsequent
Propositions themselves seem to judge it cannot be done with safety: and now,
before we have the Kings Resolutions upon the Propositions, whereby it might be
known whether he would (according to the Law in that behalf) join in such an
Act; or the Kingdom so settled, that it were in any measure fit for it: Why it
should now, I say, be demanded? I know not, unless to make the people believe
it were something that would hardly be granted at another time.

For that part which concerns freedom for Petitions, if when things have been
fully and freely debated, and rejected as prejudicial to the Kingdom, if the
people be incited to petition for the same things again and again upon no new
grounds or reason, this were rather a licentiousness then a liberty of
petitioning, seeing it is a fundamental Rule, that the same Bill which is
rejected in the House of Commons, cannot be offered in the House again during
that Session of Parliament.

For that part which concerns the power of Committees and Deputies, as also
that concerning the Accounts, and likewise that concerning the Act of Oblivion,
and the rest that follow, if it be (as I have heard) that the Parliament have
taken effectual course in some of those things, and were considering of the
rest, before your Declaration, then they might well have been left out of your
desires and complaints.

What ever has been said of these particulars, I should be glad that the
Parliament would not stand upon any thing which might be spoken for their
advantage, or your disadvantage; but rather set about the doing and resolving
every thing as far as they could in conscience and in judgment, to give you
satisfaction. And before you refuse that satisfaction offered you from the
Parliament that did raise you, and make you an Army, and by whose Commission
and Authority you do Act, seriously weigh these Considerations:

1. That to go on to disobey the Parliament, or resist them in their lawful
Commands, is to resist the Ordinance of God: For as the Administration of the
Word and Sacraments are in the band of Gods Ministers Jure Divino; so the
Administration of Judgment and Justice, Government and Rule, are in the hand
of the Magistrate Jure Divino, unquestionably.

2. Consider that you have been charged already too much to usurp the Office
of Ministry; and if you appear also to incroach upon the Office and Place of
the Magistrate, you will much confirm men in their opinions of that, which is
generally thought you make your design, viz. To take away, and overthrow all
Government, and leave the people to an unusual licentious liberty, and as a
means to that end, not only keep the power of the Sword in your own hands, but
by the force of it to draw out of the Parliament, and all other Counsels and
Judicatures in the Kingdom, those who will not either for fear, or base ends
act to that design. And however I, and (it may be) some others may account
this a Scandal, because we believe some of the chief Officers have better
Principles, yet, if it should be confirmed by your actions, they are such real
demonstrations, that no man could believe otherwise notwithstanding all
professions and protestations to the contrary.

3. Consider that if you let loose the bands of Government, and you that are
Officers by your own example (and it may be further) reach the Soldiers to
disobey the Parliament, that lesson will serve to teach them likewise how to
resist their own Officers, and this you may take as a sure Rule, That a
multitude will not long be servants to any design, but within a while they
will be Masters of it.

4. Consider, That such things as require force to obtain them, can be kept no
longer then they have force to maintain them, which keeping in a very few years
would be the ruin and loosing of the Kingdom.

5. Consider the reproach that will come to Religion if you continue your
proceedings, (and not only reproach) but the apparent hazard to all the
Reformed Churches in Christendom.

6. Consider the infinite dishonor that would come to the Army, although by
force they should be able to compass all their desires: That not withstanding
your duty, trust, and engagement to the Parliament of England, you, whom they
have made choice of out of the whole Kingdom to bear Arms for their Defense,
against all their enemies and opposers, And you that have accepted of that
engagement upon this Condition in your Commissions, To observe the Direction of
both Houses of Parliament; And you that they have made better provisions for,
and bestowed more marks of honor and respect upon, then upon any Army that
ever they had: I do only repeat these things, hoping upon serious
consideration of them, you who have appeared gallant men, will sweetly and
timely return to obedience, so that neither I, nor any else, shall ever have
occasion to make such application as would stain all your glory, Which is and
shall be the most earnest prayer of the Author.

FINIS.

