The Sacramental STVMBLING-BLOCK Removed.

Or a brief discourse concerning Examination by the Congregational Eldership,
before admittance to the Sacrament.

Wherein all contrary scruples are silenced: the Equity and Necessity of that
duty vindicated, both by Scripture, and undeniable Arguments.

Set forth for, 1. The Satisfaction of the Weak. 2. The Information of the
Ignorant. 3. The Conviction of the Obstinate. 4. The Edification of the Church
of God.


by W. L.

Cast ye up, Cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the Stumbling Block, out of
the way of my people.

Isa. 57.14. Obey them that have rule over you, and submit your selves for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.

Heb. 13.7. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you,
with meekness and fear.

1 Pet. 3.15. LONDON, Printed by James and Joseph Moxon; for Henry Overton, and
are to be sold at his Shop, in Pope's Head Alley. 1648.

To the CHRISTIAN READER.
Christian Reader,
THe grand confusion and distraction of the Church, the great opposition that
that so needful and desirable work of Reformation now meets with, together
with the great pressures now lying upon the spirits of such as bear good will
to the Peace and Prosperity thereof, has compelled me to the Press. And
although the unfittest of ten thousands; yet by drawing this Bush in the Gappe,
I may (by Gods blessing) not only prevent that Devastation that (for ought I
see) is like to follow; if not timely prevented: But also encourage some
Master Builder, to repair the Breaches with better Materials, and more
skillful hand.

I call God to witness, Nothing more moves me, then the love I bear to the
Peace of the Church of Christ, and its Reformation so much endeavored both by
Parliament and Synod, so much desired by the Saints, so much oppugned and
oppossed by Satan and his Instruments: and if by this contemptible clay; the
Cure be in any good measure effected, I have my aim; and desire thee with my
self, to give the Glory to Jesus Christ.

In whom I am thine, W. I.

A CATALOGVE of such QVERIES and SCRVPLES, as are resolved in the ensuing
Discourse.
1. Object. WHat is meant by Reformation? Page 2. 2. Object. Was not the
government of the Church by Bishops, etc. according to the Word of God? they
were Protestants; and we enjoyed far more peace in the Church then now: men
enjoyed then the Ordinances without interruption, and doubtless many thousands
went to heaven, by Gods blessing upon means then in use. Page 3. 3. Ob. But are
there not some that create Churches to themselves? what think ye of them? Page
3. 4. Object. Can you make it appear, that the Government of the Church, by
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc. is of Divine Institution by the Word of God?
Page 4. 5. Object. But what Elders are those spoken of in those Scriptures? are
they lay Elders, or Ecclesiastical? Page 5. 6. Object. What is the Office of a
ruling Elder? Page 5. 7. Object. But where I pray you, will men be found fit
for such weighty Employments? Page 8. 8. Object. But why do they choose such
young men, as in many places they have, and some of the meaner sort? me thinks
they should choose the most ancient and able men in the Parish, who would better
become both the title and office of Elders. Page 9. 9. Object. Me thinks the
Pastors and Elders in Presbyterian Congregations, are neither rightly called,
nor fitly qualified. Page 12. 10. Object. Q. But why must we appeal to
Classes? Have they any power to determine differences, and to reform abuses in
particular Congregations? Page 13. 11. Object. But they say now, none must come
to the Sacrament without Examination by the Eldership, which some hold to be
no better then a point of Popery; however its very needless and ridiculous for
ancient men that have born all Offices in the Parish, and Church too, lived
long under the means, often formerly admitted, now to be catechized like
boys: neither do I believe there is any rule for it in the Word: the Apostle
says, Let every man examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. 1 Cor. 11.28.
Page 17. 12. Object. Methinks if they would catechize the young people, it
would do well, but for ancient men that have received the Sacrament twenty or
thirty years together, or more; that have born all Offices in both Church and
Parish, to be now called to account like boys; this cannot be endured. Page
25. 13. Ob. But must all men be examined? Certainly some men are as able to
examine the Eldership, as the Elders them; What need is there to examine such?
Page 26. 14. Ob. But must women also be examined? is there any rule for that in
Scripture? Page 27. 15. Ob. Were it only to be examined by the Minister, it
were not so much; but for a man or woman to come before so many, dashes them
out of Countenance. Page 28. 16. Ob. Methinks it were sufficient to suspend the
scandalous: Is there any such need to keep off the ignorant? Is not the
Sacrament a converting Ordinance? Page 29. 17. Ob. But do you what you can, yet
many corrupt men will be admitted. Page 29. 18. Ob. Surely were it a good work,
and according to God, good Ministers would promote it; but there are diverse
good Preachers about London, and in other parts of the Kingdom, that act little
or nothing at all this way. Page 30. 19. Ob. But what if the King come home?
think ye this Government will stand? Page 32. 20. Ob. Do ye not see how
Parishes are divided about this business? in diverse places they are altogether
by the ears. Page 33. 21. Ob. But what is the reason so many Elders are chosen,
in diverse places and so few hold: not half in some places? Page 34. 22. Ob.
But is it meet all men should come before the Eldership, to be examined before
admittance? Methinks they should go to the houses of some men of best rank, and
converse with them there. Page 35. 23. Ob. But if men and women must both be
examined, it may fall out a man may be found unfit, and his wife may be
received; some-time the man received and his wife unfit: what a kind of
confusion will this be? does not the Apostle Paul lay, the unbeleeving woman is
sanct fied by the believing man, and the unbeleeving man by the believing
woman. 1 Cor. 7.14? Page 36. 24. Ob. What are the principal points, that will
be enquired of by the Eldership, what time men come before them? Page 39. 25.
Ob. What are the crimes that make unapable of admittance, in point of scandal.
Page 41.
THE SACRAMENTAL STVMBLING-BLOCK Removed.
FOrasmuch as the Lord by unexpected and unspeakable providence, has so
composed the grand quarrel of the Kingdom: that notwithstanding the spirits of
many the Arch Enemies of Church and Kingdom are not subdued; yet their rage and
malice is so limited, that although like the surging untamed waves, they would
again break out, if not bounded, and their power so broken that the mightiest
Leviathans are now held by the Hook of God.

That God has also in this breath of time, put into the heart of Parliament
and Synod, to settle a Government in the Church; having laid a good foundation
of Reformation of corruptions in and about the Ordinances, Officers, and
Administrations thereof. And for that the spirits of men are wonderfully averse
to this so necessary a work, that although it have cost so much time, treasure,
and blood, to bring to this maturitie: yet glad they would be to bring religion
to a very hotch-potch, as appears by those many vain and needless scruples and
Stumbling Blocks which Satan; and such men are every day casting in to obstruct.

I have thought good, as in duty every Christian is bound, as much as in them
lies to help the Lord against the mighty, and that no man that truly desires
satisfaction may miss of it: I have endeavored to enumerate all such
objections as have any shadow of reason; that the ignorant may be informed, the
wilful convinced, and the weak Christian satisfied, that so the Church may be
edified, and God glorified.

And that I may not be tedious, I shall without more ado, lay down these
following Truths, which by Gods grace I shall vindicate against all opposers,









For the First.

That Reformation of corruptions in the Church of God, is of absolute
necessity, etc. is granted of all; therefore needs no dispute: only,

1. Q. What is meant by Reformation?

A. The bringing of the Church and worship of God, to as near a conformity to
the mind and will of God, and to the primative Institution as may be, both by
casting out corruptions, and by supply of defects in and about the Ordinances,
Administrations, Officers, and Members thereof.

2. Object. Was not the government of the Church by Bishops, etc. according to
the Word of God: they were Protestants; and we enjoyed far more peace in the
Church then now: men enjoyed then the Ordinances without interruption, and
doubtless many thousands went to heaven, by Gods blessing upon means then in
use.

A. I shall nor need now to spend time about that Argument of the Government by
Bishops and their Substitutes: abundance of satisfaction having by diverse been
given to that point. True it is, they were Protestant Bishops in point of
Doctrine, if we look upon the Doctrine of the Church, generally owned: but
their standing was not of Divine Right, both Parliament and Synod having long
since condemned that Hyrarchy: without doubt, that Lordly Prelacy over Gods
heritage, being quite contrary to the word of God, 1 Pet. 5.3. Neither being as
Lords over Gods heritage, but being examples to the flock. Its true, we enjoyed
much Peace, because the strong man kept possession, none daring to question
their proceedings, though never so impious: but when the Lord called them to
account for their oppression and tyranny, and that Satan saw his Kingdom begin
to shake, he mustered up all his servants to his support, which has made our
times so troublesome. And although many by Gods blessing upon means and
Ordinances then in use, were saved, this we must attribute to the work of Gods
spirit, and to God owning his own Ordinances in the midst of much corruption.

This therefore makes not at all against casting out abuses crept into the
Church, neither can we expect so great a work as the turning of Church and
State up-side down, can be done without much combustion, especially considering
how most men are apt to be led by custom, though never so corrupt, and its a
special mercy, considering how many grand Enemies we have had to do withal,
that God has put so timely a period to our old troubles: I pray God our
corrupt hearts, and causeless contentions, provoke him not to punish us yet
seven times more.

3. Object. But are there not some that create Churches to themselves? what
think ye of them?

A. I think if they deny our Congregations to be true Churches, they are
erroneous; and if they do not, their separation the more unlawful: And I
think, as there is many gone from us, because they were not of us; so many are
joined to other assemblies, because our Government was so long before settled,
being too impatient to wait Gods leisure. Such men surely forgot the Israelites
were forty years together without the Passover, all the while they were in the
Journey to Canaan, had they but well eyed the Church, they might have seen it
(some years together) in a wilderness of distraction, but still no way to
Reformation, and therefore ought rather to have waited till God had brought
them into the desired Land, then to turn their backs upon that work which fares
the worse for their departure: many thousands are gone, that would (had they
continued) have much added to the visible beauty of the Church, who are justly
to be blamed: God and man looking for Reformation, not Separation: And its no
marvel God so much confounds their Language, who will be building Babels to
themselves.

For the Second, That Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc.

4. Object. Can you make it dppear, that the Government of the Church, by
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc. is of Divine Institution by the Word of God?

A. Yea, By diverse places of Scripture, as 1 Timothy 4.14. the Apostle there
says, neglect not the gift that is in you, which was given with the laying on
of the hands of the Tresbytery. Again 1 Cor. 12. and God has set some in the
Church, first Apostles, secundarily Prophets, thirdly, Teachers, after that
miracles, then gifts of healing, helps in Government, etc. viz. men fitted with
several gifts suitable to the several ages of the Church.

Again, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine.

Likewise 1 Pet. 5.1. The Elders that are among you, I exhort, who also am an
Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ.

So also Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Having gifts differing, etc. by all which places its
apparent That the government of the Church, by Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc.
is according to God: that their Offices are also distinct, the Scriptures are
so plain, they need no interpretation: some rule, some labor in the word and
doctrine.

5. Object. But what Elders are those spoken of in those Scriptures? are they
lay Elders, or Ecclesiastical?

A. The word of God makes no such distinction: I do not read in any place of
Scripture of either Lay or Ecclesiastique; but Elders, they were endowed
extraoadinarily with several gifts, some to labor in the word and doctrine,
although in that fence we take Lay, viz. for Tradesmen; I believe such for the
most part, if not all, were the Elders in the Church of Christ in those times:
And therefore it is, that the separate Churches rather question our
Ecclesiastique Elders, then the Lay, to be of Divine Right. On the otherside,
by reason our Churches have been governed by men devoted and set apart to the
Ministry, many think there ought to be no other but Ecclesiastical. I shall
adhere with neither of them, but say with all Reformed Churches, that let men
be gifted by God, whether by ordinary or extraordinary means, let them have a
lawful call to the function, whether Lay or Ecclesiastique, they are of Divine
institution: only we must not expect all to be alike qualified, some gifted for
the Ministry, others for Discipline, Order, Government; and others Church
Administrations.

6. Object. What is the Office of a ruling Elder?

A. According to their several titles in Scripture, so is their Office, and
employment: they are called Governors, Rulers, Overseers, Stewards, Watchmen,
etc. and their Office is,

1. To govern and direct persons and things in the Church, and therefore the
Apostle reproves, those that despise Government, in that 2 Pet. 2.10. but
chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise
Government: and indeed who are there despise Government, more then dissolute
vain persons?

1 Cor. 12.28. They are called Helps in Government, viz. such as together with
the Pastor govern the Church; therefore 1 Timothy 5.17. Elders that rule well are
worthy of double honor.

2. As Stewards and Overseers, they are to see the Laws of their Masters house
observed, Luke 1^.41. 1 Pet. 4.10.
to whom they must give account, and give each his portion: 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a
man so account of as, as Stewards, etc. or dispensors, verse. 2. Moreover its
required of a Steward, that he be found just and faithful: so also, Heb 13.17.
Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

3. Their duty or office is, to edify the body of Christ. (viz.) the Church,
and this is the end why the Lord gave several gifts to those that had the
Charge of the Church committed to them. Ephesians. 4.12. So also, 1 Cor. 14.12.

4. They ought to keep the Doctrine Discipline, and Ordinances, of the Church
from corruption, the Church as much as in them lies, from scandal: 1 Cor.
11.2. Now I pray you brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
Ordinances as I deliver them to you. The Apostle speaks here to those that had
power in the Church, and commends them for keeping the Ordinances and
dispensations of the Church pure.

Again, 1 Cor. 5.7. Purge out therefore the old leven, that ye may be a new
lump as ye are unleavened.

5. Their Office is to redress abules in the Church, ordering the affairs
thereof decently, as in the 1 Cor. 14.33. for God is not the Author of
confusion, but of peace; as in all the Churches of the Saints: implying all the
Churches of the Saints, are kept in good order: verse. 40. Let all things be
done decently, and in order.

6. They are to end controversies, and to make peace, to help the weak, to
restore the penitent, and to encorage every one in the ways of peace and
righteousness.

As in the 1 Cor. 6.5. I speak it to your shame, is it so, that there is not a
wise man among you, no not one, that shall be able to judge between his
brethren, but a brother goes to Law with a brother? etc.

1 Cor. 10.32. Give no offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to
the Church of God.

Philip. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife, or vain glory, but in
lowliness of mind, Let each esteem others better then himself.

It was the sin of the shepherds of Israel, to neglect their duty, Ezekiel. 34.4.
the diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was
sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought
again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost,
but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. And indeed, this was the
greatsin of our Episcopal Hyrarchy, and of too too many of our idle shepherds
under them: the Lord reform it in succeding times.

7. Their duty is to visit the sick, especially when sent for, and to pray for
them, and give comfort to them: James 5.14. If any be sick among you, let him
call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him
with oil in the Name of the Lord: and although this unction be now out of use;
yet with subjection, I may say the Apostle intends that Prayer ought not to go
alone, without applying lawful means, which indeed ought to be sanctified by
the Word and Prayer.

8. Their office is, to admit such as are sit, and to suspend the unworthy from
the Sacrament of the Lords supper: 1 Cor. 5.5. To deliver such a one to Satan,
for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved, in the day of
the Lord Jesus. verse. 11. If any that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or
covetuous, or a drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one eat not. verse. 13.
Therefore put away from you, that wicked person.

9. They ought to admit, or dismiss Officers in the Church, as occasion is
offered, and these jointly: Act. 6.6. And when they had prayed, they laid their
hands upon them, etc. verse 2. Look ye out seven men of honest report, full of
the Holy Ghost, and wisdom; whom we may appoint over this business.

So that by all that has been said, it sufficiently appears, that Pastors,
Teachers, and Elders, their Titles, Offices, and Employment, in and about
Church Administrations, are of Divine Institution: and that they had need to be
Godly, and discreet.

7. Object. But where I pray you, will men be found fit for such weighty
Employments?

A. Indeed there are none sufficient for these things, the best of men in all
ages have been short of what they ought to be: we cannot expect perfection in
this life, the most precious subject to manifold infirmities; all may say with
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.16. Who is sufficient for these things?

Yet blessed be God, we have to do with him that is willing to pass by the
weaknesses of his servants, and is also able to furnish all such whom he calls
to his work with suitable abilities and qualifications: And herein the servants
of God, have found much comfort, and with the Apostle have had occasion to say,
(and that truly) that they are able to do all things through Christ, that
strengthens them. And although none called to the work can be in every degree
fit, or peradventure many called may have meaner parts then some others not
called; and notwithstanding all chosen are not alike quallified, yet where the
Call is good, the heart upright to the work, there will not want a competent
supply from him that gives to all liberally, and severally qualities for the
good of his Church: and indeed, those that are most able, if they think
themselves sufficient, know nothing: Therefore it becomes the best, to see and
say with the Apostle, etc. 2. Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our
selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God.
Neither would I have men too much stumble at their own insufficiency, so as to
despair either of supply or success, if rightly called, and of upright hearts:
but in midst of all discouragements, sincerely endeavor to improve the small
talent received, resting upon God, for he that has said, 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace
is sufficient. Has also said, I will never fail thee, nor forsake thee, Heb.
13.5.

2. We have experience that through mercy, many able and honest men are called
to this work, and have lovingly accepted the Trust; who I doubt not but will
receive sufficient testimony of Gods presence with them, by their daily
improvement.

3. There is this remedy if men unfit or unable be chosen, they are to pass
through examination; and if found unfit, are in a competent time to be excepted
against, whether it be for ignorance or scandal, they are to be remedied and
sitter chosen.

8. Object. But why do they choose such young men, as in many places they
have; and some of the meaner sort? me thinks they should choose the most ancient
and able men in the Parish, who would better become both the title and office
of Elders.

A. They are not called Elders with respect to their age, but office: and
although it were very comendable if men could every where be got, both Grave
and Godly; to deal in so weighty affairs: and no doubt but in all places, care
is and will be, not, to neglect such as are well grounded in Religion, sound in
faith, and of good understanding: yet if it so fall out that young men are
chosen, (if thus qualified) we must take heed of stumbling at their youth:
Timothy was a very young man; but Paul gives command that no man should despise
his youth. 1 Timothy 4.12.

Its not age, but honesty and understanding, makes men fit for such employment;
and we know its not only possible, but very ordinary, for men of 30. or 40.
years, to out-step many twice their age, both in grace and wisdom.

Neither should men stumble, if here and there men of ordinary rank be chosen,
if well quallified: although (blessed be God) our times afford as many that are
both great and good, as any age since the world began; and many very able for
estate, as otherways are chosen: yet its not to be questioned, but men of a
lower rank in the world, may be, and have been very serviceable to the Church;
and therefore none ought to be offended thereat.

For,

1. We know, men ordinaryly wise for the world, are not wisest to Godward; the
Lord having hid the secrets of his Kingdom from the wise and prudent, and
revealed them to babes, Mat. 11.25. Luke 10.21.

2. When the Lord Christ, who knew best whom to make choice of, would pick and
choose men out of the whole world to advance his cause and Kingdom, he counted
it no policy to entertain the greatest men, but a company of poor Fishermen,
against whom the world might as easily be offended, it being as easy with him
to have called great and rich men, and have enabled them for his work, as those
despicable ones; yet he chose the poor, Iam. 2.5. Has not God chose the poor
in this world, rich in faith? So 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, etc. And truly, as not many
such men are effectually called to God, in Christ; so very few are fit to be
employed in Church dispensations: for rich, and men great in the world, will
not take upon them care and trouble, which brings no outward advantage: they
cry out Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.
Alas, they have their Farms to see, their Oxen to prove, their wives to
marry, etc. when they have nothing else to do, they will come to Christ; looking
all their life, with Felix, for a more convenient time: Act. 24.25. till time
be no more.

3. Mean men in the worlds account (as before) are ordinarily. wisest to
Godward, and we were better have no Governors at all in the Church, though
never so aged or rich, if ignorant of God, and in those things; about which,
they are especially conversant: certainly if ignorance and scandal, make men
incapable of Sacramental communion: much more of judicature in divine
mysteries: yet as I said before, its not unpossible for rich men and great men
to be good, and I doubt not we have our Abraham's, Lots, Noah's, Jobs, David's,
Daniels, etc. men both great in the world, and rich in grace, but these are
rare, as they were in their times.

4. Although in civil things men are to be distinguished and respected for
their age, and other outward accomodations, yet Religion makes no such
difference, but before God and good men, an honest understanding Christian is
esteemed above men great in the world, desolute of saving grace: This worldly
partiallity, the Apostle James utterly condemns, James 2.1.2. My brethren, have
not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons: read the 2.3. and
4. verses. Besides, in point of policy, if we would not befoole our selves,
and miss of heaven, we should be very careful to entrust those that are pious
and prudent with the things of God, though never so mean outwardly. Certainly
a skillful Pilot with a homely handkerchief about his neck, will better conduct
a ship to his right Port, then the Lord Major with his chain of Gold. Riches
avail not in the day of wrath: Friends, its not a Ruff-band, a Beaver hat, a
Gelding, a Gray beard, or thousands per Annum can do thy soul good, thou may
perish for all that. I believe he that's diseased in his body, or has a limb
out of joint, will rather listen to a skillful Physician or Surgeon, in a
thredbare coat, then to an unskilful Quack-salver in a Velvet suit: and
certainly it will be our shame to be wiser for the body, then for the soul,
which is more worth then the whole world.

5. Although men be never so rich and great in the world, yet if they be called
and quallified for this work, they must become fools, children and servants,
or else not fit, 1 Timothy 5.17.
either for the Kingdom of heaven or to be employed in the Church of God. And
this is one obsticle in the way of great men, who if they had eyes to see, they
might know that the service of God and his Church, is not only the greatest
freedom, 1 Cor. 4.20.
but the highest honor.

6. Its an Argument of an ignorant and carnal heart, and of such as are
utterly unacquainted with Jesus Christ, thus to stumble at his cross: was it
not the ignorance and impiety of the Scribes and Pharisees thus to do? did not
they say of the Lord Christ, Is not this the Carpenters son? are not his
brethren with us? etc. Do any of the Rulers believe in him? etc. Who is it that
counts the wisdom of God foolishness, but men worldly wise? And are not we apt
to say, What is such or such a one? do not we know them well enough? taking
exceptions at men excellently quallisied, if not so great in the world as our
selves.

7. Know this is only a block cast in the way by Satan, that men may stumble
without cause, and fall. Notwithstanding, men of abilicie and known fidelity,
be in most places chosen; yet its ordinary with the devil and his instruments,
to obstruct; therefore if he cannot quarrel with the Ordinances, then with
dispensations; if no cause there, then with the Instruments; and if with none
of those, then with Christ, with Truth it self: For he knows the settlement of
the discipline of the Church will exceedingly obstruct the increase of his
Kingdom, when corruptions are cast out, and persons ignorant and scandalous
debarred that Ordinance, which makes them ten fold more the children of the
devil, by unworthy participating: For its all one to him, either to make men
rush hand overhead upon the Ordinance, to their ruin, or to raise a prejudice
against the duty and Instruments employed, to deprive them of that mercy, which
by Gods blessing might be very Isntrumental to their salvation.

8. If they be Legally chosen, have past the trial, and the time of exception
not made use of, blame your selves. Nevertheless, if they be unfit, there is
place of appeal, and remedy.

9. Ob. Me thinks the Pastors and Elders in Presbyterian Congregations, are
neither rightly called, nor fitly qualified.

A I. Although, I doubt not but many, yea the most of them are as well
qualified as we can expect, for that as we cannot expect perfection here, nor
in a Legal sense, any fitly qualified, yet Evangelically considered, although
none are sufficient, the Lord looks upon them with approbation and acceptance.

2. Notwithstanding, there is also sufficient provision made for the removal
of such, whether Pastor or Elder, as are incapable either by ignorance or
scandal: Its not here as in Independent Churches, where if the people injure
their Pastor, or Elders, etc. or the Officers injure the people, without
redress; but if either party be found faulty, they are responsible, and
satisfaction is given to the suffering party according to the demerit: and
doubtless corruption will creep, especially into Churches where provision is
not made to keep it out.

3. Although I would not plead for the unsutablenesse or incapacitie of any
called to the meanest office in the Church of God, yet I would have them looked
upon as men subject to infirmities, not as Angels; and if we would not have
such, we must ascend higher, to look for Pastors, Elders, etc. then either God
or man ordained or expects. And yet ordinarily those that stumble most, at the
inablities of Church Officers, are men most incapable of Church Communion.

Secondly, For the Calling of Church Officers.

If Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc. be chosen according to those directions
laid down in the Ordinance, and have past through the door of trial,
accordingly as in most places they have; or otherways men disaffected to the
Government, would quickly have let them know it. There can be no just
exception, especially, if the time limited for exception be more then past
abundantly: unless you deny the public Congregations in England, to be true
Churches, which has been, and is generally attested, not only by the National
Synod now sitting, the Godly Learned in general, whether Episcopal or
Presbyterian: but all the reformed Churches, nay, the most pious and prudent of
the Independent judgment, also have publicly positively and affirmatively
declared them to be true Churches of Jesus Christ; however confessed on all
sides to be full of corrupti^ns, or else we should have no need of Reformation:
many Godly and learned Divines having taken much pains in public to defend
the Truth, against all opposers: and indeed the satisfaction of such weak
Christians as stumbled hereat, together with that other scruple of
participating the Sacrament in mixed Assemblies, was the chief cause of my own
undertaking that Subject published for common benefit, in the Book called the
Bramble berry, wherein there is full satisfaction given to that point:
therefore not willing now to insist further, I refer such as yet scruple;
thither.

10. Q. But why must we appeal to Classes? have they any power to determine
differences, and to reform abuses in particular Congregations?

A. Yea, and that for very good reason, for

1. Besides the appointment by Parliament and Assembly, they are our own
Trustees, or Representatives, such as are chosen by particular Congregations,
to hear and determine differences, and reform such abuses as in case of error
or injury they themselves cannot; for were it not for Classis, the Pastors,
Elders, etc, might injure the Congregation, or the people, injure the Pastor,
etc. and remain remediless: Classis therefore, are as Committees chosen out,
or made up of pastors and Elders out of particular Churches; and although they
have appointment by Authority of Parliament, and Assembly, so they are
approved and chosen by particular Churches, as their Trustees: so that every
particular Church has like interest, and so receive like redress in point of
appeal. And that these may not be oppressive or injurous, they are responsible
to the Provincialls, which are also made up of so many delegates as are thought
fit out of the several Classis as their Representatives, and those also
responsible to a National Synod, and they likewise to a Parliament: so that as
much provision as may be, is made to keep out Arbitrary proceeds and tyranny,
and to redress all abuses: and that neither Pastor or other Officer be wronged
by the people, or the people by the Pastor, etc. or jointly fall into errors
without remedy.

2. Although its true we read of no such power in the Church, as Classis
Provincialls, Nationalls, etc. in the Scripture, yet we find something as
equivalent to them, as those times of the Church, and the condition thereof
could admit: for in cases of controversy of doubt of error or injury, etc. we
find the particular Church, appealing to an Assembly of Apostles and Disciples
from whom they received directions, decrees; and in whose determinations the
particular Churches acquiesce: as in that great dissension that arose in the
Church at Antioch, about circumcision: Paul and Barnabas are sent up to
Jerusalem, by the Church, to receive the direction, and determination of the
Apostles and Elders there, Act. 15.1.2. Having had much debate and dispute of
the matter, send down their determination by messengers, from amongst
themselves, together with Paul and Barnabas, viz. Barsabas and Sylas who carry
them, both by word and writing, the effect whereof is in 28, 29. verses: For it
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden
then these necessary things, that ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and
from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication: from which, if ye
keep your selves, ye shall do well. Farewell. After the receiving of this
determination, we read of no more contending about circumcision, but all was
quiet. So that we see here was something of like nature to a Synodicall
Assembly, although the constitution of the Church and State at that time
neither had need of, nor could possibly set up either National, Provincial,
or Classical Assemblies.

1. They had less need then now, by reason the Churches were not so numerous.
2. There Pastors and Elders being endowed with a more infallible spirit, less
need of Apostles.
2. Not possible.

1. For that the Church being in its infancy, they had not a competent number
of Apostles, Elders, etc. to make many Assemblies.

2. And more especially, they lived not under Christian Majestrates: there was
then no National Church, they neither had countenance, nor encouragement from
the civil Majestracy: there was neither Nation, Province, or City, that
generally professed Christ; they had a particular Church here and there, and
these liable ever and anon to be dissipated by persecution, etc. Now there can
be no National Provincial, or Classical Assemblies, where the Nation,
Province, or considerable part of the Kingdom do not profess Christ. Now if
there be much corruption where so great provision is made to reform, how much
more where there is no place of appeal: Therefore I shall affirm this to the
whole world, that there is no other Government in the Church for the
substantials of it held forth in the word of God, then Presbyterian: for the
circumstancialls, the State of the times and constitutions of our Kingdom
cannot expect to find recorded in all things conduceable to the well being of
a Church, in regard of union and order. I would to God we had more wisdom then
to quarrel about circumstances; certainly, would we promote the substantialls
of Reformation wherein both Presbyterian and Independent agree, other things
would be easily reconciled; but while we thus contend about that punctillo of
appeal, the work of Reformation is most sinfully and shamefully neglected: for
as I said formerly, Independent Government is Presbyterian, except in point of
appeal; nay, Episcopacy regulated, viz. when their Lordly usurped power, their
Diocesan Dominion, their temporal civil and secular Jurisdictions is taken
off, is also Presbyterian: a Scripture Bishop is a Pastor, or Presbyter, or
Elder; only every Pastor is an Elder, but every Elder not a Pastor: Some rule,
some labor in the word and doctrine: so that Bishop, Pastor, Teacher,
Presbyter, Elder, will admit of one and the same interpretation. Therefore let
us cease contending about words, that tend rather to strife then edifying: let
us not tithe Mint and Annis, etc. while we neglect Judgment, Mercy, and
Fidelity, etc. while we quarrel in circumstances in the neglect of the
substance of Gods worship: Like a foolish builder, we are convering the house,
before the foundation be well laid: lie a Star-gazing while the ship is ready
to sink under us: we quarrel about Rosemary and Bays, while Church and State
run both to ruin, and our neighboring nation wallows in its blood: stand
combing and triming our beards, while our house is on fire over our heads.
Truly thus, and far more ridiculous is our condition, the Lord help us to see
it; and doubtless it were just with God to give us over to pursue shadows, and
lying vanities, in the neglect of our own mercy, for that we are so weded to
promote the Circumstances in the retard, and overthrow of the substantialls of
Gods worship, and the power of Godliness, etc.

The Third and Fourth particular, Concerning the Lawfullnesse and usefulness
of Examination by the Eldership, as follows

11. Ob. But they say now none must come to the Sacrament without Examination
by the Eldership, which some hold to be no better then a point of Popery;
however its very needless and ridiculous for ancient men that have born all
offices in the Parish and Church too, lived long under the means, often
formerly admitted, now to be Catichised like boys; neither do I believe there
is any rule for it in the Word: the Apostles says, Let every man examine
himself, and so let him eat; etc. 1 Cor. 11.28.

A. Its very true, that none are now to be admitted to the Sacrament of the
Lords supper, but who ought to be examined, and that upon good ground: neither
is there the least punctillo of Popery in it; or is it either needless or
ridiculous, but a very necessary duty, and grounded both upon Scripture and
good reason, as well for ancient as young people: and seeing this is the grand
stumbling block, I shall endeavor its removal, especially, and for that
indeed without Examination there can be no true Reformation.

1. For that its objected as tending to Popery: whosoever thinks so, its not
for want of ignorance, for it is not intended either by Parliament or Synod, or
any particular Congregationall Eldership, to expect auricular confession, but
only an account of a reason of men's Faith, which men may do, and yet have
little share in Jesus Christ: True, if a man render a competent account of his
knowledge in the mysteries of God, if nothing of scandal appear in the life,
he cannot be kept back from Sacramental visible communion, although as before
a stranger from union with Christ: therefore is it, there is a twofold
Examination requisite.

1. Examination of a man's own heart, whether he have the sincerity, Godly
zeal, knowledge, faith, repentance, love, etc. with such graces as indeed give
a man right, not only to the Elements, but to Jesus Christ, without which, he
can have no comfort in participating.

2. Examination by the Pastor and Elders, whereby he is known fit for visible
communion; for although a man may give the Eldership a fair account, yet may he
be an hypocrite, a child of the devil: the principal part, (without which,
all is vain) is to set things to rights between God and the soul in secret,
which being the greater work, the Apostle urges that only, not intending to
exclude Examination by the Church as needless: and is it not for this purpose
the Apostle Peter lays down that Apostolical injunction, 1. Pet. 3.15. Be
ready always to give answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you, with meekness and fear. First says he Sanctify the Lord God
in your hearts: that is, be sure the heart be upright with God, and then be
ready always to render account, etc. If a man must be always ready, and to
all men to give account; surely, especially to the Church of God. And although
Christians ought not to be ashamed to confess Jesus Christ, and to make
profession of their faith, even to heathens, or persecutors, if called to it,
yet its mainly intended that none should refuse to render a reason of their
faith, to the Church of God: yea, and that Scripture holds forth that they must
be both knowing and faithful, that render account, as well as men ignorant or
scandalous.

Now that Examination by the Eldership is very requisite will appear by these
and such like ensuing Arguments, it being already sufficiently proved, that
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, their Offices, titles, and employments, are of
Divine institution: and also that their titles are suitable to their
employments, they are in scripture called Rulers, Governors, Overseers,
Stewards, Watchmen, etc. and their Office as has been largely proved, is to
order out the administrations of the Church decently, to admit or suspend from
the Sacrament according to men's several capacities, etc. and therefore
Examination must inevitably follow.

For,

the Church, and the particular members thereof, ought to be acquainted with
their spiritual condition.

But Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, of particular Congregations, are bound to
give account to God, of the particular members of their Churches.

Therefore ought to be well acquainted with their spiritual condition.



But we are bound to submit to, and to obey the Pastors and Elders of the
Church, in all Church ordinances.

Therefore we ought to obey them in this ordinance of Examination.



But the worthy are to be admitted, and the unworthy to be suspended by the
Eldership, neither can they know men's several capacities or conditions without
Examination.

Therefore Examination by the Eldership is of necessity, without which they
cannot separate between the precious and the vile, as their duty is. Jer. 15..19


Many Arguments might more be offered, but the matter is so plain, that to any
reasonable man, there can remain no seruple: neither do I quotescriptures to
those Arguments by reason they are grounded upon the former scriptures,
alleged for the proof of the Eldership, to be of Divine right: I shall only
propound this one text which will answer all.

Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give account; that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief, for that is not profitable for you. Heb. 13.17.

In which scripture all may clearly see that the foregoing Arguments, and many
more is strongly held forth; there being contained in the words, these
following Truths.

1. That subjection and obedience, is to be given to those that rule and
govern in the Church. 2. That the reason why men must obey those that rule in
the Church, is for that they are [set over] their souls, as watchmen, and must
give account to God, concerning those committed to their Charge. 3. That its an
occasion of Joy to Governors in the Church, when people are obedient to the
ordinances thereof; and of grief when they disobey. 4. That the hurt that
follows upon the peoples non obedience, and the good that attends their
obedience redounds to themselves. 5. That its the sin of particular members
of the Church not to obey them that in the Lord are set over them in the
Church.
Certainly, the consideration of their office, and the ends of their
appointments to them, is Argument enough; doubtless he is not fit to be a
Steward, nor can possibly give account, that knows not the state of his Charge:
neither is he fit to be a Shepherd that knows not the state of his flock. And
if Elders must reprove, rebuke, exhort, admonish and encourage, as occasion is,
How shall they do this, without Examining those with whom they have to do? 2 Timothy 4.2.


Notwithstanding, by reason of that general averseness to this necessary
duty, I add these ensuing considerations, being willing to satisfy all.

1. Consider, if public profession and confession were requisite in men grown
to maturitie, before they could be baptized; much more requisite is it before
admittance to this ordinance. The Eunuch, although a man of great authority,
and well instructed by Philip, and although coming to Jerusalem to worship, yet
could not be baptized, till he made profession of his faith; and was first well
Catechized concerning Christ, Act. 8.37. If thou beleevest with all thy heart,
thou may? and he answered and said, I believe, etc. and although the Jews
were circumcised, and were of the National Church of God, yet were none of
them received into the particular Congregations and Churches of Jesus Christ,
without profession of their faith, and confession of sins, out of which we may
gather that our baptism gives us no right at all to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, unless we be sutably quallified, we may eat and drink our own
damnation.

2. Consider there is in every Christian required not only a believing heart,
but a verbal profession of Faith in Christ. Romans 10.10. For with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to
salvation.

3. Although every man ought to examine himself that comes to the Table of the
Lord; yet the Officers of the Church must also examine, else how shall they
know who is able to examine himself: And I fear they that plead most against
examination by the Eldership, are both least capable and most careless of that
especial duty of self examination: besides self examination is all that is
required of any man after first admittance. Those the Apostle speaks to, 1.
Cor. 11.28. were members of the Church, who had before admittance made
profession of their faith in Christ.

4. Methinks particular men should not stumble at examination, seeing those
that are in place of Judicature and trust in the Church ought and are first
examined, as 1. Tim. 3. After the Apostle had laid down what manner of men they
ought to be that are to bear office in the Church in the 10. v. says, and let
these also be roved: implying that all admitted to Church communion ought to be
proved: but first such as are to rule and govern these (also) must be proved.
And this the Parliament and Synod have made good provision for; in that
Ordinance for settling the government of the Church, that none be admitted to
that trust, but first to be proved by the triers, who must be found men of
unblameable Conversations, and sound in the Faith. And indeed there is great
need that men that are to rule in the Church, should be both grave and godly:
for if a man cannot tell how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of
the Church of God? 1. Tim. 3.5.

5. No man can possess outward things, but he must declare his title, and upon
all occasions produce his evidences: and do we think the things of God are to
be passed hand over head to such as are no way able to plead their propriety?
Think it requisite to deal securely for the body, and be so loose and
careless of our immortal souls.

6. Consider who is it will suffer if men unworthy be admitted, as of
necessity they will if not examined: shall not such a one reap his own ruin?
Nay, and those that ought to have debarred him Inevitably, incur the guilt of
his blood: therefore it is far better, and more agreeable to the word of God,
and more tending to the edification of the Church; for men found unfit, a while
to be suspended, till by the preaching of the Word, Prayer, Christian
admonition, etc. they become capable to participate to Gods glory, and their
own comfort.

7. There is not so great cause of offense, (if any) to any man, if they
confider it is but once: at first admittance its needless when men are once
sufficiently known to the Church, if it were to be done as often as the
Sacrament were administered there were more cause of exception.

8. Consider Authority upon long and serious debate, has found it a duty of
especial concernment, much conducing to the Reformation of abuses in the
Church, having had sufficient consult with the Assembly of Divines, concerning
the Legallity and necessity thereof; and have found it a duty of Divine right:
and therefore have enjoined all in Authority that they admit none, but first
examine their aptness both in point of knowledge and conversation: and this
Ordinance will not only debar the ignorant and scandalous, but also men of
unsound and rotten judgments, who are as dangerous in the Church, and far more
then scandalous livers: Now if we ought to submit to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, let us submit to this, especially wherein the glory of God, and
our own eternal good is so much concernd: And certainly those that most
pleaded for Conformity, for obedience to Authority in the Bishops days, should
not now spurn so much at the Ordinances of the Church: yet so it is, that those
formerly that were our greatest Conformists are in this point chief
non-conformists: And such men who I am sure cast an evil eye upon the
separation for making rents and divisions in the Church, by their spurning
against the Ordinances of the Church, running hither and thither to promiscuous
dispensations, lusting after their old onyons, become arch Seperatists: which
disorder, doubtless as the work of Reformation goes on, and the government of
the Church settled, will easily be prevented.

9. Consider, its the honor of a Christian to make profession of his Faith,
although before persecutours, and tyrants, and in midst of sufferings, and will thou be ashamed to render a reason of thy Faith to thy fellow brethren and
friends.

10. Nothing is required of any particular member, that both Pastor and Elders
have not cherefully undergone, and that in a more serious and strict nature.

11. The turning our backs upon the Lords Supper, rather then to pass through
this door of examination, argues great sleighting of that sacred Ordinance,
and herein we neglect our own mercy, and bewray abundance of folly: certainly
every man would charge him with folly, that is heir to a good estate, and will
rather loose it, then plead his interest, or bring forth his evidences. And
have we not as great reason to conclude him both ignorant and unworthy to
participate the Lord Christ, that rather then show his right or plead his
propriety, will loose his part in him* Therefore by all means take heed of
contemning this weighty Ordinance wherein our spiritual life and nutriment
consists. And the more thy heart is avers to submit, the more certainly
conclude the Ordinance is of Divine Institution for naturally our hearts are
averse to God and goodness.

12. By coming in, we shall declare our selves friends to Reformation,
Promoters of the Peace of the Church, Enemies to those that would gladly
increase our confusion, who with Sanballat and Tobiah, cast their daily scoffs
and reproaches upon the ways, people, and Ordinances of God; besides it is
far better for men found incapable by examination to be a while suspended,
then if promiscuously admitted in a crowd to be cast out by excommunication.

13. Consider the great mischiess that attend the admitting of all sorts of men
to the Table of the Lord.

First,

Hereby occasion is given to the weaker, to despise and dislike the Ordinances
of God, and to contemn our Religion, this being the very reason why many now
of the separation have forsaken our Assemblies; and do at this day power so
much reproach and contempt upon us, although they are to be justly condemned in
so doing: Woe be to them that give occasion of offense; but withal woe be to
them that take offense hereat: The sin of Elies sons, 1. Sam. 2.17. was
great in making the Lords people to abhor the offerings of the Lord: yet this
was also called the transgression of the people, so that they both sinned; even
so promiscuous dispensation of divine Ordinances gives occasion of offense to
many, especially to God, therefore sinful: but yet its their sin that turn
their backs upon the Ordinances for that ground.

Secondly,

Its a grand cause of the growth of sin: hereby profane men are encouraged
to go on in their impieties, by being admitted into Church privileges, as well
as the best men, and not discountenanced by casting out that, that makes Gods
Vineyard fruitful, as a reverend able Divine not long since well showed, is
the fencing of it, and casting out the stones thereof, Esaias 5.2. But if the
fence be so broken down, that swine, and all manner of beasts break in, and if
the stones be not cast out, to wit, men ignorant and scandalous, its impossible
for the Church to edify or bring forth fruit pleasing to God, nothing but wild
and sower grapes can be expected.

Thirdly,

The holy things of God are hereby profained, childrens bread given to dogs,
Pearls cast before swine, the uncircumcised admitted, no difference put between
the precious and the vild; giving the Lord just cause to deprive us of his
Ordinances, and to say as sometime he did of his Israel, What has my beloved
to do in my house, Jeremiah, 11.15.

Fourthly.

It will abundantly grieve and burden the godly party; even as putrified and
rotten members, grieve the whole body; and as its death for a dead carcass to
be joined to a living man: and as in the best framed Fabric, although much of
the materials are very sound and good, yet one rotten pillar or beam, may bring
all about our ears. And as no man will put an old piece into a new garment, so
is it not only unsuitable, but very unsafe, nay, destructive to admit men
ignorant and scandalous, to fellowship with the Saints; what fellowship can
light have with darkness? or God with Belial? And for this cause was it, the
hand of God lay so heavy upon the Corinthians, many of them visited with
sicknesses and death, for their unworthy participating the Lords body. 1 Cor.
11.

14. Consider that Apostolical injunction is binding to all Governors in
Churches, in this case, 1 Cor. 5.11. If any that is called a Brother be a
fornicator, or covetuous, or an Idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an
Extortioner; with such a one eat not. The Apostle prohibits not eating common
bread, with such, (for then we must go out of the world,) but Sacramental
bread: And therefore appointed this remedy: verse. 13. Put away therefore from
among you that wicked person.

12. Ob. Methinks if they would Catechize the young people it would do well,
but for ancient men that have received the Sacrament twenty or thirty years
together, or more; that have born all Offices in both Church and Parish, to be
now called to account like boys; This cannot be endured.

A. Its very good indeed for young people to be well catechized in the grounds
and principles of Religion, and in the Doctrine of the Sacrament, that may
become capable of those holy mysteries; and if in public, the ancient loose
nothing by it: yet its too too common for old men to be very ignorant of Jesus
Christ; and therefore have need enough of Examination; and yet respect had to
their years also: neither Parliament or Eldership intending such a particular
Catechistical account of ancient men, as of the younger sort; it being to
pedagogicall: but if the souls of the anciont be as precious as the souls of
the young, and if the blood of the ancient as well as the younger people, will
be required at their hands, that willingly receive them into Sacramental
communion; that by unworthy participating become guilty of the body and blood
of Jesus Christ: then I say it is of as great necessity for the old as well as
young people to render a reason of their faith to the Church.

Had not (I pray you) Nichodemus need enough of catechizing? an ancient man, a
Ruler of the Jews; yet utterly ignorant of the doctrine of Regeneration: and
as ignorant are many of our great and ancient men, both of Regeneration, and
also of the work of Reformation, and doctrine of the Sacrament: yet no doubt
but all the respect that may be, will be had both to age and sex; the work
being intended by all entrusted in it, to be carried on with all humility,
love, and Christian tenderness; laying aside all sinister respects, or
ambitious ends, according to the exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.23.
speaking there to the Elders, exhorts them to feed the flock of God, which is
among them; and of whom they have oversight, not by constraint, or for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind: neither as being lords over Gods heritage, but to
be ensamples to the stock.

And, for that some have received the Sacrament twenty or thirty years
together; the longer the worse with many, for we know by woeful experience, how
promiscuously the Ordinances of God, have been even hand over head dispensed,
to the great dishonor of God, the shame of such as had power in the Church,
and much to be feared and lamented, to the loss of many a poor soul: and
indeed, this being one of the grand corruptions to be cast out of the Church,
ought not to be pleaded for in the least. Old customs have begot old
corruptions.

13. Ob. But must all men be examined? Certainly some men are as able to
examine the Eldership, as the Elders them; What need is there to examine such?

A. Would to God all men were so: and their conversations as suitable: With
Moses, I wish all the Lords people were Prophets; yet men never so well
qualified must be examined before admitted; yea, and by men, peradventure some
of them of meaner abilities, then those Examined. For, 1. The Ordinance of
Parliament, although made upon long and serious debate for that purpose,
exempts none. 2. If men be never so able or honest, if not known, the duty may
not be omitted. 3. If they be known to be such, yet to avoid exception, and to
encourage others, although less pains need be taken; its not needless to
render an account of the reason of our faith, but according to Apostolical
injunction. Certainly, when the Apostle enjoynes all to this duty, he means not
only men of weak abilities, but even the strongest Christian. 4. Although men
be never so able, yet they must obey them that are set over them in the Lord,
and who are lawfully called to that function, and who have received authority
from God, abilities must not make men shake off obedience. 5. Such men as are
able and Godly, do seldom or never scruple this; their hearts being most
averse that have least knowledge of God: ignorance and scandal being the grand
reason of men's standing out: were not men in the dark, they would not stumble.


14. Ob. But must women also be examined? is there any rule for that in
Scripture?

A. There is as much rule for Examination of women, before their first
admittance, as there is for their coming to the Sacrament; there being no
possitive precept for it; although very undeniable consequences from the Word.
Certainly, women were conversant with Jesus Christ, as well as men; and
although not recorded in holy Writ, yet doubtless did participate the body and
blood of Jesus Christ Sacramentally, as well as men. And if they have immortal
souls, and must live by faith as well as men, and have no other way to
salvation but Jesus Christ, as well as men: and if the guilt of their blood may
by unworthy rushing upon the Ordinance of God, be charged upon the Eldership,
as well as upon themselves, certainly, as much care had need to be taken how
they be admitted, and what right they have to the sacred and divine miresteries.

Peradventure shame-fac'dnesse and modesty, (subject to that Sex) may at first
a little be some hinderance; but doubtless every knowing Christian woman that
desires communion with Jesus Christ in his Ordinances, the premises considered,
will not reject their own mercy, in turning their backs upon so weighty an
Ordinance, rather then do that duty, which we see both God and man enjoins and
expects; and wherein their own safety is so much concerned: and I am confident
out times have as many Mary's, Priscillahs, Hannahs, Lydiaes, etc. (viz.) women
fearing the Lord, and not ashamed of their profession, as any time since the
world began: and who I hope, are rather ashamed of taking upon them loose and
fantastic fashions, not becoming the Gospel, then contemn the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ: and who with those Godly Matrons of old, make their chief
ornament the hidden man of of the heart; the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit: according to the exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.4.5. also in 1 Timothy 2.9.10. both places worth the taking special notice of, by every woman
fearing God.

Neither are such useless to the Church, but may with Priscilla, help forward
the work of Christ, in the services of the Church, Romans 16.3. And doubtless
they will not miss of that respect and tender care from the Eldership, as be
seems both their age and Sex.

15. Ob. Were it only to be examined by the Minister, it were not so much; but
for a man or woman to come before so many, dashes them out of Countenance.

A. 1. Its not otherways intended but the Pastor or Minister, shall propound
such plain and necessary queries, as are requisite: which indeed are so few and
easy, that none need scruple. Neither can any be ignorant of, that know any
thing of God: especially being so clearly laid down in the Ordinance of Church
government: the Elders for the most part being auditors, only with the Pastor
approving, or otherwise of men's aptness, etc. for so weighty an Ordinance.

2. Its for very good reason there should be Elders to join with the Pastor in
this work, otherwise the business would be arbitrary, and more apt to
corruption: its not fit the power of admission or suspension, should rest in
any particular breast.

3. The Pastors and Elders doubtless know its their duty to avoid preposterous
and partial proceeds, vain glory, provocation to strife, etc. And although they
ought to be jealous, yet must they also be tender over the souls of such who
are committed to their charge: and to do all in long suffering and meekness,
forbearing one another in love: that no offense be given, according to the
Apostles rule, Phil. 2.3. Gal. 5.26. 2 Cor. 63, 4. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.

16. Ob. Me thinks it were sufficient to suspend the scandalous: Is there any
such need to keep off the ignorant? Is not the Sacrament a converting Ordinance?

A. Ignorance as well as scandal make men incapable: for ignorant men are not
able to discern the Lords body: Nay, men ignorant and erroneous, are more
dangerous in the Church, then the scandalous: for the scandalous is palpably
known to himself and others, to be in an undone condition: but an ignorant man,
or a man of corrupt judgment in fundamentalls, does not only go himself
hud-winked to hell, but if God be not the more merciful, draws others along
with him. Therefore as a man would keep a sword or other hurtful weapon out of
a Childs or a mad man's hand, so careful should we be of admitting men either
scandalous, ignorant, or erroneous, to Sacramental communion, least they ruin
themselves and others: for the Sacrament of the Lords supper is a consuming,
but not a converting Ordinance, Preaching, Reading, Prayer, etc. are converting
Ordinances: and till men are converted, and well seen in the Doctrine of Faith,
Repentance, Justification, and Sanctification, they are very unfit for
Sacramental communion.

17. Ob. But do what you can, yet many corrupt men will be admitted.

A. True, but the fewer the better, if men be inwardly depraved, God only
judges; the Eldership sees only as man sees. And if notwithstanding all care,
some will be corrupt, much more would be, if men were admitted hand over head,
as formerly, without Examination.

18. Ob. Surely were it a good work and aceording to God, good Ministers would
promote it; but there are diverse good Preachees about London, and in other
parts of the kingdom, that act little or nothing at all this way.

A. Its true, that good Ministers do promote the work very much, and many
Congregations have made good progress where the Ministers or Pastors are
hearty to the work of Reformation. And indeed where there are good Elders, it
bewrayes either a nutral, Episcopal, or a malignant spirit, in those Ministers
that act not: Let them preach how they will, if they stir not up both People
and Elders to improve their ability to the utmost, to put forward the work,
there is but little zeal for God: And if the Elders be backward, the Minister
ought to use all means, either to cause them to mend their pace, or have them
outed; and its the fault of Elders, considering remedy may be had, if they
suffer under an Episcopal or malignant Pastor.

2. Pastors ought to seek both the Elders and People, and so the Elders and
People their Pastor from God, and all jointly to seek God; ( viz.) the godly
for direction and protection; for its very unlikly, else the work should
prosper: A work well begun is half ended, no doubt but Satan and our corrupt
hearts, will cast blocks in our way that we might stumble and fall; but we have
a strong God whose grace is sufficient. Therefore all should resolve through his
strength to rush through all opposition; he that has promised to be with his
servants in Gospel Ordinances and Dispensations to the end of the world, is
semper idem: I know there are diverse discouragements arise both to the Pastors
and Elders.

As,

1. That natural and general averseness of men to come in, whence it comes to
pass that although the Confines of a Parrish be very large and populous, yet
few are fit to be admitted, and those peradventure of the lower sort.

2. Multiplicity of such as turn their backs, and lift up the heel.

3. Some again, expect either Independency will be established, or a general
tolleration; and this makes many Episcopally, neutrally, or malignantly
affected run hither and thither, rather then come in at the door of
examination; hoping this Government will not long stand, rather lust after
their old fleshpots, and Egyptian onyons, etc.

4. Some are discouraged upon fears of violence offered to the Ordinances by
profane men, that will in despite both of God and Man, lay foul hands upon the
sacred Elements, etc.

In answer to all these and many more such unworthy fcars, I could speak much,
but that I have exceeded already and account them not worthy much debate;
therefore I answer briefly,

To the first and second.

1. That general averseness that is in men to the work, should be a strong
persuasion to us that its of God.

2. That although the Confines are large and populous, and but few come in,
know its a mercy rather then any cause of discouragement; for as many are
called, and but few chosen; so many hear the Word, and but few fit for
Sacramental Communion, and so long as those that do come in, are such as we may
comfortably have fellowship withal be not troubled: God had ever the smallest
number: and for my part if the work be once in any good forwardness, I believe
there is more cause to fear too many will lay claim to it, then too few; and
will come in fast enough if they may be received.

3. Consider the condition of those that reject the Ordinance, and those that
with humble and holy hearts offer themselves to the work, those received are
godly: Let that comfort, and despise not the Day of small things. No matter how
mean in the worlds account: and let not those poor souls be deprived of their
desired spiritual nutriment by any causeless obstructions.

3. For that fear of violence, etc.

It cannot enter into my heart that men will be so impudently guilty of this
high piece of spiritual sacrilege, to lay violent and foul hands upon the
body and blood of Christ: such must especially hale the guilt of his blood upon
their own heads.

And yet if any such be, it concerns those entrusted with the Holy Ordnance to
oppose them, by doing all in them lies; either by persuasion, admonition,
complaint to the civil Magistrate; who in such cases bears not the swore in
vain, and who I am confident if applied to, will not be wanting to punish such
according to demerit, and to encourage those concernd: And if neither
admonition, or Christian persuasion, will serve, its very lawful to reprove
them sharply, and to make open opposition to them, let them be never so great.
A notable example of this we have in Azariah the Priest, who when Vzziah the
King would burn Incense upon the Altar, 2 Chronicles. 26.18, 19.
the Priests are commended for withstanding him, and thrusting him out of the
Temple, and the Lord left him not unrewarded, for he was a Leper from that very
hour to his dying day; which plainly shows that God is present in his
Ordnances, and will undoubtedly avenge abuses offered to him in their
dispensations; and without speedy repentance, and Gods wonderful mercy, such
men may justly expect the reward of Corah, etc.

4. Whereas some expect either Independency, or a general tolleration; I
answer, For general tolleration there is no great fear, and if their should,
the Presbyterian government I hope, will have its freedom as well as others:
and as for Independencie, there is no such difference between the Presbyterian
government, and that, as can any way give a nullity or change to Church
Ordinances: for they must have both Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, etc.
The same Ordnances only differ in point of appeal; the truth is, Independent
Churches are Presbyterian only: Presbyterian as now stated, not Independent; I
look upon the Independent government as a Presbyterian tree with one branch cut
off; by reason there is not that provision made in point of error or injury,
as in Presbyterian government: but in neither none can communicate without
being examined before admittance, nay Episcopal government reformed, will not
admit of promiscuous dispensations.

19. Ob. But what if the King come home? think ye this government will stand?

A. I believe many in our days there are, that despise the day of small things;
and with Sanballet and Tobiah, say, What will these weak Jews do? and who, as I
said, are lusting after their old Egyptian fleshpots, not caring at all for
the Milk and Honey of Canaan, who hope to see the wheel turn: but let such
know, their hope is as the crackling of thernes: the foundation of God stnads
sure, and he that has laid the foundation will also lay the top-stone. The
government of the Church of God is not grounded upon the King, but upon Jesus
Christ, Isa. 9.6.
that rock against which the gates of hell shall never be able to prevail: and
considering the wonderful works God has wrought for us of late years, in
order to Reformation, he knows little of God, that doubts of his assistance
for future, much less such as hope for any obstruction.

20. Object. Do ye not see how Parishes are divided about this business? in
diverse places they are altogether by the ears.

A. 1. You may easily perceive by the persons that make opposition, that the
government is of God: carnal and profane men cannot endure it, they cannot
subject to the yoke of Christ; the cause is not in Reformation, but in our own
corrupt hearts: and hence is it men band themselves against the Lord Christ,
saying, Let us break his bands asunder, and cast his cords from us, but the
Lord has them in derision, he laughs them to scorn, and he will in due time
make his stoutest foes his footstool.

2. It was said by Christ himself, that he came in the flesh, to make division,
to set the father against the son, son against father, mother in law against
the daughter in law, etc. And although this was not the intent of his coming,
yet it is so accidentally, so it ever was and will be so long as there is seed
of woman, and seed of the serpent; there will be, if a Church millitant, a
Church malignant, and so long as there is flesh and spirit.

21. Ob. But what is the reason so many Elders are chosen in diverse places, and
so few hold? not half in some places.

A. Many men that are chosen, are as unwilling to undergo that trouble, as
many other are to come in to Communion, and refuse to hold from diverse grounds.

Some, for that they fear they shall reap displeasure of their neighbors,
not having learned to go through good and evil report for Christ.

Others fear they shall spend too much time from the world.

Some out of fear of opposition and difficulty they shall meet withal in the
work, being as unwilling to enter upon the Office by Examination or Trial, as
others to come to Sacrament.

But to decline their trust from such sinister ends, is an unworthy thing;
neither ought those that do embrace that office, be discouraged, although the
sons of Anak be many and great: its the work of God: and as the Lord Christ
said in an other case to his Disciples, [it is I,] be not afraid, so say I to
all that God has called to the work, Be not afraid, its Gods work, and he
will give all suitable assistance, and will in dispite of men and devils, set
his Son upon his Holy hill.

2. No man ought to be discouraged, for that the half of those chosen hold
not; For doubtless, many that have declined after chosen, have done it out of
a sense of their own unfitness; who if they had held, would either have been
found unfit upon trial, or if not hearty to the work, would have hindered the
success thereof.

3. If but one third part of those chosen hold, and who are upon trial found
fit; being confirmed by them; their authority is as binding as if five times
their number had embraced it, and the fewer there are, the more commendable is
their resolution against difficulty, and the less fear of dissension: who also
if they find the work too hard, as opportunity is offered may admit of
additional assistance.

4. The numerousnesse of the Presbytery, is one of the blocks cast in the way
of reformation; therefore there is less need to stumble at their paucity if
able to carry on the work.

Ob. 22. But is it meet all men should come before the Eldership to be examined
before admittance? me thinks they should go to the houses of some men of best
rank and converse with them there.

Answ. Unless in case of sickness or the like, it is very unfit.

For,

1. Its exemplary, giving occasion to others to expect the like, and sets open
a door of chargeing the Eldership with partiallity and un-even dealing, in
distribution of Divine Ordinances.

2. It must needs draw contempt both upon Governors, and Government, and
Ordinances.

3. It were an endless work, and let men be never so high in the world, yet if
they ow not so much respect for the work sake to those whom God has set over
them in the Church, as to come before them, such men will never receive benefit
by the Ordinance: And if such a spirit predominate, I am sure its against the
rule laid down by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17. Yea and derogates very much from
the disposition of every one that are either fit for Church Communion, or
Heavenly intertainment; Mark 10.15. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever
shall not receive the Kingdom of God, as a little child, he shall not enter
therein: So also Matthew. 18.4. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this
little child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of God: David a King, yet
thought it his honor to be humble, Psalm. 131.2.
professing himself to be as a weaned child.

4. Where the soul truly thirsts after Jesus Christ in the Ordinances, it will
easily step over this block, hunger will break stone walls. And although the
Devil and wicked men endeavor to hedge up thy way to the Ordinances, yet if
thou spiritually hunger and thirst, all these will be laid low; every one that
has the knowledge of Jesus Christ, has learned to deny himself.

5. Although the Eldership would willingly use all good means to win men by
love, and ready to deny themselves as its their duty for the avoiding of
offense, and the enlargement of the Church, yet herein they should but please
some, and displease many more, and bring such an endless task upon themselves
as would take up much time, and abundantly retard the work.

6. Its not a work either commanded or commended to any particular Eldership by
the Classical assembly; how ever in some extraordinary cases, something of this
nature may be done, left to the discretion of the particular Presbytery, and
who I doubt not, but will condescend to any thing that may promote the work of
God.

Ob. 23. But if men and women must both be examined it may fall out, a man may
be found unfit, and his wife may be received, sometime the man received, and
his wife unfit: what a kind of confusion will this be? does not the Apostle
Paul say, The unbelieving woman is sanctified by the believing man, and the
unbelieving man by the believing woman, 1 Cor. 7.14?

A. The Apostle speaks there concerning the reason why unbelievers and
believers might cohabit and continue in a conjugal estate of matrimony. And is
not so to be understood, as that the wife can be saved by the husbands faith,
or the husband by the wives: this were to cross the doctrine of Scripture, and
the analogy of faith; for every man must know and believe for himself. The
just shall live by his faith; neither Abraham, Noah, Job or Daniel, could
deliver any man's soul by their faith though never so nearly related.

The Apostle only signifies three, that it was unlawful to depart matrimonial
society, because both were not believers; for that if the one did believe it
gave their children right to external Christian Church privileges, and such
Ordinances as they were capable of, as Circumcision under the Law, Baptism in
time of the Gospel; not that the Parents can either add or infuse Grace into
their children, (for the dearest of Gods Saints may have children destitute of
Grace, and incapable either of Church Fellowship, or the least share in Jesus
Christ;) neither is there the least hint of any thing in this Text of
Sacramental Communion, or of things pertaining to life and salvation; for in
such cases every man and woman must plead their own interest, and either have
particular and peculiar saving Grace; or the nearest relation they have to the
most Holy can do them no good. He that believes, shall be saved; he that
believes on the Son, has everlasting life; and he that believes not the
Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. John 3.16.


And hence is it that in the great and general judgment, men and women of
nearest relations are separated: Two shall be in the field, the one taken and
the other left; two women grinding at the mill, the one taken and the other
left, March. 24.40, 41.

2. As in the Kingdom of Heaven there is neither marrying, Mark 12.16.
nor giving in marriage but all are as the Angels; so the Church of God on
earth, take, no cognizance, whether men be married, or single, wives, or
Virgins; but he or she that's capable of Church Communion, ought to be admitted,
and must be visible Saints: And although never so nearly related, if not, so,
ought to be shut out.

3. Suppose a man upon examination be admitted, and his wife respited for her
incapacity a while, till God shall enable her; or suppose the wife be admitted,
and her husband for like reason suspended, is it not better for that party
found fit to be admitted, and the party unfit to be debarred, then either both
to be admitted, or both kept back; or that either of them should deny
themselves the benefit of the Ordinance.

For,

1. Its agreeable to the Word of God, and Ordinances of the Church, and tends
much to the comfort of the Communicant to be admitted, if worthy; and to admit
the unworthy, is contrary to all.

2. What comfort can it be to thee, while thou art participating the body and
blood of Jesus Christ, if thy wife unworthily admitted, not discerning the
Lords Body, be eating and drinking damnation to her self? or contrariwise, if
thy wife be a worthy Communicant, it will be the terror of her soul, to see her
husband hailing destruction upon himself, by preposterous and unwarrantable
thrusting himself upon such Divine displeasure.

Why should thou endeavor to draw the guilt of thy blood upon the Eldership?
or why should thou pull ruin upon thy self? And although thou be not
capable, bless God for a believing wife, or if thy wife incapable and thou
admitted, endeavor her instruction that she may in due time be also received
in to Sacramental Communion here, and both spiritually united to Jesus Christ.

3. Its the want of knowledge of Jesus Christ, ignorance of the Doctrine of
regeneration and reformation, that makes men scruple hereat, for any such
reason, none being more ready to rush upon Divine Ordinances to their ruin,
then men and women most incapable to receive them rightly.

Ob. 24. What are the principal points that will be enquired of by the
Eldership what time men come before them?

A. They are very plain and easy to be understood, and every man and woman may
read them in the Ordinance of Parliament, wherein are set down certain rules
and directions concerning Admission and suspension in point of ignorance and
scandal, but for that all have not that Ordinance, I shall hint out the Heads
briefly as follows. All admitted ought to know.

1. That there is a God: That there is but one True and everliving God, maker
of Heaven and Earth, and Governor of all things. That this only true God is
the God whom we worship. That this God is but one, yet three distinct Persons:
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, all equally God.

2. That God created man in his own Image in Knowledge, righteousness, and
true holiness. That by one man sin entered the world, and death by sin.
That thereby also all men are dead in trespasses and sins, and are by Nature
children of wrath, and so liable to eternal death, the wages of every sin.

3. That there is but one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus,
who is also over all, God blessed for ever; neither is their salvation in any
other. That he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary.
That he died upon the Cross to save his People from their sins. That he rose
the third day from the Dead: ascended into Heaven: sits at the right hand of
God; and makes continual Intercession for us, of whose fullness we receive all
Grace necessary to salvation.

4. That Christ and his benefits are applied only by Faith: that Faith is the
gift of God; and that we have it not of our selves, but is wrought in us by the
Word and Spirit of God.

5. That Faith is that Grace whereby we believe and trust in Christ for
remission of sins, and life everlasting, according to the promise of the
Gospel: That whosoever believes not on the Son of God, shall not see life,
but the wrath of God abides on him to Eternity.

6. That they who truly repent of their sins, do see them sorrow for them,
and turn from them to the Lord, and that except men repent, they shall surely
perish.

7. That a godly life is conscionably ordered according to the Word of God in
holiness and righteousness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

8. That the Sacraments are Seals of the Covenant of grace, in the blood of
Christ. That the Sacraments of the New Testament are Baptism, and the Lords
Supper. That the outward Elements in the Lords Supper, are Bread and Wine, and
do signify the Body and Blood of Christ crucified, which the worthy receiver
by Faith, does partake of in this Sacrament, which Christ has likewise
ordained for a remembrance of his death. That whosoever eats and drinks
unworthily, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; and therefore that
every one is to examine himself, lest he eat and drink judgment to himself,
not discerning the Lords Body.

9. That the souls of the Faithful after death, do immediately live with
Christ in blessedness. And that the souls of the wicked do immediately go into
Hell torments. That there shall be a Resurrection of the bodies both of just
and unjust, at the last day, at which time all shall appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, to receive according to what they have done in the
body, whether it be good or evil, and that the righteous shall go into Life
eternal, and the wicked into everlasting punishment.

Ob. 25. What are the crimes that make men incapable of admittance in point of
scandal,

A. 1. All persons that shall blasphemously speak or write any thing of God,
his holy Word or Sacraments. 2. An Incestuous person. 3. An Adulterer. 4. A
Fornicator. 5. A Drunkard. 6. A profane Swearer or Curser. 7. One that has
taken away the life of any Person maliciously. 8. All worshippers of Images,
Crosses, Crucifixes, or Relics: All that shall make any Image of the
Trinity, or any person thereof, all Religious worshippers of Saints, Angels,
or any mere Creatures. 9. Any person that professes himself not to be in
charity with his Neighbor. 10. Any person that shall challenge any other
person by word, message, or writing, to fight, or that shall accept such
challenge, and agree thereunto: any person that shall knowingly carry any such
challenge by word, message, or writing. 11. Any person that on the Lord's Day
shall use any Dancing, Playing at Dice or Cards, or any other Game, Masquing,
Wake, Shooting, Bowling, playing at Football, or Stool-ball, Wrestling, or that
shall make or resort to any Plays, Interluds, Fencing, Bull-baiting, or
Bear-baiting; or shall use Hawking, Hunting, or Coursing, Fishing, or Fowling:
or that shall publicly expose any Wares to sale, otherwaise then is provided
by an Ordinance of Parliament of the 6. of April, 1644. Any person that shall
travel upon the Lord's Day, without reasonable cause. 12. Any person that
keeps a known Stews or Brothelhouse, or that shall solicit the Chastity of
any person for himself or any other. 13. Any person, Father or Mother, that
shall consent to the marriage of their Child to a Papist, or any person that
shall marry a Papist. 14. Any person that shall repair for any advice to any
Witch, Wizard, or Fortune Tellers. 15. Any person that shall assault his
Parents, or any Magistrate, Minister, or Elder, in the Execution of his Office.
16. Any person that shall be Legally attainted of Barretrie, Forgerie,
Extortion, or Briberie: And the several Elderships shall have power likewise
to suspend from the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, all Ministers that shall be
duly proved to be guilty of any of the Crimes aforesaid, from giving or
receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.


FINIS.
Imprimatur,

James Cranford. John Bellamie.

Errata.
Page 4. line 6. For the journey read their journey. l. 9. for no way, r. in a
way. p. 4. Ob. 4. r. appear. p. 4. l. 24 for tresbytery, r. Presbytery. p. 10.
l. 34. for desolute, r. destitute. p. 11. l. 8. for gelding, r. gould ring. p.
12. l. 5. for which, r. when. p. 15. l. 17. for Aposiles, r. appeals. p. 16. l.
10. for hardly, r. Lordly. p. 16. l. 11. for dominum, r. dominion. p. 16. l.
31. for record, r. retard. p. 22. l. 9. for injustifiably, r. inevitably. p.
24. l. 34. for their Idols, r. the Jews. p. 30. l. 3. for preaches Preachers.


