THREE SERMONS, VIZ.

David's Tears for his Rebellious Son Absalom, Isreal's Tears for Abners Fall by
bloody Joab, Infants Tears for Athaliahs Treason, PREACHED By S. L. a true
Lover of the Church, his King, and Country, in his Country-cure.

In Rhama was a voice heard, mourning, and weeping, and great howling: Rachel
weeping for her Children, and would not be comforted, because they were not.
Mat. 2. 28. They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where to find him.
John 28. 13. Be sure that your Sin will find you out. Numb. 32. 23. LONDON,
Printed by T. C. and L. P. for Robert Crofts, at the Crown in Chancery Lane,
under Sergeants Inn. 1660.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord PETRE, Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
MY LORD,
WHen the Ilienses visited Tiberius Caesar somewhat out of season to condole
with him the death of Augustus, he smilingly answered, Et ego doleo Hectore^
vestrum, and I am sorry for the loss of your Hector: who was dead many years
before. Even so, perhaps, it may be my portion, (if not by you, for your
goodness sake,) yet by some others out of malignity, and evil disposition, to
suffer a hard censure, if not a scornful flout, with the Trojans, that I
present to you, and the world, an Embrio of my brain, born out of due time, as
the Apostle said of himself, 1 Cor. 15. 8. But give me leave to answer for my
self, and that stinking vapor will easily be shaken off from the skirts of my
garments. For first, I did appear in season, and offered to the Press some of
them, within a few days after the fall of our good Josiah: but was dissuaded
to the contrary, for some reasons best known to my self. Secondly, it is Gods
promise, Prove. 10. 7. The name of the wicked shall rott; But the righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6. And that our good King
may ever live, and live in the living pictures of himself, and in the hearts of
his people, and never be forgotten (like Ma^y Magdalen) for the good d^ed she
had done, Mar 14. 9. I conceive it not unseasonable to speak something of his
life and fall. Vivit post funera virtus. Thirdly, although it may be counted
civil policy to be silent, yet my inward prompter tells me, it is uncivil
duty, not to anoint the dead with the ointment of my dearest love and honor.
Dum spiritus hos regit artus. To love the living, may be Parasitical, as more,
propter sua, than se: but to love the dead, when they can do neither good, nor
harm, is verus amor, true love indeed: and such is mine, and so I am free from
the aspersion of ambitiousness, covetousness, and vainglory. The first text
speaks of an unnatural rebellion, and a civil, or rather uncivil War, raised by
a child against his father, and King father. The second of a deadly treachery
and conspiracy, to bring down to the ground a Prince, and a great man, whereof
the World was not worthy, Heb. 11. 38. The third of a horrid treason, not only
against the father, the King father, but even against his children, that as the
Husbandmen spoke one to another, Mark 12. 7. the Inheritance might be theirs.
So that as Protogenes in his absence, finding at his return a line drawn upon
his board in his shop, with much exquisiteness, presently concluded Apelles had
been there: Even so, by the monstrous conception, birth, and carriage of all,
or either of them, it may be imagined (without an Interpreter) who was the
father of them, Jo. 8. 44. and he that set them on work, will, or has paid
them the wages of Balaam, 2. Pet. 2. 15. If you will be pleased to overlook
with a Candid eye the following Treatises, you shall find the condition of the
Church of God, to be as a Lilly among Thorns, Can. 2. 2. and her greatest
enemies to be of her own household, as Christ foretold, Mat. 10. 36. Gog and
Magog, (like Herod and Pilate) will combine against Christ, and his Members, to
dethrone, and extirpate them; but such is Gods overruling providence, that,
Sanguis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae, he preserves her from falling into ashes,
and after a black Cloud, and waterie tempest, sends forth the brightest, and
clearest beams of his favor, and never-dying love, to warm her, refresh her,
and make her last days better than the first, like Jobs, 42. 12. Here again
you shall find, with what a Gospel-face, rebellion and treason are painted,
able to deceive the very elect, Mark 13. 22. but being unmasked, how mort
deformed, more ugly do they look than Pharaohs lean kine, when they had
devoured the fat, the full, the fair, the well fleshed of the Land? But lest it
be said of me, as once a flouting Critic said unto the Citizens of Mindus, who
having great gates to a little City, he bade them to shut the gates, lest the
City run out: even so, lest the bead seem bigger than the body, and the Proem
larger than the Oration, I shall only desire, that God may be Glorified, your
self Contented, and confirmed in those Principles which you have hitherto
professed with zeal and courage, I conclude,

Your humble Servant in Gospel-work for Christ, T. L.

A SERMON PREACHED The next Sabbath after the fall of our good Josiah.
2 Samuel 3 38. And the King said unto his Servants, Know ye not that there is a
Prince, and a great man this day fallen in Israel?
THe History makes mention of a strong, long, and sharp dispute between the
House of Saul, and David, for precedence of honor, for the Scepter, and Regal
Throne: the Generalissimo on the one side was Abner, and on the other Joab, men
of might, courage and renown, like those of old, Genesis 6. 4. who maintained
their Arguments, not with smooth words, like Sophisters in the Schools, but
with rugged Blows, and point of swords: and therefore no wise man could expect,
but the conclusion thereof would end, and be drawn up in blood. For as it is
written of those two gallant Romans,

Non tulit Caesar, Pompeiusve Parem.

Caesar and Pompey could never tolerate an equal, a Copartner, or Cosharer
with them in earthly glory, no more than can Wedlock in the same Bed: Even so,
these Worthies of Israel, and Judah, fomenting their strife, and whetting on
their anger (as the Lion is said to beat himself with his tail, to make him the
more fierce on his prey:) sometimes by public ambition, that they might sit
nearest to the Crown: sometimes by Popular applause, that silly, simple, and
weak Reed, or Spiders webb, that deceives all that trust in it, Job 8. 14. and
sometimes for private sinister ends of their own, (although far different,)
they contrive and plot each others overthrow; and what the one cannot act by
open force, he will effect by secret treason. Joabs discontent for the death of
his Brother Ashahel, may not, must not, shall not be mitigated, but by Abners
fall, and Abners fall cannot be without David's, without Isreal's tears: for
David weeps, and Israel weeps, and weeps again, as it is verse. 34. that as a
man falls before wicked men, so Abner shall fall. And the King said unto his
Servants, Know ye not, that there is a Prince, and a great man this day fallen
in Israel?

No man as yet, (no not the Son of God himself as man) be he never so potent
and mighty, was privileged from death, or from tasting of Deaths cup, Psalm. 89.
48. for the decree is past, the doom is irrecoverable, decretum est omnibus
mori, there is an appointed time for all men to dye, Heb. 9. 27. But to fall
immaturely (like Fruit before it be ripe) but to be cropped like the Rose in
the bud; but to be nipped in the Spring, like the flower of the field; but to
be chased up and down, like a Fox fleeing to the Mountains; but to be wearied
and worried to death, (Acteon-like) by his own Hounds, and greedy Currs,
thirsting to fill themselves full with the flesh and blood of their loving
Master; but to be cheated and gulled of his life, and that after many
Protestations, Vows, and lifting up of hands to the Almighty; but to be
betrayed with a Kiss, as Judas served his Lord; but to be stubbed up root and
branch in time of peace, and that under color of a fair treaty and parley, as
Joab did Abner, verse. 26, 27. Hinc illae lachryme, Niobe herself will weep at
this. This cannot but cause the most stony heart to melt, this cannot but cause
all Israel to hang down their heads like Bullrushes, and to wring their hands,
and to water their couches with tears, Psalm. 6. 6. and this cannot but move
Israel to curse, with David, the Author and Authors of Isreal's woe, verse. 29.
that Abner, a Prince, a great man, should fall, and thus fall, and in Israel
too, where was the Law, and the Prophets, where the word was taught and
preached; and where a reformation, a goodly reformation, a general reformation
is pretended. But although (horret meminisse) David is ashamed, is startled and
trembles at so horrid, so cruel, so unnatural a Fact, that he would not have it
published in Gath, nor proclaimed in Askalon, lest the Heathen, the
uncircumcised, the Philistines, the Papists, the Jesuits triumph and rejoice
in Isreal's wonderful, inspeakable, invaluable loss, wherein the light of
Israel is quenched as it is, 2 Samuel 22. 17. Yet he declares and broacheth this
sad news, and heavy tidings to his Servants, that they might take notice what a
rich Jewel was fallen from the Crown: saying, Know ye not, that a Prince, and a
great man is this day fallen in Israel?

There is no innocent blood spilt and shed upon the ground, but has a tongue
to cry unto Heaven for vengeance. So says God to Cain, Genesis 4. 10. The voice
of tby brothers blood cries to me from the Earth: and therefore that the Land
might be found guiltless of so foul crime, for, Clamitat in Coelum vox
sanguinis, and Sodomorum,
Vox oppressorum, merces retenta laborum,
and so acquitted of the imminent, and eminent judgments following it, from
the great Tribunal above, the Law requires the Coroner to sit and make enquiry,
after the death of the meanest Peasant, (for says the Statute in that case
provided) the King has lost a Subject, and must have an account thereof. How
much more then, when an Abner, a Prince, a great man falls, ought whole Israel
by the same bond of love, to stand u^ as one man, and require satisfaction for
his death? that as it is, ver. 28. The Kingdom may be guiltless before the
Lord for ever, concerning the blood of Abner. David fore-sees a black storm
coming, and therefore labors to make his peace with God and Men, laying open
unto them, the manner, and nature of Abners fall, in these words, ver. 33. Died
Abner as a fool dies? and prays unto the Lord to reward the evil doer,
according to his wickedness, ver. 39. and (digito monstrat hominem) points out
with his finger to the eyes of all the mourners in Israel, Joabs evil and
wickedness, like Cains brand-mark on his forehead, to be the shedding of
blood, innocent blood, Princes blood: for says the King to his servants, Know
ye not, that there is a Prince, and a great man, this day fallen in Israel?

Scelus aliquis tutum, nullus securum tulit, says Seneca, a man may commit
theft, rape, murder, etc. so secretly, that neither the Sun, oculus mundi, the
worlds great eye, nor man's eye sees it not: But all things are naked and open
unto his eyes, with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13. but that, Erynnis
conscientiae, the Worm of conscience will be always checking, and gnawing, and
griping of him for them, with pangs as bitter as Hell. Let Richard the third
deny this if he could speak but once again, was not his hand still upon his
Dagger, being afraid that every one met and found him, would slay him? did not
the blood of the harmless infants he caused to be slain, that they might be a
footstool to mount him into their throne, so trouble him, so disquiet him,
that either sleep departed from his eyes, as it did from Ahasuerus, Esth. 1. or
he was so frighted in his sleep, with dreadful apparitions of ugly Devils,
haling and tearing of him into pieces, that his life was burdensome unto him?
Let Joab speak what one comfortable day or night he enjoyed, after the
slaughter of a good Prince, I had almost said the best of Princes. In the day
time, trepidat ad arundinis umbram, he is afraid of his own shadow; in the
night, the cracking of a few Chest-nuts in the fire terrify him: So that
herein is the Prophecy fulfilled, Isa. 57. 21. non est pax impiis, there is no
peace unto the wicked, says my God; or otherwise perhaps, Joab may vaunt it
for some few years, or days over his prey, in great Gallantry, outward Pomp,
magnificence, and stateliness, but so sure as the Lord lives, his end shall
not be peace, neither shall he go to the grave in a full age, as a rick of Corn
comes in due season into the barn, Job 5. 26. and to this effect speaks
David, Psalm. 37. 35, 36. I have seen the wicked strong, and spreading himself
like a green Bay Tree: Yet be passed away, and to be was gone, and I sought
him, but could not find him; and no wonder, for evil shall hunt the cruel man
to destruction, Psalm. 140. 11. and such is the justice of the Almighty, that
commonly, that as he made a pit, and dug it, so he should fall into the pit
that he made, Psalm. 7. 15. and, Neque enim Lex justior ulla est,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
then evil watch, evil catch. As Tomyris said unto Cyrus who had formerly slain
her son, cutting off his head, and casting it into a Tub of blood: sanguinem
sitisti, sanguinem habes, blood thou thirstedst, drink thy fill, and as I have
done, says Adonibezek, Judge. 1. 7. so God has rewarded me. Even so, us our
Abnor, our great man in the Text, falls by the h^nd of Joab, so Joab must look
to have his fall too, although it be many years after, by Benaiah, 1 Kings 2.
31, 32, 33, 34. and the curse of Jehoiakim King of Judah, shall follow him to
his grave, Jer. 22. 18. There shall be none to lament him, saying, Ah my
Brother, or ah Lord, or ah his glory. And let all true hearted Israelites speak
as Cushi did to David of Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 32. So let all the Enemies of the
Lord, their King perish, and be as Joab is.

The Text is a vindication of David's innocence in, and a lively description of
Abners death, wherein let us consider these five particulars.

1. His qualities and so he was no mean man sprung from the dunghill, or
Ale-tap, no broken Citizen, or bankerout Gentleman, no Mechanic, or Artificer,
none of the base condition of David's followers, when he fled from Saul, 1 Samuel
22. 2. but he was Ishbosheths staff, the supporter of Saul's house, and the
glory of that Diadem, and so the Penman sets him out two ways,

1. As a Prince. 2. As a great man.
1. As a Prince; unto which the Latin word has a near relation, Princeps, the
which signifies a chief head or ruler: secretly inssinuating, that as of a head
he ought to be defended and made much of, because life consists so well in the
head as in the heart; then as a Ruler he ought to be obeyed and feared,
according to Saint Paul's rule, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers: but Joab had learned instead of Obsta principiis, Obsta
Principibus, withstand the beginnings of sin, stifling the first conception of
murder in his heart, to promote it, and give life unto it by the fall of a
Prince; and so has received to himself condemnation, ver. 2.

2ly, The Hebrews use many words, signifying a Prince, but I shall make use but
of one, and that is Naghidh, carrying this sense, Dux, Princeps, a Captain and
chief Commander, ordering, disposing, and giving rules to Soldiers, to go out
and come in, to draw and to sheath their swords: and such a Prince was Abner,
and a valiant Prince: but whom Ajax cannot conquer, Ulysses will undermine by
treason; For know ye not that a Prince, and a great man is fallen? And so I
pass to the second Branch.

2. As a great man. As when Ephraim spoke, there was trembling, Hos. 13. 1. As
when the Lion roars, who will not be afraid? Amos 3. 8. even so, when this
great man speaks, not only the inferior beasts of the Forest, but even the
Lion himself coucheth, as is clear in the 11 verse, before the Text; and if a
bare hand upon the wall, did so starcle Belshazzar in his cups, when men are
most Pot-valiant, and in the Guard of his Princes, and making metry with his
wives and concubines, that his countenance changed, the joints of his loins
were loosed, and his knees smote one against another, Dan. 5. 6. How will Joab
look? How will Joab stand? How will he shift when the great God shall make
inquisition for this great man's blood? Psalm. 9. 12. David's heart smote him for
cutting off but the Lap of Readiness garment, 1 Samuel 24. 5, 6. How then deeply may
they be touched, that had a hand in cutting off the head of the Lords anointed?
for the greater the person, the greater is the sin in them that conspire his
death. Kings and Princes, and great man in authority, are termed gods by Gods
own mouth, Psalm. 82. 6 and to act Treason against such, is to be treacherous to
God himself, for which cause God spared not the Angels that had finned, but
cast them down into hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness to be
kept unto damnation, 2 Pet. 2. 4. What Christ spoke in another kind, holds true
in this, Matthew. 25. 40. In as much as ye have done it unto them, ye have done
it unto me.

Another particular is, the manner of this great Princes death, and so he is
not threatened a fall, as God told Adam, that if he should eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, in that day he should die the death, Genesis 2. 17.
for then he would have looked about him, either to prevent his fall, or to make
a good preparation for his soul against his fall; as the wise Steward did for
his body, Duke 26. 4. but in the present tense, occidit, is fallen, noting the
suddenness of his death, and his unprovidenesse for his grave, Joab not only
laboring to kill his body, but so far as he could his soul too, like as the
Italian I read of endeavored to serve his enemy overcome in duel; wherein we
may observe,

1. Prove. 12. 10. The mercies of the wicked are truel.

2ly, The uncertainty of our death, we have one way into the world, but many
out. Ferro, peste, fame, vinclis, algore, calore,
Mill modis miseros mors rapit una viros.
as sometimes by fire, famine, plague, water, sword, like Abner and Joab. And
this consideration, should move us to look for that in every place, which every
where looks for us. Pharaoh tasted of deaths Cup in the deep Sea. Herod upon
his throne Eglon sunning himself in his Summer Parlour. Amnon when his heart
was merry with wine. Ahab in the battle. Zenecharib in the house of his God.
And who amongst us can coast of to morrow, for we know not what a day may bring
forth? Prove. 27. 1. Let it be our wisdom then,

1. So to live, as if we were always dying, and giving up our accounts to the
great judge of Heaven and Earth of our several stewardships.

2ly. With Joseph in the time of famine; with Solomon's Pismire in the harvest
time; and with the wise Virgins, in the acceptable time, to provide oil for our
Lamps, that we may be found a people ready prepared for our God, when he shall
knock at our door, and call us.

3ly. To pray always as the Church has taught us, From sudden death, Good
Lord deliver us.

3ly. The next particular is, the time of Abners fall, and that is said to be,
hoc die, this day, Know ye not, that there is a Prince, and a great man, this
day fallen in Israel? This was a day of darkness, and of blackness, a day of
clouds, and obscurity, Joel 2. 2. a day of heaviness and mourning, a stormy
and watery day: and in a word, such a sad day to David, and all Israel, as if
as one man they had combined to revive their Abner with their tears, as Christ
did Lazarus, John 11. or if they could not do that for him, yet they would
witness to the world their love to him, and how wonderfully they lamented his
loss. To love a rich man, and a great man living, is no news, the living dog
being better than the dead Lion, Eccles. 9. 4. and moreover every man's
affection almost extending more, propter sua, than propter se, for his private
profit or preferment, than for any parts or goodness he finds in him, like
drones which haunt the Hive for the honny sake: but to love him dead, when he
can do him neither good nor harm, is rara avis, nigroque similima cygno, a rare
quality hardly to be found among the sons of men: and yet this was David's case,
Isreal's case for Abner, and ought to be our case for our Prince, and great man,
that is this day fallen in our Israel. And so this leads me to the next
particular.

4ly. The place where he fell, and that is said to be Israel; he fell not
amongst the barbarous Goths and Vandals, amongst the Turks and Cannibals,
amongst the inhuman Switzers, in the Conquest of the Thuricences in battle,
Anno Dom. 1443. or amongst the Numantines, who vowed not to break their fast,
but with the flesh of a Roman, nor drink till they had tasted of the blood of
an Enemy; or amongst the heathen and uncircumcised: but in Israel, where God
was known in her Palaces, Psalm. 48. 3. but in Israel, where his wonderful acts
were manifested; but in Israel, a peculiar people chosen to himself; but in
Israel, where his Prophets taught, and his name was called upon. Quis talia
fando, temperet a lacrimis? who can restrain tears? that where there was such
gracious means, there should be such graceless practices, by a brotherhood,
like Simeon and Levi, brethren in evil, Genesis 49. 5. If this had been done at
Rome, where degrading of Princes, murdering of heretical Princes, with their
whole families, is a warrantable and meritorious tenet, the world would not
have trembled at it, nor wondered or admired it: but to be practiced in Israel,
the wonder of the world, for as it is, Deuteronomy. 47, 8. What Nation is so great,
unto whom the Gods come so near unto them, in all that they call unto the Lord
for? And what Nation is so great, that has ordinances and Laws so righteous?
Surely this makes Isreal's condition, equivalent to Chorozins and Bethsaidaes
Mat. 11. 21. Woe to thee Corazin, woe to thee Bethsaida, for if the great works
which were done in you, had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, they had repented
long agone in Sackeloth and Ashes. Wherefore it shall be easier for Tyrus and
Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you; than for Israel. Joab and Abishai
his brother were men of War, and so the less marvel they neither respected
the person, nor place where they shed blood: but the hunters of our Prince, and
great man to death, were not only Swordmen, but Gown-men, even wolves in
sheeps clothing: and if God spared not the old world, nor Sodom nor Gomorrah, 2
Pet. 2. 5, 6. how shall they escape the judgment of God to come? and, the
judgment of God is according to truth, against them that commit such things,
Romans 2. 2. Wherefore as Daniel counseled King Nebuchadnezzar, 4. 27. Break off
thysins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor, that
there be a healing of thine error; even so, my counsel to all Israel that have
had a hand in the Princes death, and great man's fall, is according to that we
read of, Amos 4. 12. Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. For repentance may
heal, where thy sin has wounded.

5ly. David's Proclamation throughout all Israel and Judah, to take notice of
his loss, and their loss; his and their loss, as if they had with him lost
the brightest star in the Firmament; or had lost their right eyes, right hands,
or their right feet, or as the Church complained, Lam. 4 20. The breath of our
Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord is taken from us, of whom we said, Under his
shadow we shall be preserved alive among the Heathen. How has the Lord
darkened the Daughter of Zion in his wrath, and has cast down from Heaven unto
earth the beauty of Israel? draw near, behold, and see what a Prince, what a
great man is this day fallen. Know ye not, that there is a Prince, and a great
man fallen this day in Israel?

1. The causes moving David to publish this Proclamation, were v. 37. his
Innocence, to clear him in the face of all the people, that he had no hand in
spilling this innocent blood, finding no fault in the man, of those things
whereof others accused him, as Pilate said of Christ, although with a better
mind, Lu. 23. 14.

2ly. To make Joab the more odious to the people for executing such a rash, and
malicious, and unnatural fact. As Jeroboam is stigmatized with this brand-mark,
lying in his Grave, Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin; and as
Judas the Traitor with this, Judas Iscariot who betrayed his Master. So Joab
has this spot and blot upon his Coat of Arms, to be seen and read of all ages:
Joab that in the time of peace slew Abner in the Gate, v. 27. And for this
David, and let all Israel curse him in the words, verse 29. Let the blood of
Abner fall on the head of Joab, and on all his Fathers House, that the House of
Joab be never without some that have running Issues, or Leper, or that leans
on a staff, or that does fall on the sword, or that lacks bread.

3ly. That Joab by the sight of the public mourning, and vent which the King
and People gave to their full hearts, might be convinced of his sin, and so
brought to repentance. Know ye not (and thou Joab too) that there is a Prince,
and a great man this day fallen in Israel?

The Observations from what has been said, are,

Observe. 1. That great men's death, and Princes fall, ought to be lamented by
all. This David confirms both by Precept and Example: and it is said Praecepta
ducunt, Exempla trahunt, Precepts do sweetly allure, but examples do violently
draw men to obedience. So that if the one or the other be of force to work upon
our hearts, and eyes, to weep with Jeremiah day and night, for our Abner; then
look upon David, Lissen to his charge to all the people that were with him,
verse. 31, 32. Rent your clothes, and put on Sackcloth, and mourn before Abner,
and King David himself followed the Beer: And the King lift up his voice and
wept besides the Sepulcher of Abner, and all the people wept; and verse. 33, 34.
The King lamented over Abner, and all the people wept again for him: As if such
a man's death can never be over-lamented. Know ye not, says David? as if no man
should be ignorant of this his duty to his Prince, to his Country. When Josiah
was buried, there was so great moan made for him, 2 Chronicles. 35. 22. that it grew
into a Proverb, Zech. 12. 11. Like the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddon. Yea when Jacob, but a mean man (although father to a Prince) was
buried, they made so great, such an exceeding sore lamentation for him, that
when the Canaanites, which dwelt in the land, saw the mourning in Gored A^ad,
They said among them selves, Surely this is a great mourning unto the
Egyptians, Genesis 50. 10, 11. Our Abner, our Josiah, our Prince, our great man is
fallen, and why should not we do likewise? as Christ told the Lawyer, Luke 10
37.

1. Because Princes are nursing Fathers to their people, Thus says the Lord,
Isa. 49. 23. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers.

Now with what a tender love, with what strong affections? and with what
vigilant care do Fathers and mothers bear their sons in their arms, and carry
them on their shoulders? as is the Prophets phrase. Christ's commandment to the
Disciples of the Pharisees, with the Herodians, was, reddere Caesari, quae sunt
Caesaris, to give to Caesar those things which are Cesars, Mat. 22. 22. and if
we must do this to Caesar a Paynim Emperor, then much more are we bound to give
to Christian Kings their due, and what those things are, Saint Paul tells us,
Romans 13. 7. 1. Tribute. 2. Obedience. 3. Honor. First Tribute, for their care
over us, and great charge in providing for us at home and abroad. Secondly,
Obedience, as our Superiors. Thirdly, Honor, as our tender Fathers, Exodus 20.
12. so that I may invert Gods own words, Mal. 1. 6. A son honors his father,
and a servant his Master? If they be your fathers, where is their Honor?
Surely they are bastards, and not sons, that will not honor their fathers, I
and such careful fathers, who wake whiles we sleep soundly, and watch, like
Epaminondas, whilst we sport our selves, and take care for us, when we little
dream of their care. The Chronicles speak of Henry the 4th, who being sick and
in a trance, that his son and heir Henry the 5th took his Crown from his beds
head, and tried how it would fit his own; but his father recovering himself,
and awaking, and missing of it, and understanding the matter, told him, Ah son,
did thou but know how full of cares the Crown is, thou would not be so
greedy of it. And it is written of Eutrapiles, that his custom was to prefer
those to honor and riches whom he most hated; thereby to fill their hearts and
heads with continual cares and vexations, there being more gall than honey in
them: so that as one spoke worthily of a Bishop, Episcopatus nomen est laboris
non honoris, the name of a Bishop sounds more of labor than honor, unto which
alludes that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 1. This is a true saying, if any man
desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires a worthy work: Even so the Office of
a King or Prince, speaks not so much his sublimity or glory, as his activity
for the common good; and if this were well weighed in wisdoms balance, Can
any Children be so unnatural, as not to lament the loss of such a father?
Certes, He that has not a tear, nay many tears for his fall, discovers his
foul disposition, and that he has sucked unnatural milk (like Rhemus and
Romulus) of whom History makes mention, that they were nourished up by a
she-Wolf. Know ye not, that a Prince, agreat man, Pater Patriae, a father of
our Country, a Martyr for his Country, is fallen? and do not the Lamentations
of Jeremy better become us, than the Canticles of Solomon? Do not Heraclitus
his tears suis better (huic diei) to this day, than Democritus his laughter?
Laugh that will (thinks David) But I will weep till I can weep no more.

2ly. Because Princes are the Ministers of God for our wealth, Romans 13. 4. They
are as Shepherds over the flock of Christ, Number. 27. 17. They are as Bucklers
and shields unto the people, Psalm. 47. 9. Under whose shadowing boughs our
nests are built, Ezech. 31. 3, 6. They are as watchmen over a City, as the
foundation to an house, as the walls to a Vineyard, as Pilots to a ship, and as
the Chariots and horsemen of Israel. Now if the Watchman sleeps, the
foundation decays, the walls be broken down, the Pilot dies, and the
Chariots and horsemen be snatched and taken away, has not the City, the house,
the ship, and all Israel that is in it, great cause to screek and scream, and
roar, and blubber their cheeks with tears, for such a loss?

3ly. Because if the Title of father, which is an amiable Title, or Minister,
which is a serviceable Title, cannot draw water out of the hard rock in Horeb,
and your stony hearts, then lo they are called angels, 2 Samuel 24. 17. and the
sons of God, which are Titles of honor indeed, Psalm 82. 6. to be the son of
God is the noblest Pedigree in the world: to be as the Angels of God, is the
highest promotion in heaven, and of them it is said, Heb. 1. 14. Are they not
all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes which shall be
heirs of salvation? I read of diverse properties of Angels, which may allude to
good Kings.

1. Dirigere gradientes, To guide and direct men in the right way, Prove. 23.
20. Behold I send mine Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring
thee to the place which I have appointed.

2ly, Confortare deficientes, To comfort the broken hearted, and to relieve
those that are in want. Genesis 21. 17, 19. The Angel of God called unto Hagar in
distress, and showed her a well of water, whereby she and her child were
preserved from death, and 1 Kings 29. 5, 6. The Angel of God brought bread and
water to nourish Elija^ in his distress.

3ly, Flagellare praevaricantes, To scourge those that do amiss: thus the
Angel of the Lord smote in the Camp of the Assyrians, one hundred fourscore and
five thousand in one night, 2 Kings 19. 35. and 2 Match. 3. 26. We find how
Heliodorus was beaten with sore stripes for robbing the Temple, that at his
return he certified his Master, that if he had an enemy traitor, he should send
him to Jerusalem, and from thence he should receive him well scourged, if he
escaped with his life. Cautiores exemplo vos. If one Angel of God could do such
execution upon malefactors, how should ye be afraid to do any thing to grieve
him, when he has mo than twelve legions of Angels to fight his battles against
offenders? Matthew. 26. 53.

4ly, Gratificare orantes, To offer up the prayers of the Sa^nts, Rev. 8. 3.

5ly, Juvare certantes, To give aid to the servants of the living God against
their enemies; and so when the Aramites compassed Samaria with a great host,
and the Prophets servant was at his wits end, not knowing what to do, or
whither to turn him, presently at Elisha's prayer his eyes were opened, and he
looked and beheld the mountain was full of horses and Chariots, round about
Elisha, 2 Kings 6. 17. Here ye have heard of the office of Angels for the good
of man, especially for them that fear God, and Kings with Princes were ordained
to the like purpose, i. e. by godly example, good Laws, and faithful laborers
in the Gospel under them, to lighten men to Canaan above, for

Regis ad exemplum totu^ componitur orbis. 2ly, To relieve those that are in
want, Thus the Kings of England have their Almoners to fling out money to the
poor. 3ly, The Apostle tells us, Romans 13. 4. They bear not the sword for
naught; for they are the Ministers of God to take vengeance on them that do
evil, 4ly, Righteous lips are the delight of Kings, Prove. 16. 13. and so stand
in the gap, like Moses, between God and his people, to make their atonement for
them. 5ly, To vindicate the cause of the innocent from the oppressor, and
wrongdoers. To this effect speaks Solomon, Prove. 29. A King that judges the
poor in truth, his Throne shall be established for ever, and Prove. 29. 28. and
for this light to be put out and extinguished, this oil to be poured on the
ground, this sword to rust, this innocence to be smothered in dust and ashes,
this judge of the poor, fatherless and widow, to be condemned, and this Angel
to fall, Let us not any more cry out with the woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14. 4.
Help O King, but help O Israel; for a Prince, and a great man is fallen this
day in thee O Israel.

4ly. Because people without a Prince, are like those Acephali, a body without
a head, and sheep without a shepherd, as Orphans Fatherless, as Servants
without a Master, as the world without a Sun. If the eye or head be cut off,
surely the body will perish. If there be no shepherd, the sheep lie open to
spoil by the greedy wolf and Jesuit. If the world loses his Sun, all things
wither to naught; and if the Servant be robbed of his Master that feeds him
fully, cloths him richly, and rewards him liberally, can their ey^s be dry to
think of their loss? Magis c^rendo quam fruendo, The Sheep, the Servant, the
body will know and feel their misery sooner by the want of their Prince, than
they were sensible of their own happiness in him. Had I wist will not serve
turn, to say they were deceived, to say they were not sensible of Joab's
juggle, will not avail them in the day of wrath, no more than their unjust
gotten riches since, by Abners fall, Prove. 11. 4. And seeing one Prince, one
great man will not be suffered to reign over them, as they in the Gospel said,
Luke 19. 14. How just will it be with God, as the wise man speaks, Prove. 28. 2.
For the transgression of the Land, many should be the Princes thereof, whose
least finger should be heavier than the others loins, as Rehoboam told the
Israelites; and for gentle rods they should be chastised with scourges, 1 Kings
12. 14.

5ly. Princes seldom fall alone, but their Lord-like Train will as well follow
them to the grave, as to the palace. If the tree be stubbed up at the root, the
top branches must fall with it; the Lord avert this sad presage, if it be his
blessed will.

Use Is for our Instruction.

1. To lament over, and for our Abner. As the Turks have a Proverb unto this
day, when they would express their grief, in the privation of any comfort,
Great such a one is dead, as if all their hopes were bedded with him, and all
their joys were nipped in the bud. And as Phinehas his wife hearing that the
Ark of God was taken, 1 Samuel 4. 21. presently fell into travel, calling her
Sons name Ichabod, for says she, The glory is departed from Israel. Even so,
every true Israelite may speak, Ichabod, our glory is departed from us. Abner
is fallen, great Abner, and not more great than good; Of whom it may be said,
as Pharaoh of Joseph, Genesis 41. 38. Can we find such a man as this? and yet this
Abner, this great man is fallen: the Lord be good unto our Israel, that all
Israel falls not presently after him.

Ob. If your Abner were so great, so good, why did not God suffer him to grow
to a good old age, as he once promised Abraham? Genesis 15. 15. Nay, why did God
suffer Joab to mow him down like grass, before his eye was satisfied with
seeing, his ear with hearing, and his heart with lusting? Eccles 1. 8. Ah
certainly, latet anguis sub herba, there was some Pad hidden under this straw,
Some Achans wedge of gold, Some abominable execrable thing in him, that God
brought him down so suddenly, so wonderfully, as it is said of Jerusalem, Lam.
1. 9.

Ans. 1. It is not for dust and ashes to enter into, arcana Dei, Gods secrets,
or dive into Gods Cabinet counsel, lest whilst we seek to know those things
that are not revealed' we sind not the comfort of those things that are
reveiled. It was wittily answered by one that was asked what God did before he
made the World: makes this reply, He made Hell. for such curious Inquisitors as
thou art; quae supra nos, nihil ad nos, those things that are above our sphere,
belong not unto us to search into: Peevish curiosity in man below, is detested
by God above. As the Master of the house said to his Labourer, Mat. 20. 14. So
I speak to thee, Friend, take that which is thine own, and go thy way, and let
the rest alone.

2ly, Who art thou O man that contendest against God, or pleadest with God?
Romans 9. 20. Will thou take Gods glory away, and give it to another? Isa. 42. 8.
Will thou wrest the sword out of the Lords hand, and maintain justice in thine
own? Show me thy warrant from Heaven for this? Show me any Law of God, or any
Law of man for this.

Ob. 1 Samuel 15. 3. 33. Did not the Lord command Saul to smite Agag King of the
Amalekites? and when Saul had spared his life, did not Samuel hew him into
pieces?

Answ. But our Abner was no Agag, our Joab no Samuel, and so I proceed.

3ly, Isa 57. 1. The righteous perishes, and no man considers it in heart,
and merciful men (and Kings too) are taken away, and no man understands that
the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.

4ly, God might suffer Abner to fall for the greater aggravation of Joab's
condemnation.

5ly, Suppose our Abner, our Prince, our great man, had sin in him, as there is
no man that sins not, says Solomon, 1 Kings 8. 46. and to the like effect
speaks John, 1 Ep. 1. 8. yet Religion, yet Charity thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.
5. that he was not guilty of so soul a crime, that nothing could expiate his
sin, but his Fall.

2ly, It teaches us, that it is a great shame for any of our eyes to be dry in
such a general loss, and publik calamity. Jacob wept and mourned for his
Joseph, and would not be comforted, Genesis 37. 35. how much more cause have we to
mourn for the loss of our father, our nursing father? It is observed, that the
love of Parents descends and flows, with a greater stream to their children,
than childrens love ascends upwards to their Parents, and this God shows,
Isaiah 49. 15. Can a father forget his child, or a woman not have compassion on
the son of her womb? but he says not, Can a child forget his father? as if
that were too frequent, too common, and lay at every man's door: but spero
meliora de vobis, I hope better things of you, and that ye have learned better
things, and your duty better, than to set light by your father, Deuteronomy. 67. 16.
We take much notice of those whose consciences are so seared, and hearts
hardened, that have not a tear at their fathers grave; and God and angels will
take notice of us for stupidity and blockishnesse, if we will not weep for our
Abner, our Prince and great man that is fallen.

3ly, If prayers and Supplications ought to be made for all men, but especially
for Kings and all that are in authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1. then consequently it must
follow, that their deaths ought to be lamented more than other men's, and if so,
then

Use 2. Is for reproof.

1. If those that rejoice and glory in their shame, Phil. 3. 19. whose end
without great Repentance will be their damnation. One boasts that he
subscribed to the lions death, another that he tried the lion, another that he
sentenced the lions damme, another that he slew the lion, another that he
shared of the lions skin; but if there be a woe unto them that speak good of
evil, and evil of good, which put darkness for light, and light for darkness,
that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sour, Isa. 5. 20. then as Jacob said
of Simeon and Levi, Brethren in iniquity, Genesis 49. 6. Let not my soul enter
into their secret, and my glory be not joined with their Assembly; for an
horrible curse and woe, like the sin of Cain, lies at their door.

2ly, Of those that had the least hand in, or approved of Abners fall. Certes
many men with Pilate, will seem to wash their hands clean from his blood,
because they were no principal actors in it, but qui non vetat peccare, quum
potest, iubet, says Seneca, He that is not with me, says Christ, is against
me, or he that hinders not a foul fact, but approves of it, is as guilty as the
principal in it. Abner is fallen, by whom and whose means? the scruple is
resolved, verse 30. of this Chapter: so Joab and Abishai his brother slew
Abner, Abishai being privy to the murder, and not preventing it, is counted by
the Spirit of God, as deep in blood, as the bloody executioner of the Treason,
Joab himself; David killed not Vriah, but the men of Rabbab: yet because he
plotted and conspired against his life, and was well pleased with his death,
Nathan tells him point blank, and in plain terms, 2 Samuel 12 9. Thou have killed
Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and have slain him with the sword of the
children of Ammon: Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house.
Ahab was not accessory unto Naboth's stoning, but his wife Jezabel, who made
use of his Seal unto the Elders and Nobles that were in his City, that they
might deprive him of life and Vineyard: yet he approving of what was done, and
rejoicing in his spoil and prey that he had taken, Elijah the Tishbite meets
him, and upbraids him of cruelty, covetousness, and blood, 1 Kings 21. 19.
Have thon killed and also taken possession? therefore in the place where dogs
licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs even lick thy blood also. And in this
sense, Saul bewailed his sad condition, and acknowledged his unworthiness and
unfitness to be a Minister of the Gospel to the Gentiles, because he
persecuted the Church of God, and had a hand in Stevens death, not as one that
murdered him, as a cutthroat, but allowed and applauded them that acted that
villainy, as his own words best speak it, Acts 22. 20. Lord, when the blood of
thy Martyr Steven was shed, I also stood by and consented to his death, and
kept the clothes of them that slew him. Now the Marginal Note says, this is
properly spoken, for Steven was murdered of a sort of rude rakehels, not by
order of Justice, but by open force, and he liking of what was done, and
lulling, and spurring them forward unto it, accounts himself a chief instrument
in the conspiracy of robbing God of a Saint, the Church of a pillar, and the
world of a bright shining light, which would have enlightened them that fit in
darkness to the true light, John 1. 9. and so to the light of heaven. As the
intruders into other men's Rectories plead for themselves, that they thrust them
not out, when they are contented to inherit their possessions, and eat up the
bread that should feed the right owners and their children, approving of the
Sequestration: even so there be, that plead not guilty of Abners fall, when in
their hearts they cried C^ucifige, let him die, and stroked the contrivers of
his ruin: but how one or the other can answer their juggle before God, who
judges righteously, and takes the affection and will for the deed, I am
ignorant, unless it be with speechlesness, like to him that came to the
wedding feast without a wedding garment, Matthew. 22. 1^. and so partake of his
portion and bitter potion.

3ly, Those that reviled Abner living, and detract from him much more being
fallen, their greatest religion is ill biased, which is to speak evil of their
Prince. He that is most foul mouthed like Shimei, is held fitest to be a
Statesman, and have a hand in reformation. When Paul had called Ananias whited
wall, and the standers by checked him for reviling Gods high Priest: he
acknowledged his error, saying, I knew not that he was the High Priest, for it
is written, thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people, Acts 23. 5.
from whence may be inferred, that to calumniate him is sin.

4ly, This highly reproves those Servants of this Prince, this great man, that
helped to pull him down. Gravior inimicus qui latet sub pectore, a bosom
enemy is of all the worst. When Caesar was stabbed in the Senate house, and
seeing Brutus acting his part amongst the Conspirators, it cut him to the
heart, using these words, (...), what and thou too my son Brutus? then fall
Caesar: even so, for a Prince to bring up birds to pick out his own eyes, and
breed vipers to sting him to death, it cannot but much add to the bitterness
of his fall, and this made David to complain so sadly, Psalm. 41. 9. That his
friend, his familiar friend, whom he trusted, which did eat of his bread,
lifted up his heel against him: that is, like a wild horse to kick at him, and
trample him under his seet. Of all injuries there are none stick so near to a
man, or go so near to his heart, as, been facere, and male audire, to do well,
and to be rewarded ill, by a Servant, or any other ungrateful wretches. The
Ox knows his owner, Isay 1. 3. and for a man not to know his master, and
maker, is worse than brutish: and deserves nigro carbone notari, to be branded
for a vile man indeed. A household enemy is noted by Christ for a sharp plague,
Mat. 10. 36. and yet such is our Abners condition to fall by such. Joab, had
Zimri peace that slew his Master? 2 Kin. 9. 31. then look for no peace living
or dying.

Obs. Occidit, is fallen; from whence may be observed, that death is no death
to them that die in the Lord. It is but as a sleep, from which they shall be
awakened at the sound of the last Trumpet. And in this sense says Christ to
his disciples, John 11. 11. Our friend Lazarus sleeps, but I go to wake him
up. It is but as a falling to the earth, from whence we through Gods might,
recover our selves, and rise again. It is but as (Requietorium) a Bed of rest:
as Isay shows, 57. 2 They shall rest in their Beds, every one that walks
before him: and men go not to bed to lie there for ever, but some short time.
It was said by a Jester unto a great man, If I fall, I can rise again, but if
thou fallest, thou will never rise more; but this holds true of the faithful
in general, Dan. 12. 2. they shall rise to everlasting life; thus David tells
not his servants, A Prince or a great man is dead, but is fallen, being assured
that he should rise again (like Antheus) with greater strength, and courage,
and honor, and glory, than ever he enjoyed before, like Damascens wise, yet
deposed King, as we read of in M. Bunnyes resolutions.

Use Here is comfort for Abners friends, that although his body is sown in
corrupion, yet it shall be raised in incorruption. If it be sown in dishonor,
yet it shall be raised in glory, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43. that although he was
conquered by Treason, yet he is Conqueror over all his enemies, and greatest
Traitors, death, sin, and Satan; that although he be fallen, yet he is mounted
up aloft upon the wings of Cherubims and glorious angels, like Lazarus, into
the bosom of his father; that although he be loss to them, yet their loss is
his gain; for instead of war he finds peace, instead of sorrow, joy
unspeakable, instead of vexation of spirit, The things which eye has not seen,
ear has not heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
instead of a corruptible Crown, an incorruptible, Chap. 9. 25. Instead of a
Crown of thorns, a Crown of ease, instead of an earthly Kingdom, a Kingdom
which endures for ever, even the Kingdom of God and of Christ, instead of
earthly treasures, heavenly, instead of buffetings, reproaches, spittings in
the face, kisses, with sweet embracings; Instead of Apage, Euge, be gone, We
will not have this man reign longer over us, welcome, and well done good and
faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Matthew. 25. 23. instead
of the society of beasts, such as Paul fought withal at Ephesus, the
fellowship of glorified Saints and Angels. Jacob in his dream saw a Ladder, the
foot thereof stood upon earth, but the top reached up to heaven, Genesis 28 12.
and by this Ladder, our Abner, our Prince (like an Angel of God) is ascended up
thither. Question not this, O man, whosoever thou art; for he was living, a
living pattern of virtue and godliness to all. 1 For sobriety; for who could
detect him of drunkenness? 2ly of chastity; for who could blemish him of
uncleanesse? Posse, and nolle, nobile, What Castle by promotion, or bribes, or
command cannot a great man scale? and not to subdue it to his power and lust,
is Prince-like indeed. 3ly, Of Piety, Religion, being diligent in Prayer,
sincere in his devotions, and admirably attentive in hearing of Sermons, and
that sometimes in my eye. 4ly, Of knowledge and learning; witness his Book
entitled (...), which few Bishops with all their learning and reading could
outrun, and witness his Disputation with the Scotch Minister, who shall be
nameless, and whom he so foiled by arguments, that whereas before he was his
bitter enemy in Pulpit, and out of it, he set forth unto the world his own
recantation, and his Princes vindication to undeceive his people. 5ly, Of
bounty and liberality to his followers, I, and to some ungrateful, and
undeserving followers. 6ly, Of patience; for after the example of Christ, 1
Pet. 2. 23. Being reviled, he reviled not a-again: when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed it to him that judges righteously. 7ly, Of
magnanimity; being as daring as a lion, as some of his own Captains can speak,
and would have proved it in red letters, (if he might have been suffered) wrote
with a pen of iron. 8ly, Of compassion; lamenting the loss of his enemies, as
if their blood had been drawn from his own heart. Julian honored those
Soldiers that died in his war and service, but he those that died in the war
against him. 9ly, Of affection to his wife; so that as Solomon speaks of the
good woman, I may truly aver of him, Prove. 31. 29. Many husbands have done
virtuously, but thou surmountest them all. 1. For fidelity to her bed, a rare
thing to be found in great men. 2. For affability and kindness to her, ^^ving
her as his own soul. 3 For indulgencie over his and her children. Now laying
all these together, as so many steps or stairs, or stakes of the Ladder,
doubtless his works follow him, Rev. 14. 13 and he is passed and gone to your
father, and his father, to his God and your God. Wherefore comfort ye one
another with these words, 1 These 4, 18. And as Christ said to the daughters of
Jerusalem, Luke 23. 28 Weep not for him, but for your selves, left as a prey to
the wolf, hurrying and worrying Christ's flock.

Use 2. Abner is fallen. As the Widow of Zarephath spoke to Elijah, 1 Kings 17.
18. O thou man of God, art thou come to call my sins to remembrance, and to
slay my son? Even so, Abners fall should put Israel in mind of their sins,
which have pulled him down from his Throne, and of a sudden Repentance, lest
they follow him to the grave. If old Eli was punished for the iniquity of his
sons, 1 Samuel 3. 12, 13, 14. then by the same rule, a Father of his Country may
suffer for the wickedness of his children and people.

Obs. 3. Hoc die, This day; from whence I observe, that all men have their
falling day, The Sun that now shines will set, the Moon that now is at Full
will wain, the sea that now flows will ebb. After a Spring will follow an
Autumn: after a Summer comes a hard Winter, and after the green blade comes a
harvest. Death thrusts in his sickle, and the fairest corn falls to the ground.
Wise men die, and also the ignorant and foolish perish together, Psalm. 49. 10.
I said ye are gods, but ye shall die like men, and fall like others, 82. ver.
7. All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man like the flower of the field,
the grass withers, the flower fades away, because the Spirit of the Lord
blows upon it. Surely all flesh is grass, omnis Caro, all flesh, the flesh
of Princes and great men, so well as of the Peasant and beggar. Paul says,
Heb. 9. 27. Decretum est omnibus mori, There is an appointed time for all men
to die. All the seed of Adam have had their day. Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Solemon, Sampson, with our Abner. Know ye not that there is a Prince and a
great man fallen this day in Israel?

Ob. If God bounds man's life to an appointed time, to a day, then Ioab seems to
fulfill the good pleasure of God, in giving a full period to Abners life: he
was but as the Atropos to cut the thread of his mortality asunder, and so how
could this be said to be sin in him?

Ans. Cain might plead the same Argument in murdering of his brother Abel, but
how displeasing it was to the most high, let his punishment, let his yellings
and roarings witness to the world.

2ly, Although man's appointed time be known to God, yet it is unknown to man:
so he is called Palmoni, which signifies a secret number, because he knows
the number of our days, which is secret and hidden to us; for as Christ spoke
of the end of the world, Mat. 24. 36. so may I speak in this kind, Of that day
and hour knows no man: And so it must needs follow, that Ioab's wickedness
was Monstrum, horrendum, most heinous and detestable.

Use 1. All men have their falling day. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be
learned ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord in fear. Feriunt ceisos fulmina
montes, the higher ye are, the more ticklish ye stand, and the more ready ye
are to fall: ye stand upon slippery places, and are suddenly cast down,
consumed and perished, Psalm. 73. 18, 19. Quem dies videt veniens superbum, hunc
dies fugiens videt jacentem. Whom the morning behold swelling and strutting
like the proud Peacock, the Evening beheld wallowing in his own blood and gore.
Know ye not that a Prince is fallen this day? The day of great men is no longer
than the poor man's day; and therefore it will be their greatest honor and
wisdom to work out their salvation whilst it is day, Phil. 2. 12. Heb. 3. 13.
For the night comes, when no man can work, John 9. 4.

Use 2. Here is instruction for inferiors, to pray with Moses, Psalm. 90. 12.
Lord teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom,
and there is no wisdom like to that of looking well to the better part with
Mary, and gaining of heaven. It is written of Alexander the great, that a
little pit held him after his death, whom the whole world could scarcely
contain living, and so he was still crowding for more elbow room, according to
that of the Poet.

Vnus Pellaeo juveni vix sufficit orbis. And of Franciscus Borgia, seeing a
little Tomb and Coffin to contain all the Princely glory, power and
magnificence of that great Empress Augusta, that he departed from her Funeral,
saying, Mortem Augustae sibi vitam attulisse, that her death should give him
life. Even so let the consideration of the mortality of our bodies, quicken us,
and put life into us, to labor for the immortality of our souls in bliss. Let
the meditation of sic transit gloria mundi, all earthly glory vanishes
immediately like flax that is set on fire, as the Master of the Ceremonies was
wont to speak to the Pope, the first day of his inauguration, mind us to seek
after the things above, Col. 3. 1. which fade not nor fail not, Luke 22. 33. It
was the saying of Augustine, nescis qua hora veniet, vigila, ut quod nescis
quando veniet, paratum te inveniat quum venerit: and ad hoc forte nescis quando
veniet, ut semper paratus sis, the which I may interpret by our Saviors own
words, Matthew. 25. 13. Ye know neither the day nor the hour when the Son of man
will come: watch therefore, that when he comes he may find you well-doing. And
for this cause of that day and hour knows no man, that every man should watch
and be found a people ready prepared for the Lord, Luke 1. 17. and so enter
into the Kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of the wotld, Matthew. 25.
34. When Pharaoh, Abimelech, Sisera, Herod, Abner, least dreamed of their fall,
then their day was at an end: Let then Abolibah learn to be wise by the
punishment laid upon her sister Abolah, for what is spoke of Abner here, will
be verified of all in the same sense, although not words, Know ye not, that a
Prince, and a great man is this day fallen in Israel?

Obs. 4. In Israel. Gods Church is not free from spots. In Paradise there was a
deadly stinging Serpent, in Christ's bosom a Juda^. In the fairest garden Later
anguis sub herba, will be some venomous creature. Israel was a nursery of
Religion and Prophets: It was the Lords peculiar treasure, Exodus 19. 5. and
Vine, and yet lo this treasure has a canker, this Vine a deadly Viper couching
under her branches to sting Abner unto death. Know ye not that a Prince, and a
great man is fallen this day? How? By Treason. Where? In Israel. whom? By Joab.
I might enlarge my self farther, but I will conclude all in a few words.

The Allusion.

1. Abner died when he least thought of death: even so our Prince and great
man, is pulled down to his grave in the flower and strength of his years, when
he least thought of the turning of the Sun ^^ Caesar being asked what death he
would choose, answered, no lingering, but a sudden death, and this our Prince
enjoyes, being alive, and dead in a moment; the breath of man can scarce
pronounce so fast, Est, but the Echo answers as fast, Non est, he is fallen.

2ly. Abner died a violent death: even so our Prince by unmercifull hands on
every side is bereaved of his life; Gebal, Ammon and Amalech, Edom and Ishmael,
Moab and the Agarims, Jesuits and Zamzummims, Deuteronomy. 2. ^0. that is, a people,
who called themselves Rephaims, preservers or Physicians, to heal and reform
vices, but played the Devils to open a gap to let in all heresy and
abomination, and wickedness and profanesse, and covetousness which is idolatry;
These all of them have taken crafty counsel against him, Psalm. 83. 3. and
worried him, and dethroned him, and like Cannihals have devoured him.

3ly. Abner was evil spoken of by Joab, and his innocence tainted and spotted
by him, and his integrity and best meaning misconstrued and misinterpreted, 24,
25. ver. Even so, our Prince, our great man, was calumniated and reproched in
the Army by rude Soldiers, In the City by ignorant Ephesians, Factious
Schismatics, and many prattling Diotrephe's. In the Country, by Copper-Smith
Alexanders, and giddy-brained Athenians, still longing to hear, and tell news,
sucking in all poison, and then spewing it out to the disgrace of their Prince.
This was Christ's lot and portion, Isa. 53. 3. to verse 12. and certainly (how
ever the world deem of it) that servant is highly honored, that is admitted to
drink of his Masters cup. If they have done these things to the green tree,
what may they not, will they not do to the dry? Luke 23. 31.

4ly, Abners fall was lamented by all Israel, unless it were by cursed Joab,
and his wicked brood, verse 32. Even so our great man's subversion did afford
much lamentation in our Rhama, where among the more godly and constant godly
ones, there was weeping, and mourning and howling for their Abner, for their
Prince, because he was not, Matthew. 2. 18. Perhaps there might be some greedy of
prey might rejoice in his fall, that they might rise and step into his seat;
but as Christ prayed for his malefactors, so pray I, Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34. That Crown must needs be dear bought,
which is purchased with blood, and an ill conscience, and the loss of a soul,
as Alexander the sixth sold his soul to the Devil, to advance him to be Pope.
The Romans were wont to begin their Epicedies after the death of their
Worthies, with Augustus mortuus est, the King is dead; the tidings of Augustus
death made a Land flood over all Rome: And why should not Abijahs sad tidings
of Princeps occidit, our Prince is fallen, turn our Israel into Bochim, a
valley of tears? Unless we have eyes and will not see, and hearts that will
not understand, the which was one of Pharaoh's plagues, We never had more cause
to pour out water before the Lord, than this day, 1 Samuel 7. 6.

5ly, Abner falling, Ish-bosheth presently fell, with those adherents to them
both, 2 Samuel 4. 7. Even so, our Prince and great man falling, how many hundred
Families that are bread at his Table, and were cherished by our good Abner,
were utterly ruined? The Peers lost the honor of their birthright, and some of
them their lives. The Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, with the learned Clergy
lost their Livings, and Liberties. The Gentry their Estates; and have not all
cause to cry out, as Elisha did after Elijah, when he was taken up into heaven,
2 Kings 2. 12. My father, my father. What shall we do? as the servant of the
man of God said, Chap. 6. 15.

6ly, Abner signifies the fathers Candle; and what he was by name, our Prince
was by nature, a bright shining light and Candle, as it was said of John
Baptist, John 5. 35. and this Candle being put out, we must needs walk in
Egyptian darkness, and darkness is none of the least plagues.

7ly, Abner was gulled of his life under a color of kindness, v. 27. Joab
pretended love, but intended murder. Mol in ore, verba lactis, fell in cord,
fraus in factis, he had honey in his mouth, but gall in his heart, he spoke to
him peaceably, but struck him to the heart. Even so our Prince was fed with
golden promises, and Naphthalies goodly words, that they would make him the
greatest Prince in Christendom, if he would null Bishops, Confirm the
Parliament during their own pleasure, Resign the Militia into their hands,
which having obtained, and all they could ask, at last cut off his head with
his own sword, as David served Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 51. And so let us pray,

From the Crafty Counsel of Abithophel,

From Rabshakeh's railing, and Shimei's cursing,

From Iudas's kiss, and Joab's bloody hands, Good Lord deliver us.

From all false Doctrine and Heresy,

From hardness of heart and privy conspiracy,

From sudden death and Jesuitical cruelty, Good Lord deliver us.

Absaloms unnatural rebellion against his father.
SERMON. II.
2 Samuel 18. 33. And the King was moved, and went up to the chamber over the
gate, and wept, and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom, I would God that I had died for thee, Absalom my son, my son.
DIC mihi Musa virnm, Tell me of any man (but the son of man) that ever was so
soaked in sorrows, and soused in tears, as David was; his whole life seemed
nothing else, (from the Cradle to the Grave) but a map of misery; the ground
on which he stood, a red sea of blood, or a wild wilderness, full of sharp
briars, and thorns, that pricked and peirced him, which way soever he moved;
his diet, like Micaiahs, 1 Kings 22. 27. Bread of affliction; and water of
affliction, so that he said truly of himself, Psalm. 102. 6. I am like a
Pelican in the wilderness, whose nature is to trickle down tears on her bill
continually; and in this sense says Job, Chap. 57. Man is born to sore travel
and trouble, as sparks fly upward; and this ye shall find in the survey of his
life. 1. He was a shepherd, and he that follows that calling, duram servit
servitutem, serves an hard Apprentiship, as Jacob speaks and shows, Genesis 31.
40. I was in the day consumed with heat, and with frost in the night, and my
sleep departed from mine eyes. 2ly. He was despised by Eliab his eldest
brother, 1 Samuel 17. 28. 3ly, He was defied by Goliath the Philistim, v. 42. 4ly,
He was assaulted by a lion and a Bear, v 34. 5ly, He was persecuted by Saul.
6ly, Despised by Michal his own wife. 7ly, He was betrayed by the Ziphims,
chap. 23. 19. 8ly, He was envied by Philistims. 9ly, And in a word, to fill up
the measure of his griefs, his own son, his bosom son, his Isaac son, his
darling son seeks his life and Crown a once; and yet for this bird that would
have picked out his eyes, this cuckoe that would have devoured his damme, that
bred, and fed, and cockered him, he good man weeps, and in the midst of his
inundation, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, I would God
that I had died for thee, Absalom my son, my son. From whence we learn after
his example,

Obs. 1. To love our enemies, to bless them that curse us, to do good to them
that hate us, and to pray for them which hurt us and persecute us, Matthew. 5.
44. for says Christ, v. 46, 47. If we love them which love us, what reward
shall we have? Do not the Publicans even the same? Or if we be friendly to our
brethren only, what singular thing do we? Do not even sinners likewise? but to
be perfect even as our heavenly father is perfect, but with Steven to render
good for evil, Acts 7. 60. but with David to mourn and grieve for the loss of
a Rebel son, Est hic labor, hoc opus, praiseworthy indeed, as it is, Romans 13.
3. and Christian-like. I must confess with Christ's disciples, durus est hic
serm^, that this is a hard saying, but verus est hic sermo, this is a true
saying, 1 Timothy 1. 15. for unless we deny our selves, and as Abraham was
commanded, exire de patria sua, to go out of his Country, Gen 12. 1. so we go
out of our selves, and cast off flesh and blood, we cannot go into Christ, or
ever come where he is.

Obs. 2. That many are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34. 19. As the
stones that were for Solomon's Temple, were sawen and squared, and endured many
an hard knock, before they were fitted for that place, and their place: even so
the godly must be sawn with the Saw of Correction, and squared with the ax of
tribulation, and suffer misery upon misery, before they can become lively
stones of the spiritual building, whereof Christ Jesus is the head corner
stone. As the ground is rent under the Plough again, and again, and harrowed,
and sown, and endures many an hard frost, and cold blast, and showers, before
the harvest comes: even so, this is the condition of Gods Holy Land, to be
tilled, and harrowed, and tumbled about, and water-furrowed, but then comes the
Harvest, and the Wheat is gathered into his Garner, when the chaff is burned
with unquenchable fire, Mat. 5. 12. Afflictions, as it is said of Gad, come by
Troop^; and as there were many Lepers, and many widows in Israel, in the days
of Elizeus; and as it was a mighty host of the Aramites compassed about
Samaria, 2 Kings 6. 14. even so the righteous, like the man of God, are
compassed about with a mighty Host, and Troops, and a multitude of calamities,
yet nevertheless in all these things they are conquerours, through him that
loves them, says Paul, Romans 8. 37. as if he had said, these things come not
to make us mourners, but conquerors, and the conqueror leaves always the field
with honor and triumph, and joy. Many are the troubles of the Righteous; Here
is asharp breakfast: but we must through many afflictions enter into the
Kingdom of God, as Paul and Barnahas taught, Acts 14. 22. there is a delicious
Supper and amends for all. I read of Jovinian the Emperor, that he had two
sorts of Wine in his Palace, the one sweet, and the other sour, but he decreed,
that whosoever would taste of the sweet, should first taste of the sour: Even so,
Qui vult cum Christo conregnare in Regno Coelorum, debet cum Christo compati in
valle lachrymarum, he that will reign with Christ in the Kingdom of glory, must
first suffer with Christ in this vale of tears, he must first take up his
Cross, before he shall put on a Crown; First drink Vinegar, then Wine: he must
first wear a Crown of thorns, and then a Crown of glory: and good reason for
it; For the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant greater than his
Lord, Mat. 10. 24. But it is enough for the disciple to be as his Master, and
the servant as his Lord, verse 25.

Obs. 3. That although many are the troubles of the righteous, yet the Lord is
their deliverer out of them all: He is their City of refuge to secure them from
the hands of the avenger; he is their shield and buckler to defend them; he is
that brazen serpent, unto which if they look and run, will preserve them. Many
are the troubles of the righteous, and they have many as deliverers out of them
all; for they that are with them and for the^, are more than they that are
against them, as the servant of the man of God can witness, 2 Kings 6. 16. and
in the multitude of the sorrows which they have in their hearts, this is their
comfort, Psalm. 119. 50. that God is able to deliver them, as the three children
said, Dan. 3. 17. and pitcheth his Lifeguard about them, Psalm. 34. 7. 91. 11:
So that they may now sing with the Church, Psalm. 124. If the Lord had not been
on our side, (may Israel now say) if the Lord had not been on our side when men
rose up against us, they had then swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was
kindled against us. Then the waters had drowned us, and the stream had gone
over our soul, then had the swelling waters gone over our soul. Praised be the
Lord which has not given us as a prey to their teeth. Our soul is escaped,
even as a bird out of the snare of the foulers, the snare is broken and we are
delivered. Our help is in the name of the Lord which has made heaven and
earth. So that as Christ asked the adulteress, Ioh. 8. 10. Where are thine
accusers? and she said, they are gone; even so, if any shall demand, where are
the troubles of the righteous? answer may be made, they are vanished like mists
at the rising of the Sun; for the Lord scattered them, as he did the Army of
the Syrians, 2 Kings 7. 6. Many were Jobs afflictions, and as sharp as any, but
the Lord delivered him out of them all, and made his comforts at last to exceed
his sorrows at first, chap. 42. 12. David was a figure of Christ, and so was
hedged about with the Cross. For 1. As Christ was contemned of his Country
men, so was he of his brethren. 2ly. As Christ fled into Egypt to save his
life: so David to Gath to preserve his. 3ly, As Christ was glad to receive food
of women: so David of Abigail. 4ly, As Herod persecuted Christ: so Saul, David.
5ly, As there was a wicked combination of Priests, Elders, Scribes, Pharisees,
Jews, etc. against Christ: so the Philistims, Ammonites, Edomites and Moabites
were all against David. 6ly, As Judas one of the twelve Disciples, and
Purse-bearer to Christ, was one of his greatest enemies: so Absalom his own
bowels was against David; but God delivered him out of his hands, and rendered
the evil he conceived and plotted against his father, into his own breast and
bosom: and for grief thereof David sobbed forth this heavy lamentation, O my
son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, Absalom my
son, my son. In the Text consider these 2 parties treated of,

1. Of a most indulgent, affectionate, kind, and cockering father, that is,
King David; And the King was moved, etc.

2ly, Of an unnatural, unkind, undutiful and ungracious son, more cruel than
the savage Tygre against his Sire, and that is Absalom, a King new erected, but
is pulled out of his seat before he was fledge, from whence we learn.

Obs. 1. Soon ripe, soon rotten, as we use to say, Ionah's Gourd sprang up
suddenly in a night, and withered the next: even so, Israel had no sooner
proclaimed Absalom King, but the men of Judah mar his pride and depose him; and
herein is Gods promise fulfilled, Psalm. 55. 23. The bloody and deceitful men
shall not live out half their days, And so as Cushi said, ver. 32. Let all the
enemies of the Lord my King, and all that rise up against him be as that young
man Absalom is.

Obs. 2. The sin of Patricide, even in the very heart, is a monstrous,
abominable and detestable sin to God and man; for the will stands for the deed
with God. Fecit quod potuit, as Christ of Mary Magdelen, goes for current
execution. A Roman being asked, why amongst all their good Laws, there was none
against killling of Parents; answered, that there was no true Roman so
unnatural: but in Israel, there was an unnatural child sprung from a good
stock, that seeks his fathers life. He that said, Ecles. 10. 20. Curse not the
King, no, not in thy thought, surely commands Absalom, and every one, not to
imagine the least evil against his King, father. We say of some ungracious
sons, they are sick of their father; and Absalom was troubled with the same
disease, but fell short of his expectation, the gallows giving him his full
reward; and for this David wept, etc.

In David let us consider these two general parts.

1. His Passion, And the King was moved, and went up to the Chamber over the
gate, and wept, and as he went, thus be said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom.

2ly, His compassion, Would God I had died for thee, O Absalom my son, my son.

In his Passion consider with me these particulars.

1. The force and violence of his passion; the which struck him like a dart to
the very heart, that he remained for the present senseless and speechless, like
him that came to the Wedding-Feast without a Wedding garment, Matthew. 2^. 12.
And the King was moved: Yea, the Original speaks it much moved; Leves loquuntur
curae, ingentes stupent, says Seneca, where the waters are shallow, there they
are rough and murmr, when the deeps are smooth and silent; the tidings, and
like Ahijahs heavy tidings to the wife of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14. 6. of his white
boys Absaloms death, overwhelmed his spirit, and amassed his soul, as he speaks,
Ps. 143. 4. that as if he had been smitten dumb, like Zacharias, he held his
peace, like Aaron, when Nadab and Abiha, his sons, were devoured with fire
from the Lord. And the King was much moved.

2ly. His breathing and reviving after his grievous passion, as if like Lazarus
he had been awakened out of his grave, And he went up to the chamber over the
gate and wept; wherein let us observe,

1. His motion, And went, etc.

2ly, His action, and wept. In the first consider, 1. Terminum a quo, v. 24.
2ly, Terminum ad quem, as here.

1. Whither he went; he went up to the chamber, not to frolic it, not to revel
it, not to commit adultery as he had done before; for how should he then make
mirth? as it is Ezekiel. 21. 10. but to fast, and to weep, and to mourn, which was
Gods call to him in that day, as it is Isa. 22. 12.

2ly, The place where the chamber was, over the gate. The Kings first seat was
below between the two gates, v. 24. a place very suitable to the condition he
was in, and the news he received from Cushi: but then when he heard what God
had done to him, he mounts upward.

1. Either to make his peace with God, that had thus tried his heart and reins,
and searched him to the quick, in cutting off his darling Absalom, as he had
cut off Vriah the beloved husband of Bathsheba. or,

2ly, That as he was a King, so he might not discover so much weakness in
himself, that he who could govern a great people, could not guide and govern
his own passions. Thus as one said, Difficilius est been regnare quam vincere,
It is a harder matter for a man to reign well, than to win all. Even so,
seipsum vincere, for a man to overcome himself, and his unbrideled affections,
is no easy task, although commendable; but how ever, if David cannot subdue
them, yet he is unwilling the world should take notice of his imbecility, and
therefore went up to the Chamber over the gate, or,

3ly, He was a man of war, and was well acquainted with the bloody event; of
war: and so as Nehemiah spoke chap. 6. 11. Should such a man as I flee, even
so, for such an one as he to be seen to melt for an outside scar, or wound,
would have much blemished and stained his honor: and therefore he weeps in
secret for his Absalom, as Jeremiah did for the pride, and captivity of the
people, 13. 17. or,

4ly. That the world should not take notice of his too too carnal affection
toward his dear Son. It is true, he was his joy, the apple of his eye, and he
thought him of all the birds of the nest the fairest, and the pretiest. Yet in
regard of his profession of godliness, he was unwilling that any should
observe his Carnality, (as in the best grain there lurks some chaff) and
therefore he takes his Chamber to roar out to himself alone his sad grievance.
O Absalom my Son, my Son Absalom.

2. As we have looked upon his motion, and went, etc. so let us cast an eye
upon his action, and wept. If he had wept for the afflictions of Zion, or for
his sins, or that God did hide his face from him, Psalm. 30. 7. this had not
been blamable: but for to weep for the loss of such a Son, such a Rebel and
Traitor, and such an unparalleld Caitiff, this is unexcusable. From whence we
learn,

Obs. 1. The best have their failings: for says Solomon, 1 Kin. 8. 46. There
is no man that sineth not, and the just man falls seven times in a day. And
so we ought to pity, support, and comfort one another, Knowing whereof we are
made, remembering that we are but dust, as God has compassion on us, Psalm. 103.
13, 14.

Obs. That the best meat may be our poison, if not well Cooked: weeping is good
in its own nature, but adulterous weeping springing from carnalitie is stark
naught. There are fourfold sorts of tears, according to the ground on which
the seed was sown.

1. Lacrymae doloris, grief tears. 2ly. Lacrymae compassionis, fellow-feeling
tears. 3ly. Lacrymae paenitentiae, repenting tears. 4ly. Lacrymae
murmurationis, grumbling or murmuring tears. And so of these in order.
1. Grief tears, are those which we shed every one in his private and
particular cross and affliction, when any evil befalls us, as we are never
unfurnished of occasions from the Cradle to the Grave. Low grounds are commonly
moist and waterie. Man that is born of a woman is full of trouble, and misery,
says Job 14. 1. He comes into the world weeping. He goes forth weeping. He
sows in tears, Psalm. 126. 5, 6. and his (Exitus) end is crying, like the
Shunamites child. Moses, in Cunabilis, in his swaddling Clouts wept, Exo. 2. 6.
Ishmael, in Infantia, in his Childhood wept, Genesis 21. 17. Esau, in juventute,
in his youth wept, Genesis 27. 38. Jacob, in Senectute, wept, 37. 35. that we are
little or no time free from mourning. All this shows, that as the Sea is
always boiling and moving, so sorrow upon sorrow follows as close at the
heels, as one wave pursues another, and as Jobs sad Messengers traced the
other. So that in this respect we may say with David, Psalm. 8. 4. Quid est
homo, what a miserable creature is man?

2ly. There are fellow-feeling tears, which is a sympathizing in our Brethrens
calamities. As Christ our head suffers when the Members of his body suffer: and
as it is in the natural body, If one Member suffer, all suffer with it, 1 Cor.
12. 26. As in a throng of people, one treads upon another foot, the which
causes him to cry out, Cur me cal^as? why do thou tread upon me? The foot
was hurt, and not the tongue, and yet the tongue complains, by reason of that
amiable sympathy and friend ship that is between the Members. Now as it is in
the mystical body, and natural body, even so should it be in the spiritual
body, weeping for Joseph's afflictions so well as our own. St. Paul, Vas
electionis, the chosen Vessel, did not only by precept, but by pattern teach us
our duty in this, 2 Cor. 11. 29. Is any weak, and I am not weak? who is
offended, and I burn not? Brethren, be ye followers of him, and look on them
which walk so, as ye have them for an ensample, Phil. 3. 17. Christ Jesus did
the like, for he appropriated all the mischief done to the Church, as done to
himself, Acts 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? So that if ye will not
be followers of Paul, nor of the Saints; Yet be followers of God as dear
Children.

3ly. There are repenting tears, which are poured forth for our sins, and for
our own, and other men's punishments, and chastisements by reason of them: for
man suffers for his sins, Lam. 3. 39. If sin breaks our head, tears lend us a
plaster to heal where sin has wounded, and the more tears, the sooner the
cure is wrought. Mary Magdalen, Peccatrix, a sinner, was so prodigal of them,
that she washed Christ's feet with her tears; her sins were many, and her tears
did correspond to her sins, and therefore her Lord did forgive her all her
sins, Luke 7. 47. What a sweet voice was it sounded in the Palsy man's ears?
Mat. 9. 2. Be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. And that I might
hear the like, (I speak from my soul) let Ziba take all; and let me tell you,
the readiest course we can take to obtain remission and forgiveness, is to
swim to God in a flood of tears, as the Ark was carried to mount Ararat upon
the waters, where it rested peaceably, Genesis 8. 4. This was the means which
Peter used to make his atonement with his master, after his lying, and denying,
and forswearing of him, Mat. 26. 75. (...) He wept bitterly, and this course
the Israelites took, when the Text tells us, that they poured out water before
the Lord, that is, they wept abundantly for their sins, they were as free of
their tears as of water, their heads were full of water, and their eyes as a
fountain of tears; they humbled themselves very low, that God might receive
them into favor again. And this was David's practice, Psalm. 6. 6. I cause my
bed every night to swim, I water my Couch with my tears. And then follows verse.
8. Away from me ye workers of Iniquity: for the Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping. It was a sweet saying of one, Never any came to Gods door weeping,
that ever went away sorrowing. The Ninevites were a sinful people, and there
was wrath proclaimed against them, and the execution thereof denounced within
40. days: yet upon their repenting tears, and crying mightily unto God, and
turning from their evil ways, God repented of the evil that he had said that
he would do unto them, and he did it not, Jon. 3. 8, 10. And to this effect
speaks Hierome, Oration deum lenit, sed lacryma angit: haec ungit, sed illa
pungit. Prayer is of great force and power with God, for what cannot a fervent
praying man do? Jam. 5. 16. but when tears accompany, and are joined with
prayer, then what can be denied to such a melting soul? The Canaanitish woman,
Mat. 15. 22. and the Father of him that was possessed with a dumb Devil, Mark
9. 24. did both by crying, and tears, and crying tears, obtain their long
wished for desires, and drew pity, and compassion, and a compassionate pity
from Christ. In which respect, Austin said, Vincunt invisibilem, and ligant
omnipotentem, they conquer him that is unconquerable, and bind the almighty
power of God to yield to our requests, as we see in Jacob, Genesis 32. 28. And so
sweetly was it uttered, by a sweet Divine: Repenting eyes are Cellars of
Angels, and penitent tears their choicest wine, which the Savor of life
perfumes, the taste of grace sweetneth, and the purest colors of returning
innocence highly beautifieth. And I would God, as David speaks, that our
hearts were such a Limbeck, evermore distilling so pure a Quintessence, drawn
out from the weeds of our offenses, by the fire of Contrition, that Heaven
might mourn at the absence of so precious a water, and earth lament the loss of
such fruitful showers. We have all sinned, and our sins are many, and great,
and a great many, and so we ought with Christ, Heb. 5. 7. to power out strong
cries, and tears, unto him that is able to save us from death. Every one of us
when we come to die, would gladly go to Heaven: but if we so intend in good
earnest, lacrymae paenitentiae, repenting tears must be our guide thither, as
the star was to the wise men, to bring them to Christ, Mat. 2. 9.

4ly. There are grumbling, murmuring, and muttering tears: the which are shed
in discontent, that God should lay this or that evil upon them, or rob them of
their Izaak, Joseph, Absalom, joy, or delight of their heart, or pleasure of
their eyes, and of these the Sons and daughters of men, are more free than
the rest; but says the Prophet, Isay 45. 9. Woe to him that striveth with his
Maker: shall the clay say to him that fashioneth, it, what make thou? or
shall man say to God, what do thou? O peace, peace O murmuring soul, be
whist, be silent, and murmur not, as some of them murmured, lest thou be
destroyed of the destroyer, 1 Cor. 10. 10. peace, O murmuring soul, be dumb,
because it is the Lord has done it, Psalm. 39. 9. David had tears of all sorts.
1. He had grief tears for the loss of his darling Absalom. 2ly. He had
fellow-feeling tears in his misery, as knowing that so bad a life he lived,
could have no good end or death, and therefore he wishes that he had stood in
his place, Would God I had died for thee, Absalom, my son, my son. 3ly. He had
repenting tears, being assured that his own sin, so well as his sons,
hastened him to the grave. 4ly. He had whining, murmuring tears, as may be
gathered by his excessive impatience, and immoderate weeping. And the king was
moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate and wept: and as he went, thus
he said, O my son Absalom, etc. And so I pass to the next particular in the
first general point.

3ly. The effect of his passion: and as he went, thus he said; wherein let us
consider these two particulars,

1. Quod dixit, that he said. 2ly. Quid dixit, what he said.
1. The vessel of his body was so overcharged with grief, that if he had not
given it vent, his heart would have burst. But his own words best speak it, Ps.
39. 3. Mine heart was hot within me, and while I was missing, the fire kindled,
and I spoke with my tongue. David was an expert and skilful Musician, and here
he shows it. For, first he begins with still Music: And the king was moved.
Then he strikes a note higher: And he went up to the chamber over the gate, and
wept. 3ly. Then he played upon loud Music, and loud Cymbals: and as he went,
thus he said, O Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, and so I am fallen upon the
next particular.

2ly. What he said. A man would have thought that David had more cause to
bless God for his great deliverance from the hands of his enemy, than to
whine, and murmur, and weep, and hang down his head like a bull-rush: I, but
thinks David, if he were mine enemy, yet he was, filius meus, my child, my
son. But if he were thy son, yet he was cast into a wretched mould, like one of
those that the Apostle speaks of, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5. A Lover of himself,
proud, unthankful, disobedient to parent, without natural affection,
intemperate, fierce, no lover at all of them which are good, a traitor, heady,
high-minded, having a show of godliness, but denying the power thereof. I, But
says David, love covers a multitude of faults, for he was filius meus
dilectus in quo mihi complacui, my beloved son in whom I was well pleased. But
if he were thy son, and thy beloved son, yet why should thou cast such a
pearl to such a swine, and be more prodigal of thy love to him, than to
Solomon, Adonijah, and the rest of thy children, better deserving? I but says
David, he was filius iste meus, the prettiest man that ever eye beheld, there
was none in all Israel like him; and therefore I cannot but sigh, and sobb, and
echo forth this sad lamentation for him, O Absalom, my son, my son Absalom.
From whence we learn,

Obs. 1. That love is blind, according to that of the Poet, Quisquis amot
ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam.
Quisquis amat servam, servam putat esse Minervam.
Quisquis amat luscam, luscam putat esse venustam


David beheld his son with the eye of flesh, and blood, but was blind to look
into the deformities of his soul; his body was not so lovely as his soul was
filthy, and therefore it was a wonder how good David should so much forget
himself, (who was a man after Gods own heart, and knew what God affected most,
Prove. 23. 26.) to be transported with love to the outward man, not regarding
how leprous and diseased the inward man was. Surely David for the present was
not David, and as the Philosopher told his old Concubine, so he might have said
of himself, Ego non sum ego, the which I may interpret by that which is said of
the Prodigal in his ranting and ruffling fit and humor, he was not himself,
Luke 15. he was as blind as Bartimeus the Beggar: neither was this his case
alone, but Adams; for he and his wife Hevab rejoiced exceedingly in their
firstborn child; but as for their second, they called him Habel, which
signifies vanity, as if he were lightly esteemed of by them in competition to
Cain: but whom they accepted, God rejected, and whom they rejected, God
accepted; For God sees not as man sees; for man looks on the outward
appearance, but God looks on the heart, 1 Samuel 16. 7. And after the pattern
of God himself. Parents should love their children for their virtue and
godliness, more than for their painted outside. Samuel was a good man and a
Prophet, and he was enamoured with Eliabs feature and stature, and goodly
proportion of body, and said, surely the Lords anointed is before him, v. 6.
but how blind he was in judgment and affection, the Sequel shows. For a
father not to love his child, is unnatural; for a father to love his body more
than his soul, is unchristian-like; for a father to over-love him, is not to
love him, nor himself: for God commonly crosses him in his inordinate love.
David, render a reason why thou delightedst in Absalom more than in the rest;
were thou taken with his goodly head of hair? Alas, that is a sorry excrement.
Were thou captivated with his fair face? Alas, that the Pox or age quickly
defaceth. Were thou ravished with his straight body? Alas, every wrinch
decrepits it. Were thou overcome with the luster and splendour of his eyes, as
Christ was wounded with one of the eyes of his Spouse, Cant. 4. 9? Alas, they
are haughty, and will soon wax dim, and cease to look out at their Windows,
Eccles. 12. 3. Were thou delighted in his legs? Alas, as God, Psalm. 117. 10. So
should not thou take pleasure in the legs of a man. Speak David, speak, what
was the object of thy love? and if thou can give no better reasons than
these, surely, thy love to Absalom was blind. Beware, lest any of you (with the
Aramites) be smitten with this blindness.

Obs. 2. Carnal Passion breaks all bounds of reason, and true Religion. If God
question Jonah, chap. 4. 4. Do thou well to be angry? he will justify
himself, and stand it out, I do well to be angry to the death, v. 9. Jonah had
pity on a Gourd, and yet he quarrels with God for having pity on Niniveh, and
showing mercy to that City, Wherein were six score thousand persons, that could
not discern between the right hand and the left. Jonah, What was thy Gourd to a
great, stately, and eminent City? What was thy Gourd to the treasures in that
City? What was thy Gourd to much cattle in that City? What was thy Gourd to the
men, women and children in that City? truly but as a straw to the Gold in
Ophir. Here then passion makes thee to break the bounds of reason. ut to take
one step and measure more. What was thy Gourd to all the souls in that City?
and in having more compassion on that, than on them, thou breakest the bounds
of true Religion. Job was a good man, an upright and just man, and as a lilly
among thorns, and an apple tree among the trees of the Forest, Cant. 2. 2, 3.
yet being stricken upon the heart-vein, he quarrels with every thing stood in
his way, and was in his eye, he falls out with his mother that conceived him,
the midwife that helped to bring him into the world, the night, the light, the
day, chap. 3. yea with God himself. His distemper is so hot and virulent, and
violent upon him, that no cords, or banks or bounds can hold him. David that
did face a Lion, killed a Bear, conquer the huge Giant, and overcame all his
enemies, was overcome and drunken with passion for the loss of his Absalom.

Use. Hence we learn, what Babes, and Weaklings, and Striplings we are, if we
loose our hold from grace; for as by faith, so by grace we stand, 2 Corinthians
1: 24.

2ly, That it is not man's merit, but Gods free mercy saves him; For what is
man, that he should be mindful of him, or the Son of man, that he should
regard him? Psalm. 8. 4. there is nothing in him, (if well canvassed) but
repining and Rebellion against his Maker.

3ly, That if Jachin and Boaz, the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, and the
godly and faithful have such shrewd faults, and foils, and falls, then how
horribly and often do the wicked shoot their sharp arrows, even bitter words,
Psalm. 64. 3. against God for their crosses?

4ly, In all our afflictions, to follow God with our prayers to strengthen us
with strength in our souls, Psalm. 138. 3. that we may possess our souls in
patience, Luke 21. 19. speaking with Job 12. 0. What? shall we receive good
from the hand of the Lord, and not evil? Blessed be the name of the Lord.

Obs. 3. From David's wonderful love to his son, we gather that Gods love to
his children is unmatchable. As 'twas said of Christ, Acts 8. 33. Who can
declare his generation? so I may speak in this kind, Who can declare his love
to man? Let us take a survey of it afar of, as Moses did of Canaan, and we
shall but admire it, and with John, Rev. 17. 6. wonder with admiration.

1. If we look into his first frame; he was created after the image of God,
according to his likeness, Genesis 1. 27. and this was a most glorious condition,
like that which Saint Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 2. 9. which the tongue of man is
not able to express, nor the heart to conceive of.

2ly, He delivered into his hand the Sovereignty over all fish, and beasts, and
all flying fowls, and all things, Genesis 1. 28. He was sole Monarch, and
commander in chief of the whole world; there was none could hurt him, till he
hurt himself by sin; so that like Israel, Hos. 13. 9. Perditio sua de se, his
destruction was from himself.

3ly, After his fall, he raises him again with the promised Messiah, Genesis 3.
15. which was a sure token of his love, to send the son of his love to pay his
debt for him, by cancelling his Obligation, Col. 2. 14.

4ly, In Christ, to bind up his soul in the bundle of life: So that now thou
may speak, Why art thou so heavy O my soul, why art thou disquieted within
me? Psalm. 42. 5. Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
world, John 1 29.

5ly, That he takes notice of his name, as he did know Moses by his name, and
moreover write his name in the Book of Life, Phil. 4. 3.

6ly, If We look lower, his love is manifested to man's body; for it shall be
clothed with glory; For when Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall
we all appear with him in glory, Col. ^. 4.

7ly, If we look yet lower, his love is seen in the bones of man, that he
should keep them, Psalm. 34. 20.

8ly, If we look yet lower, upon (parts excrementitias) his excrementitial
parts, his love to man is highly discovered, as 1. In numbering of the hairs of
his head, Matthew. 10. 30. 2ly, In not suffering any of them toperish, Luke 21.
18. 3ly, In treasuring up our tears in a bottle, Psalm, 56. 8. and in registring
of them. 4ly, In wiping away all tears from all faces, Isa. 25. 8.

9ly, In preserving him in his going out and coming in, Psalm. 121. 8. and
compassing all his paths, and lying down, Psalm. 139. 3. and directing his
paths, Proverbs 3. 6.

1. When man goes out, he may never come in more; when he comes in, he may
never lie down, or go to bed more; when he goes to bed, he may never rise
more, as we have plentiful examples of each: Now what a good God have we, that
undertaketh to be our Nurse and Keeper, and preserver from all evil? Psalm. 121.
7.

2. Paul may plant, and Apollo water, and man may eat the bread of
carfulness, rising early, and going to bed late, Psalm. 127. 2. but unless God
directs him, and blesses him, he labors but in vain, and spends his
strength in vain, like Isa. 49. 4. and therefore let it be his wisdom when he
goes about any business, or enterpriseth any thing, to call upon God by
Prayer, to assist him, direct him, and prosper him, as Abraham's servant did,
Genesis 24. 12. and then without all doubt, he will make thee as successful as
him.

10ly, In giving entertainment to the sighs and sobs of a troubled spirit.
Israel could not groan, but God heard it, Exodus 2. 24. As the sin of the old
world; so the sighs of the afflicted ascend up to heaven, and come before God,
and are so graciously accepted, that he sets a mark on such as mourn for the
abominations of the times, Ezekiel. 19. 4. and their own miseries; so that we may
cry out with Paul, Romans 11. 33. oh the deepness of the riches of his goodness
to man. As for the Application, I will refer it to the next point.

Obs. 4. From the consideration of David's love to his rebellious and wicked son
Absalom, I observe, That much greater is Gods love to poor sinners. Hear God
himself pleading the case or cause between himself and Israel, The people were
bent to rebellion against him, Hos. 11. 7. that is, set on mischief, not caring
what they did, nor how they provoked him to anger. Now God at last is awakened,
like a Giant out of wine, with the cry of their sins; and seems to deliberate
the matter in these words, verse. 8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How
shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make thee, as Admah? How shall I set
thee, as Zeboim? mine heart is turned with in me, my repentings are rouled
together. I will not execute the fierceness of my wrath, I will not return to
destroy Ephraim, for I am God and not man; and again, Jer. 31. 20. Is Ephraim
my dear son, or pleasant child? yet since I spoke unto him, I still remembered
him; therefore, my bowels are troubled for him; If will surely have compassion
on him. If the words be well scanned, what love of any father can come near the
love of our heavenly Father? for how does his heart mourn? how do his mercies
overlook our iniquities? how are his bowels troubled? how are his
repentingsrouled together? how does he in the midst of wrath remember mercy?
how does he after all his menacings and threatenings recall our frailties, and
his own blessed, glorious, and ever renowned attribute (the merciful God) And
so spare us? heu quam bonus est deus, quam vilis homo? O How good is God to
Israel? and how unworthy, and unthankful, and disobedient is Israel to this
good God? and that we may the better blush and be ashamed of our selves and
sinful courses, let us look upon some branches of his Love, As,

1. When we were deadly sick, and nothing could recover us, but the blood of
his beloved and only begotten Son, then he spared not his own Son, but gave
him for us all to death, that we might live, Romans 8. 32.

2ly, The eminency of his Love shines the more clear, if we consider the
persons upon whom he cast and bestowed his Love, and that was upon grievous
sinners, as the Apostle shows, Romans 5. 6. for Christ, when we were yet of no
strength, died for the ungodly.

3ly, The unworthiness of the persons is aggravated by their loathsome
condition, being a capite ad calcem, from the crown of the head to the soal of
the foot, full of nothing but wounds and sores, and swellings full of putrified
corruption, Isa. 1. 6. Job in that condition was loathed by his own wife, and
friends; and for the King of Kings to be enamoured on such wretched Lazarusses,
Quantus amor? how great was his Love? The blind, and the halt, and the lame,
the soul of David hated; and who but God, would but have done the like? and
therefore the stronger tie, and bond to bind us to love him, Who has so loved
us, as it is, 1 John 4. 11.

4ly, If our condition had been loathsome by divine Providence, it had not been
much to be wondered at, that he should love deformed creatures of his own
making; but when it came by our making, and marring by sin, what he had made
beautiful, this speaks his goodness indeed.

5ly, Or for a good man one may die, Romans 5. 7. but for an open and professed,
enemy who but David would die? Yet when we were enemies, we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. We conspired, and crucified, and
killed the Lord of Life, Acts 3. 15. and the Lord of Life lays down his life,
to give us life; and is not this unheard of love?

6ly, His love is most apparent by the rich purchase and price he paid for us;
For we were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled, and without spot, 1 Pet.
1. 18. All the blood of Bulls and Goats in the world could not help us: but it
must be the blood of the Lamb of God must purify our consciences from dead
works, Heb. 9. 14. and when this Lamb must be slain to save us sinners, who can
deny his love to be very great?

The uses hereof are these,

Use 1. The bountifulness, and loving-kindeness of our heavenly Father toward
us, should lead us all unto repentance, Romans 2. 4. What could he have done for
his vineyard, that he has not done unto it? Isa. 5. 4. he has planted it with
the best plants; he has watered it, and dungde it, and pruned it, and has
bestowed much labor, and cost about it, and love upon it, as the Dresser did
upon the barren fig tree, Luke 13. 7, 8. He feeds us, he clothes us, and in a
word, blesses us with the blessings of his right hand, and of his left, Prove.
3. 16. And now O man, what does the Lord thy God require of thee? Surely
nothing, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, and to
turn from thy evil ways, and to walk with thy God, Mic. 6. 8. So that as the
servants of Naaman spoke unto him, 2 King^ 5. 13. If the Prophet had commanded
thee some great matter, would thou not have done it? how much rather then,
when he says to thee, wash and be clean? I speak unto you, if God had required
of you, your lands, treasures, wives, husbands, yea, your Absaloms, ye must
have parted with them: but he soars not so high, but contents himself with
little, and that little is, to be grieved with our selves, for grieving him; to
return unto the Lord, that he may return unto us, Zach. 1. 3. and to repent us
of all our wickedness. He that will grudge God this, deserves not to be owned
for his child. It was the saying of the man of God to the good Shunamite, 2
King. 4. 13. Behold, thou have had all this care for us, what shall we do now
for thee? and of David, Psalm. 116. 12. Quid retribuam domino? What shall I
render unto the Lord, for all his benefits? even so, let it be our meditation,
what we shall do for God, that has done such great things for us? For where
much is given, much is looked for, says Christ, Luke 12. 48. Let us then with
the Samaritan leper, chap. 17. 15. return and praise God, and that not only in
tongue or word, but in our deeds, and lives, and conversations. Mark the
Apostles argument, 1 Cor. 6. 20. year bought with a price, there is our
Heavenly Fathers love. Now the sequel tells us what lies on our part to
perform; Glorify God therefore in your bodies, and in your spirits A son
honoreth his father, and a servant his master: If he be then our Father, let us
honor him: If our master, let us fear him, Mal. 1. 6.

Use 2. Here is comfort, and Balm of Gilead to heal all that are wounded with
their sins; for if David could forget, and forgive (as we use to say) all the
unkindeness, and wrongs done to him by his unnatural son Absalom, and wish to
die for him, who had as willingly die, as see him live; then out of all
question, God has more yerning, melting, and tender bowels toward them that
lie grovling on the earth for their failings. Can David soal a pardon to his
son that stands up in defiance of him, abuses his wives and concubines,
rebels, and takes arms to pull him out of his Throne by head and ears? and will
not our heavenly Father receive us to mercy, when we shall submit, lament and
bewail our errors and transgressions? weep and howl, and beg, and crave
forgiveness? shall David look a squint, and a to side upon the faults of his
child, and only eye him as the fruit of his loins? and will not God cast all
our sins into the bottom of the Sea, Mic. 7. 19. and not look upon us in our
selves, but in his Christ, in whom he is well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. and with us
in him? Wherefore let us comfort one another in these words. 1 These. 4. 18.

Use 3. Is for instruction.

1. Are we so dear, so tender to our heavenly Father, as the very apple of his
eye? Zech 2. 8. Does he take all the wrongs, and appropriate all the injuries
done to his sons, as done to himself? Acts 9. 4. and shall we not bestir us,
when his name is blasphemed? his son reviled? and his word is had in derision,
or trodden under foot? I read of the dumb Son of Cresus, seeing one ready to
stab his Father, cries out, What villain, stab my Father? What wilt thon
murder my Father? Even so, although we be silent at our own harms, yet we
should be grieved and mourn, and breath out indignation against those that
highly dishonor, and trample the blood of his dear son under foot, Heb. 10. 2.
If we be not bastards, but the true, Legitimate Sons of God, nothing should
affect us so much as when his glory suffers: like Moses, and Phinehas, who will
spare neither head nor tail in the Lords quarrel.

2ly. This may teach all parents, after the pattern of David, to be like
minded, and tenderhearted toward their Children. But many of you may seem to
give me a stop, and a Ne plus ultra, to treat of this, every one thinking his
own bird fairest, and cherishing of it: but then do you not over-love them? for
that is as bad a sin as not to love them: and see how David was whipped for
that. And moreover let me tell you, that I have known some Fathers as salvage,
as cruel, as unkind, as unnatural to their Chickens of their own hatching, and
more too, than the Dragons, and fierce Tigers, to their seed. Suppose they have
offended, so did Absalom. Suppose they are riotous, so was the Prodigal, Luke
15. Suppose they are unkind, so art thou to thy Father in Heaven. And if thou will not forgive them there trespasses, neither will thy Heavenly Father
forgive thee thy trespasses, Mat. 6. 15.

Use 4. Is for reproof unto those that wax wanton under mercies: because God is
good, they will be bad; because he is merciful, like the Kings of Israel,
therefore they will be vicious; because he is flow to anger, therefore they
will provoke him every day. And this was Jesuruns case, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. He that
should have been upright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel: thou art
fat, thou art gross, thou art laden with fatness: therefore he forsook God
that made him, and regarded not the strong rock of his salvation. And this is
too many of our cases: but as Moses to the people, verse. 6. Do ye thus requite
the Lord? surely, instead of favor, ye shall have frowns, and blastings, and
sickness, and want, and curses upon curses, as ye may read at large, 28. 15,
etc. The father was sick of this disease, but by Gods mercy recovered, 2 Samuel
12. 7, 8. the Son falls into it, and dies without mercy, and for him David
weeps, saying O Absalom, my son, my son Absalom. And so much of this point,
David's Passion.

II. The next General to be spoken of, is David's compassion, Would God I had
died for thee, Oh Absalom; my son, my son, wherein let us consider the
tenderness of his love to his son, and that discovers it self by three eminent
signals.

1. By preferring his safety and life before his own.

1. His care for his safety is discovered,

1. By the Charge he gave the Captains in chief, and the Soldiers under their
command, to entreat the young man gently for his sake, verse 5. When Absalom
was plotting and devising mischief in his bed, and out of it, to bring his
father to ruin, then he good old man is taking care for his welfare. He was of
Themistocles mind, who had rather forget and forgive an injury, than remember
and requite it. Now as Christ said, Go ye, and do likewise. To render evil for
evil, is Bestial; to render good for good is carnal; to render evil for good is
Satanical, and Absalom-like; but to render good for evil, is Spiritual, and
David-like,

2ly, By his listening and inquiring after his sons welfare. Is the young man
Absalom safe? verse 29. He deals not with the messenger concerning the event of
the battle, or the condition of his friends that hazarded their lives to save
his, or his standing or falling from the Crown: but the first question is about
his Absalom, his tongue betraying his heart, that as Joab tells him, chap. 19.
6. that he was dearer to him than all the rest.

3ly, By his immoderate weeping and inundation of tears he shed for his son;
Lachrymae non habent modum, weeping keeps no mean, where tears make the music.
Water is good to wash, and bath, and cleanse, but not to drown our selves in
it: seven so, tears are good to cleanse away our inward filth of sin, but not
plunge or drown our selves in them by despair, or excessive mourning; all the
time the Army was out Absalom lay close to his heart.

2ly, He not only cared for his safety, but preferred it before his own, Would
God I had died for thee; that is, O that I had stood in Absaloms place to have
born the brunt of the battle, and that the same darts thrust him through, had
entered into my body, and fallen upon my self.

2ly, Another eminent signal of the tenderness of his love to his son is taken
from the person for whom he would have died, expressed with an Emphasis, thee,
thee Absalom. For a man to die for a wicked man, a table-enemie, a bosom
traitor, a son traitor, who but David would do it?

3ly, The greatness of his compassion, and tenderness of his affection to his
son is discovered by the ingemination, and trebling and quatrebling, over the
words, as if he were not in joco, in sport, but serio in good earnest, and if
God had so pleased, he would have made his word good. O Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom, would God I had died for thee, Absalom my son, my son. And thus Christ
wept over Jerusalem, and to show the bitterness of his grief he suffered for
the destruction of that City, he doubleth his words, and vents them with a
passionate O, Luke 13. 34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered you together, as a hen does her brood under her wings, and ye would
not? This repetition of words in holy Scripture, implies, 1. Either truth, as
Verrily, Verily; or 2ly Passion, as My father, my Father. 2 Kings 13. 14. or
3ly, Compassiion, as my son Absalom, my son Absalom, would God I had died for
thee. David's love was either natural, and so he says, my son, or carnal, and
so he calls him his Absalem, or spiritual, and so he wishes that he had died
for him. He was so well acquainted with the will of God, by his revealed Word,
that he knew so bad a life could not have a good end, and that it would be a
hard matter for his soul to go to heaven, that had all his time served the
Devil on earth, and therefore of the two, he thought his own case best, and
that he was most fit to die, and so, if God had so pleased, chose to die. I
would God I had died for thee. From whence we learn.

Obs. That death which to the ungodly is the King of terrors, Job 18. 14. to
the righteous is a welcome guest at all times. Absalom may be afraid to die,
because the wages of his wickedness are always ready to be paid him, which is
eternal death of body and soul for ever, Romans 6. 23. When good David shall
willingly resign up his soul into the hands of his Creator: for he knows his
end will be peace, Psalm. 37. 37. Oecolampadius being ready to depart, as old
Simeons Phrase is, comforted his friends that stood howling about him, with
these words; Non mori timeo, quia bonum habeo Dominum, I am not afraid to die,
because I have served a good God. He that fears God shall never need to fear
death; for Christ has pulled out the sting thereof, that he may tryumphantly
singwith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. O death where is thy sting, O
grave where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin: but thanks be unto God,
which has given me victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Reasons why death is welcome to the godly at all times, are,

Reas. 1. Because it is an end of their sorrows, and the beginning and entrance
into the joy of their Lord, Matthew. 25. 23. It is the Exodus of their miseries,
and Genesis of their comforts: It is as a Bridge over which they must pass
into life (as the Israelites must go through the red Sea) before they can get
into Canaan, a Land flowing with milk and honey, and all good things; wherefore
they rejoice to see that day (as old Simeon did) when he embraced Christ in his
arms, Luke 2. ^8.

Reas. 2. Because they are a people ready prepared for the Lord, Luke 1. 17.
they are not foolhardy like others, who put far away from them the evil days,
that they may boldly approach unto the seat of iniquity, Amos 6. 3. but they
are still thinking of death, and looking for death, and providing for death,
that whenever it comes, early or late, at the Cock crowing, at midnight, or
the dawning of the day, they may enter into the rest remains for the people of
God, Heb. 4. 9.

Reas. 3 Because they have Jachin and Boaz, faith, and a good conscience, to
support them from sinking under the pains of death. And this made the thief on
the Cross to die joyfully, believing Christ's words, that he should that day be
with him in Paradise, Luke 23. 43. this made St. Steven to laugh in death,
beholding the heavens opened, and Christ standing at the right hand of the
Father, ready to receive his spirit, Acts 7. 55, 56. and this made David so
willing to die for Absalom, because he believed that his sins were covered,
Psalm. 32. 1.

Obj. Did David well to wish for death? or to die for his son?

Answ. 1. Mortem optare malum, formidare pejus. It is not good to wish for
death, but worse to fear it: It is an argument of great weakness to dispute
with God, much more to quarrel with God, and most of all to seem to be wiser
than God. We pray, and David prayed, Thy will O Father be done; and yet here he
seems to prefer his own will before Gods. Would God I had died for thee
Absalom. So that as the Apostle speaks, James 3. 10. This thing ought not to be.

2ly David did savor much more in this wish of flesh and blood, than of
spirit; for that altogether submits with patience to suffer, and bear what the
good pleasure of the Lord is to bring to pass: when the other grumbles, and
murmurs, and repines at every thing contraries their humors. This was David's
case, and was his failing, as the best want not theirs.

Use, Speaks the true happy state of a godly man. He will not be afraid of evil
tidings: for his heart is fixed, and he believes in the Lord, Psalm. 112. 7.
when the wicked, trepidant ad arundinis umbram, tremble at the shaking of a
leaf, and flee when none pursues; then the righteous are as bold as a Lion,
Prove. 28. 1. The very thought of death strikes the ungodly as dead, when they
that fear the Lord (like the Swan) sing the sweetest song in death, and the
song of the Saints, Rev. 22. 20. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. The wicked when
they are visited with sickness, which is deaths Paratour to summon them into
the Court for to give up their great account, like the unjust Steward, Luke 16.
2. they roar, and howl, and cry, like the hog, which thinks he is never taken
but to have his throat cut: when the upright and just look up, and lift up
their heads with joy, and comfort, for their redemption draws near, Luke 21.
28. When the wicked call to the mountains to fall upon them, and to the hills
to cover them, and hide them from the presence of him that sits on the
Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6. 16. The righteous shout for
joy, like those that divide the spoil, and rejoice according to joy in harvest,
Isa. 9. 3. for they shall be gathered like wheat into the Lords Garner, when
the chaff shall be burned with unquenchable fire, Mat. 3. 12. And as Balaam
said, Numb. 23. 10. O that my latter end might be like his. And so thus much of
the first person, spoken of in the text, David: with his passion, and
compassion.

2ly. The next person is Absalom. And in him let us consider,

1. His Name. 2ly. His Person. 3ly. His Life. 4ly. His Death.
Of these in order.

1. His Name, and that was Abishalom, which signifies, his fathers peace. He
was so sweet a Babe, that his father promised himself great matters, and hope
in him: but he proved the greatest cross that ever he did bear. So that we
cannot say, Vt nomen sic natura, (as Abigail did of Nabal,) As his name was, so
was he: For he was a moth, a canker, a thorn in his fathers eye, and the
greatest disturber of his quiet, and rest, and ease, and peace, that ever he
was acquainted with; that he is constrained to flee, and shift for his life,
lest he be devoured by his Sons sword, 2 Samuel 13. 14.

2ly. His person. And so he was the fairest of ten thousand: for from the sole
of the foot, to the top of his head, there was no blemish in him, 2 Samuel 14.
25. He had a fair body, but a foul soul and heart: like the Swan, which has a
white feather, but a black skin. Or like Mausolus his tomb, or the painted
Sepulchers in the Gospel, glorious and beautiful without, but full of
rottenness and stinking bones within; Or like a white glove, over a scabby
hand; Or like the Pharisees in sheeps clothing, but inwardly were greedy
wolves. His garment was made of Linsey-woolsey, which was forbidden in the old
Law, Deuteronomy. 22. 11. by woollen is signified, simplicity: by linen, subtilty:
and under this weed he had almost couzened his father of his life, and
Kingdom, as Jacob did Esau of the blessing. From whence we learn.

Obs. All is not gold that glisters, as all are not Israel, which are of
Israel, Romans 9. 10. All is not current coin, that has the Parliament stamp;
nor all good men, that look demurely, and speak fairly and religiously, able to
deceive (if it were possible) the very elect, as Christ speaks, Mark. 13. 22.
and therefore our Saviors counsel is, John 7. 24. Not to judge according to
the outward appearance. What a Saint was Absalom in show? yet what a devil in
practice? and this age is full of these Absaloms.

3ly, His Life; and thus his fair face was daubed, and soiled with many a black
spot; His whole life was tainted with innumerable blemishes, one drawing on
another. As to instance in some.

1. He was a murderer; and this aggravates it self by these circumstances.

1. A murderer of his brother Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 29. who the nearer he was, the
dearer he ought to have been: For no man hates his own flesh, but nourishes,
and cherishes it, Ephesians. 5. 29. We say, that it is an ill bird defiles his own
nest: but we may conclude, that is the worst bird in the nest that picketh out
his brothers eyes, and sucks his blood.

2ly. In that he masked his foul intention, with the veil of love and
kindeness. Absalom had a sheep-shearing, verse. 24. and a great feast toward,
and he could not, would not eat his meat alone, and therefore he invites all
his brethren to the banquet: but as the children spoke to their mother, 2 Kings
4. 40 there was (Mors in olla) death in the pot, and Amnon must pay the
reckoning with his life.

3ly. That he murdered him when his heart was merry with wine: not only
laboring to kill his body, but his soul too; and how does this cursed act hang
like a leprosy upon the skirts of his garments, to make him odious to all ages?

2ly. He was ambitious.

1. Of popular applause, 2 Samuel 15. 4. O that I were made judge in the land,
that every man that has any controversy, might come to me, that I might do
him justice. O brave Mountebank, that sets forth golden wares, and promises
mountains, but hides the poison, (as the Fisherman does his deadly hook under
a fair bait) which he intended to give them when he had accomplished his design.

2ly. He not only gives the people (bona verba) good words to delude them, but
courteous deeds, verse. 5. And when any came near him, and did him obeisance, he
puts forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him. And by this means he stole
the hearts of the men of Israel, verse. 6. and so makes way,

2ly, By his ambition to reach the Crown, v. 10. he acts the Devils part, to
beguile, to seduce, and to drive on his self ends, for he transporteth himself
into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. and this must needs help to make up the
measure of his wickedness, and so bring upon himself a corresponding
punishment. His sin is the greater, because by his example he has taught
others to look up to heaven, to smite upon their breasts, to pray long prayers,
to preach, to use Scripture-Sentences, when they are acting the most devilish
mischief, or aspiring to the Throne.

3ly, He was a grand hypocrite, and Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas,
counterfeit godliness, is double wickedness. The beast tells his Father a
fair Tale, v. 8. Thy servant vowed a vow, when I remained exile in Geshur, in
Aram, saying, If the Lord shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, I will
serve the Lord. Oh brave, what? a religious wretch and Caitiffe? What? to make
godliness a Cloak for his Villainy. What? to make Piety serve for a shooing
horn to draw on his interest to the Kingdom. What? to make the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ to be evil spoken of through him and his juggling. Surely, It
were better a mi^stone were banged about his neck, and he were cast into the
bottom of the sea, Matthew. 18. 6. but from hence we learn,

Obs. In nomine Domini, incipit omne malum.

Religion is made a stalking horse to palliate all evil. If Ahab cannot get
Naboths vineyard by fair play, he will have it by foul, he will proclaim a
Fast, 1 Kings 21. 9. and two sons of Belial shall be hired to bear false
witness against him, and he shall be stoned, and then he will be merry, and
take possession, v 16. If Absalom can no other way supplant his Father, he
insooth has a Vow to pay unto the Lord in Hebron, and there he will take
advantage of the place to mutiny and rebel, and raise Forces to drive his
Father out of house and home, 2 Samuel 15. 16. And this ever was, is, and will be
the practice of ambitious spirits, to strain their consciences, and to make use
of Religion to stirrup them into the Saddle; but my prayer for them shall be,
that their end may be like Absaloms, and as Cushi said in the context, So let
all the enemies of the Lord my King perish.

4ly, He was a traitor,

1. To his brother, in taking away his life: but here he seemed to be a petty
traitor, because he fell alone.

2ly, To the people of Israel; for he decoyed Israel into a net, get they out
as well as they could, Fall back, fall edge. So it is said, 2 Samuel 15. 11. And
with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, and followed him in their
simplicity, knowing nothing: like many of our Zelots, who were at first blindly
led, but when they had well smarted for their folly, cried (peccavimus) with the
Prodigal, they were misinformed, and gulled, and cheated of their expectation
by the Grandees, who sought themselves, and not the Lord Jesus Christ, and as
the Apostle speaks in one kind, so it may be said on the contrary, They sought
yours, not you, 2 Cor. 12. 14. Ours, not us.

3ly, He was a traitor in Folio to his own Father, seeking vi and armis to
depose him, I, and to quench his thirst with his blood. But hold Absalom, for
he is thy father. Hold Absalom, he is thy fond and most indulgent Father. Hold
Absalem, he is thy old Father, full of gray hairs, the which are blossoms of
the grave. Hold Absalom, and give a check-mate to thy ambition for a while, and
then ride on, and do thy will. Look upon thy brethren and sisters, his Wives
and Concubines, thy companions with him. Look upon the Virgins in Jerusalem,
the Priests of God, the hazard of War, the sad effects of the sword, as Rapine,
Famine, Blood, Desolation, etc. and if thou have not sold thy self to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, like Ahab, or art not given over to a
reprobate sense, Romans 1. 28. then these things cannot but melt thee, relent
thee, and dam up thy way from prosecuting thy devilish purposes any farther. I,
but thinks Absalom, that is not the way to the Kingdom and Scepter, and to
reign, and therefore be it never so foul, I will through it, and as Caesar said,
Vel inveniam, vel faciam, I will hack and hew it out with my sword: and so
having gathered together all the men of Israel, from Dan to Beersheba, and made
him self strong for the battle, he prepares to divide the spoil. Oh unparalleld
traitor; for

1. He sought the death of the Lords anointed: and that it is aggravated in
these Circumstances.

1. His anointed child: And right dear and precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116. 15.

2ly, His Prophet, who was as the apple of Gods eye, very tender to him, Zech.
2. 8. and concerning whom he has given so strict a chatge, Psalm. 105. 15 Touch
not mine anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm.

3ly, That he was anointed his King, a King of Gods own pointing out, 1 Samuel
16. 12. a King after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13. 14, A typical King of Christ; a
King-father, and a father to his people, so well as to his own children; a
nursing father, Isa. 49. 23. And for Absalom to rob God and men of such a King,
who would not, should not fight it out to the death, like Zebulun and Nephtali,
Judge. 5. 18. to save him, but Absalom and some of his Faction who love to fish
in troubled waters? but hence we learn,

Obs. That one sin, (if not in time stifled) makes way for a bigger, as a
little wedge does for a greater. Read backward, and ye shall find that his sin
grew like a snowball, to a very great pitch and height, and so I may compare it
to Elijahs cloud, 1 Kin. 18. 44. the which at first seemed no bigger than a
man's hand, but by and by it overspread the heaven, or like to Ezekiels waters,
chap. 47. 3, 4, 5. which came to the ancles, then up to the knees, then to the
loins, and afterward waxed so deep, that they could not be passed ove^; or like
to that fountain which became a river, Ezekiel. 10. 6. and as our Proverb is, Give
the Devil an inch, and he will take an ell. We read Matthew. 12. 43, 44, 45. of
an unclean spirit in a man, Which goes forth and takes seven other spirits
worse than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: Even so, if we give way
to one unclean spirit, one sin, yea, and as Lot said of Zoar, a little sin, we
make way for all sin, that we may say, as Jacob did of Gad, A Troop comes. As
the Sea making the least breach, be it through a molehole, presently grows
bigger and bigger upon it, and pours in an inundation to the destruction of man
and beast; and as the Story goes of Hatchet, which begging a withered bough of
an Ash to make it a helve, instantly falls to work, and cuts down the tall
Cedar, and strong Oak, and green Elm, and Ash which stood before secure; and as
Pompey marching with his Soldiers to take a great and rich City, and finding
the gates shut, and the opposition strong, he craves leave of the Citizens to
give entertainment to some few of his wounded and sickly men, and he would
pass away without their least disturbance, the which having obtained, they in
the night opened the gates to the General, and the stronger men, to the sacking
and utter undoing of a famous City. Even so, if the Devil can but beg a helve
for a hatchet, or make a breach in man's heart to get in his little finger, he
will strain hard to make room for his head, and if he can get in his head, he
will draw in his whole body, or if he can procure the favor from us to give
entertainment to some weakling and puling sins, then he cries out with Moah,
now Moah to the spoil, now Devil to thy prey; and therefore,

Use Is for our instruction, to kill the Crocodile in the egg, lest it grow to
be a serpent, and so kill us; to quench the fire whilst it is but a spark, lest
it get head, and so consume us. Obsta Principiis, withstand the beginnings of
sin, lest they grow to be so mountainous, that they crush thee down to hell.
Venienti occur morbo, faith the Physician, Prevent the disease by taking
Physic in time, lest it run on and destroy thee before thy time. If Absalom
had observed this rule, he had never fallen, so shamefully, so suddenly (like a
child new born) so wonderfully like Jerusalem, Lam. 1. 9.

2ly, Absaloms Treason is aggravated, in that he sought the death of his
father, his father that begat him, and his father that so well loved him: He
was troubled with a new disease at that time; for he was sick of his father,
and nothing could cure him, but his removal out of his eye, that he might sit
at Helm, an steer the ship; from whence we learn,

Obs. That when Kings, Princes, Governors and Magistrates shall suffer sin to
go unpunished in others, God will make them so spared, instruments to punish
them. David permitting Absalom to run on in sin, out of one sin into another,
not executing the Law or justice upon him, God makes him, (as the Canaanite to
the Israelite) Number. 33. 55. A prick in his eye, and a thorn in his side. We
have a Proverb, Save a Thief from the Gallows, and he will hang thee at last,
if he can. Amnons Murder deserved severe punishment by the Law of God: but
David out of foolish pity omitting it, and winking at it, God sets him home to
him at last, and raises up the son of his bowels and love too, to hunt after
his life. Absalom may grieve God, and yet that does not much grieve David:
wherefore God takes his own quarrel in hand, and causes him to be the greatest
grief that ever he encountered withal; and so hear him roaring and howling
forth this sad lamentation and Dittie for him, O Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom, would God I had died for thee, O Absalom my son, my son. And so I
pass to the last point,

4ly, Which is Absaloms death. The two Generals, Absalom and Joab joined Battle
to dispute the Controversy about the Crown, and at last Absalom being worsted
flies, and flying the Mule came under a great thick Oak, And his head caught
hold on the Oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and the earth, and Joab
took three darts, and thrust them through Absalom, and so he died, verse 9. 14.
Died between heaven and earth, as unworthy by reason of his debauchednesse, to
go to the one, or to have a burial place in the other: the which is a most
terrible and fearful example of Gods vengeance,

1. Against Rebels to their King.

2ly, Against those that are disobedient to Parents; and yet as bad as he was,
David the King wept for him, saying, O Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would
God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son.

Athaliah's detestable Treason.
SERMON III.
2 Kings 11. 14. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and cried, Treason, treason.
VErbum diei in die suo, was the Apostles charge to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 2. and
therefore it shall be my practice: for says Solomon, Prove. 25. 11. A word
spoken in season, is like apples of gold with pictures of silver. How well then
does this Text match the occasion of this our meeting together at this time?
which is to give thanks unto God for the discovery of Sundercombs desperate
Treason, against Oliver Lord Protector. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and
cried, Treason, treason.

Herein let us consider these two general branches.

1. Athaliahs action; Then Athaliah rent her clothes.

2ly. Athaliahs passiion; And cried, Treason, treason.

In the first let us consider these two particulars,

1. The subject of her action, her clothes: she rent her clothes. Ah Athaliah,
this was a more suitable occasion for thee to follow, the Prophets instruction,
Joel 2. 13. in rending thy heart, and not thy garments: But she that had no
heart to spare infants, like Herod, had no heart to repent, and so runs on
still in revenge. And if she can make man the subject of her wrath no longer,
her clothes shall feel it, and speak her mind. She rent her clothes.

2ly. The time of her rageing, and mad, wild action, employed in the first
word, then. Then she rent her clothes. Then, when she saw another sun risen up
in Judah to eclipse her pride, her glory, and her hautiness: Then, when she
found she could no longer stand, or keep the saddle, or wear the Crown, She
rent her clothes.

In the second consider with me these two particulars likewise.

1. The manner how she vents her passion: She cried. Her dead and seared
conscience now revives, and whispers in her ears that she had committed crying
sins, and so considering how near her door the punishment of them was come, as
a woman amazed, frighted, and startled at it, she cried out for help, when she
was past cure; she cried.

2ly The cause of her passion, and of her heavy exclamation, in these words,
Treason, Treason. She had committed Treason against heaven, and the King of
heaven, and that never troubled her, which is the greatest Treason of all. She
had committed Treason in murdering the Kings Seed, and that lies not nigh her
heart: but when she sees her full sea ebbing, her sun setting, her bright day
drawn to an end, and shutting in, her hour-glasse run out, and her doom of
death passed upon her, Then she rent her clothes and cried, Treason, Treason.

Herein let us for the better discovery and opening the Text consider these
four particulars.

1. What Athaliah signifies. 2ly, Who Athaliah was, 3ly, What her Treason was;
and that which she complained of. 4ly, What her end was; and of these in order.
1. Athaliah signifies, time for the Lord. When the ungodly destroy Gods Law,
and bring it into utter contempt, then says David in this sense, Psalm. 119.
126. It is time for thee Lord to work, that is, to send help, either by
converting or confounding the enemies thereof: as God converted Saul, but
confounded Herod. When the wickedness of the Amorites is full, Genesis 15. 16.
and the corn ripe for the harvest, then it is time for the Lord to thrust in
his sickle. When Ahaliahs feathers of pride are full grown, then it is time for
the Lord to deplume her, and send her as naked out of the world, as ever she
came into it. When she was joined to Idols, it was time for the Lord to make
her know, that an Idol was as vain a thing, as a horse, to save her from
tumbling, and ruin, and destruction. Psalm. 33 17. And this time is come, and
is made good to a tittle upon her, all crying out with one voice, as they did
against Paul, Acts 22. 22. Away with such a woman from the earl: for it is not
meet that she should live.

2ly. Who Athaliah was from the beginning. And so she was descended from high
Parentage: for she was daughter unto Omri King of Israel, 2 Kings 8. 22. and
mother to Ahaziah King of Judah, and wife to J^horam his father. As she came
from a high Stock, so she soared high: and nothing could satisfy her ambition,
but the Scepter and sway of the Kingdom, and the Crown: and have it she will,
per fas, per nefas, be it right, be it wrong, rather than she will miss of so
goodly a bait. From whence we may learn,

Obs. That ambitious Spirits will climb over the head of all wickedness, and
make it their footstool to raise them to honor. When Eteocles and Polynices
his brother were contending for their Fathers kingdom with naked swords in
their hands, ready to sheath in each others bowels, then Jocasta their Mother
stepped in between them, mediating for peace and accommodation upon her bended
knees, using these or the like words: What my sons, the sons of my womb, the
sons of my desires, as Bath-sheba the Mother of Solomon said to him, Prove. 31.
1. rather than let my eyes be spectators of your selves weltring in your blood,
in me convertite ferrum, put up your weapons into the womb that did conceive
and bear you. But says Eteocles to her, Pro regno velim patriam, penates,
conjugem flammis dare: Imperia precio quolibet constant been, To gain a
kingdom, I would set Country, Houshold-gods, wife, and all on fire, like Troy;
for Kingdoms and Crowns cannot be purchased at too dear a rate. Absalom to step
into his Fathers throne, quid non audet? what will he not? what dares he not to
do? And it was the speech of one in later times, who having by perjury,
dissimulation, and treachery, mounted himself aloft; That if he fell, all the
Commonwealth should fall with him: far preferring his private interest before
the public. And Athaliah was cast into the same mould; for neither the frown
of God, the curse of the people, the tears of Innocents, could give a
supersedeas to her wicked design she had in hand: but a kingdom she will have,
although she buys it with the loss of her soul.

Obs. 2. As it was said of Corax and Lysias, mali ^orvi, malum ovum, a cursed
Crow has hatched a shrewd egg; a crafty Master has b^ed as crafty a scholar:
Even so as Isay speaks, 24. 2. Like father, like daughter: a wicked father, 1
King. 16. 25, 26. and as vile a child. Of all the Kings of Israel there was not
one good: and of all their children there was not one thoroughly righteous. Its
true there was found some goodness in Abijah toward the Lord God of Israel in
the house of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14. 13. but it was but some, and that God takes
notice of, and that goes not unrewarded: but of all the residue, we hear no
such news, so unhappy a thing it is to be the child of a bad father, for says
David Psalm. 18. 26. With the froward he shall learn frowardness, and with the
ungodly, ungodliness; and so I pass to the next particular.

3ly, What Athaliahs Treason was, with that she complained of. Athaliahs
Treason was Monstrum, horrendum, ingens, so heinous, so detestable, so
abominable, that heaven could not but mourn over it, the earth tremble at it,
and the mountains and hard rocks be moved for it. God could not but loathe and
abhor the author of it, Man could not but be startled at her inhumane barbaism,
and the Devils themselves not own it; for when she saw that her son was dead,
she arose, and destroyed all the Kings seed, verse 1. that is, all those that
were of the house of Judah (but one called Joash) whom Jehosheba stole away,
and nursed up privately, verse 2. Alas, What harm had these harmless Lambs
done? What misbehaviour did she see in their unspotted lives, that death must
presently remove them out of her sight? It was Hecuba's speech, Thesei oultus,
amo illos priores, quos tulit quondam juvenis, that she was in love with the
youthful fresh face of Theseus, which seemed lovely as the morning, and whose
cheeks were comely, Cant. 1. 18 and why should not these Athaliah, give a check
mate to the violent torrent of thy swelling, envenomed rage against them?
Athaliah, look upon the Royal blood streams in their veins. Athaliah, look upon
their innocence. Athaliah, look upon their sweet and amiable countenances, and
if Nihil horum ^ra vul^usque movebunt, none of these can move thee to pity
them, to spare them, to have compassion on them, then let the tender bowelness
of a mother melt thee; for how will Rachel moutn for her children when they are
not? Matthew. 2. 18. Thou were once a mother thy self, and let thy own tongue
speak, What pangs and throbs (like a second labor) thou enduredst in thy
heart, when thou lost thy son, and therefore let the remembrance thereof move
thee to have a fellow-feeling of other women's miseries; or if that be too weak
to refell, repel, and null thy ambitious, high towering thoughts, then call to
mind the consanguinity and affinity they had with the son of thy love, to
quench thy burning thirst after their blood; or if that be too weak an Argument
to convince thee, then let the remembrance of thy own shame, and the grumbling
and muttering of a discontented people fright thee from doing such a cursed
act. Athaliah, remember that for blood, and such grand wickedness, the Land
mourns, Jer. 12. 4. Athaliah, remember that a house cannot be established by
iniquity, Prove. 14. 11. Athaliah, remember what a terrible woe is denounced
against those that build a Town with blood, and erect a City by iniquity, Hab.
2. 12. Athaliah, remember the Saints cry day and night unto the Lord, to judge
and avenge their blood, Rev. 6. 10. and then if thou be not more savage than
the Bear robbed of her whelps, and given over to a Reprobate sense to work
evil, and all manner of evil in the sight of the Lord, like thy Progenitors,
thou will stifle this design in the birth. I but thinks Athaliah, How shall I
wear the Crown, and sway the Reaml then? An. Imprison them, and that is cruelty
enough toward the heirs apparent of a whole Kingdom. I but thinks Athaliah,
they may break prison, and pull the Crown off again from my head. An. Then
banish them, proclaim them Traitors if they disturb thy peace, and cause the
Pamphleters to libel them, disgrace them, and bring them into an odium with
their Subject^. I but thinks Athaliah, they will be always undermining my new,
upstart honor and foundation, and hatching one evil or other against me, and
therefore my surest course will be to take offth eir heads; and here she sets
up her staff, fall back, fall edge, this she resolves to do, be it pleasing or
displeasing to God or man. She intends to make sure work where she goes, so
well as she can: and so cuts off all that might lay claim to her usurped
interest. And now she conjectures, the Crown is nailed fast to her head: She
thinks that her house is builded upon a rock that will not deceive her: She
supposed like Babylon, Isa. 47. 7. That she shall be a Queen for ever, and so
she ruffles it, and vaunts it, like Nebuchadnezzar over his Babel, Dan. 4 27.
and glorifies her self six years together, not fearing or feeling any storm to
disquiet her: She sings a Lullaby to her soul, with the rich man, Luke 12. 19.
Soul take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry: she cries peace, peace, when
there was no peace, Jer. 6. 14. for when she least dreamed of it, then her
wickedness lay at her door, like a fierce Mastiff, to rend her into pieces,
and rob her, and spoil her of all her glory; and the Lord brings a Vine as it
were out of Egypt, and raises up an Infant out of the dust to dethrone her, by
name, Joash, by birth of the line of Judah, as he had promised David, That he
should not want a man to sit upon his Throne after him, Jer. 33. 17. And all
this he brings to pass by weak means, (as when men are lowest, then he is
strongest) and loves to be Jehovah-Jereh, seen in the Mount; even by Jehoiada
chief Priest, who anoints him, proclaims him King, and the people with
acclamations of joy, shout, lift up their voices like trumpets, and cry out,
Vive le Roy, Let the King live for ever, verse 12. God save the King, God save
the King, Wherefore

1. Let no man be sorry, as they that are without hope, 1 These. 4. 13 for he is
the Almighty God, as he told Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. to do wonders for us, as well
as for Judah.

2ly, Let us comfort one another in the meditation of his power; man's necessity
is Gods opportunity to help, and if his help be deferred for twice six years,
Wait, for it shall surely come, and not stay, Hab. 2. 3.

Thus her stiff mountain is shaken, that she may speak with David, Psalm. 30 6,
7. In my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved, I having made my mountain
so strong: but thou did bide thy face, O Lord, and I was troubled. Thus the
scale is tu^ned, and Athaliah so nettled at the noise, and clamours ecchoed
into her ears, that she must hasten to see what news was stirring abroad, verse
13. but her eye no sooner gave the relation thereof, but her countenance
changes, her flesh trembles like an Aspen leaf, and her joints are loosed, and
her hands shake, ^s with the Palsy troubled: her heart now condemns her, the
dead serpent or viper now flies in her face, like Paul's, and her tongue vent^
forth her grief, bellowing forth Treason, Treason. How now Athaliah, is it
Treason for Joash to resume his Birthright? How now Athaliah, is it become
Treason for the heir to use means to sit in his own Throne? How now Athaliah,
shall the greatest Traitor complain of Treason? if Treason (as indeed thou
call the omnipotent Justice it self) be so hateful to thee now, why did
thou not abhor it at first? Why did thou learn others the Trade of high
Treason; and why did thou manage it with an irrelenting heart, and strong
hand against others? Look up, now, and see how just God is maintaining the
cause of the righteous, according to that of David, Psalm. 37. 25. I have been
young, and now am old, yet I saw never the righteous forsaken. Look up now and
blush, to see upon what a sandy foundation thou did build thy nest; and how
thy trust is but as a Spiders Web, Job 18. 14. and thy confidence cut off. Look
upon the men of Judah, and behold how soon their hearts are turned from thee:
and they that were accustomed to make the air to ring with their Hosannaes, now
clamor crucifige, and they that used to cry God save the Queen, now cry God
save the King, and laugh at thy outcry, Treason, Treason; from whence we may
gather,

Obs. 1. De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres.

Goods, and possessions, and Kingdoms ill gotten, seldom hold out to the third
generation; our eyes have read of and seen such changes in our time, and pluris
est oculatus testis unus, quam auriti december, what our eyes have been spectators
of, carries more certain credit with us many degrees, than what we hear, and
therefore I shall not enlarge my self herein. Athaliah speaks enough this truth
whose eyes did see her rising and setting, her mounting up, and falling down:
for wickedness overthrows the finner, Prove. 13. 6. and therefore Stringat
tenuis mea littora puppis. Let others sail in the midst of the swelling
Ocean, and climb high, yet my desire shall be to go by the shore side: For a
little that a righteous man has, is better than the Revenues of the wicked,
although they be large, and great, Ps. 37. 16. Because there is a moth, and a
cancker, and a Jonah's worm in them, to blast them, and smite them, and destroy
them. Have ye not read, nor heard of, nor seen one by fraud, and lying, and
hypocrisy, and swearing, and forswearing step into the Regal Chair, and his
son to keep it warm for a short time after him, and then the old Prophecy, and
this Doctrine to be verefied, Nullus?

Obs. 2. According to that of Solomon, Prove. 21. 30. There is no wisdom, nor
understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord. Athaliah thought that she had made
all cock-sure: but how easily and suddenly does the Lord defeat the counsel of
Ahithophel? How quickly does the Lord break her arm of flesh? and how instantly
does the Lord turn all her wisdom into foolishness? as it is written, 1 Cor.
1. 19. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and cast away the understanding
of the prudent.

Obs. 3. Is, that although the Lord be slow, yet is he sure, although he has
leaden feet, yet he has iron hands, Psalm. 2. 9. although he suffers the wicked
to reign long in their wickedness, yet at last he pulls down the mighty from
their seat, as Mary the Mother of our Lord said, Luke 1. 52. and brings them to
a sharp account for all. Athaliah steered the Ship, governed the Kingdom, sat
fast in the saddle six years together, that men began to think it impossible
for her Chariot-wheels to be overturned and overthrown: but then when she and
others least dreamed of such a change, God makes himself known in Judah, and
his works in Israel, Psalm. 76. 1. and casts her out of the Throne, and stripps
her of all her pomp.

Obs. 4. There is no constancy nor stability to be found in earthly things.
They are like the Heliotropium, which opens and shuts, like unto the sea,
ebbing or flowing, like unto the Moon, waxing and waining, like unto the
Journall of the Israelites, sometimes sweet, sometimes marah. If there be joy
in the morning, there is sorrow in the Evening. If the Sky be one day clear,
it is ten to one, but the next it is cloudy and waterish. If Athaliah now
pricks and trims up her self, and smiles and laughs, by and by she is at her
wits end, crying out, Treason, Treason, and herein is that fulfilled in her,
which Christ spoke, Luke 6. 5. Woe he to you that now laugh; for ye shall wail
and weep: and this Consideration should afford us much wisdom.

1 If honor, or riches increase upon us, not to set our hearts upon them,
Psalm. 62. 10. for alas, they are but for a short season, as Moses said of the
pleasures of sin, Heb. 11. 25. and either we must leave them, or they will
leave us, and says Solomon, Prove. 23. 5. Will thou cast thine eyes upon it
which is nothing? for they take their wings like an Eagle and fly away. Proud
Pharaoh in his brags, said, Who is the Lord, that I should serve him? I,
Pharaoh, is it so? Is thy heart so lifted up against thy Maker? Surely, if thou will not know God in thy prosperity, thou shall be made to confess him and his
power in thy adversity. If thou will not hear Moses, thou shall hear the Red
sea preaching thy destruction, and so with the glory of Egypt, he sinks like
Lead under the returning waters, Exodus 5. 2. 14. 27, 28. Herod vaunted himself
upon his Throne, and thought like Babylon, that he was, and none else lik^ him,
but the next news we hear of him is, Job 14. 10. Vbi est? Where is he? for he
is eaten up of worms, Acts 12 23. Haman was frolicking at Queen Esthers Banquet
at Noon, but hanging on the Gallows before night, Esth^r 7. 10. Great Frederick
the Emperor, was at last brought so low, that he became an humble suter to his
servants for a singing man's place in the same Cathedral Church which he had
builded, and yet went without it. Nero one while played the Devil, 1. In causing
Rome to be fired. 2ly, Playing upon the harp all the time it was burning. 3ly,
Singing the destruction of Troy over it. 4ly, Persecuting the Saints. 5ly,
Tyrannising over his own Subjects. 6ly, Slaying his own mother Agrippina,
causing her to be ripped up that he might see the womb wherein he was
conceived; but at last his own people, not able to endure any longer his
unparalleld cruelty, drove him out of his Kingdom, and pursuing him, slew him
like a mad dog. That famous Captain Bellizarius, who so successively prevailed
in all his Battles, at last he had his eyes put out like Sampson, and he was
seen begging by the high way side, in this Language, Date unum obulum
Bellizario, give a half penny for Gods sake to poor Bellizarius. Thus we see
what pitiful movables earthly things are, constant in nothing but
inconstancy. Thus we see how ticklish this sea of glass upon which the
children of men stand, is: and therefore David from this Consideration draws
this Conclusion, Psalm. 37. 10. Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not
appear, and thou shall look after his place, and he shall not be found. If thou
look for mighty Nimrod the great hunter before the Lord, Genesis 10. 9. If thou
look for persecuting, painting Jezabel, thou shall find nothing but her
skull and feet, and palms of her hands, 2 Kings 9. 35. and if thou look for
K^ng-killing Athaliah, she is vanished like a vapor, which appears but for a
little time, James 4. 14. and so I end this point in the words of David, Psalm.
146. 3. Put not your trust in Princes, nor the Son of man; for they cannot
help: put not your trust in riches; for they are uncertain, 1 Timothy 6. 17. and
deceivable, Matthew. 13. 22. Put not your trust in earthly things; for they are
as unconstant as the wind, and vanity, says Solomon, and vanity of vanities,
yea, and all things are vanity, Eccle. 1. 2. saving only the fearing of God,
and the keeping of his Commandments: but if ye will trust in any thing, let it
be,

2ly, In atchieving the true honor, and such treasures as fail not, reserved
in the heaven for you, Luke 12. 33. It was the Vltimum Vale, farewell Speech,
that Cardinal Wolsey gave unto the world in Henry the eighths days, being to
suffer death, Well says he, if I had been as careful to serve my God, as I
have been to serve my Prince, I should never have come to this. Even so, if we
will be careful to serve God, then when Peter and Demas, and such miserable
comforters, as Job calls them, shall forsake us, then when our earthly
pleasures, and treasures, and honors shall deny us, and leave us, then God
will fail thee never, says David, When thy father and mother shall forsake
thee, then the Lord will gather thee up, Psalm. 27. 10. When the wicked shall
not be suffered to dwell in the Land, the righteous shall never be removed,
Prove. 10. 30. When the Crown of pride shall be pulled from the head of the
ungodly, then the Lord will honor those that honor him, 1 Samuel 2. 30. and we
shall find the comfort of all when we come to die. A^h^liah had no fear of God
before her eyes: she kicked against the pricks, and strived against the stream,
Acts 9. 5. she leaned on a brok^n staff, she rejected the counsel of God
against herself, like the Pharisees, and the expounders of the Law, Luke 7. 30.
and what was the issue of this? she fell like Lighting from heaven, and once
beginning to fall, never rested till she came to the ground, like a stone
tumbled down a hill. I will end this point in the words of Augustine, Mundus
transit, and concupiscentia ejus: quid vis? Vtrum amare temporalia, and
transire cum tempore, an Christum amare, and in aeternum vivere; the world
passes away, and the glory thereof: now choose whether thou will follow, and
love temporal things, which will die with thee, or Christ, and live eternally?

3ly, Seeing there is no constancy and stability to be found in earthly things,
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Ye
have heard what God did to Pharaoh, Herod, Nebuchadnezzar, Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, for their Rebellion; Antiochus, Ahab, Jeroboam, Iezabel, for their
wickedness; Troy, Niniveh, Sodom and Gomorrhe, Israel and Judah, now lying in
dust and ashes, one stone not being left upon another. Now says the Apostle,
All these things came upon them for ensamples, and to admonish us to provide
against our changes shall come, as Joseph did against a dearth. It is a great
lessening of our grief when nothing befalls us, but what we looked for, for
forewarned, fore-armed to bear it, Praemonius, praemunitus. What made Job a
conqueror over all his sorrows, that pressed upon him like armed men, Prove. 6.
11. but his wife forecast of the brittle condition of all sublunaries? so are
his words, chap 3. 25. The thing I feared is come upon me, and the thing that I
was afraid of is come unto me. If his poverty, sores, scabs, running issues,
contempt of his wife; forsaking of his friends, scorn of his servants, derision
of his enemies, loss of his children, had according to Christ's Prophecy come
upon him as a snare, that is suddenly and unlooked for, Luke 21. 35. they could
not but have brake his heart: but musing and meditating beforehand upon the
alterations of all things, and expecting the worst, he stood in the door to
welcome them, and his godly patience drove them out again, finding a full
supper after a sharp and short dinner. As God speaks of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh
that men were wise, then they would consider this: they would remember their
latter end: Even so speak I in this kind, Oh that men were wise, then they
would understand this, they would consider that riches have their end,
pleasures their end, Kingdoms their end, honors their end, and man himself his
end, and so not labor for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which
has no end, enduring unto everlasting life, John 8. 27.

4ly, Here we learn, that it will nothing profit a man to gain the whole world,
and at last lose his own soul, Mat. 16. 26. Athaliah wore the Crown, swayed the
Kingdom, trimmed up her self with Peacock feathers, and we say, Gay feathers
make gay birds. Her Princes did her homage, her Servants went and came at her
command, her Servants cried before her Abrech, in sign of honor, as was done
unto Joseph, Genesis 41. 43. She had stately houses, fruitful vineyards, pleasant
gardens, and orchards, with trees of all fruits: She had Beeves and Sheep in
abundance, silver and gold, and the chief treasures of Kings and Provinces: She
had Men-singers, and Women-singers, and the delights of the sons of men: She
was great, and whatsoever her eyes and heart desired, was not withheld from
them, as Solomon spoke of his outward felicity, Eccles. 2. 4. etc. yet as Haman
said to his wife Zeresh, and his friends about him, showing them the glory of
his riches, the multitude of his children, and how the King had promoted him
above all: What do all these things avail me, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew
sitting at the Kings gate, not bowing his knee unto me? Even so, What do all
these things before mentioned avail Athaliah, seeing her soul shall go to hell?
she made but a sorry exchange of heaven for hell, of joy for sorrow, of things
eternal for transitory, of ease for endless pains and torments, as the rich
Gallant tells you, Luke 16. 23.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Happy are ye if her harms can teach
you Wisdom to beware of her sins, and all sins whose end is bitterness, as
Abner told Ioab of the sword, and death, Romans 6. 23.

5ly, If there be no constancy in earthly things, then let us follow Saint
Paul's direction, 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31. Weep as though we weeped not, rejoice, as
though we rejoiced not, buy, as though we possessed not, use the things of this
world, as though we used them not. The dogs of the River Nilus drink running,
lest whilst they stay to take a full draught, they are snatched into it, and
devoured by the Crocodiles are there watching for their prey. Even so let it be
our wisdom to take a little sup of these outward, lest while we load our
selves with thick clay, Hab. 2. 6. and stay to take a full draught of them, we
are devoured by the hellish Scorpion. Agurs portion is the best, Prove. 30. 8,
9. Neither poverty nor riches, but food convenient for us. Paupertas durum
telum, and necessitas cogit turpia. Poverty and need constrains many a man to
do naughty things, contrary to his nature, as steal, and prosperity makes him
to forget God, Deuteronomy. 4. 12. and kick against God, like the foal that has
sucked his fill, against his Dam. Thus did Athaliah serve God, and therefore no
marvel her Fall was great: And this leads me to the next Particular.

4ly, What her end was. We say, Mali principii, malus exitus, an ill beginning
is commonly accompanied with as bad an end, and sad conclusion: For can we look
to gather grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles? Luke 6. 44. Certainly,
whatsoever a man s^weth, that shall he also reap, Gal. 6. 7. Athaliah her self
speaks this truth; for she sowing to the flesh reaped tares and tears: she
sowed ill seed, and found a bad harvest, she laid her foundation in blood, and
bleeds for it at her death: as Samuel spoke to Agag King of the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15. 33. As thy sword has made women childless, so shall thy mother be
childlesse among other women. Even so may I speak of Athaliah in this kind: As
she let the Kings seed bleed to death, so Israel did mete her measure for
measure, Matthew. 7. 1. and paid her home in her own coin. As she would show no
mercy, so she found no mercy, and as she would not spare nor have pity nor
compassion, like the evil servant, Matthew 18. 33. So nec pretio, nec prece, by
bribing, or prayers, or tears, or wringing of her hands could she purchase the
least drop of water, like the rich man for his hard heartinesse to Lazarus,
Luke 16. 21. or dram of pity; For they laid hands on her, and she went by the
way, by which the horses go to the house of the King, and there was she slain;
She made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the pit that she made, Psalm.
7. 15. from whence we may learn these observations, according to a threefold
Proverb.

Obs. 1. Pride will have a fall. Obs. 2. Harm watch, harm catch. Obs. 3. Qualis
vita, finis ita. As we live, so we die; and so of these in order.
Obs. 1. Pride will have a fall; and in this sense says Solomon, Prove. 16. 18.
Pride goes before a fall, and an high mind before destruction, and the 29. 23.
The pride of a man shall bring him low, and chap. 11. v. 2. When pride comes,
then comes shame, wherefore Mary in her Magnificat sings, Luke 1. 51, 52. He
has scattered the proud in the imaginations of their hearts, and has put down
the mighty from their Seats. Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of
Ammon, as Gomorrha: even the breeding of Nettles, and salt pits, and a
perpetual desolation: This shall they have for their pride, because they have
magnified themselves, Zeph. 2. 9, 10. Isa. 25. 10, 11. Our first Parents were
created in a most glorious condition, but were not contented with it, but
aspired still higher, and would be as God, and so were cast out of Paradise,
and became mortal: and this they had for their pride. Jezabel flaunted it,
painted, and attired her self most gorgeously, and thought none like her, but
she at last was thrown out of the window, and eaten of dogs, as Herod was of
worms, 2 Kings 9. 36. and this they had for their Pride. Nebuchadnezzar
fluttered his wings over great Babel, Saying, Is not this great Babel that I
have built by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? But
while the word was in the Kings mouth, a voice came down from heaven, saying, O
King, to thee be it spoken, thy Kingdom is departed from thee, and they shall
drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field,
and thou shall eat grass as the oxen, Dan. 4. 27, 28, 29. And this he had for
his pride, and was so well tutored in his humiliation, and in the Crosse-house,
which is the best School-house, for Schola crucis, Schola lucis, that he spoke
truly, v. 34. The Lord abaseth all those that walk in pride. Zenacherib in the
pride of his heart blasphemed the living God, saying, that he should not
deliver Jerusalem out of his hands; but he found and felt his power in sending
him home with shame by weeping-Crosse, and then and there was slain by his own
sons, 2 Kings 19. 37. and this he had for his pride. Athaliah, proud Athaliah,
bloody Athaliah, took so wonderful a fall, that she could never recover it; as
Saint Paul says, Heb. 11. 32. Time would be too short for me to tell you of
the stately Builders of Babel, of Sheba, the son of Bichri, of Adoniah, of
Benbadad, and of Vzziah, with their ends, all of them confirming and
strengthening the point in hand, Pride will have a Fall.

Obj. But I am free from this sin, and so far enough from the punishment of it.

Answ. There are four kinds of proud men, and it is ten to one, if thou be
not within the compass and list of some of them.

1. Arrogant, attributing every good thing in themselves unto themselves, and
not unto God, when says the Apostle, Jam. 1. 17. Every good giving, and every
perfect gift comes from above, and down from the father of lights. This is
pride against God, and robbery of God, to take his glory, and clothe our selves
with his honor, which the Creator will never suffer in the creature.

2ly, Presumptuous, acknowledging that God is giver of their grace, but upon
their own merit, whereas of what little worth that is, the Prophet shows, Dan.
9. 7. 8. Unto us belongs open shame and confusion of face, and all our
righteousness is as filthy clouts, and menstruous rags, Isa. 64 6.

3ly, Boaste^s of eminency, which indeed they have not; every man naturally is
in love of himself, Narcissus like, and thinks better of himself than others
do, or he deserves; self-love is morbus communis, an Epidemical disease:
whereas if he has eminent parts and gifts, they are but lent or given unto
him, thereby the more fully and freely to glorify the donor of them: and
therefore thou ought not to boast, or to be proud of them; for says Paul, 1
Cor. 4. 7. What have thou, that thou have not received? If thou have received
it, why rejoycest thou, as if thou had not received it? These are like
Theudas, Acts 5. 36. boasters of themselves to be some body, when they are as
empty Casks, full of nothing but air.

4ly, Despis^rs of others, like the Pharisee of the Publican, Luke 18. 1. and
of all or most of these Paul prophesied, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. In the last days
shall come perilous times; for men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, high minded, etc. and a haughty eye and heart is one
of the six things the Lords soul abhors. Satan is a cunning Fisherman, and
has of all sorts of nets to catch the sons of men. If he cannot catch one man
with pleasure, he will catch him with covetousnes: If he cannot catch another
with covetousness, he will catch him with wine and strong drink: If he cannot
catch another with wine and strong drink, he will catch him with carnal pride: If
he cannot catch him with carnal pride, he will catch him with spiritual pride,
and then he is ready for a fall, and a dangerous fall; For God resists the
proud, Iam. 4. 6. and proud in heart are an abomination to the Lord, and shall
not be unpunished, Prove. 16. 5.

Use 1. Here is matter of humiliation: for what is there in man that he should
be proud of?

1. If we consider him in his first Principles, then as the Prophet David said,
he was framed, in imis terrae partibus, in the obscure closet of nature, and
the Center of the earth, Psalm. 139. 15.

2ly, For his Conception, the Anatomist tells us, he is conceived in the foul
Chanel of nature.

3ly, For his Pedigree and goodly Parentage, which our Gallants so much brag
and boast of, Job tells us, chap. 17. 14. Corruption is our father, and the
worm our mother, and sister.

4ly, If we consider the feature of his body, Calvin tells us, he is sex pedum
vermiculus, a very vermin, a Sink of unclean^sse.

5ly, For his fair face, a painted wall, which every storm of sickness defaceth
and deformeth; and in this sense says Solomon, Prove. 31. 30. Favor is
deceitful, and beauty is vanity.

6ly, For his dainty diet, the Psalmist tells us, 102. 9. That ashes be as his
bread, and tears his drink.

7ly, For his costly lodging; and that is said to be in myerie clay and in an
earthly house. 2 Cor. 5. 1.

8ly, For his reputation, the Apostle tells us, that he is the scum, and
offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 13.

9ly, For his desert and merit, Daniel tells us, chap. 9. 7. it is but shame
and confusion of face.

10ly, For his substance, it is but dust, and grass, 1 Pet. 1. 24.

11ly, For his glory, Isay tells us, chapter 46. 6. It is but as the flower of the
field. Now lay all these together, Et quid superbis terra et cinis, poor
creature, what matter can thou pick, or cull, or glean for thy pride? or may
not these several confiderations afford thee store of matter to humble thee,
and to teach thee to walk humbly before thy God, and man? and this is that the
Lord requires of us all, as the Prophet tells us, Micah 6. 8.

2ly, Here is matter of Humiliation for us in respect of spiritual gifts; for
God allows no kind of pride in man. If God has been more prodigal and
liberal to thee than others, this ought not to be a means to exalt thee above
them, or to despise them, but to bind thee to the more obedience and
thankfullness unto him: for says Christ, Luke 12. 48. where much is given,
much shall be required; as the good man looked for more increase, and better
improvement from him that had five Talents, than from him that had but two,
Mat. 25. 15,

3ly, Here is matter of humiliation for a proud man in respect of his end. As
the poor man and the rich came the same way into the world, so both go the same
way out; and then after a while, turn over their ashes, and the wisest of men
cannot distinguish them; what are the bones of the greatest Potentates better
then, than the meanest beggars lying in the grave?

Use 2. Is for information, that pride was man's undoing sin. It was the first
sin that ever was in the world, and it will be the last that shall be destroyed
in us. And when from such a bitter root shall branch all kinds of wickedness,
we may conceive it to be a deadly sin.

2ly, When other sins begin to die, then secret pride gets strength in us. Ex
remediis generat morbos, even virtue is the matter of this vice: in such sort,
that a man will be proud, that he is not proud; and therefore it concerns us to
be very watchful over our own hearts, that it get no footing in us, or if it
has broke in at our doors, like a thief, not to rest till we have purged our
hearts of this uncleanesse and enemy.

3ly, That howsoever all sin may be said to be in the Devil, secundum reatum,
yet only pride and envy is in him secundum affectum; he is guilty of all sin,
as tempting men to every sin, but pride is his own proper fault, his darling,
his Rimmon, and as Bernard speaks, his character: so that necessarily must it
follow, that proud men bear his stamp, his image, and do (patrizare) resemble
their father the Devil.

Use 3. Is for reproof. It was the Speech of one, I never saw a wise man proud,
nor a proud man wise, and Verus est hic sermo, It is a true saying, for

1. A true wise man, is an humble minded man, and he walks safely in the
valleys, when he that climbs up to the tops of the mountains is subject to
falling.

2ly, A proud man cannot be wise, because he has not learned to know God, nor
himself, which is the beginning and middle, and end of wisdom. He knows not
God that can abase him: and he knows not himself how soon he may be humbled,
and of what brittle metal he is made of, nor sordid, so well ^s the meanest.

Obj. 2. Harm watch, harm catch, with what measure m^n ^ete shall be measured
to them again, ^^i^h Christ, Matthew. 7. 2. Lex Talionis is Gods Law, Exodus 21.
24, 25. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, wound forwound: and this
is made good in Athaliah: her measure was blood, and she is repaid in blood,
that she might speak with Adonibezek, Judge 17. As I have done, the Lord has
rewarded me; As without mercy I spared not innocents, so was I not spared by my
people, although I entreated them, as Job speaks of his wife, chap. 19. 17.
Babylen was merciless and cruel, and therefore a proportionable punishment is
proclaimed against her, Rev. 18. 6. Reward her, as she has rewarded thine, and
says Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Every man shall receive according to his works, not
only ad aequalitatem, sed ^u^litatem, for equality, but quality: And thus it
was the saying of a Reverend man, that he never committed that sin in his life,
but that the Lord met with him in the same kind for it, and paid him in the
same Coin. Pharaoh causing the male children of the Hebrews to be drowned in a
River, was at last drowned with all his Host in the Red Sea, Exodus 14. 28.
Gideon slaying the Seventy Elders of Succoth with unreasonable and unmeasurable
torments, had his own seventy sons murdered by the hands of Abimelech his
Bastard, Judge. 9. 5. Haman prepared a Gallows to hang Mordecai thereon, but his
foot is taken in the same snare he laid, and he suffers on it, Esth. 7. 10.
Darius Governors that conspired Daniels death, are torn into pieces by the
Lions they had provided to devour him, Dan. 6. 24. David lying with Vriahs
wife, had his own wives defloured by his own son Absalom in the sight of all
Israel, 2 Samuel 16. 22. Bajazet the first, who resolved in the pride of his
heart, that if he should conquer Tamberlain, to carry him in an iron Cage
through his whole Kingdom in Triumph, being overcome was served in the same kind
by Tamberlain. The Tyrant Maxentius was overthrown in the same Bridge which he
craftily built as a snare for the destruction of Constantine, and so his
mischief returned upon his own head, and cruelty fell upon his own pate, Psalm.
7. 16. Alexander the sixth was poisoned at Supper with the same wine which he
had prepared as a deadly draught for his familiar friend Cardinal Adrianus, his
servants by Divine Providence mistaking the bottle. The Sodomites burning with
the fire of Lust, were burned with fire from heaven, they finned against
nature, and were punished against nature, fire descending upon them, whose
property is to ascend. The dancing daughter of Herodias, who preferred John
Baptists head before half her fathers Kingdom, going over a frozen River, the
Ice brake, and falling into it, had her head cut off without any other harm to
her body, as History reports. So that we may conclude the generality of this
point in the words of David, Psalm. 9. 15, 16. The Heathen are sunken down in
the pit that they made, in the net that they hid is their foot taken. The Lord
is known by exeecuting judgment, the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands, Higgaion, Selah; that is, take notice of it, mark it very seriously,
consider this in thine heart; for it is worthy to be noted.

The Reason hereof is, to prove unto us the attributes of God, as I will show
you in some particulars.

1. That he is omniscient; for no man can conceive the least mischief in his
heart against another, but the Lord knows it, and sees it: For he that made
the eye, shall ^e no^ see? Psalm. 94 8. and in this sense says Peter to Christ
John 21. 27 Lord, thou know all things, and knowing of them he can the
better p^e^ent them, and dispose of the issue of them.

2. That he is omnipotent, in catching the wise in their own craftiness, and
the counsel of the wicked he makes foolish, Job 5. 13 He is not only
omniscient, but omnipotent, in turning things upside down, as he best pleases.

3. That he is a most just God in repaying evil with evil; evil in intention,
with evil in execution. The wicked have drawn their sword and bent their bow to
slay such as be of upright conversation; but herein his Justi^e is made known,
that he causes their sword to enter into their own heart, and their bows to be
broken, Psalm. 37. 12, 13, 14, 15. If men were not as blind as Bats and Owls,
that can see little or nothing in the clear light, they might perceive Gods
Justice in our latter times upon many that had a bloody hand in their Masters
death: Some hanging themselves, some being beheaded, and some dying mad, and
some falling to shame, and in falling into the pit that they made for one far
more righteous than themselves.

4. That he is a most true and faithful God, and keeps his promise and
Covenant for ever, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. his promise is, Matthew. 7. 2. With what measure
men mete, it shall be measured to them again, and this is made good upon Saul,
David, Athaliah; and so I pass to the Uses.

Use 1. May serve to convince the strongest Atheist, that there is a God.
Thales Milesius considering, plantas humiditate virescere, siccitate
marcescere, concluded that there was an overruling power and providence; even
so the Consideration

1. Of the disapointing men's hopes, and bringing them to naught.

2ly, Of bringing the mischief which they imagined, upon their own heads, is
sufficient argument to declare unto us, and resolve us there is a God, and
there is none like unto God, that can do such great things: so that we may sing
with Moses, and the Israelites, Exodus 15. 11. Who is like unto thee O Lord,
among the gods? Who is like unto thee, so glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders?

Use 2. Is according to that of Moses to the people, Number. 32. 23. Be sure your
sins will find you out. Who would have thought that Athaliah sleeping so
securely in the bed of her fornications, lined and stuffed with such bloody
feathers, and boulstered with so much wickedness (so many years together)
should be awakened out of it, and called to the bar of Divine Justice, and then
and there sentenced to death? but when she sleeped, the Lord watched her
down-lying and uprising, he compassed all her paths, he sealed up her
iniquities in a bag, Job 14 17. and breaks it open to her destruction. Now,
Mutato nomine, de vobis Fabula narratur, what is recorded of her, will be
verified of you in the end, and therefore search out that Achan sin, and turn
that Hagar out of doors, lest it trouble you, and find you out, and turn you
ont of Gods favor, and bring you to shame. Oh that men were wise, says Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32. 29. then would they consider and understand this, that their sins
will find them out, and so the considering and understanding thereof would
teach them to stand in aw, and not dare to sin, Psalm. 4. 4. I read of a
Philosopher that took up a Stage in an eminent market, and proclaimed se velle
vendere sensum, that he would sell understanding to any that stood in need of
it: the King of that Country being informed thereof, sends messengers with
store of gold in their hands to purchase it: the Philosopher writes in a little
Paper these words, In omnibus quae facturus es, semper respice finem, and
cogita quid possit tibi accidere, that is, In all things thou go about,
think always what the end will be, and what may befall thee in the end: and so
delivering of it to them, advised them to carry it to their Master, and to tell
him that it was full worth his money: the which the King receiving, caused it to
be written in golden letters over his Chamber door: now after a little time,
some discontented people hired a rude, lewd fellow to stab the King, and going
about his work, with a heart full of mischief, and reading this superscription,
his countenance changed, and falls trembling, and shaking, as if he had an ague
fit: the which being perceived, and he examined, confessed the whole matter,
and what diverted him from it. Even so, if men would but seriously consider,
that with what measure they mete, shall be measured to them again, or that
nothing surer than their sins would find them out, or that the end of sin and
wages of sin is death, Rom 6. 23. How would this Meditation stop the current of
their vile affections, and divert them from sinning? It was an excellent Speech
of one, Cave quid agis; te videt Deus. Beware what thou do; for God sees
thee, and all things are naked and open to his eyes with whom thou have to do,
says Paul, Heb. 4. 13. and Homer speaking of a Frog and a Mouse, who having a
sharp contestation and bitter Skirmish, the party grieved tells the other,
(...), God had a revenging eye to right him: even so, if men would but remember
whatsoever they are about or doing, God looked upon them, and had a revenging
eye to requite it in the same measure and nature, it would stifle all treason
against heaven and earth.

Use 3. This may teach us, that seeing with what measure we mete, shall be
measured to us again, to walk circumspectly and warily, not as fools, but as
wise, Ephesians. 5. 115. the Law of God and nature should be our rule to square our
lives, and all our actions by, and that is, Quod tibi non vis, alteri non
feceris, to do as we would be done unto, Matthew. 7. 12. and says Paul, Gal. 6.
16. To as many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, and
mercy, as upon the true Israel of God. Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
also reap, Gal. 6. 7. He that sows righteousness, shall receive a good and
sure reward, Prove. 11. 18. But he that sows iniquiry shall reap affliction,
and the rod of his anger shall fail, chap. 22. 8. God has a twofold measure.

1. Either a measure of glory, and that is for those that abound in the works
of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

2ly, A measure of wrath and sorrow, and that is for those that plough
iniquity, and sow wickedness, Job 4. 8. and with this measure did God mete
Athaliah.

Doct. 3. Is, Qualis vita, finis ita, As we live, so commonly we die, as we
speak in another kind, Mali principii malns exitus, an ill beginning has an
ill end: even so, an ungodly life is accompanied usually with a sad death. Look
upon Haman, behold Judas, cast an eye upon Julian the grand Apostate, who died
cursing and banning, crying out in defiance of Christ, Vicisti Galilaeo, O thou
Galilean, thou have conquered and overcome me. Turn over the Chronicle of
Athaliah, and thou shall find, that as she s^ank living in the nostrils of the
people, for her idolatry, pride, usurping of another Crown,
blood-thirstinesse, so in her death she was abhorred by all, and had not power
to cry out with Peter, Lord save me, or with the Publican, God be merciful to
me a sinner. The Husbandman can tell us, that which way the tree leans, that
way it will fall if it be not prevented by art; and I have often observed in
visiting the sick, that as the Proverb is, quod in cord sobrii, id in lingua
ebrii, what lies close hid in the heart of a sober man, is revealed by his
tongue when he is drunk: even so, as men lean and are affected living, so their
hearts and tongues run of it dying; and what hopes can there be, that they who
had not God in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. when they were in health,
should go to God when they are dead?

Use, As the tree stands, so it falls, and says Solomon, Eccl. 11. 3. As
the tree does fall, so in the place that the tree falls, there it shall lie:
So that this does much concern us to deny ungodliness* and worldly lust, and
to live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for
that blessed hope, and appearing of that glory of that mighty God, and of our
Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2. 12, 13. laboring to fall to the South of his
mercy, and not to the North of his Justice. Death is not so fearful and
terrible in it self, as is the sting of it, which is sin, 1 Cor. 15. 56. And
therefore let it be our care to be every day weakening, and puling out this
serpents sting, that we may with old Simeon depart in peace, Luke 2. 29. And
blessed shall be the dead that die in the Lord, for their works follow them,
Rev. 14. 13. Thus ye have heard, 1. what Athaliab was. 2ly, What her Treason,
and 3ly, what her end was. She rent her clothes, and cried Treason, Treason:
and was slain by the way, which the horses go to the Kings house.

FINIS.
A Prayer for the Morning.
O Thou mighty, Almighty Creator, and Preserver of men, We thy poor Creatures
protected this night from Fire, Sword, Sickness, Death, and those manifold
evils that might have befallen us, and overtaken us, by reason of the multitude
of our sins (for man suffers for his sins) cannot but ascribe all praise with
the Samaritan Leper, due unto thy holy name, for this unspeakable mercy of
thine toward us miserable sinners, unworthy to taste of the least drop, much
less that Ocean of thy love, daily streaming and flowing home to our doors, to
the great comfort of our souls. For what is man that thou art mindful of him,
or the Son of man that thou should regard him? there is nothing in man but
deserves open shame and confusision of face continually. Wherefore we deny our
selves, and all our own unrighteousness, as filthy clouts, and menstruous rags,
and flee unto thee in thy Christ, that in him, by him, and through him, both
now and ever, we may be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, our strength, and our
Redeemer. And as thy mercies have been great toward us this night past, so we
beseech thee to continue the same mercy unto us this day, and so to the end of
our days. Defend us from our Ghostly and bodily enemies: Shield us with thy
grace, that we fall not this day into any manner of evil of sin, that we may
never grieve thy good Spirit any more by sin, and so prevent another day the
evil of punishment for sin. Direct us in thy mercy in our going out. and
coming in, that whatsoever we shall take in hand, it may prosper, like Joseph:
O prosper thou our handie work upon us. Instruct us in the heavenly wisdom,
that above all things we may be wise unto the salvation of our poor souls: And
teach us with the night past to cast away all the works of darkness, and of
the Devil, and with the day, to walk honestly, as children of the light, and of
the day. Teach us by our walking and wandering up and down from one place to
another, ever to remember that we are but Pilgrims and Sojourners here on
earth, and so to fix our hearts and eyes homeward, and heavenward, and upon
that rest remains to the people of God. Teach us by every thing we take in
hand, to do all to the glory of God, by whom we live, move, and have our being.
To this end guide our eyes, that they behold no more vanity, Guide our ears,
that they let in no more folly. Guide our tongues, that the name of God be no
more blasphemed amongst us. Guide our hearts, that they suggest and act such
things as are pleasing to the Lord. Guide our hands, that they may be more
quick and lively in doing Gods business, than our own Guide our feet, that we
may run in the ways of thy commandments, even unto the death. Lord so guide us
in our hearts, bodies, minds and affections, that above all things we may apply
our selves to glorify thee on earth, that at last we may be glorified by thee
in the Kingdom of glory. And seeing thou have made man for thy glory, give us
of thy grace, that we may serve thee to thy glory. Give us instead of hearts of
stone, hearts of flesh, and hearts of wax, that they may be alwayies pliable to
serve thee our Maker and Redeemer. Give us a true sight and light into all our
sins, and a true Repentance for our sins, yea even a loathing of our selves for
all the evils which we have committed in all our abominations against our kind
God: that our sins may be put away when the time of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power. Give us a true taste of
the joys above, that we may with David's hunted heart, pant after the Rivers of
living water, and long to be with Christ, our Love, our Head and Captain of our
salvation. Quicken us in the ways of godliness, that we may serve thee with
alacrious and cheerful spirits. Inflame our hearts with an holy zeal toward
thy Law, thy word and thy worship, that it may be as meat and drink unto us,
always to do thy will. And as we have given up formerly our Members, as
weapons of unrighteousness unto sin: so henceforward strengthen us with thy
holy Spirit, that we may give up our Members, as weapons of righteousness to
serve the everliving God: not laboring so eagerly, so earnestly, so heartily,
so greedily, after that bread and meat which perishes together with us, as
after that bread which endures unto everlasting life: For what will it profit a
man to gain the whole world, and at last lose his own soul? Our souls they were
and are dear unto thee, and they cost the son of thy love, thy only begotten
son, and thy best beloved son, thy son in whom alone thou art well pleased, the
dearest price of his dearest blood: how then ought they to be dear unto us? and
how can we better show that they are dear and precious unto us, than by seeking
the good of them more ferventlie, than after any thing else whatsoever? O Lord
grant, that we may not only know what is good, but that we may do that which
is good: For they that know their Masters will, and do it not shall be beaten
with many stripes. Except the Lord (says David) builds the house, they labor
in vain that build it, Except the Lord keeps the City, the watchman waketh
but in vain. Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but all is in vain without
thy blessing: let therefore thy good blessing, accompany all our spiritual and
bodily labors, that all things may work together for thy glory, and for the
best unto them that love thee, and desire to fear thy name. Lord be with us
this day, quicken us unto every good work, stand by us, restrain the
corruptions of our own natures, quench the fiery darts of that wicked one,
that they may not prevail against us in this world, and so be never able to
witness against us in the world to come. And all this we beg of thee for the
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, in whose name we conclude our Prayers in that absolute
manner and form, which he has taught us.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.
A Prayer for Noon day.
IT was David's practice, Evening, and Morning, and at Noon, to pray; and that
we may be followers of him, having him for an ensample, to walk according to
his rule, that we may obtain peace and mercy, as the true Israel of God, we
thy poor servants, Blessed Lord God, do humbly cast our selves down at thy
feet and footstool, begging of thee, that as thou art the shepherd of Israel,
which leadest thy people in and out like a flock of sheep; so thou would be
pleased to lead us into the green pastures, there to feed us with spiritual and
corporal food, whereby body and soul may be fed fully, comfortablie, and with
comforts everlasting. O thou shepherd of Israel, among the manifold chances and
changes of this uncertain life, defend us from Gog and Magog, that neither
inward nor outward enemies hurt us not: but above all, that sin nor Satan
prevail not against us Direct us in the narrow way of repentance, and amendment
of life, that when our day shall end, we may enter in at the straight gate, and
so enjoy the Ancient of days. Rowz up our dull spirits, that we may run in the
ways of thy Commandments, and so obtain that Crown of righteousness, which
the Lord our righteousness shall give unto those that love him, and call upon
his name. The night is past, and the bright day come, Grant us therefore grace
to walk as children of light, holilie, unblameablie, unspottedlie, and without
fault in thy sight. Grant that with the Morning we may look fresh in grace, and
with the Noon grow to a fullness of grace, and with the Evening lie down in
grace, that the God of grace may receive us into his tuition and favor. We
have enjoied a comfortable morning, O thrice blessed be thy name for it: but we
might, and all that we have might have been consumed into dust and ashes, had
not thou of thy goodness preserved us; so that who can think? who can say it
is in vain to serve the Lord? But now who can promise himself one hour more?
much less an Evening, if thou shall hide thy face, and withdraw the light of
thy countenance from us: and therefore we crave of thee to succor us, to guard
us, to continue thy loving kindness toward us, and to guide us to our rest.
Our enemies are many in this our vallie of tears, that it is of the Lords
mercy, that we have not long since been consumed; our strength to withstand
them very weak, like a reed to the great Leviathan; Our friends to help us, are
like Jobs, miserable comforters; our footing on this sea of glass, very
slipperie: but when all our other trust, is but as a spiders web, this is our
comfort in our afflictions, that although our father and mother, and all the
world forsake us, yet the Lord will then gather us up, and will not leave us
comfortless. Wherefore in all humble acknowledgement of all thankfulness due
unto thee, we offer up unto thee our selves, our souls and bodies, a quick and
living sacrifice, that the God in whom we live, move, and have our being, may
be glorified in and by our being. This is our day: therefore it is our duty
whilst it is called to day, to seek the Lord while he may be found, and call
upon him whilst he is near. This is our day wherein we are to work: and so let
it be our sole wisdom to work out our salvation, lest the night come and
overtake us, when no man can work. This is our day; and how ill does it become
us to trewant, and loiter it away, like those that stood idle in the market
place? or to riot it, and revelling it, eating and drinking, and cursing
Abimelech? lest we be in hell to morrow, yelling and howling, and roaring, with
Dives, Devils, and damned ones. Let the Sun which comes as a Bridegroom out of
his chamber, and rejoiceth to run his race, Ever teach us to be active in
spiritual duties, and heavenly exercises. Let the Sun which increases from
glory to glory, teach us to increase in virtue, goodness, and godliness:
adding to virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, to
patience brotherly kindness, and so one grace to another, that we may be
complete Christians, like unto our head, and Lord, and Master. Let the morning
instruct us to remember our Creator in the days of our youth. Let the Noon
tutour us to be strong in the faith. Let the Evening admonish us to think of
the end of our life, and shutting in of our days. Let all teach us so to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Let a waterie
day ever mind us of the sorrows, afflictions and troubles attend us in this
life. Let a pleasant day mind us of the pleasures to come, when these are
faded, and forgotten. Let a short day mind us of the shortness of this life,
which is but as a span long, and swifter than a Weavers Shuttle. Let a long
day mind us of Eternity of life, either in bliss or bane, and so read us a
continual Lecture, to labor for that meat which endures unto everlasting life,
and not after that bread which perishes with us; the which that we may do, the
Lord grant unto us, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, our blessed Savior and
redeemer, Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening.
I Will lay me down and also sleep in peace, for thou Lord make me dwell in
safety, says David. Now good God grant, that as we lie down in thy love, so we
may rise by thy power, and glorify thee for thy mercy.

O most gracious God, and in thy son Jesus Christ, our loving Father, we
miserable sinners, dust and ashes, worms and not men, do prostrate our selves
before the footstool of thy Throne of grace, beseeching thee, that seeing thou
have made the night for man to rest, so well as the day for him to labor; so
that thou would be pleased to bless us this night, and keep us from fire,
sword, sickness, death, and those manifold evils may befall us, and overtake
us by reason of our manifold sins and wickednesses. Thou art about their beds,
and give thy Angels charge over them that seek unto thee for succor: thou
know their down-lying, and uprising, and art near unto those that call upon
thee in truth and syncerity of heart: wherefore graciously, good God, spread
thou the wings of thy loving kendnesse, and favor over us this night, and let
not this house be as a tomb and Sepulcher erected over our heads: let not our
beds be as our graves, our blankets as the mold of the earth, and our sheefs,
as our winding-sheets: but let them all serve to minister comfort and
refreshment to our wearied bodies and senses, that the day following, we may be
the better enabled to set forth thy praise, and thy glory. Let not our sleep
be insatiable, according to the desires of the flesh, but only so, as that it
may revive our dull and heavy drooping spirits, and make them active in thy
service, and in the works of our calling. Teach us by our unclothing, and
uncovering of our selves, and casting away our garments from us, continually to
think of casting away every weight, and casting off that old man which is
corrupt through his deceivable works. Teach us by our nakedness when our
garments are from us, continually to think of harmlesnesse and innocence of
life: endeavoring our selves daily to live void of offense toward God, and
toward man. Teach us by going out of our warm clothes into our cold beds,
continually to think on a change of life, how that we shall one day leave this
sinful world, and pass into another, there to receive according to our
several works. Teach us by our sleep, continually to think on death, and by
our waking from sleep again, continually to think of resurrection of life; how
that we shall one day wake, and rise out of the dust of the earth, and behold
our God, not with other, but with these same eyes. O let every thing be our
instruction to show us the right way to heaven, and everlasting bliss. Father,
bless us bodily, yea and bless us spiritually: give unto our bodies a happy
rest in Christ Jesus, whenever, as we know not how soon, thou may call
them out of this sinful world; and say unto our souls, that he was the
redemption thereof, and paid the ransom of them with his dearest blood, that
under the shadow of his wings, we may fly to thy heavenly Sanctuary. Father,
bless us inwardly, and bless us outwardly: bless us inwardly with all these
graces which are fit and needful for our several places, conditions and
callings; and bless us outwardly, with all those things we want, and stand in
need of, as health, strength, ease, wealth; bless us likewise in every thing
belongs unto us, that they yielding forth their strength, and increase unto us,
we may yield forth unto thee our God the strength of our obedience, praise and
thanksgiving. O father, thou art great, and therefore to be feared: thou art
good, and therefore to be praised: according therefore to thy greatness, and
according to thy goodness, be thy praise: and we entreat thee to continue this
thy loving kindness to us unto our lives end, and to life eternal. And that we
may obtain this mercy, we beseech thee to give us grace to walk worthy of thy
mercies, that we may find and feel the fruits of thy favor budding in our
souls. O give us grace that we may look unto our feet, that we walk no more in
the ways of disobedience, whereby we should offend and grieve the good Spirit
of so Good a God, and so loving a father; for our own Consciences tell us, That
what could thou have done more for thy vineyard? and the plants of thy
vineyard? and such vile, sinful wretches, that thou have not done unto us? and
yet what could any stubborn and stiff-necked generation have done more to
provoke thee to anger, wrath, and sore displeasure, than we have done? But
Lord, call not thou our sins to thy remembrance: lay not thou our sins to our
charge; for if thou should be but strict to mark wherein we have done
amiss, who should be able to stand in thy sight? Wherefore for thy mercy sake
spare us, for the multitude of thy tender mercies sake have compassion on us,
for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that is past, how many, how
great, how grievous, how crying soever our sins have been, and strengthen us
with strength from above, that we may spend the residue of our lives in thy
service, wholly resigning up our selves unto thee, fearing of thee, and
keeping of thy Commandment, laboring, and indevouring, to live as much
hereafter to thy honor, as ever we have heretofore done to thy dishonor. And
for as much as thou have commanded us to be mindful of the afflictions of
Joseph, we beg of thee to be good to all thy poor afflicted ones: work in them
a true insight into all their sins, and a true Repentance for their sins, and a
strong faith to believe that their sins are pardonable in the blood of that
immaculate Lamb: Lord, if it be thy will, let them live to praise thee, and for
the comfort of those that belong unto them: but if thou in thy secret counsel
have decreed them for death, grant that although their bodies return to the
earth, yet their spirits may return to their Maker. And preserve thou our
lives, and healths unto us, not that they may, be a means to follow our former
wantonness with the greater greediness, but that we may be the better
abilicated to set forth the glory of our most Glorious God. Bless those of
our nearest relation: bless them and us, and all of us, with inward and
outward, with spiritual and corporal health and wealth, that we may glorify
thee our God with both all the days of our lives. Bless thy poor Zion:
deliver thy Israel out of all his troubles. Make not us who were once thy
Beulahs, thy Hephzibahs, thy joy, thy delight, now to become Loammies,
Loruhamaes, a despised and forsaken people. Make not us who were once Naomies,
a pleasant seed, now to become Marahs, a seed drunken with bitter waters of a
full cup wrung out unto us. Make not us, who were once as Abigails, the fathers
joy, now to become Benonies, the sons of our mothers sorrows. O let not this be
published in Gath, nor proclaimed in Askalon, lest the uncircumcised take up
this Proverb against us, Go ye unto Shiloh, go ye unto England, and see how
their Sun is set, their pride abased, and their pomp vanished, because they
would not hear and obey, nor regard the voice of the Lord Jehovah. O for thy
Christ's sake be pacified with thy servants that call upon thy name, as Herod
was with the men of Tire and Zidon for Blastus his sake and mediation: and as
thou art wonderful in thy name, so be thou wonderful in thy works, and
command at length deliverances for thy Jacob. Bless our Supreme head: Let
every mountain and hill that is exalted against it be made low: let the crooked
be made straight, let the rough be made plain: oh let the zeal of the Lord God
of Hosts in his good time perform all this. Call home all those that have erred
like lost sheep, and are deceived: open their eyes to see the truth, direct
their hearts to walk in that truth, that walking in the old way, which is the
good way, they may at last come to him, who is the way, the truth, and the
life. Sanctify this nights rest unto us. Grant that our sleep it may be sweet,
for the refreshing of our wearied senses, that the day following we may be the
better strengthened to set forth the honor of our God. Give thy angels charge
over us this night; for they alone are well kept whom thou keep; wherefore
into thy hands both now and ever, with blessed Steven, do we commend all our
spirits. These O father, and all other things thou in thy infinite and
all-seeing goodness shall better see to be requisite, either for our selves,
or for any other, we humbly beseech thee to grant them unto us, not for our own
sakes; for we acknowledge our selves unworthy to gather up the crumb; that fall
from thy table: wherefore we beg them for thy Christ's sake, in whose name we
conclude our prayer in that perfect form which he has taught us, saying, Our
father, etc.

FINIS.

