THE BRIBE-TAKERS OF JURYMEN Partial, Dishonest, and Ignorant DISCOVERED and
ABOLISHED;

AND, Honest, Judicious, Able, and Impartial RESTORED;

And their equal Election to Try Causes, and Find Inquests.

Written, proposed, and tendered to the same intent and purpose as all the
former Proposalls, to and for the saving to the Honest people of this Nation
the thirty hundred thousand pounds yearly are.

By WILLIAM LEACH of the Middle Temple.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, in the Year 1652.

THE BRIBE-TAKERS OF JVRI-MEN, etc.
THe Estates of Jury' men in these modern times, being far less in value,
according as now the prices, and rates of Lands, Cattle, Chattals, all manner
of Victual, and other Commodities, Wares, and Merchandises now are, and in
these latter times have been usually bought and sold for, then they have been
in ancient times: And whereas in these latter times (and especially in
inferior Courts) many not only indigent, but keepers of Alehouses, and other
places of Tippling, and the meaner and worser sort of their Guests, Associates,
and Adherents have by Sheriffs, or by their Deputies, Bailiffs, Sergeants, or
other their inferior Officers, or Ministers been returned, impannelled, and
sworn for the trial and inquiry upon, of, in, and concerning diverse Actions,
Causes, and Suites, some of very great, and others of considerable value, and
by reason of the great influence or power (which such Bailiffs, Deputies,
Sergeants, and other inferior Officers, and Ministers have had upon, and over
such Alemen and Tiplers) they with such their Associates and Adherents have
given and found Verdicts and Inquests in, and concerning many such Actions,
Causes, and Suits, quite contrary to their Evidence, (which they have received
from credible witnesses) and against all truth, reason, and sense, for the
filthy lucre of such, whom they have perceived, or found, that any of such
Deputies, Bailiffs, Sergeants at Mace, or other such inferour Officers, or
Ministers (who have been their continual Guests and Customers, and wished them
many such others) have favored or had in estimation.

And whereas by the Laws and Statutes of this Nation as yet, the Jurors who
have found, or shall find less damages, then they ought and have had evidence
for, and the Inquisitors or Jurors upon inquests have found quite contrary to
that which according to the evidence, which they have had given, then they
ought to have found, and for diverse other inconveniences, and mischiefs, which
have too often happened to the honest people of this Nation, by the
machinations, frauds, negligence, and ignorance of such Jurors and Inquisitors)
are not subject to any loss or penalty.

And whereas diverse honest Jurymen (being weak, and sickly men) of late years
often times have been put to great extremity, by cross and froward men of the
same Jury, on which they have been impannelled; who have unconscionably and
unlawfully gained the major part of that Jury to be on their side, against all
sense, right, and reason, and favored one of the parties in the suit; for the
trial of which they have been impannelled and sworn (which of late years has
been too frequent, the same being seldom heard of in ancient times) sometimes
by keeping some of the most honest parties of them long fasting, and in the
cold; whereby they have been much weakened, and by kicking, hunching, nipping,
pinching, and beating, and sitting upon them, and otherwise injuring others of
them; when they have been mewed up in the dark, and sometimes in extreme cold
weather, without fire, or other light, or any other lodging then on the ground
or boards; such Jurors by the Laws now, being to be kept together, and not to
depart the one from the other, not to eat or drink till all of them (after they
have heard, and received their evidence, and departed from the bar) have agreed
upon, and given in, or delivered up their Verdicts.

And whereas by the Laws of this Nation the Jurors (which have found or shall
find less damage, then they ought, according to the evidence which has been
given them) are subject to no attaint; neither is any Statute or Act made, or
provided for any penalty against any Jurors or Inquisitors, (who upon any Writ
of inquiry of damages, or other inquest) have found, or shall find contrary to
their evidence.

And for that now, the Judgment against Jurors to be found guilty in attaint,
is extreme villainous, and may as well fall upon the innocent (which may be
occasioned by the extremities before mentioned) as on the guilty: and the
penalty of imbracery is but small, and the offense very difficult to be
discovered.

And whereas of late years there has been much difficulty, charge, and
trouble, in procuring honest, indifferent, and able Jurymen to be returned and
impannelled.

And whereas Jurymen of late years have too often for wicked lucre, or
illegal affection found, and given Verdicts and Inquests against their
Consciences, and Evidences; for such, from whom they have had, or expected
gain, ease, or favor, or have feared, or envied.

And whereas in these latter times Sheriffs have been more careless and
negligent in returning honest and able men for Grand Jurymen, or the great
Inquest, then in former times they have been; and for gain and favor have
spared and forborne the returning or impannelling of Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlememen, and the better sort, for that employment, which would have been
much for their benefit and learning, and brought them to a desire, and love of
Religion, Honesty, and Virtue, and an abomination of debauchednesse, and all
other wickedness; and in to a delight to do good, and exercise their talent
for the good of themselves, their posterity, and the honest Christian people in
general, according to their duties, and to live such a godly and virtuous
life, that they may be always prepapared for death, and never fear it; which
will be a good example to their inferiors to do the like, and bring all, who
shall so do into a union in virtue and godliness, without falling out, and
circumventing, or defrauding one the other.

And whereas more honest fit, and able men for Sheriffs and Coroners might have
been chosen, then of late years have been.

And whereas by the long escape of Jurymen from the penalty of imbracery, or
taking money, or rewards, or accepting promises to say, or give their Verdicts;
by the means of the difficulty of the discovery thereof beforementioned, some
of them have been so bold, and impudent, that they have made it as it were a
Trade to procure themselves to be upon Juries, and to make prey of the Suitors
in diverse causes, some of such Jurymen (when they have found against their
evidence, and have met the parties whom they have wronged by their false
Verdicts) having said to such injured persons, that the cause should have gone
for them, if they had come to them first, and dealt with them about the
business.

And too often diverse (Jurors being all or the most part of them of the same
Profession, Art, Mystery, or calling of one of the parties in the Action, Cause
or Suit, upon which they have been impannelled, returned, and sworn) have
sometimes found contrary to their evidence against the other party or parties
therein; who has been of another Quality, Condition, Science, Profession, Art,
Mystery, or calling, which, or the professors thereof they have hated, or
envyed: and at other time have given excessive, or too much damages against
such party, or parties in such Action, Cause, or suite, (whom, or such his
Quality, Condition, Science, Art, Mystery, or Calling, they have so hated, and
envyed.)

It is proposed to be desired that it may Be Enacted, That hereafter no Sheriff
shall return, or impannell any man to be upon any Jury to try any Cause,
Action, or Suit; or to make any inquiry concerning the same, being of the value
of, or by the same demanded 40 shillings, or above; unless such man shall be
commonly reputed by his neighbors to have an estate in Lands, or Tenements,
Goods, or Chattalls, (over and above all charges, issues, and reprises, and
besides, sufficient to pay, or satisfy all his Debts) to the value of 40l. to
be sold, or above, for every 40 shillings of such value, or so to be demanded,
and according to the same value shall be taxed, or assessed to, or for, the
relief of the poor, and other parish taxations in the parish, where he shall be
inhabiting, or dwelling, and be a free denizen of this Nation.

And that if any man suspected (by any plaintiff or plaintifs, defendant or
defendants, demandant or demandants, tenant or tenants) to be otherwise, shall
be returned, or impannelled upon, for, or concerning any such cause so to be
tried, or inquired of, that then (at the request and challenge of any of such
plaintiff or plaintifs, defendant or defendants, demandant or demandants, tenant
or tenants and Oath by him, her, or them, or any person of such credit, or so
commonly accounted, made to the contrary of such repute) the Judge or Judges,
Justiciar or Justiciars, Sheriff or Sheriffs, Mayor or Mayors, Steward or
Stewards, or other Officer or Officers (who shall try such Cause, or take such
Inquest, or before whom such Cause shall be tried, or Inquest taken) shall put
every such person so Returned, or impannelled to be a Jury-man so suspected,
upon, or to his Oath, before such person shall be sworn to try such Cause, or
so to inquire, whether or not he then have such an estate to, or of such value
over and above all charges, issues, and reprises, sufficient to pay, or
satisfy all his debts; besides, and that if the same person to be a Juror
shall not depose upon his Oath that he then have such an estate; then such
person shall not be sworn upon, for, or concerning such trial or Inquest, but
shall be rejected; and another having such Estate, or not excepted against in
that behalf, shall be sworn so to try, or inquire in his place and stead.

And that such Judge or Judges, Justiciar or Justiciars, Justice or Justices,
Sheriff or Sheriffs, Mayor or Mayors, be empowered, authorized, and compelled
to administer, and take such Oath, being ready drawn and tendered to them in
writing, without, taking any thing for the same directly, or indirectly.

And that every such man so to be returned, or impannelled, or make Oath, and
depose false, shall be subject, and liable to all the pains and penalties
enacted and provided in, and by the Laws and Statutes of this Nation against
perjured persons.

And that if any the men Returned, or impannelled and sworn of, or upon any
Jury or Inquest in, or concerning any Action, Cause, or Suit, after they have
heard, or shall hear their Evidence concerning the same, and their charge given
to them, or taken concerning the same, and shall depart from the Bar, where, or
from him, or them, before whom (having authority in that behalf) they received,
or shall receive the same, and stay by the space of 4 hours; then next after,
before they do, or shall retorn thither, or before him, or them, before whom
they so received, or took, or shall receive, or take the same Evidence, that
then every of such Jury or Inquest men shall have one little white ball, and
another black delivered unto him, and that when the major or greater part of
the men of such Jury or Inquest be, or shall be agreed to give in their Verdict
or Inquest found, or to be found concerning the same; then every of them who
shall find, or give their Verdict or Inquest for such plaintiff or plaintifs,
demandant or demandants, in such Cause, Action or Suit, shall and may deliver,
and put a white ball wrapped in a note, or piece of paper, with his name
therein written; and such black ball without any thing about the same into a
box, or bag privately to be kept for that purpose by him, or them, before
whom such Verdict or Inquest be, or shall be to be given, or delivered up, or
to his, or their Deputy or Deputies; and that every of them (who shall find,
or give their Verdict or Inquest, for such defendant or defendants, tenant or
tenants in the same Cause, Action, or Suit) shall and may deliver, and put such
black ball so wrapped in a piece of paper, with his name therein written, and
such white ball, without any thing about the same into such box or bag so to be
kept.

And that every of such of him or them (before whom such Verdict or Inquest is,
or shall be to be given or delivered up) be empowered and compelled to keep
such note secret, and not suffer or permit any to see, or know the contents of
the same; neither shall any of such Jurors reveal to any other what note he
shall so deliver, till after an attaint brought against such Jurors, or Inquest
men, or -- years past, after such Verdict be, or shall be delivered up, but
only such Judge or Judges, Justiciar or Justiciars, Justice or Justices,
Sheriff or Sheriffs, Mayor or Mayors (before, or to whom such Balls be, or
shall be delivered) shall declare and pronounce, for which party in such
Action, Cause, or Suit, most of such notes, or pieces of paper were so
delivered, or put into such Box or Bag: And then Judgment or Judgments, or
other proceedings shall be given, and go, and be for him, or them (for whom
most of such notes or papers shall be so delivered, or put, and stand, be good
and available in Law to all intents and purposes, until the same be, or shall
be stayed by matter to be moved in arrest of Judgment before the same shall be
entered, or after reversed by writ of Error or Attaint.)

And that if such Jurors be agreed, the one half of them to find for the one
party or parties in such Action, Cause, or Suit, and the other half of those
Jurors for the other party or parties in, or to such Action, Cause, or Suit,
when such Balls shall be delivered unto them all, they shall declare, and make
known the same to the party or parties (whosoever do, or shall deliver such Balls)
and that then such Judge or Judges, Justiciar or Justiciars, Sheriff or
Sheriffs, Mayor or Mayors, Steward or Stewards, or such other chief or head
Officer or Officers shall, and may, and be authorized to swear one, or three of
such qualified persons for Jurymen (who stood, or shall stand by, or about,
and in the hearing, when such evidence was, or shall be given to such former
Jurymen to try such Issue, or make such Inquiry, and deliver unto every of
them two such white and black balls, and send those one or three to the former
twelve Jurymen; and that those one or three be empowered, and shall go to, or
be sent back with the same twelve, and shall confer with those twelve about
finding and giving their Verdict or Inquest to be given or found for, or
concerning such Issue or Inquiry, and after staying with the said twelve, by
the space of an hour, or less, shall with them return to the said chief, or
head Officer or Officers, and with them deliver their Balls, as before is
mentioned, and that then such Judgment or Judgments, or proceedings thereupon
shall be as before is mentioned, and expressed.

And that any one (against whom any Judgment or proceedings shall be after, or
upon such Verdict or Inquest) may bring his attaint within one year next after
such Judgment, or after proceedings for the same to be tried or inquired of
again by 24 other Jury men qualified as aforesaid, in the same County, City,
Borough, or Town, as the same were upon the same evidence given against, and
for reversall of the same, or for altering of the same, in giving or finding
greater or lesser damages concerning the same; and that such 24 to be chosen
out of 48 of such qualified persons, if they shall find that the said Jury of
the first inquest have made, or shall make a false Oath, or give, or find a
false Verdict or Inquest in, or concerning any such Action, Cause, or Suit
shall, and may reverse or alter the same; or give, or find greater or lesser
damages concerning the same; or otherwise to confirm the said first Verdict or
Inquest; and that the party or patties making such Election, and bring such
Writ of attaint be bound up by it, and shall have no other attaint concerning
the same matter.

That none of any Jurymen hereafter shall be subject, or liable to any pain or
penalty upon, or by any Attaint, or Writ of Attaint, other only then such who
shall be found to be the guilty persons, by, or for delivering in the greater
part of such notes or pieces of paper, if the matter shall be found against
them; but that those, (who shall deliver in the lesser part of such notes or
pieces of paper, as soon as they shall obtain a certificate recorded in
parchment from him or them, before whom such Verdict or Inquest be, or shall be
taken, and shall deliver the same into the Court, where such Writ of Attaint
shall be returnable) shall from thence be quit of the same, and go without day
there.

And that in every County, City, and Town within this Nation, using to have a
Sheriff or Sheriffs for the same; the Sheriff or Sheriffs thereof shall cause
the names of the Freeholders and the men capable of being returned to be
Grand, or other Jurymen of; or for such, his, or their respective County,
City, or Town to be written, and a competent number thereof published in Print
in his, or their respective County, City, or Town, and that he, or they shall,
at a reasonable rate deliver one paper, or book thereof to any (who shall have
a Cause there to be tried)

And that the same may be done by Mayors, Aldermen, Burgesses, Bailiffs, and
other head Officer or Officers of every City, Borough, Town corporate, Cinque
port, or other place (where a Corporation or other Court is, or shall be holden
or kept, and no Sheriff or Sheriffs for the same.)

And that after issue joined in any Action, Cause, or Suit, in any Court, the
plaintiff or plaintifs, defendant or defendants, demandant or demandants, tenant
or tenants, in, or to the same within two days next after he, or his Attorney
therein shall have notice thereof, may (giving notice thereof to the other
party in the same Action, Cause, or Suit) take exceptions in writing (and
deliver to such Sheriff or Sheriffs, or such chief or head Officer or Officers)
against one third part of such Jurymen; and that neither of the said parties,
his, or their Attorney or Attorneys, or the said the Sheriff or Sheriffs, or
other such Officer or Officers shall let the other, his, her, or their Attorney
or Attorneys willingly know of any of such to be Jurymen (against whom he, she,
or they do, or shall so except) till such Sherif or Sherifs, or other such
Officer or Officers have returned, or do, or shall return (out of the residue
of the said men so capable to be Jurors) a fit and impartial Jury according to
his, or their best endeavor or endeavors to try such Actions, Cause, or Suit.

And that such Sherif shall and may return 48 men for such Jury, out of the
remaining other third part only, if both such parties do, or shall so except;
or only out of the one half of such of persons capable of being Jurymen, if but
one of such parties in such Action, Cause or Suit do, or shall so except;
unless both, or one of them do, or shall except against so many of the
hundredors of the hundred, Town, Village, or Parish, where the Visne of the
said Action, Cause, or Suit is, or shall be laid; that they shall not leave a
sufficient number of such to be returned Jurymen from thence, that without some
of them to be returned there must of necessity be a failer in their trial of
the issue joined in such Action, Cause, or Suit: And that then such Sherif or
Sherifs, or other such Officer or Officers may return some of those so excepted
against to prevent such failing.

And that if both parties cannot agree that such Sherif or Sherifs, or other
Officer or Officers shall return or impannell 24 out of those 48, that then
such Sherif or Sheriffs, or other Officer or Officers shall, and may name some,
or more, whom neither of the said parties, his, her, or their Attorney or
Attorneys do, or shall say, that they, or any of them do, or shall know, to
whom, or one of them such Sherif or Sherifs, or other Officer or Officers
before he speak, send any other to any such strange person or persons, shall
send such parties to such Action, Cause, or Suit, if they will go to such
strange person or persons, and that then immediately one of such person or
persons shall set down in writing in the presents of such party or parties to
such Action, Cause, or Suit, his, her, or their Attorney or Attorneys, having
notice thereof, and do attend such strange person or persons; or of so many of
them, as do, or shall attend such strange person or persons in that behalf,
the names of such 24 of those 48 as are so to be returned; and that immediately
after such Sherif, or other Officer or Officers have, or shall have the same in
writing, he, or they shall, and may return such 24 for Jurymen as aforesaid.

And that all Jurymen hereafter shall, and may have, and receive, and be paid,
or satisfied by such Sherif, or other of such Officer or Officers a competent
allowance, for what they do, or shall act, do, or perform as Jurymen out of
the fines and Amercements imposed upon offenders and delinquents in every
respective County, City, or other place before mentioned where such Jurors do,
or shall serve as Jurymen) by and from such Sherif, or other of such Officers
before mentioned, and that no Juryman shall take, or receive any thing, or
promise agreement concerning the same of any party in any Action, Cause, or
Suit, by reason of, or concerning the same either before, or after trial
thereof, under penalties hereafter mentione.

And that the Inhabitants of every parish within this Nation, (being, or which
shall be persons of such capacity for electing of members of future
Parliaments, as is mentioned in the proposition for the election of a new
Parliament, or Representative) and other places, which be, or shall be
incorporated with the same, shall and may; the first quarter of every year next
after a Sherif be, or shall be constituted or ordained for the Country, or
place, wherein such parish be, or shall be, deliver in writing to the chief
Constable of every Hundred, wherein such hundred shall be; and of every City,
Burrow, Town Corporate, or place before mentioned to the Mayor, Bailiffs, or
other head, or chief Officers of the same, the names of such person or persons
dwelling or residing within the same, whom they shall conceive to be the
fittest men in honesty, judgment, and Estate to be Grand Jurymen in, and for
such respective County, City, or other place before mentioned: and that they
shall express in every such respective writing of what estate, every such
particular person for such Grand Jury be, or shall be esteemed to be of; and
that every such respective chief Constable, or other such head, or chief
Officer or Officers before mentioned shall, before the next general quarter
Sessions of the public Peace for the respective County, City, or other place
before mentioned, deliver every of such respective writing to the Sherif of, or
for such respective place: and that such respective Sherif or Sherifs shall
return or impannell as many as shall be necessary for every such respective
place, only out of those mentioned in such respective note or writing, which in
such respective writing shall be expressed to be of greatest Estates in such
respective County, or other place before mentioned, accounted to be of most
honesty and best understanding.

And that every of such Sherif or Sherifs shall cause such respective writing
to him, or them so delivered, or to be delivered to be published in Print (with
directions how, and where to find the same at a reasonable rate, for so many as
shall have occasion to use any of the same) within convenient time next after
the time that he, or they do or shall receive, or have delivered or tendered to
him or them such note or writing.

And that if after the first quarter of every year expired the major part of
such qualified persons, do or shall send, or deliver or tender unto such Sherif
or Sherifs such respective note in writing, as be mentioned in the said recited
Proposalls, what persons every such respective person do, or shall conceive to
be most fit and qualified, as before is mentioned to be such Grand Jurymen,
that then such respective Sherif or Sherifs shall return or impannell so many
(as shall be necessary and convenient for the place where; and for which he, or
they be, or shall be such Sherif or Sherifs) who shall have his name written in
most of such notes or writings to be the first or foreman of, and for such
Grand Jury; and that he whose name shall be written in the greater part (saving
such first) of such notes or writings shall, and may be the second man of, and
for the same Grand Jury.

And that such Sherif or Sherifs shall return, and impannell for such Grand
Jury, such other of those men, whose names shall be so written in most notes or
writings, the one of them next, and immediately in order after the other of
them, more then the said first and second of them, in order and degree as every
of them respectively shall have his name written in such notes or writings most
often, the one of them after the other of them, until such Sherif or Sherifs
shall have returned, and impannelled, and a competent number, or over, to be
Grand Jurymen for such respective County, or place before mentioned.

And that every such Sherif shall keep such a bag, or box, and in such manner
and form as is mentioned in the said recited Proposalls; and every such note or
writing (which shall be so delivered, or sent to such Sherif or Sherifs by any
such qualified person for returning of Grand Jurymen) shall be so put into
such box, ordered, taken out; or sorted, and sorted in such manner and form as
is mentioned in those Proposalls for the notes and writings therein expressed.

And that such Grand Jurymen so elected, or to be elected (as last is herein
mentioned) shall, and may once in every respective Sheir, County, or other
place before mentioned, keep such box or bag, and every of them write several
of such notes of two, or more names of men (whom he conceives, or shall
conceive to be most fit for such Sherif or Sherifs, Coroner or Coroners (that
is to say) one for such Sherif or Sherifs, and another for such Coroner or
Coroners of, or for such County, or other place before mentioned;) and shall so
lock, or seal upon the same in such manner and form as is mentioned in those
former Proposals for a new Parliament or Representative.

And that at the summer Assizes in every year in, and for such respective
place, such Grand Jurymen, or as many of them, as shall then meet again shall,
and may open, and unseal such Bag or Box, and take out, and sort such notes or
writings in such manner and form as is mentioned in those recited Propositions
or Proposalls, and write, or cause to be written in parchment fairly the names
of every one of those persons (whose names be, or shall be so written in
several of such notes or writings; the one of them in order next after the
other of them, and those for such Sherif or Sherifs in one part of such
parchment, writing and the other for such Coroner or Corners in another part of
the same parchment writing:) And then such Grand Jurymen, or some of them shall
deliver such parchment writing to the Justice or Justices, Justitiar or
Justiciars of, or for taking Assizes, and Goal delivery of, or for such County,
or other place before mentioned.

And that such Justices or Justiciars may select the one half of such several
and respective names, for such several and respective purposes, and deliver to
the Supreme Authority of this Nation; or to such other or others as they do, or
will appoint, or authorize to receive the same; and that they may choose out of
the same names so many for such respective employment as they do, or shall
think convenient in that behalf.

And that if any Jury-man shall accept, receive, or take any money, reward, or
thing of any, or promise of, for, or concerning the same of any person or
persons for giving, or to give; or saying, or to say, or making, or to make
inquiry in, of, or concerning any Cause or Suit upon, or touching which, he
shall be sworn to give his Verdict, or make inquiry, shall forfeit and loose to
such party or parties, against whom such Verdict or Inquest, or more or less
damage, benefit, or advantage be, or shall be given, or found, the value of
that which he or they should have had if the contrary had been found.

That if any Action, Cause or Suit be, or shall be hereafter tried or inquired
of between a Tradesman or Tradesmen, and another, or others of another or
others, quality or qualities, condition or conditions, profession or
professions, calling or callings, that then the writ or writs, precept or
precepts, warrant or warrants shall be made, granted, given, and go out only to
summon or warn men to be of, or upon the Jury between such party or parties,
none of them to be of any such qualities, professions, conditions, callings or
occupations of any such parties in, or to such Actions, Cause or Suit; or the
one half of those Jurymen to be not above, but under one half part of the
quality, condition, profession or calling of any such plaintiff or plaintifs,
demandant or demandants, defendant or defendants, tenant or tenants in, or
concerning the same: And that upon the same writ or writs, precept or precepts
warrant or warrants by the Officer or Officers (to whom the same be, or shall
be directed) shall be returned such persons for Jurymen of such several and
respective qualities, professions, conditions and callings and none other. And
that for doing or acting by any contrary, or against any thing before
mentioned, the party or parties grieved or damnified, or to be grieved or
damnified thereby, shall and may recover, have, and receive the pains,
penalties, and forfeitures before herein mentioned, in manner and form as is
mentioned for, and concerning the recovery, having, obtaining, and receiving of
the pains, penalties, and forfeitures mentioned in the former herein recited
Propositions and Proposalls.

Provided,

That any of the Jurymen before mentioned (which be, or shall be capable of
trying, or making inquiry of, or concerning any Action, Cause, or Suite of the
value of, or by which be, or shall be demanded 50 l. or under) may, and shall
be returned and impannelled for trying or inquiring, and may try and make
inquiry of, or concerning any Action, Cause, or Suit of the value of, or by
which be, or shall be demanded 1000 l. or under: and the like to be done with,
and by the half of such Jurymen, with another half of double such Estate of,
for, or concerning any such Action, Cause, or Suit, under the value of 2000 l.
or 3000 l. and with another of treble such Estate of, for, or concerning any
Action, Cause, or Suit whatsoever, notwithstanding any thing before mentioned.

THE END.

