AN Examination OF THE POLITICAL Part OF Mr. Hobbs his Leviathan.

By GEORGE LAWSON, Rector of More in the County of Salop.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Francis Tyton* at the three Daggers in
Fleet Street, near the Inner Temple Gate, Anno Dom. 165^

The Epistle to the Reader.
TO glorify God, and benefit man, both by doing good, and preventing and
removing evil, should be the endeavor, as its the duty, of every Christian in
his station. Upon this account I have undertaken this examination of Mr. Hobbs:
I was indeed at the first unwilling, though solicited, to do any such thing;
because upon the perusal of the Political part of his Leviathan, I conceived,
that as little good was to be expected, so little harm was to be feared from
that book. Yet after that I understood by diverse learned and judicious friends,
that it took much with many Gentlemen and young Students in the Universities,
and that it was judged to be a rational piece, I wondered; for though I knew
the distemper of the times to be great, yet by this I found it to be far
greater then I formerly suspected. And upon which considerations I judged it
profitable and convenient, if not necessary, to say something to the Gentleman;
and did so. After that I had communicated my pains unto diverse worthy and
learned friends, they pressed me to give way to the Printing of them, which I
did, if they after serious perusal should think them worthy the Press. They
were at length approved, and again by some desired to be public; yet by others
thought too brief, and I was desired to enlarge. But this I refused to do, both
because there is very little, if any thing material at all in Mr. Hobbs his
Civil and Ecclesiastical Politics, omitted by me and not examined; and also
because I had formerly finished a Treatise of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government, which if it had not been lost by some negligence, after an
Imprimatur was put upon it, might have prevented and made void the Political
part of Mr. Hobbs: and though one Copy be lost, yet there is another, which may
become public hereafter. When thou have read this brief Examination, thou
may, if judicious and impartial, easily judge, whether there be any thing in
Mr. Hobbs which is either excellent or extraordinary: and whether there be not
many things inconsistent, not only with the sacred Scriptures, but with the
rules of right reason. But not willing to prepossess thee, I commit thee to
God, and remain,

Thine in the Lord, Geo. Lawson.

EA est plerumque Apologiarum aut Vanitas aut infelicitas, ut injustam
amoliendo Censuram justam ferant, vel nova saltem Apologia indigeant.

Whereas in the close of the Preamble to this Examination, the Learned Author
upon the account of his Ministerial calling Apologizeth for his undertaking the
Political part of Mr. Hobbs his Leviathan; he is not so to be understood as if
he looked upon Mr. Hobbs as such an Hercules as could not be conquered by less
then two, a Statesman in the Civil, and a Churchman in the Ecclesiastical
Part of his beastly Polity, but as intending at first the consideration of the
Civil Part only.

This was thought meet by a Friend of the Authors to be thus communicated,
least the Reader should take occasion to grow more Censorious than he ought, or
Mr. Hobbs more Proud than he is.

T. G.

CAP. I. Of Mr. Hobbs his Leviathan, concerning the Causes, Generation, and
Definition of a Commonwealth.
CIvil Government derives its Being from Heaven: for it is a part of Gods
Government over mankind, wherein he uses the Ministry of Angels, and the
service of men: yet so, as that he reserves the supreme and universal Power in
his own hands, with a liberty to depose the Rulers of the World at will and
pleasure, and transfer the Government of one Nation to another; to lay the
foundation of great Empires, and again to destroy them for their iniquity. To
think that the sole or principal Cause of the constitution of a civil State is
the consent of men, or that it aims at no further end then peace and plenty, is
too mean a conceit of so noble an effect* And in this particular I cannot
excuse Mr. Hobbs, who in the modelling both of a Civil, and also of an
Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, proceeds upon principles not only weak, but also
false and dangerous. And for this reason I undertake him. This should have been
done by some wel-skill'd in Political Learning, and not by me who do not
profess, it as being a Divine, and one of the meanest amongst many. And my
intention is not to inform my Betters, who know the vanity and absurdity of his
discourse, but to undeceive the ignorant Reader, who may too easily be
surprised.

The first Chapter of the second Part, which is the seventeenth of his Book,
does inform us, First, That the end of civil Government, is Security. Secondly,
This Security cannot be had in the State of Nature, because it is the state of
War; nor by a weak, nor a great multitude, except united by one perpetual
judgment. Thirdly, A great multitude are thus united, when they conferr all
their power and strength upon one man or assembly of men, that may reduce all
their wills by plurality of voices to one will, etc. From whence arises a
Commonwealth. Fourthly, This Commonwealth is defined and distributed.
Against all this, some thing may be excepted. For First, That the State of
Nature is the State of War, may be doubted, if not denied; For man is a
rational creature, and if he act according to his nature, he must act
rationally: and though he may seek to preserve himself, and that sometimes with
the damage or destruction of another, yet he cannot, may not do this unjustly,
but according to the Laws of Nature; which are two: The First, Love thy
neighbor as thy self. The Second, Do as thou would be done unto.


These tend directly unto Peace, not unto War, which is unnatural; and they may
be kept by multitudes of men not united in a civil State, or under a form of
Government. And this is evident from Divine and profane Histories. For Families
and Vicinities, which had no dependence one upon another, and also States both
by confederation, and without any such thing, have lived peaceably together.
When the Apostle says, The Gentiles which have not the Law, by nature do the
things conta^^ in the Law, he does not mean by [Nature] a Commonwealth, or
form of Government civil. Its true, the Apostle brings in a Bill of Indictment
against all mankind, and accuses them, That their feet are swift to shed
blood: Destruction and calamity or misery are in their ways; And the way of
peace they have not known, Romans 3.15, 16, 17. Yet he understands this not of
Nature, but the corruption of Nature: and the parties here accused, are not men
only as in the state of Nature, but also under a Government, and that not only
Civil but Ecclesiastical too: For such the Jews here charged, were. So that all
that can be either by him evidently proved, or by others granted, is, That if
by Nature, he mean corruption of Nature, and the same not only original and
native, but also acquired by perpetual acts, so far as to quench the light of
Nature, and suppress the vigor of those Principles which God left as relics
of his image, then his Position may be true, That the state of Nature is the
state of War. Secondly, That by a well-constituted civil Government, to which
Nature inclines man, the Laws of Nature and Peace may be more easily and better
observed.

But I hasten to his Definition of a Commonwealth, and it is thus defined by
Mr. Hobbs.

A Commonwealth is a Person, of whose acts a great multitude by mutual
Covenant one with another have made themselves every one the Author, to the end
he may use the strength and means of them all, as he shall think expedient for
their peace and common defense.

G. L.

1. This Definition is obscure, and might have been made more plain and easy,
and such as we read in other Authors. 2. Its imperfect, and only tells us what
[pars imperans] is, and that most poorly, if not falsely too. 3. It may agree
unto the Head or Captain of a sedition or rebellion, or a company of Thieves
and Robbers by Land, or Pirates by Sea; nay but that he speaks of a society or
multitude of men, it exactly agrees unto Beelzebub the prince of Devils. In a
word, it agrees to any unlawful multitude, united to do mischief; For here is
no mention of reason, or justice, or law; Aristotle, and other Authors use to
qualify their Definition of a State, with some such term; For they make it
(...), legitimam ordinationem, and do not give up all to the sovereigns
judgment, which may be blinded; or his will, which may be corrupted; or his
power, which may act more like a beast, then like a man. 4. A Commonwealth may
be defined in another manner, thus; It is a community of men orderly subjected
to a supreme power civil, that they may live peaceably in all godliness and
honesty.
This Definition, or rather Description is not so accurate, yet it is
sufficient to inform the Reader of the nature of civil Government somewhat
better then the Author has done. In it we may consider, 1. The community, as
the Matter and Subject. 2. The supreme Power civil informing this Matter. 3.
The orderly Subjection unto it for peace and a good life.


1. The community is the Matter, of which some things may be observed; as 1.
That the name in Greek is [(...)] in Latin [Civitas] which is not as the
Author says, a Commonwealth in proper sense: for that in Greek is [(...)] in
Latin [Respublica.] 2. That it is a multitude of reasonable Men, not a
Leviathan, which is an irrational Brute. The number of this multitude may be
greater or less, and not certainly determinable. For Ragusa a little City, as
well as the vast Roman Empire, may be a community to make a perfect State. 3.
This community must be associated and united not only in vicinity of place,
which is convenient, but also in some stricter bond, before they can be capable
of a supreme Power. 4. The Members of this Society are by nature free, and by
God, to whom they are subject, left at liberty to choose what Governors or
form of Government they please; yet so that they must desire and endeavor the
best, and such as shall be most conducing to Peace and Righteousness. 5.
Sometimes it falls out, and is so ordered by Providence, that a People who have
continued for a certain time under a form of Government, return unto their
first liberty; yet even then, when God does offer them an opportunity to
establish the best form and constitution, that they are fearfully divided. Some
are for the former Government, others idolize some new Idea framed in their own
brains.
Others in the mean time get the sword into their hands, and once possessed of
Power, are unwilling to part with it. Yet these sometimes are dispossessed
again; in the mean time the People like so many waves of the Sea, are tossed
this way and that way, by contrary winds, like as in Daniels vision, when he
saw the four winds strive upon the great Sea, out of which arose the great
Empires of the world, Dan. 7.2, 3, etc. And all this comes to pass through the
just Judgment of God, and the wilful folly of men, who are enemies to their
own Peace. Lastly, In these many alterations of Governors and forms of
Government, the Community abides the same, except it be cut off by the sword,
as the Amalakites and Canaanites were, or destroyed by some extraordinary
Judgment, as Sodom and Gomorrha with fire and brimstone from heaven.

The second part of the Definition is [the Supreme Power] And here we must
consider, 1. The Nature of Power in general. 2. The Nature of supreme Power
civil. 3. The Original of it. 4. The Subject wherein its fixed.


1. Power, in Latin [Potestas] in Greek [(...)] is [Jus imperandi] a quality
inherent in a Superior as such, whereby he can effectually command or bind any
person subject, as subject. Imperium or Command is properly an act of a
superior Will, whereby the person subject is bound to obedience or punishment:
It presupposes the Understanding and practical Judgment, whereby it is
directed: and is to no purpose without an executive power and coactive force,
sufficient to protect the Subject obeying, and punish him, if he prove
disobedient; And because the Judgment may be erroneous, and the command
unjust, therefore there can be no Jus imperandi, without Divine wisdom to
direct the Understanding, and Justice to regulate the Will, which is to direct
the coactive force. And though Superiors may in many things abuse their
Superiority, yet they do not cease to be Superiors, though as abusing their
power, they are not Superiors; because Nulla datur Potestas ad malum; none can
have power to bind contrary to Divine Wisdom and Justice.

2. Supreme Power civil, which is in Latin called [Majestas] which is [maxima
Potestas in Civitate] may be defined out of Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. and 1
Pet. 2.13. to be a Sword committed by God, unto higher Powers, for to punish
the bad, and protect the good. For 1. In all Government civil there must be a
sword which is an outward coactive strength and force, and the same sufficient
for the end it was ordained and given by God. How otherwise can there possibly
be any sufficient protection or punishment within the precincts of the
community and territory. And here two things are to be observed. 1. That one
and the same Sword must protect from enemies without, and unjust Subjects
within. For the Sword of War and Justice are but one Sword. 2. That there is a
plain difference between Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, between the Sword and
the Keys.
For what is bound by the civil Power on Earth, is bound and made good on earth
by an earthly Sword: But what is bound on earth by the Spiritual Power is bound
in heaven, and made good, and executed by Jesus Christ, and that by a Spiritual
force upon a Divine Promise.

Secondly this Sword must protect the good, and punish the bad; which implies
there must be wise and just Laws. 2. There must be just judgment according to
these Laws. For otherwise there can be no true and certain knowledge of good
and bad, for to put a difference between them, that the one may be punished for
violation, the other protected for the observation of the Laws. And here again
we must note, 1. That there is a threefold Power civil, or rather three degrees
of that Power. The first is Legislative. The second Judicial. The third
Executive. For Legislation, Judgment, and Execution by the Sword, are the
three essential acts of supreme Power civil in the administration of a State.
2. That there is no Power to punish the good and protect the bad. For the Sword
must execute according to Judgment, and that must pass according to Laws: and
both Judgment and Laws must be regulated by Divine Wisdom and Justice.


Thirdly, This Sword must be in the hands and possession of higher or
supereminent Governors. For a Title without the possession of a Sword can
neither punish nor protect: Therefore in all States of the world, they who have
possession of the Sword do rule, let the Title be what it will, neither can it
be otherwise. And no Prince can rule, when God has taken away his Sword.

It has been declared in some measure: 1. What Power in General. 2. What Power
civil in Particular is. The third thing concerning this supremacy of Power to
be examined, is the original of it.
And the same Text of the Apostle Paul tells us, that it is of God; therefore in
the Definition I said, That the Sword was committed by God to higher Powers,
who become such by this Commission, when God gives them possession of the
Sword. So that the Original of this Power is from God, both in respect of the
Power, and the persons possessed of Power. For it is he that gives
Understanding, Will and Power sufficient for to govern: he gives Wisdom and
Justice: he commands all Societies that have opportunity to set up a wise and
just Government for Peace and Godliness. In respect of the persons, he designs
them either in an ordinary or extraordinary way; he inclines the hearts of the
people to submit and obey: he prevents seditions, rebellions, treasons, and
such like acts as tend to confusion and the ruin of Commonwealths, according
to that of the Psalmist, Thou have delivered me from the strivings of the
people, Psalm. 18.43. And it is God that subdueth the people under me, Psalm. 47.
In this designation, God sometimes uses the consent, tacit or express,
sometimes the force and consent of Man.

Fourthly, The Subject of this Power is either standing, or movable. The
standing Subject by Nature is the community, in whom vertually it resides, and
is exercised by a general representative upon extraordinary occasions, or at
certain determinate times. And this is the best way to preserve liberty, if
these general Assemblies be well ordered, and fit persons rightly qualified be
chosen. For its dangerous to trust either one man, or a number of men with too
much power, and the constant exercise of the same. This supreme power reserved
to the whole community to be exercised as necessity or occasion shall require,
might be called [Realis Majestas] yet every Community is neither so wise nor so
happy. For in most States we find only a personal Majesty, or supreme Power,
and the same sometimes Despotical, and too absolute; yet in other
Commonwealths, the supreme Governors are limited, and only trusted with the
exercise of the power according to certain Rules and fundamental Laws.

Of this Majesty or supreme Power, civil, some Writers have observed, that it
must be not only supreme, but also perpetual and above Laws; [soluta Logibus]
That it must be supreme, and above all subordinate power within, and
independent upon all other sovereigns without its necessary. It must be also
perpetual and fixed, that it may be distinguished from the extraordinary and
temporary powers trusted in the hands of one or more upon extraordinary
occasions. How far it is absolute or above the Laws, I shall examine hereafter.

After the supreme Power civil is determined and sixed in a certain Subject,
Subjection to it follows, which is the third thing in the Definition. Regimen
est ordo Imperii and subjectionis. For in all Government, some must be above
and have power to command; some must be below, and be bound to obey. And in a
civil State there must be one universal supreme, to which all others in the
Community must subject themselves. This Subjection must be rational, free, and
orderly, or else the State cannot continue long, nor be well administered. And
wisdom must determine not only the general order of superior and inferior,
but also in particular the Community must be divided into parts with a
co-ordination of equals, and subordination of the unequals, and of every
several part unto the whole, that so every one may know his place and rank,
that he may keep it. Therefore the Apostle commands every soul, Romans 13.1.
(...), not barely to be subject any ways but in a certain order; for the
Community must be like an Army put in array, that so the supreme Power may the
better animate and order it: upon which follows a more regular motion of this
great body both in the whole and every part, tending the more directly to
Peace, Godliness and Honesty.

For there is a twofold end of regular civil Government; The first is Peace;
The second is Godliness and Honesty, to which Peace is subordinate. For the
Apostle exhorts us to pray for Kings, and all that are in authority, that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty: 1 Timothy 2.1.
Government is for Peace, Peace for Godliness, and the performance of our duty
toward God, and Honesty: That we may live soberly and justly toward men. When
God does bless a people with a settled Government and an happy peace, (for these
are Gods blessings) neither Prince nor people must forget their God, or live in
Luxury, and deal unjustly one with another. For these things offend him,
provoke him to anger, and pull down his Judgments upon them. He expects Piety
and Honesty from every one, even from the highest to the lowest. And these
earthly States are erected, and subordinated to an higher end then peace and
plenty here on earth: they should be so ordered as to prepare men for eternity:
otherwise Regna are but latrocinia, a den of thieves, and a combination of
devils. Thus much I thought good to deliver concerning the Nature of a
Commonwealth civil. The Distribution follows.

Mr. Hobbs.

A Commonwealth is either by institution or acquisition.

G. L.

This is not the distribution of a Commonwealth either into the integral
parts, which are two, 1. The sovereign 2. The subject: not into the kinds: for
those are usually taken from the several manners of disposing the supreme power
in one or more to make it Monarchical or Polycratical; but its a distinction of
the manner of acquiring supreme power. And the ordinary way, or rather means
whereby it is acquired, is either by force or consent.
Yet this distinction is imperfect: for there be other means besides these:
neither when supreme Power is obtained either by force or consent, is a
Commonwealth framed. The Power is always derived from God, as before: and he
takes it from one, and gives to another, either in an extraordinary or an
ordinary way of Providence: as by giving a final victory, or inclining men's
hearts, and that upon several reasons to submit, and sometimes so, that if they
had liberty and power, they would not consent at all. And though men may be
unjust in desiring and seeking, yet he is just in giving it. And by the way its
to be observed, 1. That a Power acquired, and held by force, cannot govern
without a tacit consent at least, so that all Commonwealths are by consent. 2.
No man or men can govern any people long by force, except it be the Will of God
to punish and oppress them with an iron rod for their transgressions.


CAP. II. Of the Second Part, and the Eighteenth of the Book: Of the Rights of
Sovereigns by Institution.
THis Chapter informs us, what the rights of Sovereigns once constituted are.
In every Commonwealth there must be a supreme Power fixed in some certain
Subject; this is essential to it: yet though this be a principal thing to be
done, yet it is not all, neither being done, does it make a complete
Commonwealth. His Covenant of every one with every one for to design a
Sovereign, is but an Utopian fancy. For by the best Histories we may understand
that many States have attained to a settled form of Regular Government by
degrees in a long tract of time, and that by several alterations intervening;
so that the Laws of their constitution are rather customs then any written
Charter. Some Communities come under a form of Government more suddenly, and by
a way fortuitous unto man, though not so to God. And in this point the practice
of former times, not the fancies and speculations of men must instruct us.

T. H.

The first of the twelve Rights of the Sovereign, is, That Subjects cannot
change the form of Government.

G. L.

That Community which has Power and Liberty to alter the form of Government to
the better, do not their duty, or are not wise, if they do it not. And it were
wisdom in any people to reserve the Power to the whole body, to be used as
occasion, opportunity and necessity shall require. As they are bound to reform
the State when it is corrupted, so they are bound to alter the form, when
without an alteration reformation cannot be obtained.

That the Subjects have no power to alter the form of Government may be
granted: for Subjects as Subjects, must submit unto the Power established, not
take upon them the highest and most transcendent Prerogative of all others: yet
this is no right of the Sovereign, nor to be reckoned inter Jura Majestatis.
For the Sovereign himself has no right of himself to change the fundamental
constitution: Before this can be done, the People must return unto the original
State of Liberty, and to a Community, which in England is not a Parliament, but
the forty Counties. Upon this ground some have said that a Parliament cannot
alter the Government; what men may do upon a Dissolution, and in a case of
real, not pretended necessity, is another matter. But let us hear his reasons.

T. H.

The first upon supposition of no former Obligation, is, That it is a breach of
that Covenant whereby they made themselves authors of every act the sovereign
does, or shall judge fit to be done.

2. If they depose the Sovereign, that which is his own, and they had formerly
given him, they take away unjustly. 3. If any attempting to depose his
Sovereign, be killed or punished, he is Author of his own punishment. 4. A new
Covenant pretended to be made with God, cannot free them from offense and
injustice in their disobedience unto their Sovereign; because they can make no
Covenant with God, without his Leiutenant, which is the Prince.
G. L.

1. I grant as formerly, that a Subject as such, cannot act to change the
Government, or depose his lawful Sovereign.

2. They who set up a Sovereign, and by Covenant advance him to the Throne,
must and ought to be free from all former superior obligations, which cannot
stand with this. But what is this to purpose? The question is, whether Subjects
cannot change the form of Government in any case, and whether the Subjects may
not be freed, and that lawfully from their allegiance, and cease to be in the
State of Subjects? That it many times falls out so to be, is evident: For by
civil wars, by foreign invasions, transmigrations, and other ways it comes to
pass, that Subjects are free from their Sovereigns, who cannot protect them;
and in such cases, if God give them Power, they may alter the form of
Government, if it may be for the best.

But to come more close unto his first reason, let us suppose as he affirms,
That a people by Covenant have set up a particular person to be a Monarch, and
so made themselves authors of all his acts, whether is it lawful for you by a
new Covenant to obey another, or cast off Monarchy, or transfer his person upon
another without injustice? He says ye cannot without breach of Covenant do it.

But 1. He here presupposes his former Utopian fancy of a Covenant of every
man with every man; whereas its plain, few States of the world now in power,
were thus constituted. 2. Sovereigns are of two sorts; 1. Such as in whom the
supreme power does constantly and immediately abide. 2. Such as are such only
for execution and administration. To these latter, the subjects bind themselves
to be faithful, so far as they shall be faithful to the Kingdom and the Crown,
which is theirs, not [jurc dominii] by absolute right, with a power to alienate
them, or destroy them. For every subject is first bound to be faithful to their
Country, then unto their King, who swears to maintain the Laws, Liberty and
Religion by Law established. These cannot bind us to do any thing against the
Laws of God, of Nature, nor against our Country. But with this Author every
Monarch is absolute, and in particular the Kings of England amongst the rest.
3. Suppose a Covenant with a Sovereign, absolute or limited, be against the
Laws of God either moral or positive in force, may not the subjects break this
Covenant without injustice? Nay is it not injustice for to keep it, seeing
[Nullum juramentum ligat ad illicitum.] 4. If the Sovereigns Acts be directly
contray to justice, equity, and the fear of God, must the subjects who gave him
no such power, be Authors of these horrid acts, as murder, incest, adultery,
blasphemy, as also of his unjust commands and perverse judgments? 5. To be
obedient to another, to transfer his power, to depose him, is not to change the
form of government, but to pull down one, and set up another, the form
remaining the same. 6. Subjects or rather they who are subjects, as subjects,
cannot make any such Covenant, as to make one who was no Sovereign to be their
Sovereign; If they can make a Sovereign, they must be equal, and equally free
in making that Covenant whereby a supreme Governor is constituted. 7. If they,
who were [aequa liberi] before, and in the time of making this Covenant, and
after it is concluded, become subjects, afterward rebel, they cease to be
subjects, and become [hostes] enemies, and are so to be dealt withal: And what
reason can be given why the Sovereign, if he prove a Tyrant in the
administration, and challenge more power then was given him, or could by the
Laws of God or Nature be conferred upon him, should not cease to be a
Sovereign, and the subjects free from their allegiance to him, seeing he has
violated the essential part of the Covenant, and perverted the main end of all
Government? Why should it be otherwise in this then in all other pacts and
contracts? This question is the more difficult to be answered by this Author,
because he allows the people a power to make a Sovereign: and if he be such as
is one only for administration, its unanswerable. This point might have been
more clearly determined, if he had instanced in any particulars.


In all this I desire to be understood aright. For, 1. That power which the
Bishop of Rome does challenge, and has sometimes exercised in the
excommunication and deposition of Princes, and absolving their subjects from
allegiance, I detest. 2. I desire all Covenants, that are just and justly made,
whilst they are in force, to be kept, especially by all subjects to their
lawful Sovereigns. For no subjects are to be persuaded or encouraged to Treason
or Rebellion. 3. I would advise all people to beware how they rise against, or
resist the highest powers, though the cause may be just: and because the remedy
may prove worse then the disease, and often proves so: and the confusions which
follow such commotions, are more mischievous then the former oppressions, and a
Tyranny is better then an Anarchy.


His second reason is, because they had given him the right of Sovereignty,
which the cannot take away. Where, 1. He grants, That the people give the
Sovereign his right; and if so, then they gave it him not as subjects; and when
they return to the same occasion again, they may give the power to another. 2.
I deny that subjects do give any such right. 3. Neither can he prove that there
is any such Covenant of every man with every man in the constitution of civil
States. His third reason is not worth an answer.


But in the end of this paragraph, he seems to take away the pretense and
allegation of some new Covenanters with God. What Covenant he means, is not
here expressed: If he understand the National Covenant, as its very likely he
does, then let those who pretend it answer for themselves. For that Covenant
could not give the least power either to England, or Scotland, or any in either
Nation, entering into it: and in the same they only engaged to use lawful
means, to accomplish what they had promised. Yet with him this and all other
Covenants are void, if made with God without his Vicegerent, who is their
Sovereign. Yet if this were true, then the Covenant made in Baptism, by the
converted Christians under the heathen Emperors cannot be valid. This is
evidently false, because every man may voluntarily bind himself to God in those
things wherein the Laws of God and man have left him free, without the consent
or express permission of his civil Sovereign.

T. H.

The second right of a Sovereign is, he cannot forfeit, the reasons are, 1.
There is no Covenant made on his part either with them all jointly or
severally: not with them jointly, because they cannot be one person before they
subject unto him: Not with them severally, for they Covenant one with another,
not with him, and if any one pretend freedom from subjection, there can be no
judge of the controversy. 2. Words, as all Covenants are, be of no force
without a sword public.


G. L.

This is the substance, though not all the words to prove that Sovereigns
cannot forfeit. His 1. Reason takes that for granted, which is false, and
cannot be proved. For a community is one person moral by siction of Law, as
they use to speak, or as the Civilians express themselves [persona conjuncta]
opposed to [singularis] For a community is the immediate subject of a
Commonwealth, and must be associate before they can be capable of a form of
Government; and without union and communion too, it cannot be civitas,
societas, populus. As thus united, it may act and covenant by their Deputies,
who may be many, or by a Deputy, which may be one: and here they may in the
name of the whole, Covenant with the person whom they like for Sovereign, and
upon conditions just and reasonable. Thus Israel, a mere community, makes Moses
their Deputy and Mediator, to Covenant with God in their behalf. Thus the ten
Tribes by some of their principal men capitulate with Jeroboam. Thus the
Gileadites by their Messengers offer to contract with Jephtah, and some of the
Tribes make the same offer unto Gideon. Thus a free people may invest one man
or more either with original power, or trust him and them only with the
administration. And they may put conditions upon them, either to give them an
unlimited or limited power, as the wisest men amongst them shall think fit. And
there is great reason so to do: For, 1. They are free. 2. He with whom they
purpose to contract, has no right to command them, no power over them before
he be made Sovereign: He is but a private person, and they are mad men if they
will subject themselves upon unreasonable conditions: They are very unwise, who
will make a Butcher their Shepherd, or set a Woolf over their Flocks.
And surely its no point of wisdom in any free-people, to trust any one man, or
assembly of men, with an absolute unlimited power. If an enemy come in by
conquest, they must be content with what conditions he pleases, not with such
as they desire. For they are not free, because their estates, liberty, lives
are in his power; As for the Covenant of every one with every one, its a mere
Chimera: there was never any such thing, neither can he give any instance of
it, and therefore all that he builds upon it must needs fall.

As for his second reason, wherein he affirms Covenants to be but words, and
words are but breath and of no force, without a public sword, its no ways
tolerable. By these words he may be proved to be an Atheist, whatsoever he
pretends, and to deny the immortality of the soul, all Religion and fear of the
Deity, and his providence over the world, and I should be very unwilling to
trust his promise upon oath, for any thing I could not recover by Law. The
principal force of a Covenant depends upon the will and consent of the immortal
soul, which fears a Deity, and believes a supreme Judge of the world, who will
render to every man according to their works; yet because Covenants are but
words and breath, therefore he inferrs

T. H.

That a Sovereign cannot be made or receive his power by Covenant or upon
condition, for so to think is is ignorance.

G. L.

Its true, that we are ignorant fools, if we think, when a Monarch is made such
upon condition to which he is sworn, that he will part with his power, though
he has forfeited his right unto it: if he have a long sword, and a broad
conscience, he will be possessor as long as he can. And by this passage he
seems to affirm, that few Monarchs have any conscience or fear of God: For
though they lose their right, yet they will not part with their possession,
though their own conscience, Laws of God, and the dictates of nature persuade
them to keep their Covenants, and not violate their Oaths. In a word, though
Sovereigns be made by Covenant and Oath yet the Obligation is in vain, because
the people cannot force them to the observation thereof: for they have parted
with their power, and delivered the sword unto their Governors; Yet they never
gave them the sword to maintain their injustice, but to protect the just and
punish the unjust. Yet in a popular State this seems to be clear; That the
Sovereign cannot be made upon condition; for thus he writes,

T. H.

No man is so dull as to say, for example, The people of Rome made a Covenant
with the Romans to hold the Sovereignty on such or such conditions, which not
performed, the Romans might lawfully depose the Roman people. That men see not
the reason to be alike in a Monarchy and a Popular Government, proceeds from
the ambition of some, etc.

G. L.

Men are not so dull as to believe that the reason of not forfeiting the
supreme power is alike in a Monarchy and a Popular State; For we know that in
such a Commonwealth, the Community and the Sovereign are the same, though in
some respect different; but in a Monarchy or Aristocraty its far otherwise. In
the State of Rome, after that Tarquin was deposed, and that Government reduced
unto a Republic, every one severally, though never so great, was a subject:
and all jointly was their Sovereign: for in that form [singuli subduntur
universis, and universi praesunt singulis] yet the universality of the people,
as a Community, could not act and exercise the Sovereignty, and therefore
Consuls and other Officers were trusted with great power, but not with the
supreme: and these might forfeit and be deposed by the people. In all States we
must distinguish between the constitution and the administration, or as others
use to express themselves [Inter Statum and exercitium.] They who are trusted
only with the administration, as such, are not supreme, though they will
endeavor to usurp and possess that power. Therefore the Authoreither is very
ignorant, or else goes about to delude his ignorant Reader.

The question therefore is, whether a Sovereign may forfeit? That he cannot, is
not at all, by so much as a probable argument yet evinced. 1. That he may
forfeit unto God there is no doubt. 2. That if any forfeit, God will in his due
time take the forfeit, pass Judgment upon the party forfeiting, and execute
the same, either by himself, or by Angels, or by foreign forces, or by civil
wars, or some other way; and in all this God is just, though men may be unjust.
3. Monarchs and Princes only trusted with the power of Execution and
Administration, may forfeit, and justly be restrained, or reduced, or deposed.
4. Absolute Princes may forfeit their right unto the Sovereignty, when they
pervert all Laws of God and man, oppress, murder, raise war unjustly against
their own subjects, to butcher them as so many wild beasts, violate their Oaths
and Covenants without any fear of God or man. For such, as such, are hosts
humani generis, rebels against God, and agents for the Devil. All powers are
ordained of God, and from him they receive Commssion to protect their subjects,
not destroy them, and to punish the bad, not to protect them and advance them,
and use them for the destruction of the good. If any man dare plead for these,
let him; I dare not. 5. If the Author had stated the question, and informed us
of the several titles of Sovereigns, which are many, or had instanced in
particulars, and informed us of their particular titles, it had been easy to
determine the controversy; Princes acquire their power many ways, as by
Election, Succession, Marriage, the Sword, and by that, either justly, or
unjustly, usurping the power which is not due; and that out of revenge, or
covetousness, or ambition, with a desire to be great, not do good.
The question is not, whether a Sovereign according to the Apostles definition,
Romans 13. can forfeit to his subjects, as his subjects; for so he cannot do: but
it is this, whether a Sovereign may not cease to be a Sovereign, and the
subjects cease to be his subjects: and to this the Author has said nothing.

T. H.

No man can without injustice protest against the institution of the Sovereign,
declared by the major part.

G. L.

1. There are very few Sovereigns thus instituted; and if this be the only way,
what title have the greatest part of Sovereigns in the world? 2. If they be not
thus instituted, whether is it lawful to protest against them or no? of this
the Author says nothing. 3. Suppose the major part be a faction, and institute
one of their own party Sovereign, not for public good so much as for private
interest, whether may not the dissenters protest? 4. In all Assemblies and
Societies, which proceed by way of suffrage, the major part concludes and
determines for the whole, to avoid confusion and dissension, and to preserve
unity and order. Yet so that the major part may err; because they are not
infallible: and one good reason being evident, should prevail against ten
millions of votes; We find that most men in their suffrages, follow the example
of some eminent person or persons, or their own affection; few are determined
by reason. And in doubtful matters, men should first debate and thoroughly
examine the thing debated, before they proceed to give their voices; and this
is most properly and conveniently done, when after a diligent search, no
preponderant reason can be found for either part of the proposition: Men's votes
are inferior to reason and superior Laws, and are not good because votes, but
because agreeable to reason. And whereas he alleges two reasons, 1. That to
protest against a major part is injustice. 2. It puts the party protesting out
of protection; the answer is easy: 1. That a protestation is not unjust,
because it is against the major part, except it be against reason and right;
and no man will be so mad as to assent unto a major against reason, which is
above all votes. 2. Its true, that the party protesting puts himself out of the
protection of that Sovereign against whom he protests; but this may be a
misery, but no injustice.


T. H.

The Sovereigns actions cannot be accused of injustice by the subject; because
he has made himself Author of all his actions: And no man can do injustice to
himself. The Sovereign may do iniquity, but not injustice.

G. L.

1. The Sovereigns actions are to punish the evil and protect the good: as a
Sovereign, he can do no other actions, and these cannot be justly accused. 2.
Neither can the consent of the people, nor does a Commission of God give him
any power to act contrary to these. 3. When he acts unjustly, (for so he may
do, and all iniquity is injustice) neither God nor the people are authors of
such actions; for he was set up by them to do justly, and no ways else. 4.
Civil justice and injustice, as they consist in formalities, differ much from
moral and essential justice and injustice. In this respect a Prince may be
civilly just and morally unjust. 5. To accuse may be judicial, or extra
judicial. Judicially, a Prince as a Prince, cannot be accused by his subject,
as such. Yet the subject may represent unto his sovereign his saults, and by
way of humble petition, desire them to be reformed.
T H.

Whatsoever the Sovereign does is unpunishable by the subject: because if the
subject punish him, he punishes another for his own actions.

G. L.

1. A Sovereign as a Sovereign, cannot be punished by his subject as his
subject. 2. Yet he that is supreme only for administration, may be punished and
put to death. Thus the Ephori might punish the Lacedaemonian Kings, and the
Justice of Arragon the Kings of that Kingdom. 3. Absolute Princes may cease to
be such, and then they differ not from other men. And it will be an hard task
to prove that any consent of man or humane title, can free one from punishment
with death, who is guilty of a crime which God has determined to be capital,
and commanded to be punished with death. 4. Why should it be lawful for a
foreign Prince, warring and proving victorious upon a just quarrel, to put a
wicked Prince to death: and not for those who have been his subjects, when they
have power to do it, and tends to the public good, which cannot possibly
without this act of justice, be preserved? Yet this cannot warrant any cursed
Rebels, or Traitors, or the like, to murder Princes: though their pretenses
may be colored with piety and justice.
The jura Majestatis, or rights of higher-powers following are truly such. Two
things only I take notice of, 1. That the Prince is only Judge of Doctrines
taught, so far as either the matter of right, or manner of teaching may be
prejudicial to the State, or beneficial to the same: as the Doctrine of the
Gospel wisely taught, always is a blessing. 2. Whereas he affirms that there
is no propriety before a form of Government be established, its evidently
false; and civil Laws determine how every man may keep or recover that which is
by justice his own.
According to his rules, the institution of a Sovereign takes away all
propriety of the subject.

That the rights of Sovereigns are indivisible and incommunicable, is true, if
rightly understood. To this purpose Authors distinguish these royalties into
the greater and the less, and say, the latter may, the former cannot be divided
or communicated. Others affirm, That in a mixed State, they of necessity must;
in a pure State, they must not be either divisible, or communicable. This point
may be made more clear, if we understand, 1. That these rights or jura, are but
so many branches of one and the same power supreme civil, as it may act upon
several objects. And all these branches are reducible to three; For supreme
power civil is, Legislative, Judicial, Executive, as before; and because it
extends to these three acts, therefore it may be said to be threefold. And all
these rights reckoned up by him, which are such indeed, are contained under
these three, though neither he nor other Authors have much observed it. Amongst
these the Legislative is the principal, not only the first but the chiefest,
yet the other are necessary, because without them its in vain; for what are
Laws without Judgment and Execution? yet even the Laws regulate both. And to
know who are Sovereign in any act, the only infallible way is by the
Legislation. For in whomsoever the Legislative power originally is, he or they
are supreme; for it is not the actual making of certain rules to order all
things in a State, but the giving of a binding force unto them, which makes the
Sovereign.

This power, not only as it is a power, but as supreme, cannot be divided. For
if you take any essential part from it, you destroy it, so that its indivisible
in it self. 2. In respect of the subject: For whether the subject be the
Community, or the Optimates, they must be considered as one person morally,
though they be many physically: and the reason is, they must go all together,
otherwise there can be no first mover in a State; for it is one supreme power
in it self, and must also be in one subject: yet for the administration it may
be divided: because the Sovereign does exercise this power, and acts severally
by several Officers, which are but instruments animated and acted by him. This
power is also incommunicable within one and the same community and territory,
except you will constitute more States then one.

T. H. page 93.

If there had not first been an opinion recieved of the greatest part of
England, that these powers were divided between the King, and the Lords and the
Commons, the people had never been divided, and fallen into these civil wars.

G. L.

The cause moral of these wars, was our sins: the Political cause was the
maladministration; yet so, that all sides have offended through want of
wisdom, and many other ways. The ignorance of Politics in general, and of our
own constitution in particular, cannot be excused or excepted; What the ancient
constitution was, we know not certainly, though some relics of the same
continued till our times: but the whole frame was strangely altered and
corrupted. Many different opinions there be concerning our Government; yet
three amongst the rest are most remarkable: For one party conceives the King to
be an absolute Monarch: A second determines, the King, Peers, and Commons to be
three coordinate powers, yet so that some of them grant three Negatives, some
only two: A third party give distinct rights unto these three: yet in this they
are sub-divided, and they would be thought to be more rational, who give the
Legislative Power unto the Lords and Commons in one house; the judicial, to the
Lords in a distinct house, and the executive to the King, who was therefore
trusted with the Sword both of War and Justice: None of these can give
satisfaction. There is another opinion, which puts the supreme power radically
in the 40. Counties, to be exercised by King, Peers and Commons, according to
certain rules, which by Antiquaries in Law, together with some experienced
Statesmen of this Nation, might be found out, but are not. The seeds of this
division were sown and begun to appear before the wars; and the opinion, that
all these were only in one man, that is the King absolutely, some say, was the
greatest cause, not only of the last, but also of other civil wars in former
times: And it has been observed, that every man liked that opinion best, which
was most suitable to his own interest. Our several opinions in Religion have
heightened our differences, and hindered our settlement; yet Religion is but
pretended; for every party aims at civil power, not spiritual liberty from sin.
And the power to settle us thus woefully distracted, is only in God; and if he
ever will be thus merciful unto us, the way whereby he will effect it, will be
by giving the greatest power to men of greatest wisdom and integrity, not by
reducing us unto one opinion, that all the powers civil must be in one, as the
Author does fondly fancy: Let the form be the best in the world, yet without
good Governors its in vain.

The subject of this Chapter is [Majestas] [and jura Majestatis] the Rights of
Sovereigns, which this Author has handled very poorly; and if he had but
translated that which others had more excellently written in this particular
before him, he might have informed us better, given his Reader more
satisfaction, reduced them to a better method, and neither have made such to be
Rights which are none, nor omitted those which truly are such, as he has done.

CAP. III. Of the Second part, and the Nineteenth of the Book, of the several
kinds of Commonwealths by institution, and of succession to the Sovereign
power.
BY these brief contents it appears, that the subject of this Chapter is the
distinction of Commonwealths, and Succession to the Sovereign power, in a
successive State. In the first part, he 1. Reduces all Commonwealths to three
kinds. 2. Prefers Monarchy, one of them, before all the rest.


T. H.

Other kind of Commonwealths besides Monarchy, Democracy, Aristocracy, there
cannot be.

G. L.

This is conceived to be a distribution into species or kinds; yet if we
thoroughly examine it, it is not so; for its but an accidential difference: For
it arises only from the distinct and different manner of disposing the supreme
power, in one or more. In more, and these are the [Optimates] some of the best
and most eminent, or in the whole Community. Yet in all these the essential
acts of Government (and so the Sovereign power) are the same in all States: and
they are, as you heard before three, Legislation, Judgment and Execution; for
its merely accidental to the supremacy to be disposed more or more. That it
must be disposed in some certain such sect is necessary; and that as the
Supremacy is one and indivisible, so the subject must be one also, and that
either physically or morally: The great variety of Commonwealths, which is
such, that there be not two in the whole world in all things like, arises not
from the constitution, but from the different manner of administration: Though
the Author denies all mixed Commonwealths; yet wise and learned men, which
without disparagement to him, may be preferred before him, as in other things,
so in State-learning, have said, 1. That there is no pure Monarchy, or
Aristocracy, or Democracy in the world. 2. That not only some, but all
Commonwealths are in some measure mixed or tempered and allayed, because they
conceive its hardly possible for any pure State to continue long. Against these
I find in Mr. Hobbs a verbal contradiction, but no real confutation.


And it seems to me he never truly understood them, neither has he taken
notice of the difference between Real and Personal Majesty; or of the Natural
or Ethical subject of Supremacy, or of the exercise thereof by certain persons,
and the constant inherency of it in a certain subject. And we know by
experience, that such as are only trusted with the exercise of supreme power,
will by little and little usurp it, and in the end plead prescription. So Lewis
the 11. of France, when he violated the Laws of the constitution, removed all
such as by right ought to have poysed him, could boast, That he had freed the
Crown from Wardship. And this has been the practice of the Princes of Europe,
which in the end will prove their ruin, as for the present it has been their
trouble. There is no Commonwealth, but may be reduced to one of these three,
in some respect; yet so, that Monarchies differ as much from one another, as
they differ from the other two: Some are regal, some despotical; and there be
several sorts of these. But I do not intend at this time to contest with him
about this distribution but proceed.

T. H.

Tyranny and Oligarchy are but different names of Monarchy and Aristocracy,
not different forms of Governments.

G. L.

These names do not signify Chimera's, but real Entities; and if any have
abused them to signify forms of Government, let them answer for themselves; I
know them not, they cannot be men of any note; Tyranny does not signify
Monarchy, nor Oligarchy an Aristocracy. They signify the vicious corruption of
States degenerate from their original constitution, and that by the wickedness
of a Prince, and the faction of an assembly engrossing power, and enhansing it
above that which is due and just, and so become a multitude of Tyrants; and
this has been the cause, why many Nations, when they had power in their own
hands, have altered the form of Government, been jealous of trusting one man or
assembly of men long with too much power, and the wisest have set their wits on
the rack, to find out a way, how to limit and restrain the power of their
Governors.

T. H.

Subordinate Representatives are dangerous: And I know not how that so manifest
a truth should of late be so little observed, that in a Monarchy, he that had
the Sovereignty from a descent of 600. years, was alone called Sovereign, had
the title of Majesty from every one of his subjects, and was unquestionably
taken by them for their King, was notwithstanding never considered as their
Representative: that name without contradiction, passing for the title of those
men, which at his command, were sent up by the people to carry their petitions,
and give him (if he permitted) their advice.

G. L.

This man deserves to be a perpetual slave; his intention is to make men
believe, that the Kings of England were absolute Monarchs, their subjects
slaves, without propriety of goods, or liberty of person, the Parliaments of
England merely nothing but shadows, and the members thereof but so many
carriers of letters and petitions between home and the Court; What he means by
subordinate Representatives, I know not; I think his intention is to oppose
those, who affirmed King, Peers, and Commons to be coordinate, not subordinate
powers, and all of them jointly to make up one supreme; Subordinate
Representatives or powers he may safely and must grant in all States. The word
Representative, he either does not understand, or if he do, he intolerably
abuses his unwary and unlearned Reader by that term. A Representative in the
Civil Law, called (...), is one who by his presence supplies the place of
another that is absent, for some certain end, as to act that which another
should do, but in his own person does not, yet with the consent of the person
represented, so far as that the thing is judged to be done by him. And in this
sense, the person representing, is Judged to be one with the person represented
by fiction of Law. And one may represent another as a Superior, who may
represent another in any act, so far as that other is in his power: or as an
inferior, by a power derived from his superior; or as an equal by consent, so
far as the person will undertake to act for him. In all these representations,
the Representee and the Representer are judged one person. In a Free State, a
Parliament is a Representative of the whole body of the people; this we call a
general Representative. The reason of this representation is, because the whole
body of a people cannot well act personally. What kind of Representative the
Parliament of England was, is hard to know, except we knew certainly the first
institution, which, by tract of time, and many abuses of that excellent
Assembly, is now unknown. It was certainly trusted with the highest acts of
Legislation, Judgment, Execution. The whole body consisted of several orders
and ranks of men, as of King, Peers, Commons, the Clergy. Whether they might
meddle with the constitution or no, is not so clear; its conceived they could
not alter it, though they might declare it what it was. Their power was great
without all doubt, yet not so great, but that it was bounded, and a later
Parliament might alter and reform what a former had established, which argues,
That the 40. Counties, and the whole body of the people whence all Parliaments
have their original and being, as they are Parliaments, were above them. In
this great assembly, the Knights and Burgesses did represent the Connties and
the Buroughs; the Convocation, the whole body of the Clergy; the Peers, by
ancient tenure, their Families, Vassals, and Dependants. But whom the King
should represent is hard to determine. If the Law did consider him as an
infant, and this according to the constitution, he could represent no other
person or persons. And if this be so, then there is plain reason why he never
should have the title of Representative; yet evident reason there is, why the
rest should be called a Representative: and the people are not Representers, as
he fondly imagines, but the persons represented.

Its affirmed by the Author, 1. That our Government is a Monarchy. 2. The King
had the Sovereignty from a descent of 600. years. 3. Was alone called
Sovereign. 4. Had the title of Majesty from every one of his Subjects. 5. Was
unquestionably taken by them for their King.


1. Our Government is called a Monarchy] is true, and he himself in this
Chapter confesses that Elective limited Kings are called Monarchs, and their
Kingdoms Monarchies; yet he says, they are not so. Again, Monarchy is Regal
over freemen, Despotical over slaves and servants, not by a Legal but an
Arbitrary power. If he say its Regal, then the King is no absolute Monarch as
he would have him to be. If he say its Despotical, its false, and we know it so
to be false. And the Doctrine of Dr. Sibthorp, and Mannering, or Martin,
affirming this, was condemned by a whole Parliament, and that by men who have
been as great Zealots for the King in these civil wars as any other.

2. The King of England had Sovereignty by a descent of 600. years;] But first,
what does he mean by Sovereignty? If he understand an absolute supreme power,
its not true: the Kings of England have no such thing. Its true, that many of
them did challenge so much power as they could acquire and keep; and as their
sword was longer or shorter, so their power in possession was more or less. Yet
by the constitution of Law, and the best custom, it was always determined
within certain bounds. Secondly, Whence will he commence the date of 600.
years? and how will he derive the Sovereignty? If from the Conqueror, the date
of so many years is not yet expired, and the Succession is interrupted, if not
cut off by the sword upon a civil war. If he derive this power from the
Conqueror as Conqueror; all free English men will deny it; the Kings themselves
durst not challenge it upon those terms, and by consent they never had it.
Therefore the Sovereignty, the time of the commencement, the title it self does
vanish. He says something, proves nothing; that he was called Sovereign, does
neither prove that he was really such, nor that he was absolute, and that by
his own confession.

3. The King had the title of Majesty from every one of his subjects] The title
or name does not prove the thing: for we know very well, that the title is
constantly given to diverse Princes who have not the thing, no more then our
Kings had the Kingdom of France, though they had the title of the Kings of
France: France was so civil as to grant the title and the word, but never part
with the thing. The Dukes of Venice (as Contarene tells us) had insignia sed
non potestatem regis. Majestas is sometimes maxima dignitas, and this no
subject denied to the King. He had his Scepter and his Throne, his Robe and
Diadem; but all these are far short of supreme power: Majestas is Personalis
aut Realis. Real he had not, Personal he might have. Yet personal Majesty might
be his either in respect of dignity, as it was, or in respect of power; and
that also two ways; either in respect of the whole power, and all the acts
thereof; or 2. in respect of the executive only, so far as that all
Commissions, Judgments, Executions determined by Law, should run in his name,
as they did. I remember I have read in the Mirror something to this purpose,
That in the first constitution of this Government of England, in the time of
the Saxons, the 40. Counts, of the 40. Shires or Counties set up a King above
them, so that he had neither any one his Superior, nor his Peer; Yet ex
obligatione criminis, by his mis-government the 40. Counts jointly together
might judge him, whether in their own names, or the name of the 40. Counties,
may be a question. And in this sense I believe is to be understood that saying,
Rex singulis major, universis minor. Let these things be so or no, (for they
are out of my sphere) its certain the Kings of England had the title of
Majesty, yet that's no argument at all that he was invested with the supreme and
universal power.

4. He was unquestionably taken by them for their King.] I grant he both was so
taken, and was so truly and indeed. And when our Kings were such as were more
tender of the peoples good, then their own greatness, and also governed by the
direction of a wise and faithful Council, they found them the most loving and
loyal subjects of any in the world. For the English always desired to be
governed as men, not as Asses. And this is the quality of all understanding
people of other Nations. Some are not capable either of a mild, or moderate
power.

Eminent Authors who take upon them to know Law and the power of Kings, have
said, 1. That the King of England may be judged, so Horn. 2. That he is in Law
considered as Infans minorennis, as a pupil always in nonage; and as his
Courts and Officers can do nothing but in his name, so he can do nothing but by
their heads and hands, and he cannot take away the formalities of judicial
proceedings, nor by all his power revoke or make null the Judgment of any
Court. So several Authors. 3. He has not Regiam potestatem, sed politicam a
populo effluxam; so Fortescue the great Chancellor. 4. That he was a King by
Law, not above Law, and could not exercise any power but according to Law. 5.
He was sworn corroborare leges, quas vulgus eligeret: where vulgus, is populus,
and populus eligit leges; and as the Lawgiver, so his Oath. 6. No King made a
Law without a Parliament, nor could justly impose a Subsidy upon the people
without a Parliament. These two things foreign writers could observe. 7. By
the manner of their Coronation, which was turned to a Formality, he derived not
his power from the first investiture, as some tell us, the Princes of Germany
and the Kings of France do; nor from his immediate predecessor, but by
Election; and this is agreeable to Fortescue, A populo effluxam. 8. King Henry
8. desires by an act of Parliament to be empowered to design by will which of
his children he should please, for to succeed him.
What power either Kings or Parliaments have assumed and exercised de facto,
and not de jure, might be observed by some men, and brought into example, yet
to little purpose. From all this every one may see what little credit is to be
given to Arniseus and Besoldus, and some other outlandish writers, who affirm
the Kings of England to be absolute Monarchs. For they took their information
either from partial or ignorant men, or from unlearned Histories, as many of
our English be. For few of our Historians have been either Antiquaries in Law,
or learned and experienced Statesmen, such as Thucidides, Xenophon, Polybius,
Livy, Tacitus, Guiccardine, Commeignes, and such like have been: These are men
that could penetrate into the bowels of a State, and discover the inward
fabric of the same.

T. H.

Monarchy is the best form of Government.

G. L.

This is the substance of the next part of this Chapter. And in this particular
I will not be tedious, nor answer him word by word. But 1. Its certain there is
no absolute Monarch but one, and that is the eternal glorious God. 2. Monarchy
well regulated, may be a good Government amongst men. 3. There are several
kinds of Monarchies so called, and some better then another. 4. Monarchy may be
good for some people, bad for another, and sometimes good for the same people,
sometimes not. 5. To infer that Monarchy in general is the best kind of
Government always for all people, because some kind of Monarchy is sometimes
good, for some kind of people, is very absurd.
One of our learned Bishops in his answer to Bellarmine, who affirmed
Monarchical Government was the best, and therefore the Government of the Church
must be such, says, that purple is the best color, yet not the best for the
Cardinals face, so it is in this case. No man (I think) can demonstrate the
Government of Angels to be Monarchical. There may be amongst those blessed
spirits primatus ordinis, not jurisdictionis. We do not read that God did ever
immediately institute a form of Government to any people except to Israel; yet
that was not Monarchical. And though Monarchy were supposed to be the best, yet
wise men having the opportunity, did never institute that form of Government
which in it self was best, but the best the people were capable of. I am no
enemy to Monarchy, and I desire all Christian States to be content with their
present form of Government, especially if they may enjoy peace and the Gospel.
If divine Providence bring them into such a condition, as that they must, or
may lawfully and safely alter, let them use their utmost power to make the
alteration so, that it may be a reformation. To endeavor a change in a quiet
State, and that out of ambition, or an humor of innovation, or an high conceit
of their own State-learning, will much offend God, and bring great misery on
man. Alterations in Government, which though they be for the better, if sudden,
are dangerous: and should be made insensibly and by little and little; yet so,
that if there be any thing in the former old constitution, which is good, it
should be retained; what wise Politicians have done in this kind, Histories
inform us; as in England if the Common Law, which so many excellent Lawyers
have so highly commended, as next unto the eternal Law, were introduced, it
would prove a wonderful compendium in the regulation of Justice, and cut off a
world of useless Statutes, which are rather an impediment, then a furtherance
to Justice. There may be many forms of Government, and all good, yet its
certain, that is the best, which provides most effectually for good Officers in
the administration. If we may believe Contzen the Jesuit, There are amongst
others, in the constitution of the Empire of China, two excellent rules
constantly put in practice; The one is an Office or College, whose duty is to
inform the King of his errors, and never to cease petitioning in the name of
the people, till he reform, and return to the observation of the Laws. These
also inform the King of the miscarriage of all other Officers, though never so
great. The other rule and practice is, every third year to make a severe and
rigid inquisition into the administration of all Magistrates, and to put out
and punish the unjust, negligent, and unworthy, and to establish the just.

The Author endeavors to prove the excellency of Monarchy above other forms,
because it has conveniences proper to it self, and is free from
inconveniences incident to Aristocratical and Democratical States. Yet this is
to little purpose. For, 1. The best forms have their imperfections. 2. The
inconveniences mentioned, are easily prevented by wise Statesmen, even in
other forms of Government.


The discourse following, concerning elective and limited Monarchies so called,
yet are not such, as also concerning succession, I omit. 1. Because others have
discussed these points in their Political systems more accurately. 2. Because
though some things are both ignorantly and untruly affirmed, yet they are not
worthy to be taken notice of, much less of any refutation.


CAP. IV. Of the Second Part, the twentieth of the Book, of Paeternal and
Despotical Dominion.
THE method of Politics is miserably perverted by the Author. For whereas
power is first acquired before a Commonwealth can be constituted, he first
informs us of the several kinds of Constitutions, which arise from the
different manner of disposing the power acquired, and after that of several
ways how the power is acquired. And further to bewray his ignorance of the
rules of Government, he confounds Oeconomical power with Political, so that I
may truly say, that he is one of the worst that ever wrote either of Civil or
Ecclesiastical Politics.

In this Chapter he undertakes, 1. To define a Commonwealth by acquisition,
and to show the difference between it, and that by constitution. 2. To declare
how dominion is acquired. 3. To prove the Sovereign rights out of Scripture. 4.
From thence to demonstrate that all Sovereign power is absolute.


T. H.

A Commonwealth by acquisition, is that where the Sovereign power is acquired
by force -- And the difference of this from that of constitution is, that in
the former, men subject themselves for fear of the Sovereign. in the latter for
fear of one another.

G. L.

This is the substance, though not all his words, where we must observe, That
this is no distinction of a Commonwealth, but of the manner how the power,
whereby any is made a Sovereign, is acquired: and that all Sovereigns do one
way or other acquire their power: for its merely accidental, no ways essential
to any man, for to be invested with power. And howsoever the Sovereignty civil
be obtained, it makes no difference in the Commonwealth. For in every state
the power is acquired, and so there is no Commonwealth but its both by
acquisition and constitution too. So that he has made a distinction without a
difference.

T. H.

Dominion is acquired two ways, by Generation and Conquest: The first is
Paternal, the latter is Despotical.

G. L.

This is very defective, as in this place its heterogeneous and impertinent.
What have we to do with Family-power in a Commonwealth? For Familes as they
make vicinities, and vicinities a Community civil, are but a remote material
part of Politics. In a Family there is a threefold power acquired; the power
of an husband over his wife by marriage, covenant or contract, the power of
parents over their children, by generation; the power of Masters over their
servants, acquired several ways; for some servants are slaves, some are free;
Slaves are vernae, servants born in the Family: or emptitii, bought with money:
such as are free be conductitii: The two former are more subject then the last;
and the Master has more power over the former sort who are born and bought,
then over the latter, who are only hired. So that there is a difference of
Despotical power even in a Family; the one is more absolute, the other more
limited.

Sovereignty civil is acquired several ways, and all may be reduced to two.
For men come unto this power either justly or unjustly. Justly, and that either
in an extraordinary way, as by special unction and designation from God: thus
Saul, and David, and David's lawful Successors of his Family were made (the two
first by particular nomination, the other by ageneral entail) or in an ordinary
manner, and that is either by the Law of Nature, or by institution. By the Law
of Nature, when a multitude sufficient for their own protection and government,
associate and by union and communion become a Community, the Sovereignty is
virtually and eminently in themselves, and in the whole body of the people
being free: and this is so natural a subject, that upon the defect of
succession, it returns unto them again. By institution and more formal
contract; and that is by a free and full election, or by a submission to a
Conqueror, which is so far voluntary, that if they had power to protect
themselves, they would not submit. Unjustly by usurpation, when he or they who
have no right, yet take the possession into their own hands in a way contrary
to the Laws of God, and the consent of men: yet such an Usurper cannot be a
Sovereign without some kind of consent of God and man. In this case fraud or
force gets the advantage over the people so far, as that they must submit or do
worse. When any ascend the Throne by Marriage, Succession; Election, they are
made Governors by institution, with free and full consent. In all this I speak
of the supreme, not the subordinate power, which is by Commission derived from
the supreme. In all these ways of acquiring power, we must distinguish between
power of constitution in constitution, and in administration; and also take
special notice that there is no power which can govern without consent not only
of man, but also and especially of God, who either in justice and severity, or
in mercy does change and alter the Kingdoms of the world at will and pleasure.
For he alone does rule in heaven and earth at all times.

Thus far concerning the acquisition of power, and of the [jura majestatis]
rights of Sovereigns, which he conceives to have made clear by reason, and now
in the next place undertakes to prove out of Scripture, yet in such a loose and
implous abusive manner, that I verily persuade my self, he does not believe
them to be revealed and written from heaven, or that Jesus Christ was an
ordinary just man, much less the Eternal Son of God incarnate.

T. H. page 105.

Lets now consider what the Scripture teaches in the same point: To Moses the
children of Israel say thus, Speak thou to us, and we will hear thee: but let
not God speak to us, lest we die. This is absolute obedience to Moses.

G. L.

This is the first Scripture alleged by him; we read it in Exodus 20.19. To
understand these words, we must consider, 1. That cap. 19.8. That all the
people answered together, and said, All that the Lord has said, that will we
do. This was an absolute subjection of themselves to God, and a promise to obey
him. 2. That the Lord said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud,
that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever,
Verse 9. This was to procure authority and credit unto Moses, as a Messenger
between God and Israel. 3. That the words of Exodus 20.19. quoted by the Author,
are expounded, Deuteronomy. 5.27. For thus there we read, Go thou near, and hear all
that the Lord our God shall say: and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our
God shall speak to thee, and we will hear it and do it.
From all which it is apparent, 1. That the people had formerly before they
spoke these words, subjected themselves to God: and he was their Sovereign, not
Moses. 2. That they promise to obey the words of God declared by Moses, not as
they were the words and Laws of Moses, but of God, they will do them. 3. That
they promise to believe Moses as a Messenger between God and them, not obey him
as their supreme Lord.
Its one thing to believe Moses as a Prophet from God, and to yield him
absolute obedience as a King. Believe him as a Prophet they might, obey him as
their King they must not. God was their King, and Moses his Messenger and
servant. How grossly therefore does he abuse the place? how absurdly and falsely
does he thence infer the peoples promise of absolute obedience to Moses, which
was only due and promised unto God?

T. H.

Concerning the right of Kings, God himself by the mouth of Samuel says, This
shall be the right of the King you will have to reign over you, he shall take
your sons, etc. 1 Samuel 8.11, 12, etc.

G. L.

1. The translation, which he confessed is allowed by his Sovereign and the
Church of England, is perverted. For instead of This will be the manner of the
King, he turns it, This shall be the right of the King. There is a great
difference between right which is always just, and manner or custom, which is
many times unjust. 2. If this be a prerogative of Sovereigns, then its a very
great misery to be subject to a King; and that in two respects. 1. Because he
will take away from his subjects unjustly, that which justly is their own, even
the best things. 2. Because by doing thus, he will oppress them so grievously,
that having no remedy or redress from man, they will cry unto God for
deliverance from a King, as a great and intolerable mischief.
3. If it be the right of a King, yet it is but the right of heathen Despotical
Princes, and not of the Kings of Israel. But how can it be the right of heathen
Kings, seeing they had no power to oppress and do wrong? 4. It could not be the
right of the Kings of Israel; for they were bound to act and judge according to
the Laws God had made; yet these acts here mentioned, are directly contrary to
those Laws and Rules of Regal Government, delivered by God himself. For he must
have a copy of the Laws, and read in it all his life, that he may fear God,
keep his Laws, not exalt himself above his Brethren, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20.
Neither did the Kings of Judah or Israel, no not wicked Ahab practice or make
use of this power, as is evident in the case of Naboths Vineyard. 5. To do
according to this power pretended in this place, is directly contrary to the
very end of all Government civil, which is to do justice and judgment, to
preserve to every one his own, to protect the good, and punish the bad. How
shall he punish the Oppressor, when he is the great Oppressor himself? How can
he do justice upon thieves, when he is the greatest thief in his Kingdom? 6. If
this should be the right of the Kings of Israel, and of all Sovereigns, then
though the people of Israel were a free people, yet if a King was once set over
them, they were mere slaves: neither their Lands, nor their goods, nor their
children, nor their servants were their own; and also by this reason, there can
be no subjects in any state under heaven, that can have propriety or liberty,
but all are mere and absolute servants and slaves. Kings may have potentiam,
but not potestatem, force and fraud, but no just power to oppress their
subjects, and do such things as are here mentioned. Whereas some say, That God
in this place teaches us what Kings may do, and in Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. what
they ought to do, is to little purpose, as being more acute then solid. For id
quisque potest, quod jure potest. And no man, no not the greatest Princes in
the world, have any power to do that which is unjust. 7. Its a question whether
they had such a King as they desired. For they desired a King which would
offend God, and oppress them: but God gave them such a King as had no power to
make Laws, but such as were bound to Judge according to the civil or judicial
Laws made by himself; and even in the time of Kings, he reserved the Sovereign
Rights in his own hand.
It seems they understood not well, what kind of King they had desired; for to
maintain the state and pomp of a great Court, and an army in constant pay, was
a vast charge, and required such a revenue as could no ways be raised without
the great oppression of the people. And this they did not consider, neither
would understand till it was too late, and the yoke was upon their necks, and
the burden pressed them very sore. When Princes are trusted with an absolute
power to raise men and moneys at their will and pleasure, they will not be
content with the ordinary Revenue of their Crowns, but what they cannot obtain
justly by the Laws, and the constitution of the State, they will force by the
sword, and so the Government proves military, and in the end merely arbitrary.
Whereas Mr. Hobbs conceives, That to go in and out before them, and Judge the
people, contains as absolute a power of the Militia and Judicature, as one man
can possibly transfer unto another, he is much deceived. For both these may be
had in a despotical, or a Regal way, or by Commission. The first is absolute,
the two latter are not so. The Kings of Sparta, Poland, Arraegon, might have
both these, and yet be no absolute Sovereigns.

T. H.

Solomon prayed that God would give him understanding to judge his people, and
discern between good and evil, 1 Kings 3.8. therefore he had the Judicial and
Legislative power supreme and absolute.

G. L.

This is his meaning, and thus he understands these words, wherein we may
observe, 1. Solomon's place and duty as King of Israel, and that was to judge
that people. 2. That this duty could not be well performed without wisdom. 3.
God does give wisdom for that purpose: These things are employed. 4. Solomon
prases for wisdom to that end. Neither from his place or prayer will it follow
that he had the supreme, absolute, legislative power in himself alone: Neither
indeed had he any such thing at all, for God had made the Laws both Civil and
Ecclesiastical.
And he could neither alter or abrogate them, but was bound precisely and
strictly to judge according to them, and neither depart unto the right hand or
the left. And suppose Solomon had been invested with this power, does it
therefore follow that all other Kings have the like?

The rest which follow are not worthy any answer. He instanceth, 1. In Saul,
whom being their Lords anointed, David did not slay, though he was in his
power. And what follows hence, but only thus much, That no man in David's case,
and of David's conscience, dare secretly put to death a King anointed by Gods
special and immediate Word. 2. Servants must obey their Masters, and Children
their Parents in all things. And what is this to purpose? Does it hence follow,
that all Kings have absolute power? what impertinent and absurd illations are
these? But, 3. Christ's Disciples must observe and do all that the Scribes and
Pharisees bid them, as sitting in Moses Chair. From hence it cannot be
concluded, that they had Sovereign power civil, no more then Ministers of the
Gospel have it, because the people must observe and do all that they bid them
out of the Gospel. 4. Paul charge Titus, cap. 3.2. to warn the people of
Creet, that they subject themselves to Princes, and to those that are in
authority, and obey them. And his gloss is, this is simple obedience. What is
this to absolute and supreme power? By this may be as easily proved, that every
petty Officer has supreme power, as well as any other; for an Officer must be
obeyed, because he is in Authority. 5. Christ commands to give to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and paid taxes himself. All that can be inferred from
hence is, That tribute is to be paid, to whom tribute is due: and that it is
due from Provinces to their supreme Governors.
The sum of all these places amounts to thus much in. Politics, That the
chief commands in war, just Judgment in peace, or the exercise of Jurisdiction
belonged unto the Kings of Judah, and tribute to the Roman Emperor. How many
plain and express places of Scripture might have been produced to prove that
there is a Legislative, Judicial, Executive power in every State, and that it
is to be exercised by some certain persons designed for that purpose? And the
Author had no need to lay the weight of his praise for these things, upon such
places as do but tacitly and by way of intimation, point at some of them. But
why he should falsify the translation, abuse so many texts, make such woeful
illations from some of them, and so impertinently allege them, I know no
reason: and it seems to me intolerable, that in the last example he should make
Christ Jesus the civil Sovereign of the Jews in the time of his humiliation,
and by virtue of that civil power, to take another man's Ass as his own, which
he did but desire to borrow, and use for a little journey with the consent of
the owner. That the sin of our first parents, in desiring to be as Gods,
knowing good and evil, was an ambition to become civil Sovereigns, he may
persuade us to believe, when he can prove it.

T. H. page 106.

Sovereign power ought in all Commonwealths to be absolute.

G. L.

This I read in the margent; and to his understanding, its plain both from
reason and Scripture, that its as great as possibly a man can be imagined to
make it: This is plainly ridiculous. For what cannot men imagine; seeing their
imaginations can reach to wonders, impossibilities, and many things far above a
civil Sovereign power? And here is a sit occasion offered, to examine what
absolute power is, and in what respect Sovereignty is absolute. There is no
power, as there is no being absolute, but that of Gods, whose power is his
being. Civil supreme power is said to be absolute, because its soluta legibus,
free from the Laws, and not limited and obliged by them. Yet the Laws from
which they are free, as being above them, are only civil Laws made by
themselves, for the administration of the States where they are Sovereign. For
they are so strictly bound by the Law of Reason, Nature, God, which are but all
one divine Law, as they have not the least power to do any thing either as
private persons, or public Sovereigns against them, except they will dethrone
themselves, provoke the wrath of God, and bring his Judgments upon them. They
are besides, subject to the Law of Nature, which is above any particular
Sovereign, though never so great. They are indeed above their own Laws, and may
not only alter many things in them, but abrogate them. Yet so as all this tends
to the public good. They may act upon occasion, above and besides them, as the
general good shall require it. They are not bound unto formalities, but may
omit them. Yet all this is but little, and confined to the narrow compass of
things indifferent, as they are subordinate to pure morals. Its true, that
their power is in some respect arbitrary; yet if they do any thing which either
in it self, or in the circumstances only is unjust, they offend and transgress
the bounds God has put unto their power. And here we must distinguish between
the Sovereign for the Constitution, and the Sovereign for Administration. The
former has more power then the later, who only is above the Laws of
administration, yet both must be just; for they have no power to be unjust. Its
certain that Princes desire to be Gods, absolute, independent, above all Laws,
and to have a privilege to do what they list, and a right to do wrong; and its
a dangerous thing to flatter them, and make them believe their power to be
greater, then indeed it is; for this is the very highway unto ruin. Wise men
have advised all Princes to observe their own Laws made by themselves, and by
their example encourage their subjects to obedience. And this is an effectual
means to procure their safety, and confirm them in their power, and the love of
their subjects.

CAP. V. Of the Second Part, the one and twentieth of the Book, Of the liberty
of subjects.
THE subject of this Chapter is, as in the argument, the liberty of subjects,
which follows the power of Sovereigns in this discourse. And because his method
is no method, but rather a confusion, I do forbear to reduce the Chapter either
to certain Heads or Propositions, and will only observe some few passages, to
manifest that he never understood what liberty is. Liberty of subjects is not
Natural, nor Moral, nor Theological, but Political and Civil. In the Civil
Law, and Politics, its opposed to servitude and bondage, not simply and merely
to obligation by Laws, as he fancieth: for thus he writes.

T. H.

-- So men have also made artificial Charms, called Civil Laws, which they
themselves by mutual Covenants have fastened at one end to the lips of the
Sovereign, at the other to their own ears.

G. L.

The Authors meaning is, That so far as Laws bind the subject, so far they take
away his liberty: and men by constitution of a Sovereign over them, give a
power absolute to make Laws, and so far as they are virtually subject to his
power, and actually bound by his Laws, they cannot be free; yet this well
examined, will not prove true. For not any kind of Obligation takes it away;
for then the Laws of Nature, by which a man is bound, before he be subject to a
civil Sovereign, should deprive him of his liberty, yet they leave him as free
a man, as any possibly in a Free State can be. The Obligation of just Laws and
wise Edicts do regulate liberty, keep it within its proper bounds, and no ways
destroy it, or take it away. Therefore that which follows is questionable. For
he affirms,

T H.

That the liberty of a subject therefore lies only in those things, which in
regulating their actions, the Sovereign has pretermitted.

G. L.

But, 1. In things left indifferent, because not defined by Law, the subject is
not only liber, sed dominus, and has not only libertatem, but potestatem. He
is not only free, but Lord of those actions, and has not only liberty, but
also an absolute power. 2. Though wise and just Laws do regulate actions, yet
they do not make the agent a slave or a servant.
For to be a slave or a servant, is to be cast below the condition of a man,
and make him subject to some thing below himself. Wisdom and Justice are above
the power of the Sovereign, much more above the liberty of a subject. They are
particles of the divine perfection, and to be bound by them, is not only a
liberty, but an honor. To be free from the dominion of our own base lusts and
sins, and the power of Satan, is true liberty divine; and so not to be subject
to the lusts and imperious unworthy commands of absolute Sovereigns, whose
wills, though irrational and contrary to justice, must stand for Laws, is civil
liberty. And then a man is Politically free, when he is so far Master of his
life, goods, children, and that which is justly his, that they cannot be taken
away from him, but for some crime contrary to just Laws, deserving such a
penalty. In a word, the liberty of a subject is such a state or condition, as
that he is neither by the Sovereign power, nor any Laws, bound to do any thing,
which a rational and just man would not willingly do, though there were no Laws
or Penalties Civil at all. This is not to be free from Laws. And I do not know,
who they are, which he says demands any such thing. The rude and ignorant
people, and also all children of Belial, desire to have a license, not only to
do good, but evil too, as they please, and they judge all Laws as heavy
burdens, and grievous yoaks. If he mean that the subjects of England demanding
the benefit of Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, did aim at any such
extravagant liberty, he must needs be a slanderer of his own fellow subjects,
and an enemy to the English liberty, as indeed he is, and that through an
erroneous notion and conceit of absolute power civil. The liberty of the
subjects of this Nation is very great, and such, as if we either consider the
Laws of the Constitution, or Administration, the ordinary and common subjects
of other Nations are but slaves unto them. Our Freeholders have the choice of
their Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament, so that neither any Laws can be
made, nor moneys imposed upon them, without their verbal consent, given by
their Representatives. In all causes, civil, criminal, capital, no Judgment
can pass against them but by the verdict of a Jury made up of their neighbors,
which in it self is an excellent privilege. The Civilians say, Libertas est
res inestimabilis, and to be redeemed at any rate; much more the English
liberty is to be valued, and ever was by our ancestors, who obtained it,
recovered it, kept it, though with the blood of many thousands. But the
question is, whether this liberty is consistent with the Sovereigns power. His
opinion is,

T. H.

That by the liberty of the subject, the Sovereigns power of life and death, is
neither abolished nor limited.

G. L.

Its certain that the Sovereigns power and the subjects liberty are consistent.
For the Sovereign may take away the life of his subject, yet according to the
evidence of Judgment, agreeable to Law: no otherwise. Yet he presupposes, 1.
That the King is supreme, and the primary subject, owner and possessor of the
original power, which sometimes may be, yet with us its far otherwise. 2. That
the power of civil Sovereigns is absolute.
For with him,

T. H.

Nothing the Sovereign representative can do to a subject on what pretense
soever, can properly be called Injustice or Injury, because every subject is
Author of every act the Sovereign does, so that he never wants right to any
thing, otherwise then as he himself is the subject of God, and bound thereby to
observe the Laws of Nature. -- When Jephtah sacrificed his daughter, and David
murdered Uriah, both innocent, yet they did them no injustice, etc.

G. L.

Here he seems to contradict himself. For he grants two things. 1. That the
Sovereign is subject to God. 2. That in that respect he is bound to observe the
Laws of nature; yet he says, he can do no injustice to the subject, and that
he has right to any thing, yet so as he is limited by subjection to God, and
the Laws of Nature.
1. If he be Gods subject, as certainly he is, it follows, 1. That in that
respect he is but trusted as a servant with the Administration of the power
civil. 2. That he is fellow-subject with his subjects. 3. He may do injustice,
as one fellow subject may wrong another.



Secondly, If he be bound to observe the Laws of Nature, which are the Laws of
God; then, 1. He is not absolute, or solutus legibus. His power is limited and
bounded by these Laws. 2. Then he has no power to murder, oppress and destroy
his innocent subjects, who are more Gods then his, and only trusted by God in
his hands for to be protected; righted in all just causes, and vindicated from
all wrongs. 3. No Prince or Sovereign can assume, or any people give to any
person or persons, any the least power above, or contrary unto the Laws of
Nature.
These Laws are the moral precepts of eternal justice and equity, from which
all civil Laws have their rise, and are either conclusions drawn from them, or
certain rules tending to the better observation of them. Which things well
considered, do make it very evident how little the power of civil Lords and
Princes must needs be. In some few indifferent things, they may be absolute,
have arbitrary power, and be in some respect above those constitutive Laws
which they themselves enact.

His instance in Jephtah gives them power above, and contrary to the Laws of
God and Nature. Yet who will grant him, that Jephtah sacrificed his daughter?
The text will not evince it; for it only says, that whatsoever comes forth of
my doors to meet me, etc. shall be the Lords, or I will offer it up for a
burnt-offering, Judges 11.31. For the particle (...) [Vau] turned by some
copulatively for [and] is here, as in many other places, dis-junctive, and
signifies [or]. Again, if Jephtah did sacrifice her, he sinned, not only
against the Law of Nature, but also the written Law of Moses: For God gave no
command, permission or toleration to any that we read of, but only to Abraham,
to sacrifice with humane blood; and that Commandment was but to try him; for he
would not suffer him to put him to death. Besides God threatens ruin and
destruction to such as did offer their children to Moloch; and shed their
blood. And their sin was not only because they offered them to Idols and
Devils, but also because they shed innocent blood, without any warrant or
Commission from God, the only supreme and absolute Lord of life. Further, how
could the vow of man, which was but a voluntary Obligation, be above the Law of
God, and make that lawful, which by a Superior Law was unlawful? I verily
believe, she was devoted only, not sacrificed. But suppose he did sacrifice her
to God, to whom he had vowed her, yet he did not this as a Sovereign of her
life, but as a subject to God.

The example of David murdering Vriah, can much less prove the absolute power
of Sovereigns to take away the lives of their innocent subjects. For, David had
no such power: for, 1. He was no absolute Prince, but limited both by the
written Laws of God, and also the Natural. 2. Neither he nor any other can have
any such power, because man cannot, God does not give any such power. 3. David
did not only iniquity, but injustice to Vriah. 1. As his fellow-subject in
respect of God. 2. As his own subject, whom he was bound as innocent to
protect, not to destroy. 4. His proof out of Psalm. 51.4. [Against thee only] is
invalid. For, 1. Though it be so translated by some, and so understood by
Ambrose and others who follow him, yet neither that translation, nor the
interpretation thereon, can be evinced either out of the Original, or the
Septuagint, or the vulgar, or Junius, or Vatablus. 2. Genebrard, Vatablus,
Junius, Ainsworth and others understand it, that God only was privy to, and
knew of this sin: and the words following [And done this evil in thy sight]
seem to confirm this sense.
5. Yet suppose it should be turned [against thee only] yet others interpret
[onely] to be principally, as supreme Lawgiver and Judge, not only to me, but
all others; who only have the Original power of punishing and pardoning, not
only me, but others, and that not only temporally, but spiritually and
eternally. Yet the exposition of Ambrose is taken up, because Princes desire
it, to be so absolute; and both Divines and other men are very ready to slatter
such as are in present possession of power.



But to make the point more evident, let me digress a little, and search out
the reason and cause of the power of life and death, as in the hands of civil
Sovereigns. To this end observe, That no man has absolute power of his own
life, as he has of his goods: Man may have the use and possession, but not the
propriety and dominion of it. Therefore its granted on all hands, that though a
man's life be said to be his own, yet he may not be felo de se, and kill
himself; he is not Master of his life so far, as to have any power or liberty
to do any such thing. Its true that God, who is Lord of life and death, gives
liberty to man in some cases to hazard, in some he commands to lay down his
life. He may hazard it in a just war and defense of his own Country, and also
of himself, against an unjust invader. He must lay down his life, and God
commands it for the testimony of Christ, in which case he that loses it shall
find it. From all this it follows, that no people can by making a Sovereign,
give any absolute power of life and death unto him: For nothing can give that
which it has not: neither can they make themselves Authors of the unjust acts
of their Sovereign, much less of his murders, and taking away the lives of
their innocent subjects. Id enim quisque potest quod jure potest. If thus it
be, then they must have power to take away life, from God who alone has power
of life: and this power he only gives in case the subject be guilty of such
crimes as by his Laws are capital.

T. H. page 110. in the margent.

The liberty which writers praise, is the liberty of Sovereigns, not of private
men.

G. L.

By writers, he means the Roman and Greek Historians and Philosophers, who
wrote so much of liberty; amongst the rest, especially Aristotle and Cicero. By
this, it seems he never understood these Authors, though he accuse others of
ignorance. The liberty which the English have challenged and obtained with so
much expense of blood, is not the power of Kings, much less of absolute
Sovereigns, as he would make the world believe, but that which is due unto us
by the constitution of the State, Magna Charta, the Laws, and the Petition of
Right. Its but the liberty of subjects, not Sovereigns, when he has said all
he can; we are not willing to be slaves, or subject our selves to Kings as
absolute Lords. Neither are we willing that either flattering. Divines,
Court-Parasites, or Unjust Ministers of State should wind up the pretended
prerogative so high, as to subject our lives and estates, and also our Religion
to the arbitrary, absolute, and unreasonable will of one man, whom they did
desire to advance so much for their own interest. There is a difference between
the subjects liberty, whereby in many things he may command himself, and
supreme power which commands others under their Supremacy. By liberty,
Aristotle and Cicero meant such a privilege as every subject might have in a
Free State, not that Sovereignty which belonged to the whole and universal body
over several persons; where it is to be noted, that one and the same person,
who is a subject, and at the best but a Magistrate, has a share in the
Sovereign power. Yet this he has, not as a single person; but as one person
jointly with the whole body, or major part at least of the people. So in our
Parliaments, every man there is as a single person, and all of them any ways
considered but as the joint Representative of the people in a certain place, at
a certain time, acting according to a certain order, are but subjects; yet in
the capacity and habitude of a Parliament, they are no subjects, but in the
name of the people have a Legislative power, and exercise the highest acts of
Government, excepting those of the Constitution. And this may be one reason,
why our English Ancestors have been so careful to maintain and preserve this
great Court and Assembly of Parliaments, because they knew upon that depended
their liberty, in the vacancy and intervals of Parliaments. For take away this,
and our liberty is gone. And wise men know, that the liberty of the English
subject depends upon these great Assemblies. Some therefore have attempted,
either the total extirpation of them, according to the example of France and
Spain; or a diminution of their power and privileges, so as to make them mere
shadows. If any say, and infer from all this, that therefore the form of our
Government even under Kings is popular, and has the nature of a Free State. I
say, it has much of a Free State in the Constitution, but not in the
Administration. Yet its far different from those four kinds of popular
Governments mentioned by Aristotle, Pol. lib. 6. c. 4. The constitution whereof
is little better then levelling. The principal thing aimed at in such forms, as
the Author alleges out of the Philosopher, cap. 2. Ejusdem libri, was
liberty, supposing it could be had no where but in such Governments: and this
liberty was to do either what they pleased, or to govern by course, fearing
lest any person or persons continued long in any eminent place of command,
would in time ingross the power. Yet this supposition was false. For liberty
might be had without levelling, and free-States might be, and have been better
constituted and regulated. For no constitution is good, where provision is not
made, that Wisdom and Justice, rather then persons may govern: and the
multitude so kept under, as that they may be subjects, not rebels, and cast off
all power. To return unto the matter proposed, and conclude this point. 1. The
English liberty is their birthright. 2. Its not the power of Sovereigns. 3.
Its not unlimited, but bounded within reasonable bounds. 4. We do not learn it
out of the Greek and Roman Histories, nor from the Athenians or Romans, but
from our own Laws, which are far different from theirs, and far more agreeable
to the written Laws of God, which left the people of Israel under their Judges
the freest people of the world, and yet no Levellers. 5. Our learning out of
Greek and Latin Authors, has not been bought so dear, or cost so much blood,
except out of the breech of School-hoyes: And most of those who have controlled
the just acts of their Sovereigns, never read, much less understood those
Authors.


T. H. pages 111, 112, 113.

The liberty of the subject is in such things as are neither determined by his
first submission to the Sovereign power, nor by the laws.

G. L.

This is the substance of three pages, and amounts to so much as may easily be
comprised in a few words. For when a subject is not bound either by the Laws of
the Constitution or Administration, he is free according to Mr. Hobbs his
judgment. Yet in proper sense in both these cases, he is no subject; but
[Dominus] and far more then [liber]. The Civilians do better determine the
liberty of the subject to be [potestatem agendi sub publicae defensionis
praesidio] though this be no perfect definition. As before, so now I say, that
liberty here is not opposed to obligation but servitude. For ^o be subject to a
wise Sovereign according to just Laws, is so much liberty as any reasonable man
can desire: for in this respect he is rather subject to God then man; and to
serve him is doubtless perfect freedom. As no Sovereign should be denied so
much power as to protect the least, if innocent, and to punish the greatest, if
guilty; so no subject should be bound to do evil, which is servitude and
bondage indeed, or restrained from doing that good which God commands him.
Civil government was never ordained by God, to be destructive either of moral
or divine virtues, or of the noble condition of man as a rational creature.
Therefore regular submission unto supreme power, will never stand with any
obligation unto evil, or contract for protection except in innocence. Paul
pleading before Festus says, If I be an offender, or have committed any thing
worthy of death, I refuse not to die, Acts 25.11. How this can stand with what
this Author says, when he affirms that its lawful for a man guilty and
condemned to save himself if he can, I leave to others for to examine. From the
Apostles words its evident, he desires no protection, even of himself, as
worthy of death, neither has God given any power to man to save in such a
case. And though any person by the Law of nature may defend himself, yet this
must be done cum moderamine tutelae inculpatae. In case a subject has made
himself capitally guilty, he has forfeited his life to his Sovereign as Gods
Vicegerent, whom he must not resist in the execution of Justice, though he be
not bound to kill himself: neither does the multitude or strength of any such
capital offenders, any ways give them right to resist their Sovereign in
their, own defense, as the Author would have it. For they cannot defend
themselves as men, but they must defend themselves in this case as guilty men,
which is not lawful. How the offer of pardon should take away the plea of
self-defence, I understand not, seeing they had no right before it was offered.
The offer of pardon indeed, if the party offering may be safely trusted, may
take away all fear, and so all color of any plea by force to defend themselves
from that death, which pardon will take away or remove.

In the close of this discourse concerning liberty of the subject, he grants it
a part of this liberty, That the subject may sue his Sovereign, and before a
Judge appointed by the said Sovereign. If this be so, then 1. The subject has
propriety of goods. 2. That he and his Sovereign are two distinct parties, and
in this case the Sovereign represents him not as one person. 3. That the Law in
this respect is above the supreme Governor. 4. Therefore the Sovereign is not
absolute. 5. That the subject may complain of some actions and injustice of the
Sovereign, contrary to the Authors fourth right of Sovereigns. 6. That to him
belongs not all Judicature, in all Causes, as in the eighth, right of majesty
he did affirm.
Yet he distinguishes of the Sovereigns demand as twofold, either by virtue of
a Law, or by force; if he demand or take away any thing by power or pretense
thereof, there lies in that case no action of Law, because the subject is made
Author of the Sovereigns acts, and therefore the suit against him, is against
the Plantiff himself, being his subject. If this answer be good, then the
Sovereign may do what he can and will, not what he ought; he may rule according
to his strength and power, and not according to Justice: he may borrow, and
promise to repay; take away, and engage to restore, and yet do no such thing,
but violate his promise and engagement, contrary to the very Law of Nature. He
has a liberty to be unjust and wicked, and that more then any of his subjects,
as he has greater power. I leave him to be a subject of such a Sovereign, and
wish all good men a better. The true reason, why a Sovereign may be sued, is,
1. Because in the institution of a Sovereign, especially of administration, the
subjects may reserve the propriety of their goods, which may be done without
any diminution of a lawful supreme power; and in this case, when a Sovereign
takes away or detains that which is his subjects, and an action is brought
against him, the subject is not his subject, nor he his Sovereign in that
respect. Both of them in this particular are but private persons; and he that
is subject to him as he is just in his Government, questions him as he is
unjust in his actions. Again, propriety belongs unto the Law of nature, which
is above civil power. But he proceeds.

T. H.

If a Monarch, or Sovereign Assembly, grant a liberty to all or any of his
subjects, which grant standing, he is disabled to provide for their safety, the
grant is void, unless he directly renounce or transfer his Sovereignty to
another.

G. L.

By this we easily understand to what purpose the Treaty in the Isle of Wight
with the King was. For though the Parliament had voted his concessions to be
satisfactory, in some respect that of Bishops, and he was ready to close with
them, yet in the judgment of this man, and all that party adhering to the
King, the Parliament was accounted no Parliament, the King an absolute Monarch,
and the Concessions, ipso facto, void: and for this reason, because the King
had disabled himself by granting the Militia to protect his subjects. And the
issue of this Treaty to be expected was this, so far as the King had obtained
liberty and opportunity, he would declare his Concessions void and
unreasonable, and so possess himself of the Militia, and proceed against the
Treators, as Rebels and Enemies; for so they were accounted.

Yet this was not a mere grant of liberty, but of power, which in the Treaty is
presupposed to be his, though confined and a prisoner, and vanquished in a
civil war. But if we will speak properly, the grant of liberty may be such as
it may amount to an exemption from a sufficient degree of subjection, but it
does not transfer the Sovereign power to another; And this must needs be
granted, that to pass away any of the greater rights, is to dethrone. In the
conclusion of this Cap. we are informed when the obligation of the subject to
the Sovereign does cease; and it is then when his power to protect does cease.
And there is great reason for it. For whatsoever his title may be, and how
unjustly soever it may be taken away, and howsoever his subjects may stand well
affected toward him, yet seeing there can be no protection from wrong within,
nor from invasion of enemies without, nor administration of Justice, without
which any people returns unto the confusion of Anarchy, except there be actual
possession of power; therefore Obligation for the present must cease, or at
least be suspended. There be many ways, whereby a Sovereign may cease to be a
Sovereign, as by conquest, death, resignation, cession, etc. and when the
Sovereign cease to be such, the Obligation must needs determine, as to such a
particular Governor. And here I might take occasion to treat of subalternate
Governments, and fiduciary Princes, who are Sovereigns in respect of their
subjects, yet acknowledge a superior, from whom they hold their territory. But
seeing he is silent, I will be so too.

CAP. VI. Of the Second Part, and the two and twentieth of the Book: Of Systems
subject, Political and Private.
I Pass by his divisions and subdivisions of Systems, as being well known to
such as are acquainted either with Politics, or Civil Law. For the subject of
Jurisprudentia civilis, being communio, or communitas hominum; wherein the
Lawyers out of their institutions observe persons, things and actions both
private and public, that they may the better find out the several rights
determined by Law: They distinguish personam in singularem and conjunctam.
Persona conjuncta, consists of several persons distinct Physically, yet made
one by consent and association Politically. And these Systems and Societies may
be considered as parts of the Community, which is the immediate subject of a
Commonwealth, and a civil Government. Some of these are natural, as a Family,
some are voluntary and by institution. In a Commonwealth once constituted, all
these are subject to the supreme power, and their actions are so far
warrantable, as they derive their power from the Sovereign, and are agreeable
to the Laws.

Some of these are made by division, co-ordination, and subordination, as
Provinces, Counties, Hundreds, Allotments, Town-ships, Parishes. Some of them
are Ecclesiastical, some Civil. Some are made by Charter and Patent, and have
their special privileges, and immunnities, and have their Statutes, and power
to make Orders and Bylaws within themselves, and some have jurisdiction within
their liberties. Some are more noble, as Colleges, and Universities, and
Schools, and all such as are Nurseries of Law and Learning; some less noble, as
Corporations, with their several Companies and Officers.

The end of the institution of these, is either for the better and more easy
Government of the whole Community: or for the better education of the subjects
in learning or trades; or for the maintenance, or enriching, or adorning of the
State.

And it concerns the supreme Governors of a State, to have a special care of
these Societies, to order, regulate and reform them, as they shall see occasion
or need. For the good of the Commonwealth does much depend upon the regulation
and wise ordering of them.

CAP. VII. Of the Second Part. Of the Book 23. Of the public Ministers of the
Sovereign power.
MY intention in the examination of the Author, is to manifest, 1. That where
he has done ill, none has done worse. And 2. where he has done well, many
before him have done better.
This latter is my work in this part of his Book, as also in other passages of
his discourse.

The subject of this Chapter is [The Ministers of State] which by some in
Latin are called [Officiales] in English, Officers; and by the same generally
is understood the same with these, who are styled, and that very fitly [Publick
Ministers of the Sovereign Power.] For in all acts of civil Government, the
principal agent is the Sovereign, the instrumental or ministerial are Officers,
who are therefore called by some, instrumenta majestatis vicaria, which words
imply much, and contain in some sort the definition of the Author. For they
imply, 1. That the Sovereign is the principal agent. 2. That they represent the
Sovereign. 3. That they are but his instruments, and act by power derived from
him.


The difference between them and the Sovereign is, 1. That they are essentially
and properly but subjects, and accidentally Officers. 2. That though they have
power, and the same is the Sovereigns, yet as in him its original, supreme,
universal in respect of the whole state, in them it is derivative, subordinate,
particular, or but a part and particle of it. 3. That whatsoever the Sovereign
acts, is valid immediately in it self; but what they act is only good and valid
as they are one person with him, and make his will their rule and principle,
and do all things in his name.


The reason why there must be Officers in every State, and that of necessity,
is given, because no Sovereign, whether one person or more, can see all things
with his own eyes, hear all things with his own ears, do all things with his
own hands, or be present and acting in every place, where he ought to act. This
is proper to God, who yet uses the Ministry both of men and Angels, in the
Government of the world, but not out of any necessity, but because its his will
and pleasure.

There be two parts of Politics; the 1. Constitution, which disposes the
supreme power in a certain subject, whether one or more; and determines the
rights both of the Sovereign and subject. The 2. Administration, which is the
exercise of that power.
In which Administration, the first act is legislation; and this is the proper
place to speak of Laws concerning the Administration, as different from those
of the Constitution; the next is the making of Officers for the execution of
these Laws. This is the method, and here is the proper handling of this subject.

These Officers are either extraordinary or ordinary; Extraordinary, are such
as are trusted with power for a time limited in some extraordinary exigency of
the State, as the Dictators amongst the Romans. Ordinary, are such as are usual
in all States; and they are either such as by which the Sovereign acts and
deals with foreign States, or within his own Dominions. The former are
Ambassadors, Agents, Messengers, Heralds, Intelligencers. These Ambassadors are
constant and legier, or temporary and occasional. They represent Majesty, and
act according to the Laws of Nations. The Officers within the Sovereigns
Dominions, are either for war or peace. For war either by Sea or Land: hence
Jus Nauticum and Militare; and these are for defense, and act also according to
the Laws of Nations. For peace, and they are either for counsel, or judgment,
or execution, or the revenue. Hence Councellers, Judges, Sheriffs, Treasurers,
and all their servants or subordinate Agents and Assistants. Amongst these
there is a subordination, till we come to some general Officer, in every
several kind next unto the Sovereign. How to reduce the Officers of this or any
other State unto these heads, is not my work; and many have made this reduction
in several Commonwealths.

The general rules of these Officers are many, and may be read in several
Authors: As 1. Any man fitly qualified may be forced to do service for his
Country. 2. To avoid confusion and charge, they are to be reduced to a certain
number and order. The number should be according to the necessity of the State.
3. No Officer should be trusted too long with great and transcendent power. 4.
They should be fitly qualified and advanced for desert, and no other reason. 5.
Some should be superintendents over others within a certain precinct, and also
general visitors selected of purpose, to enquire into the carriage of all the
rest at certain set times.
The Roman Censors had some power in this kind, but no Jurisdiction: As the
Visitors of China are said to have.

In this Chapter Mr. Hobbs seems to make Ministers of the Gospel, such as the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.11. calls Pastors and Teachers, to be public Ministers and
Officers civil; yet though they be subject to the civil Sovereign as well as
other men, yet as Ministers they derive their power from Christ by the Church,
and not from any civil Governors, as shall be made good hereafter.

CAP. VIII. Of the Second Part, the Twenty fourth of the Book; Of nutrition and
procreation of a Commonwealth.
TWO things only in this Cap. I question: the 1. Concerning the original of
propriety. The 2. Concerning a standing revenue of the Crown.
The 1. he deriveth from the Sovereign, in manner as follows.

T. H.

Propriety in all kinds of Commonwealths belongs to the Sovereign power. And
again, propriety is the act only of the Sovereign, who distributes to every man
his own by Law; and this distribution is first of Land, as of the Land of
Promise by Eleazer and Joshua, etc.

G. L.

This is the sum and brief substance of many more words, and cannot be true.
For 1. we find propriety of goods and lands in several families, which are of
no Commonwealth. 2. The Constitution of any Commonwealth does presuppose this
propriety, without which there can be no buying, selling, exchanging, stealing,
restitution; otherwise the eighth Commandment, Thou shall not steal, could not
be a Law of nature, nor bind any man, except in a Commonwealth; and so before
a Commonwealth be instituted in a Community or people, there could be no sin in
stealing. 3. All that may be granted in this point, is, That the Sovereign may
preserve and regulate propriety, both by Laws and Judgments. Yet the Author
makes all men brutes, nay wild and ravenous beasts, and birds of prey, until
they have made themselves slaves unto some absolute Sovereign, and such they
must be, either beasts by the Law of nature, or slaves by the Laws of a civil
State. 4. As for his instance in the Land of Canaan divided by lots to be
chosen before Eleazer the high Priest, and Joshua the general, its impertinent
and false. For, 1. Israel before it was molded into a Commonwealth, had
propriety in their goods. 2. The propriety of that Land was at the first, and
continued in God; for they were but Gods Tenants, in a special and peculiar
manner, so as no people in the world was; therefore no man could alienate nor
morgage beyond the year of Jubilee: at which time God seemed to renew their
Leases, after the Jubilee-Sabbath. 3. When they had in common conquered, and
taken possession of the Land, it was theirs, so far as God had conveyed it, in
common. 4. It was for peace and order, as also for to preserve the distinction
of Tribes divided, yet so as the Sovereign dividing it was God, who ordered the
lot.

Eleazer and Joshua were but Superintendents of the lot, and no Sovereigns;
neither had they any the least propriety more then others of the people. The
Text expressly says, That when they had made an end of dividing the Land, they
gave Joshua Timnath Serah in Mount Ephra in for his inheritance, Joshua 19.49,
50. where it is to be observed, That the people gave it him.

T. H.

The propriety of the subject excludes all other subjects from the use of them,
and not the Sovereign.

G. L.

It does not only exclude other subjects, but the Sovereign too. For, 1. The
Sovereign is bound to observe the Laws of nature, which are the moral Laws of
God; and propriety as by the Law of nature. 2. Imperium nihil aliud esse
sapientes definiunt, nisi curam salutis alienae, says one very well. For civil
supreme power was never given by any people to destroy their propriety, but to
defend it. Otherwise no intelligent people in the world would advance one
person or more to take away their goods, and so put themselves in a worse
condition then they were by the Laws of nature. 3. It may be granted, that the
Sovereign has dominium eminens, so far as to command not only the estates, but
the lives of the subjects for the public safety; but what is this to propriety
properly taken? 4. If his assertion were true, then that distinction of
Civilians, and the Authors of Politics, whereby they put a difference inter
res and possessiones publicas and privatas, were in vain and false; but so it
is not. 5. By the Sovereigns in England, he means the Kings, who were no
Sovereigns at all, nor could at any time raise any moneys, or impose any
subsidy upon the people without their consent in Parliament, as not only
English men, but foreign Ministers of State, who have either read our
Histories, or our Laws, or our practice, do well know, and have made it known
to others. 6. There may be a device in Law, to pass all the land in England
upon the Crown, for to derive all tenures from thence, or to confirm propriety
to the subjects, for that every one might not only know, but keep and recover
his own the better: Yet this gives the King no more propriety, then a Peoffee
in trust may have; and that is none.


T. H.

The public is not to be dieted: in the Margint.

G. L.

His meaning is, that the Sovereign cannot be confined to a certain revenue, as
sufficient to defray the public charge. Yet the wisest States in the world
have certainly defined a constant standing revenue for the public use. For we
read of the Dominion of France, which though the Kings could neither alienate,
nor justly impare, yet Henry the fourth has woefully mangled, and given
occasion of those heavy oppressions of the people of that State; and also we
are not ignorant of the Crown lands, and revenue of England. And this is but
agreeable to Scripture, where we read that God commanded, in the division of
the holy Land, that the Prince should have his portion, that he may no more
oppress, Ezekiel. 45.7, 8. For the Land must be divided into three parts; The
first must be for God to maintain the Priests and Levites: The second for the
Prince, the third for the people: and thus some say the Land in England was
divided in the time of the pious Saxon Kings. Yet it must be confessed, that
sometimes the public charge may be so great, as that a standing revenue cannot
defray it, and then the subjects for the general good and safety, are bound and
may be commanded to contribute. But if this in a time of peace and safety be
embezelled and misspent by a prodigal Prince, and his favorites and followers,
this will no ways warrant him to fly upon the spoil, and plunder his subjects.
What William the Conqueror here in England did, it matters not much. For if he
did derive his title from Edward the Confessor, as some Histories say he did
pretend, then he was no Sovereign. If he did act as Conqueror, then all compact
and right upon Covenant is void, as his successors, who insist upon that title
of conquest, give full liberty to the English to fight against them, and depose
them if they can, and deal with them as enemies.

As for making Laws for the regulation of Traffic, Trade, Exchange, the value,
stamp and coining of moneys, the sending out of Colonies for new Plantations,
as also to make them as Provinces, or exempt them from subjection, because they
will not allow protection, I grant all these are prerogatives of the Sovereign.

CAP. IX. Of the Second Part. The 25. of the Book Of Counsel.
THE heads of this Chapter are, 1. The difference between command, counsel,
exhortation, dehortation. 2. The difference between counsel and command, made
evident out of Scripture. 3. The qualifications of good Counselors. 4. To
advise with Counselors apart, is better then to advise with them openly and in
assemblies.


1. The difference between counsel, command, exhortation, dehortation, is
easily known. For Counsel given, is a declaration of the means which tend unto
some certain end, and also of the order and manner how they should be used to
attain that end. Command is the will of a Superior made known, whereby the
inferior is bound to obey, or otherwise to suffer. Exhortation presses the
practice of some good to be done; as dehortation is the contrary. Counsel
directs, command binds, exhortation endeavors to stir up or incite the will:
dehortation keeps it back. Command is of a Superior; Counsel, exhortation,
dehortation are of a superior, inferior, equal. For any of these may counsel,
exhort, dehort, as any of them may be counseled, exhorted, dehorted. Its true,
that these words are not always taken strictly.

That command should be for the benefit of the party commanding, and counsel
for the good of the party counseled, is merely accidental in ways essential
to them. And though sometimes both the intention and the event of both may be
such as he determines, yet we know it is many times otherwise. For command may
sometimes, nay often, be beneficial to the party commanded, and intended to be
so; as counsel may be intended, not only for the good of the party counseled,
but also counselling; and also prove so to be. The nature of exhortation, and
dehortation, is as falsely, loosely and impertinently defined, as the former.

2. Upon the former supposed difference between counsel and command, he
determines, Thou shall have none other Gods; Thou shall not make any graven
image, etc. to be commands. Yet these are not for the benefit of God, but man
keeping them. For in keeping them there is great reward. But, Go and sell all
thou have, etc. is only a counsel with him, because the party shall have
benefit, even treasure in heaven if he do so. Yet even this is so a counsel, as
it is a command. For man is bound to love God more then the world; and to
prefer treasure in heaven, before treasure on earth, and this by command. As
it directs, its counsel; as it binds, its command.

For one and the same sentence may be a command, a counsel and an exhortation
too, yet in different respects; as it binds a command, as it directs a counsel,
as it incites an exhortation. And very many exhortations include, or at least
presuppose a command, and a counsel. But I wonder why Mr. Hobbs should make
these words of Peter, Repent and be baptized, Acts 2.38. a counsel only. Are
not all men, especially which hear the Gospel, bound to repent? For does not
Saint Paul say, And the time of this ignorance God winked at, but now
commands all men everywhere to repent, Acts 17.30 And what will he contradict
the Apostle, and in express terms? It seems he is but a Divine of the lowest
rank, as he is a Statesman far under the highest form. His presumption and
boldness is very great, but his knowledge and judgment very defective: For if
he had known, that repentance had been a principal duty, according to a
principal command of the Gospel, and that it was nothing else but a return to
obedience, after disobedience, he might have corrected himself, and avoided
this error.

3. In the next place, he undertakes to determine the qualifications of a good
Counselor of State; which has been done to his hand, and far better then here
we read. He is a good Counselor, who gives good connsel; and that is only good
counsel, which is a greeable to the wisdom and justice of God, and tends to the
public good of the State, therefore his first Condition is either imperfect,
or else directly false. For the interest and ends of the Counselor in his
counsel, to be consistent with the ends and interest of a Prince counseled, is
no ways absolutely good, but may be very wicked and unjust.

The rest of the conditions prescribed by him are good, yet none of the
chiefest mentioned by others, omitted by him.

4. In the last part of this Chapter he endeavors to prove, but yet upon very
weak, and also very false grounds, That its better to hear Counselors apart,
then in an Assembly. What he means by these words prefixed [supposing the
number of them equal] I know not. For he argues against counsel given in
Assemblies, without any mention of the equality of their number. Yet this is
evident by this rule of God, that the privy Council and Parliaments of England
are made useless, unprofitable, at least not so good as a secret pact Juncto.
This is very unworthy and base, and has been the ruin of many Princes. The
Constitution of England required a Parliament, as the great Council of the
Kingdom, in arduis regni negotiis; and a standing Privy-Counsel (as it was
called) in other matters of lesser moment. That both these may be ill
constituted, abused and turned into factions, there is no doubt, we have had
too woeful experience of this. Yet all these inconveniences, with others
mentioned by the Author, may be prevented, and the Counsels rectified. The way
to our good, and the welfare of England, is not to take them away and destroy
them, but reduce them, if possibly it may be done, to their prime institution.
Otherwise we may fear a military Government, or an absolute Monarch, or a
Tyranny, or an Anarchy. A wise council of Lords standing, and the great
Council of the Parliament have been the best supports under God, of the peace
and happiness of this Nation. In this I am brief, because here is little that
is material, and it more properly belongs to that head of Ministers of State
and Officers.

CAP. X. Of the Second Part. The 26. of the Book. Of civii Laws.
THE principal heads and parts of this Chapter are, 1. The definition of a Law
civil, with certain conclusions thence deduced. 2. The interpretation of Laws.
3. The distribution of Laws in general.


In the administration of a Commonwealth once constituted; the first thing is
Legislation; the second is the Execution. In the execution, 1. Officers are
made. 2. Jurisdiction exercised according to those Laws.
Therefore the proper place of treating concerning Laws civil in general, is in
the first part of administration, which requires first that Laws be made. For
God himself did avouch himself to be Isreal's Lord and King, and they avouch
themselves his subjects and people, and this was the constitution of that
State. This being done, in the next place he proceeds to make Laws. And this
is the order of all such as will imitate God, and proceed orderly to govern a
State, as appears, Exodus 19. and the 20. Chapters, and so forward. This also
was Jethroes counsel unto Moses, and approved of God. Thou shall teach them
Ordinances and Laws, and shall show them the way wherein they must walk, and
the work that they must do. Moreover, thou shall provide thee of all the
people, able men, etc. and place such over them. This was making of Officers,
after he had given them Laws, and let them Judge the people. This is
jurisdiction, Exodus 18.20, 21, 22. From hence it appears how preposterously,
this man and others are that treat, 1. Of Magistrates. 2. Of Laws.
The difference between Laws Civil in general, and the Civil Law of the Roman
Empire, is more easily known, and learned from the Civilians, who have clearly
delivered it, then from him. For Politics speaks of Civil or Political Laws
(made for the Government of State) more generally; and if it mention any Laws
of particular States, they are but examples to the general rules concerning
Laws. But let us pass by this, and proceed to his definition, which is as
follows.

T H.

Civil Law is to every subject, those rules which the Commonwealth has
commanded him by word, writing, or other sufficient sign of the will to make
use of it, for the distinction of right and wrong, that is, of what is
contrary, and what is not contrary to the rule.

G. L.

In this definition, the Genus is, its a rule; the efficient cause is the
Commonwealth; the party bound is the subject; the end is the distinction of
wrong which is contrary, and right which is not contrary to the rule. But 1.
The Genus is not a rule, which is an act of the understanding; whereas Law is
not only an act of the understanding, but the will, which is facultas imperans.
Many may give rules by their wisdom, which can make no Laws by their wills. 2.
The efficient cause is not the Commonwealth, but pars imperans, the Sovereign
who is but one part of it. 3. The end is not only to declare a distinction
between right and wrong, but to bind the subject to do that which is right, and
to forbear that which is wrong. For lex est regula obligativa. 4. Not content
to give the definition, he explains what is right, and that is that which is
not contrary to the Law; and wrong, and its that which is contrary. But what he
means by rule is hard to know.
If he mean by rule, Law it self, then its absurd; if he intends some
antecedent rule of divine wisdom, manifesting what is just or unjust, before a
civil power command it, he is obscure. Though he undervalue the Philosopher so
much, as far below him, though he was far above him, he might with Marsulis of
Padua, in his Defensor Pacis, pars 1. cap. 10. have observed out of him a
better definition of a Law given, Ethn. ad Nicho. lib. 10. cap. 9. Lex est
sententia, doctrina seu judicium universale justorum and conferentium civilium
and suorum oppositorum cum praecepto coactivo per poenam aut praemium de ejus
observatione in hoc saeculo destribuenda. More briefly, its a coactive precept
of the Sovereign binding the subject to obedience, and upon the same to be
rewarded, or upon disobedience to be punished in this life; where many things
are to be observed. 1. The matter of this Law is something in it self just, and
conducing to the publik good, yet so that it reaches to the contrary. 2. This
must be known, and judged to be so, by the wisdom and understanding of the
Sovereign; for all Laws arr made by wisdom Political. 3. This judgment of the
Lawgiver must be made known unto the subject; therefore the Philosopher says
its (...), a word. And he means not only (...), but (...), a word not only
inwardly conceived in the mind of the Lawgiver, (...), as Aristotle says, but
it must be uttered and made known, as the ten Commandments are called the ten
words; therefore its said, Exodus 20. God spoke all these words. 4. It must be
praeceptum, which includes the will of the Sovereign intending to bind the
subject, and so declaring himself. 5. It must be an universal precept binding
the whole community of the subject. 6. It must be a coactive precept, and backed
with the sword for to make the Obligation effectual. In this respect the
Philosopher says, (...); the Law must have a coactive force. And the Apostle
says, he bears not the sword in vain: which words imply, the Lawgiver must
have a sword. 7. This sword protects and rewards the obedient who observe this
Law according to their obligation, and it punishes the disobedient; and for
these two ends, the Law must be co-active and armed with a sword. 8. These
rewards and punishments are to be conferrd and inflicted in this life; for it
cannot reach the soul and the life to come; and this does difference the civil
Laws of men from the Laws of God, which bind men to obedience upon the promise
of spiritual and eternal rewards, and for defect of obedience, unto eternal and
spiritual penalties.
This has far more of the definition of a Law then his, and more fully
declares the nature of a Law civil. Yet if either he, or any other will improve
it, I shall like it well, for I know mine own imperfections. From his
definition he infers several conclusions, the first whereof is.

T. H.

The Legislator in all Commonwealths is the Sovereign: Again, the
Commonwealth is the Legislator by the Representative.

G. L.

That pars imperans, is the Legislator in every State, must needs be granted:
but that the Commonwealth should be the Legislator, either by or without (pars
imperans) the Sovereign, I do not understand. For it consists of two parts, the
Sovereign and the subject; and if the whole Commonwealth make Laws, then the
subject as well as the Sovereign is Legislator. In a Republic or Free State,
there is a difference between the Sovereign and the subject, much more in other
models and forms. Therefore he must needs speak either improperly or untruly,
when he says the State is Legislator.

T. H.

Conclusion 2. The Sovereign is not subject to the civil Laws, because he has
power to make and repeal them at pleasure.

G. L.

That the Sovereign in diverse respects, and especially as a Sovereign, is not
subject unto, but above the Laws, is a certain truth. For Laws do bind the
subject, not the Sovereign, to obey or be punished; but the Sovereign does
command as Superior, not obey as inferior; does punish, is not punished. The
power to make a Law, when there is none, and to repeal after that its made, is
sufficient evidence of his superiority, as also dispensations in judgment and
pardons be. Yet this supreme will Legislative over men, is subject to the
superior will of God, and must neither make, nor repeal Laws, but according to
wisdom and justice.

T. H.

Conclusion 3. Custom is not Law by long continuance of time, but by consent of
the Sovereign.

G. L.

This follows from the first Conclusion. For if the Sovereign only be the
Legislator, then continuance of time and practice of the people, though
universal, cannot make a Law. The Sovereign must give either an express, or
tacit consent; and this consent is then most evident, when he makes the custom
a rule in judgment, and observes it. And the Civilians well observe, that
besides continuance of time, and the Sovereigns consent, A third thing is
required, and that is, that the beginning of it be reasonable, as the Author
here does note.

T. H.

Conclusion 4. The Law of Nature, and the Civil Law, contain each other, and
are of equal extent. For the Laws of Nature, which consist in equity, justice,
gratitude and other moral virtues on these depending, in the condition of mere
nature, are not properly laws, but qualities, that dispose men to peace and
obedience; when a Commonwealth is once actually settled, then are they Laws,
etc.

G. L.

1. This is no Conclusion from the definition, except he mean that the rule of
right and wrong be the Law of Nature. 2. The Laws of Nature are the Laws of
God, and not of man; and not only subjects, but Sovereigns are bound by them.
3. Therefore they bind not as commanded by the civil Sovereign, but as written
by the hand of heaven in the heart of man. Neither is that which afterward he
makes the difference between the Law of Nature, and the Law of civil Governors,
any difference at all, that the one is written, the other not. For both are
written, one by the hand of man, though every Civil Law be not written, and the
other by the hand of God: the one in the heart, the other upon some other
material substance; and that which is written in the heart, may be written out
of it. 4. Equity, justice gratitude, and other moral virtues, are not Laws of
nature, but either habitual or actual conformities unto the Laws of Nature. 5.
How the Laws of Nature, and Laws Civil should be of equal extent, and yet
contain one another, and be parts one of another, I do not understand. 6. A Law
of Nature is only then a civil Law, when its declared to be so by the civil
Sovereign, yet its a Law before. 7. For the most part learned men do understand
by the Laws of Nature, certain divine principles imprinted upon the heart of
man; by the Laws of Nations, more immediate; by the Laws civil, more remote
Conclusions of constitutive Laws civil.
T. H.

Seeing all Laws have their authority and force from the will of the Sovereign,
a man may wonder whence proceed such opinions as are found in the Books of
Lawyers of eminence in several Commonwealths, directly or by consequence,
making the Legislative power depend on private men, or subordinate Judges: as
for example, That the Common Law has no Controuler but the Parliament. Item,
That the Common Law has two arms, Force and Justice, the one whereof is in the
King, the other deposited in the hands of the Parliament.

G. L.

The former Conclusion, which is the fifth in order, That the Laws of Princes
and Countries subdued, depend upon the Sovereign conquering is true. And it is
wisdom in the Conquerors to grant them the Laws and Customs of God, and no
ways prejudicial to their power. For many are willing to change their
Governors, yet unwilling to change their Government. But as concerning the two
maxims of Law, I might refer him to the Learned in that profession, who no
doubt can make them good against any thing he has said. They seem to him to be
unreasonable, partly because he is ignorant of the Constitution, both of this,
and also of other States; partly because they are inconsistent with his Utopian
principles. For he presupposes, 1. That the King of England is an absolute
Monarch. 2. That the Parliament, as a Parliament, is merely a subject. 3. That
the King has power at will and pleasure to call Parliaments, and dissolve
them; yet these has he not made good, neither can he. 1. That our Kings are
not absolute Monarchs is well known, the Laws and practice have made it
manifest. And whatsoever ignorant persons and parasites may say, yet wise men,
both English and Foreign Statesmen, who have dealt with England, have been
assured of the contrary; especially when in certain leagues they have required
the consent of the Parliament.
Again, the Kings of England never made or repealed a Law, nor levied a
subsidy alone themselves, without a Parliament. And they are sworn
[corroborare leges, quas vulgus elegerit] For let [Elegerit] be what tense it
will, vulgus, which is populus, non rex, eligit leges; and the late King in his
answer to the 19. Propositions, did confess that the Lords and Commons had a
share in the Legislative power. And it were very much to be wondered at, if
that King, who himself alone could never make or repeal a Law, nor levy or
impose a subsidy, nor revoke the judgment of any Court, nor alter a word or
clause in any Law agreed upon in Parliament, should be an absolute Monarch. Its
far more probable he was only trusted with the force for the execution of
justice, according to Law and Judgment, according to the second maxim. And if
he was no absolute Sovereign, then his second supposition, that the Parliament,
as such, is only an Assembly of private men and subjects, and to be considered
in no other capacity, is false: As likewise his third, That the King can call
and dissolve Parliaments at will and pleasure. For by the Constitution, the
Laws and practice, he was bound to call them once a year, and oftener as the
necessity and exigency of affairs either of peace or war should require. And in
such cases to dissolve them before the [ardua Regni] were dispatched, was both
dangerous and destructive; and did argue either a bad constitution, or a
corruption of the same.

T. H.

Law cannot be against reason, neither is it the letter, but the intention of
the Lawgiver that is the Law. And this reason is not private of subordinate
Judges, but of the supreme Lawgiver.

G. L.

All this is willingly granted, if he understand by Reason, not the mere
conceit or will of the Sovereign, but that reason which is a ray of divine
wisdom shining in the mind of the Lawgiver, regulating his judgment, and
expressed in the words of the Law. And the sense of a Law given by a learned
Judge subordinate, may be very true, yet not authentic: because he that makes
the Law, can interpret Law in that manner, and none else. I pass by his
discourse concerning promulgation and interpretation of Law, as also the
qualification of Judges, which belongs to that Chapter of Officers formerly
mentioned. He might have done well to have improved these excellent. Treatises
of other learned Authors, who have informed us both more accurately, and also
more particularly of these things, then he himself has done. But he conceits
himself as far above them, as they surpass ordinary men. Neither is his
distribution of Laws worth the examination, as being very crude and indigested,
as also heterogeneous. I proceed therefore to his two questions, concerning
what assurance may be had of, and obedience ought to be given unto divine
positive Laws. The questions are,

T. H.

1. How can a man without supernatural revelation, be assured of the revelation
received by the declarer of those Laws?

2. How can he be bound to obey them?

The answer to the first, By sanctity, miracles, wisdom, success, without
particular revelation, its impossible for a man to have assurance of a
revelation made to another. Therefore no man can infallibly know by natural
reason, that another has had a supernatural revelation of Gods will, but only
a belief.

G. L.

This presupposes, 1. That there is a positive Law of God. 2. This positive
Law is declared and witnessed to be the Law of God. 3. That this testimony
concerning this Law is divine and infallible. 4. That it is such, because its
grounded on, and agreeable to an immediate revelation from God of that Law to
him that does declare it, as to Moses, the Prophets or Apostles.
For God formerly spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets, in the latter times
to their children by his Son first, and after by his Apostles. The question
here is not how we shall attain a demonstrative, clear, or intuitive knowledge
of the matter of the Law, nor of the manner of the revelation; but how we may
be assured that the declaration or testimony of him to whom the revelation was
made, is divine, that we may believe it as divine and from God. The means
whereby the divinity of the testimony was made evident at the first, were
extraordinary, as signs, wonders, and diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy
Ghost, according to his own will, Heb. 2.4. But after that upon these divine
attestations the Gospel was generally received in all Nations, and the
prophesies of the Old Testament in this particular fulfilled, these ceased; yet
one thing always did, and ever will manifest the testimony and doctrine of the
Gospel to be divine, and that is the Holy Ghost, who (by his powerful working
upon the hearts of men, seriously attending to this truth, whereby a great
change both inwardly in their hearts, and outwardly in their lives is wrought)
does mightily confirm it. And those who find, and feel in themselves the
effects of sanctification and heavenly comfort, can no ways doubt, but are
assured that God was in the Prophets and Apostles, and did speak by them.
Besides when we consider, 1. That the more we understand them, the more
excellency of wisdom we find in them. 2. That these positives are agreeable and
no ways contrary to pure morals. 3. That they conduce effectually to holiness
and eternal life. 4. That they were approved, received by the best men in the
world, and sealed with the blood of many Martyrs, we must needs be fully
satisfied that they are not false, feigned, fantastic conceits of deluded men,
and not only so, but all these things may persuade any rational man to try upon
practice, whether they be divine or no.
And this never any did, but found the Apostles Doctrine to be of God. If we
had nothing but the universal and perpetual agreement and tradition of the
Church of all places and times, affirming the Scripture to be the Word of God,
it were sufficient to produce in a rational man a greater measure of belief,
then any Book or History in the world can possibly require or deserve. For this
universal testimony of the best in several parts of the world, at such a
distance as that they in their time neither heard of, nor knew one another,
makes it more credible then any humane History can be. But to return unto Mr.
Hobbs, I say its possible, and not impossible to know the divinity of the
testimony or declaration immediately, but not of the revelation or matter
revealed. Yet that such a revelation, and such a thing revealed there was, is
known in some measure by consequence. And the divine Authority of this
testimony may be infallibly known, and that by natural reason, yet by it as
elevated and more perfected by outward representation and inward
sanctification. And the matter of the revelation to another, together with the
manner, may be believed, though not known. For when we once know that God has
revealed it, we believe the thing revealed to be true, though by artificial and
intrinsecal arguments we cannot prove it to be so. For the testimony of God may
be evident, though the thing testified be hidden and above our reason. The
Conclusion is, That we may have an infallible knowledge of the positive Laws of
God, so far as to know that they are from him, and are his Laws, and that
without particular revelation, that they were revealed to another.

T. H.

If the divine positive Law be not against the Law of nature, and he undertake
to obey it, he is bound by his own act to obey it, but not bound to believe it.
For man's belief, and interior cogitations, are not subject to the commands,
but only to the operations of God, ordinary or extraordinary. Faith of
supernatural Law, is not a fulfilling, but only an assenting to the same: its
not a duty but a gift, etc.

G. L.

His second question was, how a man can be bound to obey supernatural positive
Laws, whereof he has no particular revelation, that they were revealed to
others declaring them. To this he answers, 1. It must not be against the Law of
nature, which is the Law of God. And its true, that the Law of nature is the
Law of God, and this is a good rule. For the positive Laws of God are not
contrary to his pure moral Laws, which have an intrinsecal rectitude in them.
2. He further adds, that if he undertake to obey a supernatural positive Law of
God, he is bound to obey it, but not believe it. This is very obscure, and very
absurd.
For, 1. To undertake to obey it, seems to be a promise to obey it: and this is
a voluntary Obligation, whereby a man may bind himself to obey it as a divine
Law, or as no Law, or if as a Law, yet not as a Law of God; and then he does
not obey as he ought to do. 3. It is absurd, To obey it as a positive Law of
God, and not believe it to be a Law of God. For if he neither know nor believe
it to be a Law of God, he cannot obey it as a Law of God. His obedience is no
obedience unto God. 4. Whereas its said, That faith is not subject to Gods
command, its not a duty, its a gift, this must needs be a gross error.
For though the active power whereby a man is enabled to believe a divine
positive truth, be the gift of God, yet the exercise of this power, and the
acts thereof, are subject to the Law of God. Other wise positive unbelief of a
supernatural divine positive Law, sufficiently declared and proposed could be
no sin. Its true, that some affirm that the first and natural acts of the soul
are not subject to any Law: yet these do grant that all practical operations
(and such assent unto divine truths is) be subject unto Law. That faith is a
duty, is apparent, because God commands it, approves it, rewards it, and
reproves and punishes unbelief. That we may the better understand the drift of
this Author in this discourse, he produces the examples of Abraham and Moses,
declaring positive Laws of God upon revelation made of them, which the
posterity of Abraham were to obey upon their declaration, and thence concludes,

T. H.

That it is manifest, and sufficiently appears, that in a Commonwealth, a
subject who has no certain and assured revelation particularly unto himself,
concerning the will of God, is to obey for such, the command of the
Commonwealth.

G. L.

But, 1. It was formerly made manifest, that neither Abraham nor Moses were
Sovereigns, much less Commonwealths. 2. A Sovereign civil may declare
something to be a Law of God, and yet it may be no such thing; and declare
against a Law, and yet it may be (and many times it so falls out to be) a Law
of God; and in neither of these cases is the subject bound to obey his
Sovereign. 3. If that which is declared for a positive Law divine be
sufficiently attested, especially by Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, by
undoubted history and universal tradition, the matter be agreeable to the Law
of nature, tends to practice of piety, being practiced, is conducing to an
higher degree of holiness and justice; and by experience constantly found to be
accompanied with rare and excellent effects tending to man's inward and real
happiness, it is to be believed and obeyed as a divine Law, though all the
Sovereigns in the world declare against it.
If a subject do accept the Religion established by the civil Laws of his
Country, he is free from civil penalties of man, yet not from the judgment of
God, if that Religion be against the Laws of God. No Laws of man can bind
above, much less against the Laws of God; and this all rational men will
confess. Austine denies the perfection, and according to Tullies definition,
the very being of a Commonwealth to the Roman State, because it commanded
subjection unto, and worship of Devils. By what this Author has delivered,
Christ and the Apostles are made guilty, because they required obedience to the
positive Laws of the Gospel, seeing they were contrary to all civil Laws of the
world: Upon this account the Rulers of the Jews, heathen Princes, and the Roman
Emperors, who persecuted the Christians, are justifiable; as all such who
received the Christian Religion contrary to their own Laws, are condemnable;
but of this you will hear more hereafter. For he makes it indifferent what
Religion any man professes, if it be agreeable to the Laws of the State where
he lives.

T. H.

There is also another distinction of Laws, into fundamental and not
fundamental; but I could never see in any Author, what a fundamental Law
signifies, etc. A fundamental Law is that by which the subjects are bound to
uphold whatsoever power is given unto the Sovereign, etc.

G. L.

This does argue his ignorance in Politics. For fundamental Laws in every
State are those which concern the constitution; not fundamental, such as are
made immediately to regulate the administration. The former are such as cannot
be altered without taking asunder and disjoynting the very frame and form of
Government; the latter may be altered, and yet the essential frame may stand.
The former are the foundation of a State; the latter are but superstructions.
The former determine the Sovereign who he is, and what his power, and also
define the bounds of the liberty and subjection of the subject. The golden Bull
is said to contain the fundamental Laws of the German Empire; as the Salick or
as some call it. [the Gallick] of excluding females from succession to the
Crown, is said to be one of the fundamentals of France.

T. H.

I find lex civilis, and jus civil, promiscuously used for the same thing,
even in the most learned Authors, which nevertheless ought not to be. For Jus
is Liberty, Lex is Obligation.

G. L.

That they are often taken for the same, and in learned Authors, is certain,
and that without any error. But yet Jus does not properly signify the liberty
left unto us by the Law; but id quod Justum est, and ought to be the matter of
the Law. And when the Civilians take Jura and Leges to be the same, they
understand by Jus, not Jus vagum, but Jus a lege determinatum. For the Laws
determine what is right, and what is wrong: and in this sense, Jus cannot be
liberty, as he does fondly imagine; but must either be, or at least imply an
Obligation.

CAP. XI. Of the Second Part. The 27. of the Book. Of crimes* excuses, and
extenuation.
THE Author in this Chapter is methodical, and cannot much be charged with
errors or misprisions, as in the former. The proper place for crimes excuses
extenuations and aggravations is next to that of Laws. For as the Apostle
teaches us, Where there is no Law, there is no transgression. And herein the
Authors of Politics seem to be defective, because, though they treat of Laws
and Jurisdiction, yet they say little or nothing of Crimes. Yet the Civilians
in this particular have done their part. He does distinguish betwixt sins and
crimes, and his distinction may be allowed, though hardly in Politics. Yet the
word Crime in Learned Authors is not always taken, as here it is, for an
offense, as it is an object or matter of Judgment. And sometimes causes
judicial are distinguished into civil, criminal, capital. In which distinction
criminals are only one sort of mules. That which we call [Sin] in Divinity is
nothing but disobedience to a Law in general, though it be strictly taken for
disobedience to divine Law. Disobedience being an anomy, presupposes a Law,
and a Law must have a Sovereign and a Lawgiver: and there can be no violation
of a Law without wrong unto the Lawgiver: And those offenses are most heinous,
which directly oppose and wrong the power of the Sovereign lawfully
constituted, because the tend to the rasing of the very foundation and
constitution of the Government it self. Such are, denying of the supreme power,
resisting it, and revolting from it, so as to be Sovereigns our selves, or
independent, or subject to another. The first law God gave was for to secure
his Sovereignty, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; as the Septuagint do
well and truly turn it. And this by Philo is said to be the Commandment (...)
of the supreme power of one God. All other offenses are against the Laws of
administration, which though they may be heinous, yet are not so heinous as
those former against the institution. These offenses of disobedience may be
considered, either with reference to the Laws antecedent, as violated, or to
Jurisdiction following, in which sense the Author handles them, and calls them
crimes! And these may be reduced unto certain heads, as they have been by
Civilians, and also by the Lawyers of particular States; yet this is most
exactly done by the Common Law of England, which was entire before the
Conquest, and followed the order of the ten Commandments of the moral Law of
God. Thus some Antiquaries in Law do inform us.

The Author acquits all motions of the soul antecedent to a deliberate consent,
resolution, and intention, from being sins; yet this I cannot do. Its certain,
that to understand, know and remember that which is evil and unjust, cannot be
sin, because God does so: and all this may be done with a detestation of it;
yet to like, approve, incline unto, delight in evil thus known and remembered,
though we never yield a deliberate or any formal consent, must needs argue some
imperfection, if not corruption in the heart of man, which should never think
of evil, but with hatred. The rest of the Chapter is rational, if rightly
understood, the greatest part whereof is taken up in that of aggravations,
wherein he has done better then others, yet he is far short of some who have
both more largely, and also accurately handled that point out of Scriptures.
Its a common theme of Casuists and Civilians, and might have been much
improved. The original of all crimes and offenses, are either from the
understanding or the will, not the passions, as he affirms. From the
understanding, either not apprehending, or not judging aright, from the will
averse, or inclined another way by reason of corruption. Ignorance and error
are from defect, or negligence, or wilfulness, severally or jointly. And here
its to be observed, That the more of mere will there is in any offense, the
more heinous it is. The highest degree of wilfulness is in obstinacy, resisting
all means and motives used for to rectify the heart.

CAP. XII. Of the Second Part. The 28. of the Book. Concerning punishments and
rewards.
UPon obedience or disobedience, follow punishments or rewards, determined by
Judgment, which is an act of Jurisdiction, and considers the Law as violated
or observed. And here comes in according to order, that head of Jurisdiction in
general, which properly is handled in that part of Politics we call
Administration. And he that undertakes to deliver a model of Politics, and yet
says nothing of Jurisdiction, but proceeds from crimes to punishments, per
saltum, as Mr. Hobbs does, is but a superficial Author. But let us hear his
definition of punishment.

T. H.

A punishment is an evil inflicted by public Authority, on him that has done,
or omitted that which is judged by the same Authority to be a transgression of
the Law, to the end that the will of men may be thereby better disposed to
obedience.

This is a very imperfect definition, and one reason is, the Author presumes
much of his own judgment, and desires to be singular; otherwise he had a
better definition made to his hands. For poena est vindicta noxae. This
punishment is defined in general, as it includes the penalties inflicted by
Parents, Masters, or any one who have power to command another: and it reaches
the punishments executed by God. This definition may easily be made so, as
fully to express the nature of civil punishment intended by this Author. But
for the better understanding of the nature of punishment, we must observe, that
it may be considered several ways. 1. As determined by the Law, which binds
the party subject either to obedience or punishment. 2. As deserved by the
party offending, who is bound to suffer it. 3. As defined by the Judge upon
judicial evidence. 4. As inflicted by the Minister of execution. 5. As suffered
by the party condemned. 6. As prevented by pardon out of mere mercy, or upon
satisfaction made and accepted.
The efficient cause of punishing in a Commonwealth, is the Sovereign or
higher powers bearing the Sword; and as exercising Jurisdiction either by
himself or his Minister. For a Sovereign does punish as a Judge. The immediate
and formal object of this act is noxa civilis, some offense or crime judged
upon evidence to be a violation of the Law. The general nature of it is, (...),
retribution. The thing retributed or rendered is something that brings hurt or
damage to the delinquent or party offending, who as judged guilty, is the
proper subject of it. Its called by some Malum triste, proper malum turpe. The
proper act complete and consummate, is the inflicting of this evil determined
by just judgment, so as that the party condemned does actually suffer it. All
this for the general notion of it, may be observed out of the words of the
Apostle, who says, That God will render to them who are contentious, and do
not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath:
tribulation and angnish upon every soul of man that does evil, Romans 2.8, 9. For
here we have the Judge, the crime Judged to be so, the retribution or
rendering, the thing or evil rendered so as to be suffered, the cause why its
rendered. In this respect the higher powers are said to bear the sword to take
vengeance upon evil doers, Romans 13.4.

The ends of punishment are many. 1. Some of them are to correct and reform the
party punished; 2. Some for example, that others may hear and fear. 3. The end
of all punishments in general, is to vindicate the power of the Lawgiver, and
the honor and force of the Law, to manifest Justice and the hatred of evil,
and to procure the peace and tranquillity of the Community.
Before the Author proceed to draw conclusions from his definition, he enquires
how the Sovereign acquired the power of punishing. And resolves,

T. H.

That the-subject in the first constitution, laid aside his power of
self-preservation, by hurting, subduing, killing others in his own defense; and
so did not give it, but left it to the Sovereign.

G. L.

This is ridiculous, absurd, and grounded upon his false principles. For, 1.
The Sovereign is the Minister of God, and is bound to do (so that he keep
within the compass of his Commission) that which God would do, and that is to
punish evil. And as all his power of making Laws, Judgment, Peace, War, etc.
are from God, so is this amongst the rest. By whom he is made a Sovereign, from
him he has the sword to punish. Men may give their consent, that such a man,
or such a company of men shall reign, but the power is from God, not them. 2.
In the constitution of a supreme Governor, no man can Covenant to be protected
or defended in doing evil.
Neither can any, or all higher powers in the world justly promise to protect
any in evil: neither has any man any power unjustly to preserve himself. For
that of the Author, that in the state of nature every man has right to every
thing, is absolutely false and abominable. When a man subjects himself unto a
Sovereign ordained of God, not only to protect the good, but punish the evil,
he cannot except himself from his punitive power, if he do ill; because he
subjects according to the just Laws of God, and cannot lawfully do any other
ways. So that power to punish is given by God, not left by man unto higher
powers civil.

After his definition of punishment civil, and determination of the means how
power punitive is acquired, he 1. Draws conclusions from his definition. 2.
Declares the several kinds of punishment. 3. Distinguishes of rewards.
1. The conclusions are either good and pertinent,
or false, or not deducible from the definition, and I will not trouble the
Reader with the examination of them.

2. His distribution of punishments is tolerable. And here we must observe, 1.
That punishment civil can only reach the body, and this temporal life of man,
for the sword cannot reach the soul. 2. That these punishments, as well as
spiritual, are either of loss or pain; poena damni aut sensus, privative or
positive. The one takes away some good, the other inflicts some positive evil.
3. That some of them take away life, either civil, as banishment, or natural,
as death: and some take away such things as make life comfortable, as goods;
such are sines, and confiscations; or liberty, as imprisonment, bondage; or our
honor, as all ignominious penalties. Those which infer some positive evil
contrary to nature, are all kind of tortures whatsoever, which cause pain in
the body of man: and all these positive punishments tend to the destruction of
life, either in part or in whole. 4. These penalties are so to be inflicted,
and in such a measure and proportion, as that no man may gain by doing evil. 5.
That though an innocent person, as such, cannot be justly punished, yet as he
is made one person with the guily, he may justly suffer. Some are one person
with the guilty by nature; as children with parents, some by consent, as
sureties with the principal guilty of non-payment, or by Laws civil, as the
subjects with the Sovereign. 6. The just execution of judgment is a means to
avert Gods wrath, to protect the just, to preserve the State, and procure Gods
mercy.


Rewards are contrary to punishments, and are due to such as are loyal and
obedient subjects doing well. These either are ordinary, and general, as
protection of life, liberty, estate; or extraordinary and more special, and
such as enrich or advance, or give privileges, immunities, and exemptions. And
these latter should never be disposed of but according to desert, and by this
means they would encourage the subject, and breed gallant men. Thus far his
constitution of the Leviathan, the great monstrous animal has been examined
and viewed: and is found to consist of an absolute power, and absolute slavery.
The head is an absolute Sovereign, the body and members absolute slaves.

CAP. XIII. Of the Second Part. And the twenty ninth of the Book. Of those
things which weaken, and tend to the dissolution of a Commonwealth.
ALL bodies Politic are truly mortal, as the Author says, though not so
mortal as the individual persons whereof they are constituted be. For by reason
of succession of these singular and several persons, they are of longer
continuance: and therefore said to be immortal; the proper meaning whereof is,
that they are not so mortal. Many States are constituted by degrees, not in a
moment, or any short time: and in the like manner, they decay by little and
little, until they utterly vanish in a total dissolution. And though both
constitution and dissolution seem sometimes to be fortuitous, yet they are not
so: for its God who in his mercy plants and builds: and in his just judgment
plucks up, and pulls down. This is the place assigned by Authors to the head of
Politics, which delivers the causes of the alteration, corruption and
subversion of States. Alterations of the forms of Government are sometimes for
the better, and so they are a blessing; sometimes for the worse, and so they
are the same with corruption. Corruption is from man; subversion from God, as
the supreme and universal Judge. Corruption goes before, subversion follows.
And this corruption is from the sins and crimes of the Governors, or governed,
or both. The crimes of Governors are either Personal or Political: Personal are
many times the same with the offenses of the people: sins of them as men:
Political are such as make them guilty as they are Governors, as ignorance,
imprudence, negligence, in justice Political; and these not only in assuming
and acquiring power, but in the administration of the same. The sins of the
people as subjects, are impatiency, when they will not endure the severity of
just Governors, good Laws, and impartial Judgment, a desire of innovation and
alteration of Government, without just and necessary causes, open rebellion,
secret treachery and conspiracy, sedition and such like. The sins of both,
which are personal, are impiety against God; injustice and unmercifulness
toward man, the abuse of peace and plenty to bravery, drunkenness, gluttony,
lewdness, and such like Vices. And when in these they become impudent,
incorrigible, and universally delinquent, their ruin is fatal and unavoidable:
the harvest is ripe, and the sickle of Gods vengeance will cut them off.

The Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, cap. 13. gives a perfect model of
the best and most lasting States. 1. The higher powers must so ascend the
Throne, as that it may be truly said, they were ordained of God, and advanced
not only and merely by his permission, but Commission and Command. 2. They must
have a sword, and a sufficient coactive power. 3. They must use the same
according to just judgment and wholesome Laws, for the protection of the good,
and the punishment of the bad. 4. The people must be subject not only out of
fear, but conscience. 5. They must obey their good and wholesome Laws. 6. They
must give them such allowance as shall be sufficient to maintain and make good
their just power. 7. They must love one another. 8. They must not live in
rioting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and envying.
In a word, they must be sober in themselves, just toward man, devout toward
God.
But when Prince, Priest and people refuse to follow these Laws, they draw Gods
judgments from heaven upon the Commonwealth. Idle, filthy, and abominable
Sodom must be destroyed: Gold-thirsty and bloodthirsty Babylon cannot stand:
Idolatrous and Apostate Israel and Judah must be wasted with sword, famine,
pestilence, their Country made desolate, and the remnant carried captives and
dispersed in remote parts, and in the midst of their enemies. But let us
examine the causes of the weakening and dissolution of States determined by the
Author.

T. H.

The 1, is when a man to obtain a Kingdom, is content sometimes with a less
power, then to the peace and defense of the Commonwealth is necessarily
required.

G. L.

This may prove to be a cause, yet very rarely. Princes and Monarchs (for of
them he speaks) offend usually on the other hand. If they can, they will assume
and challenge far more power then either God will, or man can give them; for
they desire to be absolute Lords. Few of them are of brave Theopompus his mind,
who willingly made his power less, that it might be more lasting. To be Dukes
of Venice can in no wise satisfy their vast ambitious desires: The Lacedemiun
Ephori are terrible to them: The Justitia Arragoniae cannot be endured;
Legislative and judicial Parliaments do too much restrain and limit their power
(...) with them its treason to affirm that there be any lawful means to reduce
them into order, when they apparently transgress the Laws of nature, which are
the Laws of God. The people indeed must be kept in awe and order, and this
cannot be without power. But, what is here understood by power? Its not
potestas, but potentia, strength and force; which may be great in a Leviathan,
yet without wisdom and justice can never long keep the people in subjection.
His examples of the Roman and Athenian free-States, are not fully applied,
neither do the applied come home unto the point. Rome was strong enough to
subdue a great part of the world, before she became imperial: and Athens in
that Law concerning Salamis had power enough, but wanted wisdom, and therefore
were reformed by the wise folly of Solon. That which is here spoken of the
power of Kings, is not to derogate the least from that power which is due unto
them by the constitution of the State wherein they reign. Some have more, some
have less. Yet none should have less then is sufficient for the full discharge
of their place: And it is to be wished every one of them would keep the bounds
determined by God and the Constitution.

T H.

A second cause of weakening and dissolving a State, are certain Doctrines. The
first, That every private man is Judge of good and evil actions.

G. L.

Judgment is public or private; public no private man can pass; private he
may; and that both of his own actions, and others too. The acts of others are
private or public: of both these he may Judge. Public acts of the Governors
are Laws, Judgments, Execution. Even of Laws he may, he must within himself,
so far as they are a rule and bind him, enquire, examine and determine, whether
good or evil. Otherwise, he can perform but only a blind obedience to the best:
and if he conform unto the unjust, he in obeying man, disobeys God, which no
good man will do. In other acts which are apparently just, we may judge of them
truly as they are, and no otherwise. Yet this must not be done to palliate our
disobedience to that which is just, or raise sedition, or rebel; but we may
complain to God, and by our humble prayers seek redress.

T. H.

A second Doctrine, That whatsoever a man does against conscience is sin. The
conscience may be erroneous; and he that is subject to no Civil Law, sins in
all he acts against his conscience. Yet to him that is in a Commonwealth, the
Law is the public conscience, by which he has undertaken to be guided.

G. L.

Conscience is a man's knowledge of his own acts, as agreeable or disagreeable
to the Law of God. Its not a faculty, but an act of the soul: and an act, not
of the will, but understanding, and the same as practical. The proper act is
knowledge; the object is his own acts, and these acts not any way, but as
agreeable or disagreeable to the Law of God. For as Aquinas says, there must
be applicatio facti ad legem: Otherwise a man's understanding cannot judge of it
as conformable or not unto the Law of God. These acts may be considered as to
be done, or done. In the former respect conscience binds as a Law, though it be
not the Law, but presupposes or includes the knowledge of the Law. In the
latter respect it judges, and is a kind of judge of himself in some sort as
superior to himself. But before the tribunal of God it is a witness, and does
accuse or excuse. The great Question so much vexed by the Casuists, is whether
an erroneous conscience does bind. But let them determine what they please; an
erroneous conscience in proper sense is no conscience. For an error is no
knowledge, but a defect of knowledge, or rather a plain want of knowledge, and
also an act contrary to knowledge. Conscience is a knowledge in proper sense,
and knowledge is true and certain: and its a knowledge of a man's own act or
acts as agreeable to the Law of God; this an erroneous conscience cannot be.
That conscience is such a knowledge, is made evident by the Apostle, saying,
That when the Gentiles not having the Law, do the things contained in the Law,
they having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, who show the work of the
Law written in their heart by their conscience witnessing, etc. Romans 12.14, 15.
Where we may observe, 1. That the conscience could not witness, accuse or
excuse, except there were something to be accused or excused. 2. The thing
accused as evil, or excused as good, must be something conformable, or contrary
to the Law of God. 3. The conscience could not accuse or excuse any thing as
good or evil, without knowledge both of the Law, and of the act that was
contrary or consentaneous to that Law. 4. Therefore the Apostle before he makes
mention of the conscience, affirms, 1. That they did the things contained in
the Law. 2. They were a Law unto themselves. 3. That they did by their
conscience witnessing, prove or demonstrate the work of the Law, (that is the
work which the Law did command) written in their heart.

To have the work of the Law written in their heart, is to have a certain true
knowledge of it, not an erroneous mistake. But to return to the Author,
Conscience in proper sense does bind, yet not as it is knowledge, nor as
knowledge of a man's proper act, nor as knowledge of the Law in general, but by
virtue of the Law known as a rule of his particular act. For man being subject
unto God, and under his Laws, cannot bind himself, and be his own Lawgiver:
but the Law of God, not an error, truly understood by him does bind him. But
let the erroneous judgment of the practical understanding be called
conscience, as by a Trope it may, because there may be something of conscience
in it; yet whether can it bind or no? I answer, it cannot bind: for an error
of the understanding, cannot be a binding rule to command the will of man;
neither can it be a rule at all. Again, an erroneous judgment, especially
practical, is a sin, and against the Law of God; therefore it can no ways
bind; only thus far most Casuists do grant, that by it a man is so far bound,
as not to act against it; yet this it does only per accidens, (for per se; he
is bound to act otherwise then it does dictate.) For because God has made a
man's reason his guide, he must needs be much depraved in his will, that will
act contrary unto his reason. And he that will not seruple to act against his
erroneous judgment, will be bold to act against his judgment rightly
informed. But the full debate of this, I refer to another occasion. And these
things premised, I return unto Mr. Hobbs that of the Apostle, Whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin: and therefore whosoever acts againt says and conscience,
properly so taken, sins: and for him to affirm that the true Doctrine of God
revealed in the Scripture, should be either false, or destructive of eivil
States and Governments, is no ways tolerable. Whereas he alleges, that the
Law of the Commonwealth is the public conscience by which the subject has
bound himself to be guided, its too loose and fallacious, if examined. For, 1.
The Law is not the public conscience, but the public rule of conscience in
matters civil. 2. Its a rule of the subjects obedience, not as its a Law of the
Commonwealth, but as it is agreeable and not contrary to an higher Law, the
Law of God. For the Laws civil do not immediately bind the conscience and
immortal soul, as the civil Sovereign has no power to punish it; for his sword
cannot reach that spiritual substance; Secondarily and by consequence they may
oblige the soul. 3. No subject may or ought to make the Law of the State his
absolute guide. For the Law may be against the Law of God; and then, how can
the subject undertake to obey it, and make it his rule, and not offend God? 4.
Every subject is first bound and subject unto God, before he be subjected to
civil powers: and is first bound to obey God more then man; and as his
subjection unto man is but conditional and subordinate to his subjection to
God, so his obedience to man is limited, and only to be performed in such
things as his supreme and absolute Lord does allow him.
And though man may suffer for his disobedience to humane Laws, yet he had
better suffer a temporal then an eternal penalty; and offend man rather then
God. Neither does this doctrine any ways prejudice the civil power, nor
encourage any man to disobedience and violation of civil Laws, if they be just
and good, as they ought to be: and the subject has not only liberty, but a
command to examine the Laws of his Sovereign, and judge within himself, and for
himself, whether they be not contrary to the Laws of his God.

T. H.

The third Doctrine, That faith and sanctity are not to be attained by Study
and Reason, but by supernatural inspiration and infusion.

G. L.

That divine faith whereby we believe on Jesus Christ, and obtain eternal life
in him, and that sanctity of life whereby we please God, and are accepted of
him, are no doubt both merited by Christ, and inspired and wrought in us
supernaturally by the power of the Holy Ghost. And there can be no doubt of
this to such as believe the Scripture to be the Word of God written, wherein we
read, That except a man be born again of water and the spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, John 3.5. And no man can come unto me except the
Father draw him, cap. 6.44. And to believe that Jesus was the Son of the living
God, was not from flesh and blood, but by revelation of his heavenly Father,
Christ himself teaches us, Mat. 16.17. This revelation was an inspiration or
infusion, except we will quarrel with words; and it was not natural; for then
it might have been by and from flesh and blood; but it was supernatural and
from God revealing, not only outwardly, but inwardly too. It is also further
taught us in Scripture, That no man can say, that Jesus Christ is the Lord but
by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.3. Yet this faith and sanctity are so wrought in us,
as that ordinarily God makes use of the Scriptures taught, explained, applied
unto man's heart, of hearing, study and meditation, which are acts of reason,
and such acts as man may naturally perform, and also so neglect them, as to
give God just cause to deny the inspiration of his Spirit for to make the word
taught, heard, meditated effectual upon his heart. This Doctrine has been
believed and professed in the most peaceable Commonwealths of the world, and
did strengthen, not weaken, much less dissolve the same. If he understand by
the professors of this Doctrine, the phanatick Enthusiasts of these times, who
pretend so much that Spirit which God never gave them, and upon this pretense
boast themselves to be spiritual men, judging all, and to be judged of none, as
they use to abuse the Scripture, then its true that these are enemies to all
Government, and their Doctrine tends to the dissolution of all order,
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and is to be rooted out of all Commonwealths.

T. H.

A fourth opinion repugnant to the nature of a Commonwealth is this, That he
that has the Sovereign power, is subject to the Civil Laws.

G. L.

There is no doubt but this is destructive of Government, and contrary to the
very nature and essence of a Commonwealth; the essential parts whereof are,
imperans and subditus, the Sovereign and the subject: take this difference
away, you confound all, and turn the Commonwealth into a Community; yet though
Sovereigns are above their own Laws, (how otherwise could they dispense with
them and repeal them?) wise men have given advice to Princes for to observe
their own Laws, and that for example unto others, and good Princes have
followed this advice Sovereigns are to govern by Laws, not to be subject unto
them, or as Subjects obey them, or be punished by them. But what this man means
by Sovereign, in the hypothesis, is hard to know. For he presupposes all
Sovereigns absolute, and all Kings of England such Sovereigns; and so in
general it may be granted, that all Sovereigns are above the Laws civil; yet
the application of this rule to particular Princes of limited power, may be
false and no ways tolerable. The question is not so much concerning the
superiority of the Sovereign over the Laws; but whether a Sovereign by Law for
Administration, who is not sole Legislator, is not in diverse respects inferior
to the Law; or whether an an absolute Sovereign may not cease to be such, and
ex obligatione criminis, ex superiore fieri inferior.

T. H.

A fifth Doctrine which tends to the dissolution of a Commonwealth is, That
every man has an absolute propriety in his goods, such as excludes the right
of the Sovereign. Every man has indeed a propriety, that excludes the right of
the subject which is derived from the Sovereign, without whose protection every
man should have equal right to the same.

G. L.

1. If the subject have propriety, as the Author grants, it must needs be
absolute, and must needs exclude not only the right of the fellow-subject, but
of the Sovereign too. For propriety in proper sense is an independent right of
total alienation, without any license of a Superior or any other. 2. This
propriety is not derived from the Sovereign, except he be despotical; and such
indeed the Author affirms all Sovereigns to be: and in that respect the
subjects can neither have propriety nor liberty; therefore he contradicts
himself, when he says in many places, that the Sovereign is absolute, and
here, that the subject has propriety. 3. Its to be granted, that even in a
Free State, the subjects proprity cannot free from the public charges: for as
a Member of the whole body, he is bound to contribute to the maintenance of the
State, without the preservation whereof he cannot so well preserve his own
private right. 4. Propriety is by the Law of Nature and Nations at least
agreeable unto both. And when men agree to constitute a Commonwealth, they
retain their proper right, which they had unto their goods before the
Constitution, which does not destroy, but preserve propriety, if well ordered.
For men may advance a Sovereign without any alienation of their estates. No
man has any propriety from God, but so as to be bound to give unto the poor,
relieve the distressed, and maintain the Sovereign in his just Government; yet
this does not take away, but prove propriety, because every one gives, even
unto the Commonwealth, that which is his own, not another man's, nor his
Sovereigns, who may justly in necessary cases, for the preservation of the
State, impose a just rate upon the subject.

But if the Reader seriously consider the Authors discourse in other parts of
his Book, he may easily know whereat he aims. For, 1. He makes all Sovereigns
absolute. 2. The Kings of England to be Sovereigns. And 3. in that respect to
have a power to raise subsidies, and moneys without a Parliament. And 4. has
made that a mortal disease of our State, which is a great preservative of our
liberty. For the people always bear the purse, and could not by the King be
charged with the least, without their consent by their Representative in the
Parliament.
This did poise and limit the regal power, prevented much riot and excess in
the Court, made the Prince frugal, and hindered unnecessary wars. Yet good
Princes, and frugal, never wanted money, were freely supplied by their
subjects, whilst they required in their need any thing extraordinary above the
public revenue, in a right way by Parliament.

T. H.

There is a sixth Doctrine plainly and directly against the essence of a
Commonwealth, and its this, That the Sovereign power may be divided.

G. L.

The supreme power, as supreme, must needs be one, and cannot be divided. For
as in a Natural, so in a Political body, there must be of necessity one only
principle of motion. One supreme will directed by one judgment, and
strengthened with one force of the sword, must command, judge, execute:
Otherwise there can be no order or regular motion. Yet this supreme power may
be in many persons, several and distinct physically, but morally reduced to one
by the major part agreeing in one suffrage. That some have made in this State
of England three Coordinate powers, with their several Negatives, and their
several distinct rights of Sovereign power, can very hardly be made good by any
reason, as I have hinted before. Yet even these do place all the jura
Majestatis, in all jointly. Our form of Government is confounded by the
different opinions of common Lawyers. Civilians and Divines, who neither agree
one with another, nor amongst themselves. It has been declared, That the
fundamental Government of this Kingdom has been by King, Peers and Commons;
yet this can satisfy no man, because there is no certainty what the power of
Commons, what the power of Lords, what the power of the King is: Neither
whether the house of Commons and of Lords, be two distinct houses or no: Or if
they be distinct, wherein they are so distinct. For some affirm, that in
Legislation they ought to be but one, though in Judicial acts two. Yet suppose
the Lords to have the Judicial power alone, nevertheless its a question what
kind of Lords and Barons these should be. We read first of the forty Lords of
the forty Counties in the Saxons time: after the Conquest we find three sorts
of Barons in the higher house: and they were Feudarii, rescriptitii,
diplomatici; Barons by Tenure, by Writ, by Patent. Lords by tenure were the
first; but afterward when any were called by the Kings Writ to Parliament,
they by that very Writ were made Barons with suffrage amongst the former; the
last were Lords by Patent, and such were most, yea almost all our Lords in
latter times. And to multiply the last, was a policy in the King. For by that
means, after the supremacy of the Pope was cast off, the Bishops did wholly
depend upon the King, and the Barons by Patent were his creatures, and by them
he might carry any cause, or at least hinder and cross the desires of the
Knights and Burgesses. And herein few of our ordinary Histories can help us;
because they relate only unto us matter of fact, how sometimes the King,
sometimes the Barons, sometimes the Commons were ascendant and predominant, as
now they all seem to be descendant. Yet for all this, a free Parliament, of
just, wise and good men, might rectify all this, and unite the supreme power
so miserably divided to the hazard of the State.

T. H.

And as false Doctrine, so also oftentimes the example of different Government
in a neighboring Nation, disposes men to alteration of the sorm already
settled.

G. L.

That this may be a cause of the alteration, and also of ruin too, its very
possible: and there seems to be some color of reason in it, because we are
bound to follow the best examples. And this may be powerful and prevalent with
such as are given to Change and affect novelty. Yet with wise and understanding
men its of no force, because they know full well, that some form of Government,
which may be good to one, may prove not to be so to another; and that changes
in this kind are dangerous. For to unsettle that which is firm, for to
introduce that whereof we have had no experience, may prove the ruin of a
State.

T. H.

And as to rebellion in particular against Monarchy; one of the most frequent
causes is the reading of the Books of Policy and Histories of the ancient
Greeks and Romans, etc.

G. L.

This has been formerly examined. The reading of these Books cannot do so much
hurt, as this Leviathan may do: For it is far more dangerous and destructive of
good government, then any of their Histories, which can do no hurt to any but
such as are ignorant and ill-disposed. In those Books they may read of Kings
and Emperors, and of Monarchies as well as free-States; and few are so void of
understanding, but that they well know they are bound to their own form of
Government, and are not to covet every model they read of. Such men as he do
shamefully debase free-States, as forms unlawful in themselves, and so flatter
limited Princes, as though they were absolute Lords, and advance Monarchy so
high, as though it were the only form of Government, so instituted by God and
commanded; that all Nations were bound unto it, and whosoever does not bow unto
it, is a rebel against God. Yet he never instituted immediately any
Commonwealth but one, and that was a Free State; and when a King was desired,
he was offended, and under a regal government it came to ruin. Whereas he
thinks these Books do teach Regicide and killing of Kings, he is much mistaken.
For subjects to murder their lawful Sovereigns, is an horrid crime, and so
much the more to be detested, if done under the name of Tyrannicide. To plead
for Tyrants really such as such, is to be abhorred. They pervert the very end
of all government, abuse their power, act contrary to the Laws of God and men,
to the ruin of the State, are enemies of mankind, the chiefest agents for the
Devil. The Question is, Whether a people having power in their hands, may not
restrain, or remove, or put to death such men, as being guilty of many crimes,
which the Laws of God have made universally capital, so that no man in the
world can plead exemption? Some think that they are to be left to God, and
subjects must seek deliverance by prayers and tears; and the truth is,
Christians as Christians, have no other remedy: others conceive, they may be
restrained, and that by force, and their own subjects do it: Others give this
power only unto Magistrates, or to such as share with them in the supreme
power: Others are of a mind, that seeing they cease to be Kings or Sovereigns,
they may be lawfully tried, and put to death, as well as private men; and that
without any ordinary jurisdiction: Others determine this to be lawful in such
States as that of Lacedemon in Greece, and Arragon in Spain. What the Doctrine
of the Church of Rome is, cannot be unknown. For the Pope does arrogate an
universal Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, whereby he may excommunicate any
Christian King, that shall not obey his Canons and Edicts, and upon this
sentence once given, he may depose him, free his subjects from their
allegiance, and command them as Catholics to rise in rebellion against him;
and some of them have taught, that its a meritorious art to poison, stab, or
any other way murder Kings for the promotion of the Catholic cause. This
question after the terms thereof clearly explicated, is of very great moment;
and let men advise well how they do determine either in their own judgment
privately, or before others.

T. H.

There be Doctors, that think, there may be more sorts (that is more
Sovereigns) then one in a Commonwealth; and set up a Supremacy against the
Sovereignty; Canons against Laws; and a Ghostly Authority, against the Civil,
etc.

G. L.

There cannot be any Sovereign but one, in one and the same Commonwealth: and
to set up Supremacy against Sovereignty; Canons against Laws; Ghostly authority
against Civil, must needs be a cause of division, confusion, dissolution. Yet
this will not prove any inconsistency of an Ecclesiastical independent power
with the Civil Sovereignty, in one and the same Community. And the distinction
of the power of the keys given by Christ unto the Church; and the power of the
sword, trusted in the hands of the higher powers civil, is real, and signifies
some things truly different one from another, though he either cannot or will
not understand it. With Mr. Hobbs indeed this distinction can signisie nothing,
because he has given unto the civil Sovereign an infallible judgment, and an
absolute power in all causes Ecclesiastical and Spiritual. His discourse may be
good against those Ecclesiastical persons who have usurped civil power;
otherwise its impertinent and irrational. And he must know, that it is alike
difficult to prove, That the State has the power of the keys, as for to
evince that the Church has the power the sword. Its as great an offense for
the State to encroach upon the Church, as for the Church to encroach upon the
State; The Bishops of Rome have been highly guilty of the one, and many
protestant Princes and States of the other. And though men will not see it, yet
its clear enough, that one and the same Community is capable both of a Civil
and Ecclesiastical Government at one and the same time: and that the Church and
State are two distinct Commonwealths, the one spiritual, and the other
temporal, though they consist of the same persons. And these persons, as
Christians, considered in a spiritual capacity, make up the Community and
Commonwealth Christian, which is the Church: as they are men, having temporal
estates, bodily life and liberty, they are members of the civil Community and
Commonwealth. The Power, Form of Government, Administration, Laws,
Jurisdiction, Officers of the Church are distinct and different from those of
the State. The sentence of the Church is, Let him be an Heathen, or a Publican,
and the execution is expected from heaven according to the promise, Whatsoever
you bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and this sentence does take away
some spiritual, but no temporal or civil right of the person judged, though the
judgment be passed and made valid, both in foro interiore and exteriore. The
sentence of the civil State is, Let him be fined, imprisoned, stigmatized,
banished, put to death; and its executed by the sword. The several members of a
Church National, and the whole Church jointly, is subject to the civil power;
and the civil Sovereign, if a Christian, is subject to the Church, because as a
Christian, he is subject to Christ, and bonnd by his Laws. And as a civil
Sovereign, he is bound to protect the Church, and he may by civil Laws ratify
the Ecclesiastical Canons, and then they bind not only under a spiritual, but a
civil penalty too. If Church Assemblies give cause of jealousy to the Civil
powers, they may regulate them, and order their proceedings; if they offend,
they may punish them. Their persons, lives, estates, are under the sword; and
if this be taken from them, because they will not obey them to disobey Christ,
they ought to suffer it patiently for Christ's sake. In this case the Church may
pray and weep, resist and rebel they may not; for Christians as Christians,
have no power of the sword against any man, not their own members, much less
against the civil Sovereign; whom if they resist, they must do it under another
notion, or else they transgress, and can have no excuse. And here it is to be
observed, 1. That Christ gathered Disciples, instituted Churchdiscipline, made
Laws, and the Apostles executed them in making Officers, Acts cap. 1. and 16.
made Laws, cap. 15. passed sentence and executed the same, 1 Cor. 5. and all
this without any Commission from any civil Sovereign. Therefore its not true
which some learned Divines have affirmed, That the State and Church are one
body, endued with two powers or faculties; for they are two distinct bodies
Politic. Its true, that if, as some conceive, there were no power but coactive
of the sword, then they must needs be one body. But there is another power, as
you heard before. 2. If a King become Christian, by this he acquires no power,
not the least, more then he had before: and if he be Heathen or Mohammedan, and
all his subjects become Christian, he loses not one jot of his former civil
power, which they are bound to submit unto by the very Laws of Christianity. If
he command any thing contrary to the Laws of Christ, they may and must disobey,
but deny his power, they may not, they must not. In this case a Christian may
be perplexed between the Devil and a Jailer, as some of Scotland were said to
be, when if they obeyed the Parliament, and joined with Duke Hamilton to invade
England, the Kirk excommunicate them, and deliver them up to Satan; if they
obeyed the Church prohibiting them, they were cast in prison by the State. The
cause of this perplexity is not from this, that the Church and State are two
distinct Commonwealths, but because the commands of the one or both may be
unjust.


T. H.

Some make the power of levying money depend upon a general assembly; of
conduct and command upon one man; of making Laws upon the accidental consent of
three. Such government is no government, but a division of the Commonwealth
into three independent factions, etc.

G. L.

Here again he has made the Parliament, which is the bulwark of, and best
remedy for to preserve our liberty, a disease; and has turned the King, Peers
and Commons into three independent factions; and this Government, he says,
some call a mixed Monarchy. Whether there can be a mixed State, is a question in
Politics; yet if we understand what mixture is, and could determine, whether
this mixture be in the supreme power as fixed in the Constitution, or exercised
in the Administration, we might more easily satisfy our selves. But this has
not been exactly done. For its probable, that in the exercise of the supreme
power, in the three acts of Legislation, Judgment, Execution, there might be a
mixture, and these brought to a just and regular temperament. But a mixed
Monarchy in proper sense there cannot be. Yet a limited and well-poised Monarch
there may be. To place the power Legislative, which includes all the rest, in
three coordinate parties, granting to every one of them severally a negative,
to me seems irrational; for it may easily turn them who should be one, into
three factions, as here it is affirmed: at least it will retard all businesses,
which for for dispatch, require secrecy and expedition. But to place the
universal power originally in the general assembly without any negative; the
judicial in the Lords, and the executive in the King, seems to be far more
agreeable to the rules of reason. This some think was our untient Constitution,
and the same excellent.

Difficulty of raising moneys necessary for the defense and preservation of the
State, monopolies, popularity in a subject, are diseases which much weaken a
State; there is no doubt of this. That one City should in gross the wealth and
strength of a Nation, and be so rich and populous as to be able to set forth a
potent Army, and maintain it, may be judged very dangerous to a Commonwealth,
as Mr. Hobbs informs us. By this City in particular, he means London, which, as
some tell us, furnished the Parliament with men and moneys, whereby the King
was vanquished and over-thrown. Yet they seldom did assist the Parliament but
upon high terms, and advantageous to themselves; in so much as their Petitions
were Commands unto the Parliament, which did depend more upon the City, then
the City upon them, by which means they might in time engross the whole power,
and so rule the Nation. Yet an army of their own did break their strength, and
reduce them unto their own terms: and its clear, that City depends much upon
the River, both for fuel, merchandise and provision, and by a wise provident
counsel may be easily kept in order. And this might the more easily be done,
because the Citizens have so many several interests, and the same inconsistent
amongst themselves, as that they can hardly be united.

After all these diseases from within, which weaken and may dissolve a
Government, he informs of a destructive cause, and that is a foreign or
intestine war, wherein the enemy obtains a final victory, so that the Sovereign
cannot protect his subjects in their loyalty. This indeed may cut off a line,
change the Governors, and alter the form of Government. Yet in all this, the
Community may continue, and never be like a subject matter without any form,
but the Government may be the same, and the Governors only altered; nay the
Constitution may stand firm, and the Administration only varied: or if the the
form be changed, yet the privation of the former is an introduction of the
latter. Here its confessed, that when the power of protection fails in the
Sovereign, obligation in the subject is taken away. But he starts a question,
though with him no question, whether the right of a Sovereign Monarch can be
extinguished by the act of another? He says it cannot. Yet experience tells
us, it may. For a conquered Monarch, fallen into the power of another, cease
to be a Sovereign, and this is by the act of another. And again, if God by
another take away his sword, though his person escape, and be at liberty, he
has but the name, and not the thing or real title. If his subjects freed from
obligation, because he can give no protection, do submit themselves unto
another, his right is lost. If his life be taken away, and his line cut off,
all right is extinct, and in all these cases by the act of another; yet he
thinks, that if the power of an assembly be suppressed, their right is extinct.
The assembly in an Aristocracy, or Democracy, for such he means, may be
extraordinary, or ordinary; and the same the immediate subject of the supreme
power, or only trusted for a time with the administration and exercise thereof:
and the power of an assembly may be suppressed for a time, and so only
suspended, the assembly remaining still. Except he let us know what kind of
assembly he understands, and what kind of suppression of power he means, he
does nothing. An assembly whose power depends upon a certain place, time,
number, may lose their right, if once they be scattered or defective in that
circumstance.

CAP. XIV. Of the 2. part, the 30. of the book Of the Office of the Sovereign
Representative.
ITs very expedient for those, whom it concerns, to know what Majesty is, and
what be the several rights thereof, as also that in every State it be fixed in
a certain subject, person or persons, that every one may know whom to obey and
subject himself unto; yet the principal thing is for Sovereigns to exercise
their power in the administration of the Commonwealth according to the rules of
Wisdom and Justice, without which the best constitution in the world is in vain.

It might be worth the while to examine what the Author has delivered
concerning the office of a Sovereign Representative, if he had informed us in
this point of any thing formerly unknown or more excellent, then we read in
other Writers. But he is so far from having done any such thing, that he comes
much short of others. The duties of all Civil Governors are most exactly taught
in the Scriptures, which if this man had followed, he might have given Princes
far more, and more excellent instructions.

In this Chapter we find little but what we heard before; for it consists
chiefly in the repetition of his former rules, and his method is not exact. He
presumes much of his own knowledge above others, and conceits he has given us
a better model of Government then ever any had before; and so much he admires
his own rules, that he thinks them worthy to be taught in the Universities, and
taictly decries all former Politics, and undertakes to prove his dictates out
of Scripture, which he can never do.

Many of his Rules I confess are good, but most of them are such as are very
ordinary and commonly known. But in those points wherein he is singular, he can
hardly be excused from error. His first and chiefest care after the good of the
people, is, to preserve the absolute power of Rulers, which he asserts to be
their due; and lest they should lose any of them, he renews his Catalogue of
them again. These must be taught the people, that they may know themselves to
be absolute slaves. And Princes must take heed of tranferring any of their
Sovereign Rights unto another. But this was needless; for they have a desire of
power before they do obtain it: and after they are once possessed of it, they
not only keep that which is due, but also usurp far more then either God or man
has given them. Kings, who are but trusted with a limited power, endeavor to
make themselves absolute Lords; and Despotical Sovereigns must be petty
Dieties. The best Princes had always a greater care to exercise their power
well, then to enlarge it. And by their Wisdom and Justice have governed more
happily then any of these absolute Sovereigns, who desire rather to be great
then good, and themselves more honorable then the people happy.

The Errors of this Author, vented in this part, as that Sovereign power Civil
is absolute; A civil Law against Rebellion is no Obligation; A good Law is not
a just Law, because no Law can be unjust. All his Rules of Government may be
proved out of Scripture and other such like, I will not here examine, because
some of them are ridiculous; some of them have been formerly answered: and his
proof of these in his next part shall be discussed.

CAP. XV. Of the 2. part, the 31. of the Book, Of the Kingdom of God by nature.
THis Chapter is the conclusion of the second part, the Leviathan, and makes
way for the third following. The principal subject hereof is the Laws of nature
as distinct to laws supernatural. For he truly and wisely makes God the King
and Lawgiver both in the Kingdom of God by nature, and above nature. That God
is the universal King by nature, he seems to prove out of the Scripture.

T. H.

God is King, let the earth rejoice, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 96.1. And again,
God is King, though the nations be angry, and he that sits upon the
Cherubins, though the earth be moved, Psalm. 98.1. Whether men will or not, they
must be subject always to the Divine Power.

G. L.

In the Allegation of these two places he seems to follow the vulgar Latin and
the Septuagint both for the number of the Psalms and the Translation. For with
us they are the words of the first verses of the 97. and 99. Psalms, and are
turned in another manner. The translations though seemingly different may agree
in the substance. And its agreed on all hands, that the Psalmist speaks of the
Kingdom of God; yet seeing there is a kingdom of God as Creator, and a kingdom
of God as Redeemer; it may be a question whether his kingdom in general be here
meant, or one of the former particular kingdoms. Both ancient and Modern
Divines for the most part understand both the Psalms of the kingdom of Christ,
and which is more, the Apostle, Heb. 1.6. so expounds the former Psalm, which
agrees with Psalm. 2. which speaks to the same purpose, and undoubtedly intends
the Kingdom of Christ. The Kingdom and Government of God is most properly so
called in respect of Angels and men, as only capable of Laws, Punishments and
Rewards, no rational man will deny, yet he by his wisdom does direct and order
all creatures.

T. H.

God declares his Laws three ways: By natural reason, Revelation, and
Prophecy. From the difference of the natural and Prophetic Word of God, there
may be attributed to God a twofold Kingdom, Natural and Prophetic, etc.

G. L.

In the rest of this Chapter we may observe three things. 1. The manner how God
declares his Laws. 2. The distinction of his Kingdom. 3. The ground of his
Dominion.
1. God does manifest himself both to Angels and men two ways; by his Works
and his Word. By his works in the Creation and Providence. By his word
immediately by Revelation, mediately by Prophecy. In the latter he makes use
of man to speak to man, the same thing he has spoken to man by Revelation: and
the word of prophecy to man is the word of Revelation from God: and the matter
of both is the same. The word of Creation and Providence is received by natural
reason; the word of Revelation seems to be apprehended by reason supernaturally
elevated and illuminated.

The Kingdom of God is natural, or supernatural, according to the natural or
supernatural Laws. The first Kingdom by the rules and dictates of natural
reason directs man unto a temporal peace and prosperity on Earth: The second by
the Laws of Revelation orders him to a supernatural and eternal peace and
felicity to be enjoyed fully in Heaven. For the former end all civil Policies
were instituted: For the second the polity spiritual of the Church. The
declaration of the Laws of Gods Kingdom by nature were universally always
declared even to all nations; the Laws of his supernatural Kingdom were
revealed universally at the first in the times of Adam, and after in the days
of Noah. But after a general Apostasy, Israel was trusted with the Oracles of
life until the exhibition of the Messiah: and after his Resurrection the
Apostles received a Commission to teach all Nations, and make these Laws known
more generally. So that this Author does bewray his ignorance in divinity; and
pretending to the knowledge of the Scripture, he little understands them, and
much abuses those heavenly Writings. For the Kingdom of God by Prophecy was
in all times, and confined in a more special manner for a time unto the people
of Israel for a special reason. And at the first election of them after their
deliverance from the Egyptial bondage, he immediately instituted not only
their spiritual but their civil Government. In which respect their civil
government might be called in a peculiar manner the Kingdom and Commonwealth of
God: and so the government of no Nation in the world could be accounted.

T. H.

The right of Gods sovereignty is not derived from Creation, but from his
irresistible Power.

G. L.

This is his great ignorance to think that Gods Sovereignty should be derived
from the executive power of force and strength of his Godhead. For Dominion in
general is twofold: Possessionis ant regiminis, of possession or government.
That of possession we call propriety: in which respect God is absolute Lord of
all his creatures, because he creates and preserves them, so that their very
being is more his then theirs. But his sovereign power over man arises not
only from propriety in general, but from Gods propriety in him as a rational,
intellectual creature, ordinable to an higher end then the inanimate and
irrational creature is capable of. For God created and preserved him a rational
creature; and both as a creature and as rational he is wholly his. As he is
rational, he is capable of Laws, Rewards, Punishments, and has a power to
become Gods subject by voluntary submission and donation of himself, and also
to obey his Lord and Maker. This no irrational being has or can have. So that
Gods Dominion over man arises from Gods propriety in man as a rational being,
and from the voluntary submission of man as a rational creature unto his God
who made him such. Gods propriety in man is derived from creation and
preservation; and both these were not only from Gods power, as Mr. Hobs
imagines, but also from his Understanding and Will. For God by his wisdom made
the world as well as by his power, and works all things according to the
Counsel of his Will. Dominion of government is not only from power, nor by
power alone; for understanding, will and power, must all concur to Government.
Therefore how absurd is that assertion of his which follows, If there had
been any man of irresistible power, there had been no reason why by that power
he should not have ruled. If this were true, a Leviathan, a Dragon, an Elephant
has more power then man; and why should not brutes being stronger rule over
men who are weaker? By this rule the strongest man in a Kingdom should be King:
and he that has the strength of Goliath or Sampson, should rule over others,
though they have strength without wisdom and integrity.

T. H.

The Kingdom over men, and the right of afflicting them at his pleasure,
belongs naturally to God Almighty; not as Creator and gracious, but as
omnipotent.

G. L.

Obedience is due to God not merely as gratitude to a benefactor, but as a duty
unto him as a Lawgiver. For as a Creator he may have a right to command,
because by Creation he has an absolute propriety in his being, which is such
as he is capable of a Law. And Creation is not to be considered as any kind of
benefit, but such a benefit as his rational being was wholly derived from it,
and also wholly and perpetually depends upon his preservation, and his eternal
happiness upon his legislation and judgment. And though he may afflict at
pleasure as omnipotent, because as such he can do it, yet he never afflicted
any but as a legislatour and Judge, according to his just Laws. Because God is
omnipotent he can afflict, but it does not hence follow that he will afflict.
But he instanceth in Job, and the man born blind, both afflicted by God as
omnipotent: yet Job was upright indeed, but not altogether innocent: and though
God did manifest unto him his glorious Majesty and Almighty power in his great
works, yet this was not done to show him the cause why God did afflict Job, but
to humble him. And being humbled, he did not plead his integrity, but repented
of his infirmity in dust and ashes. For though he was no hypocrite, yet he was
a sinner, Job 42.6. And though the blind man, John 9. was born blind, as we
might justly be, yet he was conceived and born in sin as we are. But neither he
nor his parents were guilty of any such notorious crime, as God does usually
recompense with exemplary punishment even in this life.

T. H.

Honor consists in the inward thought and opinion of the power and goodness
of another; and therefore to honor God is to think as highly of his power and
goodness as is possible. And of that opinion, the external signs in words and
actions of men are called worship.

G. L.

This is the first Law of Gods Kingdom by nature in respect of God, that he is
to be worshipped. Worship is sometimes an act of the soul terminated upon his
Divine excellency and dignity: its called Reverence, and sometimes Adoration.
Sometimes its an act terminated upon his supreme and universal Power: And so it
is submission to him as Supreme Lord and Lawgiver. Sometime for obedience: and
in this respect even the performance of our duty to our neighbors, as done in
obedience to him as our supreme Lord, is an act of worship. And all acts of the
soul terminated upon the Deity immediately are called worship. The worship of
Reverence and Adoration is given unto God as most glorious and excellent in
himself, yet so manifested and apprehended. The worship of submission and
obedience is given and ascribed to him as Supreme Lord; and the object of
worship is some excellency apprehended in the party worshipped: And because the
excellency of the Deity is Infinite and Eternal, therefore the highest degree
of worship is due unto him: even to the annihilation of our selves, the
resigning of our very being wholly unto him, and the emptying of our selves
into the Ocean of his most blessed Being. God deserves and is worthy of all
honor, glory and worship as excellent in himself. They may justly be required
of the creature as depending solely and wholly upon him as Lord Creator,
Preserver. And the creature is bound to worship him by virtue of his Law and
Covenant. By performance of this duty we are capable of Eternal bliss in and
from him: and by his promise we come to have a right unto Eternal life.

The Excellency of God is his most perfect and blessed Essence, which cannot be
known by man as it is in it self; yet its manifested to us by several distinct
attributes, whereof some may be known by the light of Reason in some measure,
but more perfectly by the Revelation of the Scriptures. These Attributes are
many and distinct, and so given to God by himself: because by one act of Reason
we cannot conceive of or understand his Essence; which is but one in it self,
but represented to us as different and many, and so apprehended. And by our
faith we believe the Divine perfections to be far greater then our Reason can
apprehend them to be. They are in himself one infinite being, manifested by his
works, and more fully by his Word. And our worship must ascend above our
Reason, and must be performed according to our faith, which is a divine and
supernatural light. For the distinct knowledge of this worship, with the
several acts thereof, and the several names, we must not follow the Schoolmen,
but search into the Scripture, and diligently observe the use of the words, as
they are there applied to signify the same.

How far Mr. Hobs is from the true understanding of worship in general, and of
the worship of God in particular, may easily appear from this, that he makes
worship to be nothing else but the outward signification by words and actions
of internal honor; which with him is nothing else but the inward thought and
opinion of the power and goodness of another. But neither is worship nor honor
any such thing as he has defined them. And his discourse of worship with the
distinctions will be found very poor upon examination, except we allow him a
sovereign power over words to impose what signification upon them he pleases,
and the same different from that wherein they are used in Classical Authors.

Thus he has finished his Politics, set forth under the name of Leviathan in
the Frontispiece: And though many have in this kind of learning far excelled
him: yet he thinks it clear and the best, and most rational, though it neither
agree with reason or Religion. And though his hope is not much, yet some hope
he has some Sovereign may put it in practice. If they have no better
directions, they may make use of his principles, as some have done to their
ruin. Princes and Ministers of State have no need to be taught them: for they
know them too well and follow them too much.

Of a Christian Commonwealth. CAP. I. Of the third part, the 32. of the Book.
Of the Principles of Christian Politics.
MR. Hobbs in the former part seemed to have some use of his Reason; but in
this he is like unto such as are lunatic, though now and then he has his
Lucida Intervalla. And whether he has done thus out of ignorance or design, I
know not; but this I know that he is deeply guilty of Error and presumption.
He has taught us little that is good and solid; much which is dangerous and
damnable. The judicious Reader (if any such will vouchsafe to read him) will
reject and that with scorn and indignation, many things in the Book; but some
simple giddy fools, especially in these Lunatic times, may be taken with his
fooleries, and blasphemies. His design is to take all power from the Church,
Dethrone Christ, and confer all spiritual power in matters of Religion upon the
civil Sovereign, and this directly contrary to express Scripture. He has
turned the Pope out of his infallible Chair, and transformed sovereign civil
Princes and Rulers into Popes; and to them in highest points, which concern out
eternal salvation, we must captivate our judgment. It seems to be a fault to
spend any time in answering him, and for the same I may be censured, either as
a fool, or as one ill-imployed; yet because his doctrine, though it can do no
good, yet may do hurt, and that to many, I will, yet but briefly, say something
to him.

The very Title of this part is ambiguous, and as he here understands it
uncouth. For he determines the subject to be a Christian-Common-wealth, and in
that sense as not any other has taken it. For a Christian-Common-wealth is
either a Government of Christians as Christians, and that is called the Church,
either as universally considered subject unto Christ her Lord and King, or as
it is divided into several particular associations under some form of
Discipline; and Christian its called most usually, as believing and professing
the faith of Christ exhibited: or else its a Commonwealth civil which has
publicly received and acknowledged the Christian Faith. Neither of these ways
does he understand it. For with him a Christian Commonwealth is such a State
wherein the people depend upon and must absolutely submit unto the sovereign
civil professing himself a Christian, as infallible in all matters of Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline: and he derives the Authority of the Canon of the Scripture
from him: yet neither Reason nor Scripture ever taught him any such Doctrine.
But let us hear what he professes, for thus we read in him.

T. H.

And this Scripture it is out of which I am to take the principles of my
Discourse concerning the rights concerning those who are the supreme Governors
on earth of Christian-Common-wealths, and of the duty of Christian subjects
toward their Sovereigns.

This is the substance as it is the Conclusion of his first Chapter. The Rule
of all discourse that is true, must be the Word of God either natural or
prophetic as he expresses himself. The prophetic word we Christians do
affirm to be contained in the Scriptures, which once granted to be the word of
God written, must of necessity be believed as infallibly true by a natural
principle. That God is true and truth it self, not accidentally but
Essentially; That the Prophets and Apostles knew them immediately to be the
word of God, he seems to confess. But how we know them to be so is a question.
The signs or Rules to know a true Prophet from a false, he has assigned to be
two. 1. The matter of the Revelation. 2. The miracles done for confirmation.
But of this in the former part that which is sufficient has been said. By
Scripture we understand the word of God written: to be written is but an
adjunct to the word of God, which is the word of God, and may be so though
never written; yet it pleased God to cause it to be written, that it might be
preserved more pure and entire and be continued as a lasting Monument and
record in the Church: and as he directed the Prophets and Apostles in the
speaking of it to be infallible, so he likewise made them infallible in the
writing. Words and writings are but signs of that which God revealed, they
understood, declared; and that by us being truly understood and rightly applied
according to the intention of the Revelation ought to be our Rule. But if this
be misunderstood and misapplyed as by this Author they are, they cannot direct
us, mislead us they may.

And here we must distinguish between the entire Canon of the Scripture, and
the principal and intended matter therein contained as necessary to salvation.
The Canon is so many ways and so strongly confirmed, that no other Book in the
world can be in this respect parrallel with it, and it were irrational to
reject it. The books of this Canon are usually distinguished into three kinds;
Historical, Prophetical, Doctrinal. In the Historical part, that which may seem
to be most incredible, is far more credible then many things commonly and
generally believed in all Religions, and upon far less probable grounds; This
the Ancient Fathers and Divines have made evident against the greatest
Scholars of the world, who did except against these Books. And in particular
Cyril against Julian. The Prophetical has been proved in a great part by God
himself to the least particulars fulfilling what he has foretold. The
Doctrinal part is either Moral or Positive: Morals few rational men do
question, because they have some affinity with the internal Principles of
natural Reason. The Positives are such as Reason cannot reach, and therefore
required at the first publication at least some extraordinary confirmation,
that Reason might be certain they were revealed by God: These Positives are,
that the Son of God was incarnate, that he by the sacrifice of his body and
death upon the Cross did expiate the sin of man: That he rose from the dead,
ascended into Heaven; sits at the right hand of God, and Reigns in Heaven and
Earth; shall come to judge both quick and dead, etc. The Signs and Wonders done
by the Apostles, the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and Gods powerful working of the
Spirit upon the souls of men upon the preaching, hearing and receiving of these
Positives, did sufficiently testify they were from Heaven. For in confirmation
of the Positives, not the Morals, these things were done by God. The matter of
them is such, as that though no Reason can prove, yet no Reason can contradict
justly, because there is nothing in them contrary to the principles of pure
Reason. They are proposed unto us with such credit, and urged upon us as
matters of greatest concernment in the world, in so much that he cannot be
rational that shall refuse either to give assent unto them, or make trial of
them with the sincere heart: which once done, he shall find by real effects in
the heart, not only that God did reveal them as he believed before by an
acquired faith, but have an intuitive knowledge that they are Gods testimony,
because he who spoke by the Scriptures and the Ministers, has spoken to him
immediately by his spirit working in his heart: and then Reason is satisfied
and convinced that God has spoken, and thereupon cease to deny, and oppose,
and yields a firm assent. And to conclude this point, whereof (...) had
formerly spoken, if we will but consider what kind of men have questioned or
opposed the divinity of the Scripture, we shall find it in that very thing to
be much honored (...) and the reason why men do not believe them, is not only
the imperfection but the corruption of Reason and man's will. For most men love
darkness rather then the light: and the Doctrine of the Cross of Christ as it
declares a deep design of Gods Eternal Wisdom, so its directly contrary to our
false notions and base lusts. And this is a plain reason why an acquired faith
cannot be sufficient to save any man without the powerful sanctification of the
Spirit, both to prepare the heart and work a Divine Faith, which can never take
kindly in an heart that is not prepared. These Scriptures he pretends to make
the rule of his ensuing discourse, yet its but a bare pretense; for he follows
his own fancies and false notions, not the sense and genuine mind of God in
them. He does not re far sed far sensum, as grave Hilary says. He does not
conform his notions to the Scripture, but wrests it, and makes it to speak that
which God never intended.

CAP 2. Of the third part, the 33. of the Book, of the Number, Antiquity,
Scope, Authority, and Interpreters of the holy Scripture.
SEeing he had made the Scripture to be his Rule, he thought good to say
something of the Scripture in general. And 1. Of the number of the Books; and
seeing herein he follows the Church of England, which followed the Ancient
Canon: I agree with with him in this, as I have no reason to the contrary;
neither will I debate with him in the second point of Antiquity. Its the most
Ancient writing in the world, and the doctrine more ancient then the writing.
And its remarkable that though it contain the History of 4000. years, yet it
was written within the space of 2000. 2. That all the Writers of it, if Luke be
not excepted, were of the seed of Abraham by Jacob, and of no other Nation, all
of them according to the flesh kinsmen to our Savior Christ. 3. That the
Prophetical part reaches the end, as the Historical did the beginning of the
world, and this no other book in the world does. 4. That neither Jews nor
Mahumetans have any thing good, just, and rational, but that which is contained
in these books, and retained by them. 5. That these Scriptures are found
translated into the languages of the most, if not all civil Nations of the
world.


The scope of these writings is to direct sinful man unto eternal life. And
because this eternal life is virtually in God and issues from him as the
Fountain and Author thereof, therefore in the same is revealed the Eternal,
Infinite, glorious perfection of God in himself, and also his glorious works of
Creation and Preservation, his supreme and universal Dominion, his Laws and
Judgments and special government of man. And because man as sinful and guilty,
is no ways capable of eternal life in strict justice, therefore the Scripture
directs him to God as Redeemer in Jesus Christ, that by the observation of the
Laws of Redemption he may be for ever blessed. Christ our Lord Redeemer is the
principal subject of that Book of books: For Moses and all the Prophets speak
of him as well as the writers of the New Testament, though not so clearly; and
the doctrine of his Laws takes up the greatest part of that Revelation, though
many other things are therein declared yet in reference unto the principal
subject and End. In a word, the end of the Scripture is to teach us to believe
and obey God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Creating, Redeeming, and
Sanctifying us: if it speak of civil Kingdoms, Laws and judgments, its upon
the by, with reference to the eternal spiritual Kingdom of God Redeemer and
Sanctifier: This end and scope is both obscurely and confusedly declared by the
Author, as will more appear hereafter.

The Authority of the Scripture is Divine; and so perfect, that it cannot be
improved or impaired by all the Laws of all the civil Sovereigns of the world:
Neither can the Angels in Heaven add any degree of Authority unto it; but if
any of them should (as they cannot) contradict it, they are by the divine
Apostle declared to be accursed. That any person or persons do not apprehend it
to be Divine, that's accidental, and cannot prejudice it. Therefore how vain,
and false is that of Mr. Hobs, when he gives the supreme power of making it to
be Law, and interpreting the same so made, unto the Civil Soveraignss? There is
a twofold Law; the one is Divine, and binds the conscience immediately: the
other is humane and Civil, and cannot bind the conscience, but per accidens.
The Doctrine of the Scripture not only in Morals but in Positives is Divine;
and the precepts thereof, as being the precepts of God do bind the conscience
immediately: The Laws of Civil Sovereigns may bind their subjects upon peril of
civil and temporal punishment to receive them as authentic. But Laws they are
and binding to obedience and belief, though there were no civil government in
the world. The State and Church may declare them to be Divine, but no ways
make them to be such. And as our Savior said of his Doctrine, so its true of
all the Scripture, that if any man will do the will of God declared therein, he
shall know it to be of God. Its not so much the imperfection of our
understanding, or the difficulty of the thing to be understood, as our
disobedience which is the cause why we do not see the divinity of these blessed
Books. These things being so, how absurdly and falsely has he stated the
Question concerning the Authority of the Scripture, so as to make it depend
either upon the civil Sovereign in his Territory or upon the Pope? For thus he
writes, The Question of the Authority of the Scripture is reduced to this,
Whether Christian Kings and the Sovereign Assemblies in Christian
Commonwealths, be absolute in their own territories, immediately under God, or
subject to one Vicar of Christ, etc. Whereas neither civil Sovereigns nor Popes
can make the Scripture to be Law: but all Christians are bound to believe the
Scriptures to be the Law of God upon better grounds then civil laws or
Ecclesiastical Canon; or else they cannot be saved by them.

CAP. III. Of the third Part; And 34. of the Book. Of the signification of
Spirit, Angel, Inspiration, in the Book of holy Scriptures.
A Great part of his discourse in this division of his Book, is spent in the
explication of certain words and terms much used in the Scriptures; and as he
informs us, the reason of this labor is, to take away the ambiguity of the
words, that his inferences from them may be more clear and distinct. Yet he
has done it in that manner that he has perverted the genuine sense of Gods
Word, and so much as in him was, made it more obscure, and which is worse, has
falsified the same. These terms have been examined and explained far better by
more learned men, which I desire the ignorant to consult and advise with, least
they be seduced from the truth; For Mr. Hobbs in this particular work, as in
others, is not to be trusted. But let us hear him.

T. H.

Substance and body signify the same thing, and therefore [substance
incorporeal] when they are joined together, destroy one another, as if a man
should say, an incorporeal body.

G. L.

The signification of words, whereby we signify our minds to others, is of
great consequence; and without the distinct knowledge of the several
significations of one and the same words, we can neither understand the
Scriptures, nor any other rational Author. This signification of words is
either proper and Grammatical, or Tropical and Rhetorical. Of some words we
have lost the proper sense, and therefore must understand them according as
they are most usually taken in the best Authors. These words [Body, and
Substance] wherewith he begins his Scripture- Lexicon, are sometimes taken in
the same sense to signify the same thing, yet neither properly, nor most
usually. We find some of the ancient Divines affirming Angels to be bodies and
bodily creatures; yet by body they meant substance, and yet did acknowledge
them to be Spirits. And for my part, I cannot be persuaded that either Angels
or souls rational are pure forms, as some, nay many Peripateticks do affirm.
Yet they may be spirits, and this nature better expressed by the word [Spirits]
then the word [Bodies.] And the vanity and presumption of this man is very
much, who would persuade us, that [incorporeal substance] is a contradiction.
Some have observed, that the word [Guf] in Arabic and Rabbinical Authors,
signifies, 1. A body. 2. A person. 3. The substance or principal of a thing;
yet no rational man, will hence conclude, that body and substance are the same.


The next word he undertakes to explain is [Spirit] of which he says.

T. H.

That the proper signification of Spirit in common speech, is either a subtle,
fluid, invisible body, or a Ghost, or other idol or phantasm of the
imagination, But for Metaphorical significations there be many, etc.

G. L.

One word has but one proper signification, according to the first imposition:
therefore its not true, that there be three proper significations of this word:
and as for the improper, there may be and are many, and the same not only
Metaphorical, but Metonymical, Ironical and Synechdochical. Yet he has
observed seven distinct senses of the word [Spirit] in the Scripture. But he
fearfully abuses some of those places alleged by him, does not reach the
multitude of the significations of the same in that holy Book, much less does
he reduce them into any Grammatical, Rhetorical or Natural method. If any man
will but search the Scriptures, he shall find the word [Spirit] therein to
signify above twenty several things. The original Concordances will make this
apparent to an intelligent Reader, if he look but in the word [Ruach], which
the Septuagint express and turn by 14. several Greek words, the first whereof
is [(...), Spirit] which is used by them most frequently by far, yet so as that
by that one word they signify many things. And this word [(...), Spiritus] we
find in the New Testament about 360. times, and in many places is very
differently taken. The Latin use the word [Spiritus] in 15. several senses at
least. By which it does appear that this part of the Chapter cannot be read by
Scholars but with disdain and scorn: and especially when he writes;

T. H.

Other significations of [Spirt] I find nowhere any; and where none of these
can satisfy the sense of the word in Scripture, the place falls not under
humane understanding, etc as where God is said to be a Spirit.

G. L.

He had said, that sometime the word is taken for the disposition or
inclination of the mind, and then infers these words; when he does not tell us
whether these be proper significations usual in common speech, as the three
former were, or they be Metaphorical. If he mean, that besides the three proper
and these two, he finds none, his observation and so his learning in this kind
is very poor. But whereas he will not have the place of Scripture, where its
used in another sense, to fall under our understanding, he is absurd. For the
place, where its said by our Savior, that God is a [Spirit] may be, and is
understood, though we have no demonstrative or intuitive knowledge of the Deity
in it self. There is a great difference between a word and the thing signified
by the word. The word may be perfectly understood though the thing be not: and
we may know something of the thing by some measure of knowledge, though we do
not perfectly know it with the most perfect knowledge. Christ by these words
did teach us something; and if he did, how can it be said that the place
falls not under our understanding? For there is nothing teachable, which is
not intelligible. And by that place we may easily understand that God is a far
more perfect and excellent substance or being, then any inanimate or irrational
body can possibly be. The next term to be explained, is that of Angel, whereof
he says.

T. H.

There is no place in the Old Testament, or New, from whence we can conclude
that Angels are any thing permanent and incorporeal, or created, or any thing
but an extraordinary manifestation of Gods power, especially by dream or
vision: and the Angel Gabriel was nothing but a supernatural phantasm. Yet from
my feeble understanding, was by the plain texts of the New Testament extorted
an acknowledgement and belief, that there be Angels substantial and permanent.

G. L.

Much to this purpose in this part of the Chapter we may read. And in this
particular he most woefully perverts several texts of Scripture, eludes the
plain sense, confutes his own belief, and is in effect a Sadducean. To let him
and others see his vanity and impiety, I will produce one place out of the New
Testament, where its written, Let all the Angels of God worship him; And of the
Angels he says. He makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of
fire, Heb. 1.6, 7. where we may observe, 1. That Angels are persons, and so
permanent substances; for else how could they worship the Son of God incarnate?
How could they be capable of this command? 2. They were Spirits and spiritual
substances. 3. They were made and created. 4. All these words are cited out of
the Old Testament; the first out of Psalm 97.7. The second place out of Psalm.
104.4. And both the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the Psalms are declared to be
Canonical, and that by the Church of England, to which he submits himself. This
is sufficient to discover his ignorance and damnable errors in this
particular, and to admonish all such as are taken with him, and esteem him, to
beware of him, and in no wise to trust him.


T. H.

Inspiration properly is the blowing into a man some thin and subtle air or
wind, etc. or if spirits be not corporeal, but have their existence only in the
fancy, it is nothing but the blowing in of some phantasm. For Scripture to be
inspired or given by inspiration from God, is the inclining of the minds of
those men to write, etc. For the holy men of God to speak as they were moved by
the holy Spirit, is for these men to receive the voice of God in a dream or
vision supernatural: For the holy Spirit is nothing else, its not inspiration,
etc.

G. L.

More to this purpose you may read in the close of this Chapter, where he
undertakes to tell us what inspiration and infusion are. I will not here
quarrel with him about the proper or improper signification of these words, but
consider how they are used, and do signify when they are appropriate unto the
spirit, which is God working some special thing in the intellectual or rational
creature; Significant enim ineffabilem and invisibilem Dei praesentiam,
operationem and productionem alicujus effectus specialis and supernaturalis,
sive ordinarii sive extraordinarii. They signify, 1. A special virtue and
power of God in Angel or man. 2. His presence in the creation. 3. His special
operation. 4. His production of some special supernatural effect, either upon
the soul as understanding, or affecting the thing understood, or as they
usually speak, upon the understanding by illumination, or the will by some
sanctification, whereby the soul or spirit is elevated above his natural pitch.
And the word (...), used by the Apostle, and translated in Latin [divinitus
inspirata] and in English, [given by inspiration from God] must needs signify
more then a flat and mere inclination. For if God had not immediately by his
Spirit dictated unto them, what they should both speak and write, and also in
both directed them infallibly, the holy writings had not been of divine,
infallible and unquestionable authority, as all Christians (who deserve that
name) believe them for to be. Neither could they contain the Word of God, but
only the word of man, who in ordinary things is subject unto error. The same
is also to be said of the words of another Apostle, That the holy men of God
did speak as they were moved by the Spirit of God, 2 Pet. 1.21. That in this
place, by [holy Spirit] should be meant the voice of God in a dream or vision
supernatural, cannot be true. The holy Spirit is one thing, the voice of God
another thing, vision a third thing distinct from both: and both the voice and
vision may be called inspiration either actively, or else passively. For vision
sometimes is an act of the party inspired, and an effect of inspiration, which
is an invisible and wonderful manner of communicating of Gods will and counsels
immediately unto the intellectual creature. We are not so sottish as to
understand the words [inspiration and infusion] in the Grammatical sense, as
they signify the breathing of one body upon another, or the pouring of water
out of one vessel into another. For then the Holy Ghost should be breath of a
body, and water. But we do understand them Metaphorically, as they signify a
supernatural communication of gifts.

CAP. IV. Of the third Part. The 35. of the Book, Of the signification in
Scripture of the Kingdom of God, of Holy, Sacred, Sacrament.
T. H.

THE Kingdom of God in the writings of Divines, especially in Sermons and
Treatises of devotion, is taken most commonly for eternal felicity, and is
called the Kingdom of glory, or for sanctification, which is called by them the
Kingdom of grace; but never for the Sovereign power of God over any subjects
acquired by their own consent, which is the proper signification of Kingdom.

G. L.

The Kingdom of God mentioned in Scripture is threefold, 1. The Government of
God over men in their spiritual capacity, as they are capable according to
their obedience or disobedience, of an immortal estate of felicity or misery.
2. His government over them in respect of their temporallife, liberty, estates
on earth. 3. His special government both Civil and Ecclesiastial over the
people of Israel after their deliverance out of Egypt, until the time of the
last ruin of Jerusalem, and dispersion of them into all Nations.
The first begun presently upon the fall of man, the second upon the first
constitution of civil States; the 3 about 2000 years after the Creation, and
continued till the captivity of Babylon, yet did not totally expire till our
blessed Saviors ascension into Heaven, and the fatal dissolution of that
Policy upon the destruction of the Temple. Whosoever in reading the Scripture
does not observe these three distinct and different Kingdoms, cannot well
challenge the name of a learned Divine.

These may properly be called Kingdoms, because in every one of these there is
a Sovereign, subjects, Laws, Judgments, and executions. That Divines sometimes
understand by the Kingdom of God, eternal life, which is the final estate of
the subjects of his spiritual Kingdom, they cannot be blamed justly; for in the
New Testament many times, the term is so taken: yet these exclude either
Sovereign, nor subjects, nor laws, nor any thing essential or proper to a
Kingdom; neither do they any ways by these take away or deny this threefold
difference of Gods Government. But that any of these Kingdoms should be
acquired by the consent of the subjects, they have no reason to affirm. For God
as Creator and Preserver universal, he has absolute power and dominion over
men's souls, lives, liberties, estates; as Redeemer he has power over their
immortal souls, as well as by creation and preservation. As he delivered Israel
out of Egypt, he acquired a special and peculiar right unto, and dominion over
that people. Their consent and voluntary submission did add nothing to Gods
power, which before was absolute and as high as could be; yet it did increase
their Obligation.

That which he afterward affirms, That he finds the Kingdom of God to signify
in most places of Scripture, a Kingdom properly so named, constituted by the
Votes of the people of Israel in a peculiar manner, is very false. For 1. That
Kingdom of Israel was not constituted by the Votes of the people. 2. Suppose it
had been so constituted, and the word Kingdom of God used in many places of
Scripture to signify that government, yet in the most places its never found
so taken: neither can any man find it most frequently taken in that sense. For
this is remarkable, that it hardly ever so signifies in the New Testament,
where we have the most frequent mention of the Kingdom of God: and the Kingdom
of Heaven signifying the spiritual (not any temporal) Kingdom of God Redeemer
by Christ.

T. H.

From the Creation, besides his natural reign over all, he had peculiar
subjects, whom he commanded by a voyoc. etc. This Kingdom was continued in
Noah's family; after this God made a Covenant with Abraham, and for memorial
ordained the Sacrament of Circumcision. And this was called the Old Covenant or
Testament, etc. This Covenant was afterward renewed by Moses, etc.

G. L.

The Kingdom spiritual is twofold: the first by the Power and Law of Creation,
requiring perfect obedience, without promise of any pardon, or Redeemer to
expiate sin, if man made holy should transgress: but this government lasted not
long, because Adam did violate it: and so the second Kingdom and government of
God Redeemer by promise succeeded. This continued from Adam to Noah, and was
renewed to Abraham with the addition of the solemn Rite of Circumcision, and
the promise of the Land of Canaan. It was continued from Moses to the
exhibition of the Messiah, yet with an especial appropriation of it to the
people of Israel. All this is clear out of Scripture, and received by the
general consent of all the Orthodox Christians And here by the way observe, 1.
That he makes no difference between the Kingdom of strict justice according to
the Law of Creation, and of that of Mercy in Christ according to the Law of
Redemption. 2. That with him the Covenant and promise to Abraham was the Old
Covenant; whereas the Apostle, Romans 4. and Galat. 3. affirms the contrary: and
makes the promise 430 years before the Law of Moses, to be altogether different
from the Law. 3. That the Old Covenant was that between God and Israel at Mount
Sinai: and the New was the Gospel; as may appear, Heb. 8. from verse. 6. unto
the end. 4. This new Covenant of the Gospel was promised 430 years before the
Law, and the Law could not make the promise of none effect. For it continued in
force in the time of the Law, which was annexed unto it for certain ends till
the Son of God should be incarnate. 5. This Kingdom is distinct from Gods
special government over Israel and Judah, which was subordinate unto it till
the Word should be made flesh, and assume humane nature from the House of David.


Therefore Mr. Hobbs his discourse of Gods Kingdom over the Jews is confused,
false, and bewrays either his great ignorance, or negligence, or wickedness.
But he begins to act the Critic, and sits as Judge to pass sentence upon the
Translations of those words of Scripture, Exodus 19.5, 6. Thou shall be a
peculiar treasure above all people, and a Kingdom of Priests. For so the Hebrew
expresses the privilege of this people. But he curiously distinguishes
between a peculiar treasure above all people, and a peculiar people: yet these
in sense are the same; and also between a sacerdotal Kingdom, and a Kingdom of
Priests, or Royal Priesthood, yet these do not differ. And whereas the words
are a promise of God engaging himself upon condition they will obey him; he
makes them a promise of the peoples giving their consent, that God shall be the
Lord and Sovereign. But to whom was this promise made? only unto the Priest,
or to the Prince? No such matter, but to the whole Nation, and every several
person that shall keep the Covenant, and obey God. And this promise does
include the Covenant made with Abraham concerning Christ. by faith in whom to
come this promise was fulfilled to the Saints of old; and by faith in him
already come, not only to the believing Jews, but Gentiles it was made good.
And so that place of 1 Pet. 2.9. is to be understood, Which Text is not to be
taken of Kings and civil Magistrates, but all Christians, truly such indeed.
For Christ by one offering has perfected or consecrated the sanctified for
ever, Heb. 10.14. And washing us in his blood, has made us Kings and Priests
to God his Father, Rev. 1.5, 6. from that one place of Exodus 19.5, 6.
misinterpreted by two others, one of Paul to Titus 2.14. the other of 1 Pet.
2.9. and all mis-applyed. He concludes that the Kingdom of God is a civil
government over the Israelites, wherein God was King: and the high Priest after
Moses his death was his sole Viceroy or Lieutenant.

After all this done, in this manner he endeavors to make his opinion good
from two places Historical, three Prophetical, out of the old Testament, and
two others out of the New Testament. The two first are properly to be
understood of the special government of God over Israel. The three Prophetical
places are meant of the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, and so are the two last,
which are most palpably abused. For the first of them relates the Angels words
unto the blessed Virgin, signifying, that her son Jesus Christ should sit on
the Throne of David, and should reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of
his Kingdom there should be no end, Luke 1.32, 33. Which is meant directly of
his Spiritual, Heavenly and Eternal Kingdom: whereof the Kingdom of David was a
Type. For Christ never reigned as a temporal King over Israel according to the
flesh. The second place is. Matthew. 6.10. Where our Savior amongst other things
directs his Disciples to pray, Thy Kingdom come. By which Kingdom is meant the
Reign of Christ Incarnate and exalted at the Right hand of God, which was then
to come, but now has continued 1600 years and upward; and yet all Christians
pray for the continuance, increase, and especially the consummation of the
same, when death the last enemy shall be destroyed, and God shall be all in
all, and reign most perfectly without any enemy, without any opposition: Yet
such is his intolerable boldness, that from these places thus abused, he
confidently concludes, that the Kingdom of God is a civil government, managed
by the Christian Civil Sovereigns of the world.

That Holy is the same with Public per accidens sometimes is true. But every
thing that is holy is not public, nor every thing that is public holy.
Therefore his interpretation of the word Holy is not usual, and at all times
very Katachrestical. For he can instance in no place, where its properly so
taken, except it be wrested from the intended sense. The meaning of the words
Sacred and Sacraments are known to children out of ordinary Catechisms, and
therefore I forbear any further discourse concerning them.

CAP. V. Of the third part; the 36. of the Book. Of the word of God and of
Prophets.
T. H.

THe word of God or man may be understood sometimes of the speaker; sometimes
of the subject, as the book of Chronicles has the Title Verba Dierum, for the
acts done in such times. So in the Scriptures many times the word of God is not
that which is spoken by God, but concerning God, etc.

G. L.

This is the substance, though not the very words of the Author in the
beginning of this Chapter: yet we may observe in Scripture according to the Heb
e.v and the Greek, That Dabar (...) and (...) Raema signify things as well as
words: and that the word of God is either verbum Dei, or verbum de Deo, or
both, or verbum quod est Deus. There is an usual distinction of (...) or (...).
an inward or outward word. An outward word whereby we speak to others: or an
inward word whereby we speak unto our selves: This inward word is either of
things, or acts out of our selves: or of, acts or operations in our selves, or
our own being and essence. Now the word of God, which is God, is his word in
himself of himself. And this term [Word] signifying the eternal Son of God and
the Messiah, is taken out of the Chaldee Paraphrast, as many expressions of the
New Testament are: And some learned men have observed, that the Chaldee
Paraphrast took that term from the Prophet, Esaias 40.8. The word of our God
shall stand for ever: as also the Title of Messiah from Daniel 9.25. Of this
word of God its written, John 1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the word
was with God, and the word was God: and ver. 14. The word was made flesh. Yet
if we may believe Mr. Hobbs, this word is the purpose of God: and then the
sense is, the purpose of God is God; and the purpose of God was made flesh, and
the purpose of God dwelt amongst us, and we saw the glory of this purpose, as
of the only begotten Son of God. This is his cursed and blasphemous gloss upon
these blessed Texts of Scripture, whereupon depends so much our faith and
eternal salvation.

If any man would give an accurate account of the several significations of the
word of God as its used in Scripture, he ought diligently to observe how often
its used in Scripture, consider the Context and drift of those places where its
read; examine the originals, and find out first the Proper signification,
secondly the Tropical, and also distinguish them. The reason why we say the
Scripture is the word of God written, is, 1. Because it was revealed by God,
and the writers thereof were infallibly directed, And this is the most proper
signification: yet secondly by a Metonymie its so called, because it
principally speaks of God: and he is the subject of it, to which all
particulars may be some ways referred or reduced. But let no man that loves the
truth, hearken unto this man, least he be seduced. For with some truths he
mixeth abominable Errors.

T. H.

The name of Prophet in Scripture, signifies sometimes a Prolocutor, sometimes
a Predictor, etc.

G. L.

In the rest of this Chapter he informs us. 1. Of the several senses and
significations of the word Prophet. 2. Of the several distinct kinds of them.
3. Of Rules how to try Prophets.
And his end is to make a civil sovereign Christian the supreme and infallible
Judge. Prophets in Scripture are true or false, for false Prophets have the
name. True are extraordinary, ordinary. Extraordinary are such as either were
Penmen of the Scripture; or such only as whose Prophesies are related in
Scripture. These Prophets he divides into supreme and subordinate. Yet the
Prophets extraordinary, as such, can admit of no such distinctions. Amongst the
supreme he reckons Moses, the high Priests, Kings. Yet the high Priests were
neither supreme, nor Prophets, except very rarely.

That God did make use of the Priest with the Vrim and Thummim in giving his
answers, did not make the Priest a Prophet in proper sense. That David and
Solomon were Prophets, seems peculiar to them. That some of the Kings also
called for the Priest to consult with God, according to the ordinary way
Instituted by God, who promised to give answer, so as he did to no people in
the world, it could neither make Kings or Priests supreme. Neither did Solomon
take the Priesthood from Abiathar, but for his treason suspended him ab offi
io. That the Christian Sovereign should now be the supreme Prophet, in whose
Judgment all their subjects must acquiesce, is to be derided and rejected as a
thing which neither can be proved or approved.

CAP. VI. Of the third part. The 37. of the Book. Of Miracles.
SOmething he has taught his Reader, that had not learned so much before,
concerning the nature and end of Miracles. And in this particular he is more
Orthodox then in other points. That Miracles are immediate works of God, we
believe, and such as wherein he does not make use of natural causes for to do
them. Neither can any created cause reach them. These are not ordinary works of
God, neither are they usually done, but seldom, and upon some special occasion,
and for some special end. This end in general is the same with that of all his
works, and that is the manifestation of his glory; yet in a more special
manner, to awaken men's sleepy minds and stir up attention, to persuade and
confirm the truth of those Doctrines which are above the reach of reason; by
this persuasion to work faith and conversion. These Miracles are works either
of judgment or mercy, and do really differ and far excel all enchantments,
strange works done by natural causes, delusions of the Devil, and such like,
which seem to be Miracles, and are not any such thing. And they are never done
to confirm an error, or persuade the doing of evil: For his Almighty power is
the immediate cause of them, and is exercised according to the counsel of his
will, and subservient always and only to his truth and glory?

CAP. VII. Of the third Part. And the 38. of the Book. Concerning eternal life,
hell, salvation, the world to come, and redemption.
THAT there is eternal life, we believe, as also that it is an excellent,
glorious, blessed estate, and the same to be enjoyed by certain persons, etc.
in some certain place, and that there shall be no end either of the persons or
estate, or the enjoyment, we are fully persuaded; because God has said it.
That the place is not this earth, we have some reason to think, because our
Savior ascended into heaven, and whilst he was on earth made intercession for
us, saying, Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, John 17.14. And to comfort the hearts of his Disciples, sad and
troubled because he said he must leave them, he uses these words, In my
Fathers house are many mansions, if it were not so I would have told you: I go
to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will
come again, and receive you to my self, that where I am, there ye may be also,
John 14.23. If eternal life shall be enjoyed on earth, why need Christ ascend
to heaven, there to prepare a place for us? and when he shall return from
thence, why will he not stay here, and leave us on the earth, and never trouble
himself with any translation of us into any other place, where he shall ever
abide, and we be ever with him?

Hell in Scripture, and as we understand God in that Book to teach us, is an
estate directly contrary to eternal life. And we believe that it is a most
miserable condition of such as shall suffer eternal punishments, and that in
some certain place: and our chiefest employment in this life, is to use all
means whereby we may be freed from that condition, and enjoy the contrary.
Concerning the particular [ubi] and distinct place, we do not, as we need not,
much trouble our selves. To prove that both eternal rewards are to be enjoyed,
and eternal torments to be suffered perpetually on earth, he does most woefully
wrest and abuse several places of Gods Book, and with so little solidity of
judgment, that children may answer him.

And because this eternal life is prepared by God for such as are by reason of
their sin, in danger of hell and eternal death; therefore in Scripture its
sometime called salvation, and also redemption; which is a freedom and
deliverance from all the evil consequents and effects of sin, one and the
principal whereof is, to be deprived of eternal bliss, which consists in full
communion with our God. Yet the consummation of both these conditions, is
reserved by God for the world to come, which will follow the universal
resurrection. The times of the Gospel in respect of the Law, may be called [the
world to come] and so some understand the words of the Apostle to the Hebrews
2.5. where we read that God has not unto Angels subjected the world to come,
etc. This is (...). Sometimes its taken for the time following the resurrection
and final judgment, as Mark 10.39. Luke 18.30. This is (...) Redemption is
taken in another sense, for the expiation of sin, upon satisfaction made by
Christ unto his heavenly Father as supreme Judge, who accepted his death as a
sufficient penalty to avert his wrath, and procure his mercy for all such as
should believe on him. In this Chapter he has imposed upon many places of
Scripture, a sense never intended; and this may be evident to any that can and
will examine the places according to the originals and the context. And he
drives at this, to deprive Christ of his regal power, which at the right hand
of God he now does exercise, and to invest civil powers with it, till such time
as he has brought Christ from heaven, that he may here on earth begin his
personal reign. Sr. Thomas Mores Vtopia is somewhat rational, this discourse is
void of reason, and so much the more unsufferable, as the matter is so sublime,
and this sacred Book of God so much profaned by him.

CAP. VIII. Of the third Part; And the 39. of the Book. Of the significations
of the word Church in Scripture.
IN the former Chapter he turned heaven and hell into the earth, and in this he
has transformed the Church, which is a spiritual polity, into a civil State;
and that will easily appear from his definition of this excellent and divine
Society.

T. H.

A Church is a company of men professing Christian Religion, united in the
person of one Sovereign, at whose command they ought to assemble, and without
whose authority they ought not to assemble.

G. L.

Many are the significations of the word [Ecclesia] in the Scriptures of the
New Testament, as it is applied to Christians, which he has in part, yet not
fully observed. Yet amongst them all from the beginning to the end of the New
Testament, its never found to be taken in this sense; for as he has not, so he
cannot allege one place where it so signifies. This definition is such, as
never any gave before; you can read it in no Author, neither can you prove it
out of Scripture. Only the first words seem to have something of a description,
but its no perfect explication of the quiddity and nature of the Church
Christian. For that is a society or community of persons, who believe in Jesus
Christ, and subject themselves unto him as their Lord and King. A bare
profession will not make a man a subject of this spiritual Kingdom. A sincere
profession of that faith, which is seated and rooted in the heart, comes up
higher, and is more fit to express the being of a Member of this Church.

This Church as Catholic or Universal, subject unto Christ, is like a similar
body, and therefore the parts may bear the name of the whole, as the Church of
Corinth, the Church of Ephesus, and the Church in such an house. Some part of
this Church is under a form of discipline, to be exercised in foro exteriori,
as the Schoolmen and Casuists use to speak; some parts are not so happy. For
this is not of the Essence of a Church. Its not of the being, though it tends
to the well-being of the same. Some of these are subject unto a civil Sovereign
who is a Christian; some are not. For as a Christian State may have Heathen or
Mahumetan subjects; so Christians may be under the civil power of an Heathen or
Mahumetan Prince. Both these therefore [to be under a form of discipline, and
subject to a Christian civil power] are but accidental: and these accidents are
separable, and often actually separated; and therefore, I know no reason why
they should be part of a perfect desi^^tion or so much as mentioned in it. This
may be sufficient for to discover, the vanity of the man, and the absurdity of
the definition. Yet notwithstanding his definition be faulty, I for my part do
grant, that [Jus religionis ordinandae] does belong to all Civil Governors and
powers. But with limitation, 1. That no Sovereign has power to order,
maintain, and promote any Religion, but that which is instituted from heaven.
2. That they must not intermeddle with it for to order it, further then its
ordinable by the sword, which cannot reach Religion and Chrstianity but per
accidens, so far as the persons who are Christians, are subject to the civil
power.
And this care of the Magistrate may do much good, not only in preventing all
tumults and seditions about Religion, as prejudicial to the peace of the State,
and suppress them, but also protect the servants of Christ, and promote
Christianity very much. And in this respect only I conceive Sovereigns to be in
all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, supreme Governors.

From the definition formerly given he concludes.

T. H.

That because in all Commonwealths, that assembly which is without warrant
from the civil Sovereign, is unlawful, that Church also which is assembled in
any Commonwealth, that has forbidden them to assemble, is an unlawful
assembly.

G. L.

There is a diffecence between warrant, permission, and prohibition, Acts 15.
we read of a Churchassembly at Jerusalem, yet without any warrant from the
Roman Emperor: and the same did debate, determine, engross and publish certain
binding Canons, yet I hope he dare not dictate it to be unlawful, though it had
been forbidden. Permission perhaps they had, warrant they had none. There are
actions, and such as God commands, and civil Governors forbid, yet the
prohibition of man cannot make void the command of God. For we must obey God
rather then man: But he tells us

T. H.

That temporal and spiritual Government, are but words brought into the world
to make men see double, and mistake their lawful Sovereign.

G. L.

As Government, the thing signified by the word, is a real act, so spiritual
and temporal Government, are two, not words, but things really different. For
there is a temporal Government, which is not spiritual; and spiritual, which is
not temporal. And though he will not give us leave, (yet we will take it) to
distinguish between Church and State; temporal and spiritual; man and
Christian. For he knows, and that certainly, there be men, who yet are no
Christians; States which are not Churches: and temporal things which are not
spiritual. And those things which not only may be, but actually are separated
in existence, must needs be really distinct. The rule is infallible, as its
evident. And he that will confound these, may build a Babel, but no orderly
society. And its a fault, to make that which is double to seem single, as well
as make that which is single appear to be double.

CAP. IX. Of the third Part. The 40. of the Book. Of the rights of the Kingdom
of God in Abraham, Moses, the high Priests, and the Kings of Judah.
HItherto Mr. Hobbs has abused his Reader in the explication of certain words
and terms used in Scripture, and has bewrayed his gross ignorance, and
abominable errors. And as though he had laid a sure foundation, whereon to
ground his following discourse, or at least made way for it, he proceeds to
prove out of the said holy writings of the Old Testament, the absolute power of
Christian Sovereigns and States, both in matters of Religion, and Civil
Government. And this is so done, that there is little fear least any
intelligent Reader should he deceived or persuaded by him: because there is so
great a distance between his premises and the conclusion, that no wit of man is
able to see the connection, or the illative force of them.

For he argues, That because Abraham in his family, Moses in Israel, the high
Priests after Moses in the times of Judges and the Kings, from Saul to the
captivity, had the supreme power Civil and Ecclesiastical; therefore all
Christian Governors supreme have the same. For this is the substance of this
Chapter. Yet, 1. Abraham was but the Master of a family, Moses a Mediator
between Israel and God, retaining the supreme power both temporal and spiritual
in his own hands, not only in his time, but in the reign of Judges and the
Kings. The high Priests did only ask counsel of God by the Vrim and Thummim,
and declared it to the Rulers. The Kings had no power Legislative at all, but
only executive according to the Laws of God: they had no right unto the
Sacerdotal power. For Vzziah usurping that of offering Incense, was smitten
with leprosy. Therefore his Assumption is notoriously false. 2. Abraham,
Moses, and some of the Kings were extraordinary Prophets, and immediately
inspired: Such are not Christian Sovereigns. Neither can they from God in
difficult and perplexed cases, receive counsel of God by Vrim and Thummim. 3.
Suppose all these had been invested with supreme power Civil and
Ecclesiastical, as they were not, yet it does not follow, that therefore
Christian Sovereigns are so: His consequence therefore is no consequence, but
false. 4. Here its to be observed, That no example can be drawn from the
Government of Israel, either under Moses, or Judges, or Kings, because that
Government all along was extraordinary. And as no State Christian is bound to
follow it, so no State can parallel it And its in vain for Divines or any other
writers to argue from that particular form of polity, to any other in the
world. Some general Rules and practices therein may be made use of, for the
reproof or reformation of Government in other States. His innovations and
particular false glosses upon several texts are not worthy confutation.


CAP. X. Of the third part; the 41 of his Book Of the office of our blessed
Savior.
THey who desire to obtain eternal salvation by Christ Jesus, must know both
who he is, and what he has both suffered and done for them. Jesus Christ as
Savior and Redeemer, for person, is the eternal Son of God; for Natures he is
God and Man; yet so, that these two Natures remain distinct one from the other,
yet personally united; For Office, he is Prophet, Priest, and King: and such he
is made as man by Commission from his Heavenly Father. He was Initiated at his
Baptism: after which time he began to exercise his threefold power. And 1. Of
a Prophet, to manifest that he was their Savior, and to persuade men to
believe in him. 2. He performed some acts of a King in making Laws and
Officers. 3. He acted as a Priest at his death, by offering up himself that
great sacrifice; first, by inffering and dying on earth: secondly, by entering
the Holy place of Heaven, and presenting himself as slain, and so obtained
eternal Redemption After his consecration finished upon the Resurrection, he
was made a complete Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedeck.

Upon his Resurrection he was more selemnly settled in his Throne as universal
and eternal King. And then in a more glorious manner began to act, 1. As
Prophet to teach not only Jews, but Gentiles; and that not only by his word,
but by his Spirit powered down from Heaven upon all flesh. 2. As a Priest
interceding by virtue of his blood. 3. Of a King, in all the acts of government
in his Universal Kingdom.
By his sacrifice offered on earth and presented in Heaven, he satisfied Gods
justice offended by the sin of man; and merited for himself eternal power and
glory: and for us eternal life, and all effectual means for the certain
attainment thereof. All the rest of his acts performed by him as King, Priest,
and Prophet, tended unto the application of his sacrifice, that we by faith
might be partakers of the benefit thereof.

This is the sum of that Doctrine of Redemption delivered clearly and more
fully in several places of the Scripture, especially of the New Testament. Yet
this Innovatour has obscured the same several ways, and determines the Kingdom
of Christ to begin when the world does end, because Christ said to Pilate, My
Kingdom is not of this world, Joh. 18.36. From whence he concludes

T. H.

That the Kingdom of Christ is not to begin before the general Resurrection.

G. L.

This is a gross mistake, and mis-interpretation of a place which is clear in
it self. For by his gloss he makes the Scripture to contradict it self. Christ
was then Candidatus imperii; and was King when he gave this answer unto Pilate:
yet he began to reign and exercise his Royal power more eminently when he was
set at the Right hand of the Father: yet his Kingdom was not of this world,
that is, not civil, but spiritual: and as Austin upon the place, It was, Hic
non hinc: in the world, not of the world: in the world, yet not worldly, but
divine and far more excellent then the Kingdoms of the world. This is the
genuine sense of the words. That Christ does reign now, and has reigned since
his ascension and sitting at the right hand of God, is evident. Before his
Ascension he lets his Apostles know that all power in heaven and earth was
given him, and according unto and by virtue of that power he gave Commission to
his Apostles to teach and baptize, and persuade men to the obedience of his
commands, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. He that has an universal power in heaven and
earth; who makes officers and gives them power; who makes Laws, Institutes
Sacraments, and sends down the Holy Ghost, must needs reign, and his Kingdom is
begun already. We read that Christ must reign till he has put all enemies
under his feet: and the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. And when
all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall also the Son of man be subject
unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor.
15.25, 26, 28. Where first from Psalm. 110.1. The Apostle tells us, That Christ's
Kingdom did Commence at the time of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God.
2. That with him to sit at the right hand of God is to reign. 3. That he must
reign by Word, Sacraments, Spirit, Ministry, till all enemies, whereof death is
the last, be destroyed. 4. That when death is destroyed, he shall deliver up
his Commission and kingdom in respect of this administration by Ordinances. 5.
That at the Resurrection this manner of reign shall end, when Mr. Hobbs says
it shall begin. 6. That then God shall be all in all: that is, reign perfectly
in his Saints without any enemy, without opposition, without Ordinances, and
more immediately.
Before that time indeed he will not proceed to the final and universal
sentence and execution of the same. Yet there are many acts of government
besides judgment, and many acts of judgment be sides those of the general
Assizes and last Sessions. To make Laws, reduce men to subjection, appoint
Officers, pass sentence, and execute the same in the very souls of men, are
acts of one that reigns; as likewise to subdue enemies, Sin, Satan, and the
world, to protect the Church: And in this manner Christ has reigned since his
Ascension. And many Millions do adore him, subject themselves unto him, and
obey him to this day. Yet with this man Christ does not yet reign. Let him read
Psalm 2. throughout. It began to be fulfilled upon his Resurrection and
Ascension, as appears out of the Acts of the Apostles and their Epistles: And
if he or any other shall deny the present reign of Christ, they must expect
with his Iron Scepter to be dashed in pieces like a Potters Vessel.

CAP XI. Of the third Part, the 42. of the Book Of Ecclesiastical Power.
AFter he had enthroned Civil Sovereigns, cap. 40. Dethroned Christ in the
former Chapter: In this he takes away all power from the Church, and invests
the Christian civil powers with it. And herein it may be a question whether his
ignorance or presumption is the greater: for he is highly guilty of both. He
that will determine the controversy concerning the power of the Church, must
distinguist the universal power of God, the spiritual power of Christ incarnate
and exalted to the Throne of glory, and the power deligated from Christ unto
the Church universal here on earth, as subject unto Christ as Lord and Monarch;
and also that which every particular Independent, association of Christians is
trusted withal, for to preserve the Society and the Ordinances of God from
profanation. This he has not done, and therefore little or rather nothing can
be expected from him. This last power of particular Churches, is called the
power of the keys in foro exteriori, in the particular government of their
several combinations; for there is no supreme universal Independent judicatory
on earth to which all Churches in the world are bound to appeal in this outward
visible administration. General Counsels can be no such thing: Neither was
there ever any Ecumenical Synod in proper sense since the Gospel was preached
to all Nations. This power of outward Discipline is challenged by the Pope, by
the Clergy, by the people Christian, and by the States civil and Sovereigns of
the world. And in this last party is the Author deeply engaged; but upon what
reason I know not, except he intends to side with the strongest, for such are
they which bear the sword.

The power of ordaining Ministers, preaching the Word, administering the
Sacraments was in the universal Church since the time of the Apostles. And in
every particular Church reduced to a form of outward discipline, there is a
power of making Canons, of jurisdiction, of making Officers so far as shall
conduce unto the better ordination of Ministers, the preservation of the purity
of Doctrine, and the right administration of the Sacraments, least they be
profaned, and Christ offended by the admission of ignorant, scandalous and
unworthy persons. There is a power also of disposing and dispensing of those
goods which are given to the Church for the maintenance of Christian Religion.
Civil Christian States may and ought to make civil Laws to confirm the just
Canons and jurisdictions of the Church. And those Laws may be a fence unto it
against these who shall oppose or persecute. Yet when all this is done, those
Laws are but Civil, though the object of them be Ecclesiastical matters.

This might suffice for to confute and make void the main body, and break in
pieces the main design of this long and tedious Chapter, wherein he is not
content to vent his errors, but he must broach his blasphemies. For after he
had granted the Ecclesiastical power to be in the Apostles and their successors
for about 300 years, he tells us,

T. H.

That the Trinity is a threefold representation of God. 1. By Moses. 2. By
Christ on earth. 3. By the holy Ghost in the Apostles: and this agrees with
that of the Divine Apostle.
There are three that bear witness in heaven: the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1 John 5.7.

G. L.

This deserves no answer but detestation, because its not only blasphemous,
but also devoid not only of divine but humane learning: and no ways to be
suffered amongst Christians.

Having thus determined the proper and just subject of this power for so long a
time, he proceeds to let us know what this power is.

T. H.

The power of the Church is but to teach, to baptize, to absolve, to
excommunicate.

G. L.

The foundation and Rule of all Christian doctrine, worship and discipline, is
briefly and by a wonderful wisdom comprised in those words of our Savior,
ready to ascend into Heaven: Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc.
Mat. 28.19, 20. For in those words we are taught, 1. What Doctrine we must
believe and profess. 2. What worship we must perform unto the Deity, and how,
and upon what grounds. 3. Who may, and who may not be admitted into Christian
society; and who may, and who may not be continued in the same, and enjoy all
the privileges thereof.
Those who being taught, profess their faith in God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and promise to obey the commands of Christ, may be baptized and solemnly
admitted into the Church. They who continued to profess their faith, and to
perform their promise of obedience unto Christ, might be continued in this
society, and enjoy the privileges; otherwise not. From which words its
evident, there must be a power to teach, baptize, absolve, excommunicate: and
also to ordain and design fit persons to do these things, and give rules out of
the Gospel how they may be done aright.

This Author first makes void as he conceives, all Bellarmines discourse
concerning the form of Ecclesiastical government: whether it be Monarchical,
Aristocratical, or Democratical. 2. They have power but to teach. The reason
why Bellarmines discourse is void, is given by him to be this, because the
Church has no coercive power. If he mean coercive civil by the sword, its
certain there is no such power Ecclesiastical: Neither does Bellarmine affirm
or challenge it but indirecte and per accidens. Yet he was told before that the
execution of the Churches censure is from heaven, as it is passed in the name
of Christ and by his power, 1 Cor. 5.4. And he has promised, whatsoever is
bound on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever loosed on earth shall
be loosed in heaven, Mat. 18.18. This is not in the name of the civil
Sovereign, nor by the power of the sword. And it must be done by some power:
and this power must be exercised either by one, or more, or all, according to
some certain order. And Government is nothing but ordo imperii and subjectionis.

2. That the Church has but power to teach, persuade, counsel, etc. he proves
first by his false supposition that Christ does not reign until the universal
Resurrection: secondly, by that time of Regeneration, which he bounds within
the terms of Christ's ascension and his second coming to Judgment. The former
argument was grounded upon a false interpretation of our Saviors words, and so
the later is; for by Regeneration in Mat. 19.28. is meant the Resurrection, and
so its printed and distinguished in diverse coples, and so the King of Spains
Bibles read it, as others also: and the sense is, they which have followed me,
shall in the Regeneration, that is, Resurrection, sit upon twelve Thrones, etc.

But suppose that regeneration be not the resurrection. Yet it cannot be a time
of that continuance as to reach Christ's coming to Judgment, but only the time
of their following Christ, which cannot extend beyond his ascension. Yet let it
be granted, that by it is signified the whole tract of time, from his ascension
till his coming to Judgment, it will not follow from that text that Christ
does not reign till that time be expired; for he may, as he does, reign and
exercise many acts of his regal power before he pass the final sentence upon
all men and Angels. His other reasons are frivolous, and not ad idem. Yet his
last argument save one is, That because Christ has left to civil Governors
their power, therefore he has left none to the Church. And its true that he
has left no civil power of the sword to the Church; yet it does not hence
follow, that he has denied it the spiritual power of the keys. And here he
makes a most abominable digression, affirming that we may deny or profess
against our conscience, and comply with civil powers commanding and forbidding,
contrary to that which Christ has commanded and forbidden, and so has taken
away the ground of all Martyrdom, and razed the very foundation of our
Christian confession. Besides he seems to put a difference between their power
to Preach, and their power to Teach, but he will not let us know what this
difference is. And his arguments tend to prove, that Ministers have no power to
command, no authority: yet the people are commanded to obey them that rule over
them, and submit themselves, because they watch over their souls, Heb. 13.17.
And he that hears them, hears Christ and God that sent him; and he that
despises them despises Christ, and God that sent him. To that purpose, we
read in Luke 10.17. And how can this possibly be true, if this have no
authority? no law, no sin. To teach and preach in such a manner, as they who
will not hear and obey, shall be guilty as contemners of the divine Majesty,
and so, as that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of judgment
then for them, is to teach with authority and power, and the same no doubt
greater then any Prince civil in the world is invested withal. For they cannot
command, so as to make the disobedient liable to eternal penalties.

He grants further, that they have power to Baptize, and by Baptism admit
into Christ's Kingdom, which is a spiritual naturalization: and also to absolve
and excommunicate: yet the former is an act of Legislation, the latter of
Jurisdiction: and how can that be performed without power? Thus the man is
pleased to confute himself. Yet in the acts of Jurisdiction, we do not affirm
the judgment of the Church to be infallible, because they can have no
infallible knowledge of the inward disposition of the souls of persons penitent
or impenitent. Yet sometimes the evidence of the cause is such, that an
absolute sentence on earth is made valid from heaven. And this Jurisdiction
exercised according to the Laws of Christ, has always a real effect upon the
party judged, and that without any co-ercive power civil at all. And the effect
was comfortable or terrible, both unto Believers and Apostates too, according
as they should be truly impenitent or penitent. This power is always in the
Church, and to be exercised by such as are trusted with that power, and fit for
such a work. And this is the plain truth, though the world be on a flame, and
so many Christians in a cumbustion, because of their different opinions
concerning the subject of this power. But concerning this point I have spoken
more at large in another Treatise.

He goes on to teach us the causes of Excomunication, and denies heresy to be
any cause, though scandal by his own confession be; yet heresy is the greatest
scandal. And here he abuses that place of Titus, 3.10. where its written, A
man that is an Heretic after the first and second admonition reject; where he
plainly contradicts the Apostles words. As though he had said, Reject the
heresy, not the person; whereas the Apostle commands the rejection of the
person, the Heretic, and not only the heresy. That some make Articles of
Faith, which God never made, such cannot be excused. After this he determines
the persons who are liable to excommunication, yet so as that he might have
been instructed better, then he has instructed us, by those who deserve to be
his Masters. He exempts one Church from the jurisdiction of another, so that
the one cannot excommunicate the other. Yet he does not inform us what the
extent of a Church-Independent is, and so leaves the question undecided. He
also exempts all Sovereign Princes and Assemblies from excommunication, yet so
as that he most grossly mistakes the nature and effect of excommunication. Yet
here he stays not: but a subject obeying his Sovereigns command is not liable
to this sentence, neither can it be in this cause and case of any effect, if we
may believe him. This in [terminis] is false, except he mean obedience in
licitis. The rest of his discourse concerning this particular is frivolous. The
of the Chapter is taken up and spent in the determination of two points. The 1.
is making of Scripture Canon and Law: The 2. the power of the Pope. The power
of making Scripture-Canon is given by him unto the Sovereign civil, being
Christian. Yet whether he be Christian or no, he has power to bind his
subjects to acknowledge it subpoena temporali; But the Scripture is Canonical
in it self, without any such Law at all. As for the controversy concerning the
Popes power he undertakes Bellarmine, who had often been answered in a far
better manner, and more effectually by many before him. And the truth is, both
he and the Cardinal run in extremes, the one on one side, and the other on the
other side of the way of truth. For that power which the one arrogates to the
Pope, the other gives to Christian civil powers, but both unjustly. For
Ecclesiastical power is due in some measure unto the Pope, but not unto the
civil Sovereign. The Pope is a Presbyter, and a Bishop, and some power was due
unto him by divine Law. But by that which humane Constitutions gave him, and by
his own usurpation he had engrossed, he was advanced very high. To be a
Patriarch would not serve his turn, but he must be Christ's universal Vicar, and
in the end by that means at length he hooked in the temporal power of the sword.

But to leave them both in their errors, wherein they have entangled
themselves, before I conclude this Chapter, I will say something of
Church Officers, and the Church-revenue. The Church Officers may be con^dered
either according to their Constitution or Employment. According to the first
they were extraordinary or ordinary. Extraordinary were such as had their power
and gifts more immediately from Christ, as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists. And
here by the way, we may take notice of two errors and mistakes of the Author.
1. In that he affirms Matthias to be made an Apostle by the Assembly of an
hundred and twenty Brethren assembled together. Whereas from the text its
apparent, that they did only single out by suffrage two persons, whom they
conceived so qualified, that one of them might, if God pleased, be made an
Apostle for to succeed Judas; and refer the case to God by prayer and lot, that
he might determine, whether of the two should be an Apostle, to make up the
number of twelve. Upon the reference, God did choose Matthias, and so, that he
made him an Apostle, and refused the other. To make an extraordinary Officer
was above the power of the Apostles and the Church, therefore they did not take
it upon them. 2. The second error is, That Paul and Barnabas were made
Apostles by the Church of Antioch, Acts 13.2, 3. yet Barnabas in strict sense
was no Apostle; and Paul was an Apostle before he came to Antioch. He was a
servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated to the Gospel of
God, Romans 1.1. His calling to be an Apostle was not of men, nor by man, Gal.
1.1. His separation was twofold, 1. From God, who separated him from his
Mothers womb, Gal. 1.15. 2. From man, as by the prayers and fasting of the
Church of Antioch: Yet Mr. Hobbs is not afraid to contradict the Scriptures.



Ordinary officers of the Church, who succeeded the extraordinary, were Pastors
and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. Both the ordinary and extraordinary in respect of
their employment, were either such as were designed for feeding of the soul, by
Prayer, Word, Sacraments, and were to perform the acts of doctrine, worship,
discipline: or for feeding of the body, and outward relief: and such were
Deacons. After that the number of Christians were increased, and divided into
Congregations, the Pastors and Teachers were set over their several
Congregations and Flocks assigned unto them, and these were called Elders.

Now the Question is, who in a Christian Commonwealth have power to make,
constitute, ordain these ordinary Officers? The Commonwealth says he; the
Church, say others. He confesses that the Church did exercise this power till
civil Sovereigns became Christian: and then both the power and exercise thereof
ceased to be in the Church, if we may believe him; but his credit is not much,
and with me his Authority is none. To determine this question, we must observe
that its one thing to be a Pastor, Minister, or Presbyter: another thing to be
the Pastor of a certain congregation, and another to have a right to some
temporal revenue or dignity annexed. A Minister was constituted in all
well-ordered Churches, to this day by the Church. The Church and such as the
Church does trust, does choose him, try him, approve him, and ordains him. And
by the nomination, approbation, ordination of the Church, according to the will
of Christ all Presbyters are made public officers of the Church, and separated
to their function of public preaching, praying, administration of the
Sacraments. Neither is there any place in all the New Testament, where it can
be proved that either Christ or his Apostles, who had this power, did ever
derive it to the State or Civil Sovereign, whether Christian or no Christian.
That every civil Sovereign has power to preach, baptize, ordain, and perform
all Ministerial acts, and that as a public Officer, is an impudent assertion,
and contrary to the Book of God; and is evident from that reason given by him,
why they use not to do these things: which is, because the business of the
Commonwealth takes up their whole time. Yet he that will be a Minister, must
watch over his flock, be as soldiers, who going to war, must not entangle
themselves with the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2.4. As he must have
sufficient knowledge in those things which belong unto his calling, and
integrity of life, so he must engage himself to Christ and his Church, to lay
aside all other employments to feed Christ's flock, and this must take up his
whole time. To entangle himself with other business, and so neglect his charge,
is to be unfaithful, and in effect renounce his calling. From this false
principle it is, that so many, who have a little more knowledge in Scripture
then ordinary Christians of the lowest form, a bold face, and voluble tongue,
take upon them to preach, and presume to perform other Ministerial duties,
although they be soldiers, or civil Magistrates, or Tradesmen, or all
together: These will be Elders and Ministers, although they entangle themselves
with the affairs of this life, as though the Holy Ghost had made them
Overseers to feed his Church, purchased by his blood But woe unto them when
they shall appear before the tribunal of Christ to give their last account. But
consider, a Minister as he has a temporal right unto some temporal revenue,
dignity, jurisdiction, the Church has nothing to do with him. The Church looks
after his spiritual qualification and capacity. After that Emperors and civil
powers endowed the Church with a certain revenue, and annexed unto Bishoprics,
civil jurisdictions, and temporal dignities, there was some reason why the
presentation and investiture should belong unto them, but there was no such
thing from the beginning.

The maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel is determined by this Author to
be benevolence: yet at length convinced by the arguments of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
9. He confesses that it was such a benevolence as was due, and that the Flock
was bound to maintain their Pastor. By which confession he has answered his
own allegation, Freely give, because you have freely received, Mat 10.8. which
place is abused by him, as it is by the enemies of the Church at this day. For
as by him, so by them, its understood and applied, as though our Saviors
meaning had been, That because they gave nothing for their gifts and authority,
so they must neither demand, nor receive any thing for the use of them. And by
this means they make our Savior to contradict himself, for afterward he
says, That the workman (and such is every Minister) is worthy of his meat,
ver. 10. of his hire, Luke 10.7. From whence Paul informs us, That Christ
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor.
9.14. And therefore according unto this Ordinance of Christ he commands, That
he who is taught in the Word, communicate to him who teaches in all good
things, Gal. 6.6. From all which its very evident, that maintenance is due to
Ministers, and that by a Law, and the same divine, and far more obliging then
any civilact in the world. And if Christian people had a propriety in their
goods, (as of this there can be no doubt) this might easily make this
maintenance competent, comfortable, and certain; and that without any Law of
the civil power, and they were bound so to do. When Christian Princes endowed
the Church with titles, they did but their duty, and they conceived, that no
better way of provision could be devised by the wit of man. Neither can any
Antidecimarian to this day inform us of a better. Yet if we be once Ministers,
we are bound to preach the Gospel, though we beg our bread. But woe unto them
who shall deny it, or take it out of our mouths.

CAP. XII. Of the third Part. And the 43. of the Book. Of what is necessary for
a man's reception into the Kingdom of heaven.
IT is evident from our Saviors commission unto his Apostles, Mat. 28.19, 20.
That profession of faith and promise of obedience to him, gave any person right
unto Baptism, by which we are solemnly admitted into the Church, which is Gods
spiritual Kingdom. And faith with obedience, and obedience from faith, makes us
capable of eternal life. And because we can neither believe nor obey sincerely
without regeneration from heaven, therefore our Savior says, That except a
man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. If Mr. Hobbs had
said no more, but that faith and obedience are necessary for reception into
Gods Kingdom, he had done well: but he returns unto his vomit, and resumes some
of his former errors formerly confuted. I wish him more knowledge and more
modesty.

FINIS.

