A SHORT Supply or Amendment TO THE PROPOSITIONS FOR THE New Representative,
FOR THE Perpetual Peace and Quiet of this Nation, and other parts (which be or
shall be incorporated with the same) in the Enjoyment of their just Rights and
Liberties.

Which were lately published by WILL: LEACH of the middle Temple, Gent.

AND Now published at the request of diverse well-affected and eminent
Christians of the Congregated Churches of this Nation.

Written and Proposed by EDMUND LEACH of New England, Merchant.

London, Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold by Lodowick Lloyd in
Pope's Head Alley near Lumbard-street. 1651.

A Short Supply or Amendment TO THE PROPOSITIONS FOR THE New Representative.
FOr as much as the Members of this present Parliament of England have
undergone great danger of their lives and Estates, and many of them taken
excessive pains and care, and diverse of their Fellow Members lost their lives
for the Preservation of the honest People of this Nation from utter ruin and
destruction, and gaining their just Rights and Liberties, and settling the
People of this Nation in a Government of a Republique, for the enjoyment of the
same for ever, for the quiet not only of those who may fear, but which shall
hope of much more bloodshed, Combustions, or Alterations, but that all parties
may acquiesce in this peaceable Government in all future times, without
doubting, or expectance of any other by any Monarch whatsoever; but that all
Tyranny shall be for ever hereafter turned and kept out of doors, and that all
parties may praise our great God for this our Miraculous Deliverance from
Tyranny and Oppression, and pray for the prosperity of those by whom he out of
his good will and pleasure has wrought this our great and wonderful Freedom.

And for that, upon or by a New Representative, if the most just Members (which
have brought to pass this most peaceable Government, which is most easy to be
continued, for the keeping of the People from Tyranny and Oppression) should be
neglected, (though some of the Plebeans may think amiss of diverse of them for
concealing several things from them, which they have thought to be for their
weal, the sudden revealing of which might have been to their woe) danger might
happen.

For Remedy in this behalf, these Propositions following be proposed and
tendered, to the same Consideration and intent as the said recited Propositions
are.
I.
THat every Member of this present Parliament, now sitting or acting for the
benefit and support of this Commonwealth of England (other then such who by
this present Parliament shall not be thought fit to continue without a new
Election) may sit, vote and act for and in the next Parliament or
Representative.

II.
And that (for every County, City, Borough, Town Corporate, or other place,
having, or which shall have, Power or Authority of electing Members of
Parliament or Representers, and no Member or Representer being now so sitting,
or in action for the same) this now present Parliament may send to the
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Barons, or other head Officers of the same respectively,
the names of four persons for every such place which have power so to elect or
choose two such Members or Representers.

III.
And that every such Sheriff and Officer before mentioned respectively shall or
may publish the same openly in his County, or other such place, whereof such
respective Sheriff, or other such Officer, be or shall be chief head officer or
officers.

IV.
And that the Inhabitants of every such County, City, Borough, or other place
before mentioned, shall or may so write or print one of such four for one, and
that he with another of such Member or Representer as such Inhabitants shall in
like manner choose, write or print, as is mentioned in the Propositions before
recited, shall and may be Members of the next Parliament or Representative.

V.
And that some of the chief Commanders of this present Army of this Nation may
nominate eight such persons by the Parliament, so to be sent, out of which the
same may so send the names of the before mentioned four persons.

VI.
And that according to the same number and proportion for every respective
County, City, or other place before mentioned (which have or shall have power
or authority to elect or choose more or less for such Members or Representers)
the same course may be taken, as before is mentioned.

VII.
And that in all Parliaments or Representatives hereafter, the fourth or fifth
part, or some other number by this Parliament to be thought convenient, shall
and may remain and continue as Members or Representers for the then next
Parliament or Representative, unless they be or shall be voted out by any
Parliament or Representative sitting, or to be sitting, and that then the
Inhabitants of such place for which they were or shall be chosen, may (as is
mentioned in the said recited Proposals) new elect and choose, and send in such
manner and form as is mentioned in those Propositions.

In the Propositions before recited, in page 6. l. 9. is the word [ after]
where the word [ before] should be; and in page 10. li. 30. is omitted the word
[ not,] and in page 13. li. 14. is also omitted the word [ be,] and diverse
other litteral faults, which is easily imagined what they should be; all which
are the neglect of the Printer, and therefore its not necessary to write
further against or concerning the same.

Edmund Leach.

These present Proposals are to be sold by Lodowick Lloyd, and the
before-recited Proposals by him, William Lee, Lawrence Blaiklock, and Gabriel
Bedel in Fleet Street, and Lawrence Chapman near the Savoy.

FINIS.

