A great and bloody FIGHT AT SEA Between the Parliaments Navy, under the
Command of General Blake; and the Dutch Fleet, commanded by the Lord Admiral
VAN-TRUMP.

With the true particulars thereof; the taking of 21 Men of War, 150 Busses,
4000 prisoners; and the sinking, burning, and dispersing about threescore more
of the Hollanders:

The new Oath taken by the Dutch; the advance of Vantrump; the engaging of the
Engelish; and the taking of the Sampson of London, worth four hundred thousand
pounds.

Also, the bringing in of the East India Fleet to Plymouth, by Sir George
Ayscue; and four rich Merchants taken, bound for Holland.

Examined by the Original Papers, sent to the Council of State on Sunday last;
and published by Authority.

London, Printed for J. Fielding. 1652.

A MESSAGE SENT To the Council of State, from his Excellency General Blake,
concerning the last bloody fight at Sea between the English and the Dutch.
ON Sunday last being the first of this instant August, came Letters to the
Council of State (to the great joy of their long expectance) from General
Blake, intimating, That upon the return of his Scouts with advertisements, of
the near approach of Vantrump, preparations were made to receive them; and
accordingly on the 24 of July last, both Navies engaged, and the Generals
bearing up to each other, let fly several broad sides; insomuch that great
execution was done on both sides; Major Bourn (the Rear-Admiral) seeing the
Resolu^ion somewhat engaged, bare up to the head of Vantrump, and presented him
with several thundering salutes; and with great fury and resolution was the
conflict disputed, which continued for the space of seven hours; during which
time, Victory seemed dubious; but about the eighth hour, the Lord was pleased
graciously to appear for Us, and to crown Us with a glorious success, to wit:
That although they far exceeded us in number; yet it pleased God (after a
bloody fight,) that we took nine, sunk two, fired one, the rest declined
engagement, until such time that the rest of the Fleet came up, these being
only two particular Squadrons; We shall expect the decision of the fatal blow
suddenly; for both Navies are engaged.

Our General even upon this very instant of time likewise engaged their other
Fleet, who consisted of 25 Men of War, being a Guard for the Busses, and for
safety betook them to a Bay, called Braseys Sound in Shotland; who bearing up
to them, at the Mouth of the Sound the Dutchmen prepared to receive them; so
that upon engagement, the dispute was maintained with great alacrity and
resolution, yet the success proved fatal to Mr. Launsman; For after a desperate
engagement, we sunk three gallant Men of War, took twelve, besides one hundred
and fifty Busses; but not without loss; for many of our men are killed and
wounded, and diverse of our ships rent and torn: these Seas have plenty of Masts
and pieces of ships floting. We have taken abode four thousand prisoners, and
at least two hundred and fifty pieces of Ordnance.

The Herring-Busses in regard they are too low a subject for the resolution of
our gallant Navy, are released, and an Oath tendered to the Masters and
Mariners, never more to act or engage any thing that may prove to be either
prejudicial or destructive to the Commonwealth of England. This uncouth
dealing from an enemy, has so wrought upon the Dutch spirits, that they begin
to be almost ashamed of their attempts; first, against so trusty a friend;
secondly, against so gallant an enemy, who unlading what fish they had taken,
honorably dismissed them. Sir, the darkness of the night, commands the
subscription of

Your obliged servant, J. Lawson.
Aboard the Lion near the Sound, July 26. 1652.

Since which time, the French men of War, which lay upon the catch between
Cantire and Knockfergus, for the surprisal of those Horse to be conveyed from
Air to the Highlands, missing their purpose, by divine Providence, it happened
they fell upon an English Frigot of 20 Guns commanded by Captain Thompson,
immediately they let fly their broad sides upon him, and the English men being
willing to entertain the hazard, joined issue with them from ten of the clock
in the forenoon, till eight in the evening; the conflict was disputed with
great Resolution on both sides, but by reason of the great advantage of number,
they put Captain Thompson hard to it; yet notwithstanding he so handsomely plied
them with small shot and Vollies, that he got off with abundance of honor, and
made his retreat good to the Harbor of Knockfergus, with the loss of 23 men.

Vantrump lies with 120 sail of ships upon the Coast of Scotland, and trusses
up the Fisherboats and Colliers, as a Falcon does wild Ducks; not one can peep
out of Newcastle or Tinmouth Harbor, but he goes immediately to the pot. They
have chased three Merchants, and forced them to run on ground; but that which
seems most direful, is, their taking of the Sampson of London, a ship valued
four hundred thousand pounds, whose Lading was silks of rich value. In lieu
whereof, Genesis Blake has taken three Dutch Merchants ships, coming from the
East Indies, valued worth nine hundred thousand pounds.

Thus may we judge by the series of theit Actions, that the Dutch are no more
then juggling Timeysts; and as one side takes ships and secures them, the other
takes Busses but never opens them; so that in the end the game may prove like a
Southwark prize (say some) at the Hope; where a man suffers himself to be
beaten, to gain the halfs of the Cheat; but the acting of this Tragedy, seems
to be no such Theater; for we are in daily expectation of the decision of the
fatal blow.

Letters from sir George Ayscue to the Council of state advertize, that he has
conveyed and brought safe into Plymouth five of the English Merchants ships,
richly laden from the East Indies, and of great value.

The Lord Shandoys has received his Trial at Kingston upon Thames; and, by the
Jury, quitted.

FINIS.

