THE Jacobite Principles VINDICATED, In Answer to a LETTER sent to the AUTHOR.

DEDICATED TO THE QUEEN OF ENGLAND.

Reprinted at London in the year 1693.

To the QUEEN.
MADAM,
I Beseech Your Majesty's Pardon, that, without first consulting You, I lay at
the Royal Feet of a most Injured Queen the Vindication of a most Injured Party;
and I hope this Dedication will have so much Effect upon the Public, as to
satisfy the World of my Candor in representing the Measures of Your Majesty's,
and the Notions of those that are in Your Interest; for it cannot be supposed I
dare inscribe that to Your Name, that is contrary to the Royal Intentions of
His Majesty and Your Self. I must confess I think I have reason rather to beg
Pardon that I have not sufficiently explained the good Inc^i^^tions You both
have to make us Happy. I choose to put Your Majesty's Name before these Sheets,
rather than the King's, (though I suddenly design to dedicate a short Discourse
to Him) because, if possible, the World has been more maliciously Unjust and
Inveterate toward YOU, than ever against HIM; nay, some have presumed to
censure Your Majesty for those Errors and Mistakes of His Reign (for which I
don't pretend to apologize) which were entirely the Work of His False and
Corrupted Ministers: and yet I have heard from those who had Opportunity to
know, and who are not much Your Friends, that Public Affairs were not Your
Concern whilst His Majestly was here; which is the more to be admired and
applauded in Your Majesty, since all that had the Honor to wait upon You about
Business when His Majesty's absence in Ireland made it absolutely necessary for
You to apply Your Self to it, found in Your Majesty a Genius fitted to all
Great Affairs. And, Madam, though You retired, as soon as the King returned to St
Germains, purely to the exercise of Your own private Virtues; yet I am so
assured that the Reflections You then made, whilst You was perfectly forced to
look into the British Affairs, and since You have entirely quitted them to His
Majesty's Care, have fully convinced You that these are the proper Measures of
Accommodation, that I don't doubt but Your Majesty will graciously forgive my
Presumption.

I know few Men approach Crowned Heads without making Panegyricks; but I shall
not enter upon a Theme upon which Posterity will better bear Just Things to be
said than the present Age will yet; nor is a Courtly Style my Talent, though it
is from a sense of Your Goodness as well as Greatness that I am devoted to Your
Commands and Interest.

I have heard of but sew Faults that any Party has found with the First Edition
of this Paper, which I hope is a good sign that all Men are at last inclined to
moderate Things. I am sure it was written with all the good meaning imaginable
toward my King and Country, Your Majesty and Posterity, and all the several
divided Parties of Your Subjects: And that YOU may be Glorious, and They Happy,
is the constant Prayer, and shall be the Endeavor of,

May it please Your MAJESTY, Your Majesty's most Obedient Subject, and Faithful
Servant.

THE Jacobite Principles Vindicated.
SIR,
AS much as Englishmen have been famed for their Hearts, they have been always
reproached for their Heads. They have always lost their Wits by National
In^oxications. They have been always a tempestuous, a heady, and a divided
People: But they never were more apparently so, than they have been in this
last Change. They have not only outrun their Own, but the Pretenses of their
Deliverer. He came not for a Crown, but to redress our Grievances; but we would
give the Crown, yet neglect our Grievances, and all Amendment of our
Constitution: And we will still maintain our Injustice in the one, and Folly in
the other. Those that resolve to do so, may see Maestricht taken after Mons and
Namur, Flande^ submitted to France, the Confederacy broken, and we (divided as
we are, and shall be, amongst our selves) left to grapple with all that Power,
which has now for four Years employed such united Forces. Nor can we hope God
will work a Miracle to support so unjust a Quarrel. They may see all this War
brought into our own Bowels, into this divided Kingdom; may see it make Havoc
and Desolation upon this Island; in a word, may see Friends and Kindred killing
and destroving one another, embruing their Hands in each others Blood; and then
our pretended Fears may become true, those Miseries overtake us, with the
pretended Suspicions of which we have colored over and countenanced our
unrighteous Doings. But you think it is too late to or ^w back, and you can see
no security in the Restoration; you cannot see our Lives, and our Religion, our
Liberty, and our Property will be safe. I averr you impose upon your self, and
one Man imposes upon another. But you say you are frighted at the Discourses of
some, both Protestant and Catholic, Jacobites. You say they talk for Slavery,
and that when we are Slaves, we may be made Papists. Yet if you would consider,
you have been invited by published Pamphlets to reflect who among the Jacobites
are likely to give you satisfaction. Would you have Men set their Names to what
they write? There are Men that you believe are in King James's Interest, that
you have no reason to believe would sacrifice their Country or their Religion,
and that I assure you have as true a love for those good things you mention as
you can have your self, and that would join with you and any Englishmen, to
ask in a respectful manner for every honest thing that is necessary to secure
us from Arbitrary Power, and the Violence of all sorts of Priests, and that are
themselves satisfied, and can authentically satisfy you that the King has been
a long time willing to make all those necessary Concessions that will secure
the Church of England, as the Established Worship, make an Impartial Toleration
safe, and for the future put our Liberties and Property out of the Power (as
much as good and wholesome Laws can do it) of Maladministration; nay, that are
satisfied he must be willing to do so if ever he will come home. There are
Jacobites that believe what Gourville is related to have once said concerning
our Kings; Qu'n Roy d'Angleterre qui veut estre l'Homme de son Peuple, est le
plus Grand Roy du Monde, mais s'il veut estre quelque chose d'avantage par
Dieu, il n'est plus Rien. There are Jacobites that are for Reformations, though
they believe them more lasting under uncontested Titles than where Title is too
great a part of the Dispute; that think it Lawful for Kings, and their
Parliaments, to limit and explain the Nature of Prerogatives, though they think
it safer to the Constitution to leave it to the three Estates so to do, than
for one or two of them to innovate too rudely without the Consent of the other;
that own a great Difference between the Changing or Abolition of some
particular Laws, and altering Fundamentals. And the greatest Assertors of
Liberty must acknowledge, that Prerogatives in Kings, suitable to the
Respective Constitution, are necessary to maintain those Constitutions, and to
protect their Subjects, and consequently that in all Pacts and Compositions
their People make with them, due care should be taken even by the People, not
to take from their Kings any essential Powers. Prerogative, like a River,
sometimes gains, and sometimes decreases in its Banks; but the Balk of the
Community sails safest when it keeps its own Natural Channel, according to the
respective Constitutions. Bacon, that writes the Uniformity of the Government
of England, is certainly no over Monarchical Author; yet he has this Expression
in relation to King Stephen: Too much Counter-security from the King to the
People, is like too many Covenants in Marriage, that make room for Jealousy,
and are but Seeds of an unquiet Life. After all, it is certainly the Nature of
Englishmen to delight in, and they have been used to a Limited, Explained, and
Hereditary Monarchy; and Naturam licet expellas furca tamen ipsa recurrat, will
be found true in a Politic, as well as a Natural Sense, by all those who would
change our Government into an Absolute Monarchy or Downright Democracy, or that
will interrupt the Succession. The Lancastrian Usurpations, and the Late Times,
witness this. But perhaps some of these Jacobites you complain of, may think to
disgrace what I have said, by calling these Notions Republican. To these
Gentlement I will first Answer, That since we are so Elemented for a
Commonwealth, there is no keeping it out but by a Reformation of the Monarchy,
that may as apparently Answer all the Reasons why Government was first
deposited in the Magistrates hands, either by God, or the People. I will not
dispute the Original of Government at this time, but I will offer one thing to
these Speculators to consider of, which is, That whilst they too much cajole
Kings, they lose their Interest with the People, and mislead an English
Monarch, and make way for that Government both in Church and State, which they
would (if they understood how) oppose. They help the Real Commonwealths men to
Arguments, and give the Presbyterians opportunity to insinuate, and gain the
Hearts of the People. Perhaps were the People of England a Prima Materia, I
would be very well content that the Draughts of these superfine Projectors
should be debated, but I think Machiavel was as good a Politician as most of
Them; and yet he says, If the Variations of Times are not observed, and Laws
and Customs altered accordingly, much Mischief must follow. And in another
Place, he affirms it a very had Thing to keep them in Servitude, who are
disposed to be Free. And whoever has reflected upon the extravagant Courses we
have taken to be so, ever since the Beginning of the late Civil Wars, cannot
sure doubt of our Disposition: For tho we have been mistaken in our Cures, no
body can be mistaken in our Propensity. I am no Lord, nor ever desire or hope
for any Title. I had rather serve my Country in the Lower than the Vpper-House;
and if my Country never thinks fit to send me to that neither, I shall never
Court, much less Bribe, for that Employment from my Country: for I would not be
Bribed in it. Yet considering how much the Power of the Lords has in some
Reigns been a check to the Incroachment of Kings, and in others to the
hot-headedness of the People, I should be willing to screw up the
Aristocratical part of our Government, though not to the height it sometimes
has had in our Policy: but the present Ferments of England make it
impracticable. And tho some Men are, I am not for driving Nails that will not
go; when we may without breach of Conscience let that Work alone to a more
cl^a^^sighted Age. Though I think our Oaths, and the Original Contract of our
Law Books, bind us to restore the King; yet I know no Obligation we lie under
to restore Power to the Lords, but as there shall appear both great Feasibility
and Expediency: I am not for hazarding much for bringing things exactly and
minutely to my Platform. It will be always enough for me, if the Fundamentals
of our Government are preserved. A Trimmer in Politics, if it means one that
would avoid Extremities, and compose Things, and not one that serves himself by
all Times and Changes, is a Name and Character that I shall always revere. But
to give these Gentlemen a farther Answer, I must tell them, that it is plain,
by undeniable Matter of Fact, that to those Persons that engaged in the Scotch
Plot, tho he had not tried his Fortune in Ireland, nor could the Persons
engaged assure his Return, even upon such Condescensions; yet the King granted
under the Broad Seal of that Kingdom, a full Redress for all Grievances, and
that at the Request of People that had opposed him; so that talking of Terms
will be no harsh Language to him now; he can want no farther Illumination, by a
longer Series of Misfortunes, to let him see, that Compliance with his People
is his true and only Interest. In a private Pamphlet, and in a private
Capacity, it is not proper to state the Manner and Bounds of our Redresses: But
did ever People re-admit a King they had ejected upon the Male-administrations
of his Ministers (if they could any ways help it) without making good
Provisions? Can any body imagine we expect the People of England should? The
Men of S^nse, and Quality, and Estates, amongst the Jacobites, be they
Protestants or Papists, don't wish they should do it. Would you have Trials
secured? It is the Interest of all Parties, care should be taken about them, or
all Parties will suffer in their turns. Plunket, and Sidney, and Ashton, were
doubtless all Murdered, tho they were never so guilty of the Crimes wherewith
they were charged: The one Tried twice, the other found guilty upon one
Evidence, and the last upon nothing but presumptive Proof. Either let Prisoners
have Counsel, or the Judges be forced to be more impartially so than they were
in any of these Cases; and let Juries understand that only Allegata and Probata
are to direct their Verdict, and not Deadly Feuds, Foreign Belief, or State
Necessity. In Scotland, at all Trials, the whole is taken down in Writing, Word
for Word, as well all Probations, as what is said, both by the King's Advocate,
and the Panel or Criminal, and is all made a Record; that Aftertimes (when
the heat of the Prosecution is over) may examine whether the Judge dealt
impartially; and if he did not, and is alive at the review of those
Proceedings, if the Prisoner suffered Death by his warping the Law, the Judge
is to undergo the same Punishment; and if he is dead, the Heirs of the injured
Person is to recover equal Damages to what they sustained in their Fortune, by
his illegal Sentence, from the Heirs of the Unjust Judge. The Saxons punished
false Judges by giving Satisfaction to the Party wronged by them; and as the
Case required, by Forfeiture of the Residue to the King, and by his disabling
them for ever for Places of Judicature, and by leaving their Lives to the
King's Mercy. Who can have the Face to oppose the Revival of something
equivalent to that Law? But I will not discuss too particularly the Particulars
I shall mention. The granting of that Bill for Judges, that the Prince of
Orange refused, and Whitlock's for Trials, will be the Glory of King James's
Reign, whenever he is Restored.

As to the Armed Force of England, I think there may be ways found out to make
our Militia as serviceable as any Mercenary Bands, to employ all our Officers
that have had Military Experience, to raise from time to time such Numbers of
Officers, and such Nurseries of Private Sentinels, as may make both the King
and Kingdom safe, add to the Glory and Majesty of our Monarch, and yet not
leave the least Umbrage for Jealousy in the Minds of the People. But this is
not a time of day for me to lay before the World such Plans. I will not hold
forth such Doctrines under any Government I think Unjust, and that I think too
have not the Honesty to embrace them if I would. But if ever I see an English
Parliament under a Rightful Prince, I will not be wanting in offering my Mite,
in this and all other things that may contribute to the Good of my Country: And
sure no body can be so unreasonable as to be unwilling to hear from One that
has given Testimony of his Loyalty to his King and Nation too, any thing that
such an One will propose, to establish the Throne, and quiet the Minds of his
Fellow Subjects. Praetorian Bands in Rome Butchered as well as Guarded their
Emperors. It is but very lately that the Janisaries Deposed the Grand Seignior,
and King James's own Army Deserted from Him in these Kingdoms; and I am
confident I can show, that the Love of his Subjects is the best Standing Army
for an English King as well as how he shall have it, and be able to look all
his Foreign Enemies in the face to boot: But, I say, it is not time for the
Publication of these things by my hand, nor will I be too prolix upon any one
thing; therefore to come to Parliaments.

Is there any Man of Sense and Fortune, that does not know them to be the
Conservators of all that we hold dear? Can there be an unjuster thing, any
thing more fatal, than a partial Representation of the Minds and Interests of
Men in that House? Though this Reign has taught them to do very little else but
give Money, or Sanction to, or Pardons for the Irregularities of Ministers; yet
the Design of their Institution is as well to provide Remedies for the
Complaints of the Kingdom, as Cash for the Prince's Coffers. I will not debate
what is necessary to make them Free, but I am sure they should be so. I will
not say how often they must sit, but I am sure they should frequently. Both
these Considerations are ^^test for their own House, and I am not willing to
make narrow Spirits peevish: But sure no Man of Interest, or that hopes to keep
any Reputation with the World, will deny they should be free and frequent, and
that they should not be too much Officer'd, that they may be Faithful.

I shall not enter into a Detail of what is the Work of Parliaments; but there
is One Thing I am sure is very properly Theirs; and that is, to make an exact
Scrutiny into the Public Administration, and to bring Ministers (who are above
the reach of Common Courts of Judicature, and can stem all other Prosecutions;)
I say, It is the Work of Parliaments to bring such Ministers to condign
Punishment, if they deserve it.

I know not any thing wherein Princes, and some of their Subjects, have been
more unfortunately mistaken, than in their Wishes that Ministers should be
Impunible: whereas Favorites that are not a Cement between Prince and People,
that don't consult in all their Actions the Laws of the Constitution, and
Inclinations of the Inhabitants, become Rocks of Offense, and bring Ruin,
sometimes upon Al^, too often upon their Princes, and, God be praised for it,
more generally upon Themselves. What is the Reason of that admirable Maxim,
That the King of England can do wrong? Why do the People of England make him an
Epicurean God so happy in the enjoyment of His own Majesty? Why do we say, That
He neither can nor does disturb the Peace of our World, but because His Eyes
and His Ears, His Omnisciency and His Omnipresency, are comprehended in his
Ministers; but because, if those Ministers are Troublers of our State, they are
to be punished, even for Inadvertencies, and much more for Sins of Malice? Though
this Revolution has blotted out all our Original Contract, razed all our
Statutes and Law Books, turned our Monarchy topsie-turvey, and scandalously
prevaricated from all our Civil Compacts, by employing the Men that persuaded
King James to, and acted in what we imputed to him as false steps; yet it was
his Ministers should have been punished, and not he himself dethroned; and sure
King James, after he has found so many Ministers were false, others flattering
and foolish, cannot be unwilling to leave it an everlasting Law to his and our
Posterity, that Ministers shall be accountable. It is our Law, though both weak
and profligate Men have, the one fancied, and the other pretended the contrary;
and for that Reason, and that Reason only, it ought to be written more legibly
in our Statute-Books: Is it not the Interest of Kings, that Ministers should
not Male-administer away all the Affection of their good and loving Subjects?
Is it not the Interest of Kings, that the Representative Body should plainly
show them by whom and how they are betrayed? Yet, after all, those that will
read that excellent Chapter in Machiavel, which shows how necessary it is for
the Conservation of the State, that any Citizen be securely accused, p. 277. of
his Works, ought to read the two next pages, which show, that unjust Calumnies
are no less pernicious to a Commonwealth than legal Accusations are profitable
and good; and there you will find a great difference betwixt Accusation and
Calumny. Ministers ought to be punished; I am satisfied the King is willing
they should be so, for the future: Sunderland's Ministry suggests that Advice
to Him very effectually and strongly; but Beautefeaux also are to be suppressed
in all well ordered States.

One thing seems naturally here to fall in my way, which I beg leave to handle
in the most inoffensive manner that I can. I foresee this will less please some
Men, for whom no Man living can have a greater Honor than I have; yet I think
it of so much Necessity and Importance, that I cannot forbear mentioning it.
There was not an ill thing done in King James's Reign, that I did not call so
then; and all that know me, know that I have taken it as my Province to
represent Truths, be they never so bold or bitter, whilst they are for
Instruction. I I am no Advocate for any Man's Faults, nor for any Faults, though
I would be charitable and good-natured, forgiving and forgetting, toward all
Men's Persons. Methinks the State of things require this measure. I scarce
believe there ever was a Period of Time, wherein an Universal Amnesty was so
requisite; a forgetfulness, as well as forgiveness of all past Crimes. Methinks
all sides stand in need of this Temper. If the Ministers of King James exceeded
in their Management of our Affairs, as doubtless they did, we have doubtless
exceeded too in our Revenge upon the King's Person; and besides, those that
have fallen in with the Usurpation have not proceeded against any one Man that
has been in their hands, for any thing that was done amiss in the two late
Reigns; and therefore methinks it is very hard, if we cannot forgive those that
have undergone Banishment, (which in all Countries has been reckoned some sort
of Punishment) or such as have hazarded Prisons, or the Gallows, every day. Why
should we not forgive all those that serve him amongst us, or that are with the
King (though they may have had Faults) when we desire, or I am sure ought to
desire, that the whole Land should be forgiven? All Parties, and almost all
Men, have some way or other been to blame; and therefore there seems to me to
be a little too much Passion and Self-interest in keeping up old Grudges. I
avoid saying there is any infatuation in keeping them up, though I cannot think
that it is the likeliest way to prepare the King to close with Wise Councils,
to revive or continue our Piques: For the King can scarce be supposed to be
without some Kindness for those who have either followed His Fortunes, or
ventur^d their Necks for Him; and cons quently, it is not perh^ps advisable to
make those that transact in his Affairs (though they have been peccant) believe
they can have no Quarter, no Share in him, unless he return with a High Hand.
They will have some Opportunities to put ill Constructions upon good Advices. I
have read of but few of those Heroic Spirits in any Age, who have so divested
themselves of all Regard for their own Persons and Posterity, as to be willing
to become a Sacrifice to their Country. I think this Age affords fewest
Instances of those Great Minds; and therefore I think it the likeliest way to
m^ke Men instrumental toward the Good of their Country, to show them that they
shall find their own Account in being so. I hope I have expressed my self in as
modest and inoffensive words as any, in which I could conceive my Thoughts; and
I hope I shall not be so mis-understood, as if I would justify any thing that
was by any body done amiss; for I will not justify a false step, even in the
King; but I would have us lay aside all the Byasses of Factions and
Friendships, and much more all Enmities, that we may unanimously offer to the
King Right Notions, and thereby Restore Him to His Hereditary Kingdoms. After
all, I would not have less than such a Repentance as gives evidence of
Amendment entitle to Absolution, but I would leave Room and Rewards for such
Repentance.

I fear this Moderation, and forgiving of Enemies, will be thought a hard
Lesson; but, I bless God, I have practiced it, and I think it not only the
noblest Precept in Christian Morality, but an admirable Rule in Civil Prudence,
especially in our Case; for it is as difficult for a Party that is subdivided
within it self to pull down an Usurpation, as it can be for a divided Kingdom
to stand.

But I am sensible I have made too long a Digression, and therefore must omit
many other particulars, upon which I would explain my self, and the Sense of
many other Jacobites; and I can assure you, I am sorry that any Jacobites say
any thing that offends well-meaning Men: but I wish, for their own sakes, my
Countrymen would not take a Standard, either of the King's Inclinations, or
the rest of his Friends, from their indiscreet Tattle. There are in His
Interest those that know, that to talk too loftily and dogmatically, to
dispute, as they do in the Schools, concerning Prerogative and the Nature of
Monarchy, to stand nicely upon Punctilio's, to consult Aristotle's and
Xenophon's Kings, is as unlikely a way to come to a mutual Accommodation, as to
peruse and and or am of Plato's Commonwealth, Sir Thomas More's Utop a,
Harrington's Oceana, etc. There are Men of his sid, that think (as the great
Lawgiver Solon did) that a Government must be framed according to the Nature of
the Governed, and that he is the best Subject, as well as Politician, that
adapts all his Notions to our Tempers; that considers Men, as well as peruses
Books, when he is to draw a Scheme; and I believe, as you say, that the high
flights of some Jacobites hinder many honest Men from coming into his Interest;
and farther, that they sometimes mislead the King. Nevertheless, there are in
his Interest Men that I assure you are not frighted at Words, nor startled at
Nicknames, that know the King of England makes the greatest Figure in Europe
when he is best with his People, and that is when he governs by the Measures of
Commonweal. These Men know, a good Commonwealths-man was not a Character of
Reproach in our Legislation and Politics, till all our Glory dwindled, and the
Absoluteness of Ministers was more consulted than the true Interest of King or
Kingdom; till a pack of Knaves forged a separate Interest between the King of
England and his People, and till they began to call a Mixed Monarchy an errant
Bull, and would Reform our State by Metaphysical and Court Distinctions:
whereas, if our Histories and Statute-Books were consulted, they are every
where full of Explanations. Are these Gentlemen you complain of weary of Magna
Charta, (which was but a Revival and Recitation of the Saxon Liberties, and
ancient British Laws?) I will prove them farther, That Laws and Lawful
Prerogatives may be so abused, that it may be fit to take away the One, and to
desire that the Other may never be again so used; and that our former Kings
have thought so. But I will go no farther back than the Conjunction of the Two
Roses, and they may find that in Henry the Seventh's Time Empson and Dudley
harassed the People by obsolete unrepealed Laws; nay, it has never been thought
mean by our greatest Kings to make Condescentions to their People: And, as
haughty as King Henry VIII. was, my Lord Herbert in his History of his Reign,
tells you, That in his first Parliament he Repealed, Explained, or Limited
those Statutes, by which his Father had taken Advantage of his People; and (as
my Lord Herbert judiciously observes therein) was willing to restrain his own
Authority, in some sort, that he might enlarge the Peoples Confidence and
Affection. This that King did in the celebrated part, to wit, in the beginning
of his Reign, though he had at the same time his Exchequer what was equivalent to
Seven Millions Sterling now, and was in peaceable Possession of his Throne, and
had no particular pressing Occasion to please his People. How much more
necessary is this measure to regain the Peoples Confidence and Affection
toward an Exiled Prince? The Author of this History (my Lord Herbert of
Cherbury) professes in his Epistle Dedicatory great Deserence to Kings; and
that the King (to whom he dedicates his History) had lustrated by his Gracious
Eye, and consummated by his Judicious Animadversions, all the parts of that
History, as fast as he finished them. And therefore this Instance ought to be
of great weight with every body, even with those Jacobites you talk of. It is a
Royal, as well as my Lord Herbert's History of Henry VIII.

I am not ignorant, that this King Henry VIII. is brought as an Instance of a
King that could pull up Foundations, and do what he pleased; but there was a
strange Concurrence in his Time to help him in the business he was doing, and
he did it by Parliaments, and often used Palliations; and perhaps if a Man
looks observingly upon his Life, he was but the Head of the Rabble-rout; and
that neither He nor the People knew what he would be at. It was an Age big with
Changes; and his greatest Exorbitances fell upon a sort of People who were
wearing into disesteem, or were of a more private Nature. Besides, he began his
Reign with a wondrous good Grace, and he sacrificed now and then a Minister;
and what he took from the Church, he divided amongst the Gentry and Nobility.
But, after all, I will own there are some Periods of his Reign, wherein the
Prince went farther and faster than the Peeple, and he had the good luck to do
strange things by in comprehensible ways: For my Lord Herbert of Cherbury (as
judicious and sharp-sighted an Author as he is) seems to wonder, and not to
understand all the Occurrences of his Reign. His beginning it so
condescendingly, makes it less a wonder, that the People were a great while apt
to put good Constructions upon what he did afterward. He gave up Empson and
Dudley merely to their Rage; and Woolsey's Fall was pleasing; and, as I just
now intimated, he was more Sacrilegious toward the Church, which was then
going down with the People, than he was otherwise Oppressive.

The next Person I will introduce shall be Qu. Elizabeth, whose Speech in the
43d year of her Reign, occasioned by Complaints against Monopolies, is so
excellent, that I think fit to transcribe it at length; though I will not commend
the Sanguinary Laws she made in matters of Religion, as well against Brownists,
etc. as Papists, no more than I will many other parts of her Reign. I have
often wondered why mere Church of England-men cried out against, or Whigs so
much extolled her, ten or twelve years ago; for she was a mere Church of
England-Queen: but I protest I know not how enough to commend this Speech which
she made to her Parliament; I wish every body would peruse the Context of it in
Camden, but the words of it are these:

We owe unto you special Thanks and Commendations for your singular Good will
toward us, not in silent Thought, but in plain Declaration expressed; whereby
ye have called us back from an Error, proceeding from ignorance, not
willingness. These things had undeservedly turned to our disgrace (to whom
nothing is more dear than the Safety and Love of our People) had not such
Harpies and Horse-leeches as these been made known unto us by you. I had rather
be maimed in Hand to give allowance of such Privileges of Monopolies as may be
prejudicial to my People. The Brightness of Regal Majesty has not so blinded
mine Eyes, that licentious Power should prevail more with me, than Justice. The
Glory of the Name of a King may deceive unskilful Princes, as gilded Pills may
deceive a sick Patient, but I am none of those Princes; for I know that the
Commonwealth is to be governed for the benefit of those who are committed, not
of those to whom it is committed; and that an Account is one day to be given
before another Judgment Seat. I think my self most happy, that by God's
assistance I have hitherto so governed the whole Commonwealth, and have such
Subjects, as for their Good I would willingly leave both Kingdom and Life also.
I beseech you that what Faults others have committed by false Suggestions, may
not be imputed to me. Let the Testimony of a clear Conscience be my absolute
Excuse. Ye are not ignorant that Princes Servants are now and then too
attentive to their own benefit, that the Truth is often concealed from Princes;
and they cannot themselves look precisely into all things, upon whose Shoulders
lies continually the Weight of the greatest Business.

I cannot but observe, before I go any farther, that this Queen was not willing
to take upon her self the faults of her Servants; but, on the contrary, gave
them very hard Names. I must observe likewise, that Commonwealth was no odious
Word then; for she twice in this Speech; and in her time Secretary Smith wrote
a Book of our Government, to which he gave that Title. This was an Age wherein
Majesty could court, and Ministers affect to be Patriots of the People; and yet
Prerogative did not lose much ground, although it sometimes yielded.

But I will come nearer to our Times, as far as the Union of this Island. Sir
Francis Bacon advised King James the First (as you may find in his
Resuscitatio) to amend by consent of Parliament some of our Laws, and to
expunge others, especially Penal Ones.

He quotes a Learned Civilian (though he does not name him) that expounds the
Curse of the Prophet, Plu^t super eos L^queos, of multitude of Penal Laws;
which (continues he) are worse than Showrs of Hail, or Tempests upon Cattle;
for they fall upon Men.

He goes on, There are some Penal Laws fit to be retained, but the Penalty too
great. And it is ever a Rule, That any overgreat Penalty (beside the acerbity
of it) deads the Execution of the Law.

He says also, There is a farth^r Inconvenience of Penal Laws obsolete and out
of use; for it brings a gangrene neglect, and habit disobedience upon other
wholesome Laws, that are fit to be continued in practice and execution. So that
our Laws endure the Torment of M^zentius, The Living die in the Arms of the
Dead.

I chose to express my Lord Bac^n's Mind in his own Words: But I will add to
what he has said a farther inconvenience that I my self have observed in the
reading of Histories; (...) Powers, and ob^olete Penal Laws, have not only
proved a Snare to the People, but given Kings too often an Handle to fall into
such Measures as have proved destructive to themselves. Powers in a Crown, that
are wholly unfit to be exercised, are only Temptations to Oppression and
Misunderstanding. Knight Service was once a very Politic Tenure: It was once
fit, before the several People of this Kingdom were mixed and civilized, that
whoever was born upon a Lord's Land, should be brought up under his Care; and
that no Woman that held Land of any Lord should carry her Estate to any Man
that was an Enemy to that Lord: yet in King James the First's days, the same
Sir Francis Bacon, though then Sollicitor-General to him, in a Conference with
the Lords, by Commission from the Commons, made a Speech to persuade the Lords
to join with the Commons in a Petition to the King, to obtain Liberty to treat
of a Composition with his Majesty for Wards and Tenures This was in the seventh
year of K. James's Reign, in Halcyon-days. The Speech is in the 34th page of my
Lord Bacon's Resuscitatio, and worth any Man's reading. He therein proposes,
in Recompense of the Revenue of Tenures, a more ample, a more certain, and a
more Loving Dowry; Loving Dowry expresses admirably well, that Kings should be
willing to change any part of their Revenue, for what may suit better with the
Peoples inclinations. But I will not make Remarks upon this Speech.

The next Paragraph speaks of the Nature of those things, and how it is changed
with the times. Voca^^^^ manent, Res fugiunt, are his words.

And the next Paragraph to that says a great deal in these two Axioms, Naturae
vis maxima, and suus cuique discretus sanguis: for restoring Children to the
care of their most affectionate Relatives.

I come to the Reign of K. Charles I* and must say, that the strained use of
some Powers and Prerogatives, for which the flattering Lawyers had some dark
semblance of Authority in our Law Books, gave the fatal Rise to the late Civil
Wars, which ended in the horrid Murder of that King; and when K. Charles II.
was Restored, though the first Parliament he called will be allowed by every body
to be sufficiently devoted to him, yet he therein, when they were under the
greatest Transports and Raptures of Loyalty, passed many Acts that plainly own
the great Inexpediency, if not Illegality of several things done in his
Father's Days, and secured us against the like Abuses hereafter; and had he
lived, he must have owned that he himself had carried the Quo Warrantoes too
far, or he would have sat uneasy; and those very Men that were instrumental
in Quo-Warrantoing Corporations, did every where declare, that Regulations,
which (however illegal I take them to be in themselves, how much soever I think
them a Fanatic Rowland for the Church of England Oliver, yet I think they were
agreeable to the Powers the Crown reserved to its self in the New Charters;) I
say, That those very Men that were instrumental to the Quo Warrantoing
Corporations, did every where declare, that the Regulations in the succeeding
(...) Power insecure, and resolved all our Government into an Absolute and
Despotick Rule. Questionless there should be some way to punish the Abuses in
Corporations, but the Penal Laws that are against Corporations have perhaps
annexed to them too great a Penalty; perhaps it would be better to punish the
Persons that offend, than to fall upon the poor innocent Charter. I would have
the Body Corporate be able to do no wrong, though the Members may.

But it is not my business in this place to propound the Remedies, but to show
that it is lawful to make, and that there used to be made, and that there ought
to be Reformations now, as well as there have been formerly. And I hope I have
made it plain, both from our Histories and Statute-Books, That Civil
Infallibility was not formerly an Article in our Politics, nor has it the
Universality on its side; nor will any Party abide by it, unless for Personal
Ends, or when it serves their own Party. The Papists did not believe it in
their days; the Church of England did not believe it when His Majesty was
amongst us; and the Fanatics never pretended to believe it. Thus you see my
thoughts; and, as different as they may be from the Williamites that have
deluded, or from the Jacobites that have afrighted you, I defy any of the One
to be readier to hazard themselves for their Country, or the Other to venture
farther for the Service of King James. All that I desire is, That the King may
have for his Motto what the sincere Historian says of the two best Emperors of
Rome. Tacitus his words are, DIVUS NERVA, ET DIVUS TRA^^^ (...) MISCUERUNT,
IMPERIUM ET LIBERTATEM. And may the remainder of King James the Second's days
give yet leave, after He has lived long here, to write upon his Tomb, Divus
JACOBUS Secundus, etc. Res olim insociabiles miscuit Imperium and Libertatem. I
would have the King consult his own Honor; but I think he does it best, when
he considers well and thoroughly of the Liberties of the People. I allow that
Maxim to be true, Principum actiones proecipue sunt ad famam componendoe. But
no English King will preserve his Memory grateful, in the Records of Time, or
his Name dreadful in Foreign Courts, who is not beloved by his People; and none
will be so, that does not carefully Fence, and inviolably preserve our Rights.
We have been a People always jealous of our Rights, Tenacissimi libertatis. The
Word Conquest is often met with in our common Histories, and misleads our
common Readers; but though our Nation has been often stormed, our Essential
Laws and Customs were never carried. The Romans governed us, in great part, by
our own Laws, and the wisest of their Lieutenants found we were more easily
governed by Gentleness and Justice, than by Force. The Danes made no alteration
in our Constitution; and the Saxon and Norman Invasions ended in Treaty; and
the Saxon Government was homogeneous to our Temperament; and when William
(called the Conqueror) would have introduced the Customs of Norway, the People
neither would, nor did receive them. If a Man reads Histories to understand
Government, he (...) Tale of them; and whoever looks into our Antiquities, will
find the footsteps of our Liberties are as ancient as of our Being. But to
return to what I was saying some time since, I would not injure my Country for
K. James, nor would I injure K. James for my Country. I think your Party
wicked, and I fear too many Jacobites are weak: They are weak by fantastic
Notions, and violent Aversions, and Personal, Party, and Church-Quarrels. But I
would rather lament, than expostulate too freely, and I desire no body to serve
King James, but on the Principles of making him the Father of his Country: I
once again assure you, I neither do, nor will upon any other; and were he
reinstated in his Throne, if he pursued partial Notions, and ungrateful
Measures, I would rather make a Vow of Voluntary Exile, than accept the best
Employment that a King of England has in his Power to give: I have many times
told Him so. And farther, I would always advise him to take into his Business
Popular Men, and to let them serve him by the Methods that made them Popular:
But at the same time, I say, I would advise him to forget as well as forgive
all our Miscarriages. I would have a perfect Act of Oblivion from Him; and I
would have the People pass on their part so entire an Act of Oblivion, that
they should not gall any one Man for what they did amiss in his Reign, or under
this Usurpation, on condition they testify their Repentance by their Amendment
of Life. Though Henry 4. of France (so justly called the Great) was in his
absence arraigned and condemned to (...) Harquebusses; and this by the Votes
and Order of the Parliament of Toulouse; yet, notwithstanding he recovered his
Kingdom by force of Arms, that Great and Excellent King did not in the least
revenge their Traiterous and Rebellious Usage; by which Generous as well as
Politic Carriage, he added to the Conquest of his Country the Conquest of the
Hearts of all his People, reconciling at once all the Animosities and Factions
which had been the Product of near Forty Years Civil Wars. Let a new Face of
things arise likewise out of our State-Chaos. May the King govern with that
Equal Hand, that Merit may be rewarded, and nothing but Vice in disgrace; that
those may be thought to serve him best, that most serve the General Good; and
let it be a Crime, as well as ill Manners, to revive any of our old
Distinctions; let there be no distinction upon the account of Ecclesiastical or
Civil Faith; and let Obedience and Allegiance to the Civil Power be the only
Test for Preferment. You know, my Friend! I am no Papist, though I am for a Civil
Comprehension: And as falsely as your Irish Dr. King has traduced His Majesty
for what he did in Ireland, I am told one thing for which his Wisdom and
Goodness can never be enough commended; and that is, that he required no Oath
from any one Man that served him, but trusted to their Honor and their
Interest, rather than the Obligation of Oaths, being sure an honest Man would
do his Duty without them; and being also convinced by a late and sad
Experience, that they never bind a Knave. And thus he truly made himself the
King of all Persuasions.

The Discipline of the Lacedemoniuns was positive, That every Man should keep
his Rank or Die; yet they never put an Oath to their Soldiers: Shame and
Honor had more Power over those brave Minds, made them even scorn Death (which
is the greatest Trial) had a more infallible effect upon them, than we can
pretend all Oaths have upon us.

Notwithstanding this short Remark about Oaths, I am neither Quaker nor
Sectaria; therefore a hint is enough from me upon that Subject: But from the
several Heads of Discourse I have handled, methinks I find my self under a
necessity of clearing, at least, briefly Three things, and I will do it as
briefly as I can.

The First is, That those that are both Zealous and Jealous for Liberty and
Property are more in number, than those that are for the Strains and Stretches
of Prerogative.

I find there is a vast and unlucky mistake in the Computations of some People,
and that by reason that they do not distinguish between the State and Religious
Whigg. I allow the Fanatic Whigg, or those that refuse to come to our
Communion, are not perhaps the twentieth Man in England; but there are very
great numbers of Men, who never went formerly, nor do now go, even by reason of
their Principle, to any other Church but the Church of England. There are
likewise many others, who are not at all Biggotted to any particular Form of
Church Worship, who yet mostly, if not altogether, go to the Church of England;
and yet both the one and the other of these are as much, or perhaps more nicely
Whiggs in Civils, than are the Fanatics, though not so generally called so: So
that there are Church of England and Latitudinarian, or (as the Scotch call
them) Erastian as well as Fanatic Whiggs. Now let us consider what Interest
all these Three sort of Whiggs have in our Affairs; what influence they have
over them; and you will find by Matter of Fact, that these many years last
past, they all joining upon a Civil Bottom, have all along been too hard for
that which is the Church of England, as it is contra distinguished to the
Whigg. They were fatally so in King Charles the First's Time. But to bring
things within all our Memories and Observation, the three last Parliaments in
King Charles the Second's Reign, is not an improper Season to calculate their
Interest and Influence: For then they chose before any illegal or unwarrantable
Tricks had been played by either side with Charters, and if the Nation was
inflamed by a Popish Plot, I am sure the Court leaned wholly to the High
Prerogative Church of England. Then you see that the Bill of Exclusion (though it
was an excessive and exotic Rant, rather than a natural Effect or Production
of Whiggism) was carried in the House of Commons, and that though almost all the
Members were Charch goers But I will show you yet by a later Instance, that
State Whiggism runs through this Nation. All those that are for this Government
act upon that Principle, and lay aside the Passive Obedience and Prerogative
Notions of the high Church of England men; notwithstanding that they keep up
the Episcopal Order, the Pomp, Ceremony, and Discipline of the Church of
England. And whoever will turn one a King for M^le-administration of his
Ministers, will never receive him without a Reformation in the Constitution:
They will be State-Whigs, though they do not call themselves so. It is for
Liberty and Property that these Men struggle, though they do not know how to name
their own Actions.

The second thing that seems necessary for me to clear, is, That it is
necessary to give a Liberty of Conscience; and that these Assertors of Liberty
and Property will be for Liberty of Conscience, and be able, upon the King's
giving good Securities for our Civil Rights, to give in exchange of them an
Impartial Toleration. I will not dispute the inconsistency of Persecution with
either the Christian or Moral Law; nor will I take pains to prove that where a
Nation is greatly divided into Sects, it is the Interest of that Nation to give
every body leave to worship God in their own manner: but I will show the
likelihood that the State-Whigs should and will exchange Religi^us Liberty for
Civil Security. And now I must again carry you back to the beginning of the
late Civil Wars, and then you will find, because the Church of England would
not give Liberty of Conscience, the State-Whigs set up Presbytery. The next
Consultation, I must make you acquainted with, are the Debates of the
abovementioned three last Parliaments of King Charles the Second, and you may
easily recollect they were for Liberty of Conscience to all Protestant
Dissenters; nay, they made some Votes that were thought extravagant in their
favor, some suspending dispensing Votes; for they resolved it as the Opinion
of that House, that it was contrary to the Interest of the Nation, to put the
Laws (which were then in being) in execution against them: But you will say
they did not Vote as much for the Papists. You must consider the Season.
Besides that, the Papists have been esteemed errant Courtiers ever since the
Reformation. The Pacliament then thought they had a Popish Plot on foot; they
thought that Plot was not a Plot for Liberty to worship in the Popish Way, but
to introduce Popery, by the Destruction of all our Civil and Religious
Liberties. You know at the beginning of my Letter I charged my Country with
National Intoxications: We can at some times believe Invisible Pilgrims, Black
Bills, St. Jones's Gridirons, and that three thousand Irish can Massacre all
England. And when that Popish Plot was prosecuted so violently, the generality
of Men looked upon the Papists as Banditti and Misanthropi, in relation to the
Protestants; they looked upon them as the Partisans or Janissaries of the Court,
Propagators of Civil as well as Religious Superstition and Idolatry. And if
these Men had a mind to ruin the Papists at that day, it was not because of
their Prayers and Beads, but because they thought them Enemies to our
Constitution; not only from their dependence upon the Roman See; but for a
mischief that was nigher at hand, their excessive flattery of the Court and
Crown; whereas the Dissenters being avowedly tender of Liberty and Property,
were not only favored by all those Parliaments, but influenced great numbers
of those who were not of their own Communion, at the respective Elections of
each of those Parliaments: So that the Principle of Liberty of Conscience was
perfectly prevalent, though they held a strict hand over the Papists, out of
the Principle of Self-preservation; and consequently, a trulychosen Parliament
will make the Papists Englishmen where they find them so. In farther proof of
this last Assertion, I must beg you to remember how King James's Declaration of
Indulgence was at first entertained. I know the Universal Joy with which it was
first received lasted but a little while; but I know that though the Whigs
misliked that it should be put out upon a Dispensing Power; yet believing it a
Preface to Comprehensive Measures and Latitudinarian Politics, they forgave
that blemish in its Birth; and every where so unanimously embraced it, that
those narrow Spirits of the Church of England who had a mind, were ashamed, if
not afraid to oppose it. Liberty of Conscience would have made K. James the
Second Memorable and Glorious in our Histories, had not Sunderland's Artifices,
such Speeches as Mr. Alsop's, and such Pampalets as Can there come any Good out
of Galilee? spoiled the Noblest Project any English Monarch ever set on foot,
which was, A separation of Religious from Civil Interests.

I confess we can make Popery a Ball-begger when we please, and that ought to
teach the Papists Moderation; bue the Liberty and Property-men can also call
off the Mob when they please: For you see at this time the Nation finds no
fault with the Emperor's and the Duke of Bavaria's Idolatry and Persecution; no
nor with the Spanish Inquisition, whilst they fancy (though wildly and falsely)
they are by their help supporting their own Civil Rights. They fall not upon
the Papists here, that they may not displease the Confederates abroad; so that
Popery is not so dreadful, as Property and Privileges are dear and charming.

And now since I have been proving that Interest governs the World, however Men
may mistake what is their own Interest, I think my self obliged in the third
place to show that it is the Interest of the King, and every sort of Men, that
he should be Restored upon Civil Securities; and that it is not the Interest of
the King, or any sort of Men, to endeavor that the Restoration should be put
upon any other Foot.

Whilst I show that it is the King's Interest, I shall answer the Objection of
those who say the Whigs will not think their Properties and Privileges
sufficiently secured, unless the King part with some of his Prerogative. I am
sure whilst he is dispossessed he has no Prerogative, or at least no exercise
of, and benefit by it; and the Chance of War is too doubtful to know whether he
shall have any, unless the People please. He is outed of his Estate, and can in
all probability only have it upon Composition; which if he will not make with
us, the Nation will try to the last to keep the Possession; and it has those
eleven points of the Law. Nor are all things Prerogatives that flattering
Lawyers have called so in Westminster Hall, and some well-meaning, and other
self-designing, Ciergy-men, have believed so in their Closets, or preached for
as such in their Pulpits. They can see farther than I, that expect to do any
thing without an Accommodation. I think it impossible he should be Restored, or
were he, that he should keep his Throne, without it. I think it impossible for
One Man to govern the People of England, unless they have a mind he should; and
they will never have such a mind, unless he sometimes gives way to their
Impetuosities. But farther, His Age, and the Minority of his Son, are the
highest Inducements imaginable for him to endeavor to leave a settled
Government, to quiet the Minds, as well as suppress the Insurrections of the
People. There is likewise another Reason, why as a Man of Conscience he must be
yielding; for be cannot but be willing that his Son should be educated in his
own Religion; and if he will let the Kingdom be secure of their own Religion,
and of their own Laws, notwithstanding that the Crown should be of one
Religion, and the People of another, I am satisfied that the People of England
will be little sollicitous which way our Kings think the best to Heaven. This
has Argument, as he is a Religious Man. But I must again enforce
Condescentions, as the Interest of the King under a Natural Consideration. Good
Securities will make the Nation own the Legitimacy of his Son more than all
other Proofs; and without out good Securities, there will be pretenses that his
Birth is disputable; (though I affirm it impossible for any thinking Man to
question in his own Mind the Prince of Wales's being born of the Queen's Body.)
Compliance with the People made Queen Elizabeth's Title unquestioned; so that
those that flatter the King with His Right, and seem to despise our Rights,
take the most infallible Course to destroy both the King and his Posterity.

I need not have said one Word of this matter to inform the King's Judgment;
for he is in that Temper in which his Subjects wish him, and that would
satisfy a Parliament House, were he to receive their Petitions and Addresses,
to stamp their Votes, and to end our Disputes. I do not speak this by guess,
but am convinced of it by many Discourses I have had the Honor personally to
have with him, since his Misfortunes; and the Letters I have had from several
of the best hands since I left his Court, confirm me he remains in the same
Opinion. But I thought it was necessary to say something of this sort, to set
before those Jacobites you complain of, the Interest of the King in the truest
light.

As for the Whiggs of all sorts, every Body knows that they will find their
Account in a Restoration upon Civil Securities, and that no other Restoration
will please them: So that I will not labor that matter at all; but hasten to
show that it is the Interest both of the Church of England and Catholics to
promote such a Restoration.

The Church of England is not secure that she shall be continued the National
Church, so long as there is unlimmited and unexplained Dispensing Power; and
she saw Quo Warranto's could produce Regulations, and so I might go through
other things. And the Ministers of a Catholic King may again mistake in the
Exercise of his Power, if the Boundaries of the Administration are not plainly
chalked out; and whilst the Church of England appear Enemies to Liberty and
Property, they will lose their Interest with the People; and the next
Revolution will conclude in Presbytery and a Commonwealth: For Popery wants
Numbers to establish its self; though some of the Members of that Communion may
have Vanity enough to hope to establish it; and if the Church of England do not
join in Civil Seourities; nay, if there should be a Restoration without them,
those Catholics (though it will be to their certain Ruin) may be able to do
enough toward it, to make the Church of England fall, and the Presbyterians
get all in the Scramble. And though the Presbyterians have an odd hankering after
a King; yet, after they have been bit once more, they will become tuneable to a
Democracy. Nothing can destroy the Church of England, but their Opposition to
the Liberties of their Country, or to Liberty of Conscience, or their closing
with Comprehension.

It is a little light, but however I will set down what I have often heard said
concerning it by Men of very large Minds. They have said, That if the Members
of the Church of England were as good-natured as the Constitution, it is the
best-bred, civilest National Church in Christendom. I set it down as a light
expression to be used concerning Church Affairs, and yet there may be
Instruction in it: For I believe its Civility, if it does not make too
extravagant Compliments of our Liberties, will for ever make it stand; but if
our Liberties are not well guarded, that may be pulled down, and Presbytery
will be set up.

As for the Roman Catholics, I think it is in the highest degree improbable
that the King should ever be able to come home by Conquest, and yet more
improbable he should be able to stay here upon that Title, (if indeed it is One
in a Natural King:) and if the Catholics would in all places declare for Civil
Securities, I think this is the properest Opportunity for their Incorporation
Our having been in Confederacy with Princes of that Persuasion, has made us
capable of allowing fair Quarter to those Catholics that are here. We can
follow our Interest, notwithstanding our old Grudges, and if the Catholics
will come to a Temper, we are enough in one to embody them: Whereas, should not
the Restoration be in the Life of the King, the Prince of Wales would be
fetched home upon a mere Church of England Plot, and the Proofs of his Birth
will be Authentic, and without dispute, during his Nonage, and till he has
disobliged us; and the Church of England men will, in point of Religion, carry
all things before them, as far as is in Opposition to Popery; he will be bred
up a Protestant, and must, in Proof of his being so, consent to any farther
Laws that the Church of England will think necessary to secure their Church
against Popery: So far will it then be from repealing the Test, or even the
Penal Laws, in relation to Catholics. And the Church of England, whilst they
may have their Church secured, will, during the Minority of the Prince, (before
Flattery will advance to Preferment) agree with the Liberty and Property men
for any good and wholesome Laws; and the Protectors of young Princes must give
way to the Importunities of the People. Now the Catholics will not have an
Opportunity to bribe us by Civil Securities; the Church of England will
remember all those Male administrations of his Ministers, for which they turned
out King James; and will say it was the Papists hindered us from being redressed
against them. And the Whigs will throw it in their Dish, that they offered them
Friendship upon Legal Establishments, and that they did not cry out upon the
Declaration for Indulgence, though founded upon a Dispensing Power, till the
Roman Catholics flew, or made at least an appearance to fly, at several of our
most invaluable Rights and Privileges. The Whigs will say the Papists doted
upon French Power, rather than National Restoration; nay, that they slighted
the last, and have every where declared against the King's coming home upon
Terms, Concessions, Reformations, and amendment of our Constitution; though
unless they had intended to exercise a Danish Lordliness over us, their own
Welfare must have been concluded in every thing that made England Happy. It
matters not how unjust these Accusations will be: it is a true, though a course
Proverb, It is easy to find a stick, when one has a mind to beat a Dog. Is it
the first time that we have against you believed Lies? I neither am, nor I hope
to God ever shall be a Roman Catholic; but I have such Bowels toward all
Mankind, that I seriously protest I have such melancholy Bodings far the
Romans Catholic Party, I foresee such a Period of Calamity (according to Human
reckoning) falling upon them, if the King is not restored by Great Compliances
with his People, and in his own Person, that it has given me many a painful
Though: and I must confess I am infinitely concerned for many excellent Persons
of that Communion, who deserve better than to be made a Sacrifice to our Rage
and Madness, who deserve all the Benefits of Fellow Subjects. The Whigs and
Church of England-men will come to a Compromise at that day; but in all Human
appearance it will be a dreadful one to the Catholics. Now they have an
Opportunity to be incorporated with the Protestants; but if they don't make use
of it, they may be pitied, but no Man will* in all probability, be able to help
them. How Universal and Catholic soever their Religion may be in other places,
I am sure they are Fanatics in England under a Civil Consideration; and
therefore that they have all the reason in the World to be State-Whigs, and as
such only will ever be impartially used by us.

I think nothing that I have said has depretiated the Doctrine of
Passive-Obedience. I do not pretend to determine who is in the Right in that
Controversy, much less to handle it as a Religious One: But give me leave to
tell an admirable Story concerning Dr. Colvil, a great Man in the Kingdom of
Scotland, but one that was thought not to understand clearly the Principle of
Non-Resistance. The late Earl of Middleton having him once at Dinner, asked
him, Whether there could be no Case in which Defensive Arms were Lawful? The
Doctor replied, It was fit for the People to believe them unlawful, and for
Kings to believe them lawful. It was an admitable Repartee upon a sudden
Question: But perhaps, had he thought of it, he would have said likewise, That
it is fit for the Ministers of Kings to believe them lawful too; and I presume
the present Earl of Middleton set down that additional Instruction to the
Apothegm. For though, to the eternal shame of the Judges who now sit upon the
King's Bench, they violated our Laws in the continuance of his Imprisonment it
must be allowed, for his everlasting Honor, that that Noble Lord was as
cautious of making the Law the Limits of his Ministry, as if it were lawful to
rise up in Arms whenever the Laws were broken.

But I must Answer your Postscript, wherein you tell me, that you neither know
how the King can be restored now the Prince of Orange is in possession; nor
what will become of the Prince of Orange if we should restore the King; nor
what Security we could have from any Conditions the King could make with us. I
Answer, that if the Prince of Orange is not kept in possession by English men,
he may soon be brought to Reason; and I do assure you, that there are many
Jacobites that desire rather to see the Prince of Orange return to his Station
of Stadtholder again in Holland, than wish him any personal Injury: And as for
the Security you require for any promised Conditions, you must forgive me if I
think you a little insincere, if not trifling, when you place so much Weight
upon the Pope's giving King James an Absolution for any Promises he should
make. You might have said this artfully to the Mobb; but you cannot suppose
that I would believe you were in earnest, though you make such a clutter with
it. I allow, as you say, that our Histories tell us of some Kings that were
absolved by Popes; but you know that Bulls, Absolutions, and the Pope's
Excommunications were like to go farther with the Nation in Popish Times, than
they are like to do now: And yet by your very instance of King Henry the Third,
you might be convinced, that the People of England never would, even then, let
a King be at rest, till he had performed his Promises. I will not write a long
Confutation of a thing that I know cannot stick with you, or any wise
considering Man. And besides, I do not go about to persuade you to take up with
a Constitution, that will depend either upon a King's Temper or Religion,
Honor or Veracity. Make a Government that is easy to all, and it will be the
Interest of all to preserve it: But if you would do so, you must bring the
Right Line into it; you must nicely preserve the Church of England, as the
National Church; and yet you must remember that the Kngdom of Heaven is not of
this World: You must take care in your Civil Compacts, that Priestcraft does
not spoil all at last: You must take care even of a Protestant, in Ordine ad
Spiritualia; and let the Tares and the Wheat grow up together. But farther,
although you have such wild accounts concerning the Jacobites; there are
amongst those that serve King James, Men that know what you are a doing; that
know you are looking far and near for a Deliverance; that know how impotent you
think the Prince of Orange is to Rule; how that you depise him, as much as the
Nation misliked Richard Cremwel before the Restoration; that know your
extravagant Projects, and more temperate Thoughts, and yet have accounred for
all things; and will, as things ripen, find ways to give you satisfaction, if
any thing will. We know that Maud the Empress, even when King Stephen was a
Prisoner; and though her Title was indisputable, and though the Nation was all
Catholics, lost the Crown, because she was refractory and haughty, and denied
to the Londoners, Edward the Confessor's Laws. And I assure you there will be
Men that will lay before the King the Necessity and Wisdom of giving
Satisfaction to all your Reasonable Demands. If you do not ask too much
Counter-security, things unfit for an English King to grant, there are
Jacobites that will not only deliver, but second your Petitions. A Good and
Settled Monarchy you may have; and a Commonwealth is scarce practicable, will
be hazardous at present, and cannot be lasting.

I know there are some amongst the Jacobites, who are otherwise Men of great
Honor and Worth; and yet suspect every thing, such as you promote is to make
the King a Doge of Venice: But there are others who have compared, and taken in
pieces, and viewed in parts, all the Models of Government; who, if you would
rectify, and not change, either the Name or Nature of ours, will receive very
kindly any thing you offer, will instruct you how to make it palatable to the
King, and show him how consistent it is both with his Honor and his Interest.
Let the manner be decent, and your Propositions allow King James to have the
Balance that an English King should have, and must necessarily have in our
Constitution. And I assure you many of the Jacobites know no other but such an
English King to be our Supreme Head and Governor.

But, after all, if King James is called home by the Nation, we need no other
Security than a well-chosen Parliament. The present Parliament may call him
home when they please, without any other Force, but their own denial of Money.
And the King's being of another Religion, will in some measure check the
effects of a Revolutionary Joy, and prevent our Excesses. And if sober and
honest Men would in all Corporations (instead of all other Projects) instruct
all the Populace, That all those that drink upon their Members Cost, hazard
being Slaves for that Draught; and that it is time seriously to take Care of
Themselves and their Posterity, by choosing Men of Virtue, rather than the
Favorites or the Factions of any Opinion, whether they are Jure Divino or
Original Contract men; Men that are as well Loyal to their Country as their
King, and to their King as their Country; Men that have good Nature, Estates,
Honesty, Sense, and moderate Minds: Such a Parliament would be an healing
Parliament; might not only end, but take away all occasions for Strife and
Changes. And Establishment, Virtue and Liberty, are a Nobler Happiness than
excessive Riches, pompous Buildings, and all the other Glories that a People
can possess. How is the Excellency of the Spartan Institution every where and
every day applauded, though all their Pleasures seem to be nothing else but
Hardships and Self-denial? But we may add Plenty to our Peace, increase our
Trade and our Strength, and by our Naval Force, and a perfect Union amongst our
selves, be again considered as the Arbiters of Europe.

But I am unawares launching into a spacious Subject. It is time to conclude. I
wish all Englishmen would consider how to do it; and I wish there could
suddenly, before we are undone, a method be found out to reconcile the King and
his Nephew, and all his Children, both Natural and National; a method found out
to adjust all our Interests, and bring us all to our respective Duties. I
beseech God so to order things, that all Sects and sorts of Englishmen may
think it a National Good to restore our King. I have read our Annals; I wish
every body had. Could I here delineate the Scars and Woulds, the Bloodsheds and
Distresses, that the Violation of the Hereditary Title (which will hover over
all Usurpations, and all Forms of a Commonwealth) have (...) could I paint out
the Executions, and Extinctions of Noble Families, that the Wars between the
Two Houses have occasioned, they would represent but an horrid Prospect, a
doleful Scene.

Oh, Blessed God! Visit not this Land for its Iniquities with Destruction; but
in Judgment remember Mercy. Let Righteousness and Mercy Restore Him to it, and
on them establish the Throne of thy Servant JAMES; Teach Him to go in and out
before this great People, which (by our Laws and Oaths, and His Inheritance)
thou have committed to His Charge: Let His Children Honor, His Subjects Obey,
and His Nephew be Just to Him, and GOD be Glorified, be still Glorified, in His
and Our wonderful Deliverance; that Wickedness may no longer prosper, but Peace
return to us, and our Childrens Children, to all Generations. Amen, Amen. And
God put it into the Hearts of all His Subjects to say likewise Amen to this
National and Honest Prayer.

I find that my Letter has grown under my hands; but if it tires you, you must
thank your self that you started so much Game; a great deal has risen before me
in writing that I have not followed, though I hope I have writ enough to let you
know, that whatever Spirit you find some Jacobites in, yet there are others
that cannot disgust a reasonable Man; and also that I am the same Englishman
you ever knew me, as well as,

SIR, Your affectionate Friend, and faithful Servant.

POSTSCRIPT
THE Letter I sent you last August, being shown to some that are yours as well
as my old Friends, and more so to England than to either of us, it was, at
their importunity, sent to the Press, soon enough to have been published long
before the Parliament met; but when part of it was Printed, the rest was
stopped by some Accidents that are not so proper to mention, and therefore some
sew Expressions of it may not be altogether so seasonable as they were when I
wrote it to you (since the Money is now given;) however I hope in the main it
may be of some use. And now we have begun this Scribbling Conflict, I desire
that in your next you will let me know when you can reasonably suppose this
War, and consequently Taxes, will end? And whether, if the Conf^deracy should
break before you have thought fit to restore your Rightful and Lawful King, or
the French are more humbled (as you call it) than they are hitherto, we should
not indeed run a greater risk of our Liberties, for the present, (after such a
continued Provocation of the King) than either you, or I, or any good English
man could wish to see? Tell me likewise, whether those that are not of our Army
or Fleet, cannot, if they have a Mind to restore the King upon a National Foot,
influence those Natives that are in both, to restore King James, as the Old
Army did his Brother. You have read History, and know that an Army of Natives
follows the inclinations of the Inhabitants; you know the real Power your Party
has in the Nation; and that it is not the Tories, who have broke in upon their
own Consciences, but you, who have forsaken your Understandings, that keep the
Prince of Orange (as much as you every day ridicule him) from being sent for
good and all to Holland; and though you do not know how to make him either
value your Persons, or see his own Interest; yet you can soon find ways
(notwithstanding your own Latitude) to make an English Army reflect upon their
Oaths and Obligations to King James, and their Usage under this Man; nay, you
cannot but know they begin themselves to have these Reflections, and therefore
with very little pains you may prepare them Nationally to Restore the King;
which if they do (with all due regard to him be it spoken) he is, as it were,
in our Power, and he must grant those Concessions we really want; and where a
King, whose Title is indispured, frankly hears Advice from a duly-elected
Parliament, the genuine and united Sense of the Nation may be gathered up, and
a Natural Cure given to all our Troubles, and only from thence can come an
impartial Settlement. Think of these things seriously, and let not the
Discourses of such Jacobites, as you complain of, (who have as little Interest
with the Kin^, as you say they have with England) either give you disturbance,
or make you any long^r willing to undergo worse things under this Usurpation,
than you can have any just reason to fear, if the King returns; especia^ly, if
you your selves Restore him. Besides, I must tell you, I have good reason to
believe, the King of France himself (with whom you fright the Mob) is not
politically an Enemy to a limited Monarchy in England; and that he will agree
to a reasonable Peace in Europe, if the Restoration of King James is made one
of the Conditions of it; and that he will not be brought to any Peace unless we
Restore him, how much soever the Prince of Orange has flattered you, that
(instead of the Vineyards and Spoils of Paris, that he seemed to promise) he
will bring him to an honorable Peace. I will only (...) That whereas some of
your Party do now, as you did formerly, raise malicious and unjust Calumnies
upon the Queen; I am fully satisfied that she is as desirous the King should
comply with his People, as the Noblest and nicest Patriots could be, were King
James upon the Throne: She has a mind that the Struggles between the Crown and
the People should be adjusted, that so the Succession of her Son may be
secured. Think of all this seriously, write me your mind freely, and act as
becomes a true Lover of England. Be not over fond of your own Creation, as a
Williamite. Meddle not with those who world yet farther change the Name and
Nature of our Government, and then (fiercely as you are so now) be
Anti-Jacobite as long as you can. Once again, Adieu.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
DEdication, line 12. for ever, r. even. Page 6. col. 1. l. 40. r.
Encroachments. Page 9. col. 2. l. 9. after this, add part. Page 11. col. 2. l.
6. after prove, add to. l. 33. after time, add in.


