THE TREE of FAITH: OR, The Tree of Life, Springing up in the Paradise of GOD;
From which All the Wonders of the New Creation, in the Virgin Church of the
Firstborn of Wisdom must proceed.

By J. Lead.

Matthew. 13.32. It is the Least of all Seeds: but when it is grown, it is the
Greatest of Herbs, and becomes a TREE. LONDON: Printed and Sold by J.
Bradford, in Jewen-Street, near Crowder's-Well, 1696.

TO THE READER.
HAving given an Account of the Confusion of the Babylonish Forms, being
rejected by the Head Shepherd; from whom an Angel is gone forth that has
sounded the Trumpet, to proclaim, That all Formal Worships set up by Man, and
constituted by Rational Inventions, as a Shadow must pass away: For nothing in
this Day shall stand but the Power and Spirit of the Lamb; that will cast up
his Church into no other Mold, but that in which he himself in his
Resurrection-State did Appear So that the Gathering together of his Flocks from
all Parts, shall be for the making up this Resurrection Church, as New born
into the Faith. For which Reason I have here superadded a Manifestation, which
some Years since was given me; which I judge may now be of as General Use to
make Public, as it was first for my own Particular Information and
Instruction: whence it was never designed to see the Light. But seeing that
this Church that has been described by the Spirit of Christ, is to consist of
the Branches of Faith, growing up from the Root and Stock of Abraham; it was
found very Expedient that this should follow the foregoing Treatise: Because
the New Creation which is to be brought forth, must have their Consistency of
Life, by the Faith of the Son of God; that as he was in this World, so may also
his Bride and Spouse be, acting in the Holy Ghostly Property, to do the Wonders
which the Last Age of the World is to produce. For it is expected that mighty
Deeds and Works shall be wrought by this New Risen Virgin Church, such as have,
and such as never have been: For the Patriarchs, Prophets, and most highly
Spirited in the Faith and Love, Power and Purity, shall again descend, to
assume Persons that are of this Resurrection Life, so to do all the Worthy
Exploits, according to the Lot in which each Ancient Saint did stand. All which
shall be renewed again, for the state of the Prophesies relating to Christ's
thousand Years Reign: which will overspread the Earth with the Kingly,
Prophetical, and Priestly Train.

I had some thoughts of Obliterating the beginning of this little Treatise,
being only a Private Recollection of my Spiritual Travels, which I have used to
make from Year to Year; but I quickly checked my self herein, for that it was
moved upon me, that it might be Useful and Beneficial to some Souls, and for a
Pattern to excite them to the Recollection; Wherefore I resolved to let it go,
without any Alteration., according to its full and Genuine Sense.

J. L.

THE Tree of Faith, etc.
. 1. BEing come to the Conclusion of this Year 1686. recollecting and making
Observation from one New-Year to another of what has passed both in reference
to the Internal Seize, Growths and Degrees arrived to in Spirituals, and
what has happened by special Providence concerning the outward Bodily Man,
both which I have for some Years kept a Memorandum of, for my own private
satisfaction, taking special notice how the Work of God has gone on in order
to the perfecting of what my Soul has been these many Years in great travail
for, but in special for what has been in sight and view through the Spirit of
Prophecy, declared unto me since 1670. in the which Year, and so forward on to
this time, entering upon this New Year, I have found the working Wheel from the
strong Hand of the Most High, and have driven hard on for the bringing back of
my Soul into Eternal and pure Nature's Originalty again: the which to be plain,
is no less then to be Born again into another World, where this visible Birth
in Sin, with its world, is as forgotten, and shut out: no otherwise remembered,
but to give occasion of the greatest Wonder, and admiration of that great and
infinite goodness that has unfettered, and set the Soul free, to be born into
a divine and spiritual Body, so to dwell and inhabit in the high and heavenly
World, where my Correspondency has been maintained much since the Year 70.
gaining Year by Year some increase, and higher degree of Wisdom and
Understanding in the secret Mysteries of Eternity, as to what does lie hidden
there: which through our abstraction of Mind, and watchful Attendance, in new
Varieties from that World do present themselves.

. 2. Now as to this last past Year, many have been my Internal provings, and
secret Combats that have followed me hard, to shake my Faith as to the great
and wonderful Revolutions relating to the accomplishment of a full and perfect
Redeemed State among Mortals, here to be seen and known, in order to which I
have been followed with renewed Predictions and Promises for the keeping up and
open the Springs of Faith, which otherwise would have been stopped; therefore I
must proclaim the goodness of God, who has kept the stock of Faith going on in
me, for the hopeful consummating of what is yet behind, which are great and
weighty things, worth waiting upon; which if succesfully I may attain, will
quit all suffering loss of what ever can be called Earthly and Terrene in
sensible things, which are of this World, only among Mortals seen, from all
which I have been much called from: as finding every Year has renewed upon me
great abatements, and weariness of Life and Love to all perishable things. A
good reason there is why; because the Heavens do before me open stand, by which
my Mind and Spirit is so well entertained, by the Objects there seen with all
substantial Varieties, that I need not care any more to look out for these.

. 3. When at any time drawn and plucked away I am by strong motives from this
World, then great Woe, Pain and Trouble do me possess; for so it is when at any
time I am out of the Heavenly Places, where now only my Life does lie, within
that secret Cabinet of Eternity, preferring that as my chief and only
Excellency. So I resolve to go forward by the Power of the Most High this
ensuing Year, for what of this kind may multiply and prosper in my Hand
mightily. For the which all care and strict Watch I see must be, that so I may
not overslip my Day, acting accordingly as Power does move and rise, the which
is to be attended upon Day by Day, as God shall clear up the way, otherwise all
Attempts are but in vain, which set upon may be, as I have proved by what has
been undertaken contrary to this all high and approving Eye. Therefore Wisdom
does me teach in a passive brokenness of Will to stand, till my God shall come
forth with the Express Word of Command; that so the Heavenly Plantation may go
on, and nothing it withstand: for lets and interposings have got in: as I have
from Year to Year seen, and will be still, I do find, until the Spirit of Faith
do get the upper-hand, which in God the driver on is to be, that so the long
set back Work in Pentecost Day, may after so many Years delay come forward once
again. For the which I have been a private and earnest waiter and diligent
seeker, where ever I might find Spirits that hereunto were inclined, to wait in
a pure Temple-mind unitedly for the great Dowry of the Holy Power again to
rise: but to this Day a scattering and dividing among the Holy People has
been; who hitherto are scared and affrighted away from each other, upon poor,
low and worldly Circumstances; so as no Body of Saints can yet get together.
The which has been very grievous unto me, carrying a secret Sorrow and
Mourning in my Soul here for: I having according to the power given me, made
offers here and there; but oh how little has this Call been understood? No not
even by those who might become of the high and holy waiting Disciplehood; so as
that upon this account, in long-suffering I have been looking this way, and
that way, for the most holy Wind to blow some one or other in for a beginning,
into this great and Spiritual Gathering.

. 4. I have often seen my own Angel Spirit fluttering to and fro, from Plant to
Plant, and so on to each Lebanon-Tree, to find where the Eagle-Body might make
her Nest, her Young there (...) Hatch and Brood in safety from the ravenous
Birds of Prey: but no sooner was I here alighted, after many a long Flight, but
the flying Serpent has with great sury come forth, to prevent, and demolish
what was prepared for this intent, and so has often permitted been hitherto to
keep off a selected gathering, as a Heaven-Born Society, which by coming
together, may make up the holy Priestly Body, whom God may give witness unto,
by pitching with them his Tabernacle-Presence, in great Power and Glory. O for
this, how has my Soul and Spirit been carried forth to seek and wait upon it?
and still must it pursue, till my God shall it fulfill, as decreed it is in his
Will.

. 5. Now as to what has passed this present Year relating to the outward
Being, with all Circumstances thereunto relating, it has been very
considerable and worth taking notice of. Wherein my God has appeared greatly
for my support, answering all Bodily Necessities, which has been brought in by
a signal Hand of renewed Providence, as occasion has required. Although great
plunges and difficulties, with Temptations thereupon attending, for my proving,
did meet upon me, for the trial of my Faith. Which the Power of the Most High
did still maintain and uphold invisibly, and thereby brought me forth out of
all most victoriously. My Tribulations and Distresses were known to God only:
For I saw it in vain to complain to any Creaturely Being: but still in all I
did apply my self to that Name Great JEHOVAH: whom I found a Refuge at all
times very nigh, procuring deliverance oft-times unexpectedly. For the which
great goodness from my God thus by me proved, I have so much to say and make
mention of by way of thankfulness and praise, that the number of Times and Days
are far too little, to rehearse and proclaim the Bounteousness of this great
Love, that has thus minded me in a desolate Widowhood state. But what I may be
short of in Time, let Eternity while in Time, and out, and beyond all time, for
ever celebrate one Everlasting Sabbath of Laud, with pure and powerful Praises
to thee oh, Holy, Holy, Holy, Infinite Almighty! whom my Soul does so greatly
adore, that Silence must speak much more, with a Life that must excel both.

. 6. Now waiting still upon thee, O God, for what may further produce this
Approaching Year, in order to the accomplishment of what has been the main
drift, and whole Scope of my Life's attendency, since the unsealing of the
Heavenly Mystery. By which the obligation has pressed in so deep upon me, that
has made me to relinquish all impeding Multiplicities which possiby I could
wind my self off from, that so I might follow on in pure Heart
Spiritual-mindedness, that so I might be a partaker and a possessor of what is
to follow, as has been accordingly made known through the Spirit of Revelation
unto me, which have raised all the powers and forces of my Soul for the giving
up it self to this high and heavenly Calling, which is the Holy Profession of
Faith, which now my Life that I am henceforth to live must wholly consist of;
for so my Lord has averred and established his Word renewedly unto me.

. 7. The Spirit does hard upon me for this ply, declaring unto me, that upon
Faith's bottom I must stand and go forward on all steadily: the Work is great
which I do stand chargable withal, for the which, oh God, my own strength is
but small, therefore to thy Omnipotency I do call, for that must be my all in
all, to make me a Practitioner in this high and Heavenly Calling. The Matter
which I have to work upon, is only from that Word of Faith, which did create
all Worlds: the which does greatly support and satisfy, and support me as a
stock of strength and power, that will carry on to Victory, keeping my Eye
always staid hereupon; as the Priestly Portion which is set out for me, who no
Propriety have among the Tribes, whose Inheritances are of another kind: and
therefore the Lord will still my Portion be in full, for all things that shall
needful be.

The Vision of the Tree.
. 8. Now in order to this, there was shown to me a Tree that should all
suddenly spring up in me, which spread forth its Branches for increase and
fruitfulness: and that no dependency would have upon any other Tree but it
self. Which was entitled to me to be Faith's Tree, on which, without fear, the
Eagle-Bird may build her Nest, and not be disturbed, while she is hatching her
most holy Priestly Brood, who from the Fruits of this Tree are to be fed, and
nourished, till unto such strength arrived, as to take their flight
transcendently, up unto their own Priestly Thrones, near to CHRIST their
Priestly Head, there to meet that Company, which of their own Royal sort and
kind, in sacred and pure White Robes all clothed are. So that here a mutual
fellowship betwixt the lower and higher Worlds, all agreeably will be, which is
the great Wonder that in the Heavens has lately been opened to me, not for
Speculation only, but for Provocation, to set upon this Work, with such as
shall hereunto added unto me be. For the which a pure bright attractive Eye is
gone forth, to fetch in such as are numbered to stand with me, while the
Eagle-Spirit is hatching her Young upon Faith's Tree.

. 9. Which Tree, I find, can grow upon no other Soil, but a Ground all purely
refined with oily Springs and Dews from Heaven, which must its watering be.
Then will it spread and flourish all richly, having fruitfulness in it self,
without any dependency. Oh! this is the Tree that will us bless, with Wisdom,
Strength and Righteousness: for the which I find it in my Heart most earnestly
to seek and pray, that it may be most choicely kept, and circled round about,
with the pure Love Fire, blown up by the Holy Ghost. Which may its shelter be
from all the invading Spirits, that so diligently do watch to break in, to crop
and suck away its strength. For this, O my God, an holy awful fear is upon me,
because I do well know what damage and spoil it has occured, keeping it of low
and little stature, to prevent what might be the World's Conquest, and great
working Wonder. Therefore now, my God, what is to be done for its preservation?
Make me privy in the Secrecy of acting so wise a part, as few, or none have in
this later Age found out, and why is it so, but because no skilful Artist in
this Mystery of Faith, has been made to understand the way, for the preserving
and cherishing this choice Golden Grain, from whence this Tree of Faith might
to its full growth attain.

. 10. For the which such Rules prescribed are, and revealed unto me by the only
wise Counselor, my Friend: which if I can observe and obey, I may then win the
Day^ God's great working Powers thereby for to display, much more then have
been in former Days. But the way is such an aversion to what in the whole
Universe of Mankind is practiced, that it will be a difficult point to enter
hereupon, so as to hold on; for here is required a crossing of the Tide and
st^m of Nature in all its motions which do put forth, and generate so aptly.
Against which resist in the Faith I must all steadfastly till Conquest be
wrought out by the growth of this all-powerful Tree.

. 11. This has been shown me to branch forth it self in twelve rising Degrees,
for the Manifestation of the Ancient Apostolical Faith: which in this Age is to
be recovered anew, for the cutting short that Work which in thousands of Years
many Holy Souls have been puzling and striving about, while sticking in the
wea^ and low degrees of Faith. From the consideration of which Relapse a mighty
stirring up I feel, so to press on, as to reach to all of these twelve degrees,
which from that small Mustard-Grain Seed of Faith sown by the Spirit in me, may
to such a great and full increase spread out it self, as may transcend the
growth of all other Trees that in the Forest of this World do stand bound down
with Iron Yokes, and Bands; now the twelve Degrees of this Tree in their
distinct Properties were thus expressed unto me.

. 12. 1. The first degree of this Faith, is to believe the apostasy and ruinous
heap and matter of which the Body of Sin is contracted into.

2. A second degree, is to believe that this Degeneracy has parted the Soul
from God, and made it a Stranger to all Knowledge, and Possession of those high
and precious and choice things, which might have been the propriety of the Soul
in God, had it not gone out from him.

3. The third degree is to believe there is left a Spark or Seed of Eternity in
all Mankind, which may incline and turn them in, so to feel after God, as to
lament bitterly their own Apostasy.

4. A fourth degree is to believe the Eternal Word was incarnated in Flesh for
a Universal Redemption, and Restoration out of this lapsed state, through
Faith in him, for the begetting a Likeness and Conformity through an Essential
Birth, brought forth in Spirit, all evidently.

5. A fifth degree is to believe that there is an All Sufficiency in CHRIST
thus conceived, and brought forth in Spirit internally, within the Soul's
essential part as may have power to purge, refine, save, and cleanse the Soul
from all its Sins.

6. The sixth degree is to believe and expect the Holy Ghost to come to join,
and cooperate with this new begetting Birth, for the bringing it up, and
securing it from all Assaults, Pe^^^^, and Temptations; main^^ing an holy
Clarification, che^^^^ing and strengthening it, till it be strong to go forth
for Manifestration, to show it self to the World as thus regenerated.

7. A seventh degree, is to believe and witness that Christ his risen Life in
the Soul, does become a death to the Body of Sin totally, which we may call a
Love Kiss, whereby Christ does sweetly, and seceretly draw, and part the Soul
from all the dregs and relics that appertain to a Lapsed Nature, which is
known by a power working supernaturally.

8. An eighth degree is to believe, that when all this is finished, Christ will
appear in the Soul without Sin, and so present it unto the Father, as a new
created Wonder, all completed to be his Spouse and Bride, rejoicing that the
Marriage of the Lamb is come, all things therefore being made ready.

9. A ninth degree, is to believe, that Christ the Lord will not fail to
perform the sacred Nuptial and Marriage-Union, both for Time and Eternity, with
the Spirit of the Bride thus made ready, and will own and confess her so to be
his choice, before his Father and the whole Assembly of Angels and Elders,
Principalities and Powers in Heavenly Places: and also here upon the Earth
shall so owned be for her Excellency, as shall be an all-amazing Glory.

10. A tenth degree, is to believe, that hereupon will follow all mutual Joys
and Pleasures, in Love Festival Banqueting which she is so taken up and
ravished in, as all former Mournings and Sorrows are forgotten, coming no more
into Mind: so ineffable are the Bride's So lacements with the Lord her
Bridegroom.

11. The eleventh is to believe that Christ will settle upon this espoused
Bride all that is his: that she shall have a mutual Interest with him, in what
the Father has put into his Hand, which is all Power, and Wisdom to manage
that power; which reaches to a dominion in, and over all created Beings, and
Things, whatever: herein for certainty she will be put into a Joint-possession,
with the Lord her Bridegroom, as her Propriety.

12. Twelfthly and Lastly, as the ^^m of all, is to believe undoubtly, that
after this Representive Bride of the Lamb, so declared in thi^ World to be by
her Ornamental Gifts, and fruitful Powers, that will generously go forth for
the multiplying and making up of the pure spotless Virgin Church here on Earth,
will the Lord from Heaven descend in great and high state to fetch his Bride
the Church, up to his Fathers House, or Royal City, for the consummating and
celebrating such a Tryumphant Glory, in Unity with the Body of Saints, that are
in Heavenly Places before hand, even such a Glory through the Spirit, until we
come there into the very same Glory, as Christ had with the Father before the
Worlds were, which is too great to be known here.

. 13. Thus having had all the Degrees and Branches of Faith's Tree opened, and
set before me, for Trial, Examination, and Information: not only in particular
for my self, but for such as do agree to ascend with me, and go forward on to
all these Degrees; for the which God has chosen some one or other, that are
made all willing to give up hereunto, by waiting upon it until the great
Operator shall bring forth this Tree in its full stature; that the
Eagle-Spirits may find all variety of Food for themselves, and therewith
greatly increase in all kind of Substance, without being beholding to the
World; for it has been testified unto me, and that from a sure Hand, that the
Eagle and her Brood shall in all Worlds have command, for the which I received
an express charge to wait all believingly with such as hereunto are with me to
agree, for the full accomplishment of those Gifts and miraculous working
Powers, which so long have been silenced and laid asleep: and by whom are these
to be awakned, but by the close setters, and constant feeders upon Faith's Tree
who are not to hitch off and on; for if so, the Work of Faith will never go on.

. 14. The Spirit of my God has opened this Sense deep upon me for the
bewailing of Faith's apostasy, and how that the Jerusalem waiters in this
Spirit have been along time scattered, and carried captive into Babylon, and
the most holy Vessels and Things profaned, (so considered in a Spiritual
Sense) and the anointed Holy Place, where the great High Priest's entrance
should be, is greatly demolished, and made common for unclean and worldly
Spirits to pass in, and so has brought in great confusion. Now it is much set
upon me to strengthen the feeble Hands of Faith, (...) the recovery of this All
commanding and Powerful Life, which may bring us back from so great a Relapse:
for the which end, it is averred by the Spirit, that there is to be maintained
one continued Act admitting of no Cessation, as to what may be agreed upon, to
have Faith in God; either for binding up what hurtful and pernicious is, to
hinder the process or going on of those perfect things yet behind; then again
for the unbinding and loosning of those mighty, great, and Heavenly Powers that
may make us terrible as an invincible bright Army of flying Banners, which as
light Flashes may go forth, on this Hand, and on that; as directed they shall
be for the securing, saving, and delivering those who sorrowing and mourning
are under Sin's oppression, and the worldly captivity.

. 15. Now hereupon followed this Vision, there being put into my Hand twelve
Arrows, and a Bow, the Bow seemed to be of pure Gold, and the Arrows tip'd with
Gold, and directed I was to make my aim at this Tree of Faith, which was the
M^rk to shoot at. Which keep^ng my Eye upon stedily, the true Archer the Spi^i^
in me, did let fly one Arrow after another, till I came to the ninth Arrow,
which all did well hit: and then there was a stop, and I could to no higher
degree go; but was commanded to gather up those Arrows and give them into the
Hand of them, who were to come up to the Unity of this Faith. With the same Bow
and Arrows, one, who designed in special was, did follow on to try, with great
industry; and did hit the first and second, and then attempting the third
Degree, the Arrow fell somewhat short, for want of a fullness of Faith.
Whereupon I standing by, directed the holding of the ^ow, so heeding and
observing well, she reached the third Degree. Then the other one came on to try
with the same Arrows, appearing in great resolution, and hit the first Degree,
and going upon the second was pulled away, which made a present delay. Then did
the other that had shot to the third Degree, stick to it, and after one or two
onsets got to the fourth Degree, then saw I her stop: and it was said, Be not
hereat dismayed, for Strength will renew, though the Arm too weak may be, yet
lay not down the Bow, but hold it steadily, and through constant Exercise, the
Arrow will not fail to fly from the Hand that diligent shall be, till it do
attain to all Degrees. For it was testified unto me, th^^ there must be a
continual keeping up, and bending the Bow of the Mind; that so we may all of
this Faith's Treasure find; and although to the Eye of the World nothing of
this is seen, they looking upon the true Archers of Faith in great derision,
saying, That they are come to be desperate indeed, that have nothing to live
upon but what Faith's Tree must bring forth: for such are looked upon as a
forlorn hope. Oh far be it, that this any discouragement to us should be; for
the Lord has said it again and again, that if any can hereunto reach, and come
to an all-full persuasion, then the whole World could not contain the
Treasures, which this Tree of Faith for us should command; that so proved it
may be who are the wise in Heart, who have made it their choice to learn, and
exercised be in the Art of Faith only.

16. At another time I was alarmed out of my Sleep with a Voice that cried in
me thus, O the Restaurative Tree of Faith! And when I came to consider of the
Word, and the Meaning of it, Wisdom's opening Key was put into my Hand, to
unlock that Place where this Precious Tree does stand. It did now appear to be
enclosed by it self, and a most lovely fair Tree it was, the Body whereof
seemed to be all of sweet smelling Cinnamon, and in the Hollow of it there was
a strong scented Perfuming Oil, which did produce Fruit of the same Kind, all
of a Spicy Nature; the which was shown me to be of Twelve Sorts. But this Fruit
appeared different and more various, then what I had ever seen in all former
Representations. Which made me very Inquisitive, praying that I might know the
Mind of Divine Wisdom in that Surprising Word, which came so suddenly upon me:
For I could no way be satisfied with any Visions, or Magical views of things
barely, and without Interpretation.

. 17. Which through a renewed Glance of Light, from her Orb I obtained an
Understanding of: And it was thus said to me, O Spirit, what make thou here?
How do thou think to live now that thou art departed out from the Earthly
Region, where thy Sensitive Life was maintained through the industry of the
Rational Mind? From these pleasant Things of the Earth thy Soul is now gone
out, and thou must eat of them no more: For here is quite another Way and
Manner of Living, which thou, and those that are with thee united, must fashion
your selves unto; living only upon what Fruits this Holy Land, which is by thee
now seen, does afford. Therefore did I call thee to come to this Tree of Faith,
not only it to view, but, having hit the Mark, thereof to feed; that so a
Spiritual Body may to thee renewed be, of an Incorruptible Nature and Kind,
answerable to the various sorts of Fruits, which will restore Nature to its
Ancient and Vigorous Beauty, that has looked to be altogether withered and
consumed.

. 18. Upon my Further Inquiry at Wisdom's Oracle, what might be the Qualities,
Properties, and Natures of these Fruits of Faith, and how we might be enabled
to take of them, having a Right thereto as Natural Denizons, that have a
Dependence wholly upon what this Heavenly Country of Immanuel does afford and
produce; that so we may have no Occasion to look back from whence we come, or
to be tempted to lust again after Mortal Fruits, among the Fallen Spirits. From
which state we have been called forth, to live on this Precious Tree of Faith:
the several Properties of which I will now open by Name, according as they have
been to me declared, to the end that I and those that with me in the same
Spirit cojoined be, may here satisfy our whole Internal Appetite, and in all
Parts and Degrees be made complete, as we shall hereof Magically in our Spirits
be able to eat. Now the First Quality applicable to this TREE is Magestical
Glory; the Second is Fathomless Wisdom; the Third is an Almightiness of Power;
the Fourth is Transparency of Light; the Fifth is Perfection of Purity; the
Sixth is Sovereignty of Will; the Seventh is an All-excelling Goodness; the
Eighth is Infinite Natural Knowledge; the Ninth is an All-seeing through the
Incomprehensible Eye; the Tenth is an Essential Generating working Spirit; the
Eleventh is an Omnipotency of Creation, giving New Existences, where nothing
did visibly appear; the Twelfth is Immutability of Love, which works in, and
through all these. Thus have I given a true Dimension, and Description of this
Immense and Restaurative Tree, springing up from the Seed and Root of Faith;
which will bring Dead Souls to Life again, and do all the Wonders of the New
Creation-Church, by the Great Philadelphian Worthies, when they shall be made
to appear. On it the First begotten Son of Wisdom did continually feed, which
made him a God-Man indeed: who is not contented of these unknown Sweet to taste
alone, but cries, and calls, to his Sister, and his Spouse hereof with him to
partake; that so it may have the same operation and effect on her, Godlike to
be, according to the Pattern of her Lord CHRIST, Whose Image lively drawn I may
thus see,
Through Participation of this Spicy Tree.


. 19. Some considerable time afterward, I was again called in Spirit to view
this Tree of Faith, and the Tree now seemed to be enlightened with a bright
Body, which appeared standing in the midst of it: and it bore all those several
mentioned sorts of Fruits, being therewith most richly laden, but none were yet
Ripe, or fit for Eating. But the Bright Body in the Tree, said; Go, call such
as willing are to wait for the Transmuting Power, to act forth the Amazing
Wonders of a God. Let such, with thee, come, and sit under this Tree, till the
Fruit into Gold ye shall see to be turned. Then eat thereof ye shall, and Power
will be born suddenly, to do and act in the Property and Nature of the Holy
Ghost. For this must Transmute, and alter the whole Inward Part; for that it
will be no less then the Leaven of the Deity it self. Whence this has been
frequently repeated to me, that this kind of Power, which we would have, must
proceed from a deep Ground, and Root; which is no less then the Godhead.

. 20. Also at another time, I felt a mighty stirring Life of Faith get up,
which did overtop all Self-Reasoning, whereby I found a Pass for my Spirit to
enter nearer still to the Aimed Mark, which is the Central Power. And while I
was in Prayer, that my Bow might abide in Strength, and that it might also be
given to my Fellow Laborers to hold it out with me, for Assurance of this
there was shown me the Bow in a Blew Cloud descending, and it was put into my
Hand. All Crystalline the Bow appeared to be, with Seven Golden Arrows
belonging to it. Then was it said to me, Arise, Arise, now put on thy Strength;
for the Arm of the LORD, in thee, shall stretch the Bow, and make the Arrows
fly where the Invincible Power does lie. For the Work shall not be starved for
want of Power to feed and strengthen it, while two or three do stand in one
Spirit knit. Therefore to you each one this Bow of Faith is given, with the
Sevenfold Arrow: Try, and see, whether at the Seventh Attempt it may not the
Power hit, and all the Twelve Degrees of Faith arrive at. Now put thy Hand
hereto, and be very nimble and quick: make the first Onset, that those others
who aiming are at the same thing, with thee, may also reach this weighty and
worthy Prize; That so in the Lord ye may rejoice together, in such a goodly
Habitation, and Golden Tent, to celebrate the Praise of Great ELOHIM, who has
this Power down sent to display, and make way for the Gathering in of his
Priestly Flock, and Royal Train, that shall no longer at the Worldy Spirits
Gate knock and wait. This came to pass in the 25th. of the Month January, in
the Year MDCXC.

. 21. After seven Days, being upon the First of the next Month, the same Vision
was renewed to me, and I strongly felt the Impulses of the Spirit driving me
forward toward the Mark, which seemed to stand very fair to be hit; as
inviting us who in One Faith were knit, to try and prove. Where our Seven
Nazarite Locks of Strength do lie, which answer to the Seven Spirits and Powers
of the Tri-Un Deity. For the Seven Arrows specified in the former Vision do all
of this signify, as that these are to be a Guard upon each Arrow, according as
from the Bow they shall be made to fly. For with my Lord I discoursed this
matter, concerning the Thorough-Pass of these Seven Arrows, Querying whether I,
or any one that principally aimed at the same thing with me, had shot them home
to the very Center-Point? Then upon this Inquiry the Spirit of my Lord told me,
that Five of them had already hit the Mark, but that two yet remained; which
were to make the grand Breach, and Onset, where the Rich Prize was to be taken.
And the Spirit showed me further what stopped the ascending Might of these two
remaining Arrows, which was a muddy Gulf that stood in the way, which I beheld:
and it was said, That this did signify the Lake of Self-Reasoning Spirits;
which the Starry World from Without does qualify, with what of Fear and
Unbelief is stirred up from the World Within us, so as the Power could not
arise strong enough for so Great an Enterprise. Wherefore there was all the
need that is possible of a strong Guard upon these that were yet to go out from
the Bow, that the Gulf might not swallow them up. This was the Counsel given
from the Holy Spirit, with this encouraging Word, that strength of Omnipotency
should attend us, in whatever our Hand shall find to do, as we go on to pursue
so worthy, a noble and God-exalting a Glory, as the Finishing Part will most
evidently to all Spectators appear to be, when we shall come to sit under
Faith's Tree, having through the sevenfold Spirit and Power of God arrived to
all its Twelve Degrees, there to feast upon all its Fruits, and to know the
true Banquet and Supper of the Lamb.

. 22. Now turning again into my Watch for the Inspeaking Oracle, to satisfy
several Inquiries which arose in me, one of which more particularly was with
great submitted Humility, an Inquiry Why the Expected Power of Faith in any one
yet could not go forth; albeit so many Promises have been Renewed and Repeated
upon one, and upon another of us, that have been kept up still in the
Infallible Word? And it was hereupon Answered me thus, saying, Do ye think it a
light or a small Thing which ye are aiming at? Know this then, for a present
Stay to Thee, and to the Waiting Spirits with Thee united in the same Eternal
Band, howsoever and wheresoever dispersed they may be upon the Face of the
whole Earth, that there is a Sphere, which must be cut through, that so the
Spirit may pass to find the Central Power, which this Starry Sphere, and
Outward Constellations do yet stop and hinder, who would hold their Dominion
still up over the Mortal Man. For if this Circle be broken through by any See
Enoch. Walks, p. 39.
Mighty Champion, in the Faith of God himself, opening in the Soul, then all of
that Opposing Kingdom falls: and till then the Kingdom of the Power can have
no Place. Therefore fly ye, and get above the Starry Bindings, and all that is
of this lower Elementary World: Mount, mount above all the Elements ye Flying
Archers, and shoot the last and Seventh Golden Arrow, which has on it the
Emblem of an Eye that is all-seeing, and two Wings that are over all Gulfs to
fly, and so to pass God's secret Treasury; then the Power will be set free, and
effect what each one of you have destred so exceedingly. This gave for the
present some satisfaction to my Spirit, and an Encouragement to press forward
to the Mark of the High Calling of Faith.

. 23. But having pressed on, for some considerable while longer, to this Mark,
and being still kept back from it, I have been frequently casting up my
Accounts in the Trust of the Heavenly things, which have been to me committed,
and considering that the Thread of my Mortal Day was near spun out, it has
often drawn my Mind and Spirit into God, my Deep, for Inquiry to find out, what
it is that has so very long kept me from hitting the Mark of High Faith, and
that has obstructed the Reigning Life in the Power of the Holy Ghost, by one
continued Motion and Act from the Deity; that so I might know my self to be
thereinto Baptized: being no less then what I have been caused to Hope, and
Believe, that I am to possess and enjoy, through great Strife, and Soul-Travels
tending hereto; as no way to be Pacified, till I had brought forth in me the
Mighty Birth of Faith, the Heir of the Promise, and the Firstborn of the
Power, Actually and God Manifestatively.

. 24. Now as I have been in this Inquisitive State, and Unsatisfied, that I had
reached no further with my Arrow, I have still found fresh Manuductions and
Encouragements to lead me higher, and nearer to the Last and Utmost Degree of
Faith. But more particularly, while I was, about the middle of April in the
ensuing Year, thus bemoaning and lamenting the melting and passing away of
Time, without any thing of a Godworking Power that is seen, as it was in the
Day of Christ, and of the Apostles; I had this spoke in me from the Only
Revealer of Secrets. Who in Plainness of Speech discoursed the matter, and
caused me to receive right Information concerning the withholding of God's
wonderful Appearance throughout Soul, Spirit, and Body. And it was thus made
out, that the separation from the corruptible Matter was not yet wrought out,
for there was yet a dividing to be, as of the pure from the impure, in the very
original Ground and Essence of the Soul. For all is there to be consumed, which
is not clearly of God: and this is to be done by the eternal purging Fire, from
that one pure Element, which at first produced the Eternal Angelical Natures:
and as thus it was then, so the same Motion of the Deity must in the Chosen
hereunto be made manifest in its residing power, which will multiply it self
into a Heavenly and New Born Generation: Which will be the fulfilling of the
universal, and particular Prophecies concerning the Reign of Christ in the
Spirit. For which now the Trumpet sounds, for the gathering the Tribe of
Judah, to whom the Scepter and Ruling Power of the Holy Ghost will first come,
in the waiting and separating Groundwork, as has been described by Judah's
Lawgiver: Who has said that a Body of Virgin-Spirits he will rear up, that
shall renew his great and mighty Works, which all of former ones are to excel.
Therefore said he to me, Go on to perfect that which remains in the Soul's
ground, from which may spring that which will multiply Numberless Powers.

. 25. Upon which Word of Counsel, great and strong drivings I felt still
following me for the very Body of God, which is Christ, to be manifested in a
growing Substantiality, from the first Eternal Nature, without the which
Deifick Matter do again spring, and feed, and maintain it self by, and from, it
self, it cannot otherwise live separate, and be free to act and do after its
own kind supersensually. And that it may thus get the upperhand, I was taught
here to sink away from the old Creaturely Nature, with all its sensible
Passions and Affections; that so losing that Life, I might come to find my
Eternal Native Life, from its own Original to put forth, which is God in a
fixed Body, created and brought forth from the first Creating Word, which is to
restore the Lapse again.

. 26. So that this is the work and business that my Lord of Life does set
before me to practice constantly, and is the true meaning of Christ's Doctrine
of Self-denial, which teaches me where lies the Vein of corrupt Blood, that
must be let out, whereby the precious Life may be secured and saved; that so
the Blood of Spirits from God may circulate pure and free. This will renew
Incorruption, where the Selfhood of Corruption has so long reigned; for my
Lord has said this to me in solemn Verity, henceforth therefore I see what it
is which must be dismissed, before ever I can come to say God is in the Act of
a continued flowing Spring from the Express Deity, passing through the Image of
the Anointed Christ into me, distinct from all Creaturely Images that are
raised otherwise in the Mind.

. 27. This is the summity of the Everlasting Gospel, that some Angels, who thus
qualified are, shall as flying Messengers from the Heavens declare: Then said
my Spirit, which was taken up into the Lord, Oh who, and where are the Angels
of the Power that have prepared their Trumpets to sound? no Tidings of them yet
can be heard. No, said my Inspeaker, they have not yet acquitted their Earthly
Tombs, nor put on their Resurrection Bodies, that so they may have boldness to
be witness-bearers to this Gospel-Revelation, which yet to very few is made
known, and but darkly understood, because there has not been Credit given to
that still Way of the Holy Spirit's infusion and dictation; which requires
great heedfulness, and an interior watchfulness within the Mind, at all times.

. 28. While thus I was entertained with a pleasant Internal Conference in the
Spirit with my Lord, I moved on the behalf of a Person, Whether or no he might
not be designed to go forth in this Everlasting Gospel-Message, as having been
a waiter with me for this? And it was Answered me, It might be his Lot if he
could fix to it, and observe the Method and Rules now given, not digressing or
dividing in his Mind, but sticking close to the One Thing, as gained to it he
has been: for the Ministry of the Spirit was a very nice and pure thing, that
did require extraordinarily qualified Persons to speak God forth therein; for
if any thing of Selfhood should entervene, it would quench the fiery Lamp of
the Spirit, and make it burn weak and dim. This is caution for my self, and
Friend, and such also who do separate themselves to this end, to build up an
Holy Priesthood and Tabernacle, in which the Holy Ghost may come to Evangelize
with a new Spring; which will work away the pudled Matter of every Selfish born
thing, that hinders the Live Coal of the Spirit from Burning.

. 29. Then was I minded also of our Nazarite Vow, whether or no we had kept to
it; for default herein found might keep back the Crown of Anointing, which is,
and ever will be the true Mark and Character of Christ's anointed and most Holy
Priests who are called, within the Vail of the most Holy Place ever to attend.
There is no going out, to pollute our selves with dead and unprofitable things,
as we would succeed and prosper in this High and Honorable Profession of
Faith, which by holding fast to, my Lord has it verified, we shall become his
anointed Priests and Kings, being empowered to work the New Creation-Wonders
according to the Holy Ghost's pure Act and Will in us.

. 30. This is the great encouraging Motive which the High Throne and Kingly
Priest does set before us to enkindle fresh Love and Zeal to complete, what
lies yet imperfected in the Groundwork in us for further purification, so as
passing through to the very root Essence of the Soul by the Hand of the
Separator, whose Love Fire it is that clears the morsy rough Metal from the
Golden Ore, that lies so deeply hid; which O God, is that we would no longer
be at a loss by seeking for, and not finding: But through the luster of thy
shine and Glory, We in our selves this Golden Deep may find, Still Watching to
the Furnace of our Mind.


July the 26th.
. 31. THe Eternal Word did open it self thus in me, how that the Spirit from
this Word of Life, had at sundry times, and diversely by Vision and Prophecy
been opening the Mystery of Faith unto me, for the end that I might a skilful
Practitioner in it come to be, and now again a Live Coal was put into my Hand
with an inspiring Breath that I did feel as Wind did blow upon it while I held
it in my Hand, so as that many Sparks were blown from it. Which observing and
inquiring into, it was revealed that those Sparks were the Seeds of Faith that
had been already in me sown, which had for several Years been putting forth
only as Sparks, but the Live Coal it self which is the Root and Body of the
Sparks of Faith had not till now been given; the Power, Nature and Quality of
which I should well understand, for it was designed I should still carry it in
my Hand to go forth to touch such as called and chosen a^^ to wait and live
with me, in Love's Burning-Bush, being thereto invited with my fellow Believers
hitherto to turn in, for out of this Flaming Body the Wonders of Faith should
evidently be seen.

. 32. And it was further denoted unto my Intellectual Mind, that God is upon
Spiriting some in special to be as Moses and Elijah, to act in the Spirit of
Faith, to deliver as Moses did God's Israel out of the servitude of the
oppressing Pharaoh. Whose Spirit in this day does trouble, molest, usurp,
oppress, and trample down the Holy People: and no deliverance there will be
till the lifted up Standard of Faith's Power shall into the Hand of some be
put: who set apart, are to go forth in the Power and Spirit of Elijah. The
which Manifestation of Faith is to be set afoot and revived now in this present
time, for which purpose the Revelation of it is renewed.

. 33. The mighty Powers from the Heavens do in me r^^^ with the mild and sweet,
ye^ thunder Cries; which from the Heavens I do hear to call, and gather in the
dispersed of the Dove Flock, who in Thrall and Bondage have all their days been
locked up, that now into Faith's School they may come there to be taught the
true Ancient and Eternal Freedom. Of the which, I shall as I my self have been
taught by the great Master of this Divine Mystery somewhat thereof declare from
that Scripture which was brought, and opened unto me, Gal. 4.22, 23, 24, 25.
For being all included under Sin, this brings cursed Miseries, as Cares, Toils,
Sorrows, Fears, Distresses in Mind, and upon the Soul's account also Clouds,
Doubts and Anxeities. So that both inwardly and outwardly here is a sunk
deplorable Case; and what must relieve, and redress, and redeem Souls out of
all these Evils, but Christ, who is the saving Ark of Faith, giving himself to
such as can receive him to be the Body, in which the Live Coal of Faith by its
Heat produces vigorons Acts of Faith? Now before this Faith is received, or
Christ who is the Power and Spring of this Faith; we who were as the Scripture
says, under the Law; Under what Law? even that Law of an Earthly carnal Sense,
that is ever more warring against the Law of Faith: and next to this is the Law
of Righteousness, which the Apostle mentions. And which must also give place
unto the Law of Faith: All Righteous Works must be excluded; for only the
Righteousness of Faith must here stand. Now if we look in, and examine how it
has been with us, we shall find we have been in bondage to both these Laws,
which have carried it very severely toward us. So that before Faith came to be
revealed, in what a dark imprisoned Life were we kept? There was no Comfort,
nor Satisfaction in all strict Observation of the Law of Righteousness, no more
then in the Law of Sin and Carnal Sense; so that it is time for us to look out
for another Law, which may redeem us out of both these: which is this revealed
Law of Faith. Which will become a New Birth-Nature, as is mentioned in the 26th
Verse, becoming all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, and so Born
from the Virgin-Womb of the Jerusalem-Mother.

. 34. So that you may plainly understand the drift of God our Father, is to
bring us up in the Faith, from the very Day of our being born into it; so that
we as little Children must learn the Rules of Faith, like as in the first and
natural Birth we were brought up habitually, and inherently, in the rational
corrupt sensibility, and indeed were bound by that Birth, and under the Laws
also, of righteous Rationality and sober Sensuality. Which although good in its
kind, and to be obeyed and subjected to, till such time as the Royal Birth of
Faith comes to be Born: then is to be sounded the Jubilee Hour, the Hour and
Day of our Release is come, then no longer are we under those Laws which was
the manifestation of bondage, curse, sorrow, heaviness to Death. From this
first Husband we are by the Law of Faith set free, that so we may gradually
come up to that Unity of the Faith, as to come to be in great solemnity married
to him, who is the full Body, Life, and Resurrection of this Faith; so that by
this divine Matrimonial Continuity fruitful Births of Faith may be, that may
bear the Name of God's Angelical Hosts; For none else can ever be capable to do
the great Works and Wonders which are to be manifested in him, while under the
covert of a Mortal form: but such as have the Live Coal of Faith conceived in
their Hearts, and put into their Hands, whereby they may go forth to tincture
and to touch, and leaven from the Virtue, of the central Marriage-Union, which
may bring forth the flaming or blown-up-Coal of the Holy Ghost, which always
the Birth of Faith does precede as a Forerunner. By which all Miracles may then
most easily be wrought, which must the last redeeming part of Mankind clear up
and finish. For all Dominions and Powers in the Worlds of Death, Darkness, Wars
and Strife shall and must evidently, by the Holy Ghost in Faith's Power and
Might be put under and to flight: Even so let it be in Faith's Spirit pray we.

. 35. Waiting further in Spirit upon this High Matter, the Oracle of Witness
again opened in me after Three Days, and it said: Go forward, and do not slack
to promote, and to draw forth for an United Body, in the Faith together to
stand. For hereunto are ye called, to Accord and Believe in the One only Saving
Name JESUS: and such as with thee so shall avouch the Everlasting God their God
only to be, the Blessings of Faith upon their Heads shall flow. Then hold forth
do ye mutually a clear Testimony hereof, by giving up your selves in way of
Pure Separation, as in a Silent Wilderness, there to attend, for what is yet to
come from the Seven Fountain Throne Spirits: Which way being to light such
Precious and Unutterable Things, as have been kept from all vulgar sight.
Therefore I say in Faith's Tent together abide, and to no other Business your
Minds apply, that so a Praise ye may be to Elohim Great; who will assuredly own
and stand by you, in the Work he has appointed you to: which followed is to be
close, and uninterruptedly. O therefore Courage take, my Called and Anointed
Ones, that hereby raise up ye may that Glory, which under a Cloud of Apostasy
has lain: and withal count it all Joy, that ye who thus agreed are together,
to see and obtain that high Love-Prize, which others have negligently lost, and
which a warning may be to hold out, and to Conquer the Temptations of a Mortal
State.

. 36. As this Word came in, the Figure of a Crown was lifted up upon the end of
a Scepter, which cast from it a Glance of Transparency of Glory. And then the
Word came anew, and said: Behold, and see, this shall be the Reward of
Unwearied Waiters in the Faith, who for a Kingdom are seeking, and deserting
all Visibles. Such as these who seek out and wait Believingly, and who through
this Belief are made to forsake all, shall come infallibly to inherit, and
postess the Scepter and the Crown, with CHRIST their Head Prince of
Righteousness. Wherefore gird up ye who are Lovers of, and Waiters for, the
Lamb's victorious Day, to be revealed in you; that so glorious Representatives
in his Life ye may come to be, in the Kingdom of Conquest and Victory. The
which holding out to, shall and will endear you to the Heart of your God and
Father actually, who has waited for to see, who so Valiant could be, as to
break through every Cloud of Temptation, and in no wise be prevented of the
great Felicity, which by this Victory of Faith is to be.

. 37. Then was I for some time afterward followed still with this Word, saying:
Fear not, but go on to perform what has been in the Platform presen^^^ to thy
Mind. For the Heart of thy God will strengthen, and cojoin such with thee, as
of a Gideon-Might and Spirit approved are in Valiantness, for that which
undertaken is now to be. Thus having been encouraged to stand up unmoveably in
that Faith, which is of Divine Operation, and not to be afraid in the least, or
wavering in the Belief of the Promises, which have been given of Old Times, and
which have powerfully been renewed to me; I have been made to hasten from one
Degree of Faith to another, and to shoot continually Arrow after, that so at
last I might obtain the Prize, by aiming at the Unity of it, in hitting the
Point which for these many Years I have been Aiming at.

. 38. Thus having r^^^ved Line upon Line, and Prophecy upon Prophecy, for my
Eucouragement, I was still upon the most inward Debate with the Lord Christ, or
rather with his Agent the Spirit, why the Word of Revelation and Wisdom in the
Prophetical Sense opened, should not be attended with Miraculous working
Powers? For, indeed, that is the great Thing that the Mystery of Faith moves
hard for, namely to bring the Eternal Working Properties to Fix again in
Nature's inward ground. Against which all the Earthly Senses conspire to
resist, continually raising up Blocks of Unbelief; which has been the one
great Cause of Restraint, as we in God's Light do understand.

, 39. But it was said to me by the Word of the Lord, that these great mighty
Working Powers, that the whole Course of the Visible Reign in the Earth would
change, could not be entrusted with any till God becomes Man, and Man becomes
God, all throughout in a distinct Personality, as after the Manner of our Lord
JESUS. To which estate we are to be Redeemed, that so we may come into a Joint
Commission in the Kingdom, which is all Power.

. 40. For this was the very Word that was given me, Be not solicitous for
Almighty working Power, till the Deity has wrought out Men's gross Essence,
that from the Mortal Birth does spring, and replenished all anew, by pouring in
his Baptizing Name, which will the Seal of the Power again engravve. For the
Gifts and Powers no more given out will be, till a Fixed Body be all
Substantiated with Ingredients pure from the Celestial Orb. Which said the
Word, Ye shall do well to Believe, and make all Have after this Hope to pursue
it: for it has its Season to be fulfilled.

June 6. 1691.
. 41. THis Morning I felt the Spirit opening further unto me the Mystery of
Faith, of the which I have Recorded much for my own Private Improvement: but
this Day much more has been Revealed, out of the deepest Ground from its
Eternal Originality, God abstractedly; which in a most full Body opens in me,
like as in all its Useful Members. Now the Birth of Faith is on this wise
showed to be, full of Life, Motion, and Activity: yet all whatever it works
and does, is after an hidden and silent way. For As the out ward Man has all in
a Visibility to exercise his Original Faculties upon, so contrariwise does this
Spirit of Faith, put forth all its Powers, and Spiritual Facuities most
effectually after a Secret Invisible Manner: and effects that which it aims
at, though no outward Speech or Noise of Words may be here needed, nor visible
Hands to work, or Feet to walk; but all lies hidden in the deep Center of a
Pure Mind, which works and performs Great Things on this Hand, and on the
other, and yet no Vulgar Corporeal Being can the ground of this way of working
find out, or discern. It is only known by the Operator, who can Experimentally
tell, that it is Nothing less then what does lie as Deep as God, there
Incorpoporating with the Soul, and going forth with pure Acts of Power.

42. This Opening and Manifestation concerning the Mystery of Faith; has been
presented to me as the Magical Key, which opens the shutup Wonders of God's
Eternity. Now my Business is to handle, and employ This Key, as skilled and
instructed I shall be from my Tuteress the Supreme Wisdom, who has shown, and
brought me to her several Gates; and has given forth to every Gate a distinct
Key, for the Opening One Deep upon another: Whereinto my Spirit is to pass,
which now called forth afresh I am to follow. For well satisfied I am, that the
Bright Star a Conduct will to me assuredly be, and arise suddenly, after some
Years delay, which had made me ready to give up the Ghost of my Hope, in
reference to that which in Divine Wisdom's Glass I have seen, heard, and
understood, concerning what in my Day is to be Accomplished, and brought into
Effect.

. 43. But at this time the Power begins mightily to stir, and the
Virgin-Tincture of the pure Spirit of Wisdom, does in my Spiritual Veins run,
that the Revealed Things may into an Heavenly Body turn. For I now do see, and
find a Body to its fu^l grown Stature prepared is to be, in wonderful
Spirituality, till every Organ, Member, and Faculty be run through with the
highest Virtue from the Deity. This my Lord in the Spirit did tell me, bidding
me patiently to abide, until this true Shilo. Body in me was to its full
height shot up; for that then should the most Powerful and Glorious, Holy
Ghost, appear to do and act his Part: and after such a long Silence even in the
very Heavens, should then Speak through me, not by Voice only, but by pure Act.
O this is the Proof that my God will of himself give, when being thus filled
with Him, Deeds from a Deified Power and Root shall spring up and manifest
themselves. Some Workings in order to this I do already sensibly feel, and
therefore encouraged I am to wait, and to give all place for the Fixation of
this Holy Being, which will nullify all other Beings; that so entirely I may
possess the Great JEHOVAH* as my Fountain, continually within to flow, for the
washing away of the Impurities, and for the preparing a Body in which the Holy
Ghost so Fixedly may dwell, as never out of it to depart away.

. 44. Some short time after this the Manifold Wisdom did again open it self in
me, for my further Information, that so I might hit the Mark, which I have been
so longing for, and aiming at. Now that ^ might be right set in my Way, the
Spirit and Bride gave me not only a Call, but a Love-enforcing Pull, from all
that is of this low Element, and the Astral Life; and so up my Spirit was
presently Caught to understand, and learn, what was to be expressly wrought by
the Supercelestial Art, from which Altogether is excluded the outward Hand of
Craft.

^* 45. Now the Copy I was to learn by, was that Original Word that was from
Eternity; which by entering, or opening it self in that Part which purely does
relate to God, simply, and abstractedly from the Lower Rational Consubsistency,
that is from the Outward Elements. For all of this sort must be laid aside in
this way of Working, which is after the Manner of him, who has the Creating
Power and Principle, for giving a Life, and Existency out of Nothing. This is
the Celestial School which I am taken into, in order to be brought up according
to the Degree of my Eternal Nativity; which I am driving to run back again
unto, that so I might understand how to Act from this Supreme Port, even from
the Center of a New Heart, upon which may be written that great Name Alpha and
Omega. Which only can renew the Working Power, that shall the Sealed Testimony
open, and get thereby the Crown of Dominion, to enter upon the Lord Christ's
Kingly Reign within the circle of the pure Mind; and from thence to go forth to
govern in all parts without, till the Wonders of God shall as Lightning fly
out, upon the Eagle-Wings of Faith: and the Fruits of this TREE, springing up
in the Paradisical Ground of the Soul, so plentifully drop, as to convert the
howling Desert of this outward Mortal Principle into a pleasant Sharon, and
Eden of God. This for certain is the only thing, that will bring the long
expected Redemption to its finishing End.

. 46. After which, as from a New Gust, the Eternal Word opened it self Expressly
in my Heart's Center, informing and declaring the High Prerogative of such a
Spirit, in whom the Power of Transmutation did lie. For in whom ever this comes
to be witnessed, it is no less then the Seed of the Trinity, retained in the
pure Matrix of the Virgin Wisdom, which drives forth, till it comes into
Transubstantiation. Nothing goes beyond this, for as much as it is the
Beginning, Strength, Might, and Excellency of the Father of all Spirits, who
generateth in Nature this High Birth of Power, the true Heir of Faith, as it
did appear in the Immaculate JESUS. How great is this Secret, and to whom has
it been Revealed? or who has found this Wonderful Stone? True it is, that in
all Ages it has had its Seekers: but none have dug deep enough for it.
Every Arm for these many Hundred Years has been too short to reach it. Now
unto thee, who art duly upon the Inquiry, and watching for the highly precious
Gate to open, while thou art knowing in thy self the Invalidity of all other
foregoing Births and Powers: that yet have been rested upon, as if this had
been attained to, which thou art now pressing to find within the Borders of
Immanuel, where the Seven Baptizing Pools are to be passed through, before this
Transmuting Stone comes to its perfection of Color. And though several of them
thou have been plunged into, yet know this that there remain Three. Which were
shown me to be Blood, Oil, and Fire. The Four that I had passed through were,
first the Pool of Conviction; secondly, Repentance; thirdly, Renovation;
fourthly, passing my Spirit over by pure Dedication. By all which I was made
meet to enter upon the last Three Baptisms, which would finish the whole
Mystery of the Incarnation. The Bloody Pool is the Dying with JESUS, the
Offering up thy self through his Spirit: to which end the many Lives are to
suffer Death without pity, or sparing any one of them, as they were allied, and
in concord, with the sensitive Root, from whence they all do spring, happily thou
may believe thy self to have passed through every Death. I grant that thou
have done so in thy Will; yet art thou not come to an actual, open, and
Triumphant show hereof, perfectly so expiring, as to a Total giving up the
Ghost of that Birth, which was out of the Womb of that, which was from the
Earth earthly, and into which it must be again delivered up through Death. Now
no more would I have thee to draw any Breath of Life, from that Principle which
is the Gulf of Separation: but to pass undauntedly through this Pool of Blood,
which is the Fifth Cirling Pool that surrounds that Wonderful Tree of Faith,
and Life, which thou have seen.

. 47. Now having after some Years pressing forward, since this last
Manifestation, passed through these Deaths in a good Degree, as has been
witnessed; the Lamb having been slain in me, gives a Resurrection of a New
Life, which stands clearly out of all that is of the Out-Birth, and that
consists of the Astral Reason and Animal Sense, which the being dead to gains
the wonderful Conquest, that makes way for the being plunged into the Pool of
Oil. Which Oil is the Matter and Essence from which the Holy Ghost does spring.
Then passing from this to the Pool of Fire, which also opens it self from this,
being a Fiery Seed from the Deity, and so coagulating together, it makes up a
Deified Body, which only can be capable to live in the Supercelestial Air of
the One Element. This we may entitle the Divine Magical Body, whose Motions and
Operations are all subsisting, and going forth in pure Acts of Faith. For that
is the Life that the Risen in Christ are called to, to live by alone; for as
much as by this they are always ascending above the Earth, as if they had no
more to do with it; bringing down by Faith all needful Things out of the
Storehouse of Heaven, while yet they are in Bodies Terrestrial. Our Spiritual
Merchandising is only to be upon the Fruits of Faith's Tree, which will bring
in both for Food and Clothing abundantly, while there is need for it. But
there is an Age coming, as this Tree of Faith grows up in Persons in their
inward ground to its full ripeness, when the Fruit being eaten thereof
Magically, will Transfigure the very Elementary. Body, and give it a Radical
Ruby Glory; so that Mortality shall be hid in Immortality; which is the Garment
that may last the Thousand Years Reign of CHRIST; and may be said to be the
First Resurrection Body, whereby Death shall be swallowed up. All this will be
effected by the Mighty Operation of Faith, which subdueth all things to it
self, and changes this visible Body into the Likeness of the Glorious Body of
our Lord JESUS. For when this Faith shall be wrought up to its highest
Perfection, it will be such a Prospective-Glass, through which the Glorified
Person of our Lord, and the Father in him, with the Virgin Wisdom, and all the
Saints, shall so appear before the Spirit's Eye; that according as it is
written, beholding the Glory of the Lord as in Glass, we shall be changed from
Glory to Glory: for when we see him, we shall be made like unto him. Thus has
it been shown to me, what the wonderful Effects of Faith shall do in its Time
and Age. But it may be said, who shall live such an Age as this to see? To
which I Answer, though this be Prophesied in me, yet it is not Determinated,
whether as to my own Particular I may it in my Age of Time see. For I rather
think that I may pass into Faith's Mystery, where with the High Worthies of
Faith, who died in the Faith, not having received the Promise, but seeing it
afar off, rejoiced in Spirit, as I do, hoping that others in the succeeding
Age, or Ages, may this Transformation of Bodies know: which Joy will be so to
me, when I into the Heavenly World translated shall be, having put on
Glorification which I do now already see my Superior Angel in the Mount Sion
Kingdom clothed withal; in which my Rest and Satisfaction, in assurance
hereof, do remain, not knowing whether it may not be my Lot with the Elders and
Worthies of the Faith, to descend with CHRIST again, upon the Earth to Reign.

The 4th of January, 169 -- A Continuation of what further hereupon followed.
48. THis divine Opening was with me, holding me in converse for some Hours in
my Spirit, saying, Though the staff of Time for an expected deliverance seems
to be broke, yet cast not off the work you are called to, abide and stand
together in, and understand it is the prerogative of God to change Times and
Seasons, who under no bounds of Time will be, that his depending Creatures may
never be off on their Knees as to Prayer and watchfulness. Then after some
large Conference with the Spirit, which cannot be brought forth in words, There
was presented to me in sight a wonderful great Wheel, which seemed to spread
over the whole Earth, the Color was as a Ruby-Red, and it was full of Eyes
round the circle of it very piercing: Then it was said to me, This presents God
the Almighty working Wheel, of which there is no beginning or end, so I saw a
living Spirit moving in the Wheel, hoisted up as between the Heavens and the
Earth; then saw I four small Wheels descend out of this, one of the same
color, and had Eyes also* then I enquired, Ah Lord, tell me what this means?
And it was answered, These are the Charriot-Powers which pass through all
things in Centers high and Centers low, and to whom these Wheels shall be
joined unto, they only shall be able to act the great Wonders of time; then saw
I where they descended and rested for a while: and then they went forth and
were lifted up by the great Wheel, which as a Loadstone drew them up, and my
Spirit was presently gone to them, and presently the Angelical Center stood
open, and from thence my Spirit was carried by these Wheels into the Apostles
Center, then into the Son's Center, then into the Father's deepest deep of all
Centers, where I was to center and abide till the Wheels went forth, then my
Spirit should go with them, who would be Eyes to see what way and whither my
Spirit was to go, do, and act, for it was said to me, Now no Creaturely Will
can move here; for the Holy Spirit assumeth all Will, Power and Act here, and
then no defeat is to the high, holy, pure Enterprise, which you together in the
Faith and Love co-working with these Wheels, it shall be as the spreading of
the Net aright, and casting it, to the taking of a worthy and rich Prize: so go
forward on and prosper.

February 10. 1694.
. 49. This Morning the Vision of the Four Wheels appeared again, which moved in
the Four Elements; each one being carried upward by a Spirit, that was as a
bright Flash of Lightning. The which considering in my Mind, with an inquiry
hereupon made, it was told me, That they did represent the working Wheels of
Nature, that the All-powerful Spirit does drive upward to reach the One Eternal
Element; which being touched with it, would penetrate through the whole Bodily
Man, that was made up of the Four Elements. Then did I see these Four Elements
expire into one great terrible Flaming Wheel, that spread it self over the
whole Heavens: and in the middle of the Wheel there were Seven Eyes.

. 50. Which I waiting upon was thus opened to me, that the gross Earthly Part
in the nature of the Four Elements, should by the Spirit of Christ, who took
upon him the Elementary Body, so come into ours, as to wind them up by a strong
Circling Motion, as every Part may be so touched, as to be tinged with, and to
partake of the Superior Properties and Powers of this pure and unmixed
Element; and so be swallowed up in this Great Governing Wheel, that rules over
all the lower Wheels, with all the Planets, which thereto do coagulare and
work. For all by Outward Nature are under their Power, and Empire, till got
free, by ascending up to this upper ruling Wheel, with its Seven Eyes:
Concerning which it was told me, that they were the Seven Supercelestial
Planets, or Constellations, that did govern and control all in this lower
World, and its Planets. This is that which will reach to Redemption of the Body.

. 51. Much more the Spirit of my Lord discoursed me upon this Matter, which
must be concealed till my Outward Elementary Wheels shall fully expire into the
upper and superior Wheel. Only this I may declare for the present time, that
the upper Flaming Wheel with its Seven Eyes, as a Loadstone, is drawing
mightily, some known to me, that have been touched therewith. And it will not
rest in its wheeling Motion, till they shall be, as to their weak Elementary
Life, changed into the One Superior Element; whereby the Heavenly
Constellations shall predominate over all of these outward Ones, which hitherto
have reigned over the Elementary Part, that yet lies Unredeemed.

February the 12th.
. 52. This Day being much drawn inward in the Spirit of my Mind, this word met
me: Arise, and ride upon the Mule of Faith: stand over all that is Elementary.
There is a Thing to be done by some, that in the Crown Number do stand; who
shall the Land of Havilah command: but Abraham's High Faith for this must
spring.

February the 14th.
. 53. While I was in a deep Introversion about this Matter, this Word spoke in
me, saying; There is a Birth that is upon breaking forth, that shall bring the
Blessing of mighty Increase to present, and succeeding Generations. Sarah in
her Old Age is near her time of bringing forth the Heir, who must possess the
good things of the Upper and Nether World. Understand thou then what this
means: the Old Age is an arrivement unto the Mystery of Faith. Now excite
thou those that are of Good will, to encourage themselves with the Hope this
good Old Age to see, as mighty Hero's in this Faith; that so ye may bring forth
the Blessing to the weary and oppressed. Gird up, I say, and take heed ye do
not falter, or turn out of Faith's way: then shall ye bring forth a Nation as
in One Day.

. 54. Now as some of us were hereupon waiting together, and while one was in
Prayer, there appeared this Vision from the Light World. From the which the
Virgin descended, and met an ascending Spirit, that was pressing and expecting
to come up to the Mount Sion Orb, unto the Glorious Lord. But there was a stop
by the Descent of the Virgin of that Orb, who appeared to us in great
splendor, and congratulated us, saying: Thus I know whereto ye would in your
Spirits have arrived, but I am come from your Lord, to make known the Thing
which ye have long been in travail for. And now I do appear to you for this
purpose, that you may be overshadowed with my Virgin Nature; which may be the
Womb all sanctified for the conceiving of the Holy Ghost, which will be the
Lordly Birth in Spirit. And as he was brought forth in the Fullness of Time, by
a single Personal Virgin, so now in Plurality in Virgin Spirits, to multiply
upon the Earth; that so Evil Births may sink and dye, as these Virgin Births
shall rise. And therefore to you, who in holy Dedication are, this Counsel is
given: Observe from this Day, how this Birth in you shall go forward on; and
therefore watchful each one of you be. And after this Saying, she cast a
wonderful bright shining Ray of Glory, as we were sitting together, upon each
of us.

. 55. Now at her first Appearance St. Paul stood with her, and Elizabeth that
brought forth John the Baptist, and many others that attended her, giving
audience to what she spoke, giving great Reverence to her. So then she
disappeared. And the next Morning my Spirit calling all this up into my Mind,
she appeared again, and asked me whether I had Faith to believe what she had
made known? For by Faith (said she) your strength will be to Conceive this Lord
of Life. At which the Apostle Paul, who appeared, said, I will their Assistant
be: the Faith that was Revealed to me, shall cowork mightily in the Spirit that
wills hereunto. Then she said, It pleases me well you should their Helper in
this Traveling Birth be, till to Perfection it, may come. Then I was made to
Query, What we should do further in order to this thing? And she said, Only
Believe and Love, as with One Soul and Heart. then the Apostle John appeared,
and he said, The Love which was begotten in me, I will in the way of the Spirit
enter, to beget in them, who for this great Thing are appointed, that Love may
the cherishing of this Heavenly Birth be, to carry it on till the place of
breaking forth shall be found. Then the Apostle Peter he appeared with great
Amity, and said to me, The Key was given to him to Unlock the Centre-pure of
this Holy Birth: the Binding also is given, said he, to me; and the Evil Eye
shall under a Tie be. The Loosening Power for the bringing forth hereof, shall
to the Virgin Minds by me all freely be contributed; to effect what the
Princely Virgin has so graciously declared. Then being filled with a sweet
silent Peace and Joy, as lying in a rich Bath of Flaming Love they withdrew.
There were numerous Virgins in great Triumph, with the Superior and Chief One
as her Attendants. This further is to be noted, that as I was considering still
in my mind and watching hereupon, out there went before me Seven bright Stars,
and a Crown over them. And enquiring what that signified, it was opened in me,
that they were the Super-Celestial Planets that Rule, and were to Qualify with
the holy Birth: and that the Crown denoted a King was to be born, and all
Dominion and Power should be given to him.

July the 18th.
56. There appeared to me a Glorious Face circled as with a Rainbow: the Face
sent forth such a Reflection of Light, that it drew, as out of a Cloud, another
Face, which was as the Likeness or Figure of my own Face. Which received such a
Bright Glance, as presently brought up several, who faced the Face of the
supreme Glory. And many that lay still hid in the Clouds, came one after
another, as the Clouds broke away. And by the streaming Light of the first
presented Face, we all, as in a Glass, did behold the shining Glory, that was
upon all our own Faces, such of us as in the waiting Life cojoined were.

. 57. Waiting the next Morning, and praying for the Vision to be made out more
to me, that so I might understand the drift of the Spirit hereby, finding a
vehement going out of my mind and desire after this Face to behold it again; it
did accordingly again appear. And then I did not only see it, but heard the
Voice, saying, Thus the strong ardency of thy Lovedesire has opened my Face
again, to let thee know I will make thee a Head-Leader of an Heavenly Train,
that shall to me their whole Minds, Spirits, and Persons give up for a great
and peculiar Work; which hitherto has lain under a Relaspe. Which now gird up
to thou, with thy fellow-workers and waiters in the Faith, that have offered
themselves up all willingly hereunto: for my Face and Countenance shall be
turned still toward you, for the breaking away those Clouds, that a covering
upon the Faces of my chosen Vessels have been. Thus did the Lord commune with
me, who, as the small Dust of the Balance sees her self to be; yet must stand
in a Service for the Lord all obediently; who has promised to be the Hands of
Sufficiency, to bring to pass the great Wonders out of the Sea of Glass: That
shall these Gathered Faces bless, With Floods of Joy and Righteousness.


July the 23d.
. 58. Being still upon my Watch, for what was further to be Revealed, resolving
to draw off from all the Dregs and Lees of sensible Operations, and launch
still deeper into the Immense Deity: which thus did further open a sight in me
of an enclosed Principle, whose Defense was a circling Flame. And within it
there appeared bright Beryl Bodies walking up and down, and with them did
appear as in a Looking glass, like as a round Globe, the Personal Glory of our
Mighty King, who moved as they moved. The Ground they went upon, was paved as
with Sparkling Stones, with Veins of Gold, which cast forth a mighty Luster.
This all precious and amazing sight in Spirit given me, moved to an Inquiry,
What was to be learned and understood?

July the 24th.
. 59. So next Morning attending this Vision, it was obvious to the Eye of my
Mind still, and Intelligence came in all satisfyingly, that this enclosed
Principle was the Land of all Blessed Stores, where the Eternal Springing Mines
are, that no one could ever come in to see and possess, but such as had Faced
the glorious Face of CHRIST in Righteousness: then added to such should be, the
like Beryl Bodies as here I did see.

. 60. Then did I make a further Inquiry, Whether or no I might, with any other
whom I would recommend to the Princess and Head-Governess, here admittance
have? And it was Answered, That for this very cause it was thus by way of
prospect shown unto me; whereby I might understand there was a possibility for
entering in, with such who in the Spirit of Faith's Purity, should be me
presented be here to come, that we might put on our B^ryl Bodies; as burning
Saphirs to walk, and talk with him, who in the moving Globe of Glory here was
seen. Then upon this feeding my Mind with a pleasing Hopes of finding entrance
here, for my self and such who in Faith's Unity do stand, this Word spoke all
powerfully: Hasten to put on you Flaming Garments, then free pass will for you
be, the Flaming Wall parted for you shall be: the Governor of this Principle
does both love and desire your Appearance here, for which end he does appear.

. 61. So retiring still in my Mind, and casting up these Love-Visitations and
Representations, which took up my thoughts, moving the Spirit for further
Information, what this Principle might be called, with the Inhabitants hereof;
After some stillness and attendance hereupon, the Revelation opened in me, and
I knew it to be Wisdom's Orb, or Principle. The Inhabitants herein were all
highly arted and skilful in Magical Operations: that is, whatever they bent
their Will to do, it was produced and brought forth. So as it was showed me
they were exercised in such Faith, that whatever they Believed in the Essential
Christ Consubsisting in themselves, they thereby could accomplish either for
themselves or for others: even whatever they would that lay within the
Circumference of what was either Visible or Invisible, in God's whole Creation.
And the Spirit of my JESUS did further again inform me, that my Lord did open
this Principle to me, that I with such who in one pureness of Spirit could
joinedly come to be, might admittance have into this encircled Principle: where
Learned we might be in Wisdom's divine Arts, thereby to free us from the
Worldly Crafts.

. 62. Now then know this is a Prophesy, that must reach to the Wise Men of the
East, who have been hid in Obscurity, yet known you are to be Wisdom's Divine
Magicians, that are made skilful to act the mighty Deeds of our Great Jehovah
Prince. Think not that ye are now much longer to lie hid, for there is an Holy
Dove which has into your Land taken her flight, and with her seven Eyes has
you described, who in her Bill does carry the Golden Egg, wherein lies the Deep
Philosophy, that must multiply such a Treasury, that must set the Embondaged
free, that from the Earth they may redeemed be, and bear the Name of their God
upon their Forehead. For the Dispensation of the Fullness of Time is now already
come, and the Fruits upon the Tree of Faith do present themselves ruddy,
showing that they are come to their Maturity. Therefore now Alarmed the mighty
Archers are from all their Obscure Corners to come, that we may now see upon
whom the Lot may fall, to hit the Mark, and complete what was lacking of the
Number Twelve, that so through all Wisdom's Gates we may pass, then we shall
stand upon the Sea of Glass in. Triumphant Victory the Reign of Christ to
proclaim, that so as Kings, Priests and Prophets upon the Earth, and over the
Earth, we may represent him, then will the Tri-Un Deity shine forth most
radiantly, to convey its power through simple, weak, poor Corporeities, which
though outwardly so contemptible are, yet by this Golden Stone of Wonders,
which out of the Dove's Bill does fall, capable may be to put on Bodies of
Transparency, which will well agree with the high Assembly, that with Christ in
Heavenly places do stand, that so the mutual Reign of the Saints above may be
Joined concurribly with those below; and that that which is Above; and that
which is Beneath may be one glorious Habitation for the God of Jacob, This new
Prophetical Sound that now does go forth, is to call and gather in the whole
Kingly and Priestly Host, wherever scattered and hidden they be; for Wisdom's
Star will be their Conduct to the Second Birth of our Great Immanuel.

. 63. But now Queried it may be, Where is the Place that we are to resort to,
this Kingly Birth to see? There are a few Names that linked are in the Golden
Chain of Love, and waiting are in the New Jerusalem, which is from Above,
looking for this blessed Hope that may open in the Power of the Holy Ghost,
whose burning Breath with fresh strong Odours and Perfumes are blown up, as
that the scent and favor hereof may attract the high Elders of Wisdom, for the
making up the true Sophia Bride, that has for a while lain concealed, but now
is to be revealed; this being the Fullness of Time, in which the sounding of the
Seventh Angel does her Marriage with the Lamb proclaim.

. 64. Haste therefore, O haste and fly ye Holy Doves from all parts to this
TREE of Faith, which will afford and make up a Feast of all Variety, to
entertain you at your coming: where the New Wine from the new born Vine will
run so free, of which we may not only drink our fill, but also be bathed
therein, so as thence to appear in the Ruby Tincture, all glorious without, as
well as within. This is the Message that I have to declare: Hearken, hearken
unto it, for it is to the Love-Kingdom ye are called; which being obedient
unto, ye shall know that God will be to you an everlasting Triumphant Joy.

. 65. O England, England, understand the Day of thy Visitation, for this is the
Acceptable Year, in which there is a mighty Star that in thy Bethlehem City is
born, that calls the Ransomed Ones from all Nations, Languages, and Tribes,
to come to the Brightness of its Rising. Take care, O England, lest this Star
do from thee glide away: let not the Clouds of ignorant Suspicion or demurring
Jealousy, concerning the true Heir of the New Jerusalem Mother, who is now to
enter upon (...) Reign, and to rule with the Scepter of Faith, hinder thee from
discerning that the Glass is now turned up, that its Half Hour is running, that
the third Watch is set, and that the Golden Cock is thereupon clapping his
Wings, and crowing the third and last time. Warned therefore ye are, O English
Inhabitants, that ye do not miss this your Day, and suffer other Nations more
watchful and obedient to this Call, to take the Birthright from you, and
supplant you off of your Crown. This Alarm to my Native Country I was first to
sound; So discharging herein what I lay bound to, in the Peaceableness of my
Mind, I retire into the Heavenly Choir, there waiting the blessed Issue and
Success of what has been here from the pure Unction declared.

FINIS.
THE ARK of FAITH: OR A Supplement to the Tree of Faith, etc.

FOR THE Further Confirmation of the same.

Together With A Discovery of the NEW WORLD.

By J. Lead.

By Faith Noah being warned of God, prepared an ARK to the saving of his House;
by the which he condemned the World, and became Heir of the Righteousness which
is by Faith.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by J. Bradford, in Jewen-Street, near Crowder's-Well,
1696.

THE EDITOR TO THE READER.
IT is hoped that this little Treatise, as well as the foregoing one, of which
this is a Continuation, will not give Offense to any; but will afford matter of
Joy and Comfort to very many, both in This, and in Several other Nations, ^o
whom they shall come. Since it ought not to be supposed, but that as many as
profess themselves to be Baptized into the Faith of JESUS, must be well enough
satisfied to know what that Faith is, from such as have been a long time
experienced in it, who must be allowed certainly to be the most capable Judges
in that, which is not to be Learned without a continual and unwearied
Application: or to be Attained to, in the Practice, by any low Degrees of
Assiduity, or by the ordinary Apprenticeship of a Few Years. And although by
this Prepared Instrument of God, some great Depths of his Love have been
already Publicly Declared, which, not being apprehended, seem but Foolishness
to the Wise of the World, and are a Stumbling block even to those who call
themselves the Children of Abraham; these two Treatises being more Experimental
cannot but find a more favorable Reception, if not from the former, yet at
least from the latter. However let it be as it will at the first, it is not at
all to be feared but that God will vindicate what is from Him: and all the
Promises in the Holy Scriptures being given to Faith, it cannot but reasonably
be expected that he will do Right to one that is such an Eminent Asserter of
it, in an Age and Day, of which it has been Foreprophesied, that Faith shall
hardly be found upon the Earth.

Whether it be not now high time for God to put to his Hand, and to manifest
his Sovereign Authority by all such Ways and Means, as he has done of Old
through the Operation of his own Faith, in all the great and mighty Elders of
it: and to show himself in the behalf of Truth and Goodness (as an Excellent
Person, who was never Censured as I know of for an Enthusiast expresses it)
which are so every where trampled on and despised, and to vindicate his own
Honor from all those Affronts and Contumelies, which stupid and Disingenuous
Men, which rebellious Spirits have cast upon it; having made Shipwreck of the
Faith that was delivered to them; deserves well to be considered and weighted
by every one. The Consideration of which, as well as of the genuine Sense of
our Blessed Master's Words, made this most Judicious Author, to conclude all
Christians under a necessary and daily Obligation to ask of God, that he would
be pleased to assert the Supreme Authority of his Government amongst Men;
whether it be by a FARTHER and CLEARER Manifestation of his Will, such as was
made by our Lord and his Holy Spirit; or whether some ACTS of Power be exerted
for the Protection and Preservation of his Obedient Subjects, etc. Dr. Burton,
Of seeking first the Kingdom of God, Published by J. TILLOTSON, 1684. p. 402.
Whence it is apparent that every true Christian may, and ought to Pray, both
for New Divine Revelation, which may be of the same Authority as that by Christ
and his Apostles, and for Miraculous Acts and Deeds, which may be a Declaration
of God's Sovereignty and Kingdom. Even so let thy Kingdom come, O God of the
whole Earth: let it come even so: yea, Amen! Thou art King, let the Earth
rejoice: yea, let the Great Isles be glad thereof. Thine is the Kingdom, and
thou will now take it to thy self, let the People be never so Impatient, yea,
let them be never so Unbelieving. JEHOVAH Reigns, let the People tremble, He
sits between the Cherubims, let the Earth stagger. Great will thou be O Lord
in Sion, and thy Scepter shall be lifted up high above all the Nations. The
Captives and Prisoners of Faith will thou set free, and thy Salvation unto them
will thou openly show, in the sight of the very Infidels. Let the Sea of thy
Love roar for Joy, and the Fullness thereof make a joyful Noise; for that the
despised Ones who have Believed thee, will thou bring with triumph into the
glorious Ark which thou have prepared for them. With Trumpets and with the
Voice of a Psalm will thou bring them in: they shall clap their Hands aloud,
they shall praise thy great and awful Name; for that thou, O Lord, art Faithful
and True, and can not disappoint any that have Faith in this thy Name.
Therefore a Fire shall go before thee, and thy Messengers shall thou send forth
as Flames of Fire: Thou shall speak unto them as in the Cloudy Pillar, and they
shall be kept as in the Ark of thy Presence. Samuel shall be seen among thy
Prophets, and Elijah among those that call upon the Lord of Israel; Moses and
Aaron among thy Priests, and great shall be the Company of the Preachers, to
publish that our God lives, and that our Life which was hidden in him shall be
made to Appear with him. Out of Philadelphia shall thy Word go forth, and in
Ramath of the Prophets shall thy Voice be known. Upon Mount Sion shall they
stand victoriously, they shall follow thee there in thy mighty Deeds, and from
the Balmy Mountain of Gilead shall the precious Ointment distill. For in the
Name of their God shall they cast out Devils, they shall speak with New
Tongues: no Weapon formed against them shall be able to prosper, they shall
take up Serpents, they shall drink any deadly thing; but nothing shall hurt
them: they shall lay Hands on the Sick, and they shall recover. So shall they
go forth, and Preach every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming
the Word with the Signs that follow Faith.

Thus has my Spirit been carried out, and constrained to bear this Testimony
to the Subject here treated on, which is the Resurrection of the Faith of
JESUS, that has lain for a long time as it were in the Grave, and is now to be
raised up early in the Third Day of the Holy Ghost. For which let us Watch,
Wait and Pray, that we may be of the First Fruits, of those that are Risen with
him; that so we may be admitted into Faith's Flying Ark here Described, which
will transport us into the New Earth of Wonders, delivering us from the Deluge
of the Curse, that is from Infidelity.

When the Great Diary of this Author, or as much as can be recovered of it,
shall come to be Published, the Several Progresses of this Life of Faith, the
Various Manuductions for it, and whatever else may conduce to its growth, will
then more evidently appear: and all that which opposes the Secret and Hidden
Divine Life, will be more easily Removed, and made to Vanish, then till then it
can be. However to those that have been inisiated into the Mystery of it,
enough is said: and it is not in the least doubted, but that they will see what
is Delivered both in the Former, and in This Treatise, to move upon a Real,
Solid and Substantial Bottom; such as all the Powers of Darkness shall be never
able to shake, or the Gates and strength of Hell to prevail against.

THE Ark of Faith, etc.
. 1. THere is a Cry that has gone forth from the Heavens these several Years
past, for the Preparing and Building of an Ark for the Lord's redeemed Ones;
and I am at this time, as the Natural Term of my Years seems to be expired, in
order hereto, again reminded of some former Prophecies, that were altogether by
me forgotten. But the Spirit of Wisdom has now presented them afresh to me, as
telling me they were in this Day to be looked into, for Faith to be thence
revived, and Prayer envigorated, that so the Heavenly Powers and Constellations
cooperating therewithal, they might bring down the Golden Floods of Love to
cover the Earth; that may bring up what has lain under the Death, that is to
say, a Resurrection Body of pure Spirits in a new springing Paradise, which is
the New Earth so much Prophesied of, upon which Righteousness must dwell.

. 2. For the Signs of the Superior Heavens do signify out as much, that the
Time is very near at hand for the Accomplishment of all these: for which End
there was shown to me an Ark in the Figure, but which was declared to me in the
Mystery to be no less then the Substance of the whole Triune Deity, who would
suddenly send forth Ambassadors from themselves, that are to be as the First
Fruits and Representatives of the Bride to gather in all such, as were to make
up the whole Jerusalem -- Bride; whose Habitation is prepared in Wisdom's
Wonderful Paradisical Principle.

. 3. Wherefore it was not long after I had received the first Manifestation and
Figurative Opening of Faith's TREE, from the Spirit of Faith growing up in me;
before I had further Notice given me, of an ARK, into which Faith's Archers who
had hitten the Mark, were to be received in. For in a little more then a Year
after that, I had this free Communication with my Lord concerning it, which
follows: And notwithstanding the latter Part of this, amongst many other of my
Papers, has been lost, yet this which has been by the All-wise Giver of it
preserved for that end, will, I know, be of some Service and Use; and therefore
have I been prevailed with, to insert it here, though I am not able to recall
what either went before, or followed after it.

February 21. 1687.
. 4. Being upon my Internal Watch in the pure stillness of my Mind, this Word
came to me, saying, The Ark of Faith which the Lord has been these many Years
in raising and building, is yet not persued, and as little understood, although
Warning upon Warning, and Sound upon Sound have gone forth for preparing and
building such an Ark, which may flote upon the broad River of the Holy Ghost:
Then was I touched at this saying of my Lord, as being conscious how he had
opened to me this effectual Door, and Mystery of Faith, charging me to keep to
the Rules of it, which upon this Word I questioned whether I had kept up to so
precisely, as I had received command to do. Whereupon the Spirit prayed in me,
Lord God Omnipotent, if I have been negligent, show it me: with much more to
that effect, in which my Heart was enlarged to pray about it. Then was it in
this wise revealed, and answered me: Thou have been learned and taught as
another Noah to prepare and build an Ark of Faith in this Invisible World:
therefore slack not, but go on forward, and I will strengthen the Studs and
Stakes thereof, which shall be as stable as Gold, that shall be laid in as a
firm bottom. Who further said to me, That there was One known by Name, that
should have of the same Spirit of Faith to concur, and build with me, and so we
should be mutually made able to strengthen one another Hands, to carry on this
great Work, as Male and Female in one Person, or Spirit, to enter first this
Golden Ark of the Presence, when reared up, for which we should receive further
Advertisement, as we should wait diligently hereupon.

. 5. Then it arose further in me by way of Query, to propound some things
relating to this Fabric unto the Great Master and Builder hereof; who answered
me most freely, to whatever my Spirit was made to Inquire. But the Particulars
of this matter being obliterated and passed away, the same Divine Spirit that
was then present with me, and ready to dictate what was requisite by me to be
known, has now (after many Years) revealed, and brought again to my Internal
Sight, this Ark of Faith, in the ensuing manner; which I am commanded to
declare and publish, for the Information and Encouragement of all those that
seek to be redeemed from the Earth, and would enter into this Ark.

February 18. 1695/6.
. 6. The Virgin Wisdom founded a joyful Cry, saying, Come and see what an Ark
is prepared for them that are Born into the Faith, as mighty Hero's to act the
Wonders of the New Creation; which Ark is made in my New Paradise, that has
not yet been inhabited; whereupon great Floods came down from the Heavens as a
Golden Rain; which covered the Face of the Mountains, as the Waters did in
Noah's time drown the Old World: So that there was a mighty Sea, which was
called the Love-Sea. Yet did it not as yet universally cover the Earth. Then
after this did descend also this mighty Ark, in which was Faith's great
Conqueror Christ Jesus; with Abraham, Noah, and all the High Elders of the
Faith; which floated upon this Sea. This Ark was all of a most diaphanous fine
Gold, with Six Wings on each side branching forth from it; so that it did Fly
as well as Swim: which Wings were full of Eyes. Then was it said to me, What
do thou think this Ark is sent down for, but to take in, and receive such as
have looked for Redemption, to be Saved from the Violence and Curse of the Old
Earth, and from the Malignancy and Venom of the Starry Kingdom? A loud Cry and
Call then came out of the Ark, saying, Come, Hasten, and escape for your Lives,
for here is a Shelter prepared for you, while those that do slight this Call,
and have not Faith to fly away, must in another Deluge be swallowed up, which
will be as the Waters in Noah's Day, falling down upon them from the Starry
Firmament, while the Children of Wisdom's Kingdom, who have obeyed her Voice,
shall here be kept, having the Wings of Power, which I had before seen, given
to them, that they might fly into this Ark. Whereinto some Eminent in the Faith
were received with great Acclamations, and Embracements, and these that first
entered had great longings to attract in others after them; which they waited
here in hope to see.

February the 19th.
. 7. Then the Great Captain of the Ark of Faith, Christ Jesus, did steer the
Ark, which with flying Wings did swiftly pass, and landed us in the New
Paradise. Where we were received by the Divine Magus's, and Masters of the
Faith, who understood the Mystery of all Miraculous Faith. This was a wonderful
Place, the like of which I had never seen, for the Walks were all paved as with
Transparent Gold, and several Temples were here, in which these Elders in
Priestly Robes all glittering did pay their Homage to the Great and Mighty
King, by whom they did work all their great Works, and give Existency to that
which never had been. Then were we led out to view the pleasant Trees and
Groves for delight and recreation: and the Trees did seem to be as of pure
Gold, and the Branches to be laden as with Diamonds, and all the variety of
Precious Stones. Besides which there were Trees also laden with all sorts of
precious Fruits for Food: and Rivers with Fountains flowing with spiced Wine,
and Cups and Flagons round about the Fountain. So we were called to drink at
these Fountains, and to eat of these Fruits, being entertained by these Magi:
to whose Care by the great Shepherd of this Fold we were committed. Who were to
usher us back to the Ark, to bring in others, and transport them hither. Which
accordingly was done.

. 8. After which it was said to me, this Ark does represent the Body of Faith,
of which the Lord Christ is the Head, of whom the Church that is to be gathered
into this is the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. Then did it float and fly with great
force, with outspread Banners: and a mighty Angel that was in it, did sound
forth his Trumpet, that all that would come out of the Babylonish Confusion,
should admittance have. At this Alarm came diverse in, the mighty Spirit of
Cyrus resting upon some, the Spirit of Elijah upon others, of Nehemiah and
Zorobabel upon a third sort, of Gideon, Barak and Deborah upon others of
Miriam, Huldah, Dorcas and Lydia upon some; of Titus and Omesimus upon others,
with the beloved Mary, Martha and Hephzibah, with numerous others, both Males
and Females that were unknown, of this and other Nations. For they flocked from
the utmost Parts of the Earth as Doves to the Windows of this Ark, having heard
the report of this Good Land, from those who had been sent thither as Spies to
seek it out. And when thus the Ark was filled, it was by a Principal Angel
sitting at this Helm, Steered to this Paradisical Land, where they were Landed
with a joyful greeting; and had all their Tents here prepared for them; this
being said to be the Plantation for the Virgin Philadelphian Church, which has
in former Treatise been Desoribed.

. 9. And upon an Inquiry made, whether all were now Landed? It was by the
Spirit of Wisdom, answered, No: For that the Ark was not to rest, but to Fly
and Float for more to be gathered in, till the Full Body of the First
Resurrection state was completed, and brought hither, to put on their Immortal
Robes, for the Triumphant Consummation of the Marriage of the New Jerusalem
Bride. This is a wonderful Mystery, which in its Fulfilling Day, will better be
understood: for which we are to wait in great clarity of Mind, and sanctity of
Heart, in pure and perfect Dedication, and Separation from all that is gross
and vulgar; for that none else can have admittance into this Holy Ark, but such
as are fully and wholly Purified by Faith.

February the 20th.
. 10. Here I thought to have stopped, as not knowing there should be any
further Addition from the Spirit of my Lord; but the next Morning, February 20.
all was opened to me again, the Ark descending, and a Commission given from the
Lord to the Beloved John, to steer it, with some Few Names born into the Love,
and Practicioners of the High Mystery of Faith, who were here with him to
abide, and as Heralds to Proclaim the Love-Message, and to call in such as
were willing upon the Report made concerning this New found Paradisical Land,
to leave the Land of the Curse, and to wind themselves out of the Sensitive
Principle, so as to be Disciplined into the Faith. So accordingly as Report was
made by these Persons of what they had seen in this New Paradisical Country,
the strength and power of Faith and Love did so manifestly appear, and give
such a Witness in those that were in this Ark, that they did attract many from
all Parts. And when the appointed number was fulfilled, the beloved Great
Apostle spread out the Wings of the Ark, in which were fixed the piercing Eyes,
that did see the way by which they were to move till they came to this goodly
Land; who then delivered up his Charge to the Princess and Governess of this
Land. Who received all out here with an amiable Reception, telling them this
Climate was of a Transmuting Property, which would put another kind of Body
upon them, that should be of such Agility, Purity, and Clarity, as the Old Body
should in all its Infirmities be swallowed up into this. Then was there given a
Roll, wherein there was written certain Rules, which they were to Act, and be
Practioners in, as the Laws of this Kingdom, whereof the Kingly Shepherd
himself did give them a Pattern, and said, Ye are to Act and Work, as my self
have done and acted, as an obedient Son to the Father. What ye have seen me do,
that are ye also to do, as Followers of me: for hitherto the Father works,
and I work, and ye must be fellow-workers with me, as risen with me: and so
must all your Works now be by the Faith of my Operation in you. Then the Roll
was Read to these that were now Landed, as it had been to those that were
before admitted to be Inhabitants.

The Laws of the High and Holy Calling, that are to be Observed by those that
are admitted into this Paradifical Land.
. 11. THese are the Particulars of that Holy Calling, which all are in this
Place to Profess.

I. The First of these, is to learn of me, (says JESUS) to be Lowly, and Meek
in Spirit, even as I am, being contented with no lesser Degree. For this is the
first Fundamental Qualification: for as much as my Lily grows only out of such
a Ground as is all leavened, and of an even Temperature, neither too Hot or
Cold, Moist or Dry; but found always in Contrition and Humility: from whence
Exaltation to Higher things will certainly arise.

II. The Second Degree which ye are to take from hence, is to know how to
understand the Manual Operation of the Hand of Faith, by which the goodly Tent
must be wrought for Shem and Japheth to dwell together in great and full
enlargement. For through the Exercise and nimble Activity of this Hand, all
Provisions necessary will be brought in for the Bridegroom and Bride to live
upon.

III. A Third Particular relating to your High Calling is to attend, and
officiate in the most Holy Inward Court, there to wait, and be at hand to
receive evermore fresh Command: as also to hear, and learn what further is
requisite to reach to the highest Accomplishment toward Natures most Perfect
Restoration.

IV. The Fourth Particular, or Law, is to come to a putting forth of all the
Essential Properties into Activity, according to what ye have seen, and been
instructed in from the Father and me; stirring up the Gift, that so it may not
lie useless in you in any Degree.

V. Ye are not to think it sufficient that ye have Learned Part of my Calling;
but ye are i^ ^is Place to learn All, even to the full Unity; according to the
Example which I have set you. Therefore come, set your Hand of Faith to Work
and Act, as I your Lord have done; who expect you should come up to those
Measures I have set before you: who am, and will be to you, the same flowing
Sourse of Life-quickning Power, if called out, that I was when planted in your
Likeness.

Behold! I am at hand to do as great and mighty Works, as ye are able to
receive. So will I imprint not only the Image of Purity, but of Power upon you;
that so ye may full out be made Partakers of my Profession. Which does not only
consist in Love, Meekness, Gentleness, Patience, Wisdom, and Soundness of
Judgment, but also in the Faith of the Omnipotency. For in my Calling it is
only requisite to have Light and Understanding, to find out the Mystery of this
High Art, but Strength and Might to Work out the same from the Eternal Magia
Root; from whence the Birth of Power does proceed. Now before ye can
Proficients and Practitioners in all things answerable to your President herein
be; ye must come to be strong, and find ability to turn about that which moves
the Creating Word: by which all lost Dominion may be Renewed. But what can draw
forth that, except it be somewhat, that is Equal in Might with it self; which
will be found out if the Will-Spirit sinks deep into its own Central Root. From
whence the Life sappy-Power may spring, which will do Miracles at Will. This
was the Principal Work and Business belonging to my Calling, which on the Earth
I did, and yet do, appear again to walk, and to be admired through the raising
again of this Mighty Power, which in all of you shall wonderfully work, that
have ceased now to live promiscuously in that low Temporizing State, which I
have called you out of: that so capable ye might be of this Worthy and
Honorable Vocation; exactly in, and according to, the Method that I have shown
to you: That so not only in the Hopes circling about, but coming to the very
Manual Exercises themselves, ye may reap, and live upon the Benefits which this
Pure Abstracted Calling shall and will abundantly bring in, and not only bare
Grain, that is for and to your own Accounts; which the least in your Eye must
be.

VI. For Abel- like ye are to bring the First Fruits of this high extracted
Calling, to sacrifice all in a flaming Oily Perfu^^ unto your Great
Melchizedeck.

VII. Further ye are Excited to feed upon no other Fruits, but what the Tree of
Faith does give forth. I am that Tree which ye must feed upon all other Trees
forbidden are, which cherish up the Life of Sensibility. Therefore fix your
Eye, and center your Heart upon that which may nourish up this Birth of Faith,
till it reach to its full Maturity: then will it come to understand what
Sovereignty and Dominion it is entitled to, as a King and Lord over all.

. 12. Then Queried I with my Lord, What was meant by those Trees which I had
seen all laden with Precious Stones, and the Trunks of them of such fine Gold?
To which it was Answered me, that those did run Parallel with the New
Jerusalem, representing the Bride of the Lamb that was thus to be adorned. For
it was shown me, that these Trees were Representative Figures of those that
were brought into the Ark, and here Landed; whose Clothing was to be in such
variety of Sparkling Glory, that from the Golden Sap of Faith should be always
fresh and flourishing.

. 13. Then I Queried further of him that showed me these things, Whether it
were possible for Mortals, whose dwelling was in this lower World, to know such
a Translation as this? It was hereupon Replied, There is no less a thing
designed: the Time and Age for this is already come to some, that in the Inward
Figure as Representatives stand, who are in Spirit transported into this
Mystical Land. But in obscurity they must be, till the Hand of Power shall rend
away the Veil, that has upon this Glory a Covering been; but yet the Faith is
growing, and when to a full Body of Strength it shall reach, then shall ye see
the Wonders fly from each of these bright lustrous Trees, which in (...) New
Paradisical Earth shall multiply numerously.

. 14. It was then further said, To you that attentive are to these my Sayings,
and obedient shall be to my Rules, I will put no other Burden upon you, but to
hold fast the Faith, that springs from the Golden Stem of Love; wherein your
Strength shall be as Anointed Cherubs still to move, your Rest to find in me,
where no Annoyance can ever be. For this is a New Time, in which the New World
will appear: therefore spare ye not it to declare, and proclaim. By this now
let all understand, what a wonderful Time is at the Door.

. 15. Upon which my Spirit was carried to cry, O Mighty Alpha and Omega, Arise
thou and Gather in, by thy great Power and Strength, into this Ark such as are
to make up the First Resurrection-Body; to whom thou will be the Head, the
Crown, the Joy and the Glory. Verily, this is the Time in which thou will send
forth thy Messengers that shall sound the Jubilee Horn, and pour out therefrom
that rich Anointing Oil to consecrate a Priestly Race, that shall no other
thing mind, but to pursue, and follow after that which is highly Divine. For
which there is this Day great Travail: O God, let not the Lordly Birth, which
is the King and Heir of Faith, any longer stick: let thy Mighty Arm and Hand
take hold of it, that no more drawings back there may be, but the Son of Joy
and Laughter we may see. For surely the Virgin Bride preparing is her self, in
expectation that her Kingly Bridegroom will no longer stay, but make speed and
come away; that all Redeemed from the Earth may be, that have waited in the
Faith this Resurrection-State to see. And in this New World, do thou, O great
Shepherd, plant us, as Trees of Righteousness and Glory, circling about thee,
who the over-spreaking Tree of Life, and splendorous Bightness art, under whose
Shadow we shall grow most fruitfully.

. 16. Neither pray we alone for these First Fruits, but that a plentious new
Sowing of thy Spirit may go forth, to bring in the rest of the Harvest, that
lies yet as under Death and Barrenness. For thou have said thy Ark shall not
take up its Rest till it has made its flight to all Corners of the Earth. The
Trumpet of thy Love shall such a loud Cry send forth, throughout all Nations,
that constrained they may be, to fly as swift Dromedaries, and bring their
Offerings into thy sacred Ark. Even so, Blessed JESUS, let all these Prophecies
fulfilled be, both what has been in past Ages given, and has been of late so
plentifully Renewed, through them whom thou have for this end chosen, though
not worthy to be named, yet known by Name in thy Book of Life, which sufficient
is: who shall never cease, or any Rest take up in, until thou have made a
Glorious Spotless Church upon the Earth to appear, as a Flying Ark with
Banners, whose Eyes as Lamps of Fire may go forth, to gather in the whole
Priestly and Heavenly Host, from all Quarters and Parts of the Earth. Even so,
with thy Triumphant Church,

Shall we the Song of our Redemption Sing
Glory, Glory, Glory to the Triune King.
Even so: Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas some Things have been Scandalously set forth, and Printed under the
Name of this Author to the Reproach of Truth, and the Dishonor of that which
is Holy, it is thought fit for the putting a Stop to such Impostures, and the
Evil which might thence ensue, to give a Catalogue of the Books which the
Author has hitherto Published.

THE Heavenly Cloud, or, the Ascension Ladder, 4to. 1682. p. 40. The Revelation
of Revelations, an Essay toward the Unsealing, Opening, and Discovering of the
Seven Seals, the Seven Thunders, and the New Jerusalem State. 4to. 1683. p.
130. The Enochian Walks with God* ^ound out by a Spiritual Traveller. 4to.
1694. p. 38. The Laws of Paradise; Given forth by Wisdom to a Translated
Spirit. 8vo. 1695. p. 69. The Wonder of God's Creation manifested in the
Variety of Eight Worlds, as they were made known Experimentally to the Author.
8vo. 1695. p. 89. The Message to the Philadelphian Society, whithersoever
dispersed over the whole Earth, together with a Call to the several gathered
Churches. 12ves. p. 108. 1696. The Tree of Faith: or the Tree of Life,
springing up in the Paradise of God; from which all the Wonders of the New
Creation must proceed 12ves. p. 122. 1696. The Ark of Faith. p. 33.

