A SHORT DECLARATION BY Colonel EDWARD MASSY, (one of the Imprisoned MEMBERS
of the HOUSE OF COMMONS; Lately a Prisoner at S. James's-house, Westminster;
under the Power of the Sword, in the hands of that Rebellious Army under the
Command of the Lord FAIRFAX) For his Vindication.

TOGETHER WITH HIS PROTESTATION AGAINST The Illegal and Tyrannical
proceedings of the said ARMY. January 19. An. Dom. 1648.

PSALM 37. ver. 32, and 33. The Wicked watches the Righteous, and seeks to
slay him.

The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1649.

A SHORT DECLARATION BY Colonel Edw. Massey, etc.
COuld I have satisfied my thoughts in that Manifestation of my faithfulness
and zeal to Gods Cause, the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, which has
sufficiently been held forth, and witnessed as well by my former Actings, as
late sufferings in, and for the same, I should gladly have rested therein
content: And although to the late Aspertions cast jointly upon us the
imprisoned and secluded Members of Parliament, by a paper Entitled An humble
Answer of the General Council of Officers of the Army under His Excellency
Thomas Lord Fairfax, to the Honorable House of Commons, concerning the
Imprisoned and sucluded Members, etc. We have jointly Answered, not doubting
(if may pass the Press) but it will sufficiently satisfy all un-byassed and
indifferent Readers, and return those Scandalls upon their own Heads, showing
themselves to be the Traitors, Apostates, Self-seekers, corrupt Members, etc.
which they would fain Charge upon us.

And yet, because there lies not only an obligation upon me in common, with
those my Fellow Members. (as with them borne under one King of the same Nation,
brought up in, and professing one and the same glorious Faith, called to the
same trust in Parliament; further, tied by several Oaths of Alegeance,
Supremacy, Protestation, and Solemn League and Covenant together in
Conjunction and Brotherhood:) But further also, something as a Soldier,
(before I was called to the Honor of being a Member of Parliament) wherein I
may seem more concerned, as one that with his Sword has openly, and before
the face of the world Justified and Vindicated (according to what God enabled
me) that, the best of Causes which the Parliament then Asserted, Declared for,
and bound themselves by a solemn Oath and Covenant to follow and pursue.

1. I shall therefore, first in that my undertaking, desire to clear and
vindicate my self from any false aspersions which are, or may, by malice it
self, be unjustly cast upon me, for the blasting of my Reputation.

2. And next, I shall give my reasons of my freeing my self from the hands of
my unjust Adversaries, and Gaolers.

And being by Gods great mercy and goodness at present from under their hands,
I shall protest against both them, and all their adherents as Actors of
violence, and as Unlawful, Disloyal, Covenant-breakers, and Perjured persons,
if they shall persist in their treasonable Desinnes.

In the beginning of these unhappy and sad differences between the KING and
His Parliament, I beheld the Transactions, and read the several Declarations
of them both, (with the best diligence and circumspection I was able;) And
finding both Parties professing much the same thing, (as to the peace and
welfare of the Church and Kingdom, (only differing in the way) I was not a
little at a stand; but after a longer contest, and that the Royal Standard was
set up at Nottingham, And finding that the Parliament in their several
Addresses to His Majesty, still continuing their former Professions of duty to
Him, etc. According to their former Protestation, and many Declarations, that
they never intended, either co alter the Fundamental Government of the
Kingdom, by King, Lords, and Commons, etc. But that their taking up the Sword
was only for the Defending of His Majesty's Person and Authority, for the
removal of the evil Councillors, that so His Throne might be established in
Righteousness, and for the bringing of His Majesty to the Parliament, and to
make Him a glorious King, and the like. As also for the Defense of our
Religion, and settling a happy Reformation in the Church (which by some
Superstitious Bishops had received some blemishes in their Discipline, not
becoming the purity and simplicity of the Gospel:) The bringing Delinquents to
condign Punishment, and lastly (amongst many others) the preservation of
themselves, and Privileges of Parliament from Ruin and Destruction, of that
Sword threatened against them for doing of their duty in the performance of the
Kingdoms Trust, etc.

Upon these Grounds, considering that it was possible for His Majesty by some
about Him (who only aimed at their own Advantage and Design) to be misled, and
drawn aside, to the danger of the Kingdom, and His own prejudice, which he
might not foresee, much less intend.

And next, looking upon the Parliament, the Kings Greatest Council, the
Collective body, and Trustees of the People, and by His Majesty's own free Act
confirmed to be a Parliament of Power, and so their Ordinances made Authentic
and of Force, notwithstanding the denial of His Majesty's presence, being both
knowing men and Religious, I supposed they would not possibly be so mad or
wretched, as not to see the things they prosecuted first, to be Just; and next,
the way thereunto to be warrantable and lawful, supposing none of them could
have any thought or aim beyond the Public good (which is the best Good)
especially having so largely declared to the world, they intended nothing
beyond what they had professed to His Majesty (as before) I was (with diverse
other faithful Gentlemen) induced to receive a Commission, as Lieutenant
Colonel, to the Right Honorable the Earl of Stamford, under the Hand and Seal
of His Excellency the Earl of Essex, (ever of beloved and renowned Memory) in
which was specified the ground of my taking up Arms, to be for the Defense of
the true Protestant Religion, the safety of His Majesty's Person, and of the
Parliament, the Preservation of the Laws, Liberties, and peace of the
Kingdom, and the Protection of His Majesty's Subjects, from violence and
oppression, etc.

In which, and according to the Tenor of which, I served in the sincerity of my
heart, without any Equivocation, or further Intentions, according to that
little skill God had endued me with, how faithfully, and to how much advantage
to them, and their Cause, in the midst of all discouragements; the Parliament
and Kingdom cannot be ignorant; and how little personal advantage I have made
by the said service (more then that content I have had in my self and
Conscience, making it my delight to do, and perform my Trust to the
Parliament and Kingdom) I do not appeal to those Officers and Soldiers that
served with me, as also those Parts and Countries wherein I most served, and
through which I Marched: And therefore need not despair to hope that when God
in mercy shall please to settle the Kingdom in Peace, I shall find from the
Parliament and Kingdom that Justice, in their care for the paying unto me my
Arreares (which is great) which they have not denied to diverse, whose
faithfulness or services have not spoken louder for them, then mine have done
for me; Nor whose expenses for the advantage of their service came in
competition with mine, which those Votes and promises of 1000 l. per an. (not
yet performed unto me) put me upon. And now having thus faithfully served the
Parl. and Kingdom, finding my self for the same (only) rewarded with a Prison,
my complaint of the same is the more; For I dare appeal to the very Hearts and
Consciences of my greatest enemies. (who falsely lay upon me the enjoying of Sir
Ioh: Winters Estate, which he himself enjoys by their special favor, and
for their particular service) either now sitting in the House of Commons, or in
the General Council of the Army, (as they create, and so style themselves) or
any other: That they have nothing either worthy of Restraint, or bones to lay
to my charge, only their own sinful fears, which to their own souls they have
contracted by their own horrid Apostasy, from all their former professions of
Zeal to Gods Glory and Church, of Honor and Safety to the King, and His
Posteriiy, and of faithfulness and Obedience to the Parliament, and in them
to the whole Kingdom for their peace and welfare. And therein, and in order to
their further Designs, (by blood and cruelty) to over-turne all the
foundations of Government, both in Church and State; And to enslave the
Kingdom, by bringing it under their Vassellage and iron Yoke; the satisfying
of their own Lusts, Covetousness, Pride, and Ambition.

These are the true Grounds of their Imprisoning my self, with the other
faithful Gentlemen, my Fellow Members, who have ever stood firm to our first
Principalls, and hated to join hands with them in their such horrid and
Treasonable Designs, and Actings against either the Kings Person, the
Parliament, the Constitutions and Laws of the Kingdom, or the welfare of the
People: All which, by diverse Oaths, and our Covenant, we are sworn to
Preserve and Maintain.

And now they seeing that my self could not be brought (by Gods mercy to me)
unto any compliance with them in their sinful ways, by all their temptations
and allurements; but on the contrary, found my expressions and resolutions to
oppose them therein, according to my duty and trust, (which God enabling me, I
shall ever do) They, for the expression of their malice, as well as the
manifestation of their fears, most injustly and illegally secured my Person
(with diverse other Gentlemen) and made me a Prisoner to their treacherous and
tyrannical Sword: In the mean time, aspersing me with all manner of scandals,
lies, and false reports of their own forging, That so the unknowing credulous,
might be surprised by them, in giving credit to something thereof, (at which
such as know me would laugh to scorn at the reporting) posting me from place
to place, and from Prison to Prison, detaining me full 6 Weeks without
assigning or showing Cause thereof, or laying any particular Crime to my
particular Charge, against their own sentance and Maxim (as a matter of great
injustice to others (of their Faction, though Legally Imprisoned) to be
detained Prisoner above 48 hours, without giving in a particular Charge
against them; so that I having been kept so long, and saw that my Imprisonment
was only by a forceable hand, and no Legallity in it (as at our Protest given
in at the King's Head in the Strand it was confessed by Marshall General
Lawrance; and since also confessed by the General Council of the Army in
their humble Answer to the House of Commons before cited. And that I could
expect no Legal trial or Justice no more than he that is fallen into the hands
of Thieves and Murderers, (the Case being the same, or worse) as also upon
good consideration had of the little advantage my stay would be, and what
advantage by Gods mercy my freedom (from those hands of violence) might prove
to a future justifying not only of my self, but of all the rest of the
injuriously imprisoned Members, and our joint Cause: I supposed, seeing the
Almighty opened a door for my delivery, it had been a denying of his mercies to
me, and a tempting of the Lord to have given me over to the lusts and malice of
those mine, and the Kingdoms Enemies; and therefore, by Gods leave, I gave my
self a Habeas Corpus to enjoy as much of that freedom that was my own, as
that it should please God to give me for the good and advantage of his Cause
and People; which Covenant-breakers, and Perjurers, have so villified and
trodden under feet: And notwithstanding my freedom taken, yet do I hereby
profess, that if at any time, I shall by a Legal Authority be Called to
Answer any thing that may be laid to my Charge, I shall willingly and readily
do the same, as well for the Vindication of my self, as the satisfaction of
all men whatsoever; although I, and all honest men must protest against that
Jurisdiction this Army has usurped to themselves, as not only Illegal, but
Tyrannical, and Treacherous; as also against that part of the House of Commons,
now sitting under the Power of the Sword; as no House, nor competent Judges
over my self, or any other Member of Parliament or other, until the Houses be
freed from all violence and force, and all the Members be restored.

And lastly, since above all brands of Infamy, the name of Hypocrites, and
Traitor, strikes and wounds deepest at the heart of any Person, if but
under a common or civil capacity, much more such as are truly Englishmen and
Christians, and far more yet, of such as not only have made profession of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, but sworn, and Covenanted to maintain the same, the
glory thereof; That I may clear my self before men (as I hope I have approved
my self to God, I do in his presence, who is the searcher of all hearts, in
all humility make this following Profession and Protestation:

That I never intended (in all the services I have done for the Parliament and
Kingdom, either as a Soldier in the field, or as a Member of the House of
Commons) the least evil toward His Majesty's Royal Person King CHARLES my
undoubted Legal King and Sovereign, or to His Royal Issue, or Posterity, His
Crown or Dignity; but engaged in the Parliaments service with a clear
intention and sincere heart according to the Parliaments Protestations,
Declarations, Solemn League and Covenant, for the good of the KING and His
Posterity, the Parliament and their Privileges, the Establishment of the Laws
of the Land, and this poor distressed and oppressed Kingdom, for its peace
and welfare.

And therefore I shall add this following Protestation, That I take that
violence offered to the KING'S Majesty's Person, to the Houses of Parliament
and their Members, and to the Laws of the Kingdom, by the Army under the
Command of Thomas Lord Fairfax; to be a most damnable and treasonable Act, and
contrary to that faith they have sworn to God, or trust reposed in them by the
Parliament and Kingdom: And do hereby further protest, being induced hereunto
by no other motive or argument, than for the satisfying of my own Conscience,
and in duty to GOD, the KING, Parliament, and Kingdom, not through any the
least thought of personal Revenge for any injustice I (in my particular) have
suffered at their hands; for, God that knows my heart, knows that I bear
not unto the Person of any one amongst them, the least malice, but gladly shall
pass by any injury they have done unto my particular Person or honor: But to
testify my Abhorrency to their ways of sin and violence, as thereby they
make themselves Enemies to God and his Church, and truly wish and pray for
them, that yet they may look back and Repent, that so they may obtain mercy
and pardon from God, and not that they, by their going on in the same, be
punished and followed with divine vengeance, which is the portion of all the
Contemners of his word, etc.

Lastly, that if the said Army, The General Council of the Army (as they call
themselves) or any other Rank or quality of men of what sort soever their
Assistants, shall design, act, or do any thing further against the KING'S
Majesty's Person, or Office, or against any of those other ends we are obliged
(according to the tenor of our Engagements by our several Oaths of
Allegiance, Supremacy, Protestation, and Solemn League and Covenant) to
maintain; or shall endeavor to introduce any New form of Government,
contrary to our Laws and former Constitutions of the Land (which every
faithful Subject is with his life and fortune bound to maintain) I shall not
only look upon them, and repute them the most vile and perjured Traitors in
the world (as by whom both our Nation, and Religion, is become not only a
hissing to all our Neighbor Nations round about, but our very Religion made to
stink in the nostrils of the very Adversaries of the truth of God, by their
hypocrisy; and to cause all the Reformed Churches in the whole world to cover
their faces with shame on our behalfs) But also to my last breath with what
strength God shall ever put into my hand (his Grace enabling me) use it for
bringing of them and their Adherents, as Traitors, to all exemplary and
condign punishment: and I doubt not but God will stir up the hearts of all
faithful Patriots, who are tied by any of the aforesaid Oaths, or otherways,
to resolve as one man with hearts and hands to pursue the like resolutions to
Gods glory, his Church and Peoples good, and this poor Kingdoms happiness.

POSTSCRIPT.
THat this DECLARATION wrote with my own Hand may pass the Press, is my
desire and hopes, though neither my opportunity or time would permit me to see
it Corrected or Printed.

EDW: MASSY.

FINIS.

