A SPEECH SPOKEN By an Honorable Knight IN THE House of Commons UPON THE
DELIVERY Of the City Petition: Being Tuesday the 27 of June, 1648.

London, Printed in the year 1648.

A SPEECH SPOKEN By an Honorable Knight IN THE House of Commons Upon the
Delivery of the CITY PETITION Being Tuesday the 27 of June, 1648.
Mr. Speaker,
AS long as I have breath in my body I shall stand for the honor of this House;
I have told you when I came first in the House, that Credit and Reputation was
the life or soul of the Parliament should be dissolved, then be broken or
bank-routed; alas your sacred public faith is very much fallen to a noble in the
pound.

It was a great comfort unto me when I was in prison to observe the brave
resolution of my fellow sufferers, and other worthy Citizens that came to visit
us; though they were brought very low, and much persecuted, yet they lifted up
their hearts to God and prayed for the prosperity of the Parliament; and said.
That God was the same, the Cause was the same, and Truth was the same;
therefore they would never desert the ^^^^iament.

In the Petition delivered unto you, there you may see apparently not only the
sense of the City, but of the whole Kingdom; all are weary of the War, and
desire a Personal Treaty with his Majesty, which they conceive will produce a
safe and well-grounded Peace.

And M. Speaker, I must do my duty and deal freely with you; both the City and
Kingdom groans under a grievous Monopoly, and they think all things are
monopolized. As first, they declare publicly that the Kings person is
monopolized to a few hands of a party (I have forgot what you call it) and it
is the table talk every where, that the King was juggled in that box or
mouse-trap of the Isle of Wight.

M. Speaker, You have declared the King is the fountain of Honor and Justice,
and every subject has an equal share in him; and the people begin to murmur
and complain, that the King is hardly and cruelly dealt with; and so are they,
being deprived of him; for you see the people had as lieve want the Sun as want
a King, I, and King Charles too. It is high time to resolve, to content the
people, their burdens are intolerable, they are galled sore; and you know a
galled horse will touch dangerously.

And M. Speaker, I cannot but commend your wisdom in being tender of the Kings
Person, in examining the business of Osborne, concerning the poisoning of the
King, which will give the people great satisfaction, for they will hardly
believe His Majesty is living, except the sea him: But there is an other
business of higher concernment, which I fear your Brethren of Scotland will
remind us of, which was the principal cause of all our latter troubles, namely,
the taking away the King from Holdenby, contrary to the Agreement of both
Nations. I am afraid this may be thrown in our dish another day, and be made
one of the grounds of the Scots coming into England. I pray you prevent it by
anticipating them, and put it in a way to be examined by a Committee of both
Houses.

It is generally spoken, That all offices and places of profit are monopolized.
I was lately upon the Exchange, and there was great complaining of the deadness
of trade, that no Bullion came to the Tower, and that within these 9 months
200000. l. was gone to other Countries, which had come for England only for
fear of new troubles, the Presbyterians lying under such a Cloud; and that
there was little or no Manufacture, that thousands of people, both in London
and in the Country, must strave for want of work, and how that the Seamen were
discontented.

A Gentleman stood by, who overhearing them, replied; That he wondered at their
discourse, for that there was never such trading as at present; every body was
amazed, and said it was a paradox. The Gentleman answered no; I will be judged
by your selves: Was there ever such trading amongst the lower and poorest of
the people and a generation that call themselves the Saints, why! they have
all, said he, and none can get a penny except he be of that faction.

M. Speaker, Long ago I gave you warning of these Monopolists, which I called
the Royal Presbyterians, and Royal Independents, Statesmen, that sought
themselves, and to set up their faction to the destruction of the Public.
This Government will not prosper with us; I am confident God will never honor
the Grandees, to do the great work he has in hand by them; therefore, seeing
you have experience, avoid these Rocks of Scylla and Carybdis, and sail between
both; Let us lay aside all faction, and let us unite amongst our selves, and
forget, and forgive personal animosities, and apply our selves solely to the
Public.

The chief cause is removed, for we have no money left to give our selves;
Therefore let us do righteous things, and win the hearts of the People. God can
do his work by few as well as by many. M. Speaker, loquere ut videam; give the
City such a satisfactory answer, as they may speedily reap, and see the fruits
of it: I hope the worthy Gentlemen, whom we have nominated to draw it up, will
do it effectually. M. Speaker I had almost forgot one thing, which I believe
was omitted by the Sheriff of London. There was lately a Common Hall, and a
great expectation of Tumults, but the business of the day was carried on in an
admirable good order, for there was none but Livery-men there, and they watched
one another when the Sheriffs were chosen, which was unanimous. There was a
Paper handed to the Lord Major, the chief head was, That they would engage
their lives and fortunes, that if the Parliament would bring the King to treat
at London, that the King and Parliament might treat freely and safely without
any Tumults. I thought to acquaint you with this passa^e, and recommend it to
the consideration of your Committee.

FINIS.

