THE DECLARATION Of Major General MASSEY Concerning coming into England to
assist His Dread Sovereign Lord the KING: AND To be Lieutenant-Generall under
His Highness the Prince of WALES. With his Message to the Queen of England,
and the Prince concerning the same.

Also, a Relation of the relieving of Colchester, and a List of the Duke of
YORK his Navy, concerning their proceedings, and their sailing toward England.

Likewise, joyful Propositions from the House of Peers, concerning a
Personal Treaty with the Kings Majesty, to compose all differences between the
King and His People, and to settle the Kingdom in Peace and Unity, to the
great joy and comfort of all true-hearted Subjects.

July 13 Printed for general satisfaction of all that desires Peace.

THE DECLARATION Of Major General MASSEY Concerning His coming into England,
to assist the King Majesty, and to be Lieutenant General under His Highness
the Prince of Wales.
SIR,
BY an Express from Hamborough it is certified, that Major Gen^ Massey (...)
amongst the Swi^^ers, and is made L^e^^^ Genesis of the Swedish Forces who are
designed to join with the Venetians.

But it is said that he has received several invitations from the Queen of
England, and the Prince of Wales to engage for England, and to receive
commission under His Highness, as Lieut. General, to assist His Royal
Father, and to restore Him to His just Rights and Privileges. But he returned
this Answer, and Declared,

That seeing her Majesty, and his Highness, were so graciously pleased, as to
honor his person with such a noble and Military Title, he would endeavor to
make the world an object to behold his loyalty, protesting to sacrifice his
life against any foreign enemy, who should endeavor the in^ringment of the
least tittle of the R^yall Prerogative; but to engage against his Native
Country, he were resolved to the contrary, saying, he would never draw his
sword more to involve England in blood.

Here is great preparations for the entertainment of the Prince of Wales, who
is said to be coming from Callice attended by diverse Lords and Gentlemen, but
their design is not yet known.

Diverse old Soldiers and Commanders are come out of France and other parts, to
this City. They give out, an if they had a Design for England, and we are the
rather conduced to believe the same, by reason of the Revolted ships still
lying in Gorith Haven, who it is supposed are to transport the said Officers
and Soldiers into England.

The Duke of York has declared his great unwillingnesse to engage in the said
ships, until such time that He can be accommodated with money, arms, and
other Furniture belonging to War.

From the Hague in Holland, July 12. 1648.
Postscript.
SIR,
SInce the close of this Letter, here arrived a Post from Gorith, who says,
That just upon his coming away, the revolted ships were weighing anchor, and
intends to be in the Downs very suddenly, and to put in for a personal Treaty.

We hear, that they have set forth a Declaration, declaring the grounds and
reasons of this their Engagement, and their resolution to maintain the Ancient
Government and known laws of the Kingdom of England, and to preserve and
defend the Kings Majesty's Royal Person, and to endeavor the re-inthroning of
him in his Royal Palace at White Hall, I have sent you here enclosed a perfect
List of the Ships now intended for the Downs, and the number of their Ordnance.

A perfect List of His Majesty's ships, that lately revolted from the
Parliament.
Ordnance. 1. The Constant Reformation. 56 2. The Convertine 46 3. The Swallow
40 4. The An elope 40 5. The Satisfaction 38 6. The Hynd 36 7. The Roe-buck 40
8. The Crescent 40 9. The Pelican 40 10. The Rainbow 40 11. The Garland 40 12.
The Revenge 32
By letters from the North it is advertized as follows, That M. Genesis Lambert
has received a Letter from D. Hamilton, intimating, that the Parl. of England
had not given satisfaction to the Parl. of Scotland in their desires sent unto
them, for the ^^ing whereof he was to come with an Army into the Kingdom of
England, in which enterp^ize he expected no opposition from him, Gen Lambert
returned him answer, That as to non satisfaction ^^om the Pa^l of England; he
had not to say; but as to his coming to an hostile way into England he had
authority from Parl. to resist any power not raised by them, and therefore
declared that he and his Army would oppose, and fight with them as traitors and
enemies to the Kingdom of England, and that this great breach of Covenant
between the two Nations, he doubted not but would be revenged upon them to
their utter ruin, etc. This Letter together with the Answer was read in the
House of Commons, July 12 and the Commons voted that they approve what May Gen
Lambert had sent in answer to the said Letter of D. Hamiltons.

The House of Commons at a Conference gave several Re^sons for a Treaty with
his Majesty he being at liberty before any Acts be agreed upon.

First, Its the desire of the Kingdom or Parliament of Scotland. Secondly, The
Agreement will be more Authenticke. Thirdly, Its probable, having no Army in
being, he will condescend to that which at Uxbridge and Oxford he refused*
Fourthly, Its not the way of Treaties to confirm any before all is agreed,
especially those of most concernment;
And that which chiefly will be insisted upon or to this effect the Commons
concurrence was desired God grant a good uniting.

A Fight in Worcestershire.
SIR,
IT cannot be imagined with what skill and policy, the Cavalier party have acted
in several parts of the Kingdom, for raising of forces to renew the first
quarrel, and put it into a new combustion, for which purpose many Agents have
bin employed, not only in this c^unty, but also in Herefordshire. W^rwickshere,
and. other parts of the Kingdom; and although they have bin very private in
their meetings, and listing of men, yet we bless God they are discovered and
some of those which were principal actours herein apprehended their persons
secured, which may much co^^uce to the peace and quiet of these parts,
especially (...) our neighbor Counties do the like, one of the chief in this
County which is suspected to have a hand in this business, is the Lord Dudleys
son, there be also five more apprehended but they shall be namelesse, till a
fuller discovery, be made of this business, some of them hahaving already
confessed that there was a general design to have raised forces, in all the
Counties of the Kingdom, these Gent. had many private meetings as Bromsgrave
and Kittermaster, and had gotten some forces in a readiness, but the whole
plot being now made manifest, the well-affected in these parts declare
themselves against their proceedings, and do utterly abhor their actions, and
say their actions are destructive to the settled Government of this Kingdom.

One of their Actors being apprehended, confessed that they had a design to
secure Hereford, Kidderminster, and other places, for the King, relating the
day, time, and place of their Randevouz; whereupon a party of Horse were drawn
out, and sent to the said place appointed for meeting, who came thither
undiscovered and upon the approach of the Royalists, they fell upon them,
killed four, and took diverse prisoners, amongst whom was Col. Dudley, and
diverse other eminent commanders.

This Plot was discovered accidentally by Captain Juets Dragoons, who found in
a Corn field twelve B^rrels of Powder, great store of Match, and other
necessaries for War.

Worcester July 12. 1648. July 13.
A great rumor was echoed amongst diverse persons of the relieving of
Colchester, by 3 ships from Holland who landed 2000 men; but no credence can be
given to this: therefore, I give it you as a report rather of them that would
have it so, then of any certainty that it is so, etc.



FINIS.

