The Triumph stained.

Being an ANSWER to TRVTHS TRIVMPH, i. e. a Pamphlet so called, and lately set
forth By Mr. John Wildman, a pretended Gentleman of the Lifeguard to his
Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax.

WITH A full and perfect Account of an INFORMATION OF Dangerous and bloody
consequence, given in to the House of Lords (at their Bar) January the 18.
1647. against Lieut. Col. John Lilburn and John Wildman.

By George Masterson, Preacher of the Gospel at Shoreditch near London.

1 COR. 4.5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who
both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God.

London, Printed by JOHN FIELD. 1647.

The Triumph stained.
TRuth is an high born Princess, she is eldest daughter of Heaven, of blood
with the Son of God made man; the natural beauty that she wears, shows of what
house she comes; the bright rays that shine in her face, lead captive every
soul that has eyes to behold her: There are very few (sons of utter darkness)
that resist Truth as Truth, or lift up the heel against her for her own sake:
Such is the majesty of Truth, that every knee bows down to her apprehended
Chair of State; such is her birth, and beauty, and credit, that every man
desires to have her image and superscription stamped upon his opinion and
practice, and thus it comes to pass (more then sometimes) that the Painters
mistress is adored instead of the Goddess: and as many times it is seen, that
Columns and Statues erected to Truth, do hold forth nothing more then the great
names of men that reared them in golden letters, D. VAE VERITATI. D. D.C.
Q.A.B. Thus in the Jousts and Tiltings dedicated to the honor of Truth, the
splinters of a broken lance contribute more to the credit of the Champions
prowess, then the honor of the Lady. And thus in the Triumphs of Truth (so
called) we see a man (like unto our selves in all things) drawn in a Triumphant
Chariot.

It was but the other day that I beheld a mortal man (as if he had found the
Breast plate of Aaron) hurried in a Triumphant paper Chariot about the Royal
Exchange: The Chariot was dedicated to the Suns daughter, To fair Truth; and it
carried this mark in the forehead of it, Truths Triumph. I honor the Virgin so
far, that I cannot but send this cordial Exclamation (after her Chariot) Vivat
Regina, long live fair Truth! Yea, though her furious Charioter should drive
his wheels over all that I have Sensual and Mortal, the last breathing of my
soul should contribute to her Triumph a vivat illa!

Ride on fair Truth; the wheels are slow
On which thy Chariot moves below:
Go mount thy Fathers Car, and mix
Thy purer rays with his; there fix,
Till thou thy course in light have run,
Circling the world as does the Sun.
Thus by her Father bright Sol's side,
Let mighty Truth Triumphant ride.
But truly when the heat of the wheels is a little over, and Truth comes to
cast up her account, what she has gained or saved in the Gentleman's intended
Triumph, I believe she will tell her Friends with tears in her eyes, that she
never blushed more in any day of Triumph, never did she ride so hooded and
masked in a Triumphant Chariot before that day.

You (O my friends) that have seen my riding (will she say) in the days of my
true Triumphs, my Chariot open, my face, and breast, and hands naked, my feet
and legs, and thighs bare, did not you wonder at such a winter dress, as I
appeared in that day? did not you admire to see me in my furs and saples?
Truly, I thought (however the Gentleman's intentions were for a Triumph) that I
scarce stood above the proportion of one doing penance in his sheets.

But, Gentlemen, if you will not go to the price of it as Truths Triumph, you
shall have it (rather then stand out) at the lower rate of Treachery
Anatomized; and thus if it do not make a good God, yet it may pass for a pretty
tolerable Devil.

Truths Triumph, or Treachery Anatomized: See, Gentlemen, what a Triumph of
Truth you are like to have, when she comes mounted upon an Anatomy; I have
scarce seen a private Soldier bestride such bare bones. The meanest Error that
beats upon the hoof, triumphs in a better equipage then this Gentleman's Truth
does. And truly, not only her palfrey (the forementioned lean thing) but her
clothes too (such a riding suit) would induce us to judge and believe, That the
Gentleman's Truth were rather taking a long Winter journey, then setting forth
in triumph: And let me tell the Citizens of this Renowned City, That if this
Skeleton be allowed to pass for a Triumph, every Country Carrier, and (all the
dirt they bring along with them) will from the date of this ride triumphantly
through your City. I wonder in the lap of what remote Star this Triumph was
concealed, that our English Merlin gave us no intelligence of it, that we might
have been prepared to entertain it at a rate suitable to it.

This Triumph, as we may with no great difficulty collect from page 10. sets
forth from the Fleet (and so you must suppose it is a Naval Triumph, it has
indeed its waste clothes on, and it wants nothing but Pendants and Streamers;
nor would it have wanted them, had the Design shattered the Lords House: The
Legislative Power ravished out of the hands of the Lords would have been a fine
gay indeed to have adorned Truths Triumph) But the Gentleman had consulted
better for the credit of his Truth, had he dated his Triumph from Sea, (...).
Yet (whatever is pretended) let me tell you, That this Triumph sets out at
Billinsgate, or (from what Fleet soever it comes) it lands at those Stairs; and
you will tell me so too, when you hear the Rhetoric and Dialect of that end of
the Town. A blast of right Billinsgate (in stead of Trumpets) ushers in the
Triumph, A Discovery (we shall meet with impartial anon) of the false and
treacherous Information of Mr. Masterson, pretended Minister of Christ at
Shoreditch, against, etc.

The truth or falsehood of the Information the day shall declare, and shall make
it manifest whether it be gold or wood, silver or hay, precious stones or
stubble; and I am extremely confident, that the blemished Information is of
such a kind, as will endure the touch of the fire: In the mean time (before
the day of revelation by fire comes) I shall endeavor to make it appear to all
rational men, of what sort the (forementioned) Information is.

Not treacherous (as the Gentleman's Triumph or Anatomy affirms) nor made by a
pretended Minister of Christ at Shoreditch. Treachery (I mean that which is
really so) is (in every sense) the abomination of my soul: and (though the
odium of Persecuter of the Saints, and Betrayer of the Brethren, has been cast
upon me, since I made way at the Lords Bar; for the fire which imprisoned in my
bosom, would have confirmed me to ashes; yet) I dare tell the world, that I
have not suffered a persecuting thought (no not since that great provocation
which I met with, near the House of Commons door) to go to bed or lie down with
me.

I have been learning Christian forbearance, and studying to practice it no
small space of time; and whilst I was in pursuit of it for my private use, it
pleased God to discover so much beauty in the face of it to me, that I
endeavored (at least) to provoke others to the practice of it; and I went so
far in pressing the duty, that not a few thought I humbled the duty too low;
though (I must profess withal) that it never entered into the thought of my
heart, to prostitute this virgin to the wild and hairy lust of a Catholic
Toleration. The light that I then walked by (and still follow) was held out to
me by the hand of Paul, Ephe. 4.12. and in that light I clearly saw this truth,
That they do not (cannot) walk worthy of the vocation wherewith they are
called, that do not endeavor to forbear one another in love: yet (though I
found the courteous duty of Christian forbearance ready and willing to walk
with us this mile) I durst not rudely (by laying violent hands upon her)
constrain her to travel her self out of breath, or beyond her bounds.

If it be supposed (and upon what other account the Gentleman baptizeth my
Information with the name of Treacherous, I know not) that I, who have not been
observed to tread in the path of these men, or stand in their way, must needs
walk upon treacherous feet to a meeting of such several honest men (as the
Anatomizer calls them) or else what made I there? I answer, The more seriously
I have thought of it, the more I have seen Providence in it. The wheel that
moved me toward the meeting in Well-yard at that time (though what spirit
acted in that wheel, I have not yet clearly discovered) was this, Mr. Malbon
(of my Parish) having formerly presented me with a sight of the large Petition
(though I suppose the countenance that I afforded him in it, could not amount
to the resemblance of the least approbation) did further, in reference to that
Petition, solicit me on Monday the seventeenth of January, to go along with
him in the evening of that day, to the house of one Mr. Williams (a Gardener)
in Well-yard, to hear and judge of such objections and satisfaction as should
be then brought con and pro, the (forenamed) Petition.

I withstood his first solicitation upon this ground, It has been my practice
upon the second day of the week (commonly called Monday) to meet at my house
with some of my Parish that look toward Sion, endeavoring to support and
strengthen the spirits of one another in the way thither; and I told him, that
I could not handsomely disappoint them upon such an occasion.

Whether the honor of the man (that has faithfully served this Parliament in
the capacity of a Lieutenant of Foot) would not brook a retreat, I know not;
but (as if he were resolved to carry my affections, or sacrifice his ingenuity
to the Service) he stormed me with a volley of importunities; and upon this
quarter I surrendered, That he should inform our friends (that were near him)
that a business of more public concernment (as he then phrased it) had taken
place of our private (wonted) employment, and that he would call upon me to go
along with him at the time appointed. Now let Mr. Wildman (or any sober minded
man) put his skill upon the tenters, and see if he can spell Treachery (without
Anagrammatism) in this approach of mine to the counsels of these men: This,
understood Mr. Masterson, believes a Counsel of War would acquit him of
treachery in his intentions to these men.

I shall open but one basket more of Billinsgate Commodities ( Pretended
Minister of Christ at Shoreditch) before I present you with the Melons and
Cucumbers that this Garden-meeting brought forth.

I have great cause to bless the Lord of the Vineyard, that he has vouchsafed
to own and make use of so weak and unworthy a laborer as I am; and I rejoice,
yea and will rejoice more abundantly, that the great God has accepted his poor
servant, though but to the gathering out the stones, and weeding out the
nettles that I found spread over the face of this Congregation, when he called
me to it. I am not acquainted with the faces of many Congregations in or about
this City; I know not the beauty or blemishes that is upon them: but this I
know, that it is the grief and sorrow of my soul, to see the Congregation to
which I relate, so pale and wan, to discover such spots upon it, such darkness,
such profaneness, such superstition: yet when I have poured out my complaint
into the bosoms of some friends, that may (without one grain of allowance) be
judged faithful, that I have labored and do labor in vain, I have spent my
strength for naught and in vain; they have administered words of comfort and
support to me, when they have told me ( I am a fool to publish it, but bear
with me) that I, even I have some Epistles of commendation to God and the
Saints, not written with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in
tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart: And that I have been
anointed with such a sufficiency from God (as they have called my weakness) as
might entitle me to something more then A pretended Minister of Christ at
Shoreditch. And thus having the testimony of mine own Conscience in point of
desires really to serve God and men in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, and the
subscriptions of some faithful ones in point of endeavors, I shall attempt next
to let this City see, That I was more then A pretended Minister or Servant to
the State and them, in this ensuing Discovery made to the Lords and Commons on
January 18. of certain Speeches and Practices of dangerous consequence (as I
then apprehended, and yet believe) to the whole Kingdom.

This discovery having been given in writing to the Honorable Committee of
Lords and Commons at Derby house, by Order from that Commit, of the twentieth
of January, I shall be so far from taking that liberty (which Mr. Wildman makes
bold with in his True Narrative, as he calls it) of presenting you with more or
less then that Paper contains, that I shall not so much as put a comb into the
hair of the Relation, but give it you ruffled as it dropped from the tongues of
those men.

At a Meeting in VVell-yard in (or near) VVapping, at the house of one Mr.
Williams a Gardener, on Monday the 17 of January, 1647.
THere were assembled Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, John Wildman (with many
others) debating a Petition when I and one Robert Malbon of Shoreditch Parish
came in: Anon after we were entered the room, one Lieutenant Levet objected
against the manner of their Proceedings, and said, That he liked well enough the
particulars of the Petition, but he did not like the manner, namely, of
Petitioning the house of Commons, For (said he) they have never done us any
right, nor will they ever do us any: To this Leiutenant Colonel John Lilburn
answered, We must (said he) own some visible Authority for the present, or else
we shall be brought to ruin and confusion, but when we have raised up the
spirits of the people through the whole Kingdom (whether it be nine days hence,
or a Month, or three Months, when the House shall be fit to receive an
Impression of Justice) we shall force them to grant us those things which we
desire.

Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn did then and there affirm, That the people of
London had appointed ten or twelve of them Commissioners (whereof he the said
Lilburn was one) though he said likewise, that the honest blades in Southwark
did not like the word Commissioners. These Commissioners were appointed to
promote the Petition, and apppoint, and send out Agents into every City, Town
and Parish (if they could possibly) of every County of the Kingdom, to inform
the people of their Liberties and Privileges, and not only to get their hands
to the Petition, For (said he) I would not give Three pence for Ten thousand
hands.

A plain man of the Company objected against that way of Proceeding, thus, Mr.
Lilburn (said he) We know that the generality of the people are wicked; and if
(by the sending abroad of your Agents into all the Parishes of the Kingdom)
they come to have power and strength in their hand, we may suppose and fear,
that they will cut the throats of all those that are called Roundheads, that
is, the honest, godly, faithful men in the Land. Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn
answered, Pish (said he) do not you fear that; he that has this Petition in
his hand, and a blue Ribband in his Hat, need not fear his throat cutting: Or,
this Petition in your hand, will be as good as a blue Ribband in your Hat, to
preserve your throat from cutting.

It was further objected by one of the company that sat at (or near) the upper
end of the Table, That it was not fit to disturb (or to that purpose) the House
at this time, seeing they had made such excellent Votes concerning the King,
and had appointed a Committee to hear and report all our Grievances. Lieut.
Colonel Lilburn answered, Do you know (said he) how those Votes were procured?
(or words to that effect) Some answered, No; nor did they care, since the Votes
(as they apprehended) were so excellent. Lieut. Colonel Lilburn, said he would
inform them; There was (said he) a Bargain struck betwixt Cromwell, Ireton, and
the King: and the Bargain was this, They (namely, Lieutenant General Cromwell,
and Commissary General Ireton) by their influence on the Army, should estate
the King in His Throne, Power and Authority; and for their reward, Cromwell
should receive (or had received) a blue Ribband from the King, and be made Earl
of Essex, and his Son Ireton either Lord Lieutenant, or Field-Marshal of
Ireland: And this he (the said Lieut. Colonel Lilburn) said he would make good
to all the world.

Lieut. Colonel Lilburn said further, That certain Information of this coming
to a Member of the House of Commons, our good (or best) friend, I need not name
him (said he) I suppose you all know him, his Father was a Parliament man, and
a Knight, but he is dead, and this Gentleman his Son is of his Christian name
(as they call it) a man of a good Estate; This Gentleman (said he) takes upon
him a noble Felton resolution, That (rather then a Kingdom should be enslaved
to the lust of one man) he would dispatch him (namely, Cromwell) where ever he
met him, though in the presence of the General Sir Tho: Fairfax himself; and to
that end provided and charged a Pistol, and took a Dagger in his pocket, that
if one did not, the other should dispatch him.

The said Lieut. Colonel John Lilburn (being asked how it came to pass that he
did not effect it, and act according to his resolution?) answered, The
Gentleman (said he) communicating his resolution to a Member of the House of
Commons, a Knight, whom he judged faithful; the Gentleman was by this Knight
shut up in his chamber in Whitehall a whole day, and the Knight dispatched an
Express to Cromwell, to inform him of the Gentleman's resolution: whereupon
Cromwell (apprehending his person in danger) called a pretended day of
Humiliation; there he was reconciled to the Officers of the Army, drew up a
Declaration to the House, which begat and produced those Votes.

Upon this John Wildman said, that he knew three other men that (at the same
time) had taken up the same resolution of killing Cromwell, and there was not
one of them that knew the intentions of another. Likewise the said John Wildman
said, That he would never trust honest man again for Cromwels sake.

Lieut. Colonel Lilburn and the said John Wildman (speaking promiscuously in
the commendation of the said Petition) one or other, or both of them, affirmed,
That this Petition was of more worth and value then any thing they had ever yet
attempted; and some great Malignants (as they are called) told them, That if
they were not engaged to the person of this King, and had personally served
Him, they would engage with them; and the said Malignants gave them
encouragement to go on with it, saying, It was the most rational piece that
they had seen. And that they (the people assembled) might understand how the
Petition had wrought already, they affirmed, That it (the Petition) had made
the Lords House to quake, and the Commons themselves to stink; and that before
the Petition was two days old, or had been two days abroad, the Lords (I shall
not need to name them, said he, but the greatest Earls of them in Estate, in
Authority and Popularity) sent to us a Creature of their own to Article with
us, and offered (so we would desist from promoting the Petition) to consent to
all our Privileges and Liberties that we desired in our Petition, so that we
would abate them their Legislative Power.

Lieut. Colonel Lilburn said further, When they saw we would not desist, they
(the Lords) offered us Thirty thousand pounds, if we would yet sit down, and
lay the Petition aside: Nay more, said he (but here the said John Wildman
interrupted him, and said, Prithee do not tell all; but Lilburn replied, He
would, and they should hereby see their (the Lords) baseness) whereupon going
on, he said, This morning they sent to this Gentleman's chamber (laying his hand
upon Wildman) at the Sarazens-head in Friday-street, and offered him, That if
we would forbear to promote this Petition, they would be content for their
Heirs and Successors to cut off the Legislative power from them by Ordinance or
Act for ever, so we would let them quietly enjoy the Legislative power for
their lives.

Lieut. Colonel Lilburn told them, That they (the Commissioners) had their
constant meetings on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays in the evening at the
Whalebone, and the other three days at Southwark, Wapping, and other places
with their Friends; and that upon the next Lords day they were to meet at
Dartford in Kent, to receive an account of their Agents (from Gravesend,
Maidstone, and most of the choice Towns in that County) how they had promoted
the business there.

Lieut. Colonel Lilburn drawing a paper book from under his short red Coat, and
turning over the leaves of it, told them that there were certain Letters, one
to Colonel Blunt, another (as I remember) to Sir Anthony Welden, and that, he
said, he wrote himself; likewise diverse Letters to our Friends the well
affected of such and such a County; whose Names I remembered not: He (the said
Lieut. Colonel) told them likewise, That because the business must needs be a
work of charge (there being Three thousand Petitions to come forth in print to
morrow, and it would cost money to send their Agents abroad, though the honest
Soldiers now at Whitehall would save them something, in scattering them up and
down in the Counties) they had therefore appointed Treasurers, namely, Mr.
Prince, Mr. Chidley, and others; and Collectors (whose Names, as I remember, he
did not read) who should gather up from those that acted with them, of some Two
pence, Three pence, Six pence, One shilling, Two shillings, Half a crown a
week. And thus promising to meet them the next night, he took leave.

But immediately before his departure, told them, That they shut him up in the
Tower the night before, but they should not have his company these fourteen
nights for it.

This is the sum and sense of that which was affirmed and related in the House
of Lords at the Conference, and in the Commons House, by

Geo: Masterson.

THus you have an account (to a syllable) of that Information (if the discovery
of a Design so destructive (in its tendencies, to speak modestly) have merited
no higher Title, which was given in (under my hand) to the Honorable Committee
of Lords and Commons at Derby House. And now my expectations and desires are,
to stand or fall in the thoughts of all godly Vninterested English men, as I
shall make good every particular in this Charge, in the day when the Pretended
Minister shall be called to produce his Pretended Witnesses: In the mean time,
I shall cast away a few glances of mine eye upon Master Wildmans Impartial
Relation (as the Curate of Windham, alias the Pretended Gentleman of the
Lifeguard baptizeth it).

He begins his Relation with a sentence (if dust and cobwebs be tolerable
Arguments of Antiquity) much elder then the Design of Levelling. The medly
Moth-eaten sentence runs thus (and it is the first line of his Pamphlet) In
this generation, Dicere quod nolo miserum, quod volo and debeo periculosum: I
am very sorry that ever any man should write at so low a rate in Roman hand;
sure the Gent. has a Design to make the world believe indeed, that Latin is
the language of the Beast: the best English that I can make of this Leading
sentence, is Tantamount, thus much, It is a miserable thing in this Generation
for a man to speak that which he would not; and it is a dangerous thing (you
must understand in the foresaid Generation) to speak what a man would and ought
to speak: Bate me but O tempora o mores; and if you gather such another Cinnamon
Rose in Tullies garden, I am extremely mistaken in my Calculation. This whole
Paragraph (I dare say) calls him Father that wrote the first line of it; Splen
ridere facit.
and if I should not set by three or four dishes (in the six first lines)
untouched, I should surfeit my spleen. I could make my self exceeding merry (if
so sad a subject would bear it) with the Gentleman's Sword, and his Retreat, and
his Grandees, and his Contemptible grave; but I shall say no more to it but
this, I suppose the Gentleman (that talks of a Retreat) was not of the
Lifeguard in the days of fighting: Those Horse that were under his Renowned
Excellency, never knew how to march backward; and truly, me thinks the
Gentleman is superlatively low in that expression of his Contemptible grave;
but he would write higher in the following lines, where he talks of
Astrologers, and Aspects, and Horizon, (in this lofty expression) Surely he
that is no great Astrologer, may judge by the Aspect of the Stars in this
Horizon, that this English air agrees best with the bodies of Camelions, etc.
Had the learned Author of the Book Entitled, Pseudodoxia Epidemica been
consulted with, he would have persuaded the Gentleman to have left out his
Camelions in Truths Triumph: I would fain lay aside this cheerful countenance,
but that every line (almost) in this first page, works upon me, as the
Creatures eating Thistles did upon the Philosopher: I was even changing my pen,
and then in comes Toties quoties, line 12. (with the parings of the nails of a
sentence after it) and makes me think, that among the variety of forms that
this Gentleman has appeared in, one was a Pretended Clerk to a Sub-committee
of Excize: And now I am resolved to turn over a new leaf with him, and leave
the Ingenious Reader to judge, if I do not spare the Gentleman exceedingly in
passing over his Innocent Impudence, effronted boldness, Cerberus, Peter's
Chair, and the rest of such kind of Ornaments that follow in this Truths
Triumph.

I suppose the Gentleman would take it unkindely, if we should not take notice
how much (as he says) he is devoted to support the Authority and Honor of the
Commons in Parliament; and this he does (as his book says) manibus ad sidera
tensis, by the lifting up of his hands: thus it has been accounted Devotion,
to level some Structures and Monuments, which were sacred in the eyes of our
superstitious forefathers: what Devotion he has to some particular Members in
that Honorable House, I know not; but other some again (I am sure) have no
great reason to affect a devout man for his sake: And for my part, I believe
his Devotion will scarce support the Authority of that House, unless he be
Devotum caput Authoritati: whether the Gentleman be Devoted to the Authority of
Parliament in that sense I first mention, or no, let these two passages inform
you, There is an invenomed arrow shot by my imprisonment into the heart of the
common cause of my dearest Country; who dares think now, that this Gentleman
is not Devoted to support the Authority? etc. And beside (as if he had not yet
been sufficiently devoted to support the foresaid Authority) the nation has
received no superficial wound by my Arbitrary restraint: I do not think that
Sampson evidenced more Devotion to support the house in which the Philistines
were assembled, when he laid his two hands upon the two pillars of it in his
renewed strength, then this Gentleman has done in these two particulars, To
the Authority and Honor of the Commons in Parliament.

But upon what account does the Gentleman thus say his Devotions backward, to
the Authority? etc. Because (says he) there was neither Witness nor Evidence
against me of a crime: It is true, the Witnesses which I brought along with me
(having received Summons from the Honorable Speaker of the House of Commons, in
the name of the House, to appear before them, and testify their knowledge of
the proceedings at that meeting in Well-yard) were not called into the Commons
House: and (if a man of so low thoughts as I am, may without sin humbly guess
at a reason of this) I suppose Leiutenant Colonel Lilburn having acknowledged
some things objected against him, and Mr. Wildman confessed something that he
denied) the Honorable House might have Evidence enough of a crime from their
own mouths: but above all, the presence and deportment, the tremblings and
astonishment (as by the outward appearance one might guess) that had taken hold
upon Mr. John Wildman, when he would have spoke at the Commons Bar, might be (I
do not say was) instead of many Witnesses.

You must not suppose that Mr. John Wildman delivered all that at the House of
Commons Bar, which (as a set Speech) fills up the best part of seven pages in
his Truths triumph: I know not what he might have penned the night before, but
if he had that Speech (which we spoke of) written and premeditated, he might
have published more to the honor of Truth, had he set forth to the world,

An impartial discovery of a very false and treacherous Memory; I am confident,
all the sense that the Gentleman dropped at that time at the Commons Bar (had
it been gathered up by a faithful Amanuensis) would not have amounted to a
third part of what he delivers in the Pageant that was built for Truths
Triumph; and truly that little which he did speak, was at so low a rate (though
he had the Aquavitae of a clap on the shoulder from Leiutenant Colonel John
Lilburn, as he was entering into the Commons House, with Speak up Jack, such
stumbling, interfeering and downright halting, that (I believe) it was not a
silent Witness of something; and thus I (conceive) there might be no need of
calling for Witnesses against him, whose words spoke him (...) self-condemned)
all along.

But why does the Gentleman seem to take it so unkindely, that the Witnesses
were not called in? is it because one or both of them had whispered in the ear
of some of that Fraternity, that he or they would not stand by the Information
given in by Mr. Masterson, and thereby leave it under the condemnation as False
and Treacherous. That passage of his in the heel of the ninth and head of the
tenth page of his pretended Triumph, would richly furnish a man that suspected
the lightness of his Witnesses with jealous thoughts: the words that would
tempt to jealousy run thus, As for the Witnesses, none were called or examined
(let the Diurnal man, as he calls him, look to the parenthesis) yet those two
persons, whom the Informer brought as pretended Witnesses, confessed, as I can
prove by Oath, That there was nothing spoken at the Meeting for which I am
accused, but what tended to advance the Parliaments Honor, or words to that
effect.

To this particular (which if it were of kind to Truth, might entitle his
Pamphlet a Triumph) I have many things to say:

1. Did the two persons whom the Informer brought as pretended Witnesses,
confess this? and will the proof (you wot of) be deposed for both? certainly,
aut erravit Famulus, aut ipse lapsus es memoria.

A bad Informer, or worse Memory,
Brought forth in great Truths Triumph this great --
Where the fault lies, I know not certainly, but I shall for this once set it
upon the Tailors score, and suppose that he who stitched up this garment for
Truth to Triumph in, was exceedingly mistaken in his measure.

But secondly, have you never heard of such a practice as this in the world,
when some sons of their Father the Devil have in vain attempted the chastity of
such a Matron or such a Virgin, their foul mouths have run over in such
expressions as might make others defile the innocent ones in their thoughts?
The chastity (in this particular) of one of my Witnesses, is true Roman, it
would much rather dye upon your sword, then prostitute it self to such a
dishonorable act as you speak of; his faithfulness is so mighty, that I believe
the man is not yet born, Casta est quam nemo rogavit.
that ever durst tamper with him about it; and for the other, I have had high
thoughts of him, and should be now sorry indeed, if a principle of Religion
should not carry him as far, as a lower principle of honor may carry another
man: Why then do you let fall such words from your pen? which if true, would
render these two persons to all ages unworthy of the lovely compellations of
Religious or faithful.

And Thirdly, what if I shall make it appear now, that one of these two persons
(and the other though he have scarce strength enough to stand without trembling
under the frowns of a party that he affects so well, yet dares not for his
life, if called before Authority, deny what he has affirmed in the presence of
four or five witnesses) was never guilty of speaking one such word, or the
least syllable to that effect, as both stand accused of? will it not Stain
Truths Triumph? will it not be like the Crot de paris? an indelible spot upon
the garments of her that Pretends to Triumph? This Testimony under the hand of
Captain John Willison, will be accounted little less then a Scar in the face of
her that personates Truth, in the paper Triumph.

Whereas a TAME Pamphlet (lately set forth by one John Wildman) Entitled,
Truths Triumph, has endeavored to insult over my innocence and honesty, in the
last line of the ninth, and first of the tenth Pages) in these words, Yet these
two persons whom the Informer brought, as Pretended Witnesses, confessed, as I
can prove by Oath, that there was nothing spoken at the meeting, for which I am
accused, but what tended to advance the Parliaments Honor, or words to that
effect. I affirm and publish to the whole World (and as a Christian will make
it good upon my Oath) that I never spoke one such word, or any thing to that
effect, and (in the mean time) this my hand shall make good.

JOHN WILLISON.

I am loath to insult over the contemptible Triumph; yet I dare not be wanting
to my self so far, as not thankfully to acknowledge the goodness of Heaven in
bringing to my hand an Original Letter (which if a Witness had failed, would
have risen up and born witness to some particulars in the Relation which you
have already read) which when the understanding unprejudiced Reader has
observed, if he shall then (with Master Wildman) call the discovery (which I
made to the Lords and Commons at their several Bars, and at a Conference of
both Houses) A false and treacherous Information of, etc. I will silently take
up my Cross.

Et mea me virtute incolumem involvam. The critical Letter (I spoke of) was (in
the Original) delivered by me to the Honorable Committee of Lords and Commons
at Derby House; this Transcript (with which you are presented) I received back
again from the hands of my honored Friend Master Walter Frost, Secretary to
that Committee, and it agrees so (to a letter) with the Original, that the
Reader must be entreated to bear with the broken English of it.

Worthy Gentlemen and dear Friends,
OUr bowels are troubled, and our hearts pant within us, to behold the
Divisions, Distractions, Heart-burning and Contentions which abound in this
distressed Nation; and we are confounded in our selves upon the foresight of
the Confusion and Desolation, which will be the certain consequence of such
Divisions, if they should be but for a little time longer continued: There are
now clouds of Blood over our heads again; and the very rumors and fears of War
has so wasted Trading, and exhausted the price of all food and clothing, that
Famine is even entering into our Gates; and doubtless neither Pen nor Tongue can
express the Misery which will ensue immediately upon the beginning of another
War: Why therefore, O our Countrymen, should we not every man say each to
other as Abraham to Lot, or Moses to the two Israelites, Why should we contend
each with other, seeing we are brethren? O that our Advice might be acceptable
to you, that you would every man expostulate each with other, and now, while
you have an opportunity, consider together, Wherefore the Contention have been
these Six or Seven years? has it not been for Freedom, and Justice? O then
propound each to other the chief Principles of your Freedoms, and the
foundation of Justice and Common Right; and questionless when you shall
understand the Desires each of other, you will unite together inviolably to
pursue them.

Now truly, in our apprehensions, this work is prepared to your hands in the
Petition, which we herewith send to you: Certainly, if you shall all join
together to follow resolutely and unweariedly after the things contained in
that Petition, the Blood and Confusion which now threaten us may be prevented,
and the sweet streams of Justice will run into your Bosoms freely without
obstructions: O that the Lord may be so propitious to this tottering Nation, as
to give you to understand these things which belong to your Peace and Welfare.

Many honest people are resolved already to unite together in that Petition,
and to prosecute the obtaining it with all their strength; they are determined,
that now after seven years waiting for Justice, Peace and Freedom, they will
receive no Denial in these requests, which are so essential to their Peace and
Freedom.

And for the more effectual proceedings in this Business, there is a method and
order settled in all the Wards in London, and the out-Parishes and Suburbs, they
have appointed several active men in every Ward and Division, to be a Committee
to take the special care of the Business, and to appoint active men in every
Parish, to read the Petition at set Meetings for that purpose, and to take
Subscriptions, and to move as many as can possibly to go in person, when the
day of delivering it shall be appointed; and they intend to give notice of that
time to all the adjacent Counties, that as many of them as possibly can, may
also join with them the same day; and the like orderly way of proceeding is
commended to several Counties to whom the Petition is sent, as Hartfordshire,
Buckingham, Oxford, Rutlandshire, etc. And we cannot but propound to you the
same method, as the best expedient for your Union in pursuing after a speedy
Settlement of your Peace and Freedom: Therefore in brief we desire,

1. That you would appoint Meetings in every Division of your County, and there
to select faithful men of Public Spirits, to take care that the Petition be
sent to the Hands of the most active men in every Town, to unite the Town in
those Desires of Common Right, and to take their Subscriptions.

II. That you would appoint as many as can with convenience, to meet at
Dartford the the 23. of this present January, being Lord's Day, and we shall
confer with you about the matters that concern your Peace, and Common good and
Freedom.

We shall at present add more but this, That to serve you and our whole
Country in whatsoever concerns its Common Peace and Welfare, is and always
shall be the desire and joy of

Dertford this 9. Jan. 1647. Your most faithful Friends and Servants, which
came from London from many other Friends upon this Service, John Lilburn. John
Davis. J. Wildman. Richard Woodward.


For all the peaceable and well-minded people in Kent, who desire present
Peace, Freedom, Justice, and Common Right and Good of all men.

A Man would think now (at the first blush) that this were as innocent a Letter
as any in the Alphabet; he that looks upon the smooth gums, would scarce expect
to find the Vipers teeth there. Our bowels are troubled, and our hearts pant
within us, etc. It minds me of the Emblem in the Abbey of Fulda, a beast of
prey in a specious appearance, courting a flock of sheep with these words
issuing (in a pendant) out of his mouth, God is my witness how I long for you
all in my bowels. The Design in this Letter wears a very long robe, it is
clothed with fair pretenses down to the heels of it; and yet see if you do not
perceive the Claws in this expression, Many honest people are resolved already
to unite together in that Petition, and to prosecute the obtaining it with all
their strength; they are determined that now, after seven years waiting for
Justice, Peace and Freedom, they will receive no denial in their requests: The
Letter I acknowledge has a fair appearance of an Angel of light; but me thinks
that expression is somewhat rank of Brimston. What? no denial, though all the
Authority joined with all the Representative reason of the Kingdom should Vote
against your Petition? will you yet prosecute it with all your strength, though
the strength of Reason and Authority engage against you? Is the design (that
you have carried in your thigh these seven years) so ripe for the birth, that
you cannot wait one day longer for the Midewifery of Authority to bring it
forth? you know the Proverb, festinans canis your great haste is like to bring
forth but blind whelps.

I shall say no more of the Letter now, but this, That (if report have not
abused us, in that we have heard of a Tartarian plant ( Boroneth by name) that
it growing up in the likeness of a lamb, insensibly devours all the grass that
is round about it) This Letter is Boroneth, and that but a Ciens of that
fruitful stock, the Large Petition.

And now I shall ask but this one thing of the Ingenuous Reader, That he would
compare the Discovery made by me, with Mr. Wildmans Defense, and take this
particular along with him in his understanding, That the most material passage
in my Discovery, namely, that Answer to the Objection of cutting of throats,
made by a plain man in the company, was affirmed by Robert Malbon (who was
present at the Meeting) to have been framed by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn
in these words, This Petition in your hand, will be as good as a blue Ribband
in your Hat, to preserve your throat from cutting. This the said Robert Malbon
affirmed on Wednesday the Nineteenth of January, in the presence of Mr.
Nicholas Skinner Merchant, Captain John Willison, Gabriel Gayler, and George
Cotterel.

And thus being extremely weary of following a Pretended Triumph thus far, I
shall suffer it quietly to pass through the Inns of Court; the Pretended
Minister of Christ at Shoreditch dares not pretend to so much Law (and besides,
he has another guest, Magna Charta, to employ himself in) as will serve him to
judge, whether the Gentleman's Truth triumph in his Law Cases at any higher rate
then she does in his Treachery Anatomized. Only I could wish that Mr. John
Wildman, after so long and sad an absenting of himself from a people (with whom
he has walked comfortably in Evangelical Dispensations) even to the total
neglect of them (as himself tells us) would at last seriously bethink himself,
if he might not have reaped more sweet communion with the Father, in the ways
of Fellowship with his Saints, then by yielding his members, the members of
such a Generation of men, and sacrificing his parts to a Design that can
neither dwell together with the Authority of the State, nor power of godliness
in the same Kingdom.

And, O that (while The Cry of the People is scattered up and down (the City
and Kingdom) in his language) the great God would give him an ear to hear (as
he has afforded him ability to supply) the Cries of so many thousand poor
souls that are ready to perish for want of Gospel-bread. Let me beseech you,
Sir, (in the spirit of meekness and love) to improve your utmost skill in
making out an Impartial Discovery of the comeliness and sufficiency of our Lord
Jesus to the souls of poor creatures.

Thus you shall be reckoned among the sons of Wisdom, one that has loved fair
Truth, and prepared her a Chariot to ride triumphantly in the hearts of men.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Febr. 9. 1647. G. MABBOT.


