THE CASE OF THE COIN Fairly Represented, By the Means of some Quaeres,
Conducing to the finding out whither the Trade of Ireland is Affected or not,
by the Advancement of the Rates of Coin there: And Consequently, Whither the
said Advancement of the Rates of Coin there, occasioned as is Alleged? More
Moneys being poured into that Country, to its Advantage, than would otherwise
have been carried thither.
First, Quaere, SINCE Change for Guineas used to be easily and readily had in
Ireland, and now but with great Difficulty: Is it not manifest, That there is
at present less Silver Proportionably to Gold, than was formerly in that
Kingdom?

Secondly, Quaere, Does not this proceed from Guineas, being Raised more as to
the Rates they Pass at, than the Silver Coin is Raised at there? It being
Demonstrable for Instance, That Guineas are Raised so as to Pass for 5 d. and
One 3 d Part of a Penny more each, than they ought to do Proportionably to what
Ducatoons are Raised to Pass at.

Thirdly, Quaere, Can it be imagined, That Ireland gains by having Guineas
brought into that Kingdom, therewith to Purchase or Exchange for Silver (in
Lieu thereof) upon such unequal Terms? And if the Consequences hereof cannot be
denied, why then might not other Commodities Ireland affords, be concluded to
be carried out upon the like Disadvantage to it? Let no Body Cavil at my
calling Silver Coin a Commodity, for Money Passing in Ireland by Weight, and
that Weight for more or less, according to its Fineness, viz. Plate, or Peru:
Is not it plainly in the Nature of Bullion, and is not Bullion allowed to be a
Merchandise?

Fourthly, Quaere, Does it appear by the Course of Exchange in the Returns of
Money to, or out of Ireland, that Merchants are so Rash and Indiscreet in their
Business, as to Govern themselves by no Thing more solid than the Vulgar
Opinion? And consequently, is it to be imagined that any of them are tempted by
the mere empty greater Sound than formerly, which our Pieces of Money make, (in
the People's Naming of Them,) to bring any Species of Money whatsoever into
this Kingdom, upon the prospect of Buying really greater Penny-worths
therewith? Instead of their Previously computing what Increase of Guineas,
Pistoles, English-Crowns, or Cobbs, the Produce of what They lay out in those,
or any other Species of Money, will bring them in, when they Vend the Return
for their Money in Irish Commodities elsewhere.

Fifthly, Quaere, What other Way is there of getting Money into a Country, but
by the Balance of Trade? If none, then if neither the Merchant overreaches
himself, nor the Handy-Crafts-Man, or Countryman are Bubl'd by Him, on the
Advancement of the Rates of Coin. It follows then, That the same Quantity of
Goods would have been carried out of Ireland, and the same Proportion of Money
brought in to Pay for them, (for Instance, the same Number of Guineas,) whither
Guineas had been computed betwixt them, either after the Rate of 23, or 26 s.
per Piece?

To Explain this by an Example, let it be supposed, That a Merchant, just after
the Advancement of the Rates of Coin in Ireland, carried thither to the Value
of 300 l. in Guineas to Buy Beef, Hides, Tallow, Butter, Cheese, Wool, or any
other Goods, or Manufactures of the Country; now if Beef, and the other
Commodities did still keep to the Price they were at just before, according to
Tale of Pounds, Shillings and Pence. Has not Ireland Bought that Gold too
dear, since it has lost 30 Guineas; that is to the Value of 39 l. in the said
300 l. there being so many less Guineas required now to make up 300 l. than was
before the Advancement thereof; for now 230 Guineas will go as far in Tale of
Pounds, as 260 Guineas did before; But if on the contrary it be supposed that
every Thing in Ireland, was Risen in Price Proportionably, to the Advancement
of Money; Why then, you must suppose the said Merchant a very Inconsiderate
Person, for carrying or sending over his 300 l. Venture thither, without
Previously informing himself what Consequences the Advancement of Money had, as
to the Purchasing what he intended to Deal in? (And there are not many, if any
such Merchants to be met with;) but if he advisely still thought it worth his
while to Buy there, what he wanted to Sell elsewhere, though he knew he should
not get any more of any Goods Ireland affords, for his 300 l. than he could
have done before the Advancement of the Rates of Coin: Why then it plainly
follows, That Ireland would howsoever have had his Money, though Guineas had
continued going for 23 Shillings each; Neither can it possibly be any other
way, that we are become thus Competently Stocked with the running Cash now
Current amongst Us; unless the People of Ireland could Buy and Sell to
Disadvantage, anh yet Thrive on Their Loss.

A Speech made by the Author of this Pamphlet, in the Committee of the whole
House of Commons, when it Sat on Ways and Means, August the 30th, 1697.
Mr. C --. M --. What I have to offer to Your Consideration, is designed by me,
to tend to our common Good, and I desire to be Heard with Patience, and that no
unwary Expression of Mine may be wrested to any ill Sense. The Subject we are
upon, being of a very intricate Nature, and consequently requiring to be Sifted
into, with all the Plainenss possible.

Now, that I may Express my self the more Intellegibly to the Worthy Members
here Present, I will begin by Applying what has already been Determined by
them: and in Order thereto, I beg Leave, Sir, to observe to You, That
notwithstanding a Member of Our House, concerned in the Coining of Halfpence,
has to a Tittle performed what he was enjoined by the Patent he held under,
yet this Honorable House was but the other Day of Opinion, That this Kingdom
Suffered by the Disproportion there is betwixt the Intrinsic Value of the said
Halfpence, and what they Actually Pass for, though they are in Effect but given
out as Tickets for the Benefit of Change: And pray, Sir, must not the same
Weighty Reason hold proportionably Good in a greater degree as to our Gold and
Silver Coin, in which strictly Speaking, consists the real Riches of all
Countries?

It is then, Sir, worth our Considering, whether the Advancement of the several
Pieces of Money in Ireland, though (intended for our Good) carries not in a great
Measure the same Consequences with it, as the late Clipping the Current Coin of
England, did in that Kingdom? For it is Obvious, That it is the same Weight of
Gold and Silver, and under the usual Denominations of Guineas, Ducatoons and
Cobbs, which passes at this time for more Pounds, Shillings and Pence, than
formerly: And consequently this is apparently but a Nominal, and not a real
Difference,

This Fallacy is not indeed very evident by our Home Trade, because every Body
in Ireland, unperceivedly to each other, raises the Price of what he Deals in,
proportionably to the Valuation of the Coin; and in so doing, they are all as
much even with one another, as they ever were before; for they all Buy and Sell
to one another by the same Standard, be it more or less garnished by the
Advanced Rates of the Coin; that is to say, the same Gold or Silver Counter, is
allowed by all of them to stand in the way of Reckoning at present, for more
Pence than formerly. But when the Merchant has Occasion for Foreign
Commodities, he finds that no Regard will be had beyond Sea, to our imaginary
Splitting the several Pieces of Money into a mere Notional increase of Pence;
the Foreigners will not be so: Bubl'd out of their Merchandise, and unless some
other Accident has altered the Price thereof; our Merchants will have neither
more nor less, but the very same Commodities, as to Quantity and Goodness, for
the same Piece of Money, as he had before the Advancement thereof; because it
carries the same Weight and Fineness with it, which is its real Intrinsical
Value.

In short, Sir, the Landlord is the Person chiefly Imposed upon, by this
Nick-Naming of the Money, he receives his Rent in; for when he came to let his
Estate after the Reduction of this Kingdom, his Tennants took their Farms with
a regard to the Desolate Condition thereof, and therefore undoubtedly the
Tennant, who then Covenanted with his Landlord, to pay him for Example 11 l.
10 s. 0 d. for a Farm; did then secure to himself a good Bargain, even
according to the Old Rates the Money went at; and then supposed to continue so
still by both Parties; though an unforeseen Act of State has since that,
occasioned the Tennant's having a better Bargain by 30 s. a Year in 11 l. 10 s.
0 d. than he ever thought of before: For it is plain, That the Tennant did not
at the taking of his Lease, expect to pay his Landlord the 11 l. 10 s. 0 d. he
Contracted for, with less than 10 Guineas; but now he will tell him, that 10
Guineas makes 13 l. which is 30 s. more than his Rent; and so under the Color
of Authority, he takes 30 s. out of his Land-Lord's Pocket, and puts it into
his own.

Upon the whole, Sir, I must conclude, That if it be proper for us to
inter-meddle in this Affair at all; it is rather our Interest to Address to the
Government for the Reducing of Money to what it formerly Passed for? Than to
have it still kept up it is present Titular Promotion; which conduces only to
our deceiving our Selves.

FINIS.

