Mercurius Britanicus, HIS APOLOGY To all Well-affected People.

Together with an humbe Address To the High Court of Parliament.

Published according to Order.

Aug: 11th. LONDON, Printed for R. W. 1645.

MERCURIUS BRITANICUS, His Apology, etc.
Well-affected Reader,
IT is to thee I write; as for the Malignant ignorant Rabble, I value them not.

I thought to have proceeded in my wonted Weekly course; but hearing of the
many Clamours abroad (exasperated by the malicious tongues of such as glory in
the name of Royalists) against Britanicus, and being informed of some
discontent also among our Friends, I judged it expedient first to remove this
Prejudice by a timely Satisfaction.

I intend not to act a self-justification where I know I have offended; and
there can be no greater argument or aggravation of my offense, than to have
merited the displeasure of the Parliament: With all humility then I bow to the
Censure of that Supreme Court, the most equal and excellent Arbiter in all
Cases whatsoever: Yet (and I hope without blame) I shall take liberty to say
somewhat in excuse of my fault, and endeavor to mitigate that with Reason,
which others rail at in Passion.

As touching the matter I have written, I should wilfully belie my own
Conscience, if I did not avow it for Truth; and I have weekly given sufficient
Evidences to the whole Kingdom, that it is so: Know then, Reader, (and I think
thou do know) that in such a case Britanicus will neither dissemble, nor
tremble: But in some Circumstantials, as the manner, etc. I confess I have
overshot my self, though I hope, not beyond Recovery; for when the Occasion and
Cause of my boldness is known, I suppose few will pronounce me utterly
inexcusable.

My meditating on the Kings Letters to the Marquis of Ormond, was the occasion;
and the only cause (without ostentation I speak it) was my zeal to the Honor
of the Parliament, and that poor gasping Kingdom of Ireland, now yielding up
the ghost: The former being so often branded in those Letters with the most
infamous slander of Rebels, when the abominable Irish at the same time are
called Subjects; and the latter (together with their precious Religion and
Liberties) prostituted by an open sale to the Tyranny and Cruelty of the most
barbarous Rebels in the world. The consideration of these things (I must
confess) transported me beyond my self, and clouded my judgment with so much
passion, that I did not discern when my Pen slipped: And truly, what Christian
would not have been moved upon such strange apprehensions as I then collected
out of the Kings own Letters? which you may read at large in the last weeks
Britanicus. I will give an Instance or two out of it.

The King in one Letter bids Ormond tell the Rebels, that Poynings Act, and all
Laws against Papists shall be abrogated, upon condition they will side with
him against England and Scotland: And this (he says plainly) is neither
against Conscience nor Honor.

A second Instance is, that in another Letter he charges Ormond, howsoever, to
continue the Cessation, if a Peace could not be obtained upon such Terms as
had been sent him; and that rather than the Bargain should fail about the
Cessation, he must bid so high, as to promise to join with the Rebels against
the Protestants; And for a conclusion, the King talks of granting more
hereafter, if he be able.

A third Instance out of another Letter is: That Poynings Act (the maine
fundamental of the English Protestants in Ireland, is once again prostituted
to the pleasure of Irish Rebeli: That the chief of the Rebels ( Brown,
Muskery, and Plunket) having signified their desires in matter of Religion,
receive not only satisfaction, but thanks also for their Motion; yea further,
and Counsel to stick to it; and lastly an encouragement from the King's own
hand, telling those hellish Firebrands, that so they and their Nation shall
have comfort in what they have done: That his final resolution concerning
Religion in Ireland is, a suspension of the Penal Laws against Catholics
for the present; and after that the Irish have helped him to ruin us here, an
absolute abolishment of them by a Law: Touching this, he concludes with an
Injunction of Secrecy, but now it is published on the House-tops.

I could give you more; but the consideration (I say) of these things, together
with his manifest endeavor to ruin and root out all true Professors of the
Power of Godliness, in this famous City and Kingdom, extorted that from me on
the sudden, which (upon second thoughts) I disavow, as unseemely and foolish.

That those expressions came out somewhat unseasonably, I grant, in regard
Propositions are to be sent: but this is more than I knew at the time of my
writing; howsoever, I am sure the Houses had not then determined to send any,
and I my self am so desirous of an end of these miseries by an happy
Accommodation (if possible) that I ever did, and shall endeavor to express my
self sutably thereunto, when occasion is offered.

That I have mentioned any thing to disgrace the King in his natural
infirmity, (as some concieve) I utterly deny; for if I may have the liberty
allowed by the Civil Law ( Cujus est condere, ejus est and interpretari) the
Marginall Adage is otherwise to be construed.

Thus much (well-affected Reader) for thysatisfaction: now give meleave to make
a Request; that thou be not swayed aside by the noise of Malignant and
Malicious Tongues, whose harebrain'd Masters plot and labor to heighten
discontents against me: But consider, that though Britanicus has erred once
against the King, yet never did against the Kingdom.

I shall conclude with my humble Address to the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament.

MOST EXCELLENT SENATE,
AS the sense of your displeasure first brought me to a sight of my offense, so
it is a punishment beyond all that can be inflicted: I never joyed in any thing
more than in your prosperous Success, because thereby I enjoyed Life and
Liberty to do You and the Kingdom Service; nor do I desire either of them any
longer than they may be useful to that end, but shall be ready (if commanded)
to render my self a willing Sacrifice to the Public. Yet (most honorable
Council) if in your impartial Judgment, the weight of my rash error do not
sink me, I earnestly crave it may not recieve any aggravation from the malice
of Malignant Adversaries; whom I may justly suspect to have, now I am under a
Cloud (as they ever have had in time of greatest Serenity) a particular Design
in Secret against me. What I may expect from such men, their insulting Language
declares, and the manifold Abuses put upon him now in Prison, who was only an
Instrument, not Principal in the business: And therefore prostrating my self
to the favor of that High Court, the Sanctuary and sacred Refuge of all such
as have been faithful to their Country, I most humbly beg their Pardon and
Protection.

FINIS.

