CATASTROPHE GALLIAE: OR THE FRENCH KING's Fatal Downfall, Predicted to happen
in or about the Years 1691. or 92. TOGETHER With his Nativity, Calculated
according to the Rules of Astrology. As likewise That of the Present EMPEROR of
Germany and the GRAND SIGNIOR. WITH Probable Conjectures upon the Turks new
Eruptions into EVROPE. All Humbly Submitted to the Candid and Ingenuous Sons of
Art.

By J. P. Student in Astrology.

London, Printed for Rowland Reynolds, next the Middle Exchange in the Strand,
1691.

To the Honorable and ever Loyal, Sir Edward Dering of Sharsted, in the County
of Kent, Knight, one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County.
SIR,
AStrology, as it is a Noble Science, (and therefore fit for the Study of the
Noblest of Persons) has this Misfortune commonly attends it, viz. to sink and
suffer for want of Noble Advocates and Protectors. Therefore it is (Learned
Sir) that I am thus presumptuous to shelter my mean Endeavors in that worthy
Science, (in opposition to one that has abused it) under your gentle
Patronage, being assured that both Mine and the Adversaries Arguments will be
justly weighed and considered by your more curious Judgment, under which I am
most willing to stand or fall. Your exquisite Skill in this Learning is such,
that thereby, like the thrice Excellent Knight Sir Christopher Heydon, (who
defended Astrology so happily in the last Age) you are able to judge and
distinguish between Mr. Holwel's bold and fallacious dealing, under pretense of
explaining the meaning of the triple Conjunction of Saturn, and Jupiter in Leo,
wherewith he has encouraged Mahomet, and crucified our Savior afresh, and my
humble Pains and Apology for the promotion of Christian Courage, and imbasing
of Turkish Power, in expounding the same Conjunction.

Be not offended, (I pray Sir) if I am bold to tell the World, and your
Honored Self together, that you are the only Person of Loyalty, (that I know
of) fit to be my Judge in this Matter, as having for many years, among other
Nobler Employments, diverted your self also with this abstruse Science, even
before the happy Restoration of his most Sacred Majesty, and all the Royal
Party, and by your well-grounded Confidence therein, you kept many of Them
(when beyond Sea) from desponding, with your (...), and an Assurance of the
Return of Monarchy into England again; which more than common Presage was (to
Yours and Astrologies Honor) happily verified in the year 1660. and for the
Hopes you conceived of that happy Year, you affirmed your Loyalty, even in the
worst of Times, thereby hazarding your Self to become a Victim for the Truth
you had so happily avowed. Nay, so obliging a Patron and Maecenas have You
been, to the Glories of Urania, that to your Pains and Search all the Sons of
Art owe the Knowledge of that Illustrious Geniture of the Great Carolus
Gustavus, late King of Sweden, which you, Sir, first transmitted out of Germany
into England, at that time when the victorious Arms of that King were the
Astonishment of almost all Christendom: Which happening into the Hands of my
worhy Friend, Mr. John Gadbury, by making some Remarks upon, and printing it,
(as I have heard Him say) was one of the principal Causes of His (as he was
pleased to call it, Little but envied) Fame in the World; so happy have You
been to Art and Artists, even then unknown to You, as if You were born to
befriend not only Astrology it self, but all its honest Professors too.

Neither let me forget to mention it; That You (Honored Sir) in our now later
Times of Confusion and Disorder, have stood firm to your Principles, in
adhering and paying Homage to that Monarchy, whose Return, by this Art, you had
happily encouraged; and are also the only Person of your Name and Family, that
have showed your Loyalty by Addressing, when it was little less than Treason
against that Monster the Republican, and Antimonarchical Interest, so to do,
and you have dared to own and to teach the World this Maxim, That Loyalty to
the King, and a dutiful Regard to His Royal Highness, are inseparable. Pardon
(good Sir) my Freedom in mentioning these Things, (for loyal Actions no more
than loyal Persons, ought never to be forgotten) and excuse my humble Boldness,
in making use of your Noble Name, and give me leave to end all with this
cordial Vote, viz. That Monarchy may have more such Friends, and Astrology more
such Defenders: So prays, (ever Honored Sir)

Your humblest Servant and Votary, John Merrifield.

To the Impartial READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT having been my Chance, (amongst the rest of my manifold Studies) to light
of a small Book, entitled, An Appendix to Holwel's Catastrophe Mundi, on which
carelessly casting mine Eye, I beheld all Christendom, or at least the greatest
part of it, overrun, or speedily to be overrun with Turks, which put me into
a very great Amazement, to behold the Hand of the Lord so sorely stretched out
against those Nations which do profess the Name of Christ, and do acknowledge
him to be the Son of God, and Savior of the World: and doubting in my self,
the Author of the said Book might have any divine Revelation of Prophecy
against those Nations, as Jonah had against Nineveh, and as the other Prophets
had before Christ came in the Flesh; but considering that Christ came to fulfill
the Law, I thought whether this Holwel might be a Prophet of Mahomet, to
encourage the Turks, and to dishearten the Christians, as all Ahab's Prophets
did, Micaiah excepted, encourage Ahab to go to Ramoth gilead, which were in
comparison no more than Mahometal Prophets possessed with lying Spirits, which
caused Ahab to go to Ramoth-gilead there to be slain, as the Turks fell at
Vienna. But taking a more serious View of it, I found it to be predicted
Astrologically, and then I was resolved to peruse it more carefully, whereby to
see if such Judgments were determinate by the celestial Influences, according
to secondary Causes, not doubting of a divine Providence of God over
Christendom, against the tyrannical Turks, and Power of Mahomet. And also I
soon procured Holwel's Catastrophe Mundi it self, and with a careful and
judicial Eye I thoroughly perused them both, and found it judged not really from
Astrology, but rather from Fancy; I also found many Mistakes, both in the time
of the Nativities of those magnanimous Princes there mentioned, and in many
other places, which I shall hereafter make appear, and give you the true
Nativities, with an Astrological Discourse thereon showing you how that the
Turks shall not overrun Christendom, neither shall the French King come to be
the poorest Prince in the World, as Mr. Holwel in his Appendix says he shall.
But I shall show Astrologically, what may be the Fate of those Nations, both by
the true Nativities of their Emperors, Kings, etc. and by the Effects of
Conjunctions, Comets, and other Configurations; showing my Reader a more fafe
and rational way of Judgment of the Effects of these Configurations, than Mr.
Holwel shows, in either his Catastrophe Mundi, or his Appendix, which he has
written, to make ignorant People believe that the World should be turned
immediately upside down, by means of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
Leo, 1682. and of the Comet that appeared in 1680. But let Mr. Holwel as well
as my Reader know, that there have been such Conjunctions and Comets before
these, which have had Effects bad enough, but far different from what Mr.
Holwel writes of these, and therefore unlike to be true; but I will show you
what has happened upon such Configurations already past, and my Judgment on
those lately happened for the time to come.

The Scheam of the Nativity of the French King, is the same that Morinus his
own Physician published in his Astrologia Gallica, and since printed in Mr.
Gadbury's Defense of Scorpio; that of the Grand Seignior is taken out of Mr.
Gadbury's Book de Cometis, but the Scheams of the Nativity of Mahomet, Author
of the Turks Faith, and that of the German Emperor, I had of my very good
Friend Mr. John Gadbury's own Hand, which he affirms to be the true ones, for
which I return him my hearty thanks.

And thus, courteous Reader, I have showed thee, according to the perfect Rules
of Astrology, the Fate that Europe will be like to undergo for near this twenty
years yet to come, both by the Nativities of some of her most Noble Princes,
the amazing Comet, in 1680, and the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo,
1682, which I do not question but Time will manifest to be true: And in the
mean time I crave nothing but thy kind acceptance, judicial perusing, careful
observation of the Effects for the future, and thy judgment of it according to
its merits, and this will encourage me to present thee with something of
greater Consequence; till then farewell.

John Merrifield.
From my House at the Hand and Pen at the lower end of Horslydown, near the
Dockhead in Southwark, London, Feb. 22. 1683/4.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 13. for Ascendent read second. p. 6. l. 25. for thing r. think.
p. 9. l. 33. r. Religion (excepting that of christ against which the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail. p. 12. for 60. r. Co-Anticians. p. 16. l. 1. dele by.
p. 20. l. 32. r. St. Stephen. p. 25. l. 1. for heart r. hearts. p. 26. l. 3.
dele Christ. p. 27. l. for too r. to. p. 11. l. 11. for Joseph r. Josephus, for
Falicimus r. Ferdinandus.

CATASTASIS MVNDI: OR, The true STATE, VIGOR, and growing Greatness of
Christendom, under the Influences of the last triple Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter in Leo, the late Comet, etc.
CHAP. I.
Treating of the Rise of the Ottoman Family, which is accounted to be the
Foundation of the Turks Empire.

IF we take the Original, or Beginning of the Turks Empire, to be from the
Ottoman Family, as I suppose we justly may (although they had many Risings and
Fallings, after they left their Native Country, Anno Dom. 844. and were then
called Scythians) for Ottoman taking upon him the Government of the Turks, he
first founded this great Empire, in the year of Christ, 1289. at which time,
Saturn was in Pisces; and Authors tell us, that Turkey, or the greatest part of
it, lies under Capricorn, and therefore governed by Saturn. And according to
the Rules of Astrology, Saturns greatest years are 465. which added to 1289.
will make 1754. therefore this Monarchy seems to stand firm and stable no
longer then unto the year of Christ, 1754. but as it has hitherto had at some
times Risings, and at other times Diminishings, so it will be like to continue;
and had not Saturn at his Conjunction with Jupiter, been in Aquarius his own
House, and a fixed Sign, a little before the beginning of this Empire, it had
not continued so long: But to take the time of this Conjunction, and to work by
directions from the New Moon preceding, to find the Time of the good or evil
Events of this Empire, I think it frivolous and vain, and an Abuse to Astrology
(as Mr. Holwel has done) for would not any rational man think it great Folly
or Madness in an Artist, to calculate a Child's Nativity, and take the time
thereof, four months before it was born, or first drew breath in the World? but
Mr. Holwel has taken the Nativity of the Turks Empire, four years before it
began, as he himself has written; but neither the Day nor Hour being (as I
suppose) known, nor attainable, when this Empire was first established by a
Law; therefore to know when this Empire shall be most Honorable and
Successful, or most miserable and unsuccessful, consider carefully the
Nativities of the Emperors, and chief Commanders thereof, and an able Artist
may give a good Astrological Judgment of the Success of that Empire, during his
Reign; for as a King or Emperor is the Head, and his People the Members, so the
Head cannot suffer Affliction, but the Members must partake with it; and what
Increasing, Decreasing, Ebbing and Flowing have happened in this Empire in
times past, History relates at large; and therefore I shall not here mention
it, lest my Book swell beyond my Expectation; for I intend not to write a
large-Folio, but a few Sheets, to show the World that there is a more certain
way of judging the State of a Nation, than Mr. Holwel has used in his
Catastrophe Mundi, or in his Appendix thereto. The future state of an Empire or
Kingdom, may also be judged, from the Conjunctions of the superior Planets,
Comets, Eclipses, and Solar Ingresses; all which I shall give a hint at, which
I hope I may do without offense.

And first, I will here insert the true Nativity of the Grand Seignior, the
present Emperor of the Turks; and it is the same which Mr. Gadbury has in his
Book de Cometis; which I alter only three Degrees on the Medium Coeli, and dare
affirm it to be the truest that is attainable, as I shall prove by several
Accidents.

The Nativity that Mr. Holwel has taken, cannot be the true time, because the
Accidents which have already happened will not admit of Sagittary to ascend in
the Nativity of that Illustrious Prince.

CHAP. II.
Treating on the Nativity of Sultan Mahomet, the Turks Grand Seignior.

astrological chart Sultan Mahomet Ham, was born January the 1st. 7h. 26 A. M.

Lat. 43 degrees.

.. add V. Cour.



SUltan Mahomet Ham, the present Emperor of the Turks, was born at
Constantinople, on the first day of January, 1641/2;. 26 minutes past 7 in the
Morning.

That this is a most Illustrious Nativity, here are many eminent Testimonies,
as may be seen by the Position of Jupiter, the Sun, Moon, and part of Fortune
in the Ascendent, and other Testimonies, which I will here omit, and proceed to
the general fate of the Native; this Scheme was taken out of the Book de
Cometis, written by my very good Friend Mr. John Gadbury.

The Sun, Jupiter and the Moon, in the Ascendent, are sure Testimonies of
Honor, both from great and eminent Persons, as also from the vulgar People, it
makes him extremely proud, so that he will esteem none so good as himself, but
will be apt to quarrel with those of his neighboring Nations; but the Moon in
this Nativity, applies to void of Course, showing most of his Undertakings to
be unfortunate; in this Nativity, Saturn, Lord of the Ascendent, is in square
of Mars, Lord of the tenth House, the House of Honor, so will he himself act
something that will be prejudicial to his own Honor. Mars, Lord of the Tenth,
is in the Eleventh, the House of Friendship, and there in Conjunction of Venus;
showing the Native will have many Friends, that will procure Honor to him by
their means, which will be Leaders and Generals of his Armies, the rather,
because Mars is Lord of the eleventh House, the House of Friendship; but
Jupiter Lord of the Twelfth, is in the Ascendent, showing that he will have
secret Enemies about his own House or Palace, and that there will be many
Seditions and Tumults raised against him, by his own Subjects, but they will
not prevail against him, but will be defeated in their Designs.

The Lord of the Eleventh, is in square to the Lord of the Ascendent, which
will cause the Friends of the Native to prove deceitful to him. Saturn, Lord of
the Ascendent, posited in the Second, shows the Native to use industry to
increase his Substance, and to enlarge his Territories; but Saturn is an
Infortune by Nature, and by being posited in the Ascendent, will rather destroy
the Natives Substance, and diminish his Empire; the Dragons Tail, in the Third,
makes his Inland Journies not to be very Fortunate, therefore not much like to
enlarge his Dominions by Land-Armies; but Saturn must be spiteful, though he be
defeated of his Enterprise; as the Moon is Combust, so has he been all his
Lifetime in Combustions and Troubles, even from his Minority; his Sea-Affairs
seem more successful than his Land-Affairs do, yet he has had his Affairs by
Sea often defeated by the Venetians, which have taken, sunk and burned, many of
his Ships and Galleys.

The Moon, Lady of the seventh House, the House of public Enemies, is stronger
then Saturn, Lord of the Ascendent, showing that he shall not prevail against
them, neither will his Enemies be apt to quarrel with him, seeing the Moon,
Lady of the Seventh, is in Sextile to Saturn, Lord of the Ascendent; but he
disposing of the Moon in the Ascendent, and in the Sign of the Ascendent, makes
him think that he can overpower the whole World, and especially Christendom;
not considering the Moon is in her own Triplicity, and in an Angle, and
therefore not to be prevailed against; for though Mr. Holwel, in his Appendix,
page the 25 th: says, that the Turk is ordained within a few years, to gain a
great part of Christendom, yet I do aver, that according to the Rules of
Astrology, they shall not gain one foot of Land in Christendom, but what they
shall pay dear Sauce for (let them have a care they lose none of their own) for
I would have Mr. Holwel, as well as my Reader know, that the influences of the
Stars, have not limited so short a continuance for the Christian Religion.

But the main thing that provoked this Emperor to give such an Alarm, against
Christendom in general, and Vienna in particular, are, because about this time,
he had the Sun, Moon and Ascendent directed to the Square of Mars, and Germany
being under Aries, drew him with a vast Host that way, supposing that Germany
had been his own with little or no Resistance, and so his Ambition was against
Rome, Italy, France, Spain, and all Christendom; but let not him boast that
puts on his Armor, but he that puts it off.

But had Mr. Holwel rightly understood the Grounds of Astrology, he might have
rectified his Scheme by Accidents, and he might easily have seen, that there
had been but little hope, that the Sultan should gain Honor, or enlarge his
Territories about this time by the Sword, nor need he have judged Vienna to be
taken upon such Directions; but that is like the rest of his nonsensical stuff.
I have wrought out the Directions of this Nativity, and will acquaint you with
some of them, to show thereby the truth of the Scheme, and others, what Fate
the Grand Seignior is yet like to undergo.

In the year 1648. on the 17 th. of August, Ibrim, Father of this present
Emperor of the Turks, was strangled in Prison, and his Son Mahomet being not
full seven years of age, was proclaimed Emperor in his Fathers stead; but he
being in his Minority, the Government was wholly left to his Mother, who, by
the Advice of the Council, took on her the Regency; he had then the Midheaven
directed to the Sextile of the Sun and Moon; when he was about nine years of
age, he had his Mid-heaven to the square of Mars, then were Domestic Troubles,
as well as Loss by the Venetian War; he was for the most part of his Life
healthful of body, but he has often been unfortunate in War, although he have
had many good Directions of both the Sun, Moon and Ascendent; but the general
fate of his Nativity, and the many ill Directions of the Mid-heaven, has made
him often unsuccesful in War.

At seventeen years of Age, he took on him the Regency, about which time he had
his Ascendent, Sun and Moon, directed to the Anticians of Mars.

About twenty one years of age, he had the Ascendent, Sun and Moon, to the
Sextile of Mars; then was great care taken for the carrying on the War, both
against Transylvania, Hungary and Venice.

About the year 1669. came the Ascendent, Sun and Moon, to the Sextile of
Venus, and soon after, to the body of Jupiter; then was concluded Peace with
the Venetians, and he prevailed in War against the Polanders, and he much
delighted himself in Pleasures and Recreations; but about the same time, he had
his Mid-heaven to the Conjunction of Mars, and see the effects of it; for in
the year 1673. the Poles deny paying to the Turk their promised Tribute;
General Sobieski, now King of Poland, fell upon the Turks Camp, then under the
Command of Chusalin and other Bashaws, killed about twenty five thousand of
their Men, with most of their Officers; this was very considerable; for besides
the ordinary Baggage, they took two thousand Purses of Money, that were brought
to pay the Soldiers, and twenty five thousand Wagons of Provision and
Ammunition; and about this time, he had the Mid-heaven to the square of Saturn,
Lord of his own Ascendent.

But since that time, he has had the Mid-heaven directed to the Conjunction of
Venus, and to the Sextile of Jupiter, also the Sun, Moon and Ascendent to the
Sextile of Mercury, which has lifted up his heart with Pride; but to abate his
haughtiness, in this year 1683. he has the Sun, Moon, and Ascendent, directed
to the square of Mars, Lord of both his House of Honor and Friends; Mars is
also Lord of the third House, showing that his professed Friends will be at
variance, and break their Leagues with him, and so will some of his
neighboring Nations, to his great Loss. Surely a great Oversight in Mr.
Holwel, to thing the Grand Seignior should overrun Christendom, upon such
Directions, yet he will certainly come against Christendom again.

About the year, 1687. he has the Sun, Moon and Ascendent, directed to the
Body of Saturn; I cannot positively say that he will lose his Life then about;
but I am certain he will undergo Afflictions of body, and all his Affairs go
unsuccessful for some considerable time; he has also about the same time, the
Mid-heaven directed to the Co-Antiscians of the Sun; sure, under these
Directions, the Christians may regain what the Turks formerly took from them;
and thus much of the Nativity of this great Prince. I will in the next place,
insert the Nativity of that grand Impostor Mahomet, the Author of the Turks
Faith, showing thereby, how some men are born to make and forge Lies, as he
did, and others born to believe them.

CHAP. III.
astrological chart Mahomet, Author of the Turks Faith, born April the 24th.
6h. 30 P. M. Anno Christi, 569. Latitude 41d.

add



THis Scheme of the Nativity of Mahomet, the Author of the Turks Faith or
Religion, accords to the time given by the learned Doctor Addison, and is very
like to be true, because it was ever (by Astrologers) concluded that the
Turkish Faith, first rose under Scorpio and Mars, as the Christian Religion did
under the Sun and Jupiter. I was presented with this Scheme by my Friend and
Tutor, Mr. John Gadbury, who also believes it true.

Most Writers accord, that Mahomet was born in Mecca, a City in Arabia the
happy, and Son of Abdalla, a Merchant, his Mother Hemina, a Jew: his Parents
died when he was young, and after their Decease, he was brought up by his
Uncle; at sixteen years old, he was bound to a Merchant, named Abdalmutalif,
who finding him a witty Lad, made him his Factor; afterward his Master dying,
he married his Mistress, and until thirty eight years of age, he followed his
Merchandise, traveling into many Countries, where being satisfied with Wealth,
he began to think of high things, for he was a curious searcher into both the
Jews and Christian Religion, being himself brought up a Pagan; but Pride
enflamed his heart, and wrought in him a desire to be taken for a Prophet; and
to make men believe that he was a real Prophet, he made use of his Disease
which he was often troubled withal, that was the Falling Sickness; for he gave
out, that when he fell in those Fits, that he then conferred with the Angel
Gabriel, by whom the pleasure of God was revealed to him; and thus by his
Delusions, he persuaded the People, so that they believed him to be a real
Prophet (or rather a God) and do ever since honor and esteem him so to be.

Now that this Mahomet should be so much honored and esteemed, may be thought
strange; but if we do but consider the ignorance of People in those days, and
in those Countries, we need not much scruple at it; for the Heathens worshipped
the Sun, Moon and Stars, esteeming them to be Gods, because they knew not the
true God; nay, some were more ignorant, and worshipped Stocks and Stones, also
Images which their own hands had wrought, esteeming them to be Gods; also the
Israelites, unto whom God manifested himself by many Miracles, Signs and
Wonders, and titled them his own People, they believed not in him, but made to
themselves a Molten Calf, and worshipped it; saying, these be thy Gods, O
Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, although they knew that
they came out of Egypt a long time before they made it; therefore, no wonder
that the Turks, which were of the Seed of Ham, that wicked Son of Noah, whom
his Father cursed, should esteem such a lying Impostor as Mahomet was, for a
God or Savior; for History plainly says, that after the Death of Noah, Ham
went into Africa, and there settled his Abode, and from his Posterity sprang the
Turks, a sort of People, much of his own nature; and here in the Nativity of
this Impostor Mahomet, we find the Regal Sign Leo, on the Medium Coeli, and
Jupiter, the greater Fortune, therein posited, a most eminent token of Honor;
and that he might seem to be a setter up of a Religion, contrary to that of
Christ, or rather the Author and Forger of malicious Lies, we may consider,
that he has Saturn in Libra, the Horoscope of our blessed Savior, as Mr.
Butler has it in his Christologia, and has wilfully made himself an opposer
of the Truth, and has established Christianity his Enemy, as may be seen by
Libra on the twelfth House, and Saturn therein posited, and Mars Lord of his
Ascendent in Gemini, the House of Mercury, and the Moon, Lady of the ninth
House; that being the House of Religion, applying to a quadrat of Mercury, and
to an opposition of Jupiter, might very well show him to be both the Author of
a false Religion, and promoter of Lies, and the Turks, that accursed Generation
of Ham, addicted to believe them; and that he should be an Enemy to the
Christian Religion, may well be observed from this Nativity, the Moon being in
Aquarius, in opposition to Leo, and Jupiter therein posited, and in square of
the Sun, the Sign and Planets representing the Christian Religion.

The opinion of Mahomet, or rather the Original of the Turks Religion, may be
said, to take its beginning at the flight of Mahomet, which was in the year
Anno Christi 591. for in that year, the Saracens drove him from Mecca, at which
time, the Turks first began to settle their Religion; and most Astrologers do
conclude, that the Turks Faith arose under Mars and the Moon, and good reason
may be showed for it, for in this Nativity, Scorpio ascends, and Mars is Lord
thereof, Cancer is on the Cusp of the ninth House, the House of Religion, and
the Moon is Lady of it, and may very well signify a Rude and Savage Religion,
as well as People, given to many Vices and lascivious Actions.

And to speak something of the continuance and desolation of their Faith, if we
take 264. the greatest years of Mars, and 320. the greatest years of the Moon,
and add to the year of Christ 591. the year that Mahomet took his Flight, it
will make but 1175. (a great mistake of Mr. Holwel, who takes 480. for the
greatest years of Mars, and 260. for the Moons greatest years; I wonder from
what Author he had them, but I suppose, this is one of his own new Inventions,
and like his Directions of the Othoman Family being taken four years before it
began, as may be seen in his Appendix, page the fifth) and about the year 1175.
this Faith was at the highest, for then the Othoman Family were much increased,
and settled their Religion by a Law, which I confess, was before this time done,
or else this had been but a birth of this Religion, and because God has said
in the Holy Scriptures, that all Nations shall be converted to the Christian
Faith, before the Day of Judgment, therefore we will consider, about what time
this Faith may have a Dissolution, which according to the Rules of Astrology,
and secondary Causes, if we add 584. the greater years of Mars, and the Moon,
to 1175. it will make 1759. so that about the year, Anno Christi 1759. we may
expect the Dissolution of the Turks Faith, for I would have (Mr. Holwel as well
as) my Reader know, that as any Religion has a rising, and increasing, before
it comes to its full height, so it will have the like time of Diminishing,
before it can have its full Dissolution.

CHAP. IV.
Treating of the Nativity of the present Emperor of Germany.

IN this Chapter, I will first show you, how that Mr. Holwel, in his Appendix
tells us, that this present Emperor of Germany, was born on the thirtieth Day
of May, in the year 1640. at nine hours three minutes post Meridiem, or after
Noon, in the Latitude of 48 Degrees, and that he had seven Degrees, and forty
five Minutes of Scorpio on the Mid-heaven, and Jupiter in four Degrees and
fifty four Minutes of Capricorn, as may be seen in his Scheme, which he affirms
to be the true one; because, says he, it was rectified by the Mid-heaven, to
the Square of Saturn and Jupiter, and the Square of the Moon, at which time,
says he, the Emperor and Empire had much Suffering, for the Turks did invade
him; but behold his grand Mistake, for I will appeal to all Artists, how the
Mid-heaven can come to the Square of Jupiter (as he is posited) in less than
150 years, whereas it was directed to the Square of Saturn and the Moon, about
the twenty fourth year of his Age, and therefore in the year 1664. but any
thing will serve with such Artists, to fill a Book good enough for ignorant
People to read and admire; for it is nothing with too many now a days, of our
Godly Traitors, Sanctified Hypocrites, Religious Atheists, and Protestant Turks
(as Mr. Pelling titles the Fanatics in the twelfth page of his Sermon,
preached on the ninth of September, 1683. being a day of Thanksgiving, for
deliverance from the Fanatic Conspiracy) to blast the Honor of Christian
Kings and Potentates, especially those of other Nations, when they can scarce
forbear our own; but I will forbear to speak any more of this Mistake, and
proceed to a greater. This Nativity, published by Mr. Holwel, is taken out of
Mr. Gadburies Book of Comets, only the time a little altered, and it is the
true Day, but not the true Hour, as has been proved by Mr. Gadbury, since he
wrote that Book; for any one that has had any Discourse with any man that has
seen him, or has but seen his Effigy, may very easily conjecture, that this
noble Emperor has not Capricorn ascending on his Horoscope, but rather Gemini,
and therefore I will insert a Scheme, of the true time of this Emperors Birth,
which is as follows, and given me also by Mr. Gadbury himself.

astrological chart Leopoldus the present Emperor of Germany, was born May the
30 th. 4 h. Ante Mer. Lat. 48.

add



This present Emperor of Germany, was born the thirtieth day of May, in the
year of our Lord 1640. at four a Clock in the Morning, and christened
Leopoldus, Ignatius, Franciscus, Balthazer, Joseph Falicimus, in the City of
Vienna.

At the birth of this Magnanimous Prince, Gemini was on the Horoscope, and the
Sun in the Ascendent, and Mercury Lord of the Ascendent in his own House, and
in the Sign of the Ascendent, which are testimonies of the greatest Honor,
Dignity and Sovereignty, and though Saturn, Mars and the Moon, be in the
Mid-heaven, yet will they not destroy the Natives Honor and Grandeur, because
they are not afflicted; for Saturn is Lord of the tenth House, and Mars and the
Moon are in trine to the Sun in the Ascendent, from the Mid-heaven, which are
rather testimonies of Honor than Disgrace, and here we have Mercury, Lord of
the Ascendent, stronger than Jupiter, Lord of the Seventh, the House of public
Enemies, which is an eminent token that his public Enemies shall not prevail
against him, yet his Position in the twelfth House, may show the Native to have
many Enemies, the rather, being in square to Saturn, but Mercury is strongest
in the Figure, therefore, as aforesaid, his Enemies can never prevail against
him, for the Lord of the Seventh is weak, and in his fall; neither can I
suppose the Native to die in Battle, as Mr. Holwel awards, because the Lord of
the Eighth does not afflict either the Ascendent or the Moon, nor is there any
signification of a violent Death he has about this time; the Mid-heaven
directed to the Sextile of Venus, Lady of the sixth House, a glorious
Direction, showing that his Servants and Subjects will be faithful to him, so
that he need not, neither will he fear either Turk or Tartar, nor yet the power
of Mahomet, the Treachery of Count Teckely, or Mr. Holwels idle Predictions,
nor yet any other of Mahomets lying Prophets, whatsoever they shall write or
predict against Christendom; but let such Predictors know, that God has a
Divine Providence over Christendom, and will not suffer the name of Christ to
be destroyed; but this Emperor has had many ill Directions in his Life past,
and he has also had many Controversies and Troubles, answerable to them, but
the main cause of this his present trouble is, that he has Lately had the Sun
and Ascendent, both directed to the 60 Anticians of Jupiter, the Significator
of the Christian Religion, and I think he has not been free from trouble,
since he had the Mid-heaven directed to the Square of the Sun, and the Moon to
the Square of Jupiter, which was about ten years since, and it is much to be
feared, he will not be free from trouble until he has passed the Mid-heaven to
the Square of Jupiter, which will be about the year 1688. yet before that time,
he has good Directions, for about the year 1685. he has the Moon to the
Sextile of the Sun, and the Sun to the Sextile of Venus, Directions good enough
in a mean Nativity, to raise a Beggar to good Preferment, much more in a Regal
Nativity, to give a King or Emperor Victory over his Enemies, to a great degree
of Worship and Adoration from all kinds of People.

The Moon directed to the Sextile of the Sun, is held by all Astrologers, to
produce unto the Native honorable Acquaintance, and Familiarity with some of
great Rank and Quality, whose Friendship he will make use of to his great
advantage, more esteemed and beloved of People than formerly, both enriched and
honored by means of his Prudence and good Nature; sometimes it produces
honorable Marriage, also Travel, both by Sea and Land, whereby Honor is
attained; to Kings and Emperors, it shows the Renovation of Leagues and
Friendship, and the composing of Differences with their Neighbors.

And the Sun, directed to the Sextile of Venus, does import the Native to have
a good Name, also some more than former advance to Dignity and Preferment, from
whence he shall acquire great store of Wealth, and be highly esteemed of all
sorts of People in general, he shall perform all his Affairs with much
facility, and obtain all his just desires, with much love and content, it most
commonly produces a Child unto the Native; both these Directions happen about
the year 1685. and what advantage he now gains, he need not fear losing
again, as long as he lives.

And about the year of our Lord 1688. this Native has the Midheaven directed
to the Square of Jupiter, intimating Kings and Princes to gain the Displeasure
of their Nobility and Gentry, by abridging their Privileges, so that Judges
and Lawyers will be at Controversy with him, and many of them he will turn out
of their Places; also Ecclesiastical Persons, and those of the highest degree
offensive against him, whereby will arise much Controversy, Contention and
Mutations, also some of his Kindred will be disaffected to him, but at last
they will be forced to comply with him, and that upon his own terms, and they
will be glad if they can regain their lost Favor.

But to mitigate these Troubles, he has at the same time, the Ascendent
directed to the Sextile of Venus, which will make the Native delight himself in
all manner of Pleasures and Recreations, and that he will gain the Love of the
Commonalty, and Familiarity with Women of great Rank and Quality, it often
produces honorable Marriages, and Issue soon after, and from henceforth for
many years, he has no ill Directions, so that according to the Rules of
Astrology (from which Rules I would not willingly vary) this Emperor is like to
have a long and prosperous Reign, and I know not, but that he may attain to
eighty two years of age, which God grant he may, to the Honor of Christendom;
about which time, it seems to be somewhat mortal; but I will forbear any
further Judgment thereof, as having a Veneration for the Persons of Emperors
and Kings, who are Gods Vicegerents on Earth.

CHAP V.
Treating of the Nativity of the most Christian King of France, LEWIS the
Fourteenth.

astrological chart September 5. 11 h. 11 A M 1638.

Sub Lat. 49 d.

ad



THis Scheme of the Nativity of the most Christian King of France, is the same
which Morinus, Physician to the King of France, affirms to be the true one; and
I suppose nearer the truth than that which Mr. Holwel inserts in his Appendix:
This Scheme may be seen in Morinus's Astrologia Gallica, fol. 555. as Mr.
Gadbury has assured me, and also printed it in defense of Scorpio.

In Mr. Holwels Appendix in the King of France's Nativity, he predicteth that
most Christian King to become one of the miserablest Princes in the world,
because, says he, he has many ill Directions. But we will first consider the
general Fate, (which is most to be regarded) and then proceed to particulars:
but here I will show you how there is some small difference between Mr. Holwels
Judgment and mine of the time; for I, with Morinus affirm, that he has 14.
degrees and 45. Minutes of Scorpio on the Horoscope, and Mr. Holwel says 22
degrees; no great difference in the general fate, but in the particular it will
in some directions differ ten years of time: so that the Accidents which are
produced by either the Ascendent or Mid-heaven, by Mr. Holwels Scheme, will not
come by Morinus until ten years after, which is a great difference in time.

But we have here in our Scheme the Regal Sign Leo on the Medium Coeli, and the
Sun Lord thereof posited in the Mid-heaven; also Mercury in his own house in
the Mid-heaven, which are absolute testimonies of durable Honor: he has also
the part of Fortune in the eleventh house, declaring that he shall be much
advantaged by his professed Friends, and that he shall have many Friends:
likewise the Moon is in Conjunction of Venus, Lady of the Eleventh House, the
House of Friendship, but Venus is Lady of the Twelfth House, also the House of
private Enemies; so she is likewise Lady of the Seventh House, the House of
public Enemies: but inasmuch as Mars Lord of the Ascendent, is stronger than
Venus Lady of the Seventh and Twelfth, it is an eminent token that his Enemies
either public or private shall not prevail against him, neither will they be
very apt to quarrel with him; but those that will contend with him, let them be
sure to look to come off with loss and damage, for they will not be able to
withstand him.

But I suppose the main thing that caused Mr. Holwel to predict of the
miserable poverty of this great Monarch, might proceed from the position of
Mars, and the Dragons Tail in the Second House of his Scheme; for these are
commonly testimonies of waste of substance: but Mr. Holwel does mistake, the
Dragons Tail is not in the Second House, as he has placed him in his Figure,
but in the Eighth House, and the Dragons Head is in the Second House.

And if we consider that Mars is Lord of the Ascendent, we need not judge him a
testimony of Poverty, but rather of Riches; which is much augmented by the
position of the Dragons Head in the second House; for Authors say, the Lord of
the Ascendent posited in the second House, shows a great increase of Riches by
the Natives own labor and industry, the rather being in Reception with the
Lord of the second. And pray what Prince in the World now living, has labored
more, and used greater industry to increase his Riches, and to enlarge his
Territories, than the present King of France has done? neither has any Prince
had greater success than he. And thus I shall leave the general, and proceed to
the particulars.

Whereas Mr. Holwel desires any one that will, to run down the Directions of
this Mighty Monarch, I have taken his advice, and have run down the Directions
of his Figure, and I find that the Sun came not to the square of Mars until
Twelve years of age, (but Mr. Helwel says at Nine) therefore unlike the Sun to
the Square of Mars should give the Small Pox at Nine years of age: Neither do I
hold any Direction of either the Sun or Moon a safe Rule whereby to prove any
Nativity by, but rather by the Ascendent or Mid-heaven; yet I do not say but
the Directions of the Sun or Moon may operate as forcibly as the other,
according to their nature, though not to prove the time of birth by.

But according to Morinus's Figure, which I suppose to be nearest the truth, he
had between three and four years of age the Midheaven to the Sextile of
Jupiter, about which time the French Kings Father died, and he styled King of
France: about twelve years of age, he had the Mid-heaven directed to the
Conjunction of the Sun; under this Direction he received his Crown; about
thirteen or fourteen he had the Sun to the Square of Mars, and then he had
troubles in France; and at Paris they shut the Gates against him. About two or
three and twenty, he had the Sun directed to the Sextil of both Venus and the
Moon; under these Directions he was married to Maria Tiresia d'Austria, Infanta
of Spain, which was on the Ninth of September 1660. And Mr. Holwel says, the
French King has lately had the Midheaven to the Sextil of Mars, and that
caused him to be prosperous in Arms; but I say he has not yet had that
Direction; but he has lately had the Sun to the Sextil of Mars, and the
Ascendent to the Cusp of the second House, this caused him to be prosperous in
Arms, and thereby to increase his Substance and Territories.

And Mr. Holwel also says, that the French King in August 1683. shall have
many Miseries, both in Body, Mind, and Fortune, and that then his own Subjects
will rebel against him; and that he would be in danger of Fire and Gunshot,
also Stabbing and Imprisonment; and that he should be in danger of being
cheated of his Life; and then, says he, if this happen, one may say there is
some truth in Art. But I am assured, that as this has not yet happened, and
though it never do (as I am persuaded it never will) yet there is more Truth in
Art than there is honesty in Mr. Holwel, or truth in such Artists; for such
nonsensical boasters of Art are but abusers of Art, and therefore not worthy to
bear the Name or Title of an Artist.

He says moreover about the same time, the French King should lose all his
former Honor both by Sea and Land, (but sure he means this of himself) and
that all he takes in hand for seven years space will prosper ill, if he lives
so long, and that he will soon come to be imprisoned or Banished, and be one of
the miserablest Princes in the World.

But none of these things have yet happened, neither can I find according to the
Rules of Astrology, that such Calamities will at all happen to this most
Christian Prince; for certainly he is not a Prince born to Misfortune, Disgrace
nor Poverty, as an ingenious Artist may well perceive by his Nativity, but to
be the Glory of his Nation, and a Terror to his Enemies: and as for those
Directions which Mr. Holwel pretends should bring such afflictions on this most
Christian King, are not yet come, neither will they for many years; and when
they do come, they will not be so violent as he speaks of; for he considers
not that about the same time that there happens evil Directions, there also
happens good ones; for about the year of our Lord Christ 1690. the Ascendent
comes to the Square of Mercury, Lord of the eighth and tenth Houses, which
might show some danger both of Life and Honor; but at the same time the Sun
comes to the body of Jupiter, Lord of the seventh and eleventh Houses, thereby
raising Friends unto the Native, and bringing even his Enemies to be at peace
with him, and thus abating the evil threatened by Mercury. And about the year
1692. the Ascendent will be directed to the body of Mars, Lord of the sixth
House, which may give some afflictions of body, and at the same time the
Mid-heaven comes to the Sextile of Mars, mitigating the evil influence of Mars
to the Ascendent; yet I suppose about the year 1690. or between that and the
year 1693. he may have some affliction of body that will be very violent, which
if he escape, he may ( favente Deo) live many years.

Mr. Holwel also says, that in a short time the Commons of France will be in
Arms against their present King, and that if he should live but two years (that
would be but to the year 1685,) he would be driven from his Throne by his own
Subjects, and if he die before, then the next King will be served so: but what
reason he has for any of this, I think that neither himself, nor any rational
man can tell; but especially whereby he judges the fate of the next King, by
this present Kings Nativity; nay he is not content therewith, but he adds
more nonsensical stuff; for in the same Nativity he says, the Turks shall
overrun France, Spain, Italy, Rome, Venice, Muscovia and Poland, destroying it
with Fire and Sword; and that the Key of Christendom shall be lost; (but it
were better a thousand such Predictors were served as Baals Prophets were, that
we might have no more such Christian Turks amongst us to dishearten us with
lies) but I shall forbear to mention any more of these fooleries, and certify
my Readers, that the ruin of these Kingdoms and Countries cannot by the Rules
of Astrology be predicted of from this Nativity; therefore this is like the
rest of his false nonsensical stuff, and Time will manifest it so to be; and
then let Mr. Holwel be sure that he will be derided, not only by Artists, but
by every one wholly ignorant of Art, that has, or shall chance to read his
Books, which will be to him a greater Disgrace, than ever his Books procured
him Fame or Profit; thus he has used his endeavor to dishearten all
Christendom, and to encourage the Turks and Heathens with false Predictions.
But I will advise Mr. Holwel, not to disoblige the King of England, nor the
Laws of our Land, for he has disobliged almost all Christendom, and belied the
Turks; and if he should have a fancy, or be forced to travel, I would have him
well consider, into what Kingdom or Country, he may be the most welcome; if to
the Turks he go, let him have a care of strangling, for he has been to them an
abominable lying Prophet, if to the Kingdom of France, the Bastile is the way
to the Wheel, on which they break all impudent Impostors, for he has frighted
that Country (if at least any among them be so senseless, to be frighted with
his absurd Crudities) with false Fears, more than enough. If to any other Country
of Christendom, they will quickly smell out an Ass under the Skin of a Lion, and
bait him accordingly; my Advice therefore is, that he keep himself at home,
with the Catastrophe Mundi, and Appendix of his own addle Writing, there being
nothing in them, but what is become most notorious and loathsome to all sober
men.

CHAP. VI.
Treating of the Conjunction of the Superior Planets, and more particularly, of
the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in Leo, in the year 1682.

EVery Planet contributeth in some measure or other to the Government of this
World, but some more forcibly than others, as the Superiors, being forerunners
of great and strange Accidents, War, Slaughter, and Mutations.

I come now to speak something of the Conjunctions of Saturn, and Jupiter; and
as for Mr. Holwels method of direction to that purpose, in a Figure of the new
or full Moon, either next before or after it, I think it not a safe way, there
to find the time of their Effects, for by this way of direction round and round
the Zodiac, the Effects of a Conjunction would last to the end of the World;
and if all the Conjunctions which have been since the Creation, should to this
day work their Effects, as they did at or soon after they happened, what a
miserable time should we now live in? but they are not to last always, for they
are appointed for Signs and for Seasons, for days and years; and as he has
directed Saturn and Jupiter in their Conjunction in Sagitary, Anno Dom. 1603.
to the new Star, which was in the year 1572. and the Ascendent and Midheaven of
the new Moon, before the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, 1682. directed to
the same new Star, is to no more effect (comparatively) than a man being very
cold, should fit by a great Fire till he had warmed and refreshed himself, and
many years after, he being in the same Extremity with Cold, and coming to the
same House, expecting there again to warm and refresh himself, but finds
neither Fire nor Inhabitants there at present, nor had any been there for many
years past, only there remained the House empty; so by this direction, the
House or Sign of the Zodiac may be found, but the new Star long time past,
quite out and extinguished; so are the directions to the other Promitters as
erroneous and frivolous.

But I having been atleast twenty years a Student in Astrology (and other parts
of the Mathematics) I have read many Authors, and discoursed with Doctor
Reason, and Doctor Experience, and they tell me, that the time of the Events of
Conjunctions of the superior Planets are taken two ways, that is generally and
particularly; first generally, as to the time of the whole duration of their
effects; take this for a general Rule, that the effects of the Conjunction of
any of the superior Planets continue in force, but until another Conjunction of
them happen (which is in about twenty years) and then their effects will alter,
according to the nature of the Sign in which it happens, consideration being
had to their Position and other Configurations; so that the effects of that
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Sagitary, in the year 1603. (so much
spoken of by Mr. Holwel, in his Catastrophe Mundi) ended in the year 1623. for
at that time there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, whose
effects also ended in the year 1643. and the more fully, there then happening a
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Pisces, a Sign of the watery Triplicity,
whose effects lasted but to the year 1663. for then happened another Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter in Sagitary, whose effects were not different from that
in 1603. I mean, in their own Nature, and not as the many Eclipses, solar
Ingresses and other Configurations, altered them, and their effects ceased,
when the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter happened in October 1682. and was the
first of the Triple Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, which happened then
and in the following year, under whose effects we now are, and shall so be,
until the year 1702, and their effects in their own nature are not like to be
much different from that which happened in the year 1623, only this in 1682. is
of far greater force, it being a Triple Conjunction, and therefore its effects
will be more powerful.

The effects of the Conjunctions of the Superior Planets, are commonly
Seditions, Troubles, Mutations, Wars, Subversions of Monarchies, Kingdoms,
States, alterations of Laws, Customs, Privileges, Treacheries, Treasons, and
sometimes the Death of Emperors, Kings, Princes, Potentates and Powers; and
thus much of the general Operation: now we come to the particular.

And the better to judge of the future effects of the Conjunctions of Saturn
and Jupiter in Leo, in the years 1682. and 1683. let us look back into History,
and see what has happened under such Conjunctions already past, and thereby we
shall be the better able to judge of their following significations. In the
year Anno Christi 35. (being but one year after the Death and Passion of our
Savior Jesus Christ) there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, and
then the Jews waxed bitter cruel against the Disciples of our Savior; for
after the death of Christ, the Holy Spirit falling on them, they boldly profess
what they had seen and heard, and that openly; and Stephen being chosen to
perform Holy Service, in the Company of the Christians, because he fervently
employed himself in publishing the Glory of Christ, being laid hold on by
envious Persons, was stoned to death, and from that time, the chief of the Jews
endeavored all they could, to blot out the name of the Christians by what
means they could; but especially Saul breathed out threatenings against them,
who having the largest Power made over to him from the High Priest, he then
bended toward Damascus, that he might oppress them, but in his Journey he was
affrighted, and being struck to the Earth, he is converted, and suddenly
applied himself wholly to the Worship of Christ. This happened in the third year
after the death of Christ, and the first after the Conjunction.

And this is a very good Example of what is now coming on after the Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, 1682. for Jupiter being a Significator of the
Christian Religion, and afflicted by the body of Saturn in Leo, the House of
the Sun, another Significator of the Christian Religion, and Saturn being
Significator of the Turks, may well stir them up against Christendom; Saturn
being the most superior Planet, put great and haughty thoughts of conquering
the Christians into the Turks malicious minds: But I suppose that neither the
Turk nor Mr. Holwel thought of, nor considered, that Saturn was weak in Leo,
and disposed of by the Sun, Significator of both the Christians and their
Religion; for all that Saturn can do in Leo, is but to stir up Christian
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Governors, to purge out all the dangerous dregs
of obstinate Dissenters and Fanaticism, and those of every wicked principle
contrary to the well-being of Government; and that in all parts of Christendom,
but especially in those places under the Sign Leo, also to those in Sextile or
Trine to it, which are Aries, Gemini, Libra and Sagitarius; so that all
Countries and Cities under those Signs will in some way or other receive
benefit by the means of this Conjunction, rendering the Regal power like the
Sun, glorious and splendid; but I doubt of the Conversion of the Turks under
such a Conjunction, though Saint Paul had his under the like.

In the year of Christ 94. was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, and
soon after Ulpius Trajanus took the Roman Empire, being two and forty years of
age: he was strong and expert in Military affairs; he was also wise, moderate
and courteous, so that by the general consent of all he deserved the name of
very good: he was prosperous in War; he added to the Roman Empire Dacia of
Scythia; in the year of Christ 102. he subdued the Armenians, Ibrians,
Colchians, the Sermats, Arabians, and the Babylonians; he brought under his
power Seleucia, Ctesiphon and Babylon, and several other Cities; but while he
sailed in the Red Sea, they rebelled against him; but he in person, with his
Army, soon subdued them again; he also smote the Cyrenian Jews and Parthians
with great slaughters, which rebelled against him; he fell sick and died
naturally in Cilicia, in August, Anno Dom. 117.

Sure, had Mr. Holwel compared History with his Astrology, he might have judged
more charitably of Rome, Italy and Christendom; for never yet did Christendom
under any Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, suffer Detriment, but came
off Victoriously over their Enemies, neither can either Turk, Tartar, or any
other Enemy to Christendom, under this Conjunction, preprevail against them;
yet I suppose, the Turk will have another attempt against Christendom, though
he come off with as great or greater loss, than he did last at Vienna.

In the year of Christ 153, there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, and
at the same time, Antonius Pius was Emperor of Rome, and with such virtue and
goodness governed he that Empire, that he excelled all others, the whole World
was at Peace with him, all the time of his Empire, foraign Princes did dread
him, so that they would make him the Arbitrator of their differences, because
of his Wisdom; he died naturally, Anno Dom. 161.

Antonius Varus succeeded him, and reigned prosperously; he was succesful in
War against the Parthians, also in the Marcoman Wars; he died of an Apoplexy,
Anno Dom. 171.

Surely, if Christian Princes were under this Conjunction, so wise and
successful in War against their Enemies, I know no reason Astrologically, why
they should not be so now, for the Conjunctions are the same, and therefore
must work the same effects; let Mr. Holwel, or any of Mahomets Prophets say
what they will, for the Celestial Powers have not changed their former
Influences.

Anno Dom. 829. there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, and then
Lodovick governed the Roman Empire: but in the year following, Pepin King of
France conspired against him, with the chief Governors, and lays hold on the
Empire, but in the following year, through the help of the Germans, Lodowick
regains the Empire, and in the year 833. he is driven from the Empire, by the
Conspiracy of his three Sons, and advice of the Bishops; but in the following
year, Lodowick is wholly restored to Empire, and so governed it to the day of
his death, which was in the year 840. after his decease, his three Sons fall at
difference for the Empire* Lotharius the eldest, against Lodowick and Charles
the two youngest, and join Battle, so that many men were slain on both sides;
but in the year 844. they agree, and divide their Fathers Inheritance thus
amongst themselves; unto Lotharius the Roman Empire, that is, Rome and Italy,
also Lorain, which took its Name from Lotharius, and also the Province of
Burgany, and to Ludovick, all Germany, Mentzspiras, and Worms, and to Charles,
the West Country of France.

In the year 888. there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo; about
this time, was great War between the Normans and the French; for in the year
890. the Normans lay Siege against Paris, but took it not, though (as some say)
the Siege lasted seven years, and in the year 898. the French slew of the
Normans 18000, upon the Hill Faulcon, near the City.

Anno Dom. 948. there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, about
this time, Berengarius usurps the Kingdom of Italy from Lotharius, but the
Italians disliking his Tyrannical Government (which he held for the space of
twelve years) fled to Otho King of Germany, who being gone into Italy, in the
year 962. received the Imperial Crown of Pope John, and was saluted the first
Emperor of Germany; he two years after led away Berengarius into Bavaria, and
there he died; so Otho governed the German Empire prosperously and victoriously
all his days, so that the German Empire had its rise under the Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, a fixed Masculine Regal Sign, which relates to
Diuturnity, and the long continuance of all things begun under it.

Thus you may see, that under these three Conjunctions, the Christians have had
War one against another, an Error too much practiced amongst some Christian
Princes. And indeed at this time, amongst those that profess the Christian
Religion, there are so many animosities and diverse ways of Worship, that I
think, most of our Dissenters had rather choose to kiss the Turks Alchoran, then
to submit to our Lawful Regal Authority; but let such know, that under this
Conjunction, and all other Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, there
has been, and will be a cleansing and purging by Regal Authority, all the
dangerous dregs of Fanaticism, and of every wicked Principle, repugnant to the
well-being of Government. There has also been under those Conjunctions,
Treachery, Treason and Rebellion; the Son has conspired against the Father,
and driven him from his Throne; the Subjects have conspired against their
Prince, and Brethren have made War one against another for their Fathers
Inheritance; God grant that no such Conspiracy happen in any part of
Christendom under this Conjunction.

In the year of Christ 1623. there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
Leo, just at which time Mustapha the Turks Grand Signior was deposed from his
Imperial Throne the second time, and Morat the rightful Heir proclaimed
Emperor in his room, being but fourteen years of age. In this year the Turks
had War with the Hungarians, Persians and Transilvanians; and the Persians took
the Province and City of Babylon from the Turks, slew many of them, took Mosul
(formerly called Nineve) Mecha, and great part of the Turks Territories. The
following year was much in effect like unto this. In 1625. a Rebellion broke
out in Asia against the Grand Signior, and a great Plague in Constantinople. In
1626. the Turks besiege Babylon, but came off by the loss of 70000 Turks and
Tartars; and in the following year no peace could be concluded. 1628. the War
continued, and the Persians took several Towns from the Turks. This War
continued till the year 1638. at which time the Persians had War with the
Indians, and then the Grand Signior taking advantage of the Persians, went
himself in person with a mighty Army against Babylon, and with much ado, and
the loss of a great many men, took it from the Persians on promise of quarter;
but contrary to his promise he caused all Men, Women, and Children to be
barbarously massacred: and by this you may see the faith of a Turk. And thus
much of the signification of this Conjunction, and of what is past; I proceed
now to what is yet to come.

I come now to speak of the Triple Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, in
the year of our Lord 1682. And it is a Maxim according to that of Cardan, Segm.
5. Aphor. 63. Operationes Planetarum nunquam cessant, donec contraria a
Planeta, vel Stella fixa, aut signi part contrariae qualitatis impedimentur,
vel in Solis radios incidant; The operation of the Planets never cease until
they are impedited by a contrary Planet or fixed Star, or from part of the Sign
of contrary quality, or when they fall into combustion, viz. into the rays of
the Sun.

In this Conjunction those Planets are not in evil aspects of either the Sun or
Mars, therefore no great matter of their effects could operate at the time of
this Conjunction; but about the beginning of November 1682. the Sun came to the
Square of both Saturn and Jupiter, and also of the place of the Conjunction; at
which time the effects began to operate, though but slowly; but about the
latter end of January following, the Sun came to the Opposition of both Saturn
and Jupiter, and the place of the Conjunction; this insinuated mischief into
the heart of the Turks, to proclaim open War against Germany; and in the latter
end of August, and beginning of September, when Mars came to the Square of
Saturn, and the place of the Conjunction, the effects began to operate to
purpose, as we know about Vienna, and had not Jupiter been stronger than
Saturn, Christendom might have had too great a cause to have remembered it, for
Mars is an Enemy to both Saturn and Jupiter; but a little after, Jupiter met
with the Conjunction of Venus, governess of Libra (and thereby raised the
Siege) being the Sign under which Vienna lies.

And whereas this Conjunction happened in Leo, we may consider by what has been
already said, that Christendom never suffered much under such Conjunctions, but
has come off either with honor or victory, although they have had many
Troubles and Afflictions; for under such Conjunctions they have beaten the
Turks, and almost all that have opposed them.

Now if I should be asked the reason why the Christians have been so fortunate
under the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo? Consider that Jupiter in
Leo is stronger than Saturn there, and disposes of Saturn in his own
Triplicity; for Saturn being Perigrine, and in his Detriment, he is as a man in
custody of his Enemy, forsaken of his Friend, and not able to work the evil
effects he might do if he were strong, either in his own House or Exaltation;
for what hurt can an envious man do, when he is bound in Prison, and forsaken
of his Friends? Saturn can do no more in this Conjunction (neither can Kingdoms
nor People under Saturn) but envy the happiness of Religions, Countries and
Persons under Leo, and not under Leo only, but those that be under any Sign
that is in Sextile or Trine to Leo, which are Libra, Sagitary, Aries, and
Gemini. But here, peradventure I may be asked the Question, why Vienna in
Austria, being under Libra sped so ill? To that I answer, Had it not been for
this Conjunction, it might have sped worse; for the Besieging of Vienna, was
not wholly occasioned by the Conjunction, but rather by the last Comet that
appeared in 1682, and passed through Libra, and the Conjunction may well be
reputed the Raising of the Siege at Vienna; or if any one will have it to
proceed from the Conjunction only, it matters not, for it is no more than I
told you before, that Saturn or the Turks by him represented, would show their
Envy to Religion, Countries, Cities and Persons under Leo, and under Signs in
Sextile or Trine to Leo, but would want strength and power to destroy them; for
if we compute the Loss that the Turks have sustained by that Siege, both in
Substance and People, and compare it with the Loss of the Christians, we may
say, that the Conjunction was not prejudicial, but rather beneficial to
Christendom, and prejudicial to the Turks.

Yet I do not say, but these Places under Leo, and in Sextile, and Trine to it,
may have Troubles, but their Enemies shall not have power to prevail against
them to overcome them; for though Saturn be the most superior, yet being out of
all his essential Dignities, he shall be forced to seek to, and comply with the
Sun and Jupiter, and that upon their terms, and not upon his own.

But these Regions, Countries, and Cities under Aquarius, being in opposition
to Leo, and those in square, which are Taurus and Scorpio, will be like to be
most sufferers (under this Conjunction) by one means or other; either by War,
Famine, Sickness, or Inundations of Waters, and c. for certainly, if those
under the Sextiles and Trines partake of Evil, much more those under the
Squares and Oppositions will be Sufferers by their effects, as may be seen by
this following example, being yet in the memory of many thousands now living in
England. In the year 1663. there was a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
Sagitary, and Gemini is the opposite Sign, London being under it, what sad
fates did London undergo soon after? for in the year 1665, there was a
lamentable Plague, and in 1666. the City almost consumed with Fire; many more
sad Accidents I could instance, but let this suffice at this time.

And because that every one that may happen to read this Book, may not be an
Artist good enough to know what places are under the Signs before mentioned, I
will here insert the Names of some Countries and Cities under Leo, and under
the Signs in Opposition and Square to it, which are as follows.

Under Leo, are, Italy, Sicily, Bohemia, the Alps, Gallia, Togata, Apuleia,
Phoenicia, and part of Turkey: Cities, Damascus, Syracuse, Rome, Ravinna,
Cremona, Ulms, Prague, Lints, Confluentia, Bristol, etc.

Under Aquarius, are, Samaria, Amazonia, Tartaria, Muscovia, Westphalia, Mosel,
Aethiopia, Media, Arabia, the desert: Cities, Hamborough, Breme, Montserat,
Pisarum, Ingoldstad and Trent, etc.

Under Taurus, are Russia, Polonia major, Lorrain, Campagnia, Helvetia,
Switzerland, Persia, Cyprus, Parthia, Ireland: Cities, Parma, Nants, Bononia,
Sena, Mantua, Sicila, Tigur, Tarentum, Lucern, Lipsic, etc.

Under Scorpio, are, Norway the Higher, Bavaria, Campagena, Cappadocia, Idumea,
Catalonia, Barbary, Fez: Cities, Gaunt, Algera, Messina in Italy, Frankfort
upon Odar, Valentia, and Catalonia in Spain.

Thus I have showed some of the Places under the Signs, in which the effects of
this Conjunction is like to be most powerful; and for the time of the future
effects, it is most like to be, when the Sun or Mars shall behold Saturn,
Jupiter, or the place of the Conjunction by an evil Aspect; that is, by Square
or Opposition. I do not say that all the places aforesaid shall be afflicted at
one time, neither that all the Calamities aforesaid shall happen to any one
place; it is enough (nay and too much too) if any one of them happen in any
Country or City in Christendom. Thus have I given an Astrological account of
the effects of this Conjunction, and I hope I have not varied from the Rules of
Art; and here I shall speak a little more of the effects of this Conjunction
between the Turks and Christians, in what may be the event of their present
War. In April 1684. Saturn will be again in Leo, and in square to Mars; in May
following, Saturn meets with a Square of the Sun; Jupiter also meets with the
Square of both the Sun and Mars, intimating that about that time, the Turks
will be active against the Christians, and then great preparation will be
making on both sides; but both Saturn and Jupiter are weak, and therefore no
great Actions will yet be performed; but rather about August, when the Sun
comes to the place of the Conjunction, or later in the year, when Saturn and
Jupiter meets with the body of both the Sun and Mars, and then the Turks
suppose to do great matters against the Christians: but I find no reason in
Art, why he should have any more Victory in this year, than he had in the last
against the Christians; neither do I suppose, that their Differences will be
reconciled until the year 1687. which if it be not, then let the Turk look to
be beaten to purpose, for then Jupiter comes into Sagitary, his own house, and
then, when it is too late, the Turk may repent of his Enterprises.

CHAP. VII.
Treating of Comets and their effects, and particularly of the Comet that
appeared in the year 1680.

What a Comet is.
MOst Arologers of ancient times have told us, that a Comet or Blazing-Star, is
a dry exhalation, viscous and slimy, drawn up into the upper Region of the Air
by the Sun, and there being set on fire by its Heat, breaks forth into a Flame,
of which, there be diverse sorts, as Pliny writes in Lib. 2. Cap. 25. de Not.
some whereof move Direct, some Retrograde, and some not at all, but are fixed
as the other Stars.

But my Judgment of them is, that they proceed not from natural Causes (as
before mentioned) but from Divine Providence, and sent by Almighty God, as
tokens of his wrath against mankind for their sins, thereby threatening them
with his Wrath and just Judgment, thereby to try if their obstinate Hearts will
relent and turn to the Lord, that he might turn his Judgments away from them;
or else to be the forerunners of some more than ordinary Birth; whom God is
pleased to honor with a new Light from Heaven; as he has done, not only at
the Birth of Christ, but also at the Birth of several Emperors, Kings and
Potentates.

Histories, ancient Writers, and common Experience in former Ages testify to
us, that these signs in the Heavens, or appearance of Comets, are the assured
forerunners of sterility of the Earth; Famine, Pestilence, War, Alteration of
Empires, Kingdoms, Statutes, Laws and Customs; Winds, Earthquakes,
Inundations, extreme Heat and Drought, with grievous Diseases, and such like
horrid evils; also the Birth of some great Emperor, King, Governor, or Learned
Man.

That they are the cause of inordinate heat, it appears by their burning in the
Air, as appears visible to the eye of the beholders.

Of Sterility, by reason the fatness of the Earth, is by them drawn out, and
the Earth left dry and lean, and so the Moisture and convenient Humidity
whereby it fructifieth, all things growing thereon is extinguished; whence
there must needs follow Famine and Sterility in those Regions and Places, from
whence the Matter and Substance is drawn.

And of Pestilence and Diseases, in that the Air is by them infected, through
hot cloudy Exhalations, the which being drawn in at the Mouth of living
Creatures, infecteth and kills them; also by excessive Heat the radical
Moisture of living Creatures, whereby they subsist, is dried up, so they become
no other than dead Carcasses.

Of War, Alterations in Kingdoms, States, Laws and Customs, in that when a
Comet or Blazing-Star appears, there are many Exhalations in the Air, and those
of nature hot and dry, the which do so dry up the Humors in Men, and move
Choler, that they are easily excited to Quarrels, after which, follows War and
Bloodshed; and so consequently alterations in Kingdoms, States, Governments,
Laws and Customs.

Also of Winds, for that they are of the same matter (supposed) whereof Comets
are, and when any Comet or Blazing-Star appears, many such Vapors are exhaled,
and when they vanish, they become windly Vapors.

Of Earthquakes for the same reason, for they are occasioned of Winds, and
Winds are the occasion of Earthquakes.

So of Inundations for the same reason also, for the Comets cause wind, and
wind causes the Sea to roar and rage, whence follows Inundations.

Authors give a description of several sorts of Comets both in name and form,
which I shall here omit, and proceed to their Effects; and particularly to the
Effects of that most amazing Comet or Blazing-star, which appeared not only to
us, but to almost the whole World, in 1680. and it is credibly reported that
this Comet was seen in Jamaica about the 12 th of November, in five degrees of
Libra to rise in the East, in the Morning, and moved direct as the Planets do,
and so ran through Libra, Scorpio, and Sagitary very swiftly, it ran five or
six degrees in one day; but I am not certain whether it were seen in England
until the eleventh of December, and then my self saw the stream of it in the
West, of at least 40 degrees in length, but the Star I could not see, it being
under the Earth; but on the sixteenth day of the same month I beheld it about
the middle of Capricorn, and from thence I had the sight of it every night when
the Element was clear, until the 27 th of January following; it was then in
twelve degrees of Taurus, and by observation I sometimes found the stream of it
full sixty degrees and upward, which is 3600 miles, so that after it appeared
to us in the Evening, it ran through half Capricorn, all Aquarius, Pisces,
Aries, and half Taurus; so that accounting from the first appearing to its
disappearing, it did run through two Thirds of the Zodiac, so that almost two
Thirds of the World will be partakers of its Effects. When it appeared first in
the Morning, it was said to appear very red, therefore supposed to be of the
nature of Mars; but when it appeared to us in the Evening, it was of a pale
color like unto the Planet Saturn, and therefore of his nature; and as it was
a Saturnine Comet, we must expect Saturnine Effects; and to discover what a
Saturnine Comet Effects are, both in its own nature, and in the nature of the
Signs it passed through, let us peruse the ancient Writings of the Chaldeans
and Hebrews, which were very expert in these matters in former Ages; and we
shall find Comets of the nature of Saturn to denote many Evils, as Wants,
Anxieties, Famine, Destruction of the Fruits of the Earth by Caterpillars,
Locusts, and such like vermin; Wars, Treacheries, and Troubles; Chronick
Diseases, and Melancholy Distempers, as Quartan Agues, Falling Sickness,
Leprosy, Palsies, Consumptions, and all Diseases which are of long
continuance; Destruction of Beasts appertaining to the use of Man, Excessive
cold weather in Winter, and of long continuance, Clouds, Frost and Snow more
than usually; strong and high Winds, Tempests, Shipwrecks, with destruction
both of Men and Fish, great Inundations, and Storms, to the annoyance of Cattle
and of all things; Men and Kingdoms under the Dominion of Saturn will suffer
detriment, and be in danger of destruction. Is not the most part of Turkey under
Saturn? then let them be sure to suffer much by the Effects of this Comet.

And as it first appeared in Libra, it denotes Thefes and Robberies, excessive
Cold, the Death of some great Man, great Slaughters, secret Plots and
Treacheries, a scarcity of Rain, a Drought of Fountains, and other Waters, a
want of the Fruits of the Earth, and Provision for the use of Man; great Winds,
horrible Earthquakes: and as it appeared in the East, these effects seem to
operate within few years after its Apparition, and places under Libra, will be
the greatest partakers of its effects.

Places under Libra are, Austria, Alsatia, Livonia, Sabandia, Savoy,
Dalphinate: Cities, Lisbon, Francfort, Vienna, Arles, Spire, Platentia,
Heilbarn, Landshute and Antwerp, and some of these Places have already felt too
much of the effects of this Comet.

And as this Comet passed through Scorpio, it signifies War and Rebellion
against Kings, change and alterations in Governments, Contentions amongst great
Men, great Perils and Dangers, the death of some eminent Person, Detriment and
Damage to Soldiers, Labor and Travel to all kind of Men, Mischief to Women
with Child, a scarcity of Water, and of the Fruits of the Earth; especially on
Countries, Cities and Persons under the Sign Scorpio.

Places under Scorpio, I have showed in the last Conjunction, and therefore
omit them here.

Its going through Sagitary, denotes many Misfortunes to befall great Lords and
Noblemen, Bishops, Clergymen, Scribes and Lawyers; much evil and Tribulation
to be fall wise and Learned Men; sometimes War and Captivity of Princes.

Places under Sagitary, are Spain, Dalmatia, Sclavonia, Hungary, Moravia,
Misnia, Celtica, Arabia Foelix; Cities, Toletum, Volateras, Malinum, Narbonne,
Avignion, Colonia, Agrippina, Buda, Collen.

As this Comet passed through Capricorn, it signifies Fornication and Adultery,
more than usually committed amongst Men and Women; War, Danger to Kings and
Princes by Poisoning, or by other Violent ways; Cutting by the Highways,
Quarrels, Misfortunes and Calamities amongst the vulgar People; it also denotes
Persecution and contempt of Religion, and Religious men; but its appearing in
the West, may defer its operation until some years after its apparition.

Places under Capricorn, are Thrace, Macedonia in Greece, now part of Turkey,
Albany, Bulgary, Saxony, Stiria, India, Orcades Isles, Hassia: Cities, Meklin,
Cleves, Vilna, Constance, Augusta, Brandenburg, Oxford.

As it passed through Aquarius, it denotes War of long continuance, the death
of some eminent Prince, or illustrious Person, and also of the common People;
an obscuration of the Air, much Thunder and lightning, Pestilence also, and
other epidemical Diseases.

Places under Aquarius, I have also showed in the late Conjunction, and thither
I refer my Reader

As the Comet passed through Pisces, it foreshews, that Kings shall war one
against another, also Kindred, and such as are allied one to another; the
Father against the Son, the Son against the Father, and Brethren one against
another, and there shall be much slaughter among men; great Contentions also
touching matters of Faith, Privileges and Customs in Religion, and ancient
Traditions, with destruction of Fish, and dangerous Navigation.

Places under Pisces are Cilicia, Calabria, Galatia, Lycia, Garomantes,
Pamphilia, and the higher Egypt. Cities, Alexandria, Compostella, Hispalis,
Rhemes, Worms, Ratisbone, etc.

As the Comet passed through Aries, it signifies Evil and Detriment to
Noblemen, and the Grandees of the Earth, with abundance of sadness to the
common sort of people; a dejecting or unthroning of some King or Emperor in the
Eastern parts of the World, and the promoting of some Ignoble man; also great
troubles in the Eastern parts of the Earth, much War and Bloodshed, with the
death of some Eminent Prince, and slaughter among men; much troubles, violent
pain in the Head, Eyes and Brain, a Rot of Sheep, and detriment to all sorts of
small Cattle.

Under Aries are Palestina, Syria, Swevia, Polonia minor, Denmark, Germany,
France and England. Cities, Naples, Capua, Fararia, Florence, Lyndavia, Padua,
Brunswick, Cracovia, Utretch, Marcelles.

And as this Comet took his course in Taurus, it foreshews the death of some
Great man, mischief and injuries to the meaner sort of people, with captivity
and diminishing of their Goods, detriment to great Cattle, great and
tempestuous Winds, corruption of Fruit, destruction of Corn, cold Winters, also
diseases proceeding from corruption of blood, as Scabs, Itch, etc.

Places under Taurus have been already showed in the late Conjunction, to which
I refer you.

And thus I have showed you the nature of this Comet, and its Signification in
the Signs through which it passed; also some of the Countries and Cities under
those Signs, in which the effects will be most manifest in some sort or other.

Note, that if a Comet appear in the Ascendent of any Kingdom, City, Town, or
Family, or in the Ascendent of the Revolution of the World, it signifies
Detriment or Destruction of the thing by the Ascendent signified, and the Sign
thereof: And if it appear in the Mid-heaven, or in the Sign thereof of any of
these aforefaid, it will bring danger to their Honor and Reputations in one
way or other.

I come next to treat of the time when these Events will happen; and herein we
ought to consider, whether the Comet were Oriental or Occidental; for Oriental
Comets soon show their Effects, but Occidental Comets show their Effects more
slowly: this Comet was both Oriental and Occidental; Oriental at the beginning,
while it passed through Libra, Scorpio and Sagitary; wherefore the effects in
those signs would quickly appear; but in Capricorn, it became Occidental, and
so continued until it disappeared, whose effects will be deferred until a
longer time.

And for the time of the duration of their effects, Origanus admits, for every
day a Comet appears, one years effect, and after this account, the effects of
this Comet should continue seventy six years, for it appeared from first to
last seventy six days or more; but I will not presume to affirm that it shall
be exactly so; but if we take for every Sign that it passes through, one years
effects, which I suppose we justly may, we shall not have much less than eight
years expired, before its effects be fully over, and I think, this will prove
the exactest measure of time, in the effects of this Comet, and thus much of
Comets in general, and of the Comet in 1680. in particular, with their
significations.

But what Mr. Holwel has written of Comets, is nonsensical, and the most part
of it much varying from the Rules of Astrology, especially what he mentions
of this Comet, in his Judgment of the year 1683, which was one great cause of
my writing, to show the World the true signification of Comets, according to
what Authors (more experienced than Mr. Holwel) and daily experience have
showed.

CHAP. VIII.
Treating of, and Confuting most of Mr. Holwels Judgments on the State of the
years from 1683. unto the year 1700. mentioned in his Catastrophe Mundi.

MR. Holwel in his Catastrophe Mundi, speaking of the Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter, says, according to natural causes, Persons signified by the Sun
should be afflicted in Person with Horror and Amazement, and shall be in danger
of their Lives, Honor and Estate, and be forced to fly for Safeguard; for by
bad advice, they shall attempt to do that which they shall never attain to, by
which means, they shall bring themselves and Fame to destruction for ever; and
therefore he advises Persons to beware, that have ten or eleven Degrees of Leo
ascending.

And in his judgment of the year 1683. he says, that a very great Person of
Europe that has Leo ascending, will be afflicted and flung into a great many
Troubles, with the death of some of his Children, Loss of Honor and esteem in
the World. Sure Mr. Holwel has forgotten that he himself has Leo ascending,
that he judges so hard of persons born under it; but I could wish that he had
named what great Persons of Europe he means, that we might have observed the
Event; but I shall here (as I have already) show them, that great Persons born
under Leo, shall not by the effect of this Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
Leo, receive Detriment or Loss, either of Honor or Estate; but on the
contrary, they shall gain both Riches and Honor, by the effects of this
Conjunction, though Mr. Holwel gained the displeasure of the Honorable E. A.
Esquire, to whom he confidently dedicated his Book; although he never knew him,
which nonsensical Stuff be disliking, made the Epistle Dedicatory to be taken
out again; this was done when Saturn transited Leo, Mr. Holwels Ascendant, as
also Saturn did, when the said Book was written.

Neither do I judge of the death of any Prince in Europe, that has about
thirteen degrees of Virgo ascending, though it be said in Catastrophe Mundi, if
there be a Prince in Europe, that has about thirteen degrees of Virgo
ascending, he should in the year 1684. return to the ground from whence he was
taken; for I find no such matter by the Rules of Astrology, as may signify the
death of any such Prince; but I pray for all Christian Princes, and
particularly for such as have Virgo or Leo ascending on their Horoscope.

And whereas Mr. Holwel says in his judgment of the year School. that Saturn, in
opposition to the place of the Conjunction 1682. and Jupiter in square thereto,
threatens Italy with no less than Confusion, and utter Subversion of the triple
Crown; and although it may not be fully completed in this year, yet, says he,
this year sets a great say to it, and in the following year its full
destruction. And that then the power of France shall be brought low, and many
thousands of his Subjects destroyed, through the pride of an insulting King,
and envy of the Roman Clergy. But if this Opposition and Square be the cause of
all this, why had not Rome been destroyed in the year 1639. when Saturn was in
opposition to the place of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, which
was in the year 1623. I have searched into History, and found that there was
War at that time between the Swedes and the Germans, and between the French and
the Italians, but not any thing to the Destruction of any Nation or People, yet
many eminent Persons died about that time, some in War, and some in Peace, and
many strange Accidents happened; and I suppose, near the like may happen now; but
little or nothing of what Mr. Holwel writes in all his judgment on his several
years will prove true, there being no grounds in Astrology for them, but what
his own fantastical Pate has imagined, to raise himself a Fame in the World,
by predicting Lies, and to deceive the World by Delusions; for I will appeal to
all Artists what Rules there are in Astrology, whereby to predict (as Mr Holwel
has) that in the Eastern part of the World, a whole Army should be destroyed
with fire from Heaven, with their Wealth and Treasure; or that there should be
War and Plagues over the face of the whole Earth, and that there should be so
many men destroyed that there should not be men enough left to get in Harvest,
as he predicteth in his judgment of the year 1699. therefore I aver all that he
speaks of that year and the next, to be absolutely false, nonsensical and
erroneous; in the next year (with which he concludes his Book) he says, that
Rome is now destroyed, and Peter's Seat thrown down, and the Conversion of the
Turks and Jews soon follows, and Religion (but what Religion he knows not)
truly preached universally over all the World, sure this must not be Astrology,
but Prophecy; and if Prophecy, then Mahometal, and if Mahometal, then lying
like Baal's Prophets, and so deserving the reward that they received from
Elijah.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Author hereof calculateth Nativities exactly, by knowing the Hour of any
ones Birth; showing thereby the general Fate of the Native, and the greatest
Accidents that will happen to any one through the whole course of his Life, and
the time when they will happen; whereby one may withstand much evil, and
augment the good.

He also teaches the whole Art of Astrology; and by Astrology, resolves all
Lawful Questions.

This for Mr. John Gadbury, at his House in Brick-Court in Westminster.
SIR,
HAve you seen Saunder's Apollo Anglicanus for the year 1683? Written (as I
suppose) by Mr. Henry Coley, which if you have, I question not, but that you
have seen therein, how he unworthily derides both you and me, about your
Calculation of your ten and twenty-years Ephemerides; which I dare presume,
himself is no way able to compose the like, or any that shall have so much
truth in it as those have; as for the Ephemerides of ten years, which you
calculated your self; he says it was handsomely Transcribed from Hecker, which
that I suppose to be a very great Mistake in Mr. Coley, and therefore
unworthily taxed by him in an Almanac; for I have heard you say, when you
wrote the ten years Ephemerides, you had not Heckers Ephemerides in your House,
until six years thereof was performed, which I dare believe you had not; for I
have been acquainted with you many years before that time, and I never had seen
Heckers Ephemerides in your Study, though I have perused many of your Books
there, nor yet did I ever hear you say you had it, till since; and as for the
twenty years Ephemerides, which was by me calculated by your Directions, it is
his (the said Coleys) pleasure to say, that it is an inartificial Calculation,
and done by adding one minute 56 Seconds, or 50 Seconds, or 48 Seconds, (or
rather he knows not what) to the Suns place four years before, and so the Moons
place to be taken on the first of January, from her place the 27th. of
February, twelve years before, by adding some Signs, Degrees and Minutes
thereto, and the Places of the rest of the Planets, much after the same method,
with the help of Argol, and so imposed upon the World, under very plausible
pretentions; because, says he, the Author is ashamed to show his Tables. But I
would have Mr. Coley, and all others know, that he is mistaken in his judgment,
for there was much more labor bestowed on the Calculation thereof, and many of
the Calculations I have yet by me to be seen. But by what Tables I proceeded, I
will not yet oblige Mr. Coley so much as to tell him; but I would have him
bestow the like pains, and to calculate the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter
in Leo, and tell me whose Tables will come nearer to the observed Truth, than
that Ephemerides did; and also in the Conjunction of Mars and Venus, which was
on the 28th. of February 1684. for I did with mine own eyes behold that
Conjunction, and it was so nigh, that Venus did eclipse part of the body of
Mars; now had the said Ephemerides been calculated by the Rules that he
prescribed, or otherwise transcribed from Argol, it would have differed very
much; but I could wish Mr. Coley would present the World with a better
Ephemerides, and then I might have no cause to mention this following Verse.

Some are quick-sighted faults to find,
But to perform, drowzie and blind.
He also says that neither the Author, nor his Pupil (meaning me) has yet
learned to calculate the Eclipses of the Luminaries, or else that Task was too
hard for them (as for being your Pupil, I own it) and indeed, I should think my
time ill bestowed (and my self unworthy of being your Pupil) if I could not
calculate an Eclipse as well as he; but I shall at present say no more of him,
but conclude with this Aphorism:

No wonder if some through Ignorance or Envy discommend, those Performances
which those more learned as highly commend. Sir, I desire your Answer, by the
first opportunity, and you will very much oblige

Sir, your Real Friend and Humble Servant JOHN MERRIFIELD.
From my House at the Hand and Pen at the Lower end of Horslydown, near
Dock-head Southwark, London. March the 3 d. 1683/4.
These for Mr. John Merrifield, at the Hand and Pen near Dock-head in
Horslydown, Southwark.
Good Mr. Merrifield,
YOurs of the third Instant I received, wherein you have invited me to a View
of what I had (long since) willingly passed over in silence. I was never good
at quarrelling in my more active and pregnant years, and now, my long
acquaintance with the accustomed Scandals of Invidious Persons, has made
Contests even hateful to me. Not but that my Sense of things is as quick and
distinguishing as ever, but my Reason being better informed, I can with
patience suffer an Ass causelessly to kick at me, rather than transform my self
into his Fellow Ass, and fall a kicking for company.

Your Guess at the Author of Apollo Anglicanus, 1683. is not only happy, but
true, viz. that it is not R. Sanders, but H. Coley, and therefore it had been
better dated from Baldwins Gardens, than from Ouston in Leicestershire; for if
Cambden may be credited, there is no such place in all that County, and
consequently no such man as R. Sanders (honestly) to be found to own himself
the Author of that simple scandalous Almanac.

As for H. Coley (the rightful Dad of that misshapen Brat) if after the several
Civilities I have afforded him, in using him courteously, when at any time he
came unto me for Instruction, and answering sundry of his Letters for his
information in Art; I say, if after these, and my many Friendships to him, he,
in requital, revile me, I cannot help that. It was in my power to teach him
something of Astrology, but he has another Master which instructs him to be
Ungrateful, and tutors him to Calumniate his Benefactors. For the good Opinion
the Man has of himself, and his own (supposed) Abilities, I wonder nothing at
it; that being a peculiar Virtue, and only to be found among the Sons of
Ingratitude.

The Man, as you well observed, has boldly attacked us both, and Me in
particular, he has been Pickeering at a dozen years together; but why he
should make You to share in the Scandals of his scurrilous Pen, I understand
not, nor yet do I justy know wherefore he is so impupudent and daring with Me,
from the Benefit of whose Labors he has eaten his Bread many years; and the
very Books he now quarrels at (I mean the two Ephemerides, which you take
notice of) are the Foundation of his daily Dole and Drinking.

But now, Sir, since you have by your obliging Letter rouzed me up to a
Consideration of the Malice of this impertinent Fellow (which I had so long
overlooked, and designed ever so to have done; but for this your Notice of
these his continued Scomma's and Scurrilities) I shall here inform you, as
briefly and as fully as I can, of the ground of this envious Man's Prejudice to
Me (for every Action has either a real or pretended Reason from which it
derives) which is this, [and let him say the contrary if he can or dare.] viz.
-- When he was upon publishing his Clavis Astrologiae (as he calls it) he very
confidently sent to me to give him an Encomium thereunto, without letting me
see what he had written, that I might know what I (...); which begat in Me a
desire to peruse his said Clavis, the better (...) Me to serve him. This was so
reasonable that he could not deny it, (...) accordingly he sent me (by an
ingenious Apothecary, and Neighbor (...)) several of his Printed Sheets, which
when once I had viewed, (...) and my forward Author to have taken much out of
my Doctrine o^ ^ativities to furnish his said Clavis withal, and never so much
as mentioned from whom, or whence he had it. And not content to play the
ungrateful Plagiary thus with me; he also had stolen my Title too, and affixed
it to the second part of his said Clavis, calling it Genethlialogia.

Seeing my self thus unworthily abused, I did deny to give him an Encomium,
unless he would new Print his said Title. -- This (Sir) is the real Ground and
Foundation of this Man's many years Quarrels against me, and nothing else that I
know of.

The Answer which you have made to his present Cavils in the English Apollo
1683. is enough, if not too much; I am sure, more than your causeless Adversary
can justly reply to, without confessing his Error. And to deal sincerely with
you, I did not esteem him worthy of either your Notice or Animadversion. Non
Obstante, the great Flattery with which his Friend J. Kendal has blown him up,
even to a degree near bursting; he being of himself, naturally, like the Toad
in the Fable, aiming to swell into an Ox.

And since my Hand is entered upon this unpleasant Subject let me not tire your
Patience, I pray you, if I observe further to you, a Pact or Confederacy
between this Kendal and Coley, to scratch and claw each other, as if they had
both come out of some loathsome Lazaretto, full of the Itch and Scurvy. Mr.
Coley is made the Hannibal of Astrology; but Mr. Kendal (in modesty) refuses to
be the Phormio (forsooth! for fear of being a Fool) yet he reads Lectures aloud
in his admired Hannibal's Praise. Mr. Coley on the other side (following the
Adage of Mulus Mulum Scabit) notably reveres Mr. Kendal for his great Parts;
particularly for his new Discovery of the Measure of time in Nativities, the
ground whereof, he acknowledges to have taken from Mr. Coley's Clavis; and in
the strength of this Discovery of our new Columbus, the Almagest and
Quadripartite are made (between them) to Bow and do Homage to the ones (...),
and the others Clavis. The Famed Sir C. Heydon, and excellent Valentine
Naybode, are both voted useless, and allowed only to have been Good in their
time, but now, like an old Almanac, out of Date. Thus these Sons of I^pudence
and Folly have boldly taken upon them not only to bespatter those Artists to
whom they are beholding, of this present Age; but cast Dirt also in the Faces
of those Antiquated Luminaries of Elder times; in comparison of whom, these
Scioli are scarce worthy to be accounted so much as Nebulose Stars.

Further, were it proper for a Letter, I would demand of this Coley, in case he
be so great an Artist, as Mr. Kendal pretends him to be (1.) Where he finds
Cardan saying, Nemo particularia predicit? as he has more then once affixed
upon him in Print, Cardan being the most particular in his judgment of (...)
^rologer whatever. (2.) Out of what Astrological Author it is, that he undert^
to (...) and Tutor Princes, as in his Apollo Anglicanus 1682. saying -- It is
(...) for Princes to fortify themselves with the Love of their People. And
(...) That (in that year 1682.) many Dissembling Political Stratagems among
(...), to keep up their Prerogatives, etc. -- The Epistle to Oates's Narrative
(...) (but neither Ptolemy, Haly or Bonatus) teach such like Astrology; but
(...) of this in this place. (3.) Wherefore does he take such Pains in his
(Foolish) Merlyn of this year, to scratch and claw Holwel, taking him roughly
by the Hair and Ears with one Hand, and gently leading him, for fear of
falling, with the other. (4.) What Authority He has (and from whom he derives
it) to sit and Censure whom he pleases, Voting what is, and what is not fit to
be Printed upon the great Triple Conjunction of. and. in. thereby prejudging
not only my promised Pains upon that noble Subject, but another designed
Endeavors also as useless; Mr. Lilly and Mr. Edlin (he says) having done
enough upon the like already. And I believe they have so indeed, for his
Understanding, and too much for Mine, or any other Honest Man's. There being
plain Treason to be found in one of them, and nearly the same in the other.
Behold the Authors that this our triumphant Hannibal trades in!

I might have noted many more ridiculous, vain and trifling things that this
Coley is guilty of, and render you an Account of the many slovenly Artifices
which he has made use of (besides what you complain of in your Letter) to
vilify and scandalize me; but these things cannot easily be brought into a
Letter, wherefore, I presume, you will not now expect it from me. Sir, to
conclude (for it is time now to release you) I return you my thanks for the
justice you have done both to me and your self also, in retorting those brutish
and ungrateful Reproaches (brought against my thirty years Ephemerides (in the
latter whereof, you were eminently assisting to me) upon the Head of the
malicious Author of them: And perceiving its your design to print this Letter
of mine, together with your own to me, as an Appendix to your ingenious
Catastasis Mundi, I leave it wholly to you to do therein what you please; the
matters here mentioned being most punctually and religiously true. So wishing
you success in all your worthy and Lawful Attempts for the Promotion of Art,
and detection of Cheats and Impostors, I remain,

(SIR) Yours and Astrologies Servant, JOHN GADBURY.
March 6. 1683/4. Brick-Court, by the Deans-yard, Westminster.
ADNERTISEMENT.
THe first Volume of Collection of Letters for Improvement of Husbandry and
Trade, being finished, the second is carrying on, and will be endeavored to be
made useful for all sorts of People, by John Houghton, Fellow of the Royal
Society. To be sold by John Lawrence at the Angel in Cornhill, and several
other Booksellers.

FINIS.

