Mercurius Militans, With his Hags haunting Cruelty, and his Bays crowning
Clemency; Historically suited to our long wished Peace.
By Hieron: Philalethes.
Printed in the Year 1648.

I Believe that as nothing so degenerates man into a Wolf and a Tiger, yea into
a Devil, as Cruelty, according to the phrases, Homo homini lupus, homo homini
Demon, now commented and writ in the bloods of millions of Innocents, devoured
by that worst of wolves called Rebel in Ireland, as also in England, with as
much voracity, truculency, and barbarous inhumanity, as the three Herod's in
Josephus and our Richard the third exercised against their Nobles and
Consanguinity; Ahab and Iezabel against Naboath, Elias Michah and the best
Prophets; the bramble Abimeleck against his Brethren, the 70 sons of Gideon:
Orchanes the Turk against all his Butchered Brethren, the sons of the great
Ottoman: or as ever Busiris, Periander, Emanuel, Paleologus, exercised with
numerous more in their specified cruelties by Melancton in his Gronocles page
178, 188. by Tholosanus in his six book of his Commonwealth, cap. 19. p. 380
381. and 1498. By Valerius, lib. 9. cap. 14. and by Anti-matchavil. lib. 3 p.
519, 562, 563. The rage of these our civil uncivil Wars being so great, that
against the dictate both of Reason and Religion, against the Light both of
Grace and Nature; blood has not spared blood; Brothers being divided in as
great hostility as Cain against Abel, Absalom against Ammon, Romulus once
against Rhemus, Cambises against Smerdis, Brennus against Brentius, and the
Popish Alphonsus against his Protestant brother Diazius, who, as needs running,
whom the Devil drives, came as far as Rome to Germany to murder him: so
besides the Furies and Hags, and horrors of their Consciences, which haunt them
as the worst of spirits and ghosts, as is historified in Nero after he had
mass^cred Peter and Paul, and his Master Seneca, and his mother Octavia, and in
Caligula after his Butcheries creeping into Corners in any Lightnings and
Thunders; and in Herod after his slaughter of the Bethlem Infants, his two sons
Alexander and Ari^tobulus, his wife Mariana, and the Synedrim of the Jews, and
in Alexander after he had burnt Persepolis, and slain his dear friends Clitus
and Calisthenes; with many more extracted from Josephus and secular Authors by
Strigellius. lib. 1. Ethic. p. 7, 9.155, 159. and by Patritius, l. 5. de regno.
tit. 8 p. 313. with the wonderful ^ggravations of the gnawing of this worst of
worms, the stinging of this worst of serpents, the excruciations of this worst
of beasts, an Evil Conscience; to be read in that ze^l us Melander Luther in
his Comment on Genesis. cap. 31. p. 486 and cap. 43. p. 652. and cap. 45. p.
671. And in Pezelius comment in (...) Genesis, cap. 37, page 714. and cap. 41.
page, 794. 789. and cap. 45. page 835. and cap. 50. page 971. So even in this
life; Plagues follow cru^l Princes and Peers at the heels l^ke Lacquies, and
haunt them as Brutus his ghost: Besides the exangeration of conscience which,
as is feigned of Titius and Promethius, eats their very Hearts and Livors as
the Flesh Wolf that flesh in which it breeds.

Their first plague is, That they are no better loved then the Siracusans loved
their three Dionisii, as an old woman told one of them, or then Lambs love
Wolves, being daily more cursed then the Fox by Country Beldams devouring
Poultry. O derunt dum metuunt: Feared they may be as Witches fear their Devils
and Familiar, which suck their bloods, but never loved better then Brutus loved
the Tarquins, or Felton that Frenchified Duke, who felt the sharpness of his
stabbing Knife.

Secondly, They are always plagued with a Domestic Devil, called Jealousy;
with a bosomed Snake, c^lled Suspicion, even of their best Friends whom they
seem most to love, and whom they have most honored and advanced; which
Iealousies are seldom quenched but with their blood, chiefly when their
Favorites grow popular, then Herod makes his Aristobulus, the Nephew of
Hircanus the High Priest, shorter by the head; as Sejanus was so lopt in the
like case by Tiberius (apud dionem in vita) yea the famous Mustapha in Knolls
his Turkish History, by the Tyrant his Father.

Thirdly, They are usually possessed, as with so many tormenting spirits, with
servile and slavish Fears, most of them complaining, Multa miser timeo, quia
feci multa proterve. Much have I done, base, bloody, vile, and Evil,
And much I fear to suffer like the Devil.


Which fears so possessed Dionisius, that he feared every Barbers Knife to shave
too near his throat, Tyrants usually doubling their Guards as the worst Popes
their Guards of Switzers, and the worst Erench Kings those of Feench and Scots:
the servile fears of Tyrants seldom or never cured but by a Julip or red caudle
of the blood of those they fear; as many instances are given in this kind in
Claudius Caesar, Valentinian, Wencestaus the son of Charles the fourth Emperor,
Caius, Caligula, Nero, and many more, by Dion Cassius, Plutark, Melancton, in
locis, page 118, in Chron. lib. 4. page 457. and by Antimatchavil, lib. 3. page
476, 477, 478. These pannick Terrors, as hellish Hags, usually possessing them,
in these Battles, in which they imbark themselves from a bad Cause, and with a
worse Conscience being the main Cause that often a few Soldiers bed by a Lion (as
the just are hold as a Lion) are often victorious over redoubled and trebled
oumbers of those whose hearts are in their heels, led by a Heart or a Hare, as
Leonides used the Simile; of which abundant instances are given by Pezelius in
Genesis cap. 35.669. by Strigellius, in Psalm. 9. p. 71. by Pontanus in his first
book of Fortune, c. 25. and by Patritius lib. 5. de regno, tit. 4. p. 305. in
those Terrors which God cast into the hearts of the Midianites, Judge. 7. And of
the Canaanites and those of Jericho in Joshuahs time: And of the Philistines in
Ionathans time, 1 Samuel 14. And of the Quadi in Antoninus his time, and into the
host of 100000 Ethiopians in Asa's time, 2 Chronicles. 16. And into the host of
cruel Attila, near the City Anrelia; And into the host of Benbadad in Ababs
time, 1 King. 20. And into the host of Arbogastus, and Eugenius encountering
with good Theodosius; of which Claudian could sing, O nimium dilecte deo cui
fundit ab antris Aeolus armat as acies, cui militat Ether. O Darling to thy
God, for whom the Air
And windrs do fight thine enemies troops to fear.


And when such Terrors, as God sends often into the hearts of Multitudes,
fighting with handfuls, according to his Commination, Deuteronomy. 28. do so work,
that sometimes three hundred Lacedaemonians, in the advantage of a scrait,
killing twenty thousand of Zorxes his Army; sometimes a Forbius with ^hirty
thousand quelling of the Gauls two hundred thousand; sometimes a Greek
Milti^d^s, with eleven thousand, rouing and executing a hundred thousand foot
of the Persians, and ten thousand horse: An Abraham with three hundred and
eighteen pursuing and conquering four Kings of Cilicia, Persia, Babylon and
Assyria, Genesis 14. A David with four hundred quelling the Amelekites which lay
like Grasshoppers scattered upon the earth, 1 Samuel In these cases we must say
there is concurring with digitus Dei, the finger of God: Such pannick fears as
are described with their effects by Erasmus in his Adages, Chil. 3. Cent. 7.
Adag. 88. by Politian in his Mesellanean History. by Pontanus lib. 1. fortunae,
p. 57. and by Danaeus in his politic Aphorisms, p. 163, and 204. Much also is
attributed to this pannick fear by Polibius lib. 5. in fine. in the Macedonian
Philipp, weighing up anchor on a sudden, and with hoysted sails flying with his
great Navy rigged for Illirium, when he conceited the Roman Navy nigh, which
was faroff: And Heroditus, lib. 4. p. 108. shows what it wrought on the
Sicilian slaves when their Masters left their swords, and fought with them
with such whips as they were wont to lash them with: And much I saw with my
eyes in this kind, not only at Melon Grainge, amongst the Bogs near the water,
but chiefly at the battle at Kilrush, (Kil-rouge, Kil-rebel,) when scarce two
thousand Foot and five hundred Horse, led valiantly by the great Ormond, and
that thrice worthy Coute, the resolute Scourge Kern, routed nine thousand out
of their Trenches of the Irish Rebels, flying as Hares before Hounds, (faster
then lately twenty thousand Blew Bonnets before nine thousand True Blades) into
Tyrones old Forts, their adjacent Bogs not shaked so much with their Doe-like
tripping, as their more boggy hearts shaked by trembling. Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 26.

A fourth plague which hangs over the head of Tyranny, as the sword of
Dionisius once over the head of Damocles, is this, Their Thrones, if Monarchs,
their Seats, if Magistrates, are so slippery with blood, that they as soon ship
out of them (as some Popes by an Italian Fico out of St Peter's poorly pretended
and proudly usurped chair,) as every one that has read Livy and Plinny can t
ll, how the Tarquins were hurried out of Roms; Hippias out of Athens; and the
worst of the Dionisians out of Siracusa, to change his Scepter into a
Schoolmasters Ferula: The great Monarchy also of the Caldeans being translated
by Cyrus from the Babylonians to the Persians, after that Balthazar in hunting
had slain the son of Gobrias: Others in this nature being related by Melancton
in his Chronologies, p. 605, 606.

The Wrath of God and Man, the Justice of Heaven and Earth, do often so concur,
in the cutting them off, in a retaliating vengeance, that pledging at last
those Innocents in that bloody cup they have caused them to quaff, that as it
is as rare a thing to see an aged Tyrant, as a black Swan; a self-denying
just-accounting Officer, and unplundering Soldier, and an honest free, loving,
liberal-hearted Usurer; so it is as rare to see or hear, that they quietly dye
in their beds; but to be cut off, as David prophesied, in the Spring or Summer,
the beginning or midst of their days, by some tragical and violent Death as
seized on Pharaoh, Ahab, Jezabel, Athalia, Adonizebeck, Senacharib, and Herod
in the Scripture; on Antiochus, Epimenes, Nicanor, and Holofernes in the
Apochrypha: and in Ecclesiastic Hictory on Nero, Decius, Domitian, Caligula,
Julian the Apostate, and all the Roman Emperors: In the Pagan, on Attila,
Totilas, Gensericus, Theodorick, recorded by Victor and Procopius, in the
Arrian; and on John de Roma Minerius: On Gardener, Bonner, Morgan, Friar
Alphonsus, with others, in our Papal persecutions: with all the Tragedies of
Phocas and Zimri, the murderers of their Masters; of Pompilius the second, and
Boleslaus the second, both Kings of Poland: of Hatto the Bishop of Ments, and
the cruel King Popiel, both eaten with rats: of Alexander, Phereus, and Francis
a V^count of Padua, baiting men to death in the skins of wild beasts; are
extracted and contracted out of Ecclesi^stick and secular Authors by
Strigellius, lib. 1. dialect. p. 495. by Philip Melancton in locis Manlii, p.
630, 631. By Peucer in his Lectures, anno 1575. die 9 Iulii; and by
Antimatchavil lib. 3. p. 546. chiefly by the learned Arniseus de Tirannide in
exercitio, and by junior Brutus de vindice, which some say now speaks English.

Sixthly They have lived so little desired, and dyed so little lamented, that
as though they were terrae inutile pondus, such men Monsters, or lutum sanguine
commixtum, such clays commixt with blood, that the world might well spare them
as a sixth finger; that amongst other honors, some (as Harmodius and
Aristogiton) had Statues and Images erected to them for ridding Kingdoms of
such sanguinolent blood-suckers, who have not fed the sheep, but fed and preyed
upon the sheep ( Ezekiel. 33.) apud Strigellium, part. 2. locorum, page 210. at
least they have been opposed, if not deposed, and have had as troublesome
reigns as King John, King Steven, Richard the third, and Edward the second
here in England, who either out of their own Native Disposit^ons to Cruelty
(born as it were with teeth like Cham and Zoroastres) to bite and devour men in
pernitiem humani generis, as was said of Nero to the destruction of men, or
their tolerable good natures abused by evil Counselors (as May, the most
pleasing month in the year, is often imbittered, like furious March, by the
rising of the Malignant Pliades) if once detected to be Wolves though in sheeps
clothing, they have had much ado to live quiet, and peaceable, and sedentary
lives, like Titerus Milibeus Alexis, with their Deus nobis haec otia fecit, but
Dirus Demon haec negotia; their oaten musical pipes have turned into martial
pikes, that have not been as Homer terms Agamemnon frugi pastores, good
shepherds, pecus tondentes non deglubentes, shearing their sheep by subsisting
subsidies, not tearing them by spunging sanguinolencies; Neither is it long
fair weather with their weak or wicked Counselors, but the storms, which they
have raised against others, fall often upon themselves in showers of blood, such
as we know fell on the head of Haman the wicked Syrian, counselling Darius to
second his powder plot against Mardochens, Esther, and all the Jew, and on
Achitophel strangling all his golden hopes from Absalom in his own Halter; the
like fate or a worse befalling Doeg whom David so prophetically cursed; on whom
Mathesius reflecteth, in Seracidem, c. 4, p. 20. and on one Contaeus, who lived
(in disgrace) but one year, as was presaged of him, after he had counseled
Charles, the furious Duke of Burgundy, to cut off three hundred Innocents, whom
he kept as pledges, contrary to the merciful disswafions of Imbercortus
Ambianus, as his bloody baseness, with the end of it, is related by that worthy
Comineus in his commented Gests betwixt the French Lewis and that Duke, lib. 2.
p. 57.58, 59.61, 66. And what end Steven Gardener made the cruel Counselor to
Queen Mary, in her quinquennium against all the Protestants, but especially
against Queen Elizabeth, I refer you to a foreign Author Michael Beutherus, in
his Appendix to Sleidan, lib. 8. p. 87. But however the bad Crounsellors of
Princes, making and moulding bloody bolts for them to shoot, may fly away (as
the Persians and Irish after they have cast their darts) like Woodcocks in a
mist, or a Goldfinch on windy banks, and save themselves for a time: yea may
return again into a Kingdom to do more mischief, as Rams going backward, come
on with the greater push; raising new Ward and Commotions after their Exilings,
Banishments and prescriptions: (as Catiline and Marcus Coriolanus did in Rome;
Sertorius in Spain, after his siding with Marius, Dio against Dionisius in
Siracusa, with other Exiles, stirring up the like broils in Tigure, Belgia, and
elsewhere, in all which, with others, any may be further satissied by the
relation of Pencer in his Cronocle Lectures, anno 1572, die 4. October. and by
Bodin in his 4 book de rep. p. 615. and by Antimatchavil, lib. 3. p. 400. and
by Polibius lib. 4. p. 336, 337. And he may be informed further, what
Firebrands they usually are in kindling new Commotions, by the Verdicts given
of them by Patritius de rep, tit. 5. p. 393 Dan^us in his Political Aphorisms,
p. 141. And by Melancton in Cordiali Bucholcheri p. 145. Yet nevertheless what
ever become of such in their conversion or confusion; as fiercest winds blow
down the sturdiest Oaks, the greatest Cedars of Libanus, and the highest Pines
of Ida, the just God copes with cruel Tyrants, the Executioners of bloody
Counsels, so fiercely, that the axe of his wrath cuts of both them and their
seed, both root and branch, so visibly in most Ages, that its proverbial,
Tyrannus non habet tertium heredem, A Tyrant has scarce a third Heir, nay any
Heir at all, more then Dionisius the elder, who left never a successor to the
Kingdom of Sicily: or Pisistratus, whose sons Hippias and Hipparchus were
exiled and slain, as Strigellius observes lib. 2. Chron. p. 54. and Melancton
in many before recited: yea so generally in all, that with him, est propemodum
regulare, its a Rule and a Cannon, Tyrannus expulsos esse de terra, Tyrants to
be spued out of the earth, as Canaan did her Inhabitants; yea purged out as the
Sea her froth to the shore: or as new wines work out injected poisons: in
Postillis part. 4. p. 551, and 577. As a Warning piece shot off to our
truculent, unjust, and tyrannical Times, where in peace, and mildeness, and
Mercy, each of them like the Poets Astraea, terras reliquit, has left the
earth, and with love, justice and conscience, are fled to Heaven to complain
their worse then Tom D^^ms entertainment here below, as a Monitor to every
bloody Nimrodian hunter in our worst of Wars, like Cynthius, aurem vellens,
pulling him by the sleeve, and whispering, in me inetuens pius esto. Look upon
me, believe my Creeds,
Blood calls for blood, such crops, such seeds.


On the contrary, I believe with the same Melancton, That, Moderati, boni and
benifici princepes habent diucturniorem and tranquilliorem gubernationem,
Mild, moderate, good and benign Princes (as he instances n Augustus Caesar p.
551. and in Frederick the Duke of Saxony, p. 553. And we may instance in our
late English Deborah, Spencers Eliza, and our far famed late Platonical rex
Pacificus,) have their Governments both more calm and peaceable, and more firm
and fixed; yea as a corrola^y to this Article of my morral Creed, in an
H^storical faith. I believe, that humility, modesty, moderation and clemency in
a Conqueror, makes him a constant and a more perpetual Conqueror by love, then
Caesar was a dictator by power; yea since fortius est qui se, quam qui
fortissima vincit, as it is the greatest Conquest for a Conqueror to conquer
himself (as the best study to study men and himself) to conquer his irascible
passions which Alexander could not: and his concupiscible which Hercules could
not do, so vassalized by his Iole, his Omphale, his Deianira, to him, Dei Ira;
that the Poet scoffs him with his Laenam non potuit, potuit superare leaenam.
He Gacus Cerberus and Hydra slew:
Lions, not Lusts and Drabs he could subdue.


This moderate and clement temper in a Conqueror, thinks Danaeus, in his
political Aphorisms, p. 123, 135, 177. in many expressions, has such an
Adamantine and attractive force upon the hearts of men, that it makes way and
breaks the Ice still to further Trophies and Honors, both in Wars and in Peace:
as there was nothing that more dignified Caesar then the pardoning of Tully and
others, who sided with Pompey, in weeping over Pompeys head, in warring with
Ptolomy his viperous friend, who had betrayed him, and in jugulating Achilles
Photinus who had beheaded him: Caesar dando sublovando gloriam adeptus est: his
bounty in giving to his Commilitones, his fellow Soldiers, leaving (like that
Pelean youth) little to himself but hope, and his clemency in forgiving joined
to his prowess, as a pearl in gold, so honored him, even among his enemies: So
what dignified Alexander more then all his desired Persian Honors ( in aiming
follishly to be deisied,) but in using King Porus his captive Regaliter so
regally: the Mother and Daughter of Darius so chastely and honorably: in
revenging so justly and nobly the base assassinating of the great Darius his
enemy on Bassa, and his confederate murderers: in sparing the besieging and
sacking of Jerusalem, upon the reverend regard he had to Iaddus the high
Priest: As full relation as made of all these by Plutark, and Curtius in his
life; and also of some of them by Patritius, lib. 8. de regno, tit. 12. p. 528.
and of the last by Josephus lib. 11. So what more ingratiated David in the
hearts of his people, then in burying Abner his whilom enemy, not with the
burial of an Ass, like Iehoakim, but honorably, 2 Samuel in making his
encomiastick and Funeral Sermon over his grave: In revenging his death, as well
as Amasaes, on the bloody head of Joab: In pardoning reviling Semei, though a
blatrant beast, yet sparing him as a noble Lion, when he was prostrate before
him 2 Samuel 16. Oh that these presidents and thousand more, sacred and secular,
might preach now to us Acts of Oblivion of Injuries writ in dust and
Friendships in brass, for a firm and cordial peace; never to break out as
wounds skinned over, rankling at the bone.

FINIS.

