A SPEECH Delivered by Sir AVDLEY MERVIN Knight, His Majesty's PRIME SERGEANT
AT LAW, AND SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE of COMMONS; TO His Grace JAMES Duke of Ormond,
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, IN THE PRESENCE CHAMBER in the Castle of Dublin,
The Seventh of November, 1665.

DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty:
Reprinted at London, and are to be sold at the Ship in Saint Paul's
Churchyard. 1665.

May it please your Grace.
THE House of Commons retaining a fresh and grateful memory of the repeated
advantages devolved upon them by their Addresses to your Grace, have commanded
me in all humility to present unto you this Instrument now in my hand, being
entitled, A Declaration of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the Commons
House of Parliament assembled.

The Importance of it voted it, as to be performed with no less Solemnity then
by the attendance of the whole House, with their Speaker, upon your Grace; so,
to embalm it for Posterity, and that by Survivorship it might speak when they
were silent, That it should be Entered in the Journal of their House. This
premised, with a due respect to the Sands in your Graces Hourglass (that are
not to be estimated in gross, but by retail) whispers unto me this Caution, Not
to light my Candle to the Sun, or to fully the Margin of their Text with any
Gloss of my own; as also not to entrench on that time that measures the safety
of a Kingdom: I shall therefore keep up my Sails brailed, and only spread a
Mizen to keep me from falling off from the Sense of the House upon three
Considerations that were before them, which divides this Instrument into three
essential parts.

First, The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, lawfully by the Kings Writ
Assembled in Parliament, knew themselves to be the Grand Inquest of this
Kingdom, who in discharge of their Duty had two things in their prospect;
first, such occurrences at large as were conusable by them during their recess;
and secondly, the present constitution of their House: To them intent on the
first of these there was a Presentment made, That certain Persons, not capable
of a Definition; for they want the specifical difference of a Rational Soul,
and if of a Description, it would swell the Period in too great a bulk; I will
therefore follow the words of a Presentment, That certain WICKED Persons, not
having the Fear of God before their eyes, but being seduced by a Diabolical
instigation, had traitorously combined and confederated to raise a new
Rebellion against his Majesty's Crown and Dignity: Had we consulted Reason only
we must have suppressed our belief of it, and endors'd an Ignoramus, but except
we will dismember our selves, and not own our ears at their Trial, and our
eyes at their Execution, we must find it Billa vera.

Treason, Sir, is so comprehensive a Crime, that aggravations cannot heighten
it, or excuses lessen it; and the Laws of God, of Nature and Nations have ever
raised the strongest boundances to prevent the inundation of it, especially
such a Treason as would invert the use of Arms, and alienate the hearts of
Subjects to the subversion of that Government, for the preservation whereof
only they can be lawfully exercised and intent: This turns our Cordials into
poison, and our waters into blood; Kings being Gods Vicegerents upon Earth, nay
in Holy Writ styled Gods, the Laws have allowed that Analogy, that in reference
to this Crime we are to be accountable for our thoughts; and since S. Austin
tells us, Inanis est illa Legum Censura nisi divine Legis imaginem gerit, this
judgment of our Law is founded on the Word of God, who lodges the Crown and
Scepter of our King in that security, that he will issue Summons to the Birds
of the Air to give in Evidence thoughts rebellibus against the Throne:
Observable is the Roman Law reported by Tacitus, Qui dubitant disciverunt; To
scruple, doubt, or hesitate in performance of our Allegiance, was Treason
unpardonable, Apostasy inexcusable.

The House more distinctly considered this in two instances of that Design, To
surprise His Majesty's Castle, And to seize your Graces Person.

Unfortunate, Fortunate Castle! Unfortunate to be the level mark in the eye of
every Rebellion: Thus the Dam paced on the three and twenty of October, 1641.
and now the Colt ambles; such, such a Colt, that had not your Grace in breaking
of it broke the neck of it, would in a small tract of time become a resty and
stubborn Monster: what was this but a complicated malice in one act to disarm
all His Majesty's good Subjects, to arm Traitors, to take the Childrens bread
and give it to Dogs, to make the Asylum of Innocence to be the Seat of Rapine,
and the Palace of the King to be a Den of Thieves? But Fortunate art thou yet;
for thou have taken them that would have taken thee; and those that by seizing
thy dear Dukes Person would have beheaded thee, thou bear their heads as
Trophies of thy Victory; did I say, Sir, they would seize your Person! I fear I
am in some mistake; did they behold your Brow either smooth or rough, Love or
Fear would have restrained them; Tigers would have fled you upon the first
account; Lions have fled you upon the last: May not I take up the expression of
Tully against Cataline, Nihil hic te ora, nihil hic tc vultus moverunt? Could
they imagine, that Spirit which courted Dangers, and espoused Miseries in
defense of his Great Masters Rights, would tamely have surrendered up that Royal
Fort, and Ensigns of Royalty? Could they dream, that those Officers and Guards
under whose vigilance the Golden Fleece had been secure, were all dreaming, or
if awake, would have presented them with their matches put out, to have
pinioned your arms, which so carefully had supported theirs? They knew you were
Gold in the Mine (Honorable by many Streams of ancient and untainted Blood);
they knew also this Gold was heightened by the Stamp of Royal Authority: I have
read Witchcraft so improved, as that they could transfer tortures from the
Effigies to the Person represented: Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft; why
then this were to stab the King in Effigy: But had they enjoyed a temporary
Success, could they think that no voice would sound out one Revengeful Obsequy,
That this day a great Prince was fallen in Ireland, And shall Abner dye so?
But, Sir, on recollection, maugre these considerations, it is too true they
would have seized your Person, and in that all ours: O precipitate desire of
Innovation! that held the dark side of the Lanthorn unto our Reason, and the
light side to our Passion: I conclude this with the well borrowed Caution of
our House, Fear God and the King, and meddle not with those that are given to
change: Sad and fatal would this change have proved; our wounds were scarce
scarified, the cheeks of the Widows and Fatherless scarce dry, the bones and
sculls silently declaiming against Rebellions in every Field, this would have
forced us to re-act the Tragedy of our miseries upon a new Scene and Theater of
blood. This last word puts me in mind of the Ringleader of this Plot to blood,
of whom as it was said of Nabal, Nabal is his name, and folly is with him; so
of him, Blood was his name, and blood was in his heart, and the Swadle-band of
this design was blood. A sad change! to metamorphose Heaven-born Monarchy into
Hell-born Anarchy and confusion, the restored Peace and Glory of the Church
into relapsed Schisms, Heresies and Blasphemies; the reverence of our Laws into
the mock Pageantry of High Courts of Justice; the pleasure of our Liberties
into the anguish of servitude; and our Manna into the Garlic and Onions of
Egypt: Fear God and the King, and meddle not with those that are given to
change.

Mercy and Justice are the Cement of humane Societies; these Conspirators have
sinned against both: Sentence was executed against some whom His Majesty left
to the judicature of his Parliament; Mercy was enjoyed by all whom he had
reserved to the judgment of his own breast; so that these persons will not
hearken to the rod, and are deaf to the Charmer charm he never so sweetly. A
desperate presumption! whilst this Kingdom were dividing Lands forfeited for
Rebellion, to persuade the people that the readiest way to secure them was to
engage in a new one: I have observed, Dead vermin hanged up in warrens will
banish Creatures of the same species from the place: what thought these men
became of the faculties of a Rational Soul in man? This was the height of
embittered Nature, to blow a Trumpet of Sedition while the hand was yet writing
on the wall Mean Mean Tekel, etc. Thus again they hearken not unto the rod: And
let me ask, was not Ireland now feeding upon Benjamins Mess of Royal care and
favor; nay some of those persons dipping their Sop in that Mess, and yet
resolved to betry him? was not this Kingdoms womb pregnant with the firstborn
of our Hopes, the Act of Setlement, derived from no less a Parentage then the
breath of the Royal Assent, and would these men baptize it Ichabod, and cause
our Glory and Happiness to end in shame and misery? Though the Setlement of
Ireland be later, the care of it arose equally early in His Majesty's thoughts
with the interests of his other Kingdoms, witness the twin-bearing date of this
Parliament with the Parliament of England, and His Gracious Continuance of it:
the delays evidence the Intricacy, and engage us to the larger return of our
Affections, Duties and Obedience, for the Expense of His Majesty's patience:
And unnecessarily discontented Spirits might and ought to have copied so fair
and so authentic an Original: Thus might they have concluded against their
Phanatique distempers from the Topics of Reason; or were they void of that,
yet they might have strangled their ill-begotten Resolves from the Topics of
Sense: were they not Eyewitnesses of the clear and diaphanous dispensation of
Justice through the texture of that Government committed by His Sacred Majesty
to your Grace; were they not Ear-witnesses of that Discourse delivered by your
Grace, and Printed in the richest Volume, the Affections of a people, in which
every Period was perfumed with Grace, and the Branches of it laden with Apples
of Gold in Pictures of Silver? Could the most dissolute Roman Spirit be
restrained by saying Cato looks on? It is below my Commission, and truly my
Nature, to flatter; but truth blusheth not to aver, A greater then Cato is
here; for what he spoke speculatively at the best, your Grace maintained it
practically in the worst of times, viz. Victrix causa Deis placuit, sed victa
Catoni.



Was it easy for to transform so great and understanding a people to become
Idols, That in seeing they should not see, and in hearing they should not hear?
would they have us resigned our sense, that the Government rained Snares, when
we felt the influence of it as the dew upon the tender grass; that the Sky was
overcast, gloomy, and ominous, when the Solar rays of Majesty, reflected
through your Government, begot a new, verdant, and lasting Spring? I appeal to
the greatest Prophet amongst us, durst he foretell that some future lustres of
years could have restored this Kingdom to that beauty and progressive estate of
perfection as now it enjoys, when they surveigh'd it in that Chaos your Grace
entered upon it? I pass by your patient and willing divorce (after a long Exile)
from this your Native Country to attend the public Setlement of this Kingdom;
whilst you laid aside the one, where did we then lodge our fears? In your
Graces breast: where were our Remedies prepared for His Majesty's approbation?
Much, much in your Graces wisdom: And when the execution of the Act of
Setlement could not well proceed further without manifest inconveniency, you
espoused the further care of it, and left all to follow that: you made (I may
say) a League offensive and defensive with it; if it shifted its station, you
shifted yours; if it traveled in the pestilence, you forsook it not; if it
were in storms, you bore up with it; and I hope we shall have cause to say you
are returned with your arms laden full of Sheaves: I will shut up this with one
question: Did your Graces own Estate pray in aid of any Act? yes truly; but it
was only the Acts of your own Loyalty and Sufferings: why then I correct my
self, it did not; for they were well known to your Great Master, who writes
Injuries only upon the Sand, but far lesser Merits than yours in Marble. I
confess Sir I can find your Soul and Spirit throughout the Act, your Name in a
place or two, but there rather to Give than to Receive: But had you made your
little finger greater than the loins of your Predecessors (though this Kingdom
never found you in the rushing Wind, but in the gentle Gales) must the Outcry
be, To your Tents O Israel? and must we seek Reformation from Powder and
Bullet, which as a great Cardinal termed it is -- -- Ratio ultima Regum?



Or if we will pretend only to Petition His Majesty, I say what means the
Neighing of the Armed Horses! Non been convenient, Petitions and Armed Troops;
and certainly the Devil was Master of the Ceremonies when Petitioners were
brought with drawn Swords to approach the Throne.

These Considerations, with many more, gave the first part of this Declaration
its rise, That as being the Representative of all the Commons in this Kingdom,
to declare their abhorrence and detestation as of all Conspiracies, Plots,
Designs, Confederacies, and Insurrections whatsoever, against His Sacred
Majesty, and His undoubted Rights of Government, though palliated with never so
specious Pretenses, or gilded with glorious Titles; so to declare them to be
Treason and Rebellion in the highest degree: And we are assured, Sir, that all
His Majesty's faithful and loyal Commons of this Kingdom will, as we are bound
to perform the Trust reposed by them in us, perform the Promises made by us in
this our Declaration in their behalf; we are in a sort their Godfathers, and we
do solemnly vow to fight under the Banner of CHARLES the Second, His Heirs and
Successors, against the World and all the World, against the Flesh and all
manner of Flesh, against the Devil and all his Instruments: Sir, I cannot omit
this last Champion, it being an unquestionable truth, That never was there a
Rebellion in which the Devil did not lead the Van, ordered the Battle, and drew
up the Rear.

Thus far the House proceeded upon the Inspection of this Skeleton at large (we
praise God that by your Graces Prudence and Vigilance we can call it a
Skeleton); but upon a more particular Anatomy of it, what shall I say, Sir!
Grief and Horror seizes upon my Tongue; and yet, Infandum domus ipsa jubet
renovare dolorem.



Were it not too late I would humbly request you the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, to order some Boanerges to speak this part; or may I not yet obtain
the Indulgence allowed to Archytas, commanded to repeat an unpleasing Passage,
wrote it upon the Wall. But methinks I hear the voice, To the Orders of the
House: From your Grace therefore I humbly beg, (for to your Grace only I am
commanded to apply my self) that I may express it in Hieroglyphics: Sir, the
Ostrich laid her Eggs in the Eagles Nest; The Frogs crept into one of the Kings
Palaces: Caesar is wounded in the Senate: The College of Disciples, and Judas
one of them. If so, that no Societies are privileged from some Corruptions,
Parliaments must not be styled Triumphant whilst the Church is Militant: And if
in two, the least of Numbers, and those cemented by Holy Rites of Matrimony,
the Bride may be unchaste, (her shame, though the Bridegrooms misfortune) then
Sir some Persons who were called by the Kings Writ, capacitated with a Trust
from a well-believing People, to be Members of our House, have been found to be
engaged in that Plot, so odious and destructive to all good men. Sir, this
justly alarmed us to find Death in the Pot, That the Fountains of Waters were
become brackish, That part of the Magazine was on Fire, and that the Leprosy
was amongst the Physicians. Sir, we had before us at that time many Bills, and
matters of weighty importance, even that comprehensive Bill that is to bring a
Sabbath to this Kingdom; but the House laid all aside, as judging no Law could
prosper that was blasted by their Breath; unfit Persons were they to advise His
Majesty, who after deep Wounds, scarce scarrified by application of Royal
Mercy, had conspired against him: Is Death therefore in the Pot? the House
voted to take out the wild Gourds; the Kings Writ was to gather Lentils: Is
there Brackishness in the Waters? Cast in Salt; be pleased to observe, Sugar
will not do it: Is the Magazine a sire? Separate that part: Is a Physician
Leprous? (Dio mi guarda del Medico rangoso) Put him out of the Congregation.

Treason among Crimes is as the Plague among Diseases; but an Infant Infected
warrantably immures the Family, though Noble and Numerous: Would our Gracious
Sovereign lent a quick Ear, we doubt not but some Spirits would have unhappily
improved this Crime of some, so to the disadvantage of us all, as that we might
have found our Door shut up with a Red Cross and a Miserere upon it: But to all
such His Majesty's Answer would be returned with a frowning Brow, Parcito
paucorum crimen diffundere in omnes.



And therefore after many, yet necessary Prorogations, His Majesty has
Assembled us again; nay, and not only so, but increased our Number by
Additional Boroughs Created, and Empowered by Letters Patents to return
Burgesses, some of whose eminent Abilities we enjoy at this day; and none
increases the Number of His Enemies: And truly, Sir, did not Justice to our
selves require, against whose Reputation and Honor they have so highly
offended, our Duty and Allegiance to His Sacred Majesty demands us that we
should not only purge our House, but since His Majesty's Courts of Justice have
already attached the Conusance of their Crimes, that we should rend them from
our selves, and leave them to the Justice of the Laws.

In order hereunto we have already aired our House with some preparatory Votes,
and have appointed a short day for sharper Physic. It is not my intent to draw
this Beast at length, my pencil was only designed for water colors work;
truly, Sir, it is so, I rather desire we may wear it on our breasts, to
remember it with indignation, then for Ornament to a Room; I have only shown
the track of the foot, that we may know ex ungue Leonem, and by Hercules his
foot to make the Calculation of his other dimensions: I have only pointed at a
little cloud, but such a one as would have overcast the Horizon of three
Kingdoms. But God be praised the Cloud is overblown, and the Dragon killed.

The next question is, who killed the Dragon? Let History give a place to S.
GEORGE in the Almanac; but let truth give your Grace a place in our hearts,
who crushed the Cockatrices eggs: with humble hearts, hands and eyes lifted up
to Heaven, we know our Anchor was within the vail, and to the watchmen of
Israel we give the praise. Next we acknowledge and admire the wisdom and
goodness of our gracious Sovereign, that separated you to steer this Kingdom
that was beating of it out at Sea, whilst his other two Kingdoms rode embayed:
So, Sir, though you are not the Author, yet you are the Instrument designed by
God and our King; and then what shall it be done to the man whom God and the
King intend to honor? You were preserved in the Ark of Bulrushes to be a
Deliverer; I remember the time when you found the Bulrushes, and God made you
an Ark of them; even then, when to promote your Masters Interests you came into
London in the disguise of Bulrushes, (you then saw Cromwell, and he saw not
you, though he beheld you, which proves him an Idol, that in seeing he did not
see) and God of those Bulrushes made you an Ark; for he preserved you in
safety: what a Hecatomb of Loyalty would have been of your person, if in that
Ark you had not floted above the waters? you put your hand to the Nail, and
your right hand to the workmans hammer, with the hammer you smote the Plot, you
smote off its head when you had pierced and stricken through the temples of it;
at your fect it bowed, it fell, it lay down; at your feet it bowed, it fell,
where it bowed, there it fell down dead.

But, Sir, did not represented Majesty so well seated on your brow silence me,
I should acquaint your Grace, that I observed the House of Commons much divided
in their Passions in the management of their deliverance; their deliverance was
their joy, but the hazard you exposed your Person to make it full and complete,
was their grief; you would not be contented that your knowledge of it, and the
prevention thereof should bear one date, but you watched personally night and
day to encounter those conspirators in the very act: Sir, was this well done,
to throw your Person into a throng of bloody hands and desperate hearts? was
this an even stake, Nightingales against Hedge-sparrows, and a Flagship to bear
in to a Squadron of Fireships? Had they lopt your little finger off, though
their bodies had lain gasping in heaps, the victory had been theirs, and our
eyes would have wept out the bonfires our hands had made: Therefore I am
commanded to present (...) you the humble Petition and Advice of the House of
Commons, That your Grace would measure your self, not by the Resolves of your
Courage, but by the Interest of a People whom you love, and of whom you are
dearly beloved.

Upon the result of all this, I come to discharge the strict command of the
House, to let your Grace know, that our hearts are toward the Governor of
Ireland, who offered himself willingly for the people. A single tongue (though
abler then I dare pretend unto) were too narrow a Channel for such streams of
Gratitude to glide through: It may be prudence in me to imitate the Painter,
who being required to draw Niobes face, and finding his shadows very feeble to
represent the Passions of her Soul, drew Niobes head in a bag.

But, Sir, be pleased to accept from me, who in their Names humbly tender to
your Grace their serious resentment and acknowledgement of that happiness this
Kingdom enjoys by the prudent management of that great Trust our Dread
Sovereign has invested you with, and in particular for that Sabbath we enjoy
by so great and seasonable deliverance from the consequence of this Plot, so
odious to all good men; accept, pray Sir, the tribute of their thanks, as an
Earnest and Assurance, that with their Lives and Fortunes they will assist your
Grace in vindication of His Majesty's Supreme Authority and Right, let the
opposition be hatched in darkness, masked with never so specious pretenses, or
appear (if our sins should make way unto it) never so formidable with Armed
Power.

FINIS.
A DECLARATION OF THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and BURGESSES IN THE Commons House OF
PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED.
WHEREAS certain wicked Persons, of Fanatic and disloyal Principles,
disaffected to His Majesty's just and gracious Government, and to the Peace and
Settlement of this His Kingdom of Ireland, did in the year of our Lord God, One
thousand six hundred sixty three, most Traitorously and disloyally conspire to
raise Rebellion in this Realm, and particularly had designed on the 21 day of
May in the said year 1663. to Surprise and Take His Majesty's Castle of Dublin,
His principal Fort in this His Kingdom, and to seize on the Person of His Grace
the Lord Lieutenant, in order to their carrying on their mischeivous
contrivances, for renewing bloody confusions throughout this Kingdom, from
which Evils this Realm, and all His Majesty's Subjects therein, had been then
but newly redeemed, and that by the Blessing of God upon His Majesty's Happy
Restoration to His Rightful Crowns and Kingdoms. And whereas we look upon
those odious Conspiracies as the mischievous Contrivances of some Fanatic and
Disloyal Persons, of desperate Fortunes, as well as of desperate and
destructive Principles, who endeavored to amend their own Conditions by the
Ruin of others, or to set up something (if they knew what) suitable to the
frenzy of their own humors and Imagnations, though at the charge and hazard of
others, and at the price of other men's Bloods, whom they labored to seduce:
And whereas that their horrid Conspiracy being (by the Blessing of God upon the
watchful Endeavors of His Grace the Lord Lieutenant) discovered and
disappointed, diverse of the Conspsrators were apprehended, and committed to
Prison, and some of them upon fair and equal Trials, according to the Laws of
the Land, were (in His Majesty's Court of Chief Place) found Guilty, and by
Judgment of Law Condemned, and thereupon were most deservedly Executed: And
whereas one of those Persons so justly Executed, and some others also, who were
involved in the guilt of that hideous Conspiracy, were Members of the Commons
House of Parliament, which we mention with inward sorrow, and grief of heart,
and with horror and detestation, to find that any Persons who had the Honor
(under the protection of His Majesty's blessed Government) to be Members of
this House, and consequently entrusted in those weighty Affairs, which (for the
safety and peace of the King and Kingdom) are often deliberated and consulted
in this House, should be so ungrateful, nay traiterous and disloyal, as to
conspire even against that Government (which in the Duty of Subjects to His
Majesty, and the obligation of that Duty heightened by their being Members of
this House) they were bound by the Laws of God and Nature to contribute their
best Endeavors to preserve and maintain: Yet this Parliament, by occasion of
the several necessary Prorogations from time to time, for important causes and
considerations, until the 26 day of October, 1665. had not the opportunity of
Assembling, and consequently could not declare (as we earnestly desired to do,
and as we would have done much earlier if we had been Assembled) our unanimous
detestation and abhorrence of that Traitorous Conspiracy. And therefore upon
our first Meeting in this House in this Session, although many weighty Affairs
lay before us, yet so sensible was this House of that horrid Conspiracy, and
that aggravated in that Circumstance, that some of the Conspirators were
Members of this House, as we laid all other Affairs aside for the present, and
in the first place entered into consideration of that particular: And thereupon
this House did and do hereby unanimously declare their just detestation and
abhorrence of that vile and odious Conspiracy; and do also declare the deep
sense which this House has of His Grace the Lord Lieutenants great Prudence,
Diligence, and Circumspection, as in his timely discovering that hideous
Confpiracie, so in his seasonable prevention of the sad, bloody, and dreadful
Effects which (if not so prevented) might have followed thereupon throughout
this Kingdom; for which his continual watchful Endeavors for the Safety and
Peace of the KING and Kingdom, we do return to his Grace the most humble and
hearty Thanks of this House, and do assure him of the constant Loyalty of this
House to His Majesty, and their humble Obedience to His Grace, whom His Majesty
has in His high Wisdom appointed for the Government of this His Kingdom, and
People therein, under the prudent Conduct of His Majesty. And that this House
may not fail in any point of Duty to His Majesty, we are fully resolved to make
strict Inquiry what Members of this House have been so wicked as to have had
any hand in those horrid Guilts, so hateful to God and Man; and for such as
shall be found, we shall take such course for the just prosecution of them, as
may manifest the Actions of this House to be equal and agreeable to the
Declaration we have herein made, as of our just detestation and abhorrence of
such foul Crimes, so of our bounden Duty and unfeigned Loyalty to His Sacred
Majesty. And to the end this our Declaration may be delivered over to
Posterity, and to testify to the World the true sense we have of the Duty and
Loyalty which by the Laws of God, and by our Natural Allegiance to His
Majesty, we owe to Him, and which by the blessing of God we shall be always
ready to pay to Him, with that faithfulness which becoms the Loyalty and
Obedience of good Subjects to so Great and Gracious a Majesty, it is Ordered,
That this Declaration be entered in the Journal Books of the Proceedings of this
House.

Dated the Second of November, 1665.
FINIS.
ORdered, Nemine contradicente, That the Speech delivered by Mr. Speaker
yesterday to His Grace James Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of this Kingdom,
be forthwith Printed and Published; and that Mr. Speaker receive the Thanks of
this House for so clearly delivering their sense therein, November. 8. 1665.

Phil. Fernesley, Cler. Parliam.

ORdered, Nemine contradicente, That the Declaration of this House, entitled,
A Declaration of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the Commons House of
Parliament assembled, be forthwith Printed and Published.

Phil. Fernesley, Cler. Parliam.


