THE Mercury-Gallant: Containing Many True and Pleasant RELATIONS Of what has
passed at PARIS, From the First of January 1672. Till the KINGS Departure
thence.

Translated from the French.

LONDON: Printed by T. R. and N. T. for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the
Poultry, and Jonathan Edwin at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1673.

To my much honored Friend, George Bowerman Esquire.
SOme men (not so good as you) might perhaps think that while I have thus long
been unfortunately hindered from paying the respects due to your many good
Offices and Kindnesses, I have blotted them quite out of my memory, and become
utterly undeserving both of them, or any future Favor; and there may possibly
some Reasons be urged for the entertainment of such suspicions: but I am more
than half confident they cannot at all have reached you: for as your Kindnesses
were free and unconstrained, out of your own pure and natural Goodness, so I am
bound to believe they were accompanied with a Judgment which cannot easily
think it self deceived, because it were both a sin and shame it should be.

And therefore to endeavor the best I can to disperse any such Clouds that may
be gathering, I have taken this course to let you perceive that I have
preserved a Remembrance of You and your Kindnesses, and am meditating of them,
even when you perhaps may believe they are least in my Thoughts; and though
this be the miserablest way in the World to requite Courtesies, and can no way
form an Aquittance for any Obligation, yet at worst it is an Acknowledgment,
which generous Minds use to receive in good part, and where they find it, think
the Defection of a Larger Satisfaction, proceeds rather from Misfortune than
Fault.

As such then, Please to accept this small Present I now send you, which when
in the Original, was thought worthy of being presented unto the FRENCH KING:
and was a Book He Himself passed the License for under His Seal, when He
officiated as His own CHANCELLOVR.

I will not prevent You with its Contents: Let them speak for themselves. Only
thus much I will say, That in my Judgment it may be as Useful for This Horizon
as That for which it was Calculated. And if the Pleasant Stories contained in
it, shall give You and other Gentlemen that shall peruse it, any Divertisement,
I shall have received my Satisfaction, and have no more to addle, but to beg
you to value me still, as one that will ever be,

SIR, Your most faithful and most humble Servant, J. D.

THE French Bookseller TO THE READER.
I Believe now I have hit on a Book will please all the world, because of the
diversity of matter it contains. Those who are wholly addicted to Romantic
writings, will here find Stories, though true, yet as pleasing and divertisant,
as in any of the most exquisite Books of that Kind; the curious, and the
Country Gentleman, and the Stranger, who never had the least knowledge of many
persons of high birth, and extraordinary worth, will in this Volume, and those
shall follow it, find the springs of their Renown, and what has made them
esteemable. To know the value of any person you shall only need to turn over
the Mercury-Gallant, and find your wish. Every Six months shall come forth a
Volume, and in the second shall be set down the express time of their coming
out, that people may know when to expect them; and hereafter we shall take the
liberty to speak of Foreign Courts and Countries. The Author begins now to
settle his correspondencies, and to search out the ways of the most
considerable assistances, that nothing of Novelty may happen in the world,
which his Letters shall not speak of. These are but Essays; but by what they
are, you may judge what will follow: consider therefore this only as the design
of a work which time will better polish. Those who know any thing of Gallantry,
or worthy to be made public, may bring it to me, who will engage the Author to
entertain with it the person to whom he addresses his Letters. I think my self
likewise obliged to give notice, that this Book has no resemblance with the
Journal des scavans; that treats only of such Books of Sciences as are
published, and this of pretty Love-stories and intrigues, and of the worth of
persons any way extraordinary, though their Pens never made them famous. It is
not of necessity that all who have wit must be writers, there are many proofs
to the contrary, and I will add, that if here any Books be spoke of, they are
only Books of Gallantry, and of which the Journal says nothing, and that there
is not in the whole Treatise twenty lines to that purpose.

ERRATA.
Page 21. l. 19. dele so. p. 22. l. 10. for with r. the. p. 3^. l. 7. for woman
r. women. p. p. 33. l. 19. for foryed r. forced. p. 44. l: 1. for Balads r.
Ballets. p. 51. l. 14. dele and. p. 63. l. 11. for seventy r. severity. l. 19.
for. her r. his. p. 71. l. 3. for any r. an. p. 72. l. 12. for sweezing r.
squeezing. l. 13. for his r. her. p: 73. l. 15. for unmatched r. unmasked. p.
74. l. 2. after these r. persuasions. l. 11. dele or l. p: 81. l. 16. for it r.
its p. 63. l. 18. for Faries r. Farces. p. 98. l. 14. for Jestu r. Testu.

THE TABLE OF Matters contained in this Treatise.
Letter I. THe Design of the Work. The Story of the Neclace of Pearl. Honors
paid to the memory of the late Madam de Montausier. The establishment of the
Academy of Architecture, of which the Sieur Blondel is to be Professor. Letter
II. The Story of the Green Silk Stockings. The reception of the Duke de
Feuillade to the charge of Colonel of the French Regiment of Guards. Elogy of
the Marshal du Plessis. Discourse on Bajazet a Tragedy of the Sieur Racines.
Adventures happened to a French man at Constantinople, by which Turkish
Gallantry may be judged of. Letter III. The Story of a Lady, chose rather to
burn with her Husband, then see him disloyal. A Discourse on the Marriage of
Bacchus, an Heroic Comedy, The arrival of Monsieur Courtine in Sweden. The
departure of the Duke d'Estrees, extraordinary Ambassador at Rome. Letter IV.
The History of the Family of hope. The public entrance of the Marquis de
Villars into Madrid. Monsieur de Pompone's return from Sweden. Letter V. The
Story of the maiden Soldier Elogy of the Duke of Coaslin. Letter VI. The Death
of the Chancellor, and his Elogy. Praise of the Marquis of Louvoy. Death of the
Princess of Conty. Letter VII. The Elogy of six Coansellors of Estate, and six
masters of Request, chosen by the King to be Assistants to the Seal. An
accident happened to a young Marchioness on the death of Monsieur Gualtier, the
most excellent master of the Lute. Letter VIII. The Story of a man, who would
believe he had made himself a Cuckold. Monsieur de Pachau's worth acknowledged
by the King. Meffieurs de Vendosme their return from Italy. The Kings choice of
Monsieur de Camus for first President of the Court of Aids. Letter IX. The
death of Monsieur Despincha Marquis de Ternes. The Reception of the Cavalier
d'Arquien into his fathers Charge. Letter X. The death of Monsieur de la Motte
Houdancourt. The promotton of Monsieur the Arch Bishop of Toulouse to the
Cardinalate. Discourse on Ariana. a Tradegy of the younger Corneilles. Letter
XI. The Story of the Closet of Looking-glasses. Discourse on a Comedy of
Molieres, called les Femmes scavantes, or the wise Women. Letter XII. The
occasien of the French Academies Voyage to Versailles, under the Conduct of the
Arch Bishop of Paris. Monsieur the Marquis de Angeau his treating the Academy.
Letter XIII. The Establishment of all the King of France his Forces, as well
Horse as Foot, with the Names of all the Regiments, the Companies they contain,
and the number of their Men. Letter XIV. Discourse of the Waters, Gardens, and
new imbelishments of Versailles, with the Names of the Statuaries. Letter XV.
The Praises of Cardinal de Retz. The Estates of Britain presented by Monsieur
the Duke of Chaune. the Duke of Bethune mode Lieutenant General of Picardy, and
the Duke de Duras Captain of the Gardes du Corpse. Letter XVI. The Institution
of the Academy Des belles Lettres, with the names of the Academians. An account
of the Iugenuity of Gas, Madam the Marquis of Deshoulieres Spaniel. The Death
of Monsieur de Morangis. Praises of the Baron of Schonborn, Nephew to the
Elector of Magence, and bis extraordinary Envoy. The Entrance and Audience of
Conde de Molina extraordinary Ambassador from Spain, with Observations
thereupon. Letter XVII. An account of the new Modes, as well for Men and Women,
as for the furniture of the house. The Marriage of the primier Presidents Son,
to Mademoiselle Chaluces. The Kings choice of Physicians, Discourse on the
Journal des scavans. Letter XVIII. The Names of the General Officers of the
Army. The Names of the Ships, and Commanders of the French Kings Navy Royal.
Letter XIX. Discourse on several Books of Gallantry. The Namcs of the Authors
quoted by Monsieur Menage in his Book entitled. Observations on the French
Tongue. The Speech of the College of Physicians to the three principal
Physicians. Observations on the Kings giving the Seals to Monsieur d'Aligre.
The departure of the Baggages of the Army. Descourse on the preparation of a
Mausoleum, of which Monsieur de Bru^ is the designer. The Audience of the
several Ambassadors and Residents of the King; as also of the Sovereign Courts
and Provost of Merchants. The Kings departure, some words much in Mode; the
story of Megius, and his Companion, or the Philosophers Stone.
THE MERCURY GALLANT.
Letter I.
Madam,
I Needed not have been put in mind of the promise I made you at your going
from Paris, to send you often an account of such Novelties as were worthy of
the curiosity of the most ingenious persons of that Country, which is like for
so long a time to be made happy with your residence. They which have the person
continually in their thoughts, seldom forget their promises. I doubt not Madam,
but you understand so well what that means, that I need explain it no further.
Proceed we therefore to our News, or rather first, to the order I have resolved
to observe in giving you these accounts. I will punctually write to you once in
eight days, and then give you the most particular and curious relation I can of
all that has happened in the week aforegoing. Sending you things, which the
Gazets give no account of, or at least not so full and clear a one. The most
minute things that pass here shall not escape my Quill: You shall have all
Deaths and Weddings of consequence, with such Circumstances as may create that
delight in such news, which they have not in themselves. I will endeavor to
unravel the truth of all great actions, where valor shall make it self
observable in the Army, and will often lay naked before you things which fame
gives but at random; because she not staying to search the depth of them, the
first rumors she spreads are for the most part short of truth. I will not
forget to tell you who receive favors from our great Monarch; he gives with so
endearing a grace, that though his gifts are always considerable, ^he obliging
manner with which he gives, ^reeds often as much delight in the hearer; ^s the
magnificence of his gifts in the recei^er; and whereas there often happens
pro^eedings so extraordinary, and so full of ^ntrigue, that the best invented
Romances ^ome short of them, I shall nor fail to di^ertise you with them, and
send you the ^eal Circumstances, which are seldom ^nown but to persons who make
diligent ^arch after them. Curiosity bringing to Paris ^ot only many brave
people from all Pro^inces of France, but likewise numbers of ^^rangers. I will
give you advice of the ^orth of those attract any admiration. I ^ill send you
all such witty pieces as have ^y reputation, as Songs, Verses, or o^^er such
like works. I will send you the ^^ccess of all new Plays, and what Books (...)
Gallantry are Printed: I say of Gallan^^y, because I pretend not to speak of
^^ose which concern Arts or Sciences, not being able to perform it so well as
those who every fifteen days give us an account of them. But I will do somewhat
more then I have yet promised, and often send you some new adventures in form
of Histories. Paris is big enough to furnish me with them, and every day
something considerable happens there, and those who make it part of their
business to understand the Town often hear of strange adventures, and are
sometimes witness to them: so that I fear not the giving you a new Story almost
every week; and when Paris fails by chance to furnish me, I cannot doubt to
learn somewhat divertsiing from the great number of strangers are continually
in this City I will add to this all the News worth hearing from the Ruelle^
Balls, or any meetings, and here with not omit the new Modes, the Country is
generally well pleased to know them, nor can I readily t^ll any thing they more
desire; I believe likewise you will be of my mind, that the Misses of Paris
will often furnish me with pleasant subjects, and that all these things
together and apart, will continually supply me with a sack full of news,
wherewithal to entertain you: I shall yet meddle little with foreign news, or
matters of State, and speak only of those great public news of which people
discourse every where, who make no profession of understanding them; but as
there is no news so public, but has something of privacy in it; I will send
you the opinions of those who should know things best. If I prosecute my
design, and you keep my Letters, they may for the future serve as Memories to
the curious, and many things may be met with here, cannot be found elsewhere,
because of the diversity of the matter; but it matters not much whether they be
useful to others, so they divertise you; that is my only aim and therefore I
begin with a pleasant Story before I enter upon the particularities of this
weeks news.

A young gallant coming some days since to visit a fair Lady, to whom he had no
other pretense of love, then to keep himself it talk (for it is a most ordinary
practice here, and the most part of our young people, if they be put out of the
road of talking a little love to the Ladies, and praising their beauties, have
not a word to say for themselves) This young blade, who I am telling this story
of, having run over, and over all the Lessons he had learnt, in praising every
particular charm of the beauty he came to wait on, and at last quite stranded
himself, not knowing any other way to entertain her; this lovely person tired
with hearing the same things again and again, first slumbred a little, and at
last fell fast asleep, though she designed it not; but having wearied her self
the night before at a Ball, and relishing so ill now the tedious divertisement
of him that entertained her, sleep seized her unawares. The Gallant had a fate
quite contrary; the beauty of this fair sleeper, and the motion of her Breasts
as she breathed, awakened his Senses; he viewed her with a great deal of
passion, and his heart often told him, he ought to improve the opportunity; but
whilst he stood gazing, and not knowing what to resolve, he cast his Eyes on a
Necklace of Pearl, worth twenty thousand Livers, which she had about her Neck,
and observed, That the Ribbon which tied it, did as it were present it self to
him. This idle lover, whose name I will conceal under that of Cleontes, was
immediately surprised with imaginations quite contrary to those he had had but
a minute before. He had about two days since lost all his Money at play, he
was naturally expensive, and already owed so much, that his credit was almost
cracked; besides, he was young, and had always been a little inclinable to
knavery, and all these encouragements meeting together, soon formed in him a
temptation, utterly different from the former; and now all his amorous glances
were cast at the Neck-lace. After having a good while viewed it, he turned his
eyes toward the door, his thoughts began all at once to run one way, but yet
he could not fix them; he gets up, walks two or three turns about the Chamber,
comes to the Stairs head to see if any body might perchance be coming; but
finding all things favoring his design, returns to Belisa; (for so I shall
call this fair Lady in the sequel of the story.) He was no sooner come nigh
her, but he grew as stiff as a statue, and stood like one that had lost all
sense and motion, making reflections on the action he was about. I am here alone
said he to himself, and none else can be charged with the Neck-lace but my
self, and if I go away without saying any thing, I conclude my self guilty. If
I stay after I have taken it, they will make such strict search, that they will
find it about me, hide it where I can: I had much better let it alone, and
relinquish so vile an attempt. But if I let it alone (replied he suddenly to
himself) can I ever in reason hope fortune should again do any thing for me,
and twenty thousand Franks will be a very convenient sum for me, he then began
to cast up in his head how he would dispose those twenty thousand Livers. He
would pay but few debts, but instead of that he would put himself into a
magnificent Equipage, as to Clothes, buy such and such Points and Laces, and
put his Train into the finest Liveries in the World, and with such a tempting
adjustment, he though himself secure of the Conquest of at least a dozen hearts
of those gay women, who are taken with fine outsides, and are sooner surprised
with gaudery then worth, who are so sottish to think he cannot be a worthy man,
who has not brisk accouterments, or keeps but a modest train. Cleontes having
thus disposed the twenty thousand Livers in his Coxcombe, takes the Neck-lace;
but he was no sooner master of it, then he felt a trembling over all his body,
and seized with a violent fear of being surprised with it about him he resolved
to return it: He was just about executing what his secret repentance had
determined, when it came into his head to swallow the Neck-lace, which
consisted of two and thirty Pearls. 'Twas a hard task this, but his greedy
desire of so much money brought it to effect. When he had swallowed the last
Pearl, he began to be as much troubled what to do with the Ribbon; he was a
good while studying how to dispose it, and at length concluded to cut it into
such little scraps as were scarce perceptible. You must think he was a good
while doing all this, and therefore may the easier believe Belisa awakened
almost as soon as he had done, she asks presently for her Neck-lace. Cleontes
denies the having taken it, she thought he only intended to make her search for
it, and very gallantly turns all into a Jest, but was strangely troubled when
she perceived he still denied it, will all that seriousness men use when they
would have what they say thought truth. If you will (said he to her) command
another suit of Clothes to be given me, I will strip my self before any body
you shall name, and leave mine with you; nay, they shall have my very Shirt to
search. Belisa was in more then a peck of troubles. Certain she was, she had
the Neck-lace on before she fell asleep, and none but Cleontes had been in the
Chamber, and yet the Neck-lace was not to be found, though she had made as
diligent a search, as she could, and a search suitable to the greatness of her
loss. Cleantes urged her to search his Pockets; she believed since he pressed
it so much, she might chance find it there, and that he only jested all this
while to vex her a little, she resolves therefore to satisfy him, with hopes to
satisfy her self; but just as she had put in her hand, Clidamant enters into
the Room, and thinks she was embracing him. This Clidamant was one of those
privileged lovers, who may come in without knocking, or sending word who they
are. 'Twill be an easy matter Madam for you to believe, he did or said
something, that jealous lovers use to do, when they think they find Mistresses
false, he could not restrain himself, and Cleontes seemed to rejoice rather
then be troubled at it, he had hopes this new alarm, might suppress all
farther clamor about the Neck-lace, and having some bravery (for heart none
can think he wanted, after a Cordial of two and thirty such Pills as he had
swallowed) he told Clidamant he would go forth, and there expect him to decide
their difference. The jealous man was about to follow him, when Belisa stopped
them both, and told the whole adventure. Clidamant thought it so strange, that
he could not at first believe it; but his jealousy made him determine to try
all ways imaginable, to discover whether Belisa had told him truth. He was
studying how to effect it, when three or four of the afflicted Ladies friends,
and of Clidamants acquaintance, came into the Room; they soon were told how the
whole case stood. Their amazement was great, but it was yet made greater, when
they saw nothing could persuade Cleontes to tell what was become of the
Neck-lace. Entreaties and threatenings were both employed, but all to no
purpose, and the afternoon was quite spent without making any discovery.
Belisas grief for the loss of her Neck-lace increased more and more, as her
hopes of ever finding it decayed, she being assured, that Cleontes must have
stole it, and hid it where ever it was, having either cast it into some by
Corner, or thrown it to some body out of the Window. The manner in which Belisa
spoke this, made all the Gentlemen believe it to be true, and therefore they
resolved to put it to the utmost test, and as soon as it was quite dark they
sent for a Sack which was no sooner got, but seizing all four on Cleontes, they
violently thrust him into it, and having tied it fast, carried him to the
Window. That Window was two Stories high, and answered to a Court, in which lay
some square stones for building. As soon as they had him at the Window they
threatened to throw him down; if he would not confess what he had done with the
Neck-lace, and at last so terribly frightened him, that he owned he had it,
promised to restore it; but desired time, 'twas granted him, but on condition
he should tell what he had done with it, he stumbled at that a great while; but
finding himself pressed too hard, at length confessed the whole truth.
Whereupon they presently took him out of the Sack, stripped him in spite of his
teeth, and laid him in a sumptuous bed. And immediately one of the Gentlemen
went, and fetched a vomit, which he took care should be strong enough, and by
its operation you will believe it was so, Cleontes refused a great while to take
it, but at last out of the fear of the scandal, he submitted; for they
threatened if he did not, to carry him to Prison, and to publish every where
that he was a Thief, he had many doleful reachings and strainings, and suffered
infinite pangs and gripings; but at last (though at several times) he brought
up one and thirty of the Pearls: There was one yet behind; he offered to pay
double the value for it, but Clidamont would have him take the other Potion,
which put him to mighty torment before he could bring up the two and thirtieth
Pearl, however at length it came, and they dismissed the poor unfortunate
wretch, who went away purged to the life, and more cast down then he could have
been after six months sickness. This Madam, is an adventure happened some days
since, and is yet known to few, there is something me thinks so new in it, that
I dare believe you have scarce read the like; but let us proceed to more
public news.

Though I have no intention at other times to entertain you with the Funeral
honors paid to those, who are of birth eminent enough to be spoke of it the
Gazet, and that I design not to trouble you with reading of public News,
unless they be extraordinary; yet I will not omit observing what there is of
novelty, in those affairs, which else seem fitting to be passed over in
silence, because of the little pleasure taken in reading them. I believe the
news of the service performed at Rouen for the late Madam de Montausier is of
the number; and that it being so easily to be guest at, (it being so customary
a thing to pay Funeral Rites to the dead) I might, and ought to have let it
pass; and yet the extraordinary worth of this Honorable defunct, and the
particular esteem Monsieur Pilot primier President of the Parliament of Rouen
had for her, occasioned these sad duties to be celebrated with some
Circumstances worthy remark, and though that honorable and renowned body never
used to accompany dead Corpse, on the like Ceremony; they would needs condescend
to do somewhat extraordinary to honor the memory of a person so esteemable for
her worth and piety, as the late Madam de Montausier.

I know not whether it be in my Rule to tell you, that the Abbot of Novalles
has lately made appear his great wit and judgment in the Sorbonne, even to the
astonishment of all the old Doctors; you will say perhaps reading this news,
That if I give you an account of all that maintain a Thesis, I shall stuff my
Letters with things not at all curious; but when you shall understand, that he
did in his first act on matters of Divinity, what others do not till their
last, you may perhaps think this Circumstance makes the news worth sending, and
it may induce you to conceive a fancy for this worthy Abbot, which may make you
distinguish him from others, when you hear him spoke of; for since it is one of
my designs in writing you News, to give you a knowledge of the deserts of the
most considerable persons in France; I will let slip no occasion of speaking of
them, and if the News I may sometimes send you of them, have nothing weighty
enough in it self, to make you understand their particular value; yet the
Elogies I shall give them will at least make you know them: And thus the least
curious News may be acceptable.

The King continuing daily to do something considerable for the glory of
France, has caused to be opened here some days past an Academy of Architecture
established by his Majesty, and Sieur Blondel, the Kings Professor in the
Mathematics, and who is likewise to officiate in the same function, in this
gave great Testimonies of his wit and judgment in an Oration he made in praise
of the King on this occasion. I know not Madam whether you are acquainted with
this eminent person; but he passes in the judgment of most men, for a very able
man, he has traveled much, seen both the Indies; had many different
employments, all which he has discharged with Honor, has commanded Ships, and
it is to him that Paris is obliged for the design of the Course, at which he
continually labors, and which will beautify the City from Port Richlein to
Port. St. Anthony. This Madam is all the news I can give you this week, I hope
within eight days to send you something more divertizing, and entertain you
about a Piece ready for the Theater, which friends to the Author mightily cry
up. It has not yet been acted, but without doubt they have reason for wh^t they
say, and the success will be answerable to their judgment of it.

Paris Jan. 1. 1672.
Letter II.
SInce I have proposed to begin the weekly news, I have tied my self to write
as often as I can, with foam extraordinary adventure; you have here Madam a
true one, which will doubtless please you.

A young Sovereign Gallant, and amorous, being one day walking without the
ordinary confident of his Gallanteries, after having studied upon something for
a while, hastily asks for him, which obliged all that Princes Courtiers to look
out every was for Cleodates. (so will I name that favorite, or rather under
that name speak of him in the Story, since you have given me an Item, that I
should put feigned names to all the Gallant Adventures, I shall get to send
you) Philemon, a young Cavalier, more solicitous then any of the rest, to make
his Complements to the favorite, was mosthappy, and thought himself the more
so; because as he imagined his master had particularly addressed himself to him
to seek him; he flies to Cleodates house, which had a back door directly
opening toward the Princes Palace, and which he found only put to, he must have
gone a great way about to the ordinary Gate of entrance, and there to no
purpose asked for Cleodates: For that Cavalier no less Gallant then his Master,
whose Confident he was, had gone out alone, and taking a turn about, came in
again by that private door, without being perceived by any of his people. This
way then Philemon went in without meeting any body; he goes up a little pair of
Stairs which stood in a by Corner; but which he knew very well, this not being
the first time he had tried that passage, and came presently to the Chamber,
where he thought he might find Cleodates; but seeing no one there, he was
forced to knock at a little Closet door stood by it. After having knocked a good
while, it came into his head to look through the Keyhole; for he thought he
heard some body within, he presently observed Cleodates kissing a Lady, but
could not discover who she was, her face being hid from him; only he took
notice she had Green Silk Stockings on, and very rich Garters He easily guessed
by their not answering nor stirring up and down, that they would not have it
known they were in that Closet and that they would not open the doo^ for any
one whatever. Philemon hereupo^ returns with intention to tell the Prince h^
could not find Cleodates; he did so indeed but 'twas in a way made him suspect
there was a mystery in it; for he could not forbear laughing at uttering his
name. The Prince would needs know the reason, an^ very earnestly required it,
he was soon sa^ satisfied for Sovereigns not being to be refused any thing;
Philemon told him all h^ had seen. This adventure which one would have thought
should have diverted the Prince, begot a dumps in him, made Philemon a hundred
times repent his weakness in discovering a thing he observed grieved his
Master, and might be prejudicial to Cleodates. This Prince loved a young beauty
in his Court, and now grew suspicious his favorite might be his Rival; he
asked Philemon if he knew the Lady he had seen by her Legs; Philemon was so
ready to answer yes, that he had not time to consider how he might by it both
displease his Master, and loose his Friend. The Prince replied, If that Lady
were one of the Court he would know her e're it were long, and at that instant
obliged the Princess his Wife to send for all the Ladies of the Court; and as
soon as they were come, proposed to them to mount immediately on horseback,
and see a chase; some said they should have time given them to put shorter
Coats, others were of a contrary opinion, The Prince could have wished it, that
he might the better have seen their Stockings; but then he doubted they might
in changing Clothes, change Stockings too; but whatever he feared, he was soon
recovered of it, as you will hear by the sequel. This Prince, who was naturally
Gallant, appeared so in this occasion, somewhat more so then usual, and talking
pleasantly with all the Ladies, told them, that he would set them all on
Horseback; you may easily guess what he meant by it, and that by this
contrivance he only designed to discover the Lady with the Green Stockings. He
had already seated a great many, without finding what he feared to find, when
at last he discovered one of the delicatest Legs in the world, and on it a
Green Silk Stocking. You will be as much surprised as he was Madam, when you
shall understand, that it was upon his Mistress he found them; but it is no time
to stand wondering now, or if you will wonder what you have yet to hear, will
but amaze you will more. The Prince in despair, stretched on the extremes of
love and jealousy, gave a shreck at the sight of those Stockings, and stood
like one astonished; Philemon, who was still near him, perceiving the cause of
his disquiet, told him in his ear, That the Stockings he had seen were of a
deeper Green, and the Garters of another Color. Thou would abuse me
(replied the Prince) only to assuage my grief; but if I find no other Green
Stockins, I shall give no faith to any thing thou say. At these words he
endeavered to appear Blithe and Gay, as he did before, and with a Countenance
full of mirth and jollity, though his heart were heavy, proceeded to seat the
rest of his Ladies on Horseback. He was come now to the very last, without
finding any other Green Stockings but his Mistresses, and the fear he should
fail of finding any other, hindered him from casting up his eyes on her whose
Legs he only looked on, without knowing whose they were; he was much surprised
to find Stockins and Garters both to be like those Philemon had described.
Philemon, who thought of nothing more then relieving the Prince from the
trouble he had put him, and making it appear he had no intention to deceive
him, kept still his Eyes cast downwards; so that at the same time both he and
the Prince cried out they had found what they sought for, if their joy were
great, their amazement was no less, when lifting up their Eyes, almost both at
a time they perceived. I believe you are very impatient now to know, and that
your curiosity would be very burdensome to you, if I should long delay it. It
was Philemons wife, which fight made him look as like a Coxcomb, as indeed he
was. The Prince appeared as much amazed as he; but yet could not forbear
laughing from the bottom of his heart. The Srory goes no farther, and since I
have promised to write you nothing but truth, I will add nothing of my own,
though it were easy to invent a thousand fine things on so delicate an
occasion.

Monsieur the Duke de Feuillade, of the illustrious house D'Buston so
considerable, for the many Hero's issued from that Family; and for that great
Master of Rhodes of the same name, and so renowned in his own person, and so
well known in the Ottoman Empire, who after a thousand gallant Actions done for
the Honor and Service of the King his Master, had the happiness to see the
Infidels chased out of Hungary, after their being defeated by those brave
French Troops he commanded, who following the Orders he gave them, and
imitating his valor, defeated an almost innumerable Army, composed of the
choicest Forces of the Musulmen; he, whose name is at this day so famous,
through the whole Empire of the Turks, that same Mounsieur de Feuillade has
been presented by the King with the charge of Colonel of his Regiment of
French Guards, his Majesty did him the Honor to receive him in person into
this Charge, which is so much the more glorious, because those who enjoy it,
receive thereby the Honors pavable to the Children of France. This Dukes Oath
was received by the Marshal Duke Du Ple^sis, who was chosen out among all the
Marshals in France who are Commissaries of His Majesty's Forces. This Marshal
is famous for his great Employs, for many Towns and Battails won, for the Siege
of Roses, where the Over flowings of the Waters, and all the Inconveniences of
a hard season, seemed to have conspired together to oppose his Success: yet
though he assailed that City with fewer forces then defended it, his valor
made the King Master of it, which his Majesty recompensed with the staff of
Marshal of France. This great Captain is likewise famous for the gain of the
glorious Battle of Rochel, which he won with so much advantage, and which
decided the fortune of the Realm in a time wherein the Civil Wars had wrought
so much confusion. 'Twas this Battle dispersed the Enemies of France, and made
the frontiers of the Kingdom the Barriers against the Enterprises of the
Revolted Party.

Some days past was acted on the Theater of the Hostel de Burgogne, a Tragedy
called Bajazet, which has gained the repute of an excellent Work, and you
perhaps will think it so, when you hear it is a Composition of Mounsieur
Racines, since nothing but what is most accomplished comes from the Pen of that
Eminent Author. The Subject of the Tragedy is Turkish, as the Author says in
his Preface: I will tell in two words what I could learn of that Story from the
Historians of the Country, by which you may judge of the Admirable Genius of
Poesy, that without taking any thing elsewhere, could form so excellent a
Tragedy.

Amurath had three Brothers when he went to besiege Babylon, two he caused to
be strangled, neither of which was called Bajazet, the third was saved from his
fury, because he had no children to succeed in the Empire. This Grand Signior
carried with him in that Voyage his favorite Sultaness. The Grand Vizier who
was called Mahomet Basha went likewise, as we may see in a relation writ by a
Turk of the Seraglio, and translated into French by Mounsieur du Loir who was
then at Constantinople; and this was that Great Vizier who began the assault of
that famous Town toward the Levant, with the Governor of Greece, Ali Basha,
the Son of Arlan, and the Aga of the Janissaries with his Regiment. At his
return he entered triumphantly into Constantinople, as his Master had done some
days before. Yet the Author of Bajazet does ingeniously make him stay at
Constantinople under the name of Achomat, to favor the designs of Roxana, who
is here found in the Seraglio at Byzantium, though she were indeed in his
Highness Camp, and all this to raise Bajazet to the Empire, whose name is very
well invented. The third Brother of Sultan Amurath which remained, and escaped
his wrath, was called Ibrahim, whom this cruel Emperor had the barbarous
thoughts of destroying in that extreme sickness which seized him, and of which
he died, with design (say they) to leave for Successor the young Mustapha
Capoudan Bassa his Favorite, whom he had given in marriage to an only
daughter he had by his best beloved Sultaness. I cannot yield to them who think
this piece expresses not enough of the Turkish nature. There are Turks truly
Gallant; and since it pleases, no matter how; nor costs it more when we are
feigning, to invent honest and gentile Characters, than those barbarous ones
which agree not with the humor of the Ladies of our Age, whom it is a thing of
the greatest Importance to please. Gallantry, Bravery, and Goodness, are not
things without Turkish Examples; and we have a very pleasant History in a
Letter of Mounsieur de Loir writ to Mounsieur de Charpentier in 1641, which
it is possible you would not be displeased if I should rehearse to you: some of
it you shall have. He says, speaking of a Friend of his newly arrived at
Constantinople:

He was no sooner got hither, but within three days a Lady gave him private
notice of the inclination she had for him; she caused one of her Companions to
throw into his Windows Citrons stuck with Cloves, which are here the first
Letters and Embassies of Love, and he finding the sweetness of being beloved,
answered with the same fervency the passion of her that loved him. She was a
young Turkish Damsel of very good quality called Zenakhoub, with whom he
entertained an Amorous Commerce, of which the History sets down each
particular. And surely if Adventures are thought the more pleasing the more
hazardous they are, few can claim preferrence to this intrigue; and though your
self should impose silence on me, I cannot forbear telling what at last
happened to him, which is an Adventure worth relating, and cannot be unpleasant
in the reading. This rash man had often disguised himself like a Woman, to see
his Love in Marriage-Assemblies, whither he was introduced by a Jew Woman
entrusted with their secrets, and passed for a young Slave, she said she had
lately bought; his Youth, his Knowledge in the Countrey-Language, and the love
he was inflamed with, were a favorable Pasport to him: But it was not long ere
by an unheard of Boldness and strange Imprudence, going to see his Mistress in
man's Attire, he was like to lose her, and be lost. Zenakhoub had a long time
been sought in Marriage, which she had always concealed from this new Lover,
resolving never to tell it him till it was impossible for her to hinder it
longer, and now she found it unavoidable. She therefore sent one morning (very
early) to seek her new Love, commanding him to come immediately with the Jew,
whilst the Turks were at their prayers at break of day, for that she feared she
should never more have an opportunity to speak with him. He was so shortened in
time that he could not only not disguise his Sex, but had scarce leisure to
hide his own Habits under a Vest, and to cover his Chin with a false Beard, and
coming thus to Zenakhoub, was at his entrance amazed to find her in such a
serious meditation, but was much more when with many sighs and interrupting
sobs she told him of her Marriage, and that she only sent for him to take her
last leave of him. He was astonished at first, not being able to speak a word,
sadness had so seized his Soul: but during his silence, his Eyes gave evidence
to Zenakhoub of the extreme Grief he felt within. At last, both having for a
good while entertained each other by looks, Zenakhoub with a great sigh gave
him notice 'twas time to part. I Will not tell you what they might say on this
occasion, for besides the recital would be too long, I will ease you of the
grief I felt, when he made me the Rehearsal, and you may imagine that, but you
cannot think what happened to them: He held Zenakhoub fast by the hand, and he
has swore to me that he thought verily the fire of his kisses would have burnt
her, if the tears he had shed from above, had not allayed and moderated their
flame. To speak all in a word, that at last the violences of his love had
transported him beyond those bounds of respect which that virtuous Maid had set
him, and within which he had always kept; he would have kissed her mouth, but she
who felt her Soul almost yielding to her Passion, and her Reason now at last
gasp, fearing her Resistance would at length too weakly defend her Modesty,
with a strange and sudden motion drew forth a Dagger she had at her Girdle, and
presenting it to him, conjured him by all the most obliging Considerations,
rather to take away her Life, than attempt to offend her Honor. All our Lovers
heat at this was turned to Ice, but being again by little and little warmed
with this Amorous Contestation, as he was about to disarm her, pressing down
her hand, he struck the Dagger into her Thigh, so that what with the sight o^
her Blood, and the other Agitations of her Soul, she fell into a swound. The
shreek he gave, seeing her in that condition, was heard by the Woman of the
House, who run in presently, to whom they could not refuse opening the
Chamber Door, but before they got in, Zenakhoub's Nurse had shut up in an
Alcove him that had been the cause of all this noise; and the blow having only
raced the Skin, those that found it having carried Zenakhoub into a Balcony to
give her fresh air, imputed it only to a little faint-heartedness. Mean time,
some were run to look for her Mother, who came in great haste, and found her
Daughter just recovering her spirits with the help of cold Water thrown into
her face: but she was about to fall again into her swoun, upon seeing her self
in her Mothers Arms, and in the doubts and fears she was in for her Lover.
'Twas well for her she was thought to be so weak, she had otherwise given too
apparent Testimonies of the cause of her trouble; but before she was fully come
to her self, she observed her Mother testified more kindness than anger, and
judged both by it and by her lamenting her mishap, that she knew neither of the
Author nor Cause. Yet she was not out of fear for her Lover, who for his part
past the time no better, and heard no one come near the place where he was, but
he imagined they came to him; and he gave himself over to discovery, when the
Jew feigning to look out some Clothes, threw him a Woman's Habit to disguise
himself in. I believe now that you would be glad to be rid of your fears you
are in for him: and to that purpose it will be enough to tell you, that
favored by that disguise he got out of the house: but his love not thus
satisfied, foryed him to another hazard again, to see Zenakhoub, before he left
her for ever; and, which I almost tremble at when I but think of it, made him
take the boldness to go in where she was, and to whisper something in the Jew's
Ear, as if he had been a Slave sent to her about some business. If Zenakhoub's
Mother had not been otherwise employed, or prepossessed with grief, or had
taken the least notice how the Jew was astonished, and grew pale at his
entrance, or how her Daughter changed Countenance, which on a sudden was all in
a flame, it had possibly put any other thoughts into her head than what she
feared, that this sudden change was a symptom of Zenakhoub's distemperature:
But she suspected nothing, and the sick Lady having called the Jew to her, as
if she desired some assistance from her, to help her to raise her head upon the
pillow; she commanded her immediately to carry away that rash man, to give some
ease to her Spirit tossed and perplexed betwixt Fear and Love. They departed
immediately, and Zenakhoub's Wound being more favorable than hurtful, served
only for a pretense to retard the Marriage.

But let us return to the Author of Bajazet, whose Work has occasioned the
recital of this Adventute. I have nothing to say to you of his Worth. It is so
Great, that there is no place left on Parnassus worthy to offer him. His
Friends would seat him between Sophocles and Euripides, in whose Works Diogenes
Laertius would make us believe Socrates had the greatest share in the sublimest
parts: The Rivals of this French Euripides or Socrates, would I doubt not be
willing to see him gone to those great Personages among the Greeks, though upon
condition that his memory were as glorious as theirs ever deserved to be.

Paris 9 January 1672.
Letter III.
I Cannot tell, Madam, whether my Letters have the good fortune to please you,
but I assure you, I am very diligent to inform my self of the most curious
Novelties, and most surprising Adventures; and I believe this wherewith I am
about to entertain you, will appear no less wonderful than the former. It
happened sometime since in one of the Provinces of this Kingdom, where it is
yet the whole subject of Discourse.

Celiantes a Person of Quality, handsome, witty, valiant, and who had given
Evidences of his Judgment and Valor in an Age when others seem but to peep
into the World, fell deeply in love with the young Lydiana. You may think now I
am going to paint her out like a Heroine in a Romance, and intend to tell you
she was the fairest Person in the World; but since I am to relate a true story,
I will leave the Curiosity of those pretty Imbellishments to the Ingenious
Inventers of Romances, wherewith the pleasant Wits of France have often
diverted the whole World. All that I can say for Lydiana's advantage, is, that
she had a well-shap'd Body, and had a great deal of Wit; and if she did not
pass for a Beauty, she must needs have some pleasing Features, which though all
the World could not find out, appeared so at least in the Eyes of her Lover, if
it be true that Proverbs never lie. Lydiana was of Quality, and had a great
Portion, and besides was to be Heiress to two of her Relations, who had the
repute to be the richest men of their Country. You know Madam, that there
cannot be much deceit; those that appear rich in the Country, are so indeed.
Their Wealth appears to the Eyes of all the World, and their Lands are a
substance not to be carried away in a night. Lydiana's great Riches, and the
hopes of those great Inheritances like to fall to her, gained her an incredible
number of Suitors of all Qualities, among whom Celiante appeared not the least
passionate. Since she was not fair, and had the wit to know she was not so, she
resolved to dispose her heart to him who mixed the least Interest and hopes of
Gain with his Love. This was a hard thing to find out. Men know so well how to
dissemble; and when there is Interest in the case, there are few but find
presently the way to become Hypocrites. Lydiana after having the best she could
examined them all, and tried them by a thousand cunning practices, believed
Celiantes the honestest man of them all; and judging him the most upright and
least covetous, thought she ought to dispose of her heart to him: He perceived
her inclination toward him, which made him press forward his love the more,
and he soon obtained what he wished; there can little resistance be found after
such Resolutions as Lydiana's. The Intelligence formed between them was soon
found out by the rest of the Suitors of this Ingenious Lady, and her Relations
were not long ignorant of it. The Choice of Lydiana's Heart agreed not with
Theirs, they had not taken such precaution in making it as she had done, but
the richest seemed to them most worthy to have her. I will not relate to you
the crosses these Lovers met with, nor what Lydiana suffered between Love and
her Friends; few Amorous Histories but will supply you with such Traverses. I
will be satisfied to tell you, that after many Disputes the prudent Lydiana
knew so well how to manage things with her Relations, that soon after they not
only yielded she should not marry whom they had first pitched upon, but
likewise consented she should espouse Celiantes. Nothing could be more happy
than the first years of their Marriage, they loved like Lovers; nor was there
ever seen a more perfect Union, which might happily have endured longer, if the
Eyes of the young Elisa had not come to disturb their Content and Quiet. Never
was there Woman more subtle, nor practiced more Arts and Devices to please.
She pleased indeed Celiantes unhappily for him, and knew how to allure him with
so much Cunning and Artifice, that he lost by little and little all the love he
had for his wife, he presently forgot his good Humor and Complaisance toward
her, from thence passed to Indifference, and his Indifference soon turned to
Neglect. Neither did mischiefs stop here, but as these Misses are not content
with men's hearts, but only subject them to draw in somewhat else; Celiantes
found himself insensibly engaged to make every day new Presents to Elisa, and
that cunning Whore had such sly contrivances to bring occasions about, that
they seemed as it were to present themselves. You may easily guess Lydiana bore
not very patiently both the loss of Celiantes heart, and the consumption of
their Estate. There were many storms about it, that made a thundering noise, but
Lydiana loving her Husband passionately, still appeased all these vehemencies
by a compliant submission. Till in the end things grew to that height of
distress, she could no longer forbear, but was forced loudly to complain; for
blows and ill usage followed his Indifference, Neglect, and waste of Estate.
The Clamor Lydiana made, gladded instead of afflicting Celiantes, he took
thence occasion to leave his Wife, and to go live with his Miss. Lydiana, who
now began to believe she had not so much love as formerly for her Husband,
because she had no reason to love him, was not sensible at once of all her
Grief, and all her Love. Nay, now she began to think she might come to hate
him, because she found her heart endeavoring to entertain a hatred of him: Yet
again she would have some returns of kindness which made her endure all the
most violent Torments of Jealousy, which at last threw her into so furious a
despair, that at length she determined to execute what I am about to tell you.
She feigned her self sick, and that she daily grew worse and worse, having
corrupted a Doctor to aver the same thing. She desired then to see her Husband,
as being unwilling to die till she were reconciled with him. He was sent for in
haste to the Country, where he lived with Elisa: His Interest made him come
with all speed and diligence, for he had yet some considerable things to hope
from his Wife, if he made his peace with her before she died. He was no sooner
arrived, but he begged her pardon, which she as soon granted him, at least in
appearence; and they seemed the best agreed people in the World. After the
second day she desired he would lie in her Chamber, and not at all leave her,
he yielded to her request, and a Bed was set up for him near to hers. Short
time after, she declared her self somewhat better, and that there was no
necessity for any other than her Husband to lie in the room, 'twas thought she
had something in private to say to him; so at last they consented, though with
some opposition, for fear she might be taken ill in the night. She seemed
extremely kind that evening to her Husband; but when he was fast asleep, she
rises and hides the Key of the Door, then places some Faggots in the middle of
the Chamber with the Tables and Chairs, and so sets fire to it in many places,
and to the Matresses of the two Beds. There was already a great flame, when
Celiantes awoke: he would have run straight to the door, but the smoke and fire
hindered his finding it; and if he had found it, it had been to small purpose.
You must die, said Lydiana, stopping him by the Arm; and though thou would
not live with me, I will let thee see I have love enough for thee to die with
thee. She added somewhat else, and he answered her; but those who came to help
them could neither hear what it was, nor prevent the fires consuming both of
them. Elisa was so penitent for having been the cause of so cruel an accident,
that she went into a Nunnery, but all her penitence for her Crimes will not
restore Life to these two unfortunate Persons, whom Love has made perish in
flames much fiercer than his own.

There is nothing talked of here but pleasure and divertisements, nor were ever
Balls or Music so much in the mode. The Commedians have lately acted here a
piece stuffed full of them, which is entitled The Marriage of Bacchus and
Ariana; the Songs took mightily, the Airs being composed by the famous Monsieur
de Moliere, whose abilities are every where known, and who has been for many
years employed to compose the Aires for the Kings Balads. He is the Author of
The loves of the Sun, which got so much fame the year last past, and which this
present Winter has been the business of the Theater; for almost two Months I
will say no more of his works; he is too much my friend, and therefore the
praises I give him, may perhaps be suspected.

After having undergone the troubles of a long Voyage, and suffered all those
inconveniences which the Sea oppresses them with, whose tempers cannot away
with it; Monsieur Curtin is at last happily arrived in Sweden. Though he be yet
but young, he manages all trusts imposed on him with the prudence and
discretion of the most ancient men, and that have been the longest verst in
imployes. And we must needs believe his merits to be great, if we judge of them
by the many Services, wherein the King has made use of him.

Monsieur the Duke D'Estrees, as intelligent in Affairs of Counsel, as of War,
parted some days since extraordinary Ambassador for Rome; he is Son to the
late Marshal D'Estrees, so famous for the War of the Princes of Italy, which
his discontents conceived against the Court of Rome made him stir up, and who
in many other Embasses had favorable successes.

Paris Jan. 16. 1672.
Letter IV.
THough there be nothing more ordinary then Compliment, nothing for the most
part is more troublesome and useless. I therefore entreat you Madam to excuse
them at the front of my Letters, and that I may immediately fall to the Story I
intend to relate, and take now one, which I Will assure you is very new.

One of those young people, who pretend to know all things, and yet do nothing,
of those able Coxcombs who spend most part of their lives in waiting for
imployes, having devoured all his income, which was not much, flattering
himself still with the hopes of a great fortune, at length finding himself
somewhat oppressed for want of means, believed, that he might more commodiously
wait for an employment, to raise him to the heights he dreamed of, if he
married, and eat up a Wives fortune, as he had done his own. His pretended
endowments soon made him find out a woman, and the mighty things he boasted
himself capable of, made it be thought, that if he could but one day get the
least employ in the Treasury, he might in a little time gain two or three
Millions of Estate. He wanted not famous examples of his prodigious fortunes,
to authorize his great hopes, and he made it evident, that all those who had
gained such great fortunes, were but Asles and Fops in Comparison of him. The
Parents of her he desired to marry, swallowed this Gudgeon, and believed, that
if one day he came into the management of business, he might give Commissions
to all their Family, and one of these Gentlemen fully relied upon it, for three
or four of his Children. And as many Nephews. There was likewise one of the
richest amongst them, who being to give some recompense to a servant had waited
on him for ten years, opened his Purse-strings, which he had already untyed,
and promised him a Commission of a hundred Crowns Rent. The man accepted the
Bargain, and fancyed to himself, that after that Commission, he should get
another; that soon after he should have his Coach, and possibly in a little
more time might buy some Marquisate; nay, he did not despair, but it might come
to a Duchy; upon these splendid hopes of the whole family of the future
Spouse, all whose Relations had their heads filled with Chimera's, the Marriage
was agreed upon, celebrated and consummated all at once; so earnest were these
imagining people at it, and so fearful least the main Engine of such great
fortunes should escape them, and their Family. There was nothing but Feasts and
Rejoycings succeeded the Marriage, at which nothing was talked of, but the
future greatness of the new Husband, two or three Months passed in this manner,
and no employments came to supply the expense. The Relations of the Wife
bestirred themselves mightily to get one for their new Kinsman; they employed
their Friends, but with all their solicitations they could get only a
Serving-man; which he refused with much disdain, in the mean time the Portion
he got with his wife wasted, and he became almost as beggarly as before; and
now his vexation was the more, because he had now a Wife to maintain, whose
humor is a little whorish, and who loved to live high. The Gallants came, and
it being now much to the purpose, were well received not by the Husband; for he
was naturally jealous; but they told him, That those that came thither were
persons of quality, and who might help him to an employment. Being in these
straits he was forced to make a virtue of necessity; having hopes to get a
Commission by their means; but though all these reasons made him suffer their
coming thither, he could not do it but with much perplexity, and his continual
presence, growing troublesome to them, there was one, who to get rid of him,
gave him an employment in the Country. He was dubious at first whether he
should accept it, not being willing to go from his Wife; but in the end he was
persuaded to part, the employment being considerable. They told him, Fortune
offered not her self every day, and that who once let her escape, did not
easily find her again. To it then he goes, but with much reluctance; so much he
feared his Wives growing more whorish in his absence; he was not deceived in
it, and had notice of it by one of those impertinent friends, who giving advice
to Husbands of what their Wives do, wrong them more then their Wives
themselves, though all they say of them be true. This poor Husband endured much
sorrow, with vexing that his Wife enjoyed more pleasure then he; he was many
times about to quit his employment, and come to be her Jailer; but having no
reasonable pretense, he saw well that his return would be to no other purpose
then to make his misfortunes more public. This made him change his
determinations, but as a jealous man continually meditating, it came one day
into his head, to find out a way that his Wife should no longer be so fair,
believing that with her beauty she would loose many of her lovers; and this was
the Stratagem he concluded of, he sent her a Packet by the Post, into which he
made up a very fine Box of Gold. This Box was filled with Gunpowder, and so
ordered, that when the Scrue was opened it should take fire by means of a Stone
plaplaced to that purpose. This present was delivered safe to the party to whom
it was designed; but it was given to her in his presence from whom her Husband
held his Commission, he thought it a Picture sent from some other Lover, and
earnestly snatches the Box, but his Jealous Curiosity was soon punished, for in
opening it, it wrought the same effect on him the Husband designed it should
have done on his Wife. This Adventure became a Town-talk. The Gallant believing
the Husband had sent the Box, and soon after took away his Commission, on a
false pretense of ill management. He returned to his Wife, where he and the
whole Family are expecting new Commissions, which may one day put them in a
condition to satisfy their mighty hopes.

Mounsieur the Marquess de Villars has made his Public Entry into Madrid with
a great deal of Magnificence: You know he is a very comely Gentleman,
excellently humoured, and of a tried Valor; and the choice made of him to be
Ambassador in Spain, where such delicacy of Judgment is required, is a certain
evidence of his Abilities.

Mounsieur de Pompone is lately returned from Sweden, and has already taken his
Oath as Secretary of State: His Worth is known to all the World, since it is
that has raised him to this Dignity. There is no person but is persuaded he
will behave himself worthy of the Choice made of him by the Greatest and Wisest
King of the World; and great things are expected from him. He writes with more
spirit and life than can be observed in any of the most studied Letters of our
Academians.

Letter V.
SInce I have told you in my last I would use no more Complements, but begin
all my Letters with the Stories I intend to relate; I will keep my word with
you, and begin.

An old covetous Fellow, who had yet no Children, and who was desperate fearful
of any expense, was almost ready to run mad, when his Wife told him she
believed she had conceived; he began to cast up in his Brain all that a Child
would cost him, till it came to be thirty years of Age, and framed so exact an
account of it, that he reckoned likewise the food they took in their Mothers
Bellies, alleging that Women with Child eat both for Themselves and their
Children: He added together all these sums, and then cast up how much they
would purchase, if he laid them out in Rents, and how much the Interest upon
Interest would produce. He found the total to amount so high, that he repented
a thousand and a thousand times the day that ever he was married, and made a
full resolution never to attempt getting any more Children, deeming it a
pleasure unbecoming a discreet and understanding man. Whilst he was making
these Accounts and these Reflections, his Wife perceived certainly she was with
Child, and no more doubt to be made of it; she told it to her griping Husband,
whose grief was twice as much as it had been before, and from that very minute
he began several Retrenchments in his House, that his Thrift might help bear
the charges of the coming Infant; but how gripple soever he were, he could save
little this way, since rather than a superfluity, there was already a want of
many necessary things. But if his torment were great, to see his Wife with
Child, it was doubled and redoubled, when about the sixth month she told him
that she believed she was with Child with two, and that many knowing Women
doubted it; he was then ready to hang himself; but one we call a Man-midwife, a
Friend of his, eased him of this vexation, by assuring him the contrary. Soon
after, scolding with his Wife, he told her 'twas convenient to consider which
would cost least, to bring up a Boy or a Girl; and after having well examined
the matter, and reckoned at their fingers ends the expense of one and the
other, they found that a Boy would cost least, because he might make his own
fortune; but the Father and the Mother must make out the Girls, by providing
her a portion. I will have you then said the Husband bring me a Boy. That is
neirher in your power nor mine, replied the Wife. It shall be as I tell you,
replied the Husband. It may be so, indeed, answered the Wife, if Nature has
thought good to make one. Let Nature have made one or no, cried the old Wreth
in wrath, I say you shall be brought to Bed of a Boy, or at least the Child you
bring forth shall appear to the eyes of the world whatever I will have it to
be: for if you be brought to bed of a Girl, we will say it is a Boy, and bring
it up under that habit. The Woman was forced to consent, and all the rest of
her time they fortified themselves in this Resolution. Her hour being come, she
was brought to bed of a Girl, and to make it be believed a Boy, they took those
courses they had before contrived. All that saw it were deceived, and when it
grew in years many young Maids fell in love with it. This young Beauty being
ill treated by her Father, and worse fed, resolved to leave the Covetous Miser,
and as soon as she found her self able to carry a Musket, enlisted her self
and came to the Army, where in the first Field she made her self be taken
notice of. All that saw her, took a liking to her, they could give no reason
for, and she had a kind of modest and obliging carriage, which hindered those
who were Enemies to Worth in all others, from envying her. She was always very
retired; and though she knew not her self what she was, she lived as if she
designed a concealment; and it succeeded so happily, that never any suspected
it. She was not yet grown to all the marks necessary to distinguish her: for
though she was pretty large, she was very young, and had strength enough to
undergo the toyls of War. In the first Garrison where she quartered, her
Landlords Daughter fell desperately in love with her, and fearing her self to
be already with Child by a Lover that was lately dead, and willing to hide her
shame by clapping up a Match with this Object of her New Love, she omitted
nothing might gain his good Will, doing a thousand obliging things for this
fair Soldier, to bring her design to effect: she followed him every where,
gave him meetings in an hundred different places, that all the World might take
notice of her love, and speak of it to her Father. Her plot took, for those who
spoke of it told him, That after so much talk of this her Passion, he would
never find any one would marry her, and therefore to salve his Reputation, he
must of force give her to him she loved so fervently. The Good Man was of their
opinion, and after having a little chid his Daughter, and given her some good
Lessons, he talked with her about marrying the young Soldier quartered with
him. It is to be observed that this Disguised Maid passed for a young Lad of a
good Family, and pretty rich, who was come to the Army without his Friends
Consent; and this was the chief Motive to make mine Host resolve to give him
his Daughter. I will not trouble you with all that passed till the wedding day,
but only bring this new-married Couple to Bed: There it is I believe you expect
them. The Bride's heart went pit-a-pat out of fear her Husband should discover
another had reaped those Favors should have been reserved for him: But that
fear soon vanished, when she perceived too clearly that he was in a Condition
to examine nothing; thus from one danger she apprehended, she fell into a
worse, from which she would soon have withdrawn her self, if she had not been
with Child, by discovering all. But however, she did nothing; and was so long
consulting with her self what to do, that her Great Belly appeared; and now she
thought it too late to speak: But unhappily for her, as she was in her Ninth
Month, and a bed with her pretended Husband, one of her Kinswomen came into
the Chamber while they were asleep, and putting her hand on the bed to wake her
Cousin, who stirred not at the noise she made coming in, she met with the
Breasts of the Maiden Husband, which lay uncovered, and presently it was known
she was a Woman, for the Kinswomans astonishment was so great, that she cried
our aloud what she had discovered. This is the original of that Adventure has
been of late so much talked of, and which has made so many ignorant people
publish, That one Maid got another with Child.

Mounsieur the Chancellor finding himself much afflicted with his Distemper,
has ordered his Children to return the Seals into his Majesty's hands, fearing
lest his Malady should hinder him from serving him with the same application he
had done for this thirty nine years, in which he had officiated in this
important Charge. Mounsieur the Duke of Coaslin carried word of it, and did it
in a way very satisfactory to his Majesty. I know not, Madam, whether you have
ever understood all the Worth of that Duke; his Valor is well known, and he
esteemed one of the best men in the world, and the most officious Friend,
earnest to do kindnesses, and joyful when he has done them. As for his internal
parts, the place he has in the Academy is a sufficient Testimony of them.

Paris 30 January 1672.
Letter VI.
I Am very doubtful Madam whether this Letter will have the good fortune to
please you. and I have a great deal of reason to doubt it, since instead of
finding as in the precedent, some divertizing Story, you will understand that
such is my grief for the death of the good Chancellor, that I am not in a
condition to relate Adventures. That great Chancellor is now no more, nor had
death so long spared him, but to make France more sensible of his loss. He was
a man of eminent knowledge, of admirable eloquence, and a Prudence often put to
the test in the Counsels of two of the greatest Kings in the world he was a
great Benefactor to learning, the Protector of all knowing men, and for a Crown
to all his glories, he was the strongest prop and buttress of the Church that
any age has known. Nor do I say this but upon the credit of many Prelates, who
publish it as a truth. Never did man better understand the Justice, Ordinances
and Laws of the Kingdom, nor appeared more to value able men of whatever
profession. He sought with much labor and diligence to understand what
belonged to his employment, or to those Counsels he was obliged to give in
affairs of State, often acknowledging the search he had made of persons who
might give him the least light, though he had much more understanding then
those he consulted with.

But if death has ravished from us one great Minister. The King has made
another by giving Mounsier de Louvoy the quality of Minister of State, he ows
this advancement only to his worth; for it is apparent, that his vigilance,
exactness and good conduct in all things depending on his ministry, have made
his Majesty discern in him the most accomplished policies, which obliged him to
make choice of him to assist in all Counsels in the quality of Minister of
State. Though he be yet very young, there shines in him all the prudence and
sagacity of a Counselor grown gray in affairs. All his actions are beautified
with an incorruptible fidelity, and an exemplary strictness, which may be
observed in his seventy toward his dependants, when they at any time faulter
in their duty, he is always ready to applaud and recompense good service, but
he is inexorable when men stray from their duty. The choice he makes of those
he puts into employments under him, justifies the good choice the King made
when he left things to her dispose, and daily intrusts him with affairs of most
concern both to the public, and to his own particular glory.

Death the day before yesterday snatched from us Madam the Princess of Conty,
she was as you very well know daughter of Count Martinozzi, and of a Sister of
the late Cardinal Mazarine. Though nature had given her a great portion of
beauty, her devotion made her neglect it, she lived with Mounsier the Prince of
Conty with that respect made her reguarded with much kindness and
consideration. Her great piety none are ignorant of, and her plentiful Alms
could not be hid from the world. Her care in bringing up her Children was
worthy so great a Princess, and the fruits of her endeavors may be seen in
those little Princes, in whom may be observed qualities above the usual reach
of such tender spirits.

Paris February 6. 1672.
Letter VII.
I Believe, Madam, fame has already given you an account, how since the death
of the late Lord Chancellor, the King would himself take the Charge of Keeper
of his Seals; but perhaps you have not yet heard, that the first day he took
that care upon him, he employed himself at it for near seven hours, and yet
that hindered him not from holding the same day two Counsels of more then three
hours and a half each. Never was Prince heard of, that took so much pains, or
labored so hard for the good of his Subjects, his Majesty has since named to
have care of the Seal with deliberative voice, six ordinary Counselors of
state, who are the Mesieurs D' Aligre, de Seve, Poncet, Boucherat, Pussort, and
Voisin; he has nominated likewise fix Masters of Requests, which are the
Messieurs Barretin le Boulanger de Haqueville, le Pelletier, de Faucon, de
Lamoignon, and Pellison. The Kings prudence may be judged of by the merit of
those he has named.

Monsieur D' Aligre is of Sixty Nine years of Age, and Son of a Chancellor, he
has been Fifty years in the Counsel, has passed through all Charges, and been a
long time Director of the Finances; his honesty and uprightness are known and
esteemed by all the world.

Monsieur de Seve has been Secretary of the Closet, Master of Requests, and
since Provost of the Merchants; he is at this present one of the Eldest
Counselors of State, and has ever been one of the most zealout Servants of his
King.

The many different Charges undergone by Monsieur Poncet, have got him a great
fame, and made his merits be acknowledged.

Monsieur Boucherat is well known by the great employments he has had, and the
many important Commissions he has always discharged to his Majesty's content,
particularly in Britany, where he has been often Commissioner of the States for
the King, he is a man of great Learning.

Monsieur Pussort is estemable for many things, and particularly for the
invention of new Laws and Ordinances, which may deliver the French from
oppression,

Monsieur Voisin has Signalized himself in many occasions, respecting his
Ministry, he has been Provost of the Merchants, where he deserved the place of
Ordinary of the Counsel, with which he was honored.

Monsieur Barretin is sometime since returned from the Super-intendence of
Poictou he is Master of the Requests, and President of the great Counsel, I
know, Madam, you are sensible of his worth, and therefore shall say no more of
it.

Monsieur le Boulange de Haqueville is a man whose uprightness is well known in
the Council, he has a great deal of wit, and makes himself be distinguished by
a particular way of reporting affairs.

Monsieur le Pelletier de la Houssaye is fearless, a good Judge, and who knows
how to value a good Cause.

Monsieur de Lamoignon is Son to Monsieur the premier President. The great
worth of his Father, and the care he had of his Childrens Education, would
sufficiently of themselves speak advantagiously of him, if he had not of
himself given particular Evidences of his merit. He has Signalized himself in
the Parliament, and continues to do so every day in the Council, thereupon his
Majesty has chosen him an Assistant of the Seal.

Monsieur Pellisson is known by all the world, his judgment and his uprightness
are indisputable, and though he had every where left Evidences of them, the
Favors he continually is receiving from the King, would be an assured
Testimony for him.

The Young Marchioness, whom you know very well, who began to play so well on
the Lute, is fallen into despair some days since. Monsieur Gaultier, who
taught her, had assured her she should in a little time play as well as Madam
Moiselle de Lenclos. 'Twas a bold word that; but he was one might give
decisions in those sort of Affairs. Those were the last words that great Master
spoke about playing on the Lute; For at his going from this young Marchioness,
he fell sick of a distemper, which he is since dead of. She no sooner heard the
News; but resolving her Lute should not survive so great a Master, she broke it
all in pieces, and has determined never to play more. I will not discant on
this action, but leave you to judge of it. But if the death of Monsieur
Gualtier hinders her from ever playing on the Lute, so well as Madam de
Lenclos, she may yet endeavor to resemble her in her wit and judgment, with
which you know that excellent person is infinitely well stored.

Paris February 13, 1672.
Letter VIII.
I Cannot tell, Madam, whether you may have yet heard of any Adventure happened
sometime since in this City, and which has been occasion of much pleasant
discourse this Carnaval in all the Balls at Paris.

A young married man, being one afternoon with some of his Friends, told them,
that that Evening he had a Meeting at his house, and that he gave a Ball to a
Sister of his Wives, that sojourned with her. One of the most pleasant fellows
of the Company persuaded to go in Masquarade, and told the young married man,
His pleasure would be much the greater, if he came along with them in a
disguise. He consented, and they presently sent for Habits of Masquerade. The
Hour of the Ball being come, they all went thither, and their Gentee carriage
made many Conquests. The young Husband made one, which in the end pleased him
not at all; for his Wife fell in love with him without knowing him, she staid
not long before she gave him signs of it, tenderly sweezing his hand, and he
answered his kindness in the most loving manner he could; for the Adventure had
a little Chilled his Blood, and never was man so vexed to be taken for another;
yet he was resolved to see how far the business would go; but he found all
things so well disposed, that it was no mighty task to make himself happy. I
mean happy in quality of Gallant, for he was not so as Husband. His wife, who
had doubtless heard some good Gossips say, That a favorable occasion must
never be lost; For it is a hard matter to find again those we let escape,
thought best to make use of this opportunity which the Ball presented; and
since the confusion of so many people as were there gave her the means of
stealing safely from them, without being perceived; she thought it a duty to
love, and nature to slip aside with her new Gallant, and 'twas no sooner
thought then done. She led him up a private pair of Stairs into a Chamber,
where they could not be surprised. I will not tell you all that passed there;
but the Lady was very well contented; yet it somewhat troubled her, that he
would not speak to her, and that for fear to be known he had put out the light
before he unmatched himself. She asked him many times the reason of it. He
would not then answer her; but as soon as he had proceeded far enough to
convince her of disloyalty, he broke silence, and began to reproach her with her
falseness. She was so much the more bold to answer him, because there was no
light to discover any change of Countenance, and having thereby time to recover
from any surprise. She told him she knew him as soon as he came into the house,
and that she only contrived this to laugh a little with him: He was not at all
satisfied with these, but would, and will pass for what other men are so afraid
of being accounted; and though it were done by himself, yet he believed himself
as substantial a Cuckold as any man in the world could make him. He would never
see his Wife from that time, and designs to sue out a separation from her. I
leave you to judge whether he or I have reason; and pass to other News.

The King willing to acknowledge the merits of Monsieur Pauchau, and recompense
his services, gave him some days past a Commission to be one of the Masters of
acccounts, and joined a considerable sum to that gift; his Majesty likewise let
him know, that he should attend to the same services under Monsieur Pompone, he
had formerly done under Monsieur de Lion.

The Messieurs de Vendosme are lately returned from Italy, where they have
gained repute in all places where they have passed. The vivacity of their
Spirits is a thing incredible, and and they compose Verses with so much
smoothness, as would make great Authors jealous if their quality would admit
them to do it often. Monsieur the Cardinal Patron, caused to be set up for them
the representation of an Opera, to give them some divertisement. Judge by that,
Madam, what considerable things these Opera's are, when persons of such high
quality are concerned in them, and honor them with their presence.

Monsieur de Camus has bestowed on him by the King the Charge of Premier
President of the Court of Aids, his merit must needs be extraordinary, since
he was preferred before so many deserving persons, and who had the same
pretensions. It is he, who was formerly Proctor General of the same Chamber.

Paris February 20, 1672.
Letter IX.
MAdam, I am afraid that at opening this Letter, finding it so short you will
think me Idle: but pray consider that I cannot be so in any thing relates to
you, but throw all the fault on this Weeks barrenness of News.

Mounsieur Despincha Marquess of Ternes, of one of the best Families of
Auvergne, Lieutenant General of the Kings Naval Forces and Galleys of France,
and who had served under three Kings with much Zeal, Fidelity, and Glory, died
some days since: His long life may teach those who are fearful of the Sea-Air,
that one may live as long there as on Land.

Mounsieur the Cavalier D' Arquien is received in reversion to the Charge of
Captain Colonel of one hundred Swissers of the Gardes du Corpse of Mounsieur: He
is remarkable for his pleasant Countenance, and handsome Garb; which often
stretches to Magnificence. He holds one of the first degrees among those who
are accounted handsome men at Court.

Paris 27. Febr. 1672.
Letter X.
I Expect one of my Friends to come and give me an account of an Adventure
newly happened, which I design to communicate to you: But lest the Post-hour
should come too quick upon me, I hope Madam, you will pardon me, if at this
time I begin my Letter with the Weeks News.

Monsieur de la Mothe Houdancour died some days since at the age of fourscore
years, he had signalized himself at the Siege of Rochel and at that of
Montmelian. The several Employments and Governments that he had, were the
justest Evidences of his Deservings.

Monsieur de Toulouse, Great Almoner to the Queen, and of one of the most
Illustrious Families of Tuscany, and which has produced many Cardinals, after
having been Ambassador for the King in Venice and Poland (where he deserved
the Nomination of that Crown for a Cardinals Cap) and after Ambassador in
Spain, and President of the Estates in Languedoc, where serving the King very
beneficially, he knew likewise how to please and gain the love of all the
Orders, is at length honored with the Eminent Dignity of Cardinal, and his
Holiness preferred him before many others upon the Kings Recommendation, who
strengthened the Nomination of Poland.

I will make you no long discourse of the death of Madam; you cannot but know
it, and fame flies quick with misadventures that befall Crowned Heads. Yet it
may be she may not have told you that that young Princess knew the King even in
the greatest distraction of her distemper, and even then when she knew no other
person. She was carried to S. Denis with all the Pomp due to her Quality, and
Monsieur the Cardinal of Bovillon made an Oration which drew the admiration of
all the Assembly; You know that he joins to his Great Birth a Capacity above
his Age, and a Prudence makes him be looked on with wonder by all that know him.

The Ariana of Monsieur Corneille the younger, which has been so long expected,
appeared on the Stage on Friday last; there was never any thing writ more
feelingly; and that Princess expresses her self in Conceptions so soft and new,
that it is not to be imagined any thing can be done better in that way: And to
say all in a word, the Excellencies of Bajazet have not hindered it, Admirers to
find some in this Piece, and to see it more than once.

Paris March 5. 1672.
Letter XI.
I Believe, Madam, what I am about to write you of Monsieur Le -- whom you know
very well, and better perhaps than I do, will gain the Credit with you to be
thought a pleasant Adventure; and that the reading it will contribute no less
to your advertisement, than that of the best contrived Story imaginable which
is not so true nor so new. You know, Madam, that that small Friend of ours,
(whom I will now call Cleantes) could never be persuaded to declare his Choice
either of the Church, the Long Robe, or the Sword: for sometimes he would by
all means be an Abbot; and the next morning, quitting that Resolution, he would
needs be a Counselor; and within a minute or two after, nothing would serve
his turn but to be a Soldier. His Relations and Friends having at last pressed
him to determine upon something, and having been somewhat severe upon him for
his Irresolution, he promised them he would very suddenly declare his Choice,
and that on the morrow he would advise what course was best. You will never,
Madam, be able to imagine of whom he took Counsel, and what he did to put
himself into a Condition to receive it. He borrowed a Suit of Arms, and all the
Habiliments of War: He sent to a Counselor who was a Friend of his, for a
Lawyers Gown, and he entreated an Abbot that was of his Acquaintance to lend
him only for one Afternoon his Surplice and his Rochet. All this Harness he
caused to be carried into his Closet, where he had four great Looking-glasses.
In short, being there alone, and having shut to the Door, he arms himself
Cap-a-pe, puts the pot upon his head, takes the Sword and Pistol into his hand,
consults his four Looking-glasses, struts in a warlike manner half a dozen
turns up and down his Closet, furiously assails the figures in the Tapistry,
and finds in himself Courage, Strength, and Resolution enough to go to the
Army. He therefore examines all the Advantages of that Profession, and the
fortunes that he might rise to: Such and such, said he within himself, have had
such Commands: Such have been made Marshals of France at such an Age; such have
made their Actions the talk of the World, and their names have served to
lengthen out Gazetts, they are gazed at wherever they go, and marked out with
the finger for Brave Men; None dare speak almost to them, but their Reputation
makes them every where be dreaded. After having run over these fancies in his
brain, he began to make reflections on the pleasures he should enjoy upon his
Return from a Campaign to appear with all the Equipage of a Marquess; for he
concluded that gay and fine people made many more conquests than others: he
believed he saw already a great Plume wagging in his Hat, and his Coat
glittering all over with Embroydery, that it out-vy'd the Sun, wherever he
went; he fancied all Eyes followed him, and he could not doubt but his manly
presence supported and set off with this Equipage of a Marquess, and of a
Marquess that was come from the Army, must captive the stubbornest hearts, and
make the Ladies fall flat before him. These magnanimous thoughts stirred up
afresh his Courage in the Closet, and he summoned all his Courage together, and
redoubled his blows against a Squadron of Horse that was in the Tapistry; But,
O dire mischance! blinded with too furious a height of Courage, he
unfortunately mist the Hangings, and his Sword lighting upon one of the
Looking-glasses broke it all in pieces; he presently throws down his Arms with
a resolution never to handle them more: He believed now he should be
unfortunate in the Army, that he should certainly be slain, and the broken
Looking-glass was an infallible presage of it. Well then, Arms laid aside, he
takes up the Gown, and clothes himself like a Counselor, putting on a little
Minikin Ruff, and a short white Perriwig: He consults with remaining
Looking-glasses, and thinks this Habit became him mighty prettily, and begins
to feel his Spirits exalted that way: So he sets himself to examine the
Advantages of this Profession, which he finds very considerable. All People
that have Courage, said he within himself, do not come to be Marshals of
France, the number would then be too great, and one must have exposed ones life
a thousand times before one can justly pretend to that Dignity. This thought
made him frown and grow pale at once; he found a Counselors condition much
better and securer; and in time, thinks he, I may come to be a Judge, without
running any hazard of my Life. He proposes to himself a thousand Pleasures and
Delights before it came to that; Fancies to himself an Antichamber, and all
the Stairs leading up to it full of Clients ready to cast themselves on their
Knees before him, and calling him, My Lord. He smirks and smiles, imagining he
sees among them a great many pretty Women, and these thoughts egg on others
which fill his whole Brainpan full of a thousand ravishing Conceptions. Here
therefore he resolves to fix his Standard, and to become a Counselor; but yet
he will first put on the Rochet to see how it becomes him. And now he admires
his incomparable Gravity, and being mightily taken with himself, it comes into
his head, that he might one day arrive to be a Cardinal: O then! how should he
look in a Scarlet Robe! A Counselor now seems to him but a Coxcomb, in
comparison of a Cardinal: No, no, said he within himself, I am not of the
humor to undergo the toyls and labor which a man of the Long Robe must submit
to; what a thousand troubles do continually haunt him, after having spent a
whole evening in reading over Breviates, and perhaps the best part of the
Night, he must be rouzed by four or five a Clock in the morning, with bawling
and crying, Good Sir, Remember my cause; Pray Sir, Remember my cause; and this
din continues all the while he is within doors, nor scapes he when he gets out,
but at every corner some are watching to catch him, and ring their cause in his
ears. If I think to go eat or drink with my Friends, they themselves grow my
Tormentors, and are recommending one Cause or another; or if I go to court my
Mistress, and take an hours divertisement with her, she is worse than all the
rest; and being gained by the almighty power of Presents, I must not be
admitted to the touch of her finger without the extracting some promise from
me, and if I promise her, I must keep my word, and then ten to one fall into
injustice. No, no, I will not be a Counselor, it is too weighty a Charge; it is
better being an Abbot, they live as they please: They -- He was about to
enlarge himself upon the Advantages of this Profession, when a beautiful young
person whom he loved, and was designed to be married too as soon as he was
settled, entered the Closet together with her Mother. He believed he had shut
the door very securely; but alas, he had left the Key in it, his Brain was so
overwhelmed with Imaginations and Whimseys concerning the Choice he was to
make. He could not be more surprised to see them come in, than the Ladies were
to see him in that posture. They asked him what was the meaning of his being
habited in that manner? He told them he had determined to become a Churchman,
and had put on the Rochet to see how the Habit agreed with him: He was hardly
to be known, for he had put off his Perruque, his Hair reached but to his Ears,
and the square Cap he had put on, almost covered them, so that he looked mighty
ridiculously to the Ladies in that disguise. They asked him again and again
whether he would be steadfast in his Resolution to become a Churchman? He told
them, Yes, and that they could not justly complain of him if he took that
Course; for if he deserted his Mistress, 'twas for God alone; and that since he
left her not for any other beauty, they ought not to be angry with him, nor
could not accuse him of Inconstancy. They told him they believed they should be
guilty of a great crime, if they should endeavor by any considerations to
divert him from so pious a design; and soon after left him, without seeming
either glad or sorrowful at the accident. The Mother who knew very well, and
had seen many evidences of his natural Inconstancy of Mind, was glad to be so
rid of him. She had another Match ready for her Daughter, and that fair Maid
had some inclination for him she designed her; so that things were easily
concluded. The pretended Abbot heard of it, and was ready to run mad; he comes
and throws himself at his Mistresses feet, protests, That to enjoy her he would
renounce all the Abbeys in the world, and would embrace whatever profession she
liked best. But it was now too late, and things were too far gone, which did so
much afflict him, that he is since turned Monk. I know not how long his unquiet
and irresolute Spirit will suffer him to stay in the Convent; but I believe to
any one of his humor, confinement will be very tedious and irksome. Few people
know this Adventure, and I am confident, Madam, you will find it very
extraordinary; and though you may have some commiseration for our friends
misfortune; yet you cannot at the same time forbear laughing at his follies.

Never did one year produce so many excellent pieces for the Theater, and the
famous Moliere has not deceived us in the hopes he inspired almost four years
ago, that there should be one day represented at the Place Royal a Comical
piece after his own Mode, which should be absolutely accomplished. We are
excellently divertized sometimes by those Pretieuses or Femmes Scavantes (wise
women) sometimes by the pleasant railleries of a certain Henrietta, and then by
the ridiculous conceits of a Fantastic, who believes all the world with him,
and would persuade others so too; I omit speaking of the Character of a Father,
who would make us believe, that is Master of his house, and braves it nobly
when he is alone; but is as quiet as a Lamb if his Wife but appear. I say
little likewise of the humor of Monsieur Trissotin, who brimful of
understanding, and puffed up with the glory he believes he has deserved,
appears so full of confidence in himself, that he looks upon all Mankind
besides as contemptible. The ridiculous opinion which a Mother spoiled with
reading, seems to have conceived for this Mounsier Trissotin is no less
pleasant, and this humor as violent as that of the Father in Tartuffe, would
last for ever, if by the ingenious Artifice of the false news of a Cause lost,
and of a Bankrout (which is an invention not at all inferior to that of the
Buffoon in the impostor) a Brother, who though but young, appears a man of
exquisite understanding, did not break it off by laying open the whole piece,
There is in the third Act a quarrel between Monsieur Trissotin, and another
wise man very divertising, and at last there is the return of a certain
Kitching Maid, called Martina who makes the whole Audience laugh with an
infinite number of Jolly things, which she says in her Gibbrish, to prove,
That men should have the preference of women. This is a most confused account
of the most considerable parts of this Comedy, which has got the vogue of all
Paris. There are throughout the whole a thousand wittly quirks, many happy
expressions, and new and bold ways of speaking, the invention of which can
never enough be praised, and is impossible to be imitated. Many people have
made different applications of persons in this Comedy, and a quarrel the Author
had about eight years ago with a learned man, whom they think represented by
Trissotin has given occasion to the public talk; but Monsieur Moliere is
sufficiently justified in that by a speech he made publicly two days before
the first representation of his piece; nor ought such a pretended Censure of
this ingenious Comedy give him any trouble, if he be as wise, and as able a
man, as it is said he is; since 'twill only make his merit shine the brighter,
and stir up in people a desire to know him, read his writings, and hear his
Sermons. Aristophanes blemished not the reputation of Socrates, by playing upon
him in his Faries; nor was that great Philosophers esteem at all lessened in
Greece. But to be the better Judges of the Comedy I have been speaking of, I
would advise all the world to see it, and to divertize themselves, without
examining things at Random, or listening to the Critical humor of most people,
who think it a monstrous witty thing to find fault.

Paris March 12. 1672.
Letter XII.
THe Arch Bishop of Paris, director of the French Academy went with them some
days past to Versailles to return the King thanks for the Honor he had done
to that Illustrious and Learned Society, to take upon himself the place of
their Protector in the room of the dead Chancellor. He made his Compliment to
the King after his ordinary rate; that is, with a great deal of Wit and
Eloquence. You know well, that with the comeliness of his person, which pleases
at first sight, he has a most delightful way of utterance, and that never
person brought forth words with so much ease, aptness, and delicacy; besides he
is endowed with all the knowledge of the most accomplished Doctors, which he
gives Evidence off on all occasions; but I undertake not to write hi^
Panegerick, leaving it to them design his History.

Mounsieur D'Angeau, Governor of Anjou, and sometime Camp-master of the
Regiment du Roy, and designed Ambassador for Sweden, who is likewise of this
Academy, gave a Magnificent treat to this Prelate, with all the Academians of
his confraternity, Mounsieur de Corin was not of their number, for fear, as
it is said, least he should lay hold on the occasion, to complain to the King of
the Comedy it is pretended Mounsieur de Moliere has made against him; but it is
not to be believed, that a man, who often converses with the chief persons of
Court, and whom Madammoiselle honors with the name of Friend, can be the
Object of so bloody a Satyr. The resemblance they attribute to him, agrees not
with a man, who has published works with an approbation as general, as that of
his paraphrase on the Song of Songs. I speak not of his works of Gallantry, of
which there are many Editions, those are Plays he divertized himself with,
before he made profession; which since his first embracing it, he has ever held
to the same Austerity he now maintains it with.

There was in this Assembly Mounsieur Quinault, so well known for his smooth
and soft Verses; Mounsieur Desmarests so famous for a great number of
extraordinary works, which at once set forth both the height of Wit, and depth
of Knowledge. The Famous Mounsieur Corneille the Elder, was here too. I can say
nothing of him, which will not be beneath him; he is the only man whose works
may be praised without seeing them, and from whom notwithstanding his great Age
we may yet expect accomplished things, as will doubtless, be his last Tragedy,
which will appear next Winter under the name of Pulcheria, and which cannot
fail pleasing of those, who are in their right Senses, as it has already
pleased all have had the happiness to read it. There were likewise in this
Illustrious Company the two Abbeyes Tallemont, the one chief Almoner to Madam,
whose merit is indisputable, and who with so much success and, and so much
benefit to the public, made that excellent Translation of the Lives of
Plutarch. The other in a thousand occasions has showed his ingenuity, and made
himself be admired, as well for his pleasant and witty Compositions, and by hi^
Sermons, which declare his Eloquence and Learning. I had forgot Mounsieur
L'Abbot Jestu, whose Sermons charmed the whole Court, and whose soft and Divine
Poems give him the preference before all undertake those ways of writing, from
whom we might expect many admirable things, did not a distemper of ascending
vapors hinder his doing any thing. I cannot forget Mounsieur the Duke
D'Anguien, whose exquisite Gallanteries, Frolicksome and Gallant Verses, and
high feats of Arms, are unknown to no person, who captives all that know him,
by an obliging Civility, and by the kindnesses he is ready to do for all the
world upon all occasions. There are many others very considerable for their
Worth and Endowments, whose names I cannot now remember.

Paris 19. March.
Letter XIII.
I Now send you, Madam, what you were pleased to let me know was much desired
in your Province; and what you have often wished for, to communicate to some
Gentlemen your Friends: for, for the Ladies, I believe they had rather
understand the estate of those hearts that sigh for them, than that of the
KING'^ Forces.

An Account of all the Forces, Foot and Horse, which are in the Kings Service,
according to the Establishment concluded on for their Subsistence.
Regiments of French Foot, containing 53 Men in a Company, comprising the
Officers.
Regiments Names. Number of Companies. Picardy. 70 Champaigne. 70 Navarre. 70
Piedmont. 70 Normandy. 70 La Marine. 70 La Marine. 32 Castelnau. 33 Avergne. 33
De Sault. 33 Bandeville. 16 Regiment du Roy. 70 Regiment Royal. 70 Regiment
d'Anjou. 70 Praslin. 18 Lyonnois. 35 Dauphin. 70 Cursol. 17 Montaigu. 16
Turenne. 33 La Motte. 17 Dampierre. 16 Lovigny. 18 Grance. 16 La Reyne. 70
Montperat. 16 Les Vaisseaux. 70 Orleans. 33 Artois. 33 Bretaigne. 16 Carignan.
16 Chasteaneuf. 16 Sourches. 18 Vendosm. 16 La Ferte. 18 Conty. 16 La Fere. 16
Conde. 17 Anguien. 17 Jonzai. 18 Monperoux. 16 Bovillon. 16 Burgogne. 33 La
Marine Noveau. 20 Fusilliers du Roy. 24

In all 46 Regiments, containing 1569 Companies of Foot, of 53 men to the
Company, amount in all to -- 83157 men.

Foreign Regiments of Foot.
Alsatia, Twelve Companies, of 182 men, each, make 2184 men. English and
Scotch, Twenty Companies, of 123 men each, 2460 Roussillon, Twenty Companies of
the same, 2460 Furstenburgh, Twelve Companies, of 182 men each, 2184 Irish,
Twelve Companies, of 104 men each, 1248 Another Irish, Sixteen Companies, of
104 men each: 1664 Royal Italian, Twenty seven Companies, of 104 men each, 2808
Royal English, Eight Companies, of 103 men each, 824 Stoop Swiss, Twelve
Companies, 200 men each, 2400 Erlac Swiss the same, 2400 Festa Swiss the same,
2400 Salis Swiss the same, 2400 English, Eight Companies, 103 men each, 824
Fifty Unregimented Companies, containing 200 men each, 10000 The whole Number
of thirteen Foreign Regiments, and fifty Unregimented Companies of diverse
Nations, amounts unto 36256 men.
Gend'armes light Horse, and Musketeers on Horseback.
Four Companies of Guards du Corpse. 1039 men Scotch Company of Gend'armes. 105
men Two Companies of Musketeers on Horseback, making 554 men English Company
of Gend'armes. 105 men English Company of Light Horse. 110 men The Queens
Gend'armes. 154 The Dauphins Gend'armes. 209 The Dauphins Light Horse. 108
Gend'armes d' Anjou. 105 Gend'arms d'Orleans. 154 Orleans Light Horse. 157
Total of the Companies of Gend'armes, Light Horse, and Musketeers on
Horseback above specified. 2800 men.


Light Horse, of which the Regiments are of six Troops, and 54 men each.
Colonel General of the said Cavallry Camp-master General of the said Cavalry.
Commissary General of the said Cavalry. Royal du Roy. Two Foreign Regiments.
Cravates du Roy. La Regne. Dauphin. Orleans. Conde. Anguien. Rouvray. Gassion.
Des Forneaux. Joyeuse. Bonaveze. Fourrilles. Resnel. Cabonet. Montauban.
Pillois. Coulange. Merlin. St. Loupe Cachan. St. Aoust. Derdelin. Douget.
Duconde. Nogent. Tillader. Sourdis. Hislez. Bligny. La Fabliere. Lambert.
Caberel. Humieres. Proville. Bartillac. Beaupre. Paulmy. Beaufort. Carendo.
Sanzay. Chenuet. Novart. Sommieure. Hanjou.
In all 52 Regiments of six Troops each, and of 54 men each Troop, make 324 men
in a Regiment, in all 16848 men.

Other Regiments of Horse, of three Troops each, and fifty four men in a Troop.
Coislin. Estrades. Bethune. Montgeorge Busenval. Basleroy. Thrange.
Langueville Ragny. Bouillon. Auvergne. Grignan. Laurieres. Granville. Duroures
Mere. Thury. Valavoire. Arnolfiny. Harcourt. Armagnac. St. Aignan.
In all 66 Troops of the 22 Regiments above, at 54 men to a Troop, amounts to
3564 men.

Foreign Light Horse.
The Prince of Piemont Ten Troops, some of 64 and others of 54 men. 556
Konesmark, 24 Troops of 54 men each. 1296 English Ten Troops, of 54 men. 540
Schomberg 3 Troops of 54. 162 Rose 3 Troops the same. 162 Aousset 3 Troops. 162
All the above Foreign Cavalry. 3196 men.
Two Regiments of Dragoons.
Colonel General of the Dragoons Six Troops, 104 men each. 624 Dragoons du
Roy, 6 Troops, 54 men each. 324 Total of the Dragoons, 948
Forces belonging to the Kings House.
French Regiment of Guards, 30 Companies 100 men each. 3000 Swiss Regiment of
Guardes, Ten Companies 200 men each, 2000 Gend'armes du Roy, 200 Light Horse of
the Guard, 200 Total 5400 men
The Forty six Regiments of French Foot in this Establishment, amount to 83697
men. Thirteen Regiments of Foreign Foot amount 36256; to which adding the Swiss
Regiments of Guards of 2000 men, and the fifty loose Companies of several
Nations, 41318 men. The Sixteen Companies of Gend'armes, 2608 men. The Fifty
two Regiments of French Horse, 16848 men Twenty two other Regiments of French
Horse, 3564 men. Twelve other Regiments of French Horse, 648 men Regiments of
Foreign Horse, 3096 Kings Gend'armes, 200 Kings Light Horse, 200 Total of the
Infantry and Cavalry, 155687 men
Since this Establishment was settled, the King in February las^ 1672. gave
Commissions for raising Three Hundred Companies of Foot, making Fifteen
thousand men, to incorporate with the old Bodies, and make them 80 Companies
each, and six score Troops of Horse to consist of 6000 men, in all (...) 21000.

Which added to 155687,

Makes 176687 men in all.

Paris 26 March, 1672.
Letter XIV.
I Have nothing of News Madam, to communicate this Week, unless it be the Kings
Journey to Versailles. I know you have seen that place, and that you have read
the excellent description given of it by Mademoiselle de Scudery; but the
Versailles you have seen, and that which she has writ of are much different
from that which now is; and the King never is a Month away from thence, but he
finds something new, and the place appears changed, by reason of the beauties
incessantly added. The Grotto has been lately imbelished with many incomparable
Figures, they have placed there a great Sun; with a many Nymphs abour him,
Crowning him, and washing his feet and his hands. This wonderful piece (the
largest yet there) is the Workmanship of Messieurs Gerardon, and Renaudin: In
two niches which are of the side of it, are placed four Horses of the Sun,
which seem to breath forth fire, and look as if they were taking their
Carriere, but are stopped by the powerful Tritons that withhold them. Monsieur
Guerin made one half of this work, and Messieurs Gaspard, and Baltazard the
other. There are likewise placed in this Grotto many other curious Figures of
Monsieur Battista a very famous Artist, from whence it appears, that France
does produce men great in these works, as well as Italy. I should never have
done, should I speak of all the wonders the Waters produce in that delicious
Paradise. The Sieur Denis brings it thither by wonderful Pumps and Aquaducts,
and Monsieur Faucine does with it things surpassing imagination, Witness the
Marish, the Tree, and the Mount of Water, not to forget the Theater, where the
changes of the Scenes of Water are as quick and fast as in the other, where the
Machines are the thickest; but one would think there should want water for all
these things, and so there must, but for the great care of those that bring it
to that place; for there are are very large Terrasses excellently Wrought and
Imbelished, under which are Cisterns of Water. The Miracles done by Monsieur
Nautre in these Magnificent Gardens are no less admirable. The great quantities
of Orange Trees Planted in the ground, may be a Testimony of it, as well as
those great Trees transplanted to enlarge the great Walk, a thing never before
seen. There are yet a thousand things might be said of this Castle, which
surpasses the Palace of Armida. I might speak of the Buildings, and those who
are the Architects; but that would be too long a Story, and therefore had
better put it off to another time, or rather till they be finished.

Paris April 2. 1672.
Letter XV.
I Know not, Madam, whether the News I have sent you since the Month of January
has satisfied your Curiosity. I am of the opinion, that what I have hitherto
done, has only showed my obedience in punctually writing you; but I hope in
time to send you more pleasing and plentiful news.

Monsieur the Cardinal de Bonzy received this week the Cap from the Kings
hands, in the presence of the Cardinals de Retz, Bovillon, and Maldoching. I
have already writ you something of Cardinal Bovillon, and you are not ignorant
of the great merit of Cardinal de Retz, and that both his wit and his
misfortunes have made him equally famous as well as his fidelity to his
Friends; and you know likewise, that his Justice and Generosity, of which every
one is a partaker, who comes within the reach of his kindness, make him no less
admired. All men seemed astonished to see at this Ceremony Monsieur Priam,
formerly President at Mantoua, who had seen the former Cardinal of Bonzy, great
Uncle to this man, and Grand Almoner to Mary de Medicis, receive the Cap from
the hands of Henry the fourth.

The Duke de Chaune, famous for his Embassis to Rome, as likewise for the good
service he has done the King in the States of Britain, of which he is
Governor; some days since presented the Deduties of that Province to his
Majesty.

The Duke of Bethane, so well known under the Title of Count de Charost, whose
services, fidelity and acknowledgements to his Benefactors makes as esteemable
as his Illustrious birth, which he derives from the ancient Count of Bethune
has taken his Oath between the Kings hands for the charge of Lieutenant General
of Picardy, in Exchange of that of Captain of the Guard du Corpse, which is
given to the Duke de Duras. You know Madam this Duke is one of the most ancient
Houses in France that has a vast wit, that he has in all Armies where he has
served, given approved marks of Valor and Conduct, and gained the esteem of a
very great Captain.

You may have heard e're this of the Death of the Duchess Dowager of Orleans,
her Age, her Family, and her Christian Virtues are all so well known to you,
that I need not enlarge my self on that point.

Paris April 9. 1672.
Letter XVI.
SInce it is your desire, Madam, after having heard something concerning the
French Academy, that I should likewise write you something concerning that of
the Abbot of Aubignac, of which, as you say, you have only heard some confused
speeches. I will tell you, that it is called l' Academie des belles Lettres,
and that its institution was for examining works of Eloquence and Poesy. The
first day of every Month a discourse was held of the several Conditions of man,
in which Eloquence was held necessary. The holding the first discourse fell to
Monsieur Blondeau, Advocate in Parliament, he held it on the Eloquence of the
Bar, and acquitted himself very well in the great Hall of the Hostel de
Matignon, before an Assembly composed of many persons of quality, both of the
one and the other Sex. Monsieur the Marquis de Villains gained applause the
Month following on Military Eloquence. The impression this discourse made is a
sign of its Excellence; and therefore I Will say no more, but pass to the third,
which fell upon Monsieur the Abbot of St. Germain. The two former having made
discourse; with regard to their profession, this illustrious Abbot would make
his on the Eloquence of the Pulpit, and had great success in it, to the
wonderful satisfaction of the whole Assembly. Monsieur Perachon gained credit
the Month following, and the other Academians addicted themselves from Month to
Month to give Evidences of their Wit and Learning. At the end of these
Discourses they read some works of Poesy. composed by some of the Gentlemen of
the Academy, and these are the names of the Composers.

Monsieur the Abbot of Aubignac, director Monsieur de Vaumorieres Subdirector.
Monsieur Gueret Secretary of the Academy The late Marquis de Chatelet. Monsieur
the Marquis de Villains. Monsieur the Marquis d' Arbaux. Monsieur Petit,
Director after the Abbot d' Aubignac. Monsieur Perachon Advocate in Parliament.
Monsieur The Abbot of Vilars. Monsieur the Abbot of Villeserain, at present
Bishop of Senes, Director after Monsieur Petit. The late Abbot of Ganaret.
Monsieur de La^nay, Monsieur Care Advocate in Parliament. Monsieur Richelet.
Monsieur de Perier. The late Monsieur de Baurin Advocate in the Counsel.
Monsieur Barallis Physician. Monsieur the Abbot of St. Germain.
The illustrious Academy has been broke off since the Abbot of Villeserain was
made Bishop of Senes, there was a design sometime before to bring women in, and
Madam de Villedieu was proposed, whose works were grown so famous; they talked
likewise of Madam the Marchioness of Guiberminy, Daughter of Monsieur the
Marquis of Villains, who has a piercing and delicate wit, and cannot be too
much praised; nor did they forget Madam the Marchioness Deshoulieres, you must
needs have heard speak of her (Madam) for his worth is every where known, she
writes very Politely both in Verse and Prose. There run up and down some
Gallant pieces of her Dog called Gas, who is lately turned excellent Poet, so
that his works deserve to be Printed. This Lady has made him the Cerberus of
Pornassus, to defend its entrance against Dablers. I have enclosed a Copy of
his Verses being a Letter to the Count L. T. that you may judge of his wit, and
when you have read them, I believe you will say, you never saw more natural
Verses, nor heard of a more Ingenious Cur; but the reason is evident, all
Spanels have not such witty Mistresses.

Monsieur de Moranges, Director of the Finances died last week, he was an
honest and an ingenious man, and the Gazetsayes so much of him, that I can say
nothing comes near it.

Monsieur the Barron of Schonborn, Nephew and Envoy extraordinary of the
Elector of Mentz had Audience from the King, he demonstrated under the face of
Youth, a Prudence surprises the Aged, and business seems so natural to him,
that the most knotty things are easy, this he has given such evidences of, and
I have been assured it by so many persons that know him well, that you may
believe all I write of this young Minister is true.

Monsieur the Count de Molina, extraordinary Ambassador from Spain, made his
Entry accompanied with Marshal de Grance, and some days after was conducted to
have Audience from the King, by Monsieur the Count de Armagnac. You may observe
one thing, which those who have read the Gazets this twenty years, have not
perhaps taken notice of, which is, that the Ambassadors of Crowned heads, or
those that are treated, as such are always conducted to their Audience by a
Prince of the Blood, and that he, who receives them on the day of their public
Entrance, never conducts them to the Louvre.

Paris April 16. 1672.
Letter XVII.
I Promised you Madam to send you all the new Modes; and yet I have not, you
tell me, writ you one word of them in any of my Letters. The Courts being so
long in mourning has been the cause of it. It has put a stop to the inventions
of many and smothered those have come forth in their Infancy; yet I will tell
you, That they wear their Gowns so long Wasted, that it reaches almost to their
Thighs, who have but little Haunches.

The men still wear their Hats so large, that the old men (who for fear of
appearing ridiculous; wore great ones while others wear little ones) appear at
present what they sought to avoid, because they will not change their Mode; and
the great Hats of that time, are the little ones of this.

They wear now few Hatbands of Ribbon or Silk, and Gold Hatbands are come again
in Mode. I know not whether it will long be suffered; but within this eight
days they begin to wear all their Coats Laced or Embroidred with Gold and
Silver. It Is seldom but the same thing has happened over again; but time past
is now no more, and Monsieur de la Reynie attempts nothing he brings not to
pass; he has done things since he has been Lieutenant of the Policy, that were
thought impossible, and which many ages attempted in vain; no Judge can be more
equitable, uncorrupr or zealous in the service of his King. The populacy are so
obliged to him, they ought to contrive a way to Eternize his memory.

After having spoken of the Modes respecting the habits of Men and Women, I
must now entertain you with one newer then any of those I have spoken of, and
which relates to Household Stuff. I was lately at a Gentlewomans, who is none of
the highest quality; but whose Gallant is extremely rich; they told me they
would show me a Hall, very neatly furnished, and they carried me into a Room,
whose Hangings were of fine Damask. Whilst they made me look out at a Window
had its prospect on a very fine Garden, that Hanging was gone in an instant, so
that but turning about, I saw the Rooms hung with Hangings of another Color,
and the first drawn up like a Cornish about it. Admiring this invention, they
bid me pull a little weight that was hid in the Corner of the Room, where it
was not seen, and yet was fastened to Strings of Silk and Gold, which I had no
sooner as it were touched, but the second Hanging came up, and disposed it self
into little folds, making Buttons as it were between the Cornish, and
discovered a rich Green Hanging, adorned with many Pictures with curious
Frames. Never was any thing so pleasant to me, and I cannot but admire at those
that found out this pretty invention, and had I gone out of the Hall as often
as it changed, I could never have believed it to be the same Room. The
Inventors of this, they say, are framing a Bed shall change as often. I thought
I could never have sent you so much of new Modes; but I see this Article will
always furnish me with matter.

One of Monsieur the primier Presidents Sons, has lately married a Daughter of
Monsieur de Calucet, Governor of the Castle of Nantes. I will inform you as
soon as I can of the particular endowments of these young married people.

The King has nominated Monsieur D' Aquin his principal Physician. I will
neither speak of his worth nor capacity, the Kings choice is enough to make
both known.

Monsieur de la Chamber is nominated principal Physician to the Queen; he is
much esteemed in Court, and has the repute of an able man.

Monsieur Renadot, whose long Experience, and the infinite number of
distempered persons he has had for many years to practice upon, should be one
of the ablest Physicians in Paris, is by the King chosen Principal Physician to
the Dauphin.

Since January last has been continued the publishing of le Journal des
Scavans, which you have sometimes read with delight, it is a good and a
profitable Work, the Author is in much esteem, and has the Honor to be
favored by a great Minister of State.

Paris April 23. 1672.
Letter XVIII.
I Now send you a List of the General Officers nominated by the King to serve
him this Campaigne. I will not be so positive as to affirm it so exact, that
nothing may be forgot, nor nothing altered, or that the degrees are infallibly
observed; but in short, it is the best I could get, and I give you part in it. I
believe there is many people in your Country don't know half so much.

Names of the General Officers of the Kings Army.
MONSIEUR, Generallissimo. Monnsieur de Turenne, General.
Lieutenant Generals.
Monsieur de Gadagne. Monsieur the Duke de Feuillade. Monsieur the Count de
Soissons. Monsieur the grand master of Artillery. Monsieur de Lorge. Monsieur
de Rochfort.
Marshals de Camp.
Monsieur the Chevalier de Lorrain. Monsieur Martinet. Monsieur de Montal.
Monsieur de Fourille is Campmaster of the Cavalry, and Serves always.
Brigadiers of Horse.
Monsieur de M. Monsieur de C. Monsieur de Feuille. Monsieur le Comte du Roy.
Monsieur de Chazeron.
Brigadiers of Foot.
Monsieur de Beauveau. Monsieur
Adjutants of the Camp.
Monsieur the Count d' Again. Monsieur D' Albret. Monsieur the Chevalier de
Nogent. Monsieur the Marquis d' Angeau. Monsieur de Breaute. Monsieur de la
Roche Courton.

Officers of the Army of Monsieur the Prince.
Lieutenant Generals.
Monsieur the Count d' Guiche. Monsieur de St. Avre. Monsieur Faucaut.
Marshals of the Camp.
Monsieur the Count du Plessis. Monsieur the Count de Nogent. Monsieur de
Magaloty. Monsieur de Chiseuile.
Commissary General of the Horse.
Monsieur de la Cardoniere.
Brigadiers of Horse.
Monsieur de Beauveze. Monsieur Vivien. Monsieur de Fourneaux.
Brigadiers of Foot.
Monsieur Pilloy. Monsieur

Officers of the Army to commanded by Monsieur the Marshal de Crequy.
Lieutenant General.
Monsieur de Nanere.
Marshals of the Camp.
Monsieur de Vaubrun. Monsieur the Cavalier du Plessis.
Brigadiers of Horse.
Monsieur M. Monsieur de Pierrefite.

The King has nominated Monsieur de Sainsandoux, Major of the Regiment of
Guards, Major General of his Army; he has likewise nominated Monsieur Tracy,
Captain of the Guards, Major General to the Prince, and Monsieur de la
Marrilliere, Lieutenant Colonel of the Queens Regiment, Major general of the
third Army,

General Officers of the Armies of the Allies.
Monsieur de Luxembourg, Lieutenant General to the Bishop of Munster. Monsieur
de Chamilly, Lieutenant General to the Bishop of Cullen. Monsieur de Renel to
command the Horse. Monsieur de Mornas to command the Foot. Monsieur de
Beaudevis to command The Army of Rossillon to be Commanded by Monsieur le Bret.
I fancy, that after this account of the Land-Armies, you may likewise be
desirous to know the force by Sea, and that these-veral names of the Ships may
divertize,

A LIST of the several Ships of the Fleet, appointed for Service this year 1672.
At Rochefort. Names of the Captains and Ships.
Monsieur de Rabinieres. Le Superbe, 1300 Tuns, 70 Guns. Monsieur Gabaret.
LeFoudrogant, 1300 Tuns, 68 Guns Monsieur Gombaut. Le Grand, 1100 Tuns, 64
Guns. Monsieur Michaut. LeConquerant, 1100 Tuns, 64 Guns Monsieur de Grancay.
L' Illustre, 1100 Tuns, 70 Guns. Monsieur de Beaulieu. L' Admirable, 1100 Tuns,
70 Guns Mons. Le Comandeur de Verdille, L' Invincible, 1100 Tuns, 70 Guns
Monsieur Destivall, Le Sans-pareil, 1100 Tuns, 62 Guns Monsieur D'Ymagnion, L'
Excellent, 1000 Tuns, 56 Guns Monsieur de Blenac, Le Fort, 1000 Tuns, 54 Guns.
Monsieur de Tourville, Le Gallant, 700 Tuns, 44 Guns. Monsieur de Villeneuf
Ferier, Le Brillant, 600 Tuns, 40 Guns. Monsieur de la Vigery, Le Hazardeux,
550 Tuns, 34 Guns
Fireships.
Monsieur Rocachon. Le Fin. Monsieur Ozcer Thomas, Le Perilleux. Monsieur
Vidaut, Le Voile. Monsieur du Rivault, L' Inconnu. Monsieur Serpaut, De
Deguise. Monsieur Chabosseau. L' Entreprenant.
At Breast.
Monsieur Le Comte d' Estrees, L' St. Philip Admiral. Monsieur de Quesne,
Lieutenant General. Le Terrible. Monsieur des Ardans, Le Tonnant. Monsieur de
Vallebelle, Le Brave. Monsieur de Suerdis, Le Valliant. Monsieur de Larcou, Le
Temeraire. Monsieur de Quyovet, L' Oriflame. Monsieur de Queruville, Le
Bourbon. Monsieur d' Infreville, Le Rubes. Monsieur Desbeville, Le Duc.
Monsieur de Coquelin, Lacolle. Monsieur Panetier, L' Heureux. Monsieur de
Bleor, L' Alcion. Monsieur La Rocque Souftreet, Le Hardy.
Light Frigates.
Monsieur -- La Tempest. Monsieur de Bellemont, L' Aurora. Monsieur de
Gravencon, La Railleuse. Monsieur de St. Michel, La Subtle. Monsieur de
Grosbois, La Lutine. Monsieur Delmonts, La Galliarde.
Brulots.
Le Trompeur. Le Serpent.
Foists. Two Tartans.
Monsieur du Quesne is to Guard the Coast of Rochel with a Squadron of fourteen
Ships. Monsieur Martel to Command a Squadron of fourteen Ships for a Reserve.

Paris 23 April 1672.
Letter XIX.
MAdam, I now send you a part of the New Books are lately published by Monsieur
Barbin. The Beralde, of an unknown Author, you will find well writ. The Exiles
of Madam de Velledieu, will divertize you extremely; the Contrivances are well
laid, and delicately handled; and that witty Lady, all whose Writings have yet
gained applause, will deserve renewed Praises. I send you likewise the Second
Tome of the Works of Monsieur le Paiis. The former had great success, be you
Judge of this. I will send to you within this eight days a new Book of Monsieur
Menage; they are farther Observations on the French Tongue Though a work is not
always to be valued by its success, yet may we judge of the worth of this by
the general repute it has gained, since it is with Justice it pleases; and I
doubt not but in a little time in stead of saying, Parler Vaugelas, (speak,
Vaugelas) to praise those that speak well, we shall say, Parler Menage. This
great man (for so we may call him for his abundance of Learning) exposes now
all the different manners of speaking which signify, or which we would have
signify the same thing; he quotes all those have made use of them, and after
having given their true derivation, determines for the most part in favor of
Custom, which he says is the Sovereign Master of Language, which we should most
apply our selves to, and following which, though we break the Rules, we yet
speak well. This decision of so famous an Author, will be very profitable, and
will in the future bring all the world to understand and speak things in the
same way, the contrary of which has been practiced hitherto: for some knowing
men have spoke according to Custom, and others according to fancy, that is,
sometimes one way, sometimes another, which in time has much obscured the
Language. Therefore Madam, all France is much obliged to Monsieur Menage for
the pains he has taken to teach them to speak. Do but observe the Authors he
quotes: Monsieur Vaugelas, whom he often approves, and often condemns;
Messieurs Balzack, Malherbe, Sarazin, Vecture, Mamard, St. Amant, Brebeuf,
Ablancourt, Colletet, Gombaut, the Father Rapin, Racon, Mairet, the Father
Chiflet, Desmarests, Gomberville, the Abbot Chasteliu, the Abbot Sassy,
Mereray, Sorel, Charpentier, Briauville, the Bishop of Vauce, Pellison la
Mothe, le Vayer, the Father Bohours, Patru, Chapelain, Segrais, Marolles,
Benserade, Corneille, Dandilly, the Author of the Count du Gabalis, Bary, La
Fountain, Talleucant, Messieurs du Port Royal, and Mademoiselle de Scudery. I
have not observed the degrees of these Great Wits, 'twould be too bold an
Enterprise: Monsieur Menage has not observed them, not having quoted them, but
as he had occasion of their Works to authorize his opinions. He has spoken of
some a dozen others, but their Worth being grown old, I thought it not
necessary to enlarge my Letter with their Names.

The King has given the Seals to Monsieur D' Aligre: I have told you his Worth
already, and his sundry Employs and Embassies: His Majesty, at making him this
Great Present, spoke much in his praise; letting, by what he said, all the
World know the Confidence he had in him. It is to be observed that a
Chancellours Son was never before made Keeper of the Seal.

All Paris are running every day to the Fathers of the Oratory, to see the
Mausoleum of the Late Chancellor, erected by the Contrivance of Monsieur de
Brun, When I have seen it, I will tell you more, both of the Work and the
Contriver.

The Physicians in a Body, and in their Doctors Habit, and having the Sieur
Puylon their Director in the head of them, have been at St. Germains to
complement the Three Principal Physicians to their Majesty's. What a brave
thing it is to have these Employments which bring Honor, and something else.

The Equipages of the King, Monsieur, the Princes and Officers of the Army, are
gone hence this Week. Never was any thing seen so great, and for eight days all
the Windows were filled with People, as at a Public Entrance. Among this great
number of Mules, Horses and Chariots richly covered, were to be seen fourscore
Wagons, whose coverings were not so rich and gaudy as those of the Chariots,
but they were better lined, and the Horses could hardly draw them. They were
laden, as it is said, with what we call the Nerves and Sinews of War, and
guarded with the Kings Gend'arms and Light Horse. The Covetous looked with
greedy eyes on this great mass of Money: Mothers wished it for portions for
their Daughters, Lovers to make Presents to their Mistresses, and Debtors to
pay their Debts; In short, every one wished to supply his occasions, and the
least interessed had their thoughts too. That which was most pleasant in it,
was, that every one believed what he wished for would not much lessen the sum,
nor do the King or his Armies any wrong; and yet had this Money been to be
distributed according to every ones wish, there must many yet have remained
unsatisfied, and not a denier of it gone out of Paris.

If the Equipages during the last week have filled all the streets of Paris,
the old Castle of St. Germain has been as full of those who went to take their
leaves of the King. The Ambassador of England has taken it for a long time,
being to return to the King his Master; he is of the House of the Montagues,
which is no less Honorable in England, then well known in France. He is a man
of excellent Parts, of which the particular respect he has ever shown here to
men of knowledge, is a sufficient Witness. He leaves them very melancholy for
his departure, and some Ladies of very great reputation are sharers in their
sorrow, with whom he used to spend the time he could spare from the serious
business of his Employ; he presented to the King the Sieur de Godolphin, who is
to stay with his Majesty during this Campaigne. The Ambassador of Savoy, the
Swedish Resident, and the extraordinary Envoys of Mentz and Genoua, took
likewise leave of his Majesty, and so did all the Sovereign Courts, and the
Provost of the Merchants. All the Bishops that are here, were there likewise,
and all persons of any consideration imitated them. These marks of respect and
love to the greatest of Kings had never ended, if his Majesty's Warlike ardour
had not made him leave St. Germain sooner then he intended. He is gone with a
small Train; but he is gone to find an Army so great, and numerous, that never
any of his Predecessors saw the like. His Majesty has left the administration
of Affairs to the Queen, with a Counsel composed of the Keeper of the Seal
Villeroy le Tellier and Colbert. Their merit is so well known, that I can say
nothing to their advantage, which will not be infinitely below it, or which has
not been ten thousand times said.

I should in my Letter concerning the new Modes have told you of some words,
which though they be not new, yet are at present a la mode. Par toute Terre
(thorough the whole World) is one of them, and when they would speak highly of
any thing that it is approved or pleases, etc. They will say they talk of that
Par toute Terre, That is liked Par toute Terre, That is approved Par toute
Terre. The Gallants now scarce speak fifty words without using that ten times,
as well as the word Violant, which is much worse applied to all they use it
for, to say, That is troublesome, they will say, Cela est violant; to express
he has wrong, they say the same, and seem to affect to make it serve to express
things with which it has not the least agreement. I believe, Madam, you never
heard of the like Foppery; those who have hitherto invented new words or
expressions, have studied to make the best they could signify what they would
say. The Verb Desoler is no less a la mode; and now when any one would say,
That another is trublesome she says, Qu'elle la desole; when they would say,
One is melancholy, they say, Qu'on est desole; and in short, they apply this
word to any thing has any pain or trouble in it.

I cannot resolve to close this Letter, till I give you a Story I have just now
learned.

Megius a learned man, and known by many fine works, was lately at a Ladies,
his friends accompanied with Bretius a young man of great wit, but who was not
very forward in showing it, having been there a good while, and said nothing.
This Lady ( Megius his friend) was an admirer of Astrology, and believed she
knew something of it, which was enough to begin a discourse of it. That brought
on others, and at last they talked of fixing of Mercury; Megius said, That if
they would send for some, he would fix it; some was presently brought, and he
did what he had promised, to the Ladies great amazement, and more to an
Astrologers, her friend, that was with her. This pretended Astrologer asked him
how he came to know what he had done, if he had learnt it by reading, if any
one had showed it him; or if by some chance he had hit of it, or by Art had
found out the secret. By one of these ways indeed, answered Megius, I learnt
what you have now seen me do; for look you there, said he, turning to Bretius,
who had yet spoke only Monosyllables, is he that taught me what I have now
done; both the Lady and her friend presently cast their Eyes upon him, they
viewed him from head to foot, and blamed themselves in private, that his
silence had made him pass with them for a man of no Sense. They offered him now
a thousand praises, and spoke of him with admiration: In the remainder of the
conversation, he made them perceive he had his share of wit; but instead of
satisfying their curiosity in what they desired, he only told them things that
inflamed them the more, and made them passionately desire to unite a firm
friendship with him. night coming on, obliged them to part sooner then they
would have done, for every one had his design, as you will understand by the
sequel of the story.

The Astrologer, whom I shall hereafter call Zoroastes, came to see Bretius the
next morning, and expressed such a vehement desire to learn his secret, that
the young man, who had long wished for some body to make a Fop of, was mighty
glad to have found one. Zoroastes on his part pretermited nothing might engage
his friendship; presented him, gave him great treats, and all yet to no
purpose; for the young man, who had resolved to make himself sport, and was
mightily pleased with these treats, had the cunning to delay him so long, till
himself was almost weary of it. At length the day broke, which was to enlighten
Zoroastes Knowledge, and all things being prepared, Bretius weighs a little
Ball of Wax which he had brought with him, and which weighed almost nothing,
and put it into the (...) and told Zoroastes after having covered it, that it
must stand two hours without being looked on, and that in the mean time he
might go to his Closet, and cast a Figure to see if the work should have good
effect. The two hours being run out, they found there very good Silver, at
least it appeared so to the eyes of Zoroastes, who went presently to show it
three or four Gld-smiths, who affirmed it as good as any they had in their
Shops. His Caresses now to Bretius cannot be described; he almost smothered him
with kindness, and treated him like a man who was able to teach him a secret,
by which he hoped to become master of more treasure then all the Kings of
Europe; swelled with these hopes, he conjured him to give him where withal only
to make Silver. Bretius gave him one of his Balls, but it melted, and came to
nothing with our Astrologer. Hecomplains to Bretius of it, who told him his
curiosity was the cause, which had made him too soon remove the Cover, he did
it over again with him, and it succeeded as before. Zoroastes was convinced,
and one day tells the Prince of it, then again tell Bretius what he had said of
him: The young man was in a Peck of Troubles, and was forced to acknowledge it
was but a trick of Legerdemain, and to show him his cunning, and so things
stopped there. There are many people suffer themselves to be cheated by such fine
outward appearances. Me thinks, Madam, this Letter is somewhat long; I know not
whether it may divertize you, or whether any of the former have pleased you:
But I know I will use my endeavor to find out things so pleasant and
delightful, that if it be possible you shall be satisfied.

Paris May 1. 1672.
FINIS.

