THE LAST NEVVES FROM THE ARMY: JUNE the Twentieth, 1647.

Wherein is set forth, Their further Resolution and proceedings about Windsor
Castle, and their sending of a Party of Horse and Dragoones into KENT.

As also, their seizing of the Magazine in Oxford, and bringing of it to the
Army; together with above forty Piece of Canon.

Likewise, the present proceedings of the Army about the Golden Butter-Firkins
taken at Graves-end, and a further discovery therein.

LONDON, Printed for James Neale, June 21. 1647.

A Declaration of the Army under command of his Excelleney Sir Thomas Fairfax.
Honored Sir,
ACcording to your desire, expressed in the last, I shall here give you a just
account of the Armies proceedings at this instant, (which I believe are
contrary many men's expectation) they behave themselves very gallantly, injuring
no man, they preserve much, but spoyleth little, their deportment is so fair,
to the Inhabitants hereabouts, that they embrace them as bosom friends, more
liker then strangers.

SIR,
It has been rumoured abroad, that the Army intends to advance nearer London
within few days, and some talk there is of a surrounding; but I will wave my
pen in this, because it sounds to me with a contrary echo, for I never heard
it from any, but only some few private Soldiers. The Army is said to be about
twenty thousand (besides the additionall Forces which are lately joined with
them) and indeed I can not conceive how they can amount to less, but rather
more; for the whole Body of the Army is drawn into 20 Regiments, 8 of horse,
and 12 of Foot, each Regiment of foot consisting of 1200 hundred, and each
Company belonging to every Colonel amounts to eightscore, a Lieutenantcolonels
company sevenscore, a Majors company sixescore, and every Captains company one
hundred, containing seven in number, throughout every Regiment in the Army.

The horse are supposed to be about seven thousand, and (as I suppose) as brave
a Brigade as Europe can afford, being endued with many excellent and divine
gifts, both for valor, prudence, and pious actions, injuring no man, but
planting peace and unity where they discern the springing up of discord and
contention. They have declared to the countries adjoining their candid
intentions and resolutions in this their present design^, showing that all
their endeavors and actions are only for the settling of a safe and
well-grounded peace within this his Majesty's Realm and Dominion.

We hear that there is a party of horse and Dragoones advanced into Kent, and
that diverse Regiments of horse and foot are quartered about Reading, Windsor,
and those parts; some reports also of a Randevouz appointed by the whole Army
upon Hounslo-heath, toward the latter end of this instant Month: the
Committee of the Army sits very close, having (as they say) some weighty
particulars to communicate to the house touching the eleven Members impeached.

Colonel Rainsboroughes Regiment, who by order of both houses of Parliament,
were appointed for the Western service, are returned from Portsmouth, and come
again to the Army, leaving all their Commanders behind them, except some few
inferior Officers, what their intentions are, time will make manifest. There
are also diverse other parties which were appointed for Ireland, come back to
the Army; saying, they will not engage for that service, until this Kingdom
be settled in peace.

We hear of the Trayn of Artillery being drawn out of Oxford to the Generals
headquarters at St. Albanes, together with sixeteen Demi Culverans, ten Sakers,
fifteen Drakes, fifteen small Fieldpieces, with great store of Ammunition, all
which (is said) was conducted to St. Albans by a party of horse appointed for
that purpose; what the issue of this will be, I cannot as yet discover; but my
prayers shall be, that peace and unity may flourish, and strife and discord
abandoned, and that a happy concurrence may be had betwixt the Parlirment, City
and Army, that so all things may be composed in love, without any more
bloodshed.

Here is much talk in the Army of the Golden Butter-firkins, that were lately
stayed at Graves-end, and of the politic designs of those famous Chermers,
which are said to be men of eminency: the army is very inquisitive to to find
out the actors, it will fall heavy upon some, it is to be feared. But time
gives an allarm now to with draw, therefore for further particulars, I refer
you to the ensuing List, only in the close, humbly take my leave, and remain

Your most affectionate friend and Kinsman, THO. MICHEL.
Wallingford, June 20.
A List of the Army, containing the just number of Horse and Foot, together
with their Ordinance and Train of Artillery.
12. Regiments of Foot consisting of about 13000. 7. Regiments of Horse and
Dragoones, consisting of about 7000. Reformadoes, consisting of about 200. 16.
Brass Demy-Culverins. 10. Sakers. 15. Drakes. 15. small Field Pieces to play
betwixt Files, at a pitched Field, or otherwise as occasion shall require. 4.
Mortar Pieces, great store of Hand-Granadoes, with plenty of Powder Shot, and
other Warlike Provision.
FINIS.

