A MESSAGE Sent to the L. Admiral Vantrump From the High and Mighty Lords the
States General of the united Provinces, touching hostile acts toward all
English ships, whether Merchants or others.

WITH The burning and consuming of the State-house and Bank of Money at
Amsterdam, and the firing of a gallant ship in the Harbor; and the debates of
the States at the Hague, touchin their constituting the young Pr. of Orange,
Governor of the United Provinces.

LIKEWISE, A full and perfect relation of the late transactions betwixt the two
Fleets under the command of Sir Geo. Ascue, and Admiral Vantru^p upon the
Downs; with Vantrumps Design to have surprised our ships in the Hope; His
sailing westward, and his design therein.

Also a bloody Fight at Sea, and the taking of diverse Dutch ships by his
Excellency General Blake in the Northern Seas.

LONDON: Printed by E. C. 1652.

A MESSAGE Sent to Admiral Vantrump From The High and Mighty Lords the States
General of the United Provinces.
SIR,
THe Lord Paw, Ambassador extraordinary from the States General of the United
Provinces, has made a large report to his Masters, touching his Embassy to
the Commonwealth of England, since which he has sent a messenger to the
Parliament to gratify the respects and civilities used by them toward him, he
also assures them, that in all probability, the States will send yet another
messenger. Upon his report, and a motion by him made to that purpose, the
States have sent a Message to the Lievt. Admiral Vantrump, wherein They
expressly charge, require, and forbid him, or any of the Fleet under his
command, to meddle with, hinder, or disturb by any hostile act, any English
ship whatsoever, not offering injury or affront to them; but to let them pass
freely without let or molestation, until they have made their full
resolutions, touching the report made by the Lord Ambassador Paw. So that all
hopes of a peace with England is not quite taken away, notwithstanding the
strong endeavors of a hot spirited party among us, who desire nothing more then
to see the two nations imbroyled in a cruel and bloody war.

The people notwithstanding are arming every where, and every Stadt reinforced
both with Cavalry and Infantry; even the Hague it self is made a garrison; and
all ships fit for service are stopped and entertained, although the men have
small stomachs to engage with your men of war, who they know want not courage
to receive and entertain them; many of the East India Fleet are rigging and
preparing for war, that Company apprehending, that if matters go not according
to their expectation, they shall be called to an account for the business of
Amboina: and for the defense of our frontier towns, we have sent abroad to
foreign Princes to assist us, who will (no doubt) be as ready to supply us, as
we to desire their aid, though but to serve their own ends.

Much scuffling there is among the States, for the making the young Prince of
Orange Governor, and very violently has the motion been followed by all the
Provinces, Holland only excepted, which strongly apposeth it: Count William
has been named for Lievt. General; but many fear if this motion should take
effect, he would introduce foreign forces amongst us, and so betray our
liberty, having the D. of Brandenburgh, and the Grave of Embden his brothers.
But while these things were in deep consultation at the Hague, the element of
fire raged in this City in a double misfortune both on the water and on the
land: on the water we had a new ship fired, how, or by what means we cannot
certainly learn, but this I am sure of, that if great pains and industry had
not be^n used for the speedy extinguishing thereof, it would (...) all
li^elihood have fired and burnt our fire ships, which the^ lay near them, but
are since gone out to our Fleet. To second this, the State-house of this City
was sudd^^ly fired and burnt down to the ground, we having as little k^owledge
of the author or cause of this as of the (...). Many there was that cried out
Treason, Treason, (...) conjecturing it could be nothing else, and that (...)
that envied the glory and riches of that City, (...) on purpo^e out of malice
done it; however much they ^ow to heaven that there was so little wind, had the
wind been ^igh, the pride of this City had been laid in the dust. Much o^ the
Bank-money lay in that place; and is melted to the great grief (no doubt) of
those that laid it for security and profit in that place; generally the people
still continue high in their language, and seem loath to trust those English
that so faithfully served them against the Spaniard, but rather rely upon such
foreign auxiliaries, as it is believed will rather seek the way to ruin us,
thereby to advantage themselves, then endeavor to put a period to our troubles.

Amsterdam, July 16, still. novo. 1652.
A Letter from the Downs, containing a full and perfect Narrative of Admiral
Vantrumps facing of Sir George Ascue with a Fleet of above an hundred Sail.
SIR,
I Received yours of the 12 instant, wherein you desire to be informed touching
the transactions betwixt our Fleet under Sir George Ascue, and the Dutch under
Vantrump; for your satisfaction take this account. Some of the Scouts Sir Geo.
Ascue had sent out, returned the 8 of this instant July, declaring that they
had descried above 60 sail of Dutchmen in the Downs, Sir George then riding
with part of his Fleet near Deal Castle, the other part was in the Hope,
intending toward him. The enemy seemed to design an interception of that
party, and then to fight Sir George. But Sir Geo knowing they were not well
provided for fight, sent to them, commanding them to continue there till he
should send them further Order; and with those he had (being not 20 sail) he
resolved to fight it out, what ever Fleet should attempt to engage him, and
prepared himself in the best manner he could to receive them, howbeit there was
no attempt made upon him that night nor the next day, during which time he
received aboard him 200 foot soldiers, distributing them among his Fleet.

On Saturday the Dutch came in sight, we conceived them to be about an hundred
and two Men of War, and ten or twelve fire ships; they were divided into 3
squadrons, viz. 35 sail with the Admiral on the back of the Goodwin; Three
leagues Eastward of him was another squadron consisting of 40 sail, and the
third at Longsands-head, which lay in a posture to intercept our ships as
aforesaid, and to keep Sir George from steering Westward. The next day being
Sunday, very early, the intent of the enemy being frustrated, those ships which
were coming forth being returned into the River according to Order, he divided
his Fleet into two parts, the greatest part (consisting of about 75 sail) bore
up directly toward Sir George between the Brake head, and North sands head,
whilst the rest of the Fleet, being about 35 sail, lay upon the back of the
Goodwin, to intercept Sir George, if their Fireships should constrain him to
quit his anchors. But the Tide of Ebb being done, and but little wind, the
enemy was compelled to anchor about a league distant from our Fleet, expecting
the opportunity of the next Tide of Ebb to fall upon Sir George, who knowing
that both his Officers, Mariners and Soldiers were filled with courage and
resolution, prepared himself for their reception. In the mean time six pieces
of Ordnance were mounted on two Platforms between tween the Castles of Deal and
Sandown, which might annoy the enemy if he should engage; The Militia of the
Country, both horse and foot, were also on their march thitherwards.

Whilst all things were thus disposed, and our soldiers both Seamen and
Landmen, with great cheerfulness and courage attended the falling on of the
enemy, the wind turned, so that the Dutch could not come in as they intended,
and at Ebb it came to South-west, which was very disadvantageous to the enemy,
who finding that providence fought against them, weighed, and stood back again
to the back of the Goodwin about 5 a clock, where meeting altogether, they
steered away.

I cannot omit to tell you, that above two hundred Seamen, to show their good
affection and zeal to the Parliament, came voluntarily and freely in to assist
our Fleet, there were also diverse fireships preparing at Dover, to be made use
of for entertaining of the Hollanders Navy, had they approached any nearer;
They thought to have performed Wonders upon our Fleet here in the absence of
General Blake, but the Lord was pleased to disappoint them, and bring to naught
their Counsels.

From the Downs, July 14. 1652. His Excellency Genesis Blake has been all this
while, and is yet Northwards with a very gallant fleet of ships, and some
letters I have seen from the North, which say, That there has been a great
Fight between a part of General Blakes Fleet, and the Dutch in the Northern
seas, and that Genesis Blake has taken diverse Dutch ships, fishermen and others,
but no letters are yet come from his navy to confirm it. It was conjectured by
many that a squadron of Vantrumps Fleet sailed Northwards, but we understand
since that they are all together, and are gone Westward, thinking thereby to
draw Genesis Blake from the North.



FINIS.

