A VICTORY OBTAINED By Lieut: Gen: David Lesley, In the North of Scotland,
against Colonel Hurrey and his forces; and the number killed and taken.

ALSO, The Declaration and Resolution of the Inhabitants of Yorkshire,
Cumberland, Sunderland, and the Bishopric of Durham, for the Parliament of
England; And the desires of the English Army in the North, touching Scotland.

TOGETHER, With the further proceedings of the Treaty at Breda, the sending of
a Message to the Emperor of Germany and the Duke of Saxony, by Captain Swan,
with an Answer thereunto, in relation to the affairs of England.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Wood. 1650.

A Victory obtained by Lieutenant General David Lesley, in the North of
Scotland; against Colonel Hurrey and his forces, and the number killed and
taken.
SIR,
I Am so much your Servant, that I must wait upon you, and attend the motion of
your personal residence; and though my Letters are long ere they arrive, yet I
hope at last they will have the honor to kiss your hand; and I beseech you
permit them so to do, and with as much affection as is possible, from a person
whom you have suffered to be acquainted with your worth, and have so infinitely
obliged; which makes me very unhappy, that I can neither say or do any thing
accordingly. However, give me leave to entertain you with what is done on the
other side of Tweed; which I here humbly represent, by communicating these
ensuing lines to your tender object, and favorable construction.

This morning, here arrived a Messenger from Scotland, with several Letters to
Gentlemen of quality in these parts, intimating the transaction of affairs
between the Committee of Estates, Clergy, and Laity; And amongst the rest, he
makes mention of a great blow given to Renegado Hurry (and his party) near
Caithness, in the North of Scotland, the manner thus:

Sir John Hurrey (that grand Renegado-Artist) having landed a considerable
party, consisting of about 2000 horse and foot, presently endeavored to leave
no means unattempted, that might prove instrumental for the carrying on of the
royal interest and design, and likewise for the fomenting of new Commotions.
The Committee of Estates timely foreseeing the sad event that might happen and
ensue thereupon, forthwith resolved to expedite a potent power against them;
and accordingly gave instructions to Lieutenant General David Lesley, to issue
forth Orders for a general Rendezvous of the horse and foot in those parts; to
the end, he might speedily take the field, and be in a posture of opposition,
to retard the Enemies farther march Southward: This being with alacrity
facilitated, the said Lieutenant General took his march toward the North, and
(as it is said) on the 28 of April last, marched toward Caithness; the Enemy
having intelligence of their advance, mustred up all his forces, and Colonel
Hurrey (Commander in chief of that Brigade) having all his men in readiness,
fell suddenly upon General Lesley's men, and assaulted them courageously, but
they being provided for them, gallantly resisted them, and forced them to
retreat: The first of this instant, the Lieutenant General having united all
his forces together, gave command to Colonel Humes to advance with a party of
Horse toward the Enemy, who according to Order, charged Colonel Hurrey's
horse, and exchanged several vollies, and were received with great gallantry,
being most of them old Soldates, and well knew how to withstand the fury of an
enemy; but being at the last over-powred, they retreated to the next Reserve,
and Colonel Humes his men returned to their main Body. Within a while after,
their Bodies joined, and the conflict grew very hot, which put them all in a
great heat, notwithstanding their being in a cold Climate. The victory seemed
somewhat dubious for a while, for Colonel Hurrey and his men fought very
gallantly, and for the space of two hours very manfully maintained their ground,
but (having not many horse, and they being over-powred by General Lesley's)
were forced to desert their foot; then General Lesley's men (upon routing of
the horse) suddenly fell in among the foot, and by main force and violence
broke their ranks, disordering their Battalia, and putting all to the sword
that stood in opposition and defiance, which befell the Zwitzers in no small
number, for many of their fiery spirits denied quarter; but those that desired
that martial privilege, had the same granted. In this great blow, (we hear)
that the Lord Napier is wounded, and that Renegado Hurrey is taken prisoner,
being very dangerously wounded; who is now like to sing a most doleful tune,
to his several Changes. It is very credibly reported, that there were killed,
routed, and taken prisoners, two thousand five hundred of the Hurronians, and
that the aforesaid Lieutenant General David Lesley, returned triumphantly with
several trophies of his victory (having taken all their arms and ammunition,
and diverse prisoners) with the loss of about 300 men, and some 350 wounded.

The rest of the Confederate-royalists in the North, (it is said) are making
what haste possible they can toward the Mountains, and many discontented
spirits (who seemed not a little active for the propagating and carrying on of
the design) begins now to sing a song of Recantation; so that (it is believed)
the flames are already quenched which began so violently to break forth:
notwithstanding, the great talk of the Treaty at Breda for an Agreement, and
new forces to be speedily landed; for that goes on but slowly, and [perhaps]
may be ended, when the Parliaments Army comes to Edenborough. The Scots know
their [declared] King is young, necessitous, and with a divided-Councell, and
are steadfastly resolved to deal with him accordingly; for unless he will come
to their terms, he must expect nothing from them. Truly (if I may tell you my
thoughts) I conceive he is in a sad condition; for the States are weary of his
being there, and the Prince of Orange sits but loose in the saddle himself,
therefore the Scots are not to be discommended, in seeking to make good
conditions.

Having given you a word or two of the Treaty, I shall present you with the
latest Intelligence which we have received from Germany. The declared King of
Scotland having sent Captain Swan to the Emperor, as an Ambassador (and after
to the Duke of Saxony) received this answer from the Emperor. That he condoled
with him for his fathers death [and that with a great invective against the
Parliament] withal telling him, the poor and unable condition that Germany was
in; yet he promised to do his best, when the allied Crowns, and Neighbors, and
the united Provinces should be a president, for he must regulate himself by
them. But it is believed, all their negotiations and subtle actings will be
frustrated, and suddenly blasted in the bud; for in Scotland they still play
fast and loose, and good reason they have, for misery is hastening upon them, if
they presume to attempt another invasion, which to prevent, the soldiery in
these parts seem both unanimous and resolved; being also seconded with an
invitation from the well affected in Yorkshire, Sunderland, Cumberland, and
Durham, who are resolved to stand close to them, for the preservation of their
Countries, lives, and liberties, against the force and violence of any invaders
whatsoever; And declaring, That they will be obedient to the present
Government, and give their utmost aid and assistance against all persons
whatsoever, that shall endeavor to abolish and extirpate the same: Yet
notwithstanding, many there are in these parts, who walk too much averse to
their steps, desiring a change, etc. As the daughters of Pelias King of
Thessaly did, who harkening to the counsel and advice of Medea, suffered their
old decrepit father to be boiled in a Chaldron with herbs, persuading the
people, that nothing was more available, for the restoration of him to his
former youth. Even so, when self-ended spirits, carry eloquence in the one
hand, and subtilty in the other (under the pretense of Reformation in
Government) they immediately cut the Commonwealth in pieces; as these turbulent
spirits in these parts would do, who (by their fair eloquent delusions, for
Monarchy) endeavor to alienate and withdraw the hearts of the people, from
their due obedience to the present Authority, and seeks nothing more then the
ruinating of the Preservers of Englands Liberties, and casting all the fruit of
their labors and indefatigable pains, into a Chaos and labyrinth of misery.
Sir, fearing that I have been too tedious, be pleased to excuse him, who remains

Your obliged friend, to serve you: PETER MICHEL.
Kendall, May 4. 1650.
Postscript.
Sir, I remain still in the Regiment of renowned Major General Lambert, our
horse and foot have had a Rendezvous, and we expect [and hope] to cross the
River Tweed very suddenly; the soldiery desiring nothing more then to fight
Jockey once again, because he complains, that he cannot be satisfied, unless
Berwick and Carlisle be surrendered to him; in lieu whereof, we are desirous to
give him a full and final payment, for the interest of them.

Yours, P. M.

FINIS.

