A Midnight Touch At an Unlicens'd Pamphlet, CALLED, A Vindication of the
Archbishop, and several other Bishops.
WE do justly term and esteem him, who Abdicated the Throne, no other than the
late King; yet we find in the Paper, this day published; Five Clergymen, in
defiance of an Act of Parliament, calling themselves, W. Cant. W. Norwich, F.
Ely, Tho. Bath and Wells, Tho. Peterburgh. It would have given great offense,
if there had been added, Richard Baxter Rector of Kederminster; yet a good
Lawyer affirmed in a Coffe-house but two hours since, that he has as good a
title to Kederminster as the other five have to the Names which they assume to
themselves, and presume to write, and that they ought only to have subscribed
William Sancroft, William Loyd, Francis Turner, Tho. Ken. and Thomas White,
late Bishops (if they pleased.)

It is as certain that there is a third Plot, as that there is a New Liturgy;
and that there is a Lambeth Club, the Paper now published confesses; but
whether Holy or not, I know not; and for ought I know the inserting that
Epethete (holy) both to theirs and the Jacobite, or Devil-Tavern-Club, may be a
good reason for saying it is Abusive.

It seems by their Paper, that they are put under a necessity of holding
Meetings (or Conventicles) at Lambeth, in their present difficulties; to advise
how to keep good Consciences; which looks as tho 'twere no easy thing to them
to do it.

Indeed, They tell us; that they heartly and incessantly pray for the Peace,
Prosperity and Glory of England, (which is well, though as to the words we find
them not in their Liturgy) and Methinks we want the Addition of these words
under the Auspetious Government of our dread Sovereign Lord and Lady, King
William and Queen Mary.

We are not to seek for their meaning, when they talk of bearing their Cross;
but their prating of seeking the good of their Native Country; is so ambignous
and uncertain, that for ought I know, should Marshall D. Humiers come, (which
God forbid) VV. C. would call for the Keys, which he delivered to my L. L. and
put them into his Hands; and then conclude that he had done the Church and his
Country a great piece of service.

I do think that 'twas not so much for the sake of Wit or Honesty, as for the
well understood word (as they call it) de Wuting; that their Vindication was
published; and therefore, I declare, that, rather than see the Throne of our
rightful and Lawful King and Queen (who now possess it) overthrown; I shall
rejoice to see all who refuse to Pray and Fight for its support, de VVitted.

Their late Reverences declare themselves ready to sacrifie their All to
prevent Popery and the Arbitrary Power of France from prevailing over them; for
they have the Persecution of the French Protestants fresh in their Memories.

'Twere to be wished, that these Non-Resisting and Non-Assisting Gentlemen;
would now (in their difficulties, and whilst under the Cross) when they tell
us that they remember the Persecution of the French Protestants, acknowledge
the Error and wickedness of their Persecuting those of England; for till they
do so, there are a Censorious sort of People amongst us. who will conclude,
that though some of our Clergymen, would not have the Arbitrary Power of France
to prevail over them; yet that they do wish and hope, by that Power, to prevail
over, and yet again to trample upon English Protestants.

When Mr Randal Tailor emits his next Paper, which is to declare the Absent
Brother of Glocester's concurrence, I shall endeavor to read it at a more
seasonable hour, and to find a little more leisure than I now have, to speak to
this Point.


