EDICTS UPON THE Ordaining and Establishing of a Commonplace, and
Jurisdiction, of the PRIORS and CONSULLS OF THE MERCHANTS Of the CITY of ROAN.

Together with the Letters, Pattents, and Declarations of His MAJESTY, since
that time made with the Approbations, and Regulating thereupon ensuing in the
Court of Parliament of the same City.

Translated out of French into English, for the benefit, and use of MERCHANTS.

By Peter Mitton.

London, Printed by J. R. and are to be sold by Peter Mitton, dwelling in
Mark-Lane. 1645.

To the Right Honorable, Thomas Atkin, Lord Major; And the Right Worshipful,
the Aldermen, his Brethren; And to the Merchants in general of this Honorable
City of LONDON.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful, etc.
WHereas you have been pleased (for the great ease and benefit of the Merchants
of this Honorable City) to employ me for that purpose, to procure a Court of
Merchants here, (as may appear by a Petition of all the Merchants in general)
which Court is the usual Custom in France, (as appears by their own Printed
Book for that purpose) which said Book, after a long and diligent search, I
have with much labor and charge, translated, and procured leave from the
Parliament to Print and Publish. And I hope, what is done, will be to your good
liking: And if the business shall be prosecuted, so as to be wholly effected,
I fear not, the result will prove it to be an acceptable endeavor, from

Your Servant Peter Mitton.

THE MERCHANTS New Royal Exchange.
His Majesty's Edict, for the ordaining, and establishing (in the City of
Roan) of a Commonplace for Merchants, according to the Order of the Change in
Lions, and the Bourse in Thoulouze.
HENRY By the grace of God, King of France,
to all manner of persons of what estate soever, greeting;
Whereas we have been heretofore informed, That our City of Roan is one of the
best Towns in all our Kingdom, by reason of the situation; commodious for all
Comerce and Traffic, where diverse Merchants (as well of this our Realm, as of
many other Nations) do usually hold an intercourse of buying and selling, for
the continuance and propagation; whereof there has of late (by virtue of our
Letters missive) been erected and established in the same City, a Common Place
for Merchants and their Factors to assemble themselves in, twice every day at
the hours accustomed, to dispatch their Affairs and Negotiations in such manner
as is accustomably used in the Exchange at Lions, and the Bourse at Thoulouze,
to the intent, that the Foreign Commodities of other Countries, may more
readily be transported and exchanged away with those which our own brings
forth.

Be it therefore known to all men, that we (through an Ardent zeal and desire
that we have to advance the general good of our said City of Roan, and to
augment the Common benefit, and ease of all Merchants Negotiating there, and in
all things possible to gratify them, that they may not be distracted and drawn
from their Affairs and business, into sundry Courts and Jurisdictions, (by
means of Suites and variances arising at any time about their Traffic) by the
deliberate advice of our Privy Council, (together with diverse Noblemen and
Princes of our blood) besides other great and honorable personages: Of our own
proper motion, assured knowledge, and Royal Authority, have approved and
confirmed, and by these presents, do approve and confirm, the erecting and
establishing, of the said Common Place in that our City of Roan, Instantly
ratifying the same in all points, with the Exchange of Lions, and the Bourse of
Thoulouze.

We will and Ordain, and our pleasure is, that all Merchants, Factors, and all
others of what Nation soever, may resort themselves in the same twice every
day, at the hours accustomed: And in their meetings shall freely use their
Traffic, and pass their Business, as well by Exchange, as otherwise, not
only in the same place, but also in any other whatsoever, within the Liberties
of our said City of Roan, when and where, they shall think good, with all
assurance and safety of their Merchandise; And withal such Privileges and
Liberties, which Merchants Trading to our Towns of Lions and Thoulouze, do
enjoy and use, according to the grant of our Predecessors, Kings of France,
and of us.

Furthermore, We will and ordain, That the Merchants of the said Town of Roan
(frequenting the same place) shall every year, cause a general meeting of
Merchants in the Common Hall of the said Bourse, or in any other place in the
same Town, and at such time, as they shall think good; in which meeting, they
shall choose out of the said number, three Officers, viz. a Prior and two
Consuls, to remain in their Authority for one year, and so yearly to be
changed, and there new to be elected, according to the ordinary form of most
voices; not only the Merchants of the Town of Roan, but also the Merchant
strangers, being to be present, and assistants in the said election; which
election and nomination being fully ended, the said Prior and Consuls, shall
have present power in them, to take notice, and to give judgment (between all
men, of what estate, quality, or condition soever they be) of all suites,
controversies, and differences, touching matters of Merchandising, or buying,
and selling, in such manner as the Conservator of the Fair at Lions, and the
Prior and Consul at Thoulouze do, as well for Obligations, Bills of Debt,
Receipts, Blankes Signed, Bills of Exchange, Answers by Sureties, Associations of
Merchants, (either general or particular) Assurances, Accounts,
Transportations, Bargains, and Partnerships, for matters aforesaid, or any
thing belonging thereunto, with as full Authorite, Power, and according to the
Judgments, and Condemnations, of the said Conservators of Lions, and the Prior
and Consuls of Thoulouze. And that the Judgments, and Sentences, Decrees and
Ordinances, Commissions and Commands of the said Prior and Consuls of Roan,
provissionaries, or definitives, (the word provissionaire or interlocutor,
signifies, to lay down the Moneys) shall stand in as much force and effect,
for any matter Judicially determined, as those causes which the Conservator of
Lions, and Prior and Consuls of Thoulouze, and others of our Judges do decide:
And the same shall be executed by our Sergeants and Officers, in such manner
and form, as they are in their behalf above named, either by committing to
prison, or by inflicting severe punishment, if it be so decreed and ordained:
And to that end, shall our Messengers and Officers be bound to serve the
executions: Our Jaylors and Keepers of our prisons, shall likewise be bound to
receive and keep all such prisoners, in such manner, as if they were committed
unto them, by our abovesaid Judges, and under the like penalty (if any escape
happen) as they be bound to keep the prisoners by the Authority of the said
Judges; For so we have charged and commanded our Messengers, and other our
Officers, Jaylors, and Keepers of prisons, upon such penalties, as the case
shall require, and according as by the said Prior and Consuls shall be set down
and declared, without any appeal, according as the offense committed shall
require.

Moreover, we have granted, and do grant, the said Prior and Consuls, to take
unto them, twenty of the said Merchants, or more or less, as they shall think
reasonable, to assist them in proceeding in their Judgments, in Causes of
Merchandise, Bills of Exchange, Assurances, and Differences, as abovesaid; and
to cause to be executed, their Sentences, Judgments, and Ordinances, of
Consignments, Provisions, Seizing of Goods, and all their other Condemnations,
Sentences, or Appointments, to proceed therein by Outcries, Proclamations,
giving notice to themselves, or leaving notice at their Houses, by Proof,
Sales, Depositings, Deliveries, and execution Definitive, as the Case shall
require.

Likewise, we give them power, to direct the same Process, and to proceed
therein, according to their Ordinances, as well in matters summarily, as by
provision: As acknowledgement of Bills, Subscriptions, and Letters of Exchange.

And the like in Acts of deposite consignments, by one only default of
Appearance duly proved, by summoning the person at his House, or fixing there a
Copy of the Commission or Process, in all places where it is lawful to be
done. And touching other matters, where two defaults shall be made, or summoned
in person, they shall proceed, observe, and keep the course according to the
Kings Ordinances. And for all matters wherein they shall give sentence of
execution according to their knowledge, We will, and We do permit them (as
before is said) to cause the execution to pass in all places under command, of
Our Court of Parliament at Roan, and in all other places of Our Kingdom, where
need shall require: Without any disturbance, or let to be done, by any of Our
Judges, Justicers, or Officers, either against them, or their Deputies: Neither
shall they let or hinder any Summons, or Arrest, Writ, or Warrants, issued out
by them. And to give their assistance in all Causes appertaining to their
knowledge, touching matters of Traffic, and all things thereunto belonging,
against all Merchants trading in our said City of Roan. And as touching their
Factors, Dealers, and Corresponders, of what quality soever they be, (sent by
them into diverse Countries, Regions, and Provinces, as well within, as without
Our Kingdom, Countries, and Dominions, under Our Obedience, for the Cause of
Traffic, Merchandising, and doing of business, and all other things thereunto
belonging.)

We will and ordain, That they may be constrained to bring their Causes and
Proofs, for all matters aforesaid, before the said Prior, and Consuls, for the
time now being, or that shall hereafter execute these Offices: Be it either for
the rendering of account, and satisfaction of part, or of whole, or
condemnations in penalties, or other condemnations for fines, for trespasses,
and of all other things that shall be requisite, concerning, and belonging to
the trade of Merchandise, according as they shall demerit; Whereof We have
permitted them, and do give them power to use the form, even as the said
Conservator of Lions, Prior and Consuls of Thoulouze, and others our Judges do.
And to cause execution to be served on the offenders, either by Arrest,
Attachment of Goods, and sale thereof, or by imprisonment of the Parties
condemned, even as they shall think good. Inhibiting all our Judges to presume
to take knowledge of any of their said proceedings, or of any matter or plea
thereunto belonging: Which Commanders, We will to be made known unto them, and
unto whom it shall appertain, by the first of our Officers, or Sergeants, that
shall be required, whom We enjoin to perform the same accordingly, to the
intent, that all those charges and extraordinary expenses, which Merchants may
be put unto, in following their suites against their Factors and Corresponders,
before many Judges, might by this means be utterly avoided.

Furthermore, We have permitted, and do give Authority to the said Prior and
Consuls, that all such penalties of Moneys as by them shall be inflicted upon
men for contempts, or any other offenses, shall be forfeited, the one half to
Us, the other half to the use of the said Common Place, or Bourse of Roan, for
the use thereof; allowing them likewise, absolute liberty and power, to choose
and appoint one Counselor, and one Attorney, who shall by all lawful means,
labor the benefit and advancement of the said place, and shall defend the
same; to direct their Process and Causes, as well before the said Priors and
Consuls, as before all other Judges.

And to the end, that the Merchants may assemble themselves, as well to consult
of their common affairs, as to appoint the said Counselor and Attorney,
without being bound to repair to Us, or to Our Judges for leave, when need
shall require. Therefore all such Judgments as shall pass before the Prior
and Consuls, being sealed with their seals, and signed by a Register by them
appointed, be it by imprisonment, sale, disposing of Goods, or otherwise, shall
be held for real and lawful, being past in manner aforesaid; without any
constraint to obtain our further permission or liking, even according as was
granted by Our most Honorable Father the King, unto the Merchants of Our City
of Lions, by His Letters Pattents; Given in the Month of February, in the year
of our Lord, 1535. Reserving unto Our said Court of Parliament, at Our said
City of Roan, for a last conclusion; and by appeal, the jurisdiction and
knowledge of the said discords and differences.

And to the end that all such appeals as shall proceed, by reason of the
Judgments and Sentences that shall be given and declared by the said Prior and
Consuls, may be speedily and without delay ended in our said Court; We have
ordained, and do ordain, enjoin, and command, all our loving and trusty
Presidents and Counselors, (holding our said Court of Parliament) to appoint
the said Merchants, without delay, one day in every week, such as they shall
think convenient, to hear, determine, and dispatch the said Appellations, by
order of Roll for that purpose ordained. And in regard of the process by
writing, there shall be an other Roll made apart, to the end, that the said
appeals may be ended in the same day, to avoid the prolonging of suites, to the
ruin and consuming of the parties. And to the end, that the said place of
meeting of the Merchants, twice a day, may be quiet, and without disturbance;
Our pleasure is, and We do straightly command, That none of our Sergeants and
Officers, presume to enter into the same place, nor to make any Arrest (for any
cause) of any person whatsoever, during the time of those two accustomed hours
of meeting. And if such Arrest should be made during the said hours; We have
declared heretofore, and do declare at this present, the same to be void and of
no effect, charging all our Judges, not to meddle therein.

And as we are informed, that the Trade of Assurances, is of late greatly
advanced by the Merchants of the said City of Roan, (a work so honorable)
that it does even increase, and greatly advance the Traffic, and commerce of
the said City. We (to the end those said policies of the said Assurances, and
all other writings thereunto belonging, may receive full force) have permitted,
and do permit that all Merchants frequenting the said place, (both now and
hereafter) to come to assemble themselves at all times, when it shall be
needful, to choose and nominate according to the most voices, one Merchant
amongst them (such a one as they shall think meet, being a man trusty and
expert in the knowledge of the Traffic of Assurances) who shall make and
register the said policies, whereunto the Assurers shall set their hands at all
times hereafter in the said place and liberties of Roan, when as it shall
please the Merchants: Whose Office shall likewise be, to draw forth accounts of
such arrerages as shall happen, (being thereunto called) receiving for his
pains and time spent about the business, of the same Assurances, according as
it shall be thought meet by the said Merchants: And keep a perfect and true
Register of the same Assurances; To the which Register and Copies thereof, and
all other Acts and Writings by him made concerning matter of Assurances, and by
him assigned; We will and ordain, That all manner of credit shall be thereunto
given, before all Judges, and others, to whom it shall appertain, without that
any other person or persons shall have to do, or meddle in the said business
of Assurances, or any thing thereunto belonging, unless he be before chosen
and admitted thereunto, by the said Prior and Consuls, and by the said
Merchants as beforesaid.

And we do command, and do charge, all Persons holding our Courts of
Parliament, Great Councels, Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Stewards, and their
Deputies, and all other Judges and Officers whom it shall concern, That you do
cause to be read, proclaimed and registered, this our present Will, Declaration,
Permission, and Ordinance; and the same to be observed and kept by all them
accordingly; That the Merchants may use and enjoy the force and benefit
thereof, plainly and peaceably, without any contradiction.

Moreover, We do charge and command our Attorney General, that he does withal
diligence, cause all these things to be plainly and truly executed, and that he
does certify us of his diligence so done: For such is our pleasure, for that
of our mere motion and power, we will have it done, notwithstanding any
Ordinance, Customs, Statutes, Privileges, Commands, Prohibitions, or Letters
to the contrary, the which in this cause, without doing prejudices to other
causes, we have made void, and do hereby make void. And because men shall have
occasion to use this our Grant in diverse places; Our pleasure is, That credit
shall be given, to all such Copies, as shall be made by any of our loving and
trusty Notaries, and Secretaries, or under our Royal Seal, in as ample a
manner as to the Original.

And to this effect, We do give you full Power, Authority, Commission, and
special charge; commanding by these presents, all our Justices, Officers, and
Subjects, to obey you in this case. And to the end this may remain established
for ever, (our own right in all other causes reserved,) we have hereunto caused
our Seal to be put. Given at Paris, in the Month of March, and in the year of
our Lord, 1556. And the tenth year of our Reign, and signed by the King, then
in Council, and sealed with Green Wax, upon a Pendant of Red and Green Silk
Lace.

A Reason wherefore this ancient Authority was granted to Merchants.
THere be two things that cause a Commonwealth to flourish, and are main
Supporters and Pillars to the same: The Traffic and use of Merchandising is
the first; For by it, those commodities, which in some Countries grow
superfluous, and over abundant, are transported over into others; In whose
stead, the needful commodities of those other Kingdoms are returned thither.
For which cause, the Emperor commanded all his Judges, and Governors of
Provinces, to hold the same in great estimation. The second, is the order and
custom of Exchange, whereby any man's need may be supplied in all places
wheresoever, only by a Bill of Exchange (of a Merchant of credit) without
endangering either his goods or person; A thing most profitable as reports
Papinian: So that the ancient Lawmakers (perceiving that Merchants were the
first setters up and inventors of Comerce, for buying and selling, together
with the order and use of Exchange; and that they had thereof the best and
soundest understanding, did wisely institute them only to be the principal
Judges thereof; whereby it appears to be no new Authority, whose beginning
grew up, even with the best governed Commonwealths; As may be proved by
infinite examples both of Greeks and Latins.

The number of Officers, appertaining to the said Jurisdiction, and of their
Power.
ARTICLE. 1.
THere is one Prior, and two Consuls, called by those Titles, according to the
Kings pleasure, being renewed every year, about Twelf-tide, at which time all
the Merchants (as well Citizens as Strangers) are assembled in one place; where
after they have given praise to God, choice is made of the said Prior and
Consuls, by most voices; In which election, every Merchant has his voice,
according to the number of Magistrates whom they are to choose: The manner of
giving their voices, being done secretly, either in the favor, or refusal, of
those that are nominated. As first, for the Prior, then for the first Consul,
and next for the second Consul; and so give they the same to the Register of
their Court. And whosoever has the most voices in the Election of the Prior,
is Prior: and so consequently for the Consuls: Following orderly, the choice of
the first, and next after the second: being a thing most commendable and
requisite for the avoiding of all affection and corruption. The President
whereof being taken from the Greeks, who by the same course did make choice of
their Magistrates and Governors.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, The Prior and Consulls newly chosen, do take their oath of the old ones,
and immediately being set in the manner and form of the former, they take the
same oath, in presence of all the Merchants there assembled; promising duly
and faithfully to execute Justice, without any regard either to poor or rich,
as other Judges do, when they are newly established in their government.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, The said Prior and Consuls, present, or to be chosen hereafter, may call
unto them, twenty Merchants, or a greater number to assist them, as
Councillors, for the understanding and deciding of all such differences, as
appertain to their knowledge: and to urge the said Merchants thereunto, upon
their oaths: in such sort, as other Judges do (with such Councillors as they
make choice of, to assist them) in like case; in regard of their Authority.

ARTIC. 4.
Item, the said Priors and Consuls, may choose and nominate one Counselor,
and one Attorney, to procure the good and maintenance of the said Common Place,
and to defend the same in all rightful causes, and to manage both the suits,
businesses, profits, revenues of the same place, as well before the said Prior
and Consuls, as before all other Judges wheresoever.

ARTIC. 5.
Item, the said Counselor and Attorney, shall be chosen by the most voices of
all the Merchants assembled together for that purpose, and not at the will and
pleasure of the Prior and Consuls: and are to be changed every year, according
to the will and discretion of the same Merchants of the same place; having
taken a general deliberation thereof, according to the tenure of the said
Letters Patents of the Month of May, the Kings pleasure being well understood.

ARTIC. 6.
Item, the said Prior and Consuls, shall take the oaths of the said Counselor
and Attorney, that they shall procure as well the good and profit of the same
place, as the credit and increase of their Authority, and the same shall defend
against all men: And they shall never give counsel to the contrary, by any
means whatsoever.

ARTIC. 7.
Item, the said Prior and Consuls, may call to their assistance, the said
Counselor and Attorney, that with them and the said other Merchants, they may
judge and decide all suites and differences appertaining to their knowledge.

ARTIC. 8.
Item, the said Prior and Consuls, of their own authority, may appoint such a
Register, as they shall think meet, to keep their Registers, who shall be
changeable every year, as are the Prior and Consuls; The which Register shall
subscribe to all Acts that shall pass during their government, and by him
done, under the title of a Register, As is contained in the Letters Patents of
the Month of May.

ARTIC. 9.
Item, all Messengers, and such like Officers of the Kingdom, are constrained
by the King, to obey the said Prior and Consuls, and duly and amply to
execute, all, and every of their Commands, Commissions, Sentences, either
definitive or otherwise; And all the judicial Acts and Decrees, of the said
Prior and Consuls, in every place of the Kingdom, like as of the Judges in all
other Governments, whereas the said Messengers and like Officers, do exercise
their Offices; And under the same penalties to be laid upon them without
default, like as they may be constrained to obey other Judges, as is contained
in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 10.
Item. All Jailors and Keepers of Prisons, are subject to receive and keep the
prisoners committed unto them by the said Prior and Consuls, as they do the
prisoners of all the other Judges, and under the same penalties and bonds, if
any escape happen, even like as they are subject to keep the prisoners by
Authority of the other Judges of the Kingdom, as is contained in the said
Letters Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 11.
Item, The Kings pleasure is, that all the said Messengers and such like
Officers; And all Jaylors and Keepers of Prisons within all his Dominions,
shall obey the said Prior and Consuls, without demanding leave or other License
of other Judges, within whose government they do dwell, and exercise the charge
of their Office, according as the late King Francis (of noble memory) has
granted to the Conservator of the Fairs of Lion, in the Month of February, in
the year of our Lord God, 1535. As in the like Authority, the Prior and Consuls
of the Bourse of Thoulouze have been established by this King present, as is
contained in the Letters Pattents hereafter specified.

ARTIC. 12.
Item, The Kings pleasure is, and he does permit and suffer the said Prior and
Consuls, to make choice, and to appoint, within all the Towns, Villages, and
other places of the Provinces of Languedock and Lorogois, certain good,
faithful, and expert men, to search all the Merchandises, which is growing and
used in the said Provinces, to see if there be any abuse, fraud, falsification,
or other deceit in any of the said Merchandises: And according to the report of
the said Searchers, to punish the offenders, according to their demerits, and
power of their authority, for the benefit of the said Merchandises, as is
contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 13.
Item, The said Prior and Consuls, may appoint one or more, Visitors or
Searchers, for the abovesaid Causes, in all places where as they shall think
meet, for the true maintenance of all Merchandises: And the said Searchers so
appointed, shall take their oaths in all things requisite, to discharge their
Offices faithfully, and truly, and according to a good conscience: And to
search the said Merchandise, whereof, and by whom they shall be required
accordingly, for the respects contained in the former Article: And the charges
that shall arise, to be laid upon the offenders, according to the report of the
said Searchers, to whom the said Prior and Consuls shall set down a reasonable
Salary, or reward, to be presently paid unto them without any delay; to the
end, not to fear the parties offending, by color of suite, as the Kings
pleasure is, in the said Letters, Pattents, of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 14.
Item, The said Prior and Consuls, may appoint the said Searchers to take view
of all Woods, Saffrons, Wools, and all other Merchandise that shall be growing,
and used in the said Provinces of Languedock and Lorogois, as is contained in
the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 15.
Item, The said Visitors or Searchers, being chosen as before is said, shall be
subject upon any summons or request made unto them, by any Merchant that
pretends any Merchandises to be falsified, or any other deceit to be found in
it, that they should execute their Offices, be it either in the Kings name, or
in the name of the said Prior and Consuls, without other express Commandment
from the said Prior and Consuls; And shall duly and truly search the
Merchandise whereof they shall be required, upon the like fines and
forfeitures, as should have been laid upon him, who by their report should have
been found culpable, to the end, that the parties offending, should not be made
afraid by Letters, nor no other means used in the other Jurisdictions, for the
gain and profit of the Judges and their Ministers, considering that the said
Searchers shall be chosen and constituted, as before is said.

ARTIC. 16.
Item, The said Searchers may (in the Kings Name, and in the name of the said
Prior and Consuls) command every man whom it shall concern, to bring forth all
their Merchandises, which they shall be required to search, that they may
truly discharge their Office: And if any man shall in such case, refuse to
bring forth his Goods, they shall summon them (so refusing) to appear before
the said Prior and Consuls, that they may take order therein according to
reason.

ARTIC. 17.
Item, The said Prior and Consuls may punish such as shall cause any
Merchandises to be searched, if by the Visitors the same Merchandises shall be
found good and lawful; as contrariwise, they may punish the Refusers, or them
that have committed any fault in their Merchandises, in such penalties as the
case shall require, and as their authority may use.

Of the Forfeitures and Punishments, and what Seal the said Prior and Consuls
may use.
ARTIC. 1.
ITem, The said Prior and Consuls, to entertain, conserve, and defend their
Authority, may for every offense use only the penalty and forfeitures of
Money, and shall apply the same, the one half for the King, the other half to
the party, according to his desert; as is contained in the said Letters
Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 2.
Item. The said Prior and Consuls may without dispersing of the Goods, proceed
by Sequestration, Arrest and Imprisonment of the Persons, who by them shall be
condemned, until their sentence be fully executed, according to such form and
order, as the Conservator of the Fairs of Lion, Bry, and Champaign do usually
observe, as is contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of February
hereafter expressed.

ARTIC. 3
Item, To give force and authority to all the Judicial Acts (being done by the
authority of the said Prior and Consuls) the same shall be sealed with the Arms
and Seal of the said Prior, or of one of the said Consuls, who has judged the
said Acts; and the same shall be subscribed by their Register, even as it is
more amply expressed, in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May, being
thereby prohibited to use any of the Kings Seals, according to the tenor of
the said Letters.

ARTIC. 4.
Item, The said Prior and Consuls, having knowledge of any fraud, or other
deceits, to be used by any man, they may cause the body of the offender to be
committed, and proceed against the offender, so far as his offense shall
concern Trade of Merchandise, Change, or Rechange, although the King be
interessed therein; Provided, that they proceed no further, then concerns
matters of Merchandises, Change, and Rechange: And for his other punishment,
for other offenses, they shall deliver the persons to the Judges, to whom does
appertain the knowledge thereof, for the better punishing of the offender, and
the correcting of all other vices, and not otherwise.

ARTIC. 5.
Item, All Judgments of the said Prior and Consuls, may be executed throughout
all the Kings Dominions, be it by Attachment of Goods and sale thereof, Arrest,
and Imprisonment of the persons condemned, as also by penalties and forfeitures
of Money, according to the cause of the offense, and the Authority of the said
Prior and Consuls, as is contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month
of May.

ARTIC. 6.
Item, All Judgments, Sentences, Ordinances, Commissions, Decrees and
Commandments, as well definitive as otherwise, being done and judged by the
said Prior and Consuls, for all matters pertaining to their knowledge are of
effect and force through all the Kings Dominions, as is contained in the said
Letters Pattents in the Month of May; and others of the Month of February,
hereafter specified according to the order, as well of the Conservator of Lion,
as of other Judges.

Who are subject to the Authority of the said Prior and Consuls, and who are
exempt.
ARTIC. 1.
ITem, All Noble personages and others, all spiritual men, and laymen, of
age, or under age, or their deputies, using and exercising the Trade of
Merchandise or Exchange, shall in that respect be subject to the power and
authority of the said Prior and Consuls, without any manner of exception, as is
contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May, and the
Restrictions thereof, contained in the Letters Pattents, Given at Fountain
Bleau, the seventh of December, in the year 1551. and published in the
Parliament at Thoulouze, the ninth of February in the same year.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, All Servants, Factors, Dealers, and others, of what quality soever they
be, being sent by the Merchants of the said Thoulouze, into any place,
Countries, Dominions, or Provinces, being either within or without the Kings
Dominions, for the Trade of Merchandises or Exchanges, are subject to the
authority of the said Prior and Consuls, only in the respect of the Trade of
Merchandise and Exchange. And all other Judges are forbidden concerning such
debates and differences, growing between the said Merchants, and the parties
above specified in this Article, only to avoid the frauds, abuses, and ill
demeaners of the said servants and dealers, and for other good reasons,
contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, All the Heirs of such men, as are subject to the said authority of the
said Prior and Consuls, and by them shall be arrested and imprisoned, are
exempted: And the said Prior and Consuls shall not have to do, to arrest the
bodies of the said Heirs, but the same suite shall proceed before the Lords of
the Court of Parliament of the said Thoulouze, according to the effect of the
Letters of the eight day of March, in the year 1551. grounded as well by common
reason of Right, as by the Kings Ordinances in the Rewbrick of Letters
Obligatories.

ARTIC. 4.
Item, All Noble personages, Lawyers and Officers, are exempt from the said
authority, although they have bought Cloth of what kind soever, borrowed
Money, or other Merchandises for their necessary uses, according to their
estate and callings, as is contained in the restraints of the said Letters
Patents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 5.
Item, All Opposers against the Sentences and Decrees of the said Prior and
Consuls, are exempt from the said authority, and they cannot thereby be
constrained to bring their causes of opposition before the said Prior and
Consuls; but they shall return the same unto the Judges, to whom the knowledge
thereof does appertain; who having heard the same, and given sentence thereof,
and the execution being accomplished, both for the right of the King, and the
performance of Justice, or otherwise ordained by the Judge, to whom the
knowledge of the said oppositions does appertain, as is contained in the
Restraints of the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 6.
Item, All Appeals of the Sentences and Ordinances of the said Prior and
Consuls, shall be brought immediately into the Court of Parliament of the said
Thoulouze; And none other Judge can reform the Judgments of the said Prior and
Consuls, as is contained in the Letters of the Month of July, 1549. and of the
month of May, 1551.

Three Additions to resolve two difficulties.
ARTIC. 1.
ITem, All that be exempted from the Jurisdiction of the said Prior and
Consuls, can by no means submit themselves thereunto, to take any benefit
thereof, unless it be by the Kings express Command, or Consent of the other
Judges, in special favor and regard of the Causes of the said exemptions,
wherein the said Prior and Consuls must be wise and careful, not to give other
Judges occasion of offense by their rash hearings.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, Saving and excepting the Heirs of such as be dead, that were in their
life time subject to the said Authority, which Heirs (the debts owing by their
Predecessors being proved, and they submitting themselves again by new
Obligations to the rigor of the said Authority) may be constrained by arrest
and imprisonment of their persons: Renouncing the privileges of the same
Articles, made only in the favor of the said Heirs; As by the said Article
before alleged does appear.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, Excepting the Heirs and Successors of Merchants, frequenting the same
Bourse, who, of what estate, profession, or quality soever they be, either
Noble or Head-Officers of the said City of Thoulouze, or of any other
condition, not using nor professing the Trade of Merchandising or Exchange,
shall be summoned, adjourned, and pursued by all due ways, and fit courses,
even as their Predecessors, Merchants should have been, if they had lived
before the said Prior and Consuls, for all things concerning the Trade of
Merchandise, and matters of Exchange, done and used by their said Predecessors,
Merchants, without pretending or alleging any disability or insufficiency, by
reason of their Estate. Provided always, that the suing of them shall be done,
without arresting or imprisoning of their persons; And the said Heirs (of what
condition soever they be) may sue, or cause to be sued, all other Merchants for
the causes and reasons before rehearsed, before the said Prior and Consuls, and
no where else, as is contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of
February, and as in all common right is observed.

What matters are subject to the said Authority, and what matters are not.
ARTIC. 1.
ITem, All debates and differences, by reason of Traffic and dealing in
Merchandise, or cause of Exchange, be it by Obligation, Bill of debt, Receipts,
Blanks signed, Letters of Exchange, and Rechange, Suretiships, Partnerships,
(general or particular) nominations of the sufficiency of men, or places where
they dwell, Debts, Assurances, Accounts, or Auditings of accounts, Transports,
Bargains, and all other Acts and things, with their circumstances, and what
else belonging unto them, do appertain to the knowledge of the said Prior and
Consuls, as is contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, The Imposition or Assessement of such necessary sums of Moneys, as shall
be need full for the building, buying, or hiring of a place fit for the
exercises of the said Jurisdiction to be used in, and for the profit of the
said common Bourse, and of all things belonging thereunto, as also for the
entertaining (in good estate and due form) for the case and benefit of the
transportation of all Merchandise upon the Rivers of Garona, and Geronda, from
the said City of Thoulouze, to the City of Bordeaux, and of all other Rivers
within the Countries of Languedock, and Lorogois: Also the Taxation and
Assessement of every Merchant (as well Inhabitant as Stranger, using the Trade
of the Thoulouze) according to their Abilities and Dealings, does appertain to
the said Prior and Consuls, as is contained in the said Letters Pattents of the
Month of May.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, The said Prior and Consuls, may impose penalties of Money, upon all such
Merchants as shall obstinately refuse to pay such sums of Money as are taxed
upon them for the Causes abovesaid by the said Prior and Consuls, and their
Council: And shall constrain them thereunto, by all due ways, and lawful
means, and also by imprisonment of their persons, until such time as they
shall make payment of the Moneys imposed upon them, as aforesaid. And the
penalties that shall grow thereupon, shall be disposed of by the Prior and
Consuls, the one half for the King, the other half for the benefit of the said
Bourse, as is contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 4.
Item, There does appertain to the said Jurisdiction of the said Prior and
Consuls, the knowledge of rendering of accounts, payments of the whole, or of
part, and all other things concerning the Trade of Merchandise, and order of
Exchange, as is contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 5.
Item, The punishing of all frauds, abuses, deceits, falsifications, and all
other ill dealings in Merchandises, bought and used in the said Countries of
Languedock and Lorogois: And all abuses committed in the course of Exchanges:
All this, in all reason, does appertain to the said Prior and Consuls, as is
contained in the said Letters.

Matters wherein the Prior or Consuls, are forbidden to deal withal.
ARTICLE. 1.
ITem, all matters criminal or offensive, in regard whereof the Kings Attorney
is a party, and thereby has interest therein; as falsifying of Obligations,
and Bills of debt, or other writings, matters of reproach or discredit of
persons, thefts, and other evil and unlawful behaviors, done and committed,
as well by the said Merchants, as by their Servants and Factors, in causes of
Merchandise. As also all others, not exercising the Trade of Merchandise; are
forbidden to be dealt withal, by the said Prior and Consuls, as is contained
in the restraints of the said Letters Patents, of the month of May, hereafter
specified.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, the said Prior and Consuls, are not to deal with the contracts of Usury,
either fained, or otherwise unlawful, whereby the offender, by all reasonable
judgment deserves punishment: As is contained in the said restraints.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, all Civil causes, between men, of what quality soever, besides those
which concern Trade of Merchandise, or matter of Exchange, be it by gift of the
dead, by Will, or in advancement of Marriage, enterchanging of goods by
consent, and all other such like Contracts: be all exempted from the
Jurisdiction of the said Prior and Consuls, As is contained in the said
restraints.

ARTIC. 4.
Item, the said Prior and Consuls are not to meddle with any opposition made
against the execution of any of their Sentences, or ordinances; as is before
expressed, and contained in the said restraints.

ARTIC. 5.
Item, The Authority of the said Prior and Consuls, is only in Civil causes,
according as before is recited: and all such forfeitures as shall happen, shall
be arbitrated by the discretion of the said Prior and Consuls, and disposed of,
as before is said.

ARTIC. 6.
Item, touching all matters that concern the Authority of the Prior and
Consuls, and do appertain to their knowledge, all other Judges, their Deputies,
or Assigns, within all the Kings Dominions, cannot impeach or gainsay: neither
shall they cross or contradict any thing, directly, or indirectly, whatsoever
the said Prior and Consuls, or their Officers shall do: As is mentioned in the
Letters Patents, in the Month of May.

The matters wherein they may Summarily proceed.
THe King in his said Letters Patents of the month of May, has named and
specified the said matters Summaries, the knowledge whereof does appertain to
the said Prior and Consuls, which be these: Acknowledgement of Bills,
Rescriptions, Letters of Exchange, Letters of Advice, Receipts, Blanks signed,
Suerties, Garnishment, and Consignations of moneys, of what sum soever: And all
other circumstances, belonging and concerning the Trade of Merchandise, and
matters of Exchange; As is more amply contained in the Letters Patents of the
Month of May.

The manner how to proceed in matters to be delivered upon a brief and summary
trial, until definitive sentence, according to the Kings Ordinance.
ARTICLE. 1.
FIrst, the said Prior and Consuls shall cause all Plaintiffs at their first
coming before them, in person, or by their Atturnies sufficiently authorized,
to nominate a place in the same Town, for his residence or abiding; and in
default thereof, the said Prior and Consuls shall refuse to receive their
demands, defenses, and oppositions, specially the Plaintiffs, as is contained
in the first Article of the Kings Ordinance in the special clause, That all
Litigans, etc.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, the said Prior and Consuls, are at all times authorized, to proceed in
their said Jurisdiction, ordained for the expedition of Suits, and the ease of
all Merchants trading in that place: except those days, and holy days, in
which the Court of Parliament of the said place does not sit: according to
which Order, the said Prior and Consuls may intermit the exercises of their
Authority: And excepting furthermore, the day of the feast of the Kings (called
Twelf-day) in which the said Prior and Consuls are new chosen.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, the said Prior and Consuls, in the said causes, cannot grant more then
one delay, which is a sufficient advantage for the party offending, as is
contained in the said Letters Patents of the Month of May: And shall be
hereafter declared.

ARTIC. 4.
Item, if any question shall arise, for the acknowledgements of Bills, the
party that is adjourned shall be granted but one default, as above said; to
come, either to confess, or deny his deed: And having made one default, his
Bill shall be held as confessed and available, from the day that the said Prior
and Consuls shall give their Sentences: as is contained in the Kings
Ordinances, and in the Rubric, for the acknowledgement of Bills.

ARTIC. 5.
Item, the said Prior and Consuls, may take notice, that their Authority is
greater in the acknowledgement of Bills, then the Authority of any other
Judges, and more then the foresaid Ordinance does express: For the said
Ordinance does extend but to the adjourning of the said persons only. And the
said Prior and Consuls, upon one only default, and notice left at the lodging
of the defendant, may aver all Bills, and declare the same to be payable, As is
contained in the said Letters Patents, of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 6.
Item, all Debtors and Defendants, being in Question for the said matters,
Summary and Provisionall, shall be by their Creditors and Plaintiffs only once
warned to appear; That is, at a competent day and hour, before the said Prior
and Consuls, to accept or deny the demand, which shall be made against them by
their Creditors and Plaintiffs.

ARTIC. 7.
Item, all warnings or adjournments that shall be given at the first beginning
of any Process, shall contain summarily all the demands of the Plaintiff, to
the end that the Defendant being adjourned, may come prepared for his answer,
at the day and time assigned: As is contained in the third Article of the Kings
Ordinances in the Rubric of Adjournments.

ARTIC. 8.
Item, the Messenger or Sergeant, executing the said Prior and Consuls Letters
of Summons, touching the said matter Summary, he must adjourn the person
himself, if he can find him: otherwise, he shall fix, as well the Coppie of the
Demand, as his said Warrant, at the door of the lodging of him that is
summoned, and the same to be duly proved: and shall afterward give knowledge
unto the said Prior and Consuls, of his diligences done therein: as is
contained in the said Letters Patents of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 9.
Item, forasmuch as in the foresaid matters, the Plaintiff, may (in regard of
one default) obtain advantage in his cause, as is contained in the sixth
Article of the Kings Ordinances, in the Rubric of Sergeants: Therefore all
executions, or Warrants of all Messengers or Sergeants, shall be served and
signed by two Witnesses, or of one at the least: And the said Messengers and
Sergeants, shall be bound to leave a Copy thereof, with the parties so
assigned, or else to six the same upon the door of the lodging, as beforesaid,
although they make resistance; And to make mention of all the Warrants they
have served at the charges of the Plaintiff, as is contained in the first and
last Article of the Kings Ordinances in the Rubric of Adjournments.

ARTIC. 10.
Item, If the party so warned in, make not his appearance at the time to him
assigned, then the said Prior and Consuls, may proceed against him in the said
Causes, by seizing of his Goods, so far as the sums shall amount unto,
pretended to be owing to the Plaintiff, or by arresting and imprisoning the
party adjourned, if he may be taken, and so to detain him, until he shall put
into the hands of the Justice, the like sums pretended to be owing to the
Plaintiff: And this, in case where the party warned and imprisoned would
declare nothing in his defense, against the other party: The Moneys first
deposited in the Court, as the Conservator of the Fairs of the said City of
Lion does, and is contained in said the Letters Pattents of the Month of
February hereafter expressed.

ARTIC. 11.
Item, Without seizure of Goods, it is lawful for the said Prior and Consuls,
at the request of the Plaintiff, to proceed against the Debtor by arrest and
imprisonment, if that be thought the easiest way to do right to the parties,
without exhibiting the Process: Like as the Conservator of the said City of
Lion does, according to the will and pleasure of the late King Francis,
contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of February.

ARTIC. 12.
Item, If the like sums be consigned by the Defendant, he being heard in his
defenses, shall be released or condemned by the said Prior and Consuls, with
charges and fines, according as the Case shall require, and quality of the
person. And if the Defendant be prisoner, for want of depositing the moneys in
the Court, according to the demand of the Plaintiff, heard upon his defense:
The said Prior and Consuls, shall proceed against all such persons, as
abovesaid: And like as the Conservator of the Faires of the said City of Lion
does; To avoid long proceedings, considering the Parties be present: and being
for matters touching Trade of Merchandise and Bills of Exchange.

ARTIC. 13.
Item, if he that is Warned in, do not make his appearance according as he is
Warned to do, and is no prisoner, then, after one default, the said Prior and
Consuls may proceed, by seizing of his goods, so far as the sums contained in
the demand of the adverse party do amount unto. And they may order to call the
said debtor, that at a certain day, hour, and place, he may come to see his
Goods so seized to be publicly sold, to the end that the Plaintiff may be
satisfied with the Money proceeding thereof, according to reason, without any
further delay, as is contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of
May.

ARTIC. 14.
Item, If the Goods so taken and seized be unmovable, the said Prior and
Consuls having caused the Outcries to be made, and present sale thereof, they
shall cause the said Goods to be committed to a certain Commissioner, by the
Messenger, or Sergeant, who did execute the said Outcries; And the party who
is the pursuer, shall cause to be intimated and signified the said Outcries to
all men to whom it shall concern, and to annex the intimation of their said
Outcries, and the returns of the Warrants under the Counter-Seal of the said
Prior and Consuls, upon pain otherwise to be of no effect, as is contained in
the Kings Ordinances in the Rubric of Outcries and Sales, in the second and
fourth Articles.

ARTIC. 15.
Item, The Notice and Outcries being made according to the form usually
observed in the City of Thoulouze, the Sentence and Decree of the said Prior
and Consuls being given, upon the Goods so sold, shall be put into execution in
the behalf of him that offers most, and is last inhanser of the price, as it
is ordinarily done in the Jurisdictions of the other Judges of the said place,
according to the Tenor of the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May; and
as it is contained in the fifth Article of the Kings Ordinances in the Rubric
of Obligations.

ARTIC. 16.
Item, Forasmuch as the said Prior and Consuls, by the Tenor of the said
Letters, may use the Rites and means in the exercising of their Jurisdiction,
which other Judges of the Kingdom do use: The said Prior and Consuls may upon
the interposition of Decree, observe and keep the custom of the Judges of
Normandy, contained in the twenty fourth Article of the Kings Ordinances, in
the Rubric of Abolitions, Confessions, and Grants, etc. whereof the Tenor
ensues.

ARTIC. 17.
Item, Whereas the Returns of many Lands and Inheritances do pass by one only
Decree, upon any person for his debts, although there be many inhansers of
price, yet notwithstanding they shall suffer one only Decree to pass, which
shall be by the last inhanser, to whom the adjudication shall be made; And the
Register cannot constrain the other parties, specially the party who obtained
the Decree, to take the Letter of Decree and Estate; but they shall suffer the
said Inhansers to take the Letters of their Inhansements only; and the said
party who obtained the Decree, to take the Act of that which shall be ordained
upon his opposition, or else the said Prior and Consuls may make the Act of
Return, to the other Judges, to whom the knowledge of the oppositions do
concern.

ARTIC. 18.
Item, For all executions where there is a command to pay within a certain
time, it shall not be needful for the validity of the Warrant of the Outcries
and Notice, or other seizing of Goods or person, to make farther enquiry of
Goods moveable: But a command duly made by a Messenger or Sergeant to the
person, or warning left at his Lodging, shall suffice. After which, the Goods
seized, or the person arrested, shall remain until such time as he has obeyed
the said Command; as is contained in the Kings Ordinances in the eleventh
Article of the Clause of Obligations: And in the said Letters Pattents of the
Month of February, or otherwise they may proceed to the sale of the Goods, as
is before specified.

ARTIC. 19.
Item, If the Goods so seized be movables, then after one default, they shall
be sold publicly to him that offers most, to make satisfaction to the
Plaintiff; And before the sale of the said Goods, the Plaintiff shall cause the
Defendant to be warned to come see his Goods sold and delivered to him that
bids most, according to the custom, and of the Judges of the said place, as it
is contained in the said Letters Pattents of the Month of May.

ARTICLE. 20.
Item, If the said parties warned do make their appearance at the day
appointed, and do show any thing against the demand of the Plaintiff, being by
the said Prior and Consuls condemned to deposite and consign the sums contained
in the said demand, they cannot hinder the said depositing, although they do
appeal from the said sentence which is provisionall, and cannot be withstood,
or suspended by appeal, as is contained in the last Article of the Kings
Ordinances, and in the Clause of provisionall Sentences; and for want of
depositing and obeying the said Sentences, the said Prior and Consuls, may
constrain the Opposers, by arrest, and by imprisonment of their persons, as is
contained in the two Letters Patents of the Months of May and February
hereafter expressed.

ARTIC. 21.
Item, If opposition be made against the seizing, sale, or delivering of the
Goods, or against the Outcries or interpositions of Decree, or against any
other chief point, where opposition may take place, the Money being duly
deposited in the Court, for the matter of the Authority of the said Prior and
Consuls, the parties so opposing themselves, shall be sent to their Judge and
chief men of their Province, to declare before them the causes of their
oppositions, as is contained in certain Letters of the Kings, Given at Fountain
Bleau, the seventh day of December, 1551. Read and published according to their
Tenours in the Parliament of the said City of Thoulouze, the ninth day of
February in the same year.

ARTIC. 22.
Item, If the party warned do offer security, yet notwithstanding he shall be
caused to deposite, and then have power to call his security, (the Money being
deposited in the Court) who being called before he be accepted for security,
shall deposite in the like manner, that after they may proceed as well against
him, as against the principal debtor, according to reason: And all Sentences
and Judgments that shall be given against the security, shall be put in
execution, to wit, against the principal debtor, for the principal sum: And
against the securities for the charges, damages, and interest only; as it is
contained in the twentieth Article of the Kings Ordinances, in the Clause of
Delays.

ARTIC. 23.
Item, To call a Security before Contestation of the Cause, the said Prior and
Consuls cannot grant but only one default, unless the first Security will
call a third man for Security, to whom they may grant another only default; as
it is contained in the second, third, and fourth Articles of the Kings
Ordinances, in the said Clause of delays.

ARTIC. 24.
Item, In the said matters to be proceeded against Refractories, there is no
need to give any delay, but after one default to proceed as aforesaid; for one
only default in the said matters, does give great advantage to one of the
parties; as it is contained in the first Article of the Kings Ordinances in the
Clause of Warnings: And all delays are left by the King to the discretion of
the said Prior and Consuls, to grant them according to the quality of the
persons, causes, and places, as other Judges do.

ARTIC. 25.
Item, If the Plaintiff does Comence any suite by craft, and causes any
execution thereof against his adverse party, or otherwise, if the Defendant
uses any crafty helps, or unlawful means, to defraud the Plaintiff, and not
to satisfy him; The said Prior and Consuls may condemn the party offending,
(for using the said deceit, or unlawful means) in a forfeiture, and the same
to be disposed of as aforesaid; as is contained in the tenth Article of Kings
Ordinances in the Clause of Obligations, and in the said Letters Pattents of
the Month of May.

A note of such Matters wherein it is needful to have instruction, and
knowledge of the Cause.
ALL those Matters are specified and named particularly in the said Letters
Pattents of the Month of May, even as is likewise named, Obligations,
Associations, either general or particular, Nominations of persons, or of
Goods, Assurances, Accounts, and Auditing thereof, the giving up of the Rest
left in the hands of the Accountant, satisfaction of the whole or of a part,
Transports, Delegations, Novations of Debts, Partnerships, Bargains, and other
Acts concerning the business of the said Exchange, and all thereunto belonging.

ARTIC. 1.
First, The Kings pleasure is, by the Tenor of the said Letters of the Month
of May, that the said Prior and Consuls do proceed to Judgment of the debates
and differences moved, or to be moved, by reason of the said matters, after two
defaults, and that the parties warned twice, and making no appearance the
second day appointed them, shall undergo the same Judgment: Note that the King
has not limited any time for the said defaults, but leaves the same to the
discretion of the said Prior and Consuls, who are to limit the same according
to the distance of the place, quality of the party warned, commodity of the
time, and cause of the business, as all other Judges are accustomed to limit
the defaults, according to the same circumstances, and according to the common
disposition of right; And the tenor of the second Article of the Kings
Ordinances in the Clause of Delays.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, Whether the parties warned do appear, or be absent the day appointed
them the second time; The said Prior and Consuls (before they do proceed to
Judgment of the said matters) shall hear the Plaintiffs, who upon their Oaths
shall affirm their debts so demanded to be true, and contain nothing but truth:
And then the defendants so warned being present, answering by credit, which is
as much to say, that it is true, that the demand of the Plaintiff do contain
truth: And forthwith, the said Prior and Consuls condemning them to satisfy
the said Plaintiff with all costs presently taxed, without any form of
Process, by the said Prior and Consuls, according to the Kings pleasure
contained in the said Letters of the Month of May.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, If the parties so warned shall answer by no credit, which is as much to
say, That the demands of the Plaintiffs are not true in all, or in part, they
shall then affirm the same upon their Oaths, and submit themselves to prove the
contrary, as it is contained in the first Article of the Kings Ordinances in
the Clause of Answers.

ARTIC. 4.
Item, If the parties so warned make no appearance (the two defaults being
past) then shall the Plaintiff be bound to send unto the Defendant a Copy of
his demand, with his oath, to the end, that he may either oppose the same, or
approve it, which the Plaintiff may do either by himself, or by his Attorney,
intimating unto him, That if he fails therein, that then the said Prior and
Consuls, will proceed against him summarily to Judgment, upon the Plaintiffs
conclusion, as it is said before.

ARTIC. 5.
Item, If the parties do vary in their demands, they shall be bound to give in
writing, both under their hands and oaths, those points wherein they vary, and
that within eight days, to the end that diligent enquiry may be made thereof;
as it is contained in the third Article of the Kings Ordinances in the Clause
of Articles agreed upon.

Of Inquiries.
ARTIC. 1.
ITem, The said Prior and Consuls, their Lieutenants and Deputies, in making
their Inquest, may not admit of any witnesses, nor take their oaths, nor
proceed in proof, except the adverse party be first called thereunto, or else
their proceedings in such a case shall be of no force; and if the party shall
make default, after he has been twice called, they may then admit of the
Witnesses, and proceed to the Inquiry, and all things thereunto belonging; as
it is contained in the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth Articles of the
Kings Ordinances in the Clause of Commissaries to make Inquest.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, If inquiry be needful to be made for both parties, and one of the
parties will appeal from the Prior and Consuls and from their Deputies, then
the said Prior and Consuls, and their Deputies, may make inquiry in the behalf
of the party that does not appeal; as it is contained in the fifteenth Article
of the foresaid Clause.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, The said Prior and Consuls, in making their inquires, can give but one
only default, within which time the parties must make report of their
inquiries duly to be made, and sealed up with their Seals; as is it contained
in the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Article of the Kings Ordinances in the Clause
of Delays.

ART. 4.
Item, Except the parties have used their diligence in making the same
inquiries within the time limited them, and cannot within that time finish the
same, then upon due proof made of their diligence so used, in such case the
said Prior and Consuls may give them one only delay more, after the which time
they cannot make any further enquiry, by witnesses or otherwise: as it is
contained in the 12. and 13. Articles of the said Ordinances.

ARTIC. 5.
Item, the parties accepted of to make enquiry before the said Prior and
Consulls, may use all sorts of lawful proofs, as well by right as by the Kings
Ordinances; Provided that the same be done as breefely as can be, according to
the power of the Authority, of the said Prior and Consulls: All which is to be
done in civil manner, be it by witness, by writings, public or private, by
collection of Letters, by oath in the fulfilling of all proof: and otherwise,
according as the case shall require, to know the truth, and to instruct the
Consciences of the said Prior and Consuls.

ARTIC. 6.
Item, if in the end of the cause of Demands and Articles of the Parties, there
be found any Article false and deceitful, he that has affirmed the same shall
be amerced by the said Prior and Consuls, an hundredth sols, half thereof to the
Kings use, and the other half to the parties: as it is contained in the 15.
Article of the Kings Ordinances, in the Title of Answers. And they may make use
of the same penalties, against all parties, who shall not within eight days
after all delays, give in all their Demands and things contrary thereunto,
being so ordered by the said Prior and Consuls: as it is contained in the
fourth Article of the Kings Ordinances, in the Title of Articles of Agreement.

ARTIC. 7.
Item, the said Prior and Consuls, and their Deputies, in the proving of any
matter in the behalf of any man whatsoever, can take but ten witnesses, and
them secretly, the one after the other, upon an Arbitrary Amercement, wherein
the said Prior and Consuls and their Deputies may be condemned by the Court of
Parliament of the same place: And that all witnesses whom they shall take
herein above the said number, shall be rejected; as it is contained in the
Title of Witnesses, and likewise upon a matter in the Kings Ordinances.

ARTIC. 8.
Item, The inquiries being made, the Parties there, both or severally, shall be
bound to put in their exceptions, or reproaches, within three days after the
receiving the said Inquiries, without any further delay, upon pain to be
refused; as it is contained in the second Article of the Kings Ordinances in
the Title of Reproaches.

ARTIC. 9.
Item, All Contradictions against the Letters and Exceptions, shall be given
in, within eight days after the said Reproaches, and Exceptions, without any
further delay, otherwise to be denied; as it is contained in the sixth Article
of the said Ordinances.

ARTIC. 10.
Item, After publication made of the said Inquiries, no Reproaches and
Exceptions shall be permitted to be given in; but they shall proceed to
Judgment, and to the deciding of the Cause, upon the former proceedings; as it
is contained in the third Article of the Kings Ordinances.

ARTIC. 11.
Item, All Inquiries, considering they cannot be other then Civil, shall for
Actions of Case be published before the said Prior and Consuls, having first
observed the Tenor of the Articles here before immediately written; as it is
contained in the Kings Ordinances, in the Title of Publications of Inquests:
and every party in the end of the Cause, may retire his own, if he so please,
as it is observed in the Jurisdiction of other inferior Judges.

Of Production.
ARTIC. 1.
ITem, If the proof be to be made by Writings, then the Parties are to bring in
all the same Writings; by which they pretend to prove their intention, within
three days, without any further delay, unless the distance of the place do
require any more time; as it is contained in the third Article of the Kings
Ordinances, in the Title of Productions.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, If the Parties produce any Writings that concern not the cause (to
trouble the Judgment of the said Prior and Consuls) they may then amerce the
same party that shall bring in any such Writings, in a hundred soles, ten
shillings; as it is contained in the second Article of the foresaid Title, to
be employed as it is said before.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, the said respite of three days, or other respits, given by the discreet
deliberation of the said Prior and Consulls, being past, the parties shall not
after be permitted to produce any further Writings, but the process shall be
judged in the same state, as it shall be found at the expiring of the respite,
as it is contained in the fourth Article of the foresaid Title of Productions.

ARTIC. 4.
Item, the Register of the said Prior and Consuls, shall be bound to keep a
little Inventory of all the Writings that shall be produced, and shall cause
the Parties that produce them, to write their names upon every one of them, to
the end that none of the writings so produced, be altered or lost, which might
happen to be of great importance, specially amongst Merchants, between whom
oftentimes do arise differences of great sums, contained in little papers; As
bills of Debts, and letters of Exchange: And likewise to the end that all
Writings so produced, might be seen to agree with the tenor of the Inventory,
in the deciding of the Process: as it is contained in the Kings Ordinances, in
the Title of Inventories.

ARTIC. 5
Item, the said Register shall not take out any Copy of matters of effect out
of the said Inventory, neither for the one party nor for the other, but only
in the cause, and for the end wherefore the said writings are produced, under
the amercement of one hundred sols, to be employed to the profit of the said
Exchange, as the Atturnies of parties in other Jurisdictions, are condemned in
the like sum, to be employed to their Chapel: as it is contained in the
second Article of the said Ordinances, in the Title of Productions.

Of Sentences.
ARTICLE. 1.
FIrst, the said Prior and Consuls, according to the certainty and truth of the
proofs and allegations made before them by the parties, shall pronounce their
Sentences clearly, deciding the Process, under pain of punishment by the Court
of Parliament of the said place, upon the reformation of their Sentences: as it
is contained in the second Article of the said Ordinances, in the Title of
Sentences.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, when the said Prior and Consuls have pronounced their Sentence without
correcting, adding or diminishing the fame, the said Register shall give a
Copy of the said Sentences to either of the said Parties, being required
thereunto, upon an arbitrary penalty to be set upon him, and to be held a false
man if he does the contrary; as it is contained in the third Article of the
foresaid Title.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, the Kings pleasure is, that all Sentences given by the said Prior and
Consuls, both interlocutory and desinitive, shall be of force and effect, even
as those of other Judges, as it is contained in the last Article of the said
Title of Sentences.

Of Arbitrators.
ARTICLE. 1.
ITem, the Merchants of the jurisdictions of the said Exchange of Thoulouze, as
well by their own consents, as by the command of the said Prior and Consuls,
may refer their differences to Arbitrators, from whose sentence, they may
appeal to the said Prior and Consuls, who as they shall see cause, may reform,
or confirm the Sentence of the said Arbitrators.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, the appellation of the Sentence of the Arbitrators, shall not be
accepted by the said Prior and Consuls, before the Arbitrament be performed, by
the party that does appeal; upon condition of restoration in the end of the
Process, if it be so thought good by the said Prior and Consuls: as it is
contained in the Kings Ordinances, in the Title of Arbitrators.

ARTIC. 3.
Item, the said Prior and Consuls are to note, that no Merchant, nor other
being of their Jurisdiction, can transport, or make over their interest to any
person Privileged, and not subject to the same Jurisdiction, be it by gift,
sale, or Exchange, or by any other means, thereby to avoid their Authority, or
else the same transports or possessions, shall be of no effect, and the loss
of their right and cause: as it is contained in the first and second Articles
of the Kings Ordinances, in the Title of Cessions.

ARTIC. 4.
Item, all Scriveners, who shall receive any such transports shall be punished
by the said Prior and Consuls, in an arbitrary penalty: and further shall be
condemned, to pay unto the adverse Party, al his costs and charges, which he
has sustained by means thereof; as is contained in the first Article of the
foresaid Rubric, taken of the common disposition of the right.

Of Accusations.
THe Parties may accuse the said Prior and Consuls, and others of their
Jurisdictions, if they have lawful cause so to do, And that not in writing but
by word, in his presence whom they suspect: And their accusations shall be
summarily examined and decided; and if in case the said Prior and Consuls
should be accused, then the most ancient Merchants, and those who have had the
first pre-eminence in the said Exchange, shall sit in the place of the said
Prior and Consuls: as is observed in the other Jurisdictions; and contained in
the Kings Ordinances, in the Title of Accusations.

Of Distributions.
ARTICLE. 1.
THe said Prior and Consuls, may distribute the Process unto the most ancient
Merchants, that be most expert in the matters that be in Question, to make a
true report unto the said Prior and Consuls: according to the allegations and
proofs of the said parties, to the end to decide the same, according to right;
without any sallery to be given to the said Merchants, in regard of their
report.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, all Merchants to whom the said Prior and Consuls shall distribute the
Process, they shall be subject to take the advice of the Advocate, and Attorney
of the said Exchange, or of any others, if there be any difficulty in the
cause, to the end to discern the right, and to make the better report thereof
unto the said Prior and Consuls, that they may the sooner end the same,
according to reason and right, and at the charges of their parties pursuants,
like as the Conservator of the Faires of the said city of Lion does.

Of Charges and Damages.
ARTICLE. 1.
FIrst, all Charges and Damages shall be taxed by the said Prior and Consuls to
a certain sum, as it shall truly appear unto them, by the discourse of the
Process, having a regard to the quality of the Parties, and quantity of the
causes, without receiving from the Parties any declaration of their charges,
and without any other order of proceeding, as is contained in the last Article
of the Kings Ordinances, in the Rubric of Charges: like as the Conservator of
the Faires of the said Lion does; and is contained in the Letters Patents of
the month of February, hereafter specified.

ARTIC. 2.
Item, if for the repair of the Charges, Damages, and Interest, any person were
condemned in a penalty, and to remain in prison until he had satisfied the
same, by the said Prior and Consuls, the said party cannot be by them enlarged,
without the express consent of the Party interessed, or that he have satisfied
him; As is contained in the seventh and eight Articles, in the Rubric of
Charges, and in the sixth Article of the Rubric of Penalties.

Of Penalties.
ALL Penalties adjudged by the said Prior and Consuls (to be employed as before
said) shall be leavied without delay, as is contained in the second Article of
the foresaid Title of Penalties.

An Extract out of the Register of Parliament.
THe Court did peruse King Henry's Letters Patents in form of a Charter, and
Ordinance, given at Paris in the month of March, 1566. con containing the
ordaining, erecting and establishing of a Common place in the City of Roan for
Merchants, that they and their Factors may assemble themselves there twice a
day, at the usual hours, to traffic, and transact their businesses, as they
do in the Exchange at Lions, and in the Burse at Tholouze: and also to meet and
assemble themselves every year in the said common place: and to choose one
Prior, and two Consuls out of the Merchants, from year to year, to take notice
and Judge of such things as are mentioned in the said Letters Pattents;
together with the Privileges and Liberties contained at large therein. A
Petition being presented by the Citizens, Merchants, dwellers, and Inhabitants
in this City of Roan, in the behalf of themselves, and other Merchants
resorting and trafficking thither, concerning matters of Merchandise; for the
approving of which Grant, and for publishing of the said Letters Pattents; It
is ordered, that without any prejudice of the oppositions made against the
publishing of the said Letters Pattents and Charter, they shall be read,
published, and registered. The Merchants that shall be chosen (according to the
tenor thereof) to be the Prior, Consuls, and Clerks of their Court, must be
free Denizens, or else Naturalized, and married in this Country. Moreover the
Election shall be made before a Committee of two Councillors, named and
deputed by the Court of Parliament for that purpose; before which Committee the
said Prior and Consuls, and the Clerk of their Court shall take the oath
requisite for exercising and discharging their duties in their Offices and
places.

The Register of the said Court of Consuls, and the Clerk of the Assurance
Office, must be inhabitants in the City of Roan, in some public and eminent
place, which shall be chosen and assigned for that purpose.

Given at Roan in the Court of Parliament, the 20 of July 1563. signed by De
Goismare.

I Lewis Marc Pursuivant in the said Court of Parliament, did afterward read
and publish the things above mentioned and contained, at the crossing of the
ways, and in the public places where Proclamations use to be read in this
City of Roan; having first of all caused the Trumpet to be sounded, and
Outcries to be made after the usual manner, on Friday the last day but one of
July, 1563. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and subsignature

Lewis Marc.
In the presence of Peter Bataille the Trumpeter, and of many others there
present at that time.



The Kings Letters Pattents, by which all Messengers of the Parliament, and all
other, or any of the Sergeants of other Courts are enjoined to put in Execution
the Commands and Sentences given by the said Priors and Consuls: and to serve
the Warrants, whenever they shall be required.
CHarles by the Grace of God, King of France, etc.
To all our Messengers, and Sergeants whom it shall concern, Greeting.
Whereas the late deceased King Henry our most honored Lord and Father, has
ordained and established, in our City of Roan one Prior, and two Consuls, after
the manner used and observed at the Exchange in Lions, and at the Burse in
Tholouze. Which thing was approved of by our Court of Parliament at the said
Roan, after many and long suits: and yet, notwithstanding, the most part of you
do refuse to put in execution sentences given, and orders made by the said
Prior and Consuls, under color and pretense, that our Bailiffs, Sheriffs,
Admirals, the Masters of our Waters and Forests, and the rest of our Judges or
their Lieutenants, have inhibited you to warn any persons before the said Prior
and Consuls, under great penalties, and amercements; so that by these means,
the Edict of their establishing is made delusory, void, and of no effect for
them; although we are chiefly interessed in the business, our intent being to
make traffic to be used honestly in our Kingdom.

These are therefore to command and charge you, and every one of you, being
thereunto required, to put in full and entire execution, all Ordinances,
Sentences, and Judgments given by the said Prior and Consuls, and also to
serve their Warrants, and Writs, and make returns thereof, as you, and every of
you shall be required, without asking any leave, Placet, Visa, or Pareatis;
neither shall any one of our Judges whatsoever, have power or authority to
hinder you, or to call you into any of their Courts, or Jurisdictions, for we
have expressly interdicted and forbidden, and do interdict and forbid them by
these presents, so to do, under the penalty of answering in their own
particular persons, for all charges, damages, and interests of the parties;
for such is our pleasure, notwithstanding any Edicts, Ordinances, Restraints,
Commands, Prohibitions, and Letters whatsoever to the contrary.

Given at Paris the 23. day of October in the year of our Lord 1563. and of our
reign the third. Signed by the King in his Council Morin with his
Subsignature, and sealed with one only labell of the great Seal, with yellow
wax.

The said Patents signified unto the Bailiff, Sheriff, the water Sheriff,
Admiralty and Sergeants, by Cireule the Messenger, according to the relations
of the 15. of November 1563. and the 3. of September 1514.

The Kings Letter Pattens in form of a Declaration, given upon the establishing
of the Judges Consuls at Paris.
Charles by the Grace of God,
to all unto which these presents shall come, Greeting.
We give you to understand that upon the Petition presented unto us in our
Council by the Merchants of our City of Roan; We have through the advice of
the said Council, declared and ordered and do declare and order by these
presents, That the Edict and order made by us at Paris in the month of
November, in the year 1563. for the establishing in our said City of Paris, one
Judge, and four Consuls of Merchants, with a Jurisdiction and Power of taking
notice of all Processes and differences between Merchants, in matters of
Merchandice; shall have place, and shall be kept and observed henceforward, as
well for what concerns the manner of the Election, as for the Jurisdiction of
the Prior and Consuls of Merchants heretofore established in our said City of
Roan: To exercise and to execute Justice henceforward, by them that shall be
chosen from year to year, between Merchants, in matters of Merchandice only,
according to the Tenor of the said Declaration. And the Counselors of the
common Citie-Hall (except they be of the number of them that are chosen) shall
have no authority to intermeddle with their affairs during the times of free
Fayrs, as they do pretend to belong unto them by the Charter of the deceased
King Lewis the eleventh, given at Arras in the month of May, 1417. which we
have called in, upon that consideration; and in so doing, have united, and do
by these Presents unite the pretended Jurisdiction of the said Counselors of
the Common Hall, to that of the said Prior and Consuls of Merchants, and upon
the Remonstrance also made by the said Merchants: That ordinary Judges do still
take notice of the oppositions made against the execution of Sentences and
Judgments given by the said Prior and Consuls, they pretending to know, and
that they ought to take notice of the differences between Merchants, Drapers,
Hosiers, Shoe-makers, Mercers, Fishmongers, and others, that sell and buy by
Retail; saying, That it is a business belonging to the Bailiffs Court of the
City, and to the Lieutenants, and to the Sheriffs. We, to make an end of those
difficulties and hindrances in the execution of our Edicts, have declared and
ordered, and do declare and order, and it is our Will and Pleasure, That the
taking notice of all oppositions which shall happen hereafter against the
execution of the Sentences and Judgments given by the Prior and Consuls of the
Merchants of Roan, and of all differences in matters of Merchandice between
Merchants only, either sellers or buyers, by the Great, or by Retail; shall
remain, and belong to the said Prior and Consuls, privatively from any other
Judges, as well ordinury, subordinate, Deputies, Inferior, as of Our said Court
of Parliament at Roan: Forbidding them the taking of the same in the first
Instance, being reserved for the parties to provide themselves by Appeal, in
the cases of Our Ordinance, and not otherwise.

Moreover, We do command Our trusty and welbeloved, keeping Our said Court of
Parliament at Roan, to cause these Presents to be read, published, and
registered with an Extract signed, out of the Register of Our Court of
Parliament at Paris, of the said Ordinances given at Paris in the month of
November, 1563. to keep and observe the Contents thereof, and to cause them to
be kept and maintained inviolably, and in every point, according to the Form
and Tenor thereof; causing all hindrances to the contrary to cease,
considering the good, and profit, and ease which resulteth from thence unto
Merchants; and for the maintaining of Traffic, Negotiation, and otherwise.
For, such is Our Pleasure, all pretended Privileges, Statutes, Ordinances, or
any other Letters to the contrary thereunto notwithstanding.

Given at Montpellier the 29 of December, 1564. and in the fourth year of Our
reign.
And upon the backside it is endorsed, By the King in his Council, signed by
Cauvet his Subsignature, with an appearance that the said Letters were sealed
with a double Label.

Moreover, it is endorsed, Read, published and registered, with the Extract of
the Decree of Parliament at Paris therein mentioned, at the request of the
Prior and Consuls, established for the Merchants in the City of Roan, and also
at the request of the said Merchants; with the consent of the Kings Atturneys
General, under the Clauses contained in the Decree thereupon ordered, given,
and now published. 1566.

At Roan, in the Parliament. Signed, Du Val his Subsignature.

Decrees, Ordinances and Presidents of the Court of Parliament, given between
the Bailiffs, Aldermen, Sheriffs of Roan; the Water-Sheriff, and the forty
Sergeants of the said City, of the one part: And the Priour and Consul
Merchants of the said Common Place, of the other part: Upon the approving of
the Kings Letters Patent given at Montpellier the 29 of December, 1564. above
inserted. On the 13 of July, 1565. at Roan, in the Court of Parliament.
BEtween the Prior and the Consuls established for Merchants in this City of
Roan, and the Merchants, dwellers and inhabitants of the said City,
Plaintiffs, desiring the approving of the Grant, and publishing of certain
Letters Patents of the Kings Declaration, containing an Enlargement of their
Jurisdiction; M. Nicholas Rome Lord of Fresquiennes, now Prior; Peter Dumoncel
and Allonce le Seigneur, the Consuls, being present: and by M. Richard le fae
their Attorney, on the one part: And the Bailiff and Sheriff of Roan, the
Water-Sheriff, and the Counselors of the Common Hall of the said City, and
the forty Sergeants of the said place, Defendatns against the said approving
of the Grant, and publishing of the said Letters Patents; appearing by M.
Martin le Roy, James de Verdun, and Peter Deffaies, their Atturneys, of the
other part, in the presence of the Kings Attorney General. The parties being
heard, and the Kings Attorney in a verbal Plea; and that Bigot for the said
Attorney General, said, That the cause of the Order which was made, that the
said Letters Patents should be communicated unto the Defendants, was, to hear
if they could allege any thing for the public good and utility, which the
Court and the Kings Officers intended only to regard. And having heard what is
pleaded, the said Attorney General shall give his Conclusions in writing: that
all being seen and perused by the Court, they may do justice therein. The Court
has ordered, and does now order, That the said Attorney General shall give
his Conclusions in writing, upon the approving and publishing of the said
Letters Patent, as was intended at the Council. The cause pleaded by the
Defendants, was annexed thereunto.

Given as above: the Copy being examined with the Original. Signed, de
Boisleuesque, with his Subsignature.

The eleventh day of December 1655. in the Court of Parliament.
BEtween master William Puchot the Sheriff of Roan, plaintiff, desiring the
grant of a certain Request presented by him unto the Court: whereby the Letters
Patents of the Kings Declaration, obtained by him at Rochel the 15 of September
last past, might be read, published, and registered; the Contents whereof to be
enjoyed, and use made of by the said Sheriff, being then present himself in
person, and by Master William de Bourgongne his Atturny, of the one part; and
the Prior and Consuls established by the Merchants of this City of Roan
defendants, and opposing themselves against the grant of the said request:
Bardin Bignon, the Warden of the common Burse of the Merchants being present:
and by Master Richard le Fae their Attorney, of the other part: in the presence
of the Kings Attorney General: when Ange had said in the behalf of the said
Puchot the Sheriff of Roan, that he had formerly made an opposition unto the
publishing, approving, and grant sued, and desired in the said Court, by the
Prior and Consuls, of certain Letters Pattents, granted by the King at their
suite and instance, pretending to increase, and enlarge by them their
jurisdiction. And though they were established and ordained to take only
notice of traffic, and Merchandise between Merchant and Merchant: Yet they
endeavored to procure and obtain that it might be granted unto them to take
notice of processes and differences, which might arise and happen out of things
sold by retaile for the ordinary uses, and for the necessities of the people,
and of the Kings Subjects, to the great prejudice of the said Sheriffs
Jurisdiction. Upon which opposition, and other contradiction made against the
publishing desired by the said Priour, and Consuls of their said Letters given
at Montpellier the 29. of December, 1564.

The case was laid all open plainly, and given his Majesty to understand in his
Privy Council, where he was present, that by the Contents of the said Letters
Pattents of the 29 of December, 1563. so obtained in the behalf of the said
Consuls, they could not extend them to the taking notice of such Processes as
should arise by reason of that which is sold by retaile for the use and
ordinary necessities of the people: and nevertheless the King, to make the
business more clear, had moreover by the said letters, being a decree of his
Privy Council, of the 15. of September, declared and ordered, That by the said
Letters Pattents of the 29. of December 1564. his Majesty's intent was, that
the said Priour and Consuls should know of no other differences soever, but in
matters of traffic negotiation, and Merchandise between Merchants only,
according to the tenor of the Edict, and Letters Patents of their ordaining
and establishing, and that they should have no authority to take any notice of
those differences that might arise for any Merchandise soever sold or bought
for the ordinary necessities or use of the Kings Subjects: which notice his
Majesty's will and intent was, and now is, that it should belong and remain
with the said Sheriffs of Roan, and with other ordinary Judges, though the
buyers, and sellers be Merchants, since this kind of selling and buying is not
made by way of Merchandise, but only for their necessity and uses, the said
Ango concluding in the behalf of the said Sheriff of Roan to the ends of his
request, and that thereby the Letters Pattents of the Kings Decla-Declaration
of the 15. of September, now read, published, and registered, the Contents
whereof to be enjoyed and use made of by the said Sheriff according to the form
and tenor of the same, and that inhibition may be made unto the said Prior and
Consuls, for attempting any thing to the prejudice of them, desiring charges
against them in case of contradicting.

Unto which Cadyot, for the said Prior, Consuls, and Merchants, has said that
the said Letters Pattents of the Declaration obtained by them, were
communicated by Order of the Court to the Citizens Councillors of the Common
hall of this City of Roan, which have them still in their hands; upon the
reading and publishing whereof, the said Sheriffs of Roan had opposed himself,
as also the Bailiff of Roan and others. Whereupon the case was appointed in the
Council: the said Sheriff not signifying it unto the King, had obtained the
said Letters Patents of the Declaration, by which there might be done a formal
prejudice unto the said instance, which would have been judged nothing, (being
seen, and the party not being heard) by the said Letters Patents, an unusual
thing and altogether unreasonable; declaring, that he opposes himself against
it, and hinders the ends of the said Sheriff of Roan his request: maintaining
that the said Letters of the new Declaration obtained by the same Sheriff, may
not, nor must not be published nor take any effect to the prejudice of the said
instance appointed in the Council, which must be first decided: or else he
maintains that first and before they can proceed farther in this business,
the parties must be sent back to provide themselves before the King, and that
he has many great and important reasons to show of which he is not at all
instructed at the present, which to bring in he maintains howsoever that a
competent time and delay must be given him, which delay has been contradicted
and hindered by the said Ango, for the said Sheriff of Roan, considering the
preceding delays before, by him quoted, prefixed, and limited to the said Prior
and Consuls, to come to make inhibition against his said request; when also
Bigot had said for the Kings Attorney General that the said Lord our Sovereign
by his last Letters of Declaration had made a very reasonable limitation to
those whom the Prior and Consuls had obtained to enlarge the Jurisdiction given
unto them, by their ordaining and establishing; desiring that Cadyot Advocate
for the said Prior and Consuls would say what he should think good, if he did
intend to say any thing else, or otherwise, that default might be given against
him in his own presence. The said Cadyot, for the said Prior and Consuls,
insisting in his plea, and in desiring that the parties might be sent back to
the King and to his Privy Council, where they do intend to show fully the
consequence and importance of the said Letters of Declaration obtained by the
same Sheriff of Roan; and in case they should take effect, and the taking
notice of what is sold by retaile, should be taken away from the said Prior and
Consuls: the grant of Jurisdiction made unto them, would be so weakened, that
the traffic of merchandise would be much retarded thereby, by the long suits
against the Kings mind, and other great and pertinent reasons, which the said
Prior, Consuls, and Merchants do intend to show plainly.

The Court has appointed and does appoint the parties to the Council upon the
publishing, desired upon the Sheriff of Roan, of the Letters of the Kings
Declaration of the 15. of September, to do right therein, in Judging the
instance also appointed to the said Council, by a decree of the 13. day of
July last past, as it shall be found requisite: in the mean time the said Court
has made, and does make inhibitions, and forbids the said Prior and Consuls
upon such penalties as belong to the case, to assume unto themselves the taking
notice of Processes and differences arising out of Merchandises sold, or bought
for the ordinary necessities, or uses of his Majesty's people and subjects,
permitting them only to take notice of those differences, that proceed by
reason of traffic, and negotiation of Merchandise, between Merchants,
according to the Ordinance and Letters Pattents of his Majesty, concerning
their Ordaining and establishing.

Given as above, Signed, Dudere, with his Subsignature.

An extract out of the Register of the Court of Parliament.
THere was seen by the Court the Kings Letters Patent given at Montpellier the
29 day of December, 1564. signed by the King in his Council Camus, and sealed
upon a double Label of yellow Wax, containing a Declaration, Order and
Enlargement of the Jurisdiction of the Prior and Consuls established for the
Merchants in this city of Roan; a Decree of the Court of Parliament of Paris
of the 18 day of January, 1563. upon the publishing of the Ordinance, and
establishing of a Judge and Consuls in the said city of Paris. There was seen
also the said Ordinance transcribed, and inserted into it: the Decree given
between the said Prior and Consuls, and the Bailiff and Sheriff of Roan, the
Water-Sheriff, the forty Sergeants, and the Counselors of the common Hall of
this said city of Roan, and the Kings Attorney General, the 13 of July, 1565.
An Act of the 14 of April last, made before the said Prior and Consuls,
containing a Declaration made by them, that they intended no ways to prejudice
the franchises and liberties of Faires of this said City of Roan, by the said
Pattents, and other Papers produced in the said Court, according to the said
Ordinance of the 13. of July, 1565. a conclusion given in writing by the said
Attorney General, of the 13. of August, in the said year 1565. The Lawyers of
the Bailiffs, Sheriffs, of Roan, Water-sheriffs, and of the Counselors of the
Common hall of this City of Roan, being all considered. It is said that the
Court considering the request of the said Prior and Consuls, immediately after
the publishing of the first Ordinance made upon their ordaining and
establishing, and with the consent of the Kings Attorney General, has
ordered, and does order, that the said Letters Pattents with the extract of the
decree of the Court of Parliament at Paris, and the Declaration inserted and
transcribed therein, shall be read, published, and registered in the Registers
of the said Court, upon the condition, and provided nevertheless, that the
Priors and Consuls, which are now, and which shall be hereafter chosen, shall
be bound to appear in the said Bailiffs Court at Roan every year, on the usual
days, and there to take their oaths as other Judges, resorting unto the said
Court and depending thereon; end that the Election of the said Prior and
Consuls shall be made in the presence of the two Presidents, and Councillors
of the said Court, as before, according to the Decree given in that Court, upon
the approving and publishing of the first Ordinance of the ordaining and
establishing of the said Prior and Consuls; upon condition likewise that they
shall Judge according as it is prescribed by the Kings Laws and Ordinances, as
well concerning unlawful contracts, as concerning the number and quality of
their Assistants, which they shall call in (being a fit and competent number)
to Judge: and also that they may not know, judge and decide cases, finally and
without appeal, but only in such cases and no further than the Presidiall
Judges.

Given at Roan in the Parliament the 30. of August: the Audience sitting, 1556.
Signed Du Val, with a Subsignature.
The copy being examined with the Original.



The 25. day of July, 1566.
I Claudius Moysi Pursuivant in his Majesty's Court of Parliament of Roan, do
certify that at the request of the honorable Ferdinando de Quintanadoines
Prior, Thomas du Pont, and John Tanquart Consuls of the Merchants of this said
City in this present year; have Signified the said Decree of the said Court,
dated the 30. of August 1566. unto Lewis Combaut, John Baudovin, Roger Bechin,
and Guillebert Marsellet, his Majesty's Sergeants of this City of Roan, and the
chief of every decury, speaking unto them in persons, and at their dwelling
houses, for them, and all his Majesty's Sergeants of their respective decuries
in this said City, that they nor any of them may not plead that they were
ignorant thereof, or attempt any thing to the prejudice of the same, upon the
penalties thereunto belonging, sommoning the said chief persons of every
decuries, to give special notice of it to the Sergeants of their decuries: to
which end, I delivered unto every one of the said four chief persons of the
decuries, a copy of the said decree with a relation and return thereof, at the
charges of the said Prior and Consuls.

Done by me the above said Pursuivant, in the presence of Peter du Val, and of
Romain de Bosc, witnesses.

Signed Moisi with his Subsignature.

The Kings Letters Pattents in manner of a Declaration given at Moulins,
containing the confirmation of the Ordinances and Declarations heretofore
granted to the Prior and Consuls of the Merchants in Roan, with an enlargement
of their Jurisdiction, Registring, and Decree of the approving thereof, and a
Verbal process of the reading of the same, made in the Bailywick, and in the
Sheriffs Court of Roan.
CHarles by the Grace of God, King of France,
to our trusty well beloved, keeping our Court of Parliament at Roan, Greeting.
The Prior and Consuls of the Merchants of our City of Roan have caused to be
told and Remonstranced unto us in our Privy Council, That although by our
Edicts, Ordinances, and Declarations, given by us concerning the Jurisdiction
of the said Prior and Consuls: it is expressly prohibited unto Judges in
Ordinary, to assume unto themselves the taking notice, and Judging of such
cases, which are attributed unto the said Prior and Consuls. Yet
notwithstanding, they do commonly assume unto themselves the taking notice, and
judging of the said matters between Merchants, and in matters of Merchandise,
sold or bought, either by whole sale or retaile: even so far, as to prohibit
the parties to proceed any where else, but before them; and they do also
forbid the Sergeants to execute the Sentences and commands of the said Prior
and Consuls, or to cite and warn any body before them, amercing them; so that
the said Sergeants make a scruple, and refuse to assist and to be present in
the said Court of the Prior and Consuls, as they are enjoined by our Edicts and
Declarations, which would be made by these means delusory unto them, except we
were pleased to provide for them in this case, being therefore willing that for
these causes, our Ordinances and Declarations may take place and effect, We
charge you, and through the advice of our Council, do expressly command you by
these presents, that according unto our said Ordinances and Declarations, you
do expressly prohibit the Judges in Ordinary, the Officers of our said city of
Roan, and others, whom it shall concern, to assume unto themselves the taking
notice of matters granted by our said Ordinances and Declarations unto the said
Prior and Consuls, directly or indirectly, although the parties themselves were
willing to proceed before before them, and also to forbid the Advocates and
Sollicitors to undertake the said causes, nor to plead them before the Judges
in Ordinary, upon the penalty of making void the suite, and of Arbitrary
amercements, charges, damages, and interests of the parties, as well of the
said Judges, as against the Lawyers and Attorneys: enjoining all our Serjegants
every one of them in their turns to assist and to be present at the days and
hours in which the Court of the said Prior and Consuls uses to be kept; there
to command silence, to put in ure and execution their Orders and commands, and
to summon all such persons before them, and to serve their Warrants as they
shall be required thereunto, and to give them such honor and reverence, as
they owe unto Magistrates, constraining them and evey one of them so to do; and
to suffer and obey by all due and reasonable means, and by imprisonment of
their persons. All oppositions and appeals to the contrary notwithstanding, by
reason of which we will not have any delay to be made, enjoining likewise our
Atturnies in every one of the several Courts, upon the duty of of their
Office, to be aiding and assisting in the execution of the command and
Authority of these presents, which we will have to be read and published as
well in our said Court, as in every of the said Jurisdictions, that none may
plead that they were ignorant thereof: for such is our pleasure.

Given at Moulins the 22. day of February 1566. and in the sixth year of our
Reign. Signed by the King in his Council.
Camus with his subsignature, and Sealed upon one Labell with the great Seal of
yellow wax, and in the Margent of the said letters Pattents it is written
underneath.

Read, Published and Registered, in the hearing of the Kings Attorney General,
that they that have obtained them may enjoy them, as it is contained in the
Ordinance given this day upon the publishing thereof at Roan in the Parliament
the 22. day of March, in the year mentioned in the Original.

Signed De Boisleuesque with his Subsignature.

Of the 22 of March, 1555. at Roan in the Court of Parliament.
Upon the request made verbally in the Court by de Bretignieres, Advocate, in
the behalf of the Prior and Consuls established for the Merchants in this City
of Roan, which have obtained some certain Letters Patent of the Kings
Declaration, for the ordering of their Jurisdiction, given at Moulins the 22 of
February last past, appearing by M. Richard le Fac their Attorney; that it may
please the Court, in approving the said Letters Patent, to cause them to be
read, published and registered, that the said Prior and Consuls may enjoy them,
according to the form and tenor thereof: Bigot did afterward declare, by the
Atturney-Generall, that he would not hinder it, in case there was no derogating
from the Ordinances made by the Court, as well upon the publishing of the
Ordinance for the ordaining of the said Prior and Consuls, as from others; even
from that Ordinance which was given upon the 11 day of December last, between
the Sheriff of Roan, and them: by which it was ordered, that the said Prior and
Consuls should not take notice of differences arising about things sold for
common necessities; but only of such as did arise concerning Traffic between
Merchant and Merchant: without any prejudice likewise to the Court which uses
to be kept in the Common Hall of this city of Roan, during the Fayrs: and by
the Agreement made between them and the Citizens counselors of the
Common Hall, that the said Prior and Consuls of the Merchants should have no
power, nor no authority of assembling themselves in the said Common Hall, for
the giving and allowing of charges.

Because also they may neither thereby assume unto themselves any authority
over Judges in ordinary, to punish them, pretending that they have usurped upon
their Jurisdiction. And Ango for the Sheriff of Roan, and Lermite in the behalf
of the Counselors of the said Common Hall, appearing by M. Peter de Hays and
Marten le Roy, their Atturneys respectively; have declared, that except the
said Prior and Consuls would give their assent unto the said Qualification and
Restraints mentioned by his Majesty's Atturney-Generall, they do intend to
oppose the said reading and publishing.

Unto which de Bretigneres, for the said Prior and Consuls, has said, That
their intent was not to do against what was agreed upon between them and the
said Counselors of the city, neither to withstand the Ordinances of the said
Court, by which they were prohibited to use Amercements and Censures permitted
by Law, for the maintaining of their Jurisdiction: and that the said
Letters Patent were read in a due and lawful manner.

The Court has ordered, and does now order, That in the margent at the lower
end of the said Letters Patent, these following words shall be written.

Read, published and registered, in the hearing of the Kings Atturney-Generall;
the Contents thereof to be enjoyed and used by the Petitioners, according to
the Edict of their ordaining and establishing: a Decree being made thereupon;
and another Ordinance being made between the Sheriff of Roan and them, in the
month of December last past; and an Order between the Prior and Consuls, and
the Counselors of the Common Hall of this City.

Given as above. Signed Du Val, with his Subsignature.

BY the Kings Letters Patent given at Angers the 6 of November, 1568. it was
permitted unto the said Consuls to levy Moneys upon Merchants dwelling and
trafficking in the city of Roan, either strangers made Denizens, or others; as
well for the buying of a place for their Court, as for other occasions and
things thereunto incident: and approved of in the Court of Parliament, the 2
day of May, in the year aforesaid. The said Letters Patent, and the Ordinance
of approving thereof, are here omitted, for brevity sake, because they are
mentioned and related in the next following verbal Process.

The verbal Process made by the Counselors deputed by the Court.
IN the year of the Lord 1566. on Friday the 2 of August; We George le Brun,
one of his Majesty's Counselors in his Court of Parliament at Roan, deputed
Commissioner by it, by an Ordinance of the 26 day of June last; at the request
of Bardin Bignon the Attorney of the Merchants, and of the Exchange of the
Prior and Consuls of this city of Roan: and M. William Godeffroy, Advocate in
the said Court, and chief Commissioner in the civil Register in the Auditories
of the Bailiffs and Sheriffs Courts in this city of Roan: did go to put in
execution the said Ordinance, containing our Commission; and, according unto
it, to cause the Letters Patent to be read and published, and also the
Ordinances of the said Court mentioned therein. And first of all, in the
Auditory of the Bailiffs, where we found the Court sitting, and M. James de
Brevedent, Lieutenant-Generall unto the said Bailiff of Roan, keeping it,
assisted by M. James de Chandelier, Richard Guerard, James Cadyot, and Robert
le Teillers, counselors in the Presidiall See of the said Bayliwick: which de
Brevedent having yielded us the chayr, we have, at the request of the said
Bignon the Attorney, caused to be read and published by the said Godeffroy our
Register, first of all the said Decree containing our Commission, and
afterward the said Letters Patent given at Angers the 6 day of November last,
the Ordinance of the Court given for the approving and granting of them, the 2
day of May also last past; the Letters Patent given at Moulins the 22 day of
February; the Ordinance of the Court given upon the reading, publishing and
registring of them, the 22 of March, and another Ordinance therein mentioned,
given the eleventh day of December aforegoing, between the Sheriff of Roan, of
the one part, and the said Prior and Consuls of the other: together with the
Decree of the 22 of June last past, containing a Permission from the said
Court, unto the said Prior and Consuls, to cause the said Letters and
Ordinances to be published in the said Jurisdictions and Auditories of the
Bayliwick and Sherivalty of Roan: after which reading and publishing, the said
Bignon, in the said Name, has required us, that an Act and a verbal Process
might be delivered unto him. And it has been required and demanded, by the
said de Brevedent the Lieutenant, that the copies of the said Letters and
Ordinances might be delivered unto him, to provide himself for his part,
against the usurpations which the said Prior and Consuls make commonly upon the
Jurisdiction, and otherwise, as he shall see good to be done; protesting, that
the said reading and publishing can be no ways prejudicial unto him. The like
Request and Protetestation being made by M. Matthew Poullain, Advocate in the
behalf of the Registers of the said Bailiff of Roan, the said Bignon protesting
against it, in the said Name: Of which reading and publishing, we have granted
an Act to the said said Prior and Consuls, appearing as above; and to the said
Lieutenants, and Registers of their Protestations; and to the said Bignon in
the said Name, of his Protestation to the contrary, to be available unto them
respectively, as it shall be reasonable; and have ordered, that the copies of
the said Letters Patent and Ordinances should be delivered unto the said
Bevedent and Register, to such end as shall be fitting.

This being done, we went into the Sheriffs Auditory, wherein we have likewise
found the Court sitting, and kept by M. William Puchot Sheriff of Roan, who
yielded us the place and the chair: in which Auditory the Court sitting as
above, we have caused the like reading and publishing to be made, as above, of
the Letters Patent and Ordinances above quoted and dated: Which reading and
publishing being heard by the said Bignon, he has besought and requested in
the said Name, that an Act, and a verbal Process thereof, might be delivered
unto him, to be available in time to come, as it shall be meet. And we were
requested by the said Puchot, to cause the copies of the said Letters Patent
and Ordinances to be delivered unto him, to provide himself for his part,
against the usurpations which he has said to be made daily by the said Prior
and Consuls upon his Jurisdiction; and to that end, to present his Petition
unto the Court, that it may be likewise permitted unto him to cause the said
Ordinance of regulating made between him and the said Prior and Consuls, the 11
of December, to be published, after the sound of the Trumpet, in all the
crosse-ways of the City: protesting moreover, that the said reading and the
publishing can be no ways prejudicial unto him. Whereupon we have ordered, that
the said Prior and Consuls shall have, and we have granted them, an Act of the
said reading and publishing to such ends as are contained in their request, and
unto the said Sheriff his Protestation: and that the Copies requested by him
shall be delivered unto him, to such ends as it shall be meet, and unto the
said Bignon in the said Name, of his contrary Protestation. Of all which things
we have made this verbal Process, and have signed it in truth with our
Signet, and caused it to be signed by our Register and Assistant, and thereunto
the Seal of our own Arms to be put, the year and day above-written.

The Kings Letters Patent, containing a Declaration, upon the reestablishing
of Court of Requests in Roan.
CHarles by the grace of God, King of France,
To Our trusty and welbeloved keeping Our Court of Parliament at Roan.
Whereas by the Ordinance of the reestablishing the Court of Requests in Our
said Court, published in it the first day of July last, it was ordered in one
of the Articles thereof, That the Masters of the said Requests shall take
notice in the first instance privatively from any other, of the differences of
Hansians, Germans, Ostrelins, English, Scotch, Portingals, Spanish, and other
Foreigners, which shall be made and moved by them against Our Subjects within
the Precincts of your Jurisdiction, for what occasion soever: which many would
interpret to the prejudice and restraint of the Jurisdiction of the Prior and
Consuls of the Merchants of Our city of Roan.

We give you therefore to understand, That upon the Remonstrance made unto us
by the Attorney of the said Prior and Consuls, to make Our intents and will
clear; We have said and declared, and do say and declare, by these Presents,
That we have not meaned by the said Article of the said Ordinance to prejudice
any ways, nor touch what is formerly granted by Our Ordinances, Orders and
Declarations made upon the establishing of the said Prior and Consuls of Roan,
for Suits in Law, and differences between Merchants, and in matters of
Merchandise, and in things incident thereunto. We will, and Our pleasure is,
That the said Ordinances, Orders and Declarations shall hold, be kept and
observed in every point, without any restriction or limitation soever: the said
Article notwithstanding. Moreover, We do command and enjoin you to cause the
said Prior and Consuls, present or to come, to enjoy fully and peaceably the
said Letters Patent and Declaration; ending, and causing all hindrances to
the contrary to cease. The Ordaining, and re-establishing of the said Chamber
of Requests, or any oppositions, or prohibitions to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding; for such is our pleasure.

Given at the Castle of Bolonge near Paris the 8. day of July, in the year of
the Lord 1568. and the eighth year of our Reign. Signed by the King in his
Council Camus, and sealed upon a single Labell with the great Seal of
yellow-wax.

A Confirmation of the Ordinances and Declarations concerning the establishing
of the Jurisdiction, and Common Place of the Merchants of Roan in the year
1596. And Ordinance of the approbation thereof in Parliament.
HEnry by the Grace of God, King of France, and of Navar,
To all present and to come Greeting.
Our dear and well beloved, the Prior and Consuls of the Merchants of our City
of Roan, have caused to be Remonstrated unto us, That although our deceased
predecessors Charles and Henry the last our most honored Lords, Father in Law
and brother, have for great and just considerations granted them Letters
Pattents as well in form of Ordinances of their ordaining and Institution, as of
Orders, and Declarations, concerning the Jurisdiction, and the taking notice of
what is granted them in matters of Merchandise and for the manner of their
Election duly and rightly approved of in our Court of Parliament of the said
place: nevertheless they are daily troubled and tormented by Judges in
Ordinary, which endeavor to make the said Jurisdiction of no effect, and to
frustrate the Merchants of the said Roan, their Widows, Heirs, and Factors,
Negotiators, Masters of Ships and of Vessels, Boats, and Packmen, Carriers
carrying and re-carrying their Merchandises, importing or transporting their
Wares by water and by land; of the good and sincere intention of our said
Predecessors, and there are also Commissions of appeals issued out of the
Chancery in the said Roan, for small sums under which they have power to Judge
without any appeal. And moreover, Sergeants do not perform and execute what
they are enjoined by the said Ordinances and Declarations, and other trespasses
made upon their Jurisdiction; by reason of which and that we may cause them to
enjoy peaceably the contents of the said Ordinances and Declarations, Dated in
the Month of March 1556. 23 of October 1563. 29 of December 1564. 22 of
February 1566. 22 of August 1586. and of the Ordinances of approbations
thereof, which have ensued in our said Court of Parliament: they have besought
us to be pleased to grant them our necessary Letters Pattents of confirmation,
and therefore desiring to redress the Petitioners in this point, and to afford
all occasions unto Merchants to cause the commerce and traffic to flourish, as
much as it shall lie in us, in imitation of our said Predecessors, and for the
Common good of this our Kingdom We have continued and confirmed, do continue
and confirm by these Presents, all the Contents of the said Ordinances,
Orders, and Declarations of the said Kings our Predecessors, and of the said
approbations made by our said Court of Parliament concerning them, here annexed
against the Counter-seal of our Chancery, that they and their successors in
the said charges, may enjoy them, and make use of them, as they have done
heretofore, and do yet at this present, altogether and in the same form and
manner as it is contained at large, and declared in the said Ordinances,
Orders, and Declarations, and in the said Ordinances of approving thereof.
Moreover, we do charge and command our trusty and wellbeloved the Councillors,
keeping out Court of Parliament in the said Roan, the masters of Requests in
Ordinary of our hall, keeping the Seal of our said Chancery, and unto them that
keep the Court of Requests of our said Court, the Bailiff of the said Roan, or
his Lieutenant, and to every one of them, as it shall concern them, to verify
or approve of these our present Letters of continuation and confirmation, and
of all the contents thereof of the said Declarations, Ordinances and
approbations thereof granted and made by the said Kings our Predecessors, to
cause, suffer and permit the said Petitioners, and their successors in the
said charges, fully, peaceably, and perpetually to enjoy and use them; ceasing
and causing others to cease from all troubles, hindrances, and oppositions to
the contrary. For such is our pleasure, and that it may be a sure, and a
permanent thing for ever, we have caused our Seal to be put unto these
presents, our own right, being saved in this, and other men's right in all
things.

Given at Roan in the year of our Lord 1569. and the eighth year of our reign.
Signed Henry,
and upon the fold of the Labell, By the King. Potier,
with his Subsignature.
Moreover it is written thus upon the fold, or place of the Labell, Visa
Contentor. Signed Poussepin with his subsignature, and sealed upon a labell of
red and green silk, with the great Seal of green wax; and besides Registered in
the Registers of the Court, in the hearing, and with the consent of the Kings
Attorney General, to the end, that they which have obtained them, may enjoy
the Contents thereof according to their form and tenor, and according to the
former Ordinances.

Given at Roan in the Parliament the 7. day of August, 1598. Signed De
Boisleuesque
with his Subsignature.
An Extract out of the Register of the Court of Parliament.
Upon the Petition presented by the Prior and Consuls of this City of Roan; to
the end that the Letters Pattens granted unto them in the month of December
1596. may be verified and approved of, and registered in the Registers of the
Court, to enjoy the Contents thereof according to their form and tenor, by
which the King has confirmed unto them all the Contents of those Declarations,
and Ordinances, which were made by his Predecessors in the month of March
1556. the 23. of October 563. the 29. of December 564. the 22. of February 566.
and the 22. of August 586. together with the approving and acceptations thereof
by the said Court, that they and their successors in the said Offices, may
enjoy and use them, as they have done heretofore, and do still use at this
present, and in the same form and manner altogether, as it is contained and
Declared in the said Declarations, Orders, and Ordinances concerning the
approbations thereof. The said Petition being seen by the Court, together with
the Letters Pattents in form of a Declaration of King Henry the second in the
month of March 1556. The Ordinance of the said Court ensuing upon the
approbation thereof, on the 20. of July 563. other Letters Pattens of Charles
the ninth of the 25. of October in the same year, and the 29. of December 564.
An Ordinance ensued upon the approbation thereof, of the 30. of August 566.
Other Letters Pattents of Declaration, of the 22. of February in the said year
66. An Ordinance of approbation of the 22. of March, other Letters Pattens in
form of a Declaration, granted to the said Prior and Consuls, by King Henry of
happy memory, lately deceased: In the month of August 586. upon the Ordinance
ensued for the approbation of the said Letters Pattents of the 22. of the said
Month, after the Conclusion of the Kings Attorney General. All being
considered, the Court has ordered, and does order, that the said Lettets
Pattens of confirmation of the month of December 596. shall be Registered in
the Register of the said Court, That the Prior and the Consuls of the Merchants
of this city of Roan, may enjoy the Contents thereof, according as it is
contained in the former Ordinances.

Given at Roan in the said Court of Parliament the 7. day of August, 1598. The
Coppies being compared with the Original. Signed De Boisleuesque with his
Subsignature.

Another Confirmation of the said Jurisdiction and Place of Merchants in Roan,
and the approbation thereof in Parliament.
LEwis by the grace of God, King of France and Navar,
To all present and to come, Greeting.
Desiring, in imitation, and after the example of the deceased Kings our
predecessors, to show our grace and favor unto our dear and welbeloved the
Prior and the Consuls of the Merchants in our good City of Roan, and to
maintain and protect them with all our might, in the Consulary Jurisdiction,
which was granted unto them by our Predecessors, by many of their Letters
Patents; confirmed also by the Letters Patent of Charter of the month of
December, of our most honored Lord and Father, in the year 96. After which,
many Judgments and Ordinances have ensued to their profit and advantage, that
the said Jurisdiction might no ways, and in what manner soever, be altered or
diminished to their prejudice.

For these causes, by the advice of our Council, who have seen the said
Letters Patent, Judgments and Ordinances annexed hereunto. We, out of our
special grace, full power, and Royal authority, have continued and confirmed,
do continue and confirm unto the said Prior and Consuls of Merchants in the
said City of Roan; granted, given and confirmed unto them by the said
Letters Patent and Ordinances, to be enjoyed and use made of by the said
Petitioners, and by their Successors in the said Charges, fully and peaceably,
according unto their said Letters Patents, Grants, Judgments and Ordinances,
and in the same manner as they have well and rightly enjoyed and used them, and
do still at this present make use thereof. Moreover, we do command our trusty
and welbeloved keeping our Parliament in Roan, the Masters of Requests in
Ordinary in our Common Hall, the keepers of the Seal of the Chancery, and those
that keep the Requests in the Hall or Palace of the said place, the Bailiff of
the said Roan, or his Lieutenant, and every one of them, as it shall concern
them, to cause, suffer and permit the said petitioners and their successors in
the said places, to enjoy, and peaceably, fully, and perpetually, to make use
thereof in every point according to their form and tenor of these Letters
Pattens of confirmation, and all the Contents as above, and so to cause our
abovesaid Letters Patents, Declarations and Ordinances made thereupon, to be
kept, observed, maintained, and put in execution, not permitting nor suffering
the least trouble, disturbance, or hinderance to be done unto them to the
contrary.

Which we do expressly forbid unto all persons upon 100. l. amercement, and upon
all the charges, damages, and interests; for such is our pleasure. And that it
may be a sure and a permanent thing for ever, We have caused our Seal to be put
unto these presents, save our own right in these, and the right of others in
all things.

Given at Roan in the year of our Lord, 1617. and the eight year of our Reign.
Signed Lewis, and upon the Labell Visa, and Contentor: signed Thibaut with his
subsignature. The said Letters being sealed with the great Seal of green wax,
with red and green strings.

And Registered, the Kings Attorney General hearing, and assenting unto them,
that they that have obtained them, may enjoy the Contents thereof according to
the former Ordinances.

Given at Roan in Parliament the 14. day of August, 1618. Signed Cusson with
his subsignature.

An Extract out of the Register of the Court of Parliament.
Upon the Petition presented by the Priors and Consuls, and the Attorney of
Merchants of this City of Roan, to the end that the Letters Pattents in form of
Charters given at Roan in the month of December last, may be verified and
approved of, and Registered in the Registers of the Court: that they that have
obtained them, may enjoy the Contents thereof, according to their form and
tenor, the Court having seen the said Petition, the Letters Pattens by which
the King) having seen at the Council Table, many other Letters Pattens of the
Kings his predecessors Charters, Judgments, and Ordinances ensued) has
continued and confirmed the jurisdiction of the said Prior and Consuls, that
they and their successors in the said charges, may keep it, and exercise it,
according and conforming to their said Letters: and even as they have
heretofore well and rightly enjoyed them, and made use thereof, and do still at
this present make use of the same.

The Letters Pattents in form of a Declaration of Henry the second of the
month of March 1556. containing the Ordaining and establishing of the
Jurisdiction of the said Prior and Consuls. The Ordinances of approbation
thereof, in the said Court of the 20 of July 1563. Other Letters Pattents of
Charles the ninth of the 13. of October, in the said year of the 29. of
December 1564. The Ordinances upon the approbation thereof of the 30. of
August, 1566. Other Letters of Declaration of the 22. of February in the said
year, and an Ordinance of approbation, of the 22. of March. Other Letters
Pattents in form of a Declaration of the month of August 1586. and another
Ordinance ensued thereupon, of the 22. of the said month. Other Letters of
King Henry the Great, of the month of December 1596. containing the
confirmation of all the said Ordinances and Declarations. An Ordinance of the
said Court of the 17. of August 1598. made upon the approving of the said
Letters Pattents: The conclusion of the Kings Attorney General and the
relation of the Deputy Counselor deputed by the Court. All these things being
heard, the said Court with consent of the said Attorney General; Has ordered
and does order, that the said Letters Pattents of the said month of December
last past: shall be Registered in the Register thereof; that they, which have
obtained them, may enjoy what is contained therein, according to the former
Ordinances.

Given at Roan in the said Court of Parliament the 14. day of August in the
year 1618. The Copy being compared with their Originals. Signed Culson with
his Subsignature.

An Ordinance of his Majesty's Privy Council, containing a prohibition made
unto the Clarks Audienciaries, and Controllers of the Chancery of Roan, to
issue forth any Commission or Writ of appeal from those sentences given by the
Prior and Consuls, that shall not exceed 250. l. upon nullity and no Validity
thereof. And they are enjoined to insert in the Commissions or Writs of appeal
the Date of the said sentences, and the sums likewise from which the appeal is
made.

An extract out of the Registers of the Kings Privy Council.
Upon the Petition presented unto the King in his Privy Council by the Prior
and Consuls of Roan, to the end, that whereas by the establishing and
institution of their Jurisdiction, in imitation, and after the manner of that
of the Consuls of Paris: they have Authority to Judge without appeal, as far as
500. l. The Court of Parliament has notwithstanding limited the said Authority
unto 250. l. after the manner of presidiall Courts, which the said Petitioners
have always enjoyed, but within these few years, that Merchants seeing
themselves condemned to pay any small sums as of 50. l. and of 100. crowns, or
of 120. l. do appeal from their sentences, and address themselves to the
Clarks of Chancery, which for the most part set not down the sums contained in
the said sentences, nor the date thereof, which is the reason why the
Petitioners, are commonly intimated and cited by the said appeals. That it may
therefore please his Majesty to maintain and uphold the Petitioners in the
Authority they have to Judge without appeal as far as 500. l. and to order that
such sentences as shall go beyond the said sum, may be put in execution,
oppositions, or appeals whatsoever notwithstanding, according to the Contents
thereof, and to prohibit all or any of the Clarks, Audienciaries and other
Officers of the Chancery to sign, or cause to be sealed any Commission of
appeal from the said sentences of the said Petitioners upon 200. l. amercement
in their own private names, and which contain not the sums and the Date
mentioned therein, and to enjoin the Court of Parliament to take no notice of
such appeals, but to send the parties back again presently, and to amerce those
that shall appeal.

The said Petition being seen, the copy of the Declaration of the Ordaining of
the Jurisdiction of the Consuls of Paris of the month of November, 1563. the
copy of the Letters Patent in form of a Declaration, containing the
Institution of the Jurisdiction of the said Prior and Consuls, after the manner
of that of Paris, of the 29 of December, 1564. the Ordinance of the Court of
Parliament of Roan of the 30 of August, 1566. containing the approving of the
said Declaration, upon that condition, That the said Consuls shall not take
notice or judge of Causes, without appeal, beyond and further then the Judges
of Presidiall Courts use to do. Other Letters Patent containing an order and
regulating of the said Consulary Jurisdiction of Paris, of the 20 of July,
1566. The Sentences given by the said Prior and Consuls of Roan: A copy of the
Commission of Appeal from those Sentences, with the Warrants and Citations of
the said Consuls before the Court of Parliament in Roan, to see the said
Sentences corrected and amended: and other Papers annexed to the said Petition:
And the Relation of the Counselor deputed by the Court for that purpose being
heard; the King in his Council orders, That this Ordinance shall be put in
execution, according to the Decree and Ordinance of the approving of the
Parliament of Roan thereof; and so, that Sentences given by the said Prior and
Consuls not exceeding 250 l. shall be put in execution, notwithstanding
oppositions or appeals whatsoever, has prohibited the Clerks, Audienciaries,
and Controllers of the Chancery of Roan, to issue out any Commissions of Appeal
from the said Sentences; and charged them to insert henceforwards in the said
Commissions, the dates of the said Sentences, and the sums contained therein,
with the penalty of the damages, and interests of the said parties, in their
own private name, for their own particular, and of greater loss, if it falls
out so.

And this present Ordinance shall be read in the Chancery on a Seal-day, lest
the Officers of the Chancery should pretend to be ignorant thereof. The
Atturney-Generall of the said Court is charged to aid and assist the execution
of the said Declaration, and of this present Ordinance.

Given in his Majesty's Privy Council sitting in Paris, the 17 day of March,
1618. The copies being compared with their Original. Signed de la Grange with
his Subsignature and Signet.

LEwis by the grace of God, King of France and of Navar,
To all our Trusty and Welbeloved the Counselors keeping our Court of
Parliament in Roan, Greeting.
We command, order, and expressly enjoin you, to cause to be put in execution
the Ordinance of our Council here annexed under our counter-Seal, given this
day upon the Petition presented unto us by our welbeloved the Prior and Consuls
of our city of Roan, in every point according to the form and tenor thereof;
constraining, and causing to be constrained, in our Name, all such as shall
suffer themselves to be constrained to do it, to suffer and obey it, by all
due, right and just ways, oppositions or appellations whatsoever
notwithstanding. We do likewise command the first of our welbeloved
Counselors and Masters of Requests in ordinary of our Hall, that shall be
found in those places, or in any Audienciary of the Chancery of Roan, to cause
the said Ordinance to be read and published in the Chancery on a Seal-day, that
the Officers thereof may not plead ignoramus: charging to that effect our
Atturney-Generall to aid and uphold the execution of the said Ordinance, and of
the Declaration mentioned therein. We do moreover charge and command our first
Pursuivant or Sergeant required thereof, to signify our said Ordinance unto
the said Officers of the Chancery, and to all others whom it shall concern,
making unto them, in our name, the Inhibitions and Prohibitions contained
therein: and for the full and entire execution of our said Ordinance, to serve
all other Warrants and Acts requisite and necessary, without asking any leave
or Pareatis to that purpose: For, such is our pleasure, notwithstanding any
clamor of Haero Charter of Normandy, and Letters contrary unto it.

Given at Paris the 27 day of March, in the year of the Lord, 1618. and the 8
year of Our Reign. Signed by the King in his Council: de la Grange with his
Subsignature, and sealed upon a single Label of the Great Scal of yellow Wax.
And underneath in the side of the Margent, it is written:

Read, published, registered in the Chancery of Roan, on a Seal day, before us,
John Halle Lord of Monflaines, his Majesty's Counselor of his Privy Council,
and of his Council of State, and Master of Requests in Ordinary, of his Hall,
that the Contents thereof may be kept according to their form and tenor.

Given on Tuesday the 28 day of August, 1618. Signed Halle with his
Subsignature.

An Extract out of the Register of the Court of Parliament.
Upon the Petition presented by the Prior, Consuls, and by the Attorney of the
Merchants of the city of Roan, to the end that the Ordinance of the Privy
Council, and the Letters Patent given presently after it, of the 17 day of
March last, may be registered in the Registers of the Court: That the contents
thereof may be put in execution, according to their form and tenor: and to
that end, to charge one of the Pursuivants to signify them unto the Officers
of the Chancery: and that the said Ordinance and Letters may be read, that they
may not plead, Ignoramus.

The said Petition being seen by the Court, and the said Ordinance of the 17 of
March, by which it was ordered, that the Declaration of the ordaining and
establishing of the Jurisdiction of the said Prior and Consuls shall be put in
execuiton, according to the Ordinance of the approbation of the said Court, and
so, that Sentences and Judgments given by the said Prior and Consuls, not
exceeding the sum of 205 l. shall be put in execution; oppositions or
whatsoever notwithstanding. And inhibition is made to the Clerks,
Audienciaries, and Controllers of the Chancery of Roan, to issue forth any
Writs or Commissions of appeal from the said Sentences: and they are charged to
insert henceforward in the said Writs of Appeal the date of the Sentences, and
the sums contained in them, upon the penalty of damages and interests of the
parties in their own private name, and for their own particular. And that the
said Ordinance shall be read in the said Chancery on a Seal day, that the said
Officers thereof may not plead, Ignoramus. The said Letters of March, of the 17
of March, given immediately after the said Ordinance: The conclusion of Kings
Atturney-Generall, and the Commissioners being heard, the said Court has
granted an Act unto the said Prior, Consuls, and to the Attorney of Merchants:
of the presentation of the said Letters, and of the Ordinance of the Council.
And has ordered, that a copy thereof shall remain in the Registers Office of
the said Court, that they may be taken into consideration, as it shall be meet.

Given at Roan, in the said Court of Parliament, the 14 of August, 1618. The
Copies being compared with their Original. Signed Cusson, with his
Subsignature.

Out of the Paper of the Articles of the Remonstrance made in the Assembly of
the three Estates of Normandy sitting at Roan, the 16 of September, 1613.
Together out of the Answers and Ordinances made thereupon, by the King at Paris
the 22 of January next after following, 1614. was extracted the following
Article.

The XXII. Article.
THe calling in of the Controlls of Titles, is demanded. All manner of persons
are interessed in it, and more especially Merchants, for Bonds conceived to be
made for Merchandise, which require a speedy dispatch, as well for foreign
Merchandise, as for them that are transported from one Country into another;
such unprofitable expenses being needless in trading; underneath which Article
the words are written. To the King. And that the Commissioners are agreed on.
Moreover, Granted upon paying again what is disbursed. And in the Interim, the
Kings intent is not, That the said Controls should be of any effect for the
Bills of Exchange, and promises between Merchants.

Out of another paper of the Articles of the Remonstrances made in the Assembly
of the three Estates of Normandy sitting at Roan the 18. day of September,
1614. together out of the Answer and Ordinance made thereupon, by his Majesty
at Paris the 29. of January 1615. was extracted the 17. following Article.

The XVII. Article.
ALthough by the Answer given unto the Estates assembled the last year, your
Majesty did grant us, That the Control of Titres should be of no more effect,
for Bills of Exchange, and promises between Merchants, because the freedom of
traffic does require that the strictness of formalities may not be so exact
in such kinds of Agreements, as it must be in others. Nevertheless upon a
mere Request presented by Master Champage, Captain of Fointaine-belleau:
pretending to have a Pattentee for the said Controuls; he has obtained an
Ordinance of the 24. of April last, by which the Answer given to the said
Estates is called in: and it is permitted unto the said Champagne, and to his
Farmers, to get themselves paid for the Control upon the said Bills of
Exchange, and promises between Merchants. In case this should take effect, it
were to make all Illusory, which was resolved in your Council, upon the Just
demands of your people: and the Answers also, which your Majesty was pleased to
give them (which ought to be held holy, and kept inviolably) and to turn them
into smoke. May it therefore please your Majesty to Order, That the Answer unto
the Paper of the last year concerning Bills of Exchange, and promises between
Merchants, be put in execution.

Underneath the which Article, these words are written, To the King, And the
Commissioners are agreed upon it. Moreover, The Kings pleasure is, that his
Answer given upon this matter, to the 22. Article of the Paper which the
Petitioners presented unto him the last year, shall be put in execution.

An Extract out of the Registers of the Court of Parliament.
THe Court has seen the Letters Pattents given at Paris the 22. of January
1614, by which the King commands and does order that the answer made by him
the said day, unto the 22. Article of the Paper of the Remonstrances, those of
the three Estates of the Country and Duchy of Normandy, concerning the
Control of Titres, be put in execution, kept, and observed according to the
form and tenor thereof: the extract of the 22. Article containing the calling
in the control of Titres, demanded by the States abovesaid, with the Answer
of the said Lord. That he granted the said Article upon repaying of the
charges: and in the Interim that the intent of the said Lord our Sovereign is
not, that the said Control shall be of any effect for Bills of Exchange, and
for promises between Merchants of another extract of the 17. Article of another
Paper of the Remonstrances of the said States, answered by the King the 29. of
January last concerning the former. The Kings Atturny General his conclusion,
and the relation of the Counselor chosen Commissioner for that purpose, being
heard. The said Court has ordered with the consent of the Attorney General,
and does Order that the said Letters Patents, and the extracts of the said
Articles of the Remonstrances of the said Estates shall be Registered in the
Registers thereof: that the Contents of them may be put in execution, kept, and
observed according to their form, and tenor.

Given at Roan in the said Court of Parliament the 24. day of November in the
year, 1615. The Copies being compared with their Original.
Ordinances and sentences given after the Ordinances and Declarations of the
Jurisdiction of the Priour and Consuls of the Merchants at Roan.
IN the year of our Lord 1567. on Saturday the 26. of April, the Court
sitting: the Prior and the Consuls of Roan being before us; when the Attorney of
the Place, Exchange, and Jurisdiction of the Merchants in Roan, had caused to
be cited James Du Fay Merchant, living is this City to be warned, that he might
be amerced, by reason of removing and transferring of their Jurisdiction,
because against the Kings Declaration, and the Ordinances of the Court; he had
transferred this Jurisdiction, and pleaded before the Sheriff of Roan, or before
his Lieutenant, Jesse de Cauvigny Merchant in this City of Roan, upon the
assignation, warning given in the room of the said Cauvigny unto the said Du
Fay, for the payment of 8. or ten barrils sold unto him by the said De
Cauvigny, and since sold again by the said Du Fay, unto Master John Du
Monstier, Advocate in the Sherivalty of this City, to shun the payment of the
said barrils; the said Du Fay had declared unto the Kings Attorney General, in
the said Sherivalty, the said citation and disagreement of the parties arising
out of Merchandise between Merchant and Merchant, and according that same
denounciation, and intimation, the Kings Attorney General, has obtained an
Injunction and Warrant of the said Sheriff, by virtue whereof he made a
prohibition unto the said Jesse de Cauvigny to plead any where else, but before
the said Sheriff: and he being cited to appear on the 23. day of this present
month, before the said Sheriff, which was the day of the assignation given at
the Instance of the said De Cauvigny to the said De Fay, at which day the 23.
the Kings Atturny had obtained a default against the said De Cauvigny, in the
said Sheriffs Court, and it was ordered that he should be forced by an habeas
corpus, to appear to answer the demands and conclusions of the said Attorney
General and moreover at the instance of the said Attorney General, was sent
for and carried before the Worshipful Laurence Puchot, Lord of Gerpon ville,
and Sheriff of Roan, James Grenier his Majesty's Sergeant in this City, for the
citation made before the said Prior and Consuls, and that the said Grenier was
amerced 10. l. and committed to prison to close imprisonment, until the full
payment of the said sum, so that to shun the imprisonment of his person, he was
constrained to lay the said amercement in the hands of Gosselin a Sergeant, as
it appears by his bill of receipt, bearing the Date of the 23. of this
Instant month and year, desiring that the said Du Fay should purge and clear
himself if he had not bought the said 8. Barrils, and since sold them again
unto the said Du Monstier, and if he was not a Merchant trading and trafficking
in Wines, and in Linen clothes and in other commodities, and if being in
Maillotz street near Renelle, upon the warning which the said Grenier gave him,
at the instance of the said De Cauvigny, to appear before the said Prior and
Consuls, and that upon this he, the said Du Fay, had desired and declared unto
the said Grenier Sergeant, that he intended to plead before the said Sheriff,
and not before the said Prior and Consuls, and that according to this, the said
Grenier had made his relation thereof unto the said Du Fay. The Petition of the
said, De Cauvigny, in the granting whereof we have taken and admitted of the
oath of the said Du Fay, who has said sworn, and affirmed, acknowledged, and
confessed; that he had bought of the said De Cavigny, the said eight Barrills
to sell again, and that they were by him sold again unto the said Du Monstier,
of which oath and affirmation, a letter was granted unto the said Atturny of
the Merchants, and the said Du Fay, according to his confession, and the advice
of the Merchants there present; was condemned to pay for the said Barrils after
the rate of 11. sols, 6. deniers a piece; there being deduced out of that a
teston; which the said Cauvigny had received of the said Du Fay upon the said
sum, and the said Du Fay was amerced an hundred sols tournois for removing of
and transferring the Jurisdiction, appliable according to the Ordinance with a
restitution as well unto the said Grenier Sergeant of the amercement, unto
which he was condemned upon imprisonment of his body, by the said Sheriff, as
even also to the Interests, as well of the said Grenier, as of the said De
Cauvigny together with the charges of the said De Cauvigny, taxed to the sum of
40. sols six deniers fournois these present being comprehended, and the first
Pursuivant or his Majesty's Sergeant required thereof, is charged, and
commanded to put these presents in execution. Given as above. Signed Halle, a
mark and his Subsignature.

In the year of our Lord 1567. next following after the Declaration, on
Saturday 26. day of April in the morning in the hall of the King our Lord and
Sovereign at Roan, before us Laurence Puchot Esquire Lord of Gerponuille, and
Sheriff of Roan, according to our Order, and verbal process made by us unto
Thomas Pouppart the Kings Sergeant in this City of Roan, to cause to appear in
person, and to bring coram nobis, Jesse de Cauvigny a wine Merchant dwelling in
Perchere street in Cooper this City, the said Poupart Sergeant has presently
brought before us the said De Cauvigny, to answer unto the Conclusions of the
Kings Attorney General, and to be amerced, because he had required, and caused
to be cited by James Grenier, the Kings Sergeant in the said Roan, one James du
Fay, Tailor, living in Perchere street, to appear the next day after before the
Prior and Consuls, to pay him for eight Barrils, which is a transferring of
Jurisdiction against the Ordinance of the Court of Parliament, given between us
and the said Prior and Consuls, so that by a sentence given by us on Wednesday
last, the said Grenier was fined 10. l. and inhibition was made unto the said
Du Fay, then present at the giving of Judgment, to answer and contest upon the
same action before the Prior and Consuls, and moreover there was an injunction
granted unto the Kings Attorney, to cause the said De Cauvigny to be warned to
appear and to be amerced for the transferring of Jurisdiction; and since the
said De Cauvigny was warned, he had appeared by his wife, which was many times
enjoined to cause her husband to appear, and yet had not regarded it, and in
the Interim had still pursued the said Du Fay before the said Prior and
Consuls, where this morning the said Du Fay having appeared before them, he was
amerced one hundred sols, and condemned to restore the said 10. l. amercement,
unto which the said Grenier was condemned by, the said Wednesday last, as the
said Du Fay has attested before us just now. The said De Cauvigny, being heard
thereupon, who has acknowledged, that he did require, and did cause the said
citation to be made before the said Prior and Consuls for the aforesaid cause,
but that he was not the Solicitor of the pursuit and sentence given by the said
Prior and Consuls, against the said Du Fay, but that it was rather at the
instance of the Attorney of the Exchange of the Merchants in the said
Jurisdiction; the said De Cauvigny saying, moreover, that at the instance of
the said Attorney, he was prohibited to appear and to answer before us in the
said cause, as he did make it appear by the coppie of the said Warrant of
inhibition, and by Mr. Jean de Laudassi the security, as being the most ancient
Advocate in the absence of Kings Atturny General in this Court of the Sheriff.
It was required, that notwithstanding the allegations; and Remonstrances of the
said De Cauvigny, he might be condemned to 10. l. amercement for the
transferring of Jurisdiction, and to the Jurisdiction of the amercement unto
which the said Du Fay was amerced by the said Prior and Consuls: whereupon
advice being taken of the assistants, it was said according unto it, that the
said De Cauvigny, for the transferring of Jurisdiction, and for the contempt of
Justice, should be amerced 10. l. and condemned to restore the sum of one
hundred sols, and all to which the said Du Fay was condemned by the said Prior
and Consuls, considering the inhibitions which were made unto him, speaking to
his wife, for which amercement it was ordered that the said De Cauvigny should
be kept close prisoner unto the full payment thereof, and to that end committed
to the custody of the said Poupart Sergeant, from which the said De Cauvigny
has declared that he did appeal, notwithstanding the which appeal and without
any prejudice unto it, We have ordered that he shall forthwith pay the said
amercements from which the said De Cauvigny has declared again, that he did
appeal and did take us to parties, saying, that he had Letters to that purpose,
which he had got in the Chancery of Roan, which he showed; using these words,
We shall meet with you well enough, with an incivill countenance, by reason
whereof, and because the said De Cauvigny has taken us to party, by which he
has declared again that he did persist, we have ceased from taking any further
notice of this cause, and forthwith required Master Robert Anfrye, as being the
ancientest Advocate in this Court, after the said Landasse, to do us Justice
for the said rude, and undecent words, considering that the said Landasse had
presently concluded, in the name of the Kings Attorney, against the said De
Cauvigny. Whereupon, in doing right upon the said Request, We the said Anffrye,
in the quality aforesaid have taken and forced the said De Cauvigny to tell the
truth upon his oath, who has told us, that truly he had taken to party the
said Gentleman the Sheriff, but that he had not used these words, We shall meet
with you well enough: which fault being considered, and because it was
witnessed unto us by Master William, Commissioner of the Register of this
Court, That the said De Cauvigny had speaking unto the said Gentleman the
Sheriff, We shall meet with you well enough; and that there were here many
persons, which might have heard it. We have caused to come and to appear before
us Master Geuffin Cave, Claude Clave, Nicholas Vaignon, and Jean Servain
Atturnies deputed Commissioners in this Jurisdiction here present; which after
a Solemn oath taken by them, to speak and bring the truth: Against whom the
said De Cauvigny being thereupon asked, would not allege any exception, and
also, when he had purged them of all wonted objections: they have told us,
witnessed, and related unanimously and with the same, and like deposition upon
their oath, that they had heard just now, the said De Cauvigny, speaking unto
his worship the Sheriff, when he had told him, that he took him to party, and
that he had used these words, We shall meet with you well enough; being moved
with anger, holding in his hands some Letters, which he did exhibit unto his
Worship the Sheriff, using many undecent jests and postures: which relation,
witnesses being considered, and moreover, because the said De Cavigny committed
many insolences in this Court, in our presence, and even when it was attested
unto us, by Master David Doublet Advocate: upon the asking of his advice, that
the said De Cauvigny, had been sued in this Court for usury by one Du Thil by
name; We have Ordered, according to the advice of the Assistants, that the said
De Cauvigny, shall by reason of his denial, forthwith lay down and depose the
said amercements, and without any prejudice to his appeal, and that he shall be
really and effectually imprisoned: and moreover, that it shall be
extraordinarily proceeded against (...) shall be meet, whereof the said De
Cauuigny obtained these Presents.

Given as above. Signed Puchot and Marest, two Subsignatures; the Copies being
compared with the original in Parchment here above, transcribed by me Jean
Vienne, his Majesty's Pursuivant in his Court of Parliament at Roan, at the
Request of the Attorney of the Exchange of the Merchants of this City, to be
available, and serve him, as it shall concern them. The 9 of May, 1567.
Signed Vienne, with his Subsignature.

Of the 15 day, 1567, at Roan, in the Court of Parliament.
BEtween Jesse de Cauuigny Citizen Merchant, dwelling in this City of Roan,
appealing from the Sheriff of the said place, or from his Lieutenant, and
otherwise intimated, appearing by Master Peter Sirette his Attorney, of the one
part, and James du Fay also Citizen Merchant living in the said Roan, intimated
in the appeal of the said Cauvigny, and for his own part, appealing from the
Prior and Consuls established for the Merchants in the said City, by M. John
Morin his Attorney, of the other part: and also between the said Prior and
Consuls, plaintiffs, by way of Petition, to that end, that Inhibitions may be
made unto the said Sheriff of Roan, and to his Lieutenants, to take notice of
causes and matters concerning Commerce and Traffic of Merchandise granted and
given to the said Prior and Consuls, by the Kings Ordinances and Orders given
thereupon; Pierre Lachers Merchant, and the Attorney of the said Merchants
Jurisdiction of the said Prior and Consuls, being present, joined with the said
de Cauvigny, and by M. Richard le Fae their Attorney, of the one part: and the
said Sheriff of Roan, Defendant against the Request of the said Prior and
Consuls, asking and desiring the grant of another Request, tending to that end,
that Inhibition may be made to the said Prior and Consuls to take upon them any
other notice of matters, but that which was given them by the Ordinance of
their ordaining and establishing, or to attempt any thing against the Order
made by the King, and against the Ordinance of the Court ensued thereupon, by
which they are prohibited to assume unto themselves the notice of those
differences which are arisen and shall arise from Merchandises sold and bought
for the public necessities, and for the Kings subjects, though it be between
Merchants; appearing by M. Peter Deshayes his Attorney, of the other part. The
Court, the parties being heard, and the Sentences being read, which were given
as well by the Sheriff or by his Lieutenant, as by the said Prior and Consuls,
containing the Amercements of the one and of the other part, has made the
Appeal, and the matter thereof, void, without any Amercements or Charges: And
for this cause, and for amending the Judgment, has sent back, and does send
back the cause and matter betwixt the said Cauvigny and Du Fay, before the said
Prior and Consuls, on the first day, that right may be done unto them, as it
shall be meet: and has taken off, and does take of the Amercements in which
the said Cauvigny and Du Fay, and the Sergeant also, were respectively amerced
by the said Sheriff, Prior and Consuls; unto the restitution whereof, the
receivers have been and shall be constrained, by all due and reasonable ways.

Given as above. Signed de Boisleuesque, with his Subsignature.

And these words were endorsed: The sum of ten pounds tournois, was given back
again, and restored unto the said Grenier, by Master Nicholas Vaignon, Receiver
of the Amercements in the Sherivalty of Roan. Which sum he was condemned to
restore, by the Contents in the other part.

IN the year of our Lord, 1568, on Monday the 11 of October, in the Court,
before us, John de Brevedent Esquire, Counselor unto the King our Lord, and
Lieutenant-Generall in the Bailiffs Court of Roan: between John Peter prisoner
and plaintiff, desiring to be admitted into the Benefice of Cession of goods,
appearing by Tiregorge his Attorney, on the one part; and the Worshipful
Stephen Dugard Merchant in this City of Roan, defendant against the said
Cession, and withal Plaintiff, desiring to be sent back before the Prior and
Consuls of this said City, appearing by le Mire his Attorney, of the other
part. The parties being heard, the Bonds being read, and the Accounts brought
in by the said Dugard and the Kings Attorney in the said Bailiffs Court, who
has said, that the imprisonment of the said Peter was by virtue of Bills of
hand, and of Accounts acknowledged before the said Prior and Consuls; the most
part whereof were made in the City of London: and the matter was between the
parties about their Negotiations and Traffic, and the privileges thereof: for
that cause he intended not to hinder the said renewing. As for the said Peter,
that he intended to withstand the removing of his Suit, because the question
was only about Cession of goods into which he pretended to be admitted; which
was not under the notice and Jurisdiction of the said Prior and Consuls, We
have ordered nevertheless, that the said Dugard shall proceed before us, and
shall prohibit the said Petition of Cession of goods, from which the said le
Mire, in the said name, has appealed, which appealing he was commanded to
take, and cause to be served in due time: whereof the said Peter obtained these
Presents.

Given as above. Signed Varin with his Subsignature.

Of the 4 day of February, 1569. in the Court of Parliament at Roan.
BEtween Stephen Dugard, appealing from the Bailiff of Roan his Lieutenant, and
anticipated, appearing by M. William Valdorg his Attorney, of the one part: and
John Peter, prisoner in the prison of the Bayliwick of Roan, intimated and
anticipating by Master Richard le Fae his Attorney, on the other part. The
Court, the parties being heard, and the Kings Atturney-Generall likewise, say,
That it was ill, and to no other effect judged by the said Bailiff of Roan, or
by his Lieutenant: and well appealed by le Mire, and amending the said
judgment. The said Court has sent, and does send back again the said parties,
to appear eight days hence before the said Prior and Consuls of this City of
Roan, to proceed in the matter, as it shall be meet.

Given as above. The Copies are compared with the Original. Signed de
Boisleuesque, with his Subsignature.

An Extract out of the Register of the Jurisdiction of the Worshipful the
Prior and the Consuls of the Merchants of Roan, of what follows.
Wednesday the 13 of December. 1570.
Whereas John Bourgovin Merchant, living at Orleans, obtaining of us Warrant,
and the Kings Letters Patent in form of Debites, he being present in his own
person, has caused to be warned Richard Pillon Merchant, living in Saint
Christopher, near Montfort in the Sherivalty of Pontanton, and Ponteaudemer
within the Bayliwick of Roan, also present, to save or amend a default which
the said Bourgovin had got against the said Pillon the 25 of December last, and
to see himself condemned to pay him the sum of 25 l. tournois, for which he
said that the said Pillon had remained debtour unto him upon some Accounts made
by the said Pillon, between themselves upon a day past, for a certain quantity
of Merchandise of Wines, which he had formerly sold and sent to the said
Pillon: Since the which Accounts, he said that he had sent a Kilderkin of Wine,
which he had promised to give him, upon the making of the said Accounts. The
said Pillon considering the Allegation made, that it was for Merchandise sent,
and that the said pretended Accounts were made in his house, he has
acknowledged it, and has demanded to be sent back again before his ordinary
Judge, though he confessed himself to be a Merchant: which removing of the Suit
was withstood and prohibited by the said Bourgovin, maintaining that he ought
to proceed before us, since the difference was about Merchandise between
Merchants. Whereupon, advice being taken of many Merchants being then present,
considering the quality and condition of Merchants of both the said parties,
and that the said Pillon is residing within the Bailywick of this City of Roan,
and seeing the Warrants and the Kings Letters Pattents in form of debitis,
obtained by the said Bourgouin; We have denied the said removing of the suit,
unto the said Pillon; which was demanded by him, and have said, that he was
bound to answer before us in the said Action; from which the said Pillon has
declared that he did appeal, for which cause the said Parties have respectively
chosen their lodgings. To wit, the said Pillon his own in the house of Master
Heultes Attorney in the Court of Parliament, and the said Bourgouin at Master
Charles Drovets Merchant, living in Saint Vincents Parish.

CHarles by the Grace of God King of France,
to all them that shall see these presents, Greeting.
We give you to understand, that Richard Pillon appearing this day in the
Register Office of our Court of Parliament, and appealing from the Prior and
Consuls of this City of Roan, by Master Peter Heultes his Attorney, of the one
part; and John Bourgouin Merchant, living for this present at Rambouillet
present in person, and by Tulles Mare his Attorney, assisted by Master Jean Du
Hamel his Council, of the other part. It was appointed or ordered, when the
Advocate and the Attorney of the said Pillon have declared that they found no
valid cause, for which they should maintain the said appeal, and the consent of
our Attorney General concurring with it; and the said parties appearing as
before: that the said appeal was made void, by paying seventy five sols
amercement; the sentence from which it is appealed, in date of the 13. day of
December, 1570. shall take its effect, and shall be performed in every point,
according to the form and tenor thereof, notwithstanding oppositions and
appeals whatsoever: the said parties are sent back again before the Prior and
Consuls, to proceed between themselves according to the said sentence, and as
it shall be meet.

And moreover the said Pillon plaintiff in the appeal, is condemned to the
charges of the cause, and action of appeal, the taxation thereof being reserved
to our said Court. Moreover we do command the first Pursuivant of our Court, or
any of the Kings Sergeants desired thereof to execute this present Ordinance,
as much as it shall belong to him, and as his Office shall require, and as far
as the said Bourgouin shall require of him fully and entirely according to the
form and tenor thereof, We give him authority so to do: we command all our
Justices, Officers, and Subjects to obey him in so doing. In witness whereof
we have caused our seal to be put to these presents.

Given at Roan the 5. day of February in the year of our Lord 1573. and the
thirteenth year of our Reign.

And upon the turning of the Labell these words are written. By the King.

Signed De Boisleuesque, with his Subsignature, sealed with a double Label with
the seal of yellow Wax.
Of the seventeenth day of October. 1573. at Roan in the Chamber appointed during
the vacations.
BEtween Stephen du Venon, appealing from the Prior and Consuls established in
this City of Roan, and anticipated, appearing by Master Martyn le Roy his
Attorney of the one part, and Isabell le Noir Widow of the deceased Peter
Chevey in his life Merchant, and then living at Orleans, intimated and
Anticipating, Francesse le Noir, being present, the widow of the deceased
Fremin des Fourneaux likewise a Merchant, and of Orleans, and by Master John
Morin her Attorney of the other part, whereas De la Fay Lawyer for the said
intimated and anticipating, has required and demanded, that the plaintiff in
the appeal should propose the causes or reasons of his appeal, or else that
default might be granted unto him with such profit as the case does require. Le
Roy Attorney for the Plaintiff in the appeal, has said, That as for the
appeal, he would say nor conclude nothing about it, but that having consulted
upon the matter, he had found by his Council, that his appeal ought to be
changed into an opposition, and that to this effect, and for that purpose he
had set letters upon the seal, beseeching the Court to accept of his said
letters, issued out by a Commission.

And it was said by the said La Fay, that the said Le Roy upon just reason will
not plead for the said appeal, because he does appeal without any grievance
from which the appeal must result, because his bond was turned into a deed,
judged by the Prior and Consuls, his causes of opposition only excepted, unto
which he was to be received upon depositing and laying down the money due.
Therefore he needed not any other Letters, but he ought rather to allege his
reasons for his appeal, or else the appeal to be void, and the sentence
confirmed with charges, and in case of opposition, that the parties should be
sent back again before the Prior and the Consuls, before which he maintained
that they ought to be sent back, since the question and difference was about
Merchandises, and that he makes no other acquittance to appear, but what is
endorsed upon his bond. The said Le Roy insisting upon his Declaration saying,
that he forbids the sending back of the cause to the said Prior and Consuls,
considering the remoteness of the place of his habitation, and that he cannot
be removed, and taken off from his ordinary Jurisdiction, before which he
desired to be sent back to proceed in the opposition: in the discourse whereof
he protested to make use of his acquaintances, and to tell and produce all his
reasons, and causes of opposition.

When the Advocate and the Attorney of the Plaintiff in the appeal could not
tell any valide cause, or reason to maintain it: the Court has made it and
does make it void: has ordered and does order, that the thing from which it is
appealed, shall take its full and entire effect; and has condemned and does
condemn, the Plaintiff in the appeal, unto 100. sols, for the King, and to the
charges toward the Intimated, and has sent back, and does send back, the
parties on the first Court day, before the said Prior and Consuls of this City
of Roan, to proceed upon the opposition as it shall be meet.

Given as above. The Copies being compared with the Original. Signed De
Boisleuesque, with his Subsignature.

IN the year of our Lord 1577. the 12. day of November in the New Castle,
before us Francis Avisse Lord of Songeons Sheriff of the said place: Upon the
complaint made by Michael Herlenc prisoner in the prisons of this place;
against Jean Bricquot the Kings Sergeant in the said City of Roan; because he
had imprisoned the said Herlenc at the request of Graffard by name, a Merchant
living in Roan, for the sum of 100. l. for one part, and of 27. l. ten sols,
for another part: which he should say to be due unto the said Graffard by the
said Herlenc, for the sale of wine: the said imprisonment made by virtue of a
certain obligation acknowledged before the Prior and Consuls of the said place
in Roan, the 25. of September last, unto which there was no attachment of the
honorable the Bailiff of Caux, nor of us neither. Therefore he desired the
said Warrant to be made void, and the said Herlenc to be delivered, and to be
put out of the said prison, with the interest and charges. When we had heard
the said Sergeant thereupon, who has confessed, that he made the said
imprisonment by virtue of the said Obligation, without any attachment; we have
declared the said execution and Warrant void and annulled; and made an
inhibition unto the said Sergeant, to make any more imprisonments of such
persons resorting, and Ostagers of this Jurisdiction, without our attachment,
or that of the honorable the Bailiff, upon the penalty of 100. l. amercement;
and we do order for this present, that the said Herlenc shall be delivered out
of the said prisons, and that the goods taken upon execution, by the said
Sergeant, shall be restored by the said Sergeants, unto the said Herlenc,
except the matter of his interests and charge, which to obtain, he shall (if he
thinks good) cause the said Graffard to come before us: unto which end a
Warrant was granted to him; and the first Sergeant is commanded to put these
presents in execution.

Dated as above. Signed Avisse, and Lorbec with their Subsignatures.

Of the 20. day December 1577. at Roan in the Registers Office of the Court of
Parliament.
BEtween Peter Graffard Citizen of Roan, being joined with him, the Attorney of
the Prior and Consuls of this said City, and the Kings Attorney General,
appealing from Master Francis Avisse, the Sheriff of the New Castle, all
appearing; to wit, the said Graffard, by Master Adrian le Tellier his Attorney,
assisted with Master William Prin his Council, of the one part, and the said
Attorney of the Merchants by Master William le Fae his Attorney, assisted by
Master Peter Cadyot his Council likewise of the one part, and the said Avisse
the Sheriff, intimated in the appeal, and taken to party, being present, and by
Master Nicholas Guillot his Attorney, assisted by Master James Lermitte his
Council, of the other part. It was appointed with the consent of the said
parties appearing, as above; that the said appeal, and that from which it was
appealed, should be made void, and by reforming the Judgment and sentence,
that the parties should be discharged of the suite without any charges or
interests of either part; and it was ordered that the sentences of the said
Prior and Consuls shall be put in execution according to the form contained in
the Ordinance of their Ordaining, and without being bound to take any
attachments of the Judges of the places.

Given as above. Signed De Boisleuesque with his Subsignature.

HEnry by the Grace of God, King of France, and of Poland,
to all those that shall see these presents, Greeting.
There being presented this day in our Court of Parliament, the Cause of Peter
Allaine Citizen Merchant of Roan, appealing from Master John du Tot, Lieutenant
to the Sheriff of Caudebec in the sea Court of Cany. The Attorney of the Prior
and Consuls of the said Roan, being joined with the said Allaine; likewise
appealing from the said Du Tot: and the said Allaine requiring the grant of a
request tending to the end that right may be done upon the principal, by
judging the appeal, and to the said principal Plaintiff, by an execution for
the sum of 29. crowns, two third parts of a crown, and seven sols six deniers;
appearing by Master Nicholas du Quesnay, and Richard le Fae their Atturnies, of
the one part; and Nicholas le Clerc intimated, and to the said principal
opposing himself, and the said Du Tot also intimated, and taken to party in his
own particular name, and defendants against the said request, by Master William
Halle, and Robert Arondell their Attorney, of the other. Prin for the
Plaintiffs in the appeal has said, that their appeal resulteth and proceeds
from a manifest error in case of right, committed by the said Du Tot
Lieutenant; and the said Plaintiffs in the appeal are not willing that this
cause should be pleaded in a public Audience: he has offered an expedient out
of the Court without suing, to make the appeal; and that from which it is
appealed, void; and by the deciding the principal, that the said Clerc, and Du
Tot, might be condemned to the payment of 29. crowns, two thirds of a crown,
seven sols six deniers, for the which sum the said Allaine had required and
caused execution to be made upon the taking of many dead and alive Mamps; which
goods the said Du Tot had abusively caused to be put again into the possession
of the said Le Clerc: the said Du Tot Judge a quo, pretending that the said
Allaine had no Authority to cause the sentence to be given by the said Prior
and Consuls upon the recognisance or acknowledgement of the bill of the hand,
and of the bond of the said Le Clerc, containing the said 29. crowns, two
thirds of a crown, and 7. sols 6. deniers, to be put in execution, except he
had obtained of the said Sheriff De Caudebec, or of him Du Tot his Lieutenant
an attachment to that effect; which is an error in the fact and in Law,
because it is manifest Notorietate facti permanenti. That the Warrants,
Sentences, and Judgments of the said Prior and Consuls are to be put in
execution within all the Precincts of this Jurisdiction, without asking of the
Ordinary Judges of any of the places, any placet, leave or attachments for that
purpose, by the means of which error, upon which the sentence and Ordinance of
the said Du Tot Lieutenant, is grounded: the said Allaine would be like to lose
his said debt: the said Clerc having been put again into the possession of his
goods, taken upon the execution, which he has since alienated, and so became
insoluable; by the means whereof by the said expedient, the said Du Tot and Le
Clerc should be condemned in solidum, to pay unto the said Allaine the said sum
with charges and interests; which expedient was accepted of by the said Le
Clerc, and not by the said Du Tot, and therefore the said Prin would propose
and allege his causes of appeal, and so conclude upon the principal.
Whereupon Isnel for the said Le Clerc has said, That he did persist in the
Declaration made by him (out of the Court) that he accepted of the said
expedient, and by Du Vinier the elder for the said Du Tot: that for his own
part he would not (and for a just cause) accept of that expedient for his
particular, because it would not be reasonable, that he, the said Du Tot, who
is a Judge, being no ways interessed in the cause, should be condemned in
solidum, to pay the said sum, for the said Le Clerc, yet nevertheless that the
said Du Tot, would willingly upon a sentence against him, the execution whereof
should be forborne and stayed, until sufficient enquiry was made upon the said
Le Clerc, and until he be found and declared insoluable; and moreover to do
more then he is bound to do, he would yield unto half the charges of the cause
of appeal; which he maintains to be more then reasonable, because he is
greatly to be excused, as having not ever known or heard, that there had been
any Ordinances or other Letters Pattents or Ordinances of Parliament, which had
declared the Prior and Consuls more privileged, than the ordinary Judges,
whose Warrants, Sentences, and Judgments, cannot be put in execution beyond
their Precincts and Jurisdictions, without obtaining to that purpose
attachments of the ordinary Judges, within the Precincts of whom they will
require, and cause the execution thereof to be served by those means he has
concluded to the ends of an absolution, and that he might be freed, in case the
said Allaine would not accept of his profer, and it was said and maintained by
the said Prin, for the said Allaine, that the said Du Tot is altogether
inexcusable, having erred in matter of fact and of Law, In facto and in Jure,
and by consequence made the cause his own; the said Prin persisting to
maintain, that the said Du Tot is to be condemned in solidum, and in body with
the said Clerc; Factus non solvendo, who is made insolvable; against whom the
said Allaine has no more means to get himself to be paid, by reason of the
deed and fault of the said Du Tot, concluding to these ends, and asking charges
and the interests.

And it was said by our Atturney-Generall, that the opposition made by the said
Clerc, upon whom the execution was served, grounding his opposition upon the
fault of not having got an Attachment. That the Sentences of the Prior and
Consuls are to be put in execution within all Precincts of this Jurisdiction,
without any Pareatis or Attachment. And the cause upon the said opposition
being presented before the said Du Tot Lieutenant, he has under that color,
male consultus, being ill advised, made the execution void, and restored the
said party whose goods were executed into the possession thereof; who, as the
plaintiff in the appeal, does plead, Factus est non solvendo, is made unable to
pay, unsolvable; in which the said Du Tot has too grossly erred, and fecit
litem suam, made the suit and cause his own. Therefore the said
Atturney-Generall adhereth unto the plea, to the ends and conclusions of the
said Plaintiffs in the appeal. We give therefore to understand, that our said
Court by its Ordinance and Judgment, the parties being heard, together with
our Atturney-Generall, has made and does make the said appeal, and that
likewise from which it is appealed, void; and amercing the Judge, has ordered
and does order, that within sixteen days, for all prefixions and delays, the
said le Clerc who opposes it, shall be bound to bring forth the goods taken of
him upon execution; and that he shall be constrained to do it, by all due and
reasonable means, even by the imprisonment of his person: and in case of a
refusal, or of a delay in doing of it, our said Court has from this very
present time, condemned and does condemn the said Du Tot, in his own particular
name subsidiarily, in case of not bringing for the said goods, to pay unto the
said Allaine the sum for which the execution, which is now in debate, was
desired by the said Allaine, and the said Clerc Debtor and Defendant, to the
charges for the said Allaine, unto the day of the Declaration made by him, That
he assented unto the way and expedient offered unto him by the Plaintiff in the
appeal, to the other charges since the said Declaration to this present time,
for the said Allaine, save in all the recourse and recompense of the said Du
Tot, against the said Clerc, which our Court has ordered at this very present,
condemned by body to the said recourse concerning the principal sum; and
moreover has condemned the said le Clerc to the charges of the said Du Tot.
Besides, we do command the first Pursuivant of our Court, or any of the Kings
Sergeants, required thereof, to put this present Decree in execution, so far as
it shall concern him to do, and as far as he shall be required to do by the
said Allain duly and fully, according to the form and tenor thereof;
constraining all whom it shall concern to obey him, and which shall cause
themselves to be constrained, by all due and reasonable ways: we give him
authority and commission so to do. We charge and command all our Justices,
Officers and Subjects to obey him in so doing.

Given at Roan in our said Court of Parliament, the 17 day of March, in the
year of the Lord 1593. and the 5 year of our Reign. Signed by the Court, de
Lintot with his Subsignature, and sealed upon a double Label with yellow Wax,
with a little counter-Seal of yellow Wax.

IN the year of our Lord 1593. on Saturday the 27 day of March, the Court then
sitting, being before us John le Doux Esquire, Counselor unto the King,
Lieutenant-Generall Civil in the Bayliwick of Roan, between the Worshipful M.
James Febvrier Counselor and creditour unto the children under age and heirs
of the Worshipful Bartholomew le Cuilier, plaintiff, and appearing by Richer
his Attorney, of the one part; and the Worshipful Claudius le Cuiller Tutour
of the said under-aged, cited to declare unto the said worshipful Febvrier, if
he had not received, or caused to be sold, or otherwise, to be put to profit
for the said under-aged, the number of 260 Barrells and a half, of Salt Callais
measure, belonging unto the said under-aged, and put them into the hands of
John Gryniers son of the deceased Charles Gryniers, in the said Callais,
according to the said John Gryniers Letter and Accounts sent from 13 day of
June, 1587. or else to declare in whose hands the said Salt was yet at this
present, upon protestation made by the said the Worshipful Febvrier: in case
of the negligence of the said le Cuillier Tutour, in putting the said Salt to
profit, and of leaving it so long a space of time; and seeing that the Traffic
was free with them at Deepes, by the means whereof, it was easy to put it off
and to sell it: That the said prices and valuation of the said Salt, must be
laid upon the said Cuillier; and that in case any loss thereof does chance to
happen, it shall be at the perils and interests of the said Cuillers his
brother, and security for the said Claudius; the said Claudius Cuiller Tutour
and Defendant, appearing by his eldest son, and by le Pueu his Attorney, of the
other part. When the said Cuillers had persisted to demand that the cause
should be sent back, as he did demand it yesterday, and protested that the
summoning made by the said Febvrier was of no validity, it was said, That the
parties shall be and are sent back again to the said place on Monday next, to
proceed upon the said summoning, as it shall be meet.

Given as above. Signed Richer and Nephueu, with both their Subsignatures.

Of the 4 day of December, 1597. at Roan, in the Court of Parliament.
BEtween Anthony Solenne, calling himself the Deputy-Commissary unto the
Treasurer-generall of the States of Flanders, plaintiff, by a request of the 30
of August last, tending to an Order for a Judge, by reason of the contention
about Jurisdiction, between the Bailiff of Roan, or his Lieutenant, and the
Prior and Consuls of this said City, and in chief also plaintiff for a Decree
and a Distrein, in the hands of Nicholas Bailleul Citizen of the said Roan,
upon the sum of 200 Crowns consigned into his hands by Giles Fouan, to receive
payment by the said Solenne of a great deal of money due unto him, by Daniel
Loyseleur, for the remainder upon accounts, appearring by M. Thierre des
Marestz his Attorney, of the one part; and the said Giles Fouon a Fleming,
Merchant here, by benefice of Inventory by his wife; of the said Loyseur
present in person, and by M. Nicholas le Cerf his Attorney, on the other part.
Deschamps being heard for the said Solenne, and Chrestien for the said Fouan,
the Court has changed and does change the said Ordinance into action; and that
right may be done upon it, has sent back and does send back the parties before
the Prior and Consuls of Roan: and inhibition is made unto the said parties to
treat elsewhere, upon the penalty of nullity of their proceedings, the charges
being reserved: and has in the interim ordered and does order, that the said
Fouan shall have a mainprise of the money stayed, upon giving security for the
said sum of 200 Crowns.

Given as above. The copy is compared with the Original. Signed de
Boisleuesque with his Subsignature.

To the Lords of the Parliament. The humble Petition of Francis le Teinteurier
Citizen of Roan, Prisoner in the Court.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner was arrested on Tuesday the 9 of this instant month,
according to the Extract of his imprisonment annexed hereunto, at the suit of
Nicholas Larcanier Tutor in chief unto the children of Nicholas Godin, in his
life Citizen of Roan, which are yet under age, for the sum of eleven hundred
threescore and five pounds tournois, according, and for the causes contained in
the said Extract, for and in the name of the said children under age of the
said deceased Godin; although the said Godin does but represent any particular
person, for buying the Petitioners debt at a rate more than just by half, as
the Court shall know, by the Bills of hand and Cedulles inserted into the
accounts, by virtue of which he was made prisoner: yet nevertheless the said
Petitioner to prevent the detaining of his person in prison, has offered and
does offer unto the said Larcanier, all and as much yearly means as he can
possess, which consists but in 50 l. per annum, until the end of his
payment, having no ways to satisfy the debt: and moreover, that he has a
charge of two children upon his hands. For these causes, may it please you, my
Lords, that the Petitioner may be enlarged and let out of prison, with making
over unto the said Larcanier a Letter of an Attorney of the said 50 l. per an.
or else to see himself received and admitted to the Benefice of Cession of
goods; and to that end, to grant and give Warrant unto the said Petitioner, to
call within few days the said Larcanier before this Court, and you shall do
well.

Signed le Teinturier and Cave, for Bindel Attorney, with their Subsignatures.

And underneath the said Petition, the following Ordinance is written.

Let the Petitioner have his recourse before the Prior and Consuls, that right
may be done to him, as it shall be meet.

Given at Roan in the Parliament, the 11 day of April, 1619.
And lower: The 12 day of the said month, and year, at the request and
petition of the said le Teinteur aforenamed; and by virtue of the present
Petition and Ordinance, I have cited the said Larcanier here also named,
speaking to him in his own person, in the place of his habitation at Roan, to
appear to morrow morning, before the Worshipful Prior and the Consuls of the
Merchants of Roan, to be heard upon the ends of these presents.

Done by me Pursuivant in the Court, undersigned: and I have given a Copy of
the Warrant, in the presence of Martin Bouchart, and of others. Levent.

Of the 10. of April 1619. in the Chamber of the Edict in the Parliament at
Roan.
BEtween William de Hammerville Merchant, Citizen of Roan, creditor unto Peter
de Namps, Plaintiff by a request presented by him unto the Court the 11. day of
December last: That, by reason of the appeal from the 100. sols amercement
Judged, and given against him by the Prior and Consuls the 10. day of December
1618 for the pretended transferring and removing of Jurisdiction and of the
contention of Jurisdiction between the said Prior and Consuls of Merchants in
the said Roan; and the Sheriff of the said place, for keeping a day for
accounts of the money raised out of the sale of the movables and Marchandises
of the said de Namps distrained at the request of the said Hammer-ville; by
virtue of a sentence of the said Prior, and Consuls; There was a Warrant was
granted to him, to cite all the creditors of the said De Namps opposing
themselves to the said making of accounts, to be ordered concerning Judges. The
said De Hammerville appearing in person, and by Master Anthony Clovet his
Attorney of the one part, Peter le Roux, Jean le Court the younger, and Charles
Coasture also creditors unto the said de Namps opposing themselves about the
said money cited upon the said Request, and the defendants appearing, to wit,
the said Le Court, and Consture by Master James de la Ruelle: and the said le
Roux, by Mr. James Baillard their Atturnies of the other part; in the presence
of the said Prior and Consuls of the Merchants of the said Roan, having
presented themselves in the cause, to demand the sending back thereof into
their Jurisdiction, appearing by Mr. Ambrose Marc, their Attorney of the other
part: the Court sitting in the Chamber of the Edict; the parties being heard,
and also the Kings Attorney General, has made and does make void the appeal
and the Contents thereof, and amending and redressing the Judgment and
sentence, has discharged and does discharge the said de Hammerville, of the
amercement made by the said sentence; and doing right upon the said Warrant,
has sent back and does send back the parties before the said Prior and
Consuls, to be proceeded between them as it shall be meet and fit.

Given as above: and there is written beneath; the Coppies were compared with
the Original. Signed De Boisleuesque with his subsignature, and a flourish.

An Extract out of the Registers of the Court of Parliament.
Upon the Petition presented by the Prior and the Consuls of this City of Roan:
tending to the end, that it may be permitted unto them to put in Print as well
the Declaration, and Ordinance of the ordaining and establishing of their
Jurisdiction and of a Common place for Merchants in this said City, of the
month of March 1556. as also an Ordinance of the Court made upon the approving
of the said Declaration; an Ordinance, and other Letters Pattents, Ordinances
and Declarations of the enlargement of the said Jurisdiction, Ordinances, and
Orders made afterward thereupon, that in time hereafter, there may be nothing
undertaken to the prejudice of the said Jurisdiction under pretext of being
ignorant thereof.

The Court having seen, and perused this Petition, the Coppies of the said
Declarations, Letters Pattents, Ordinances and Orders, the Conclusion of the
Kings Attorney General, and the Councellor deputed for that purpose being
heard; has with the consent of the said Attorney General, permitted and does
permit unto the said Prior and Consuls to put in Print the said Declarations,
Letters Pattents, Ordinances, and Orders, to serve and to be availeable unto
them, as it shall concern them.

Given in the said Court of Roan the second day of July one thousand six
hundred and nineteen. Signed De Boisleuesque.

FINIS.
Printed according to Order.


