Mr. ALLEN's Vindication; OR; REMARKS upon a late Scandalous PAMPHLET,
Entitled, A strange and New Discovery, etc.
Sir,
HAving lately perused a Scandalous Pamphlet, reflecting on Mr. Allen Ordinary
of Newgate, I thought my self obliged, being a Member of the Church of England,
to enquire of several credible Persons, the true Grounds and Reasons for such
Reports. And being convinced that Malice and Envy were the Sources from whence
such impure Streams flowed, I thought it but Just and Christian-like, to
publish to the World the Matter as it appeared to me. But first I beg Mr.
Allen's Pardon, especially since I am assured he is now writing his own Defense
at large, so that I ought to leave it to his more ingenious Pen. Lampoons and
Libels so much in Fashion in this witty Age, are a ready way to murder any
Person's Reputation; and indeed the Nature of true Virtue is commonly such,
that as the Flame ever bears its Smoke, and the Body its Shadow, so the
brightness of Virtue never shines, but has Disdain or Envy waiting upon it.

But to come to the Point. I find the Chief stress of the Matter is grounded
upon Mr. Allen's being supposed to be the Person, who prevailed with Jones to
Swear against Capt. Newey at his Trial. But according to the best Account I can
receive from such Circumstances and Persons as are least liable to Mistake, the
Matter of Fact is truly Thus: Mr. Allen, according to Custom, a little before
the Sessions begins, Visits the Prisoners, and exhorts them to prepare for
another World, and such as are Evidences to speak the Truth without Favor or
Affection, telling them the Nature of an Oath and what it is. Mr. Charles Newey
happened to be with one Jones alias Ambrell in the Master's side, when Mr.
Allen came to Visit, and he was reading a Paper to Newey, being the Contents of
an Oath he was to swear against Mrs. Newey his Sister-in-Law in Holbourn. Newey
staid and heard the Exhortation, and it was the first time Mr. Allen ever saw
Jones. Presently after this, Jones writes a Letter to Justice Ellis, who
committed him, importing that he had Business of Great Consequence, and desired
to see him. Upon this Justice Ellis went to an adjacent House, and sent for
him, where he acquainted him, that he was very sorry for what he had done, and
was willing to confess the Truth, which was, that Newey was to give him ten
Guineas to swear High Treason against his Sister, viz. That he actually saw her
Coin Half Crowns, and that he was to put them off; whereas indeed he never saw
Mrs. Newey at all, till such time he had been Suborned by the Captain. That he
the said Jones went before Sir Robert Jefferies, and swore the same by the Name
of Ambrell, being persuaded to it by the Captain, that they might have the
better Pretense to carry on their Matters, by having two Witnesses to one Fact.
That he was also to swear himself to be the Husband of one Hannah Goodridge, to
whom Newey had been married some Years before, and that he left her because she
would have poisoned him. For the Truth of this, I must refer my self to the
Worshipful Justice Ellis, who lives near St. Giles's Church.

A small time after Newey himself was committed Prisoner to Newgate, and being
in the Press-Yard, insinuates himself into the Company of Mr. Allen, and
frequently importuned him to go to his Sister-in-Law, whom Mr. Allen had never
seen, having himself at that time a Wife living. So that his Marriage which
happened with Mrs. Newey very lately, could not be the Price and Purchase of
Mr. Allen's prevailing with Jones to be an Evidence against him, as he pretends
in his Pamphlet. At length being prevailed upon by frequent Entreaties, Mr.
Allen went to his Sister in behalf of the said Newey, being accompanied by
Capt. Isaac, who lives in Holbourn, and others of Newey's Relations and
Acquaintance. She returned for Answer, that she could do nothing without Advice
of Counsel. After this, Mr. Newey writes a Letter to Mr. Allen, the Original
whereof is now in Mr. Allen's Hands, and contains what follows.

Dear SIR,
NOT knowing any one readier to serve a Gentleman in Distress than your self,
and having but few Friends, occasions my giving you this Trouble, to beg for
God's sake you will assist me, by Speaking or Doing what you think proper to the
Recorder or Lord Mayor, or with any other Person; which Favor, I will rather
die than not Acknowledge with the Hazard of ten thousand Lives, if I had them,
who am, and always was by Inclination,

Dear Sir, Your most humble Servant to Command, whilst CHAR. NEWEY.
From the Press-Yard. Superscrib'd, To the Reverend Dr. Allen at his Lodgings.
Present.



Mr. Allen was his Friend at that time, and did what in him lay to serve him;
and I cannot but Note how well he Requites him for it. That I pass by in short,
and only observe in the Whole, that it appears Mr. Allen was a perfect Stranger
to Mrs. Newey at the time this Discovery was made to Justice Ellis; and
therefore, what he would infer from it, being built upon a wrong Foundation,
does utterly fall to the ground. As to what is said concerning Mr. Allen's
being an Evidence against him, there is no more in it, than that the Court,
upon Newey's Trial, asked Jones how he came to discover the Matter to Justice
Ellis. He told them he was convinced of the Danger of taking a false Oath by
the Exhortation of Mr. Allen, a little before the Sessions began, which was the
same time the Captain was present, as he owned at his Trial. The Court desired
Mr. Allen to declare upon Oath, whether he had made such Exhortation, and he
answered, Yes, which is all the Evidence Mr. Allen ever gave, notwithstanding
he makes so great a Noise about it in his Pamphlets.

The 2d thing Mr. Allen is charged with, is taking Money from Joseph Fisher and
John Davis lately Ezecuted, under pretense of saving their Lives. The Truth I
find to be this. Mary Fisher, Wife of Joseph Fisher, came to Mr. Allen about
Eleven of the Clock, the Day before the Execution, and gave him a Petition, and
put 2 Guineas in his Hand, entreating him with many Tears, to put her in a way
to get a Reprieve for her Husband. To which Mr. Allen's Answer was, that he
could do her no Service therein, and was unacquainted with those things, and so
gave her the Money back again. On Saturday, May 25th between 6 and 7 in the
Afternoon, Mary Fisher came again to Mr. Allen, and told him, that as she was
going through Newgate, one of the Prisoners called to her, and told her, that
Capt. Newey in the Press-Yard, would speak with her. Accordingly she went, and
after some Discourse, he desired her to swear before a Magistrate, that Mr.
Allen defrauded her of 2 Guineas, under Pretense of saving her. Husband's Life,
which, as she said, she refused; and in order to get from him, promised to
return in 2 Hours. Instead of returning she went directly to Mr. Allen, and
acquainted him with Newey's Intention, and voluntarily made an Affidavit of the
Truth thereof. Mr. Harvey, a Gentleman of Reputation, who lives in
Red-Lion-Fields, drew up the Affidavit, and read it to her distinctly and
deliberately. She replied, it was very true, and so signed it. Mr. Harvey's
Clerk went along with her before Judge Gould; his Clerk asked her whether she
had heard the Contents read, and she said Yes, and that they were very true,
and are as follows.

Mary Fisher of the Parish of Stepney in the County of Middlesex, late Wife of
Joseph Fisher, deceased, makes Oath, that she this Deponent, did apply her
self to Mr. Allen, Ordinary of Newgate, to put her in a way to get a Reprieve
for her Husband a Prisoner in Newgate, then under Sentence of Death, and gave
him 2 Guineas; but that he the said Mr. Allen, told her, he could do her no
Service therein, for he was unacquainted with those Concerns, and gave her the
2 Guineas again.

The Mark of M Mary Fisher.
Coram me. H. Gould.
Jurat May 25.
The Day following being Sunday Mr. Allen acquainted Newey with what Fisher had
told him, and read him the Affidavit; he was so concerned, that he sent for the
Woman the next day, and told her Mr. Allen had abused her, and prevailed with
her so far, that at his Request she went before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor, and deposed that Mr. Allen had forced her to take the said Oath before
Judge Gold. Whereas Mr. Harvey and his Clerk did affirm and they were ready to
depose that Mr. Allen, did not go with her, nor stir out of the Chamber when
she made the aforesaid Affidavit, his Chambers being in Fleetstreet, and the
Judges in Chancery Lane; which in the Opinion of every unprejudiced Person that
I have conversed with, does fully enough clear the Reputation of Mr. Allen as
to that Point; though it is an unhappy Circumstance for a Minister to have to do
with Persons of such profligate Consciences, as will Swear and then Forswear,
for a small Gratuity.

I find Mr. Allen accused also with taking 40 s. from John Davis, who was
lately executed; as also 20 from his Wife. I have inquired into this Matter,
and find no Evidence but Davis his Wife, who only says, that she heard her
Husband say so. I am unwilling to reflect on the Dead; but it is well known what
a Person this Davis was. It seems he was a Minister's Son in the North, near
the Place where Mr. Allen was born, and desired him with great Earnestness not
to give any Account of his Disaster to his Parents by Letter, his true Name
being Shirley; and upon this account sent 20 s. to Mr. Allen, to buy him a
Mourning Ring by his Wives Hand, which Mr. Allen, in my Opinion, very
imprudently returned her at the Request of the Lord Mayor; and especially,
seeing he has discharged that painful and laborious Office a Year and 3
Quarters, and has received but one Quarters Salary of the Whole, as I am
informed by several.

Thus, I have given a true Account of the Matters of Fact as they are in
themselves, and can be Attested by Persons of unquestionable Reputation, and
shall only add, that what I find in another Paper, concerning Brabazon's giving
Mr. Allen Money, has no appearance of Truth, he being now a Convict in Newgate,
that lies for Transportation; and I am very well assured that Mr. Allen has
formerly paid this Man's Fees out of mere Charity, and so set him at Liberty
once before.

I am Yours A. B.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Next Week will be published a short Account of the Life and Conversation of
the pretended Capt. Charles Newey, writ by a Person well known to him.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1700.


