METHODS TO PREVENT SMUGGLING IN GREAT BRITAIN.
SMUGGLING cutters have regular charter parties, pretending to be bound to
foreign ports, laden with customable and prohibited goods; if they are not
within the limits of a port, or within two leagues of the shore they cannot be
seized; ships often bring spirits into port, and if they have no opportunity to
smuggle, report their cargoes for exportation: vessels with spirits have often
been stranded and have had liberty from the commissioners of the customs to
fell certain quantities free of duties, which gives encouragement to this
trade, as very few British or Irish vessels are employed to carry spirits or
tea for foreigners, unless to smuggle on our coast, the nation would lose
nothing on account of freights, to make all vessels of Great Britain or
Ireland, bound from any ports in Europe, liable to seizure and penalties
wherever found with tea or spirits, would tend more than any other method to
prevent smuggling.

2. Vessels of 100 tons and upwards which can import brandies, etc. often land
part of their cargoes before and after their reports at the custom-house; all
merchants who import foreign brandies should be obliged to take out a license,
as is done in the spice trade; and let vessels of any tonnage import brandies,
etc. under like restrictions.

3. No masters of vessels arriving from foreign ports should have liberty to
report bails of merchandise, contents unknown, but should be obliged to declare
the contents on their report at the custom-house, of all bails of goods on
board their vessel, because great quantities of prohibited goods are by this
method brought into the kingdom.

4. There are continually cutters from Flushing and Dunkirk and other French
ports, who supply our outward bound ships and coasting vessels with spirits,
teas, and all sorts of merchandise, to the very great loss of the nation and to
the enriching our enemies.

5. And the coasting vessels are not only supplied for their own use but land
great quantities in the ports where they are bound.

6. The Deal boats attend on all homeward bound ships, from whom they buy all
sorts of goods and run them on shore.

7. If the masters and crews of any vessels on our coast, who receive spirits
or tea from on board any vessel, were liable to serve for a certain number of
years on board the navy it would prevent this trade; and if the masters and men
of the Deal or any other boats, likewise on conviction were made to serve on
board the navy, and the captain and crews of the vessels who should put goods
on board them, it would stop this trade to the very great benefit of the
revenue.

8. The boatmen or the ships crew who should inform against the others should
be free: as his Majesty is in want of soldiers great numbers may be raised, if
they were to allow 5L. for each smuggler, and his horse for the use of the poor
of the parish where he was taken, and to make the parish liable to a penalty
for smuggled goods found and seized in the parish, which penalty to go to the
use of the next parish, unless a parishoner give information, in which case it
shall go to the poor of the parish where found; the constable, churchwardens,
and overseers to have power to make seizures; as the parishoners often
encourage poor people to sell tea and spirits by retail, the parish should
forfeit 10L. to the use of the adjoining parish, for each person convicted of
retailing tea or spirits in the parish, which will prevent in a great measure
the number of these houses, and of course idle people from frequenting them,
and be some means of lessening the parish rates.

9. Foreign vessels often come with cargoes to smuggle on our coast, every
foreign vessel should be obliged on her arrival in port to give an account of
all teas and spirits on board, and if any more should be found the vessel
should be forfeited, and on the vessel's departure an officer should go on
board to examine if there were any deficient more than what was necessary for
the ship's use; hand bills in Low Dutch and French to be delivered to the
masters of foreign ships, that they may not plead ignorance.

10. As his Majesty's navy is in want of sailors, if a few stout cutters were
to be stationed from the Northforeland to West Cappell in the Isle of Welchern
to cruise against smugglers, they might soon pick up some thousands of sailors,
and at the same time prevent the privateers from Dunkirk, etc. from annoying
our trade in the north sea.

11. If government was to allow a bounty of 5L. for each sailor took out of a
smuggler, and 10L. a ton for each vessel brought into port by any of the King's
ships it would very much tend to stop that trade.

12. Goods sold at the custom-house sales for exportation are mostly
clandestinely re-landed and sold for home consumption, as are large quantities
of prize goods, as the attestations of their being landed in a foreign port,
signed by two British merchants, can always be had to discharge the bond
entered into here by the exporters, notwithstanding the goods were never landed
there; this may be prevented by subjecting the master and sailors to some
punishment, and forfeiture of the vessel out of which they were re-landed.

13. Any person having a license to retail spirituous liquors being convicted
of buying or keeping smuggled spirits, to forfeit their license for three years.


