A Mirror; Wherein the RUMPERS AND FANATICS (Especially those, who even yet
desire to continue Religious Rebels, and to make Piety the Sire to Treason,
and new Disturbances;) may see their deformity, and abhor both themselves and
their Actions.

Sent in a Letter by a Friend, to a Votary and Follower of that FACTION.

Occasioned by a Seditious Sermon lately Preached.

Psalm. 59.12. For the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips, let them
even be taken in their pride; and for Cursing and Lying which they speak.

Hor: lib. 3. Ode 4. Vis consilii expers mole ruit sua.
Vim temperatam Dii quoque provehunt,
In majus; iidem odere vires
Omne nefas animo moventes.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawley at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet, 1660.

A Mirror, etc.
SIR,
I Suppose you will readily grant, that if a Person has a limb or a member cut
off, there needs not many Arguments to persuade him, that there is a maym and a
deformity in his Body: And surely I think it is equally sensible, and will
therefore require as little labor to prove, that in this latter Age of the
World there never was more visible tokens of a Divine displeasure upon any
Nation, than this of England, which being possessed with many legions of Evil
spirits, most furious and fanatic, has, from their Impulses, for many years
together, been like a great body tearing it self to pieces. During a tedious
interval of time we lay gasping under the groans and pressures of a Civil
Usurpation: from thence (like our Savior, delivered from the Tyranny and
Injustice of Pilate, to the rudeness and violence of his Soldiers) we were
transmitted to a Military Insolence: When those Persons, who, before they had
built their fortunes upon public ruins, we should have disdained to have set
with the dogs of our Flock, were become our Dictators, and the grand Masters of
our Lives, our Properties, and our Laws; all which lay like a Partridge under a
Falcons wing, ready to be seizd upon, and torn in pieces at their pleasure. We
have known committed the most irregular and exorbitant Tyrannies, aggravated
from one part of the Actors from a mercinary perfidiousness, and more highly
aggravated from the other party by a pretended legality, which endeavored to
make the Vassallage certain, and irrevocable. Religion, Justice, Counsil, and
Treasure, those four Pillars of Government were undermined, and in part
demolished: We were indeed a mere heap and rout of Men hudled together like the
Emblem of Disorder. And now, that from all this Misery and Confusion we are in
some measure emancipated. When those Daemoniacks, which, (like him in the
Gospel) has many times thrown the Nation into the fire of War and Rapine, and
many times into the Water of Violence and Desolation, are almost charmed and
exorcis'd; And when a most distempered People, whom we may properly say, Satan
has bound these eighteen years, are in some assurance of being loosed from
their infirmity: When the dawnings of a happy Settlement break forth upon us,
and when, (to endear the Mercy,) all this is accomplished without blood and
sweat, in such an unexpected and sudden change of Providence, that no Oracle
could have found belief, if any had foretold it: That yet notwithstanding any
Person should be so besotted with Ignorance, or so everwhelm'd with Malice, and
Self-interest, as still to dote upon our Enslavers, and consequently, to desire
a Return of our Madness and Distraction, is even the most prodigious Wonder;
which as in my self it produces pity and amazement, so in others it cannot but
beget both scorn and indignation. For how can it be thought upon, otherwise
than with a reflection of horror, that because some corrupt stomachs are able
to digest poison, all others must be forbidden the use of more wholesome diet?
It is true, there was a time when these State-Conjurers, did with so many
clouds wherein their Actions were inwrapt, fill the passages of Men's
understanding, that the beam of the mind could not set open the light of
Reason; but now that those thick Scales are fallen off, and all that painting and
varnish with which their pretenses were adorned, is now dissipated and
vanished, for men still to continue their desires to uphold so corrupt an
Interest, does not admit either Excuse or Pardon, seeing it does not proceed
from Ignorance, or Error, but from a perverse ebstinacy, and a Malicious
Ambition. It is a true saying of one of the Ancients, that Time and the Eye try
out truth, but falsehood wins eredit only on a sudden, and by uncertainties:
And since Time, the most sure and impartial Judge, has sentenced those
glorious pretenses, with which our late Politicians did veyl themselves, to be
nothing else by gilded Hypocrisies, and the baiting of their hook with Heaven
to catch Earth; he that subscribes not to this Testimony, must even defy the
light it self. Naturalists tell us of the Basilisk, that if he see a Man first,
the Man dies, but if a Man see him first, the Basilisk dies; It is most certain
of those politic frauds and impostures, used by those exquisite State-Jugglers
lately turned out of Play; Many Persons, not being quick-signted enough to
discern them, they did not only endanger, but destroy; but now they are
discovered, all their power of doing hurt is lost, except over those, who choose
to prefer Rebellion with ruin, before Subjection with Safety. I think it may be
a question concerning many of our grand Tyrannizers, whether their Persons were
more contemptible, or their Actions more to be detested? For there was obtruded
upon the Nation, not only vassallage, but contumely: How many of them grew,
like Melons, out of Dunghils? Whom that Character which Tacitus gives of some
Promooters in his time may aptly express, Of Beggars they are become Rich, Of
Contemptible persons feared, procuring destruction to others, and in the end to
themselves. Should their Actions be described, the Illegality, Injustice,
Rapine, and Violence which was interwoven and coexistent with them, would fill
a Volume as big as the Book of Martyrs; And, were they not most eminently
notorious, and impossible to be hidden, I should say as Seneca in the like
Case, Satius erat ista in oblivionem ire, ne quis postea Potens disceret,
invideretque rei minime humanae. However, my intentions are not to stain my
Paper with the things themselves, but only to note their Circumstances, and
attendants.

I am persuaded, since mankind had a being, there was never joined together
fairer resemblances, and souler Ends, then in those men. How well may that be
applied to them, which Herodian observes of the Emperor Severus, that he was
the most cunning Dissembler in the World; not regarding to falfify his Oath to
serve his Ambition; one that knew how to insinuate into others, for his own
purposes, And would readily utter that with his tongue, which he never intended
in his heart.

Never was that precept of Lysander so well practiced, as by these Statists,
That Children are to be deceived with Comfits, and men with Oaths. Never was
there beast who had more foul and stinking garbage covered over with a fair
skin. Never was there Crocodile who was more plentiful in tears, nor more ready
to devour: They were like the Cane-plant, which of all Plants, as it is
Smoothest in bark, so it is hollowest in body.

But that which gave the most horrid aspect, and the most noisome favor to all
their impieties, (like a taper in the hand of a Ghost, or as sweet Oil to a
rank and stinking body,) was, that Religion was forced to become a Fander to
their Tyranny and Ambition: And as the Heathens of old, fancied Jupiter to be
an Adulterer, Mars a Quarreller, Bacchus a Drunkard, Mercury a Thief, and Venus
a Whore, that having such Patrons for their Vices, their uncleanness might seem
Religious; So these Politics would needs fancy God to be such a one, as
themselves, by interesting him in all their designs; and after the Plot was
contrived, he was implored to give the Success, though the thing it self was
never so Villainous; and if the Issue was suitable to their desires, then they
boasted that they were delivered to do such abominations. Casuists say, He
that lies with his Sister commits a heinous Crime, but he that marryes his
Sister heightens his impiety, by applying Gods Ordinance to his own Villainy:
Surely there cannot be a more profligate and flagitious Act, then to make God
the Patron of fraud, and to use Religion as a Mask to cover their lewd designs.
And indeed, how can those impious wretches be sufficiently abhorred, who being
full fraught with Malice, and Ambition, lift up polluted hands to heaven; And
are neither afraid nor ashamed to approach the most holy of Religious duties,
being yet polluted with the blood of their Murders and Regicides? These are the
Person, who whilst their Actions gave the cleerest evidences of Cruelty and
Sacrilege, Disloyalty and Perfidiousness, did notwithstanding not cease to be
devout. But what was the Efficacy of their Devotion? Surely nothing more than
the correcting of their gestures, and the reforming of their hair; it did not
in any measure repress their passions, nor touch their Vices, nor restrain and
prevent their Treason and Tyranny. Their greatest virtue consisted in extolling
those offenders, whom their own Examples and Commands having made like the Evil
Angels, they nevertheless reputed to be Saints, and in speaking evil of those
Innocent Persons, whom having injured with the greatest oppression, they also
branded with the most infamous terms. Their Zeal, which according to the phrase
of the Holy Ghost, ought to have eaten up themselves, did devour their
Neighbor, and made a Conflagration, not only of Towns and Provinces, but of
Kingdoms and Nations. What did they gain by their frequency of Converse with
holy things, more than the contempt which grows from familiarity, and the
Custom to violate, and porfane them? They became more confident to commit
Wickedness, and willingly lost the scruple, that with the left cheek they
might pursue the sin. So that we may believe they made use of Religious
Exercises, not so much to implore pardon for their enormities, as liberty to
perpetrate more, and to sin with authority. These are they, who did certainly
fancy that all Villainy was permitted them, provided they did but retein a show
of Piety. These were they, who mingled God among their Passions, though never
so irregular and exorbitant; that engaged him in their Interests, though never
so mischievous and corrupt; and employed him upon all occasions where Avarice,
Rapine, Murders, and Usurpations were to be promoted. And, that which is not
least to be admired, notwithstanding their pretended Sanctity, was at length
even manifest to all, to be but a vizard of specious Hypocrifie, yet still they
continued to make use of it, thereby to abuse the People: Being, as I conceive,
ambitious to exalt their Impudence, to the same degree with their Impiety, I
could wish that there was no such cause to affirm of these Men, that as they
took the surest course to make other Persons Atheists, so their own handling of
holy and religious things, discovered themselves to be worse than Atheists. It
was one principal part of their aim, to multiply divisions in Religion, that
so, a Spiritual Anarchy, might be engaged to support their Civil Usurpation;
Now it is observed of old, That many divisions in Religion are a principal
cause to introduce Atheism. Doubtless such Schisms are a greater Scandal, than
corruption of Manners: For what can be the effect of such a Morris-dance of
Sectaries) each of them having a diverse Posture and Cringe by themselves) but
to move derision and Contempt in Worldlings and depraved Men, who are too prone
to scorn and reject piety and holiness. But on the other side, If any Atheist
did but reflect upon those Nefandous and Atrocious Crimes, which those corrupt
Politicians have committed, under a pretense to advance the Cause of Religion,
He would surely be a thousand times more Atheist than before, and with scorn
and detestation cry out, Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.

It must needs be more commendable to have no Opinion of God at all, than to
entertain such thoughts as are not only unworthy of him, but Contumelious and
Reproachful unto him: It is observed, that the Devils Blasphemy was, I will
Ascend, and be like the most High. But those men's Blasphemy exceeds that of
Lucifers, for they make the most High Descend, and become like the Prince of
Darkness. For what else can it be, to Interest God in those execrable Actions
of Murdering Princes, Butchering People, and the Ruin and Subversion of States
and Governments?

And what now is the effect of all, but this only, That having filled their
Sails with the Breath of Religion, Profit was the Compass, by which those
Land-Pirates steerd their Course in all our mischievous Commotions: For the
rest, it is most evident to any who have but the least portion of
understanding, that they have destroyed the most Glorious and Excellent
Commonwealth, which the world could boast off; A Commonwealth which was best
Balanced, and most equally Tempered between Royal Prerogative, and the Peoples
Liberty, each Supporting and Maintaining the other: Nor is it possible, for any
form of Government upon Earth, more really to secure the peoples Rights, than
that: Nor to give unto them, either a more assured Redress of Material
Grievances, or a clearer exemption from all Burdens, and Taxations, but such as
themselves shall concur in the Imposition. And yet our late State- Mountebanks,
were like that famous Quacksalver Paracelsus, who counting it a trivial
over-worn way, to maintain the world as God himself had provided, thought fit
to propose a mean for the Propagation of Mankind without the use of Women. Or,
as it is Fabled of Ixion, that projecting with himself to enjoy Juno the
Goddess of Power, he had Copulation with a Cloud, of which he begot Centaures,
and Chimaeras, so these men being carried away with a Frantic and Impotent
Passion, and a Vapourous conceit of forming some Imaginary model of Government,
which they did especially defign to have Perpetuated in themselves, are indeed
delivered of nothing but ayrie hopes, and certain most deformed, and monstrous
Apparitions.

But Sir, to pass from these unto your self; Is it not most strange, that as
Glaveus praised Injustice, and Isocrates extolled Busiris that notable Tyrant,
so these men's Commendations should be your Subject, or their Restoration your
Desire? And is it not equally wonderful, that such Lectures should be heard
with any Approbation and Allowance? But I perceive it is upon the same Reason,
that Tacitus gives of the Applause afforded to Aliniue Gallus for his defense
of Luxury and Prodigality, The acknowledging of Vices under honest terms, and
the likeness of Affections in your hearers minds, causes their assent to be
easy and favorable: Nor can the strength of your Arguments be any other, than
such as Anthony the Orator was once forced to use; who, being to defend a
Person, that was accused of Sedition and Treason, bent all the force of his
Eloquence to prove, that Sedition and Treason were no Crimes. Surely it will do
well if you take pains to consider, That such an Enterprise as you endeavor,
Is as Vain, as it is Impious: There never wanted any thing to the overthrow of
those Statesmen, which you so magnify, but only to have the people undeceived
and restored to their Right wits: For that which was long since objected to,
and answered by that Excellent Phocion, (with whom expired the Liberty of his
Country, which procured his Ruin) may both ways here be most properly
applied; One told him, that if ever the People grew Enraged, they would kill
him; Phocion answered, Peradventure they may kill me when they are Mad, but if
ever they grow Sober again, they will not suffer thee to live. They who have
advantaged themselves by the Frenzy of the Vulgar, they will assuredly
Abominate, if now they are returned unto their sober temper. So that your old
Patrons have two potent Enemies to encounter withal, that is to say, Heaven,
and Earth; Heaven for their Blasphemy, and Earth for their Deceit; You
therefore who are still their followers, do but labor to kindle a Fire, by
blowing of dead Ashes, which if you continue to endeavor, you will but too
clearly manifest a strange Composition of Folly, and Fury to be in you, and you
must give others leave to take it, not as an evidence of your Saintship, but as
an Argument of your Stultitude. And certainly as the Enterprise is Ridiculous,
so the Impiety is Incomparable; For what can be more unbecomming him, whose
Office is to be an Ambassador of Christ, than to demean himself as an Herald to
Beelzebub? Or to bring down the Holy Spirit not in the likeness of a Dove, but
in the form of a Vultur, or a Raven? It was an Excellent saying of King Henry
the 7th. of England, That when Christ came into the world, Peace was
Proclaimed, and when he left the world, Peace was bequeathed. How then can they
pretend to be his Ministers, who in their Conscionatory Invectives, breath
nothing but Blood, Ruin and Confusion? And rather say as Jehu did, What have
thou to do with Peace? Get thee behind me: As if Peace were not their
business, but following, and Parties, and Factions. I cannot but believe that
a Minister intermedling in Court and State affairs, deserves as severe
Scourges, as a Merchant who buys and sells in the Temple. However they ought
to be such studious Lovers of Concord and Amity, that they should even avoid a
Seditious Truth.

I know what you pretend to fear, and what you are bold to affirm, That Popery
will be introduced, and that the King is already a Papist; for the first, let
me tell you, (although this old Jesuitick Juggle does not deserve an Answer)
that it is an Objection only of your Suspicion, not your Reason: And yet it is
such a Suspicion, that as it imports the greatest scandal to the State, so it
implies a most Sottish contradiction in it self: For all men know, That they
who first raised a Credit to themselves, by fastening that Imputation upon
others, did in the exercise of that power, which partly by that aspersion they
obtained, give a perfection to those designs, which the Pope and his
Partisans, although they often desired to effect, was never able to accomplish;
And it is now fully evinced, That the Beast with seven heads, and the Beast
with many heads, have both the same design, to make Princes as the Banditi,
and at their own pleasure to proscribe their Lives, their Revenews, and their
Kingdoms: So that it cannot but be the strongest symptom of a Fanatique Fancy,
to imagine, that the same Persons should be instrumental to return us to that
madness and confusion, from which they have even now freed us, and are still
laboring to protect, both themselves and the Nation.

As to the other part, the truth is, you follow the rule of depraved Nature,
though it be most unsuitable to Christianity, You hate him whom you have
wronged: And as it is said of the Dragon, that when he cannot reach his prey,
he poisons the Air with his breath, and so destroys it; So because you cannot
touch his Majesty's Body, you labor to blast his Peputation; And now that your
Company of Lying Wonders for the Public good, fail, and are become useless,
you have recourse to lying Slanders, and perhaps intend to make your Libels,
and defamatory Speeches, to be Successors to the Popes Legend. Surely these
Politic contumelies are a recent Invention of this corrupt age; or old they
used them not: For it might as well have been objected against David, that he
was a Worshipper of Dagon, when Readiness fury and injustice forced him to fly to
King Achish, and the Philistines. But of this thus much only need be said,
Ten est mendacium pellui et si diligenter inspexeris.

By this time, Sir, I hope you see that fourfold mischief in which you are
implicated, Your Desires are Impossible, your Attempts are wicked, your Fears
are vain, and your Reports are false and scandalous: And is it possible that
after all this, any Person should be such a superlative Fanatic, as to need
extrinsick argumen's to reclaim him? Surely it cannot be; except he be rooted
in his Error, as they say Marsus Diaboli roots in self in the Earth, which
can never be pulled up without breaking. However I do not doubt, but, as
Suetonius reports, that Augustus Caesar walking by a Pond where the Froggs were
croaking, commanded them to keep silence, and they were never after heard to
make any Noise in that Place: So all that harsh roaring, and discordant clamor
both in pulpits and other places, which has not only portended, but caused so
much mischief in the Kingdom, (like the Prognostications of some Conjurers,
that foretell the tempests they intend to raise) will ere long by the presence
and command of our Augustus be silenced and restreyn'd.

I have now done: Only suffer me to add this, What I have writ, although it be
bitter, yet it is wholesome: There can not be a perfect Conversion, unless a
full Conviction do proceed: Especially in a case of this nature it is
indispensably necessary; For those persons, who have hitherto triumphed over
our laws, and would now triumph over our senses, as well as our reason and
judgment, by persuading us that Tyranny is liberty: Usurpation, justice: and
Pressures and burdens, Ease and Rest, will not be reclaimed, until they
perceive that their depraved and corrupt Principles, and their crooked and
perverse Rules, are as deeply sounded, and as plainly discovered to others, as
they are known unto themselves.

I know that the wound given to the State wants Oil, rather then Vinegar to be
poured into it. But he is no good Physician, that does not in some cases, as
well accomodate his Receipts to the temper of the Patient, as to the nature of
the Disease. Some wounds are not fit for an healing plaster, except a
Corrosive be first applied. And in this distemper you your self have proved it
necessary; And that is the reason I am forced to observe that Method of
Physic, which cures one heat by another. I shall conclude with this cordial
desire, That as the King is called Gods Vicegerent, So that he may make him the
pattern, and examplar of his Proceeding, by extending a plentiful pardon to
penitent offenders, so far as his mercy may not violate his justice: but they
who will still continue perverse and Contumacious, let them perish in their
Obstinacy.

Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claudo.
Seldom the Villain, though great haste he make,
Slow-footed Vengeance fails to overtake.
Prove: 24.24, 25 He that says unto the wicked thou art Righteous, him shall
the people curse, Nations shall abhor him. But to them that rebuke him shall be
delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.

THE END.

