Mr. WOOLLASTON's CASE, In Relation to a Breach of PRIVILEGE Committed by Mr.
ROBERT THOMPSON, and others.
MR. Woollaston in October 1697. came to an Agreement with one Mr. Thompson, to
Hire of him Woodhall-Park, and other Lands in the County of Hertford; being the
Estate of one Philip Butler, Esquire an Infant. He the said Thompson, being then
Tenant to the Premises, and was to Pay 60 l. per Annum Rent, besides some
Venison and Rabbits; and was to give the said Thompson Twenty Guineas to
procure him a Lease of the said Premises for Five Years. And in pursuance of
the said Agreement, the said Mr. Woollaston entered upon the Premises, and was
thereof Possessed, and Paid all Parish Duties, and other Taxes and Charges in
Keeping and Maintaining of the Deer all the Winter long, and also in Keeping
and Repairing the House and Gardens: And that he made little or no Benefit or
Advantage of the same, although in quiet Possession until the Sixth of July
last; being the last Day but one of the last Sessions of Parliament. At which
time, when the Profit was to be made of the Premises by the said Mr.
Woollaston, then Mr. Thompson, Mr. Samuel Robinson, John Plummer, John Crane,
Samuel Seagins, Joseph Biggs, John Crabb, Richard Nash, James Pendrid, Nicholas
Bickerton, William Ansell, Thomas Waller, and Edmund Chambers, with diverse
others, came in a Riotous manner with Clubs, Staves, and other Weapons, when
they knew Mr. Woollaston was Absent, and in the Service of the House the last
Sessions of Parliament, and Entered the said Premises, kept his Servants
Prisoners all that Day and the next Night, and while they kept his Servants
Prisoners, they went and Killed the Deer in the Park; and then came and Entered
the House with a great Rabble, and turned the said Mr. Woollaston's Servants
out of Possession of the said House, and seized upon his, and his Servants
Goods, and his Cattle in the Park, as also upon a Gentleman's Goods that was
then in the House, a Friend of the said Mr. Woollaston; and that in so Inhumane
and Barbarous a manner, that they would not so much as leave a Bed for him or
his Wife or Children to lie on: And likewise set on several Men to Mow down the
Grass, pretending all this was for Arrears of Rent, whenas indeed there was no
Rent due.


