Tetrachordon: EXPOSITIONS UPON The four chief places in Scripture, which
treat of Marriage, or nullities in Marriage.

On Genesis 1. 27. 28. compared and explained by Genesis 2. 18. 23. 24.

Deuteronomy. 24. 1. 2.

Matthew. 5. 31. 32. with Matthew. 19. from the 3d. v. to the 11th.

1 Cor. 7. from the 10th to the 16th.

Wherein the Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, as was lately published, is
confirmed by explanation of Scripture, by testimony of ancient Fathers, of
civil laws in the Primitive Church, of famousest Reformed Divines, And
lastly, by an intended Act of the Parliament and Church of England in the last
year of EDWARD the sixth.

By the former Author J. M.

(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
Euripid. Medea. LONDON: Printed in the year 1645.

To the PARLIAMENT.
THat which I knew to be the part of a good Magistrate, aiming at true liberty
through the right information of religious and civil life, and that which I
saw, and was partaker, of your Vows and solemn Cov'nants, Parliament of
England, your actions also manifestly tending to exalt the truth, and to
depresse the tyranny of error, and ill custom, with more constancy and
prowess then ever yet any, since that Parliament which put the first Scepter of
this Kingdom into his hand whom God and extraordinary virtue made their Monarch,
were the causes that moved me, one else not placing much in the eminence of a
dedication, to present your high notice with a Discourse, conscious to it self
of nothing more then of diligence, and firm affection to the public good. And
tbat ye took it so as wise and impartial men, obtaining so great power and
dignity, are wont to accept, in matters both doubtful and important, what
they think offered them well meant, and from a rational ability, I had no less
then to persuade me. And on that perswaston am returned, as to a famous and
free Port, my self also bound by more then a maritime Law, to expose as freely
what fraughtage I conceave to bring of no trifles. For although it be generally
known, how and by whom ye have been instigated to a hard censure of that former
book entitled, The Doctrine, and Diseipline of Divorce, an opinion held by some
of the best among reformed Writers without scandal or confutement, though now
thought new and dangerous by some of our severe Gnostics, whose little reading,
and less meditating holds ever with hardest obstinacy tbat which it took up
with easiest credulity, I do not find yet that ought, for the furious
ineitements which have been used, has issued by your appointment, that might
give the least interruption or disrepute either to the Author, or to the Book.
Which he who will be better advised then to call your neglect, or connivence at
a thing imagined so perilous, can attribute it to nothing more justly, then to
the deep and quiet stream of your direct and calm deliberations; that gave
not way either to the fervent rashness, or the immaterial gravity of those who
ceased not to exasperate without cause. For which uprightness and incorrupt
refusal of what ye were incensed to, Lords and Commons, (though it were don to
justice, not to me, and was a peculiar demonstration how far your ways are
different from the rash vulgar) besides tbose allegiances of oath and duty,
which are my publie debt to your public labors, I have yet a store of
gratitude laid up, which cannot be exhausted; and such thanks perhaps they may
live to be, as shall more then whisper to the next ages. Yet that the Author
may be known to ground himself upon his own innocence, and the merit of his
cause, not upon the favor of a diversion, or a delay to any just censure, but
wishes rather he might see those his detracters at any fair meeting, as learned
debatements are privileged with a due freedom under equal Moderators, I shall
here briefly single one of them (because he has obliged me to it) who I
persuade me having scarce read the book, nor knowing him who writ it, or at
least faining the latter, bath not forborne to scandalize him, unconferr'd with,
unadmonisht, undealt with by any Pastorly or brotherly convincement, in the
most open and invective manner, and at the most bitter opportunity that drift
or set design could have invented. And this, when as the Canon Law, though
commonly most favoring the boldness of their Priests, punishes the naming or
traducing of any person in the Pulpit, was by him made no scruple. If I shall
therefore take license by the right of nature, and that liberty wherein I was
born, to defend my self publicly against a printed Calumny, and do willingly
appeal to those Judges to whom I am accused, it can be no immoderate, or
unallowable course of seeking so just and needful reparations. Which I had don
long since, had not these employments, which are now visible, deferred me. It
was preached before ye, Lords and Commons, in August last upon a special day of
humiliation, that there was a wicked Book abroad, and ye were taxt of sin that
it was yet uncensur'd, the book deserving to be burnt, and impudence also was
charged upon the Author, who durst set his name to it, and dedicate it to your
selves. First, Lords and Commons, I pray to that God, before whom ye then were
prostrate, so to forgive ye those omissions and trespasses, which ye desire
most should find forgiveness, as I shall soon show to the world how easily ye
absolve your selves of that which this man calls your sin, and is indeed your
wisdom, and your Nobleness, whereof to this day ye have don well not to
repent. He terms it a wicked book, and why but for allowing other causes of
Divorce, then Christ and his Apostles mention; and with the same censure
condemns of wickedness not only Martin Bucer that elect Instrument of
Reformation, highly honored and had in reverence by Edward the sixth, and his
whole Parliament, whom also I had published in English by a good providence,
about a week before this calumnious digression was preached; so that if he knew
not Bucer then, as he ought to have known, he might at least have known him
some months after, ere the Sermon came in print, wherein notwithstanding he
persists in his former sentence, and condemns again of wickedness, either
ignorantly or wilfully, not only Martin Bucer, and all the choicest and
holiest of our Reformers, but the whole Parliament and Church of England in
those best and purest times of Edward the sixth. All which I shall prove with
good evidence, at the end of these Explanations. And then let it be judged and
seriously considered with what hope the affairs of our Religion are committed
to one among others, who has now only left him which of the twain he will
choose, whether this shall be his palpable ignorance, or the same wickedness
of his own book, which he so lavishly imputes to the writings of other men: and
whether this of his, that thus peremptorily defames and attaints of wickedness
unspotted Churches, unblemisht Parlaments, and the most eminent restorers of
Christian Doctrine, deserve not to be burnt first. And if his heat had burst
out only against the opinion, his wonted passion had no doubt bin silently
born with wonted patience. But since against the charity of that solemn place
and meeting, it served him further to inveigh opprobriously against the person,
branding him with no less then impudence, only for setting his name to what
he had writt'n, I must be excused not to be so wanting to the defense of an
honest name, or to the reputation of those good men who afford me their
society, but to be sensible of such a foul endeavored disgrace: not knowing
ought either in mine own deserts, or the Laws of this Land, why I should be
subject, in such a notorious and illegal manner, to the intemperancies of this
man's preaching choler. And indeed to be so prompt and ready in the midst of his
humbleness, to toss reproaches of this bulk and size, argues as if they were
the weapons of his exercise, I am sure not of his Ministry, or of that days
work. Certainly to subscribe my name at what I was to own, was what the State
had ordered and requires. And he who lists not to be malicious, would call it
ingenuity, clear conscience, willingness to avouch what might be questioned,
or to be better instructed. And if God were so displeased with those, Isa. 58.
who on the solemn fast were wont to smite with the fist of wickedness, it
could be no sign of his own humiliation accepted, which disposed him to smite
so keenly with a reviling tongue. But if only to have writ my name must be
counted impudence, how does this but justify another, who might affirm with as
good warrant, that the late Discourse of Scripture and Reason, which is certain
to be chiefly his own draught, was published without a name, out of base fear,
and the sly avoidance of what might follow to his detriment, if the party at
Court should hap to reach him. And I, to have set my name, where he accuses me
to have set it, am so far from recanting, that I offer my hand also if need be,
to make good the same opinion which I there maintain, by inevitable
consequences drawn parallel from his own principal arguments in that of
Scripture and Reason; which I shall pardon him, if he can deny, without shaking
his own composition to pieces. The impudence therefore, since he waigh'd so
little what a gross revile that was to give his equal, I send him back again
for a phylactery to stitch upon his arrogance, that censures not only before
conviction so bitterly without so much as one reason given, but censures the
Congregation of his Governors to their faces, for not being so hasty as himself
to censure.

And whereas my other crime is, that I addressed the Dedication of what I had
studied, to the Parliament, how could I better declare the loyalty which Iowe to
that supreme and majestic Tribunal, and the opinion which I have of the
high-entrusted judgment, and personal worth assembled in that place. With the
same affections therefore, and the same addicted fidelity, Parliament of England,
I here again have brought to your perusal on the same argument these following
Expositions of Scripture. The former book, as pleased some to think, who were
thought judicious, had of reason in it to a sufficiency; what they required,
was that the Scriptures there alleged, might he discussed more fully. To their
desires, thus much further has been labored in the Scriptures. Another sort
also who wanted more autorities, and citations, have not been here unthought
of. If all this attain not to satisfy them, as I am confident that none of
those our great controversies at this day, has had a more demonstrative
explaining, I must confess to admire what it is, for doubtless it is not
reason now adays that satisfies, or suborns the common credence of men, to
yield so easily, and grow so vehement in matters much more disputable, and
far less conducing to the daily good and peace of life. Some whose necessary
shifts haeve long enured them to cloak the defects of their unstudied years,
and hatred now to learn, under the appearance of a grave solidity, which
estimation they have gained among weak perceivers, find the ease of slighting
what they cannot refute, and are determined, as I hear, to hold it not worth
the answering. In which number I must be forced to reck'n that Doctor, who in a
late equivocating Treatise plausibly set afloat against the Dippers, diving the
while himselfwith a more deep prelatical malignance against the present state,
and Church Government, mentions with ignominy the Tractate of Divorce; yet
answers nothing, but instead thereof (for which I do not commend his
marshalling) sets Moses also among the crew of his Anabaptists; as one who to a
holy Nation, the Commonwealth of Israel, gave Laws breaking the bonds of
marriage to inordinate lust. These are no mean surges of blasphemy, not only
dipping Moses the divine Lawgiver, but dashing with a high hand against the
justice and purity of God himself; as these ensuing Scriptures plainly and
freely handled shall verify to the launcing of that old apostemated error. Him
therefore I leave now to his repentance.

Others, which is their courtesy, confess that wit and parts may do much to
make that seem true which is not (as was objected to Socrates by them who could
not resist his efficacy, that he ever made the worse cause seem the better) and
thus thinking themselves discharged of the difficulty, love not to wade further
into the fear of a convincement. These will be their excuses to decline the
full examining of this serious point. So much the more I press it and repeat
it, Lords and Commons, that ye beware while time is, ere this grand secret, and
only art of ignorance affecting tyrany, grow powerful and rule among us. For
if sound argument and reason shall be thus put off, either by an undervaluing
silence, or the maisterly censure of a railing word or two in the Pulpit, or by
rejecting the force of truth, as the mere cunning of eloquence, and Sophistry,
what can be the end of this, but that all good learning and knowledge will
suddenly decay: Ignorance, and illiterate presumption, which is yet but our
disease, will turn at length into our very constitution, and prove the hectic
evil of this age: worse to be feared, if it get once to reign over us, then
any fifth Monarchy. If this shall be the course, that what was wont to be a
chief commendation, and the ground of other men's confidence in an Author, his
diligence, his learning, his elocution whether by right, or by ill meaning
granted him, shall be turned now to a disadvantage and suspicion against him,
that what he writes though unconfuted, must therefore be mistrusted, therefore
not received for the industry, the exactness, the labor in it, confessed to
be more then ordnary; as if wisdom had now forsak'n the thirsty and laborious
inquirer to dwell against her nature with the arrogant and shallow babbler, to
what purpose all those pains and that continual searching required of us by
Solomon to the attainment of understanding; why are men bred up with such care
and expense to a life of perpetual studies, why do your selves with such
endeavor seek to wipe off the imputation of intending to discourage the
progress and advance of learning? He therefore whose heart can bear him to the
high pitch of your noble enterprises, may easily assure himself that the
prudence and farre-judging circumspectnesse of so grave a Magistracy sitting in
Parliament, who have before them the prepared and purposed Act of their most
religious predecessors to imitate in this question, cannot reject the
cleernesse of these reasons, and these allegations both here and formerly
offered them; nor can overlook the necessity of ordaining more wholsomly and
more humanly in the casualties of Divorce, then our Laws have yet established:
if the most urgent and excessive grievances happening in domestic life, be worth
the laying to heart, which, unless charity be far from us, cannot be
neglected. And that these things both in the right constitution, and in the
right reformation of a Commonwealth call for speediest redress, and ought to
be the first considered, anough was urged in what was prefac'd to that monument
of Bucer which I brought to your remembrance, and the other time before. Hence
forth, except new cause be given, I shall say less and less. For if the Law
make not timely provision, let the Law, as reason is, bear the censure of those
consequences, which her own default now more evidently produces. And if men
want manliness to expostulate the right of their due ransom, and to second
their own occasions, they may sit hereafter and bemoan themselves to have
neglected through faintness the only remedy of their sufferings, which a
seasonable and well grounded speaking might have purchased them. And perhaps in
time to come, others will know how to esteem what is not every day put into
their hands, when they have marked events, and better weighed how hurtful and
unwise it is, to hide a secret and pernicious rupture under the ill counsel of
a bashful silence. But who would distrust ought, or not be ample in his hopes
of your wise and Christian determinations? who have the prudence to consider,
and should have the goodness like gods, as ye are called, to find out readily,
and by just Law to administer those redresses which have of old, not without
God ordaining, bin granted to the adversities of mankind, ere they who needed,
were put to ask. Certainly, if any other have enlarged his thoughts to expect
from this government so justly undertak'n, and by frequent assistances from
heaven so apparently upheld, glorious changes and renovations both in Church
and State, he among the foremost might be named, who prays that the fate of
England may tarry for no other Deliverers.

JOHN MILTON.

TETRACHORDON, Expositions upon the four chief places in Scripture which
treat of Marriage, or nullities in Marriage.
Genesis 1. 27. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created
he him; male and female created he them. 28. And God blessed them, and God said
unto them be fruitful, etc. Genesis 2. 18. And the Lord God said, It is not good
that man should be alone, I will make him a help meet for him. 23. And Adam
said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called
Woman, because she was taken out of Man. 24. Therefore shall a man leave his
father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one
flesh.
Genesis 1. 27.
SO God created man in his own image.] To be informed aright in the whole
History of Marriage, that we may know for certain, not by a forced yoke, but by
an impartial definition, what Marriage is, and what is not Marriage; it will
undoubtedly be lafest, fairest, and most with our obedience, to enquire, as our
Saviors direction is, how it was in the beginning. And that we begin so high
as man created after Gods own Image, there want not earnest causes. For
nothing now adays is more degenerately forgott'n, then the true dignity of
man, almost in every respect, but especially in this prime institution of
Matrimony, wherein his native pre-eminence ought most to shine. Although if we
consider that just and natural privileges men neither can rightly seek, nor
dare fully claim, unless they be allied to inward goodness, and steadfast
knowledge, and that the want of this quells them to a servile sense of their
own conscious unworthiness, it may save the wondering why in this age many are
so opposite both to human and to Christian liberty, either while they
understand not, or envy others that do; contenting, or rather priding
themselves in a specious humility and strictness bred out of low ignorance
that never yet conceived the freedom of the Gospel; and is therefore by the
Apostle to the Colossians rankt with no better company, then Will Worship and
the mere show of wisdom. And how injurious herein they are, if not to
themselves, yet to their neighbors, and not to them only, but to the all-wise
and bounteous grace offered us in our redemption, will orderly appear.

[In the Image of God created he him.] It is anough determined, that this Image
of God wherein man was created, is meant Wisdom, Purity, Justice, and rule over
all creatures. All which being lost in Adam, was recovered with gain by the
merits of Christ. For albeit our first parent had lordship over sea, and land,
and air, yet there was a law without him, as a guard set over him. But Christ
having cancelled the hand writing of ordinances which was against us, Coloss.
2. 14. and interpreted the fulfilling of all through charity, has in that
respect set us overlaw, in the free custody of his love, and left us victorious
under the guidance of his living Spirit, not under the dead letter; to follow
that which most edifies, most aides and furders a religious life, makes us
holiest and likest to his immortal Image, not that which makes us most
conformable and captive to civil and subordinat precepts; whereof the
strictest observance may oftimes prove the destruction not only of many
innocent persons and families, but of whole Nations. Although indeed no
ordinance human or from heaven can bind against the good of man; so that to
keep them strictly against that end, is all one with to break them. Men of
most renowned virtue have sometimes by transgressing, most truly kept the law;
and wisest Magistrates have permitted and dispenc't it; while they looked not
peevishly at the letter, but with a greater spirit at the good of mankind, if
always not writt'n in the characters of law, yet engrav'n in the heart of man
by a divine impression. This Heathens could see, as the well-read in story can
recount of Solon and Epaminondas, whom Cicero in his first book of invention
nobly defends. All law, says he, we ought referr to the common good, and
interpret by that, not by the scrowl of letters. No man observes law for laws
sake, but for the good of them for whom it was made. The rest might serve well
to lecture these times, deluded through belly-doctrines into a devout slavery.
The Scripture also affords us David in the shewbread, Hezechiah in the
passover sound and safe transgressors of the literal command, which also
dispensed not seldom with it self; and taught us on what just occasions to do
so: until our Savior for whom that great and God-like work was reserved,
redeemed us to a state above prescriptions by dissolving the whole law into
charity. And have we not the soul to understand this, and must we against this
glory of Gods transcendent love toward us be still the servants of a literal
indightment?

[Created he him.] It might be doubted why he says, In the Image of God
created he him, not them, as well as male and female them; especially since
that Image might be common to them both, but male and female could not, however
the Jews fable, and please themselves with the accidental concurrence of
Plato's wit, as if man at first had bin created Hermaphrodite: but then it must
have bin male and female created he him. So had the Image of God bin equally
common to them both, it had no doubt bin said, In the image of God created he
them. But St. Paul ends the controversy by explaining that the woman is not
primarily and immediately the image of God, but in reference to the man. The
head of the woman, says he, 1 Cor. 11. is the man: he the image and glory of
God, she the glory of the man: he not for her, but she for him. Therefore his
precept is, Wives be subject to your husbands as is fit in the Lord, Coloss. 3.
18. In every thing, Ephesians. 5. 24. Nevertheless man is not to hold her as a
servant, but receives her into a part of that empire which God proclaims him
to, though not equally, yet largely, as his own image and glory: for it is no
small glory to him, that a creature so like him, should be made subject to him.
Not but that particular exceptions may have place, if she exceed her husband in
prudence and dexterity, and he contentedly yield, for then a superior and more
natural law comes in, that the wiser should govern the less wise, whether
male or female. But that which far more easily and obediently follows from this
verse, is that, seeing woman was purposely made for man, and he her head, it
cannot stand before the breath of this divine utterance, that man the
portraiture of God, joining to himself for his intended good and solace an
inferior sex, should so become her thrall, whose wilfulnes or inability to be
a wife frustrates the occasional end of her creation, but that he may acquitt
himself to freedom by his natural birthright, and that indeleble character of
priority which God crowned him with. If it be urged that sin has lost him
this, the answer is not far to seek, that from her the sin first proceeded,
which keeps her justly in the same proportion still beneath. She is not to gain
by being first in the transgression, that man should further loose to her,
because already he has lost by her means. Often it happens that in this matter
he is without fault; so that his punishment herein is causeles: and God has
the praise in our speeches of him, to sort his punishment in the same kind with
the offense. Suppose he erred; it is not the intent of God or man, to hunt an
error so to the death with a revenge beyond all measure and proportion. But if
we argue thus, this affliction is befaln him for his sin, therefore he must
bear it, without seeking the only remedy, first it will be false that all
affliction comes for sin, as in the case of Joh, and of the man born blind,
Joh. 9. 3, was evident: next by that reason, all miseries coming for sin, we
must let them all lie upon us like the vermin of an Indian Catharist, which his
fond religion forbids him to molest. Were it a particular punishment inflicted
through the anger of God upon a person, or upon a land, no law hinders us in
that regard, no law but bidds us remove it if we can: much more if it be a
dangerous temptation withal, much more yet, if it be certainly a temptation,
and not certainly a punishment, though a pain. As for what they say we must
bear with patience, to bear with patience, and to seek effectual remedies,
implies no contradiction. It may no less be for our disobedience, our
unfaithfulnes, and other sins against God, that wives become adulterous to the
bed, and questionles we ought to take the affliction as patiently, as christian
prudence would wish; yet hereby is not lost the right of divorcing for
adultery. No you say, because our Savior excepted that only. But why, if he
were so bent to punish our sins, and try our patience in binding on us a
disastrous marriage, why did he except adultery? Certainly to have bin bound
from divorce in that case also had bin as plentiful a punishment to our sins,
and not too little work for the patientest. Nay perhaps they will say it was
too great a sufferance: And with as slight a reason, for no wise man but would
sooner pardon the act of adultery once and again committed by a person worth
pity and forgivnes, then to lead a wearisom life of unloving and unquiet
conversation with one who neither affects nor is affected, much less with one
who exercises all bitterness, and would commit adultery too, but for envy lest
the persecuted condition should thereby get the benefit of his freedom. It Is
plain therefore that God enjoins not this supposed strictnes of not divorcing
either to punish us, or to try our patience.

Moreover, if man be the image of God, which consists in holiness, and woman
ought in the same respect to be the image and companion of man, in such wise to
beloved, as the Church is beloved of Christ, and if, as God is the head of
Christ, and Christ the head of man, so man is the head of woman; I cannot see
by this golden dependence of headship and subjection, but that Piety and
Religion is the main tie of Christian Matrimony: So as if there be found
between the pair a notorious disparity either of wickedness or heresy, the
husband by all manner of right is disengaged from a creature, not made and
inflicted on him to the vexation of his righteousness; the wife also, as her
subjection is terminated in the Lord, being her self the redeemed of Christ, is
not still bound to be the vassal of him, who is the bondslave of Satan: she
being now neither the image nor the glory of such a person, nor made for him,
nor left in bondage to him; but has recours to the wing of charity, and
protection of the Church; unless there be a hope on either side; yet such a
hope must be meant, as may be a rational hope, and not an endless servitude. Of
which hereafter.

But usually it is objected, that if it be thus, then there can be no true
marriage between misbeleevers and irreligious persons? I might answer, let them
see to that who are such; the Church has no commission to judge those without,
1 Cor. 5. But this they will say perhaps, is but penuriously to resolv a doubt.
I answer therefore, that where they are both irreligious, the marriage may be
yet true anough to them in a civil relation. For there are left some remains of
Gods image in man, as he is merely man; which reason God gives against the
shedding of man's blood, Genesis 9. as being made in Gods image, without expression
whether he were a good man or a bad, to exempt the slayer from punishment. So
that in those marriages where the parties are alike void of Religion, the wife
owes a civil homage and subjection, the husband owes a civil loyalty. But
where the yoke is mis-yok't, heretic with faithful, godly with ungodly, to
the grievance and manifest endangering of a brother or sister, reasons of a
higher strain then matrimonial bear sway; unless the Gospel instead of
freeing us, debase it self to make us bondmen, and suffer evil to control
good.

[Male and female created he them.] This contains another end of matching man
and woman, being the right, and lawfulnes of the marige bed; though much
inferior to the former end of her being his image and helpo in religious
society. And who of weakest insight may not see that this creating of them male
and female, cannot in any order of reason, or Christianity, be of such moment
against the better and higher purposes of their creation, as to enthrall
husband or wife to duties or to sufferings, unworthy and unbeseeming the image
of God in them? Now when as not only men, but good men do stand upon their
right, their estimation, their dignity in all other actions and deportments
with warrant anough and good conscience, as having the image of God in them, it
will not be difficult to determine what is unworthy and unseemly for a man to do
or suffer in wedlock; and the like proportionally may be found for woman: if we
love not to stand disputing below the principles of humanity. He that said,
Male and female created he them, immediately before that said also in the same
verse, In the Image of God created he him, and redoubled it, that our thoughts
might not be so full of dregs as to urge this poor consideration of male and
female, without remembering the noblenes of that former repetition; lest when
God sends a wise eye to examine our trivial glosses, they be found extremly to
creep upon the ground: especially since they confess that what here concerns
marriage is but a brief touch, only preparative to the institution which follows
more expressly in the next Chapter: and that Christ so took it, as desiring to
be briefest with them who came to tempt him, account shall be given in due
place.

V. 28. And Godblessed them, and God said unto them, be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth, etc.
This declares another end of Matrimony, the propagation of mankind; and is
again repeated to Noah and his sons, Many things might be noted on this place
not ordinary, nor unworth the noting; but I undertook not a general Comment.
Hence therefore we see the desire of children is honest and pious; if we be not
less zealous in our Christianity, then Plato was in his heathenism; who in the
sixth of his laws, counts offspring therefore desirable, that we may leav in
our stead sons of our sons, continual servants of God: a religious and prudent
desire, if people knew as well what were required to breeding as to begetting;
which desire perhaps was a cause why the Jews hardly could endure a barren
wedlock: and Philo in his book of special laws esteems him only worth pardon
that sends not barrennes away. Carvilius the first recorded in Rome to have
sought divorce, had it granted him for the barrennes of his wife, upon his oath
that he married to the end he might have children; as Dionysius and Gellius are
authors. But to dismiss a wife only for barrennes, is hard: and yet in some the
desire of children is so great, and so just, yea sometime so necessary, that to
condemn such a one to a childles age, the fault apparently not being in him,
might seem perhaps more strict then needed. Sometimes inheritances, crowns, and
dignities are so interested and annexed in their common peace and good to such
or such lineall descent, that it may prove a great moment both in the affairs
of men and of religion, to consider thoroughly what might be don heerin,
notwithstanding the way wardnes of our School Doctors.

Genesis 2. 18. And the Lord said, It is not good that man should be alone; I will
make him a help meet for him. V. 23. And Adam said, etc. V. 24. Therefore shall
a man leave, etc.
THis second Chapter is granted to be a Commentary on the first; and these
verses granted to be an exposition of that former verse, Male and female
created he them, and yet when this male and female is by the explicit words of
God himself here declared to be not meant other then a fit help, and meet
society; some who would ingrosse to themselves the whole trade of interpreting,
will not suffer the clear text of God to do the office of explaining it self.

[And the Lord God said it is not good.] A man would think that the
consideration of who spoke, should raise up the attention of our minds to
enquire better, and obey the purpos of so great a Speaker: for as we order the
business of Marriage, that which he here speaks is all made vain; and in the
decision of matrimony, or not matrimony, nothing at all regarded. Our
presumption, has utterly changed the state and condition of this ordinance:
God ordained it in love and helpfulnes to be indissoluble, and we in outward
act and formality to be a forced bondage; so that being subject to a thousand
errors in the best men, if it prove a blessing to any, it is of mere accident,
as man's law has handled it, and not of institution.

[It is not good for man to be alone.] Hitherto all things that have bin named,
were approved of God to be very good: lonelines is the first thing which Gods
eye named not good: whether it be a thing, or the want of something, I labor
not; let it be their tendance, who have the art to be industriously idle. And
here alone is meant alone without woman; otherwise Adam had the company of God
himself, and Angels to convers with; all creatures to delight him seriously, or
to make him sport. God could have created him out of the same mould a thousand
friends and brother Adams to have bin his consorts, yet for all this till Eve
was given him, God reckn'd him to be alone.

[It is not good.] God here presents himself like to a man deliberating; both
to show us that the matter is of high consequence, and that he intended to
found it according to natural reason, not impulsive command, but that the duty
should arise from the reason of it, not the reason be swallowed up in a
reasonlesse duty. Not good, was as much to Adam before his fall, as not
pleasing, not expedient; but since the coming of sin into the world, to him
who has not received the continence, it is not only not expedient to be alone,
but plainly sinful. And therefore he who wilfully abstains from marriage, not
being supernaturally gifted, and he who by making the yoke of marriage unjust
and intolerable, causes men to abhor it, are both in a diabolical sin, equal
to that of Antichrist who forbids to marry. For what difference at all whether
he abstain men from marying, or restrain them in a marriage happening totally
discommodious, distasteful, dishonest and pernicious to him without the
appearance of his fault? For God does not here precisely say, I make a female
to this male, as he did briefly before, but expounding himself here on purpos,
he says, because it is not good for man to be alone, I make him therefore a
meet help. God supplies the privation of not good, with the perfect gift of a
real and positive good; it is man's pervers cooking who has turned this bounty
of God into a Scorpion, either by weak and shallow constructions, or by proud
arrogance and cruelty to them who neither in their purposes nor in their
actions have offended against the due honor of wedlock.

Now whereas the Apostle speaking in the Spirit, 1 Cor. 7. pronounces quite
contrary to this word of God, It is good for a man not to touch a woman, and
God cannot contradict himself, it instructs us that his commands and words,
especially such as bear the manifest title of some good to man, are not to be so
strictly wrung, as to command without regard to the most natural and miserable
necessities of mankind. Therefore the Apostle adds a limitation in the 26 v. of
that chap. for the present necessity it is good; which he gives us doubtless
as a pattern how to reconcile other places by the general rule of charity.

[For man to be alone.] Some would have the sense heerof to be in respect of
procreation only: and Austin contests that manly friendship in all other
regards had bin a more becoming solace for Adam, then to spend so many secret
years in an empty world with one woman. But our Writers deservedly reject this
crabbed opinion; and defend that there is a peculiar comfort in the married
state besides the genial bed, which no other society affords. No mortal nature
can endure either in the actions of Religion, or study of wisdom, without
sometime slackning the cords of intense thought and labor: which lest we should
think faulty, God himself conceals us not his own recreations before the world
was built; I was, says the eternal wisdom, daily his delight, playing
always before him. And to him indeed wisdom is as a high towr of pleasure, but
to us a steep hill, and we toyling ever about the bottom: he executes with ease
the exploits of his omnipotence, as easy as with us it is to will: but no
worthy enterprise can be don by us without continual plodding and wearisomnes
to our faint and sensitive abilities. We cannot therefore always be
contemplative, or pragmaticall abroad, but have need of some delightful
intermissions, wherein the enlarged soul may leav off a while her severe
schooling; and like a glad youth in wandering vacancy, may keep her hollidaies
to joy and harmles pastime: which as she cannot well do without company, so in
no company so well as where the different sex in most resembling unlikenes,
and most unlike resemblance cannot but please best and be pleased in the
aptitude of that variety. Whereof lest we should be too timorous, in the aw that
our flat sages would form us and dress us, wisest Solomon among his gravest
Proverbs countenances a kind of ravishment and erring fondnes in the
entertainment of wedded leisures; and in the Song of Songs, which is generally
believed, even in the jolliest expressions to figure the spousals of the Church
with Christ, sings of a thousand raptures between those two lovely ones far
on the hither side of carnal enjoyment. By these instances, and more which
might be brought, we may imagine how indulgently God provided against man's
lonelines; that he approved it not, as by himself declared not good; that he
approved the remedy thereof, as of his own ordaining, consequently good; and as
he ordained it, so doubtless proportionably to our fall n estate he gives it; else
were his ordinance at least in vain, and we for all his gift still empty
handed. Nay such an unbounteous giver we should make him, as in the fables
Jupiter was to Ixion, giving him a cloud instead of Juno, giving him a
monstrous issue by her, the breed of Centaures a neglected and unlov'd race,
the fruits of a delufive marriage, and lastly giving him her with a damnation to
that wheel in hell, from a life thrown into the midst of temptations and
disorders. But God is no deceitful giver, to bestow that on us for a remedy of
lonelines, which if it bring not a sociable mind as well as a conjunctive
body, leaves us no less alone then before; and if it bring a mind perpetually
avers and disagreeable, betraies us to a wors condition then the most deserted
lonelines. God cannot in the justice of his own promise and institution so
unexpectedly mock us by forcing that upon us as the remedy of solitude, which
wraps us in a misery worse then any wilderness, as the Spirit of God himself
judges, Prove. 19. especially knowing that the best and wisest men amidst the
sincere and most cordial designs of their heart do daily err in choosing.
We may conclude therefore seeing orthodoxall Expositers confess to our hands,
that by lonelines is not only meant the want of copulation, and that man is not
less alone by turning in a body to him, unless there be within it a mind
answerable, that it is a work more worthy the care and consultation of God to
provide for the worthiest part of man which is his mind, and not unnaturally
to set it beneath the formalities and respects of the body, to make it a
servant of its own vassal, I say we may conclude that such a marriage, wherein
the mind is so disgraced and vilify'd below the bodies interest, and can have
no just or tolerable contentment, is not of Gods institution, and therefore no
marriage. Nay in concluding this, I say we conclude no more then what the common
Expositers themselves give us, both in that which I have recited and much more
hereafter. But the truth is, they give us in such a manner, as they who leav
their own mature positions like the eggs of an Ostrich in the dust; I do but
lay them in the sun; their own pregnancies hatch the truth; and I am taxt of
novelties and strange producements, while they, like that inconsiderat bird,
know not that these are their own natural breed.

[I will make him a help meet for him.] Here the heavenly instituter, as if he
labored, not to be mistak'n by the supercilious hypocrisy of those that love
to master their brethren, and to make us sure that he gave us not now a servil
yoke, but an amiable knot; contents not himself to say, I will make him a wife,
but resolving to give us first the meaning before the name of a wife, says
graciously, I will make him a help meet for him. And here again, as before, I
do not require more full and fair deductions then the whole consent of our
Divines usually raise from this text, that in matrimony there must be first a
mutual help to piety, next to civil fellowship of love and amity, then to
generation, so to household affairs, lastly the remedy of incontinence. And
commonly they reck'n them in such order, as leaves generation and incontinence
to be last considered. This I amaze me at, that though all the superior and
nobler ends both of marriage and of the married persons he absolutely frustrat,
the matrimony stirs not, looses no hold, remains as rooted as the center: but
if the body bring but in a complaint of frigidity, by that cold application
only, this adamantine Alpe of wedlock has leav to dissolve; which else all the
machinations of religious or civil reason at the suit of a distressed mind,
either for divine worship or humane conversation violated, cannot unfasten.
What courts of concupiscence are these, wherein fleshly appetite is heard before
right reason, lust before love or devotion? They may be pious Christians
together, they may be loving and friendly, they may be helpful to each other
in the family, but they cannot couple; that shall divorce them though either
party would not. They can neither serve God together, nor one be at peace with
the other, nor be good in the family one to other, but live as they were dead,
or live as they were deadly enemies in a cage together; it is all one, they can
couple, they shall not divorce till death, no though this sentence be their
death. What is this, besides tyranny, but to turn nature upside down, to make
both religion, and the mind of man wait upon the slavish errands of the body,
and not the body to follow either the sanctity, or the sovranty of the mind
unspeakably wronged, and with all equity complaining? What is this but to abuse
the sacred and misterious bed of marriage to be the compulsive stie of an
ungrateful and malignant lust, stirred up only from a carnal acrimony,
withour either love or peace, or regard to any other thing holy or human. This
I admire how possibly it should inhabit thus long in the sense of so many
disputing Theologians, unless it be the lowest lees of a canonical infection
livergrown to their sides; which perhaps will never uncling, without the strong
abstersive of some heroic magistrate, whole mind equal to his high office dares
lead him both to know and to do without their frivolous case-putting. For
certain he shall have God and this institution plainly on his side. And if it
be true both in divinity and law, that consent alone, though copulation never
follow, makes a marriage, how can they dissolv it for the want of that which
made it not, and not dissolv it for that not continuing which made it, and
should preserve it in love and reason, and difference it from a brute
conjugality.

[Meet for him.] The original here is more expressive then other languages
word for word can render it; but all agree effectual conformity of disposition
and affection to be heerby signified; which God as it were not satisfied with
the naming of a help, goes on describing another self, a secondself, a very
self it self. Yet now there is nothing in the life of man through our
misconstruction, made more uncertain, more hazardous and full of chance then
this divine blessing with such favorable significance here conferred upon us,
which if we do but err in our choice the most unblamable error that can be,
err but one minute, one moment after those mighty syllables pronounced which
take upon them to join heaven and hell together unpardnably till death pardon,
this divine blessing that looked but now with such a human smile upon us, and
spoke such gentle reason, strait vanishes like a fair sky and brings on such a
scene of cloud and tempest, as turns all to shipwreck without havn or shore but
to a ransomles captivity. And then they tell us it is our sin; but let them be
told again, that sin through the mercy of God has not made such wast upon us,
as to make utterly void to our use any temporal benefit, much less any so
much a vailing to a peaceful and sanctified life, merely for a most incident
error which no warines can certainly shun. And wherefore servs our happy
redemption, and the liberty we have in Christ, but to deliver us from
calamirous yokes not to beliv'd under without the endangerment of our souls,
and to restore us in some competent measure to a right in every good thing both
of this life, and the other. Thus we see how treatably and distinctly God has
here taught us what the prime ends of marriage are, mutual solace and help.
That we are now, upon the most irreprehensible mistake in choosing, defeated
and defrauded of all this original benignity, was begun first through the
snare of Antichristian canons long since obtruded upon the Church of Rome, and
not yet scour^d off by reformation, out of a lingting vainglory that abides
among us to make fair shows in formal ordinances, and to enjoin continence and
bearing of crosses in such a garb as no Scripture binds us, under the thickest
arrows of temptation, where we need not stand. Now we shall see with what
acknowledgement and assent Adam received this new associat, which God brought
him.

V. 23. And Adam said this is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, she
shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.
That there was a nearer alliance between Adam and Eve, then could be ever
after between man and wife, is visible to any. For no other woman was ever
molded out of her husbands rib, but of mere strangers for the most part they
com to have that consanguinity which they have by wedlock. And if we look
nearly upon the matter, though marriage be most agreeable to holiness, to purity
and justice, yet is it not a natural, but a civil and ordained relation. For
if it were in nature, no law or crime could disanull it, to make a wife, or
husband, otherwise then still a wife or husband, but only death; as nothing but
that can make a father no father, or a son no son. But divorce for adultery or
desertion, as all our Churches agree but England, not only separats, but
nullifies, and extinguishes the relation it self of matrimony, so that they are
no more man and wife; otherwise the innocent party could not marry elsewhere,
without the guilt of adultery; next were it merely natural why was it here
ordained more then the rest of moral law to man in his original rectitude, in
whose breast all that was natural or moral was engrav'n without external
constitutions and edicts. Adam therefore in these words does not establish an
indissoluble bond of marriage in the carnal ligaments of flesh and bones, for
if he did, it would belong only to himself in the literal sense; every one of
us being nearer in flesh of flesh, and bone of bones to our parents then to a
wife; they therefore were not to be left for her in that respect. But Adam who
had the wisdom given him to know all creatures, and to name them according to
their properties, no doubt but had the gift to discern perfectly, that which
concerned him much more; and to apprehend at first sight the true fitnes of
that consort which God provided him. And therefore spoke in reference to those
words which God pronounced before; as if he had said, this is she by whose meet
help and society I shall no more be alone; this is she who was made my image,
even as I the Image of God; not so much in body, as in unity of mind and heart.
And he might as easily know what were the words of God, as he knew so readily
what had bin don with his rib, while he slept so soundly. He might well know,
if God took a rib out of his inside, to form of it a double good to him, he
would far sooner dis-joyn it from his outside, to prevent a treble mischief to
him: and far sooner cut it quite off from all relation for his undoubted ease,
then nail it into his body again, to stick for ever there a thorn in his heart.
When as nature teaches us to divide any limb from the body to the saving of his
fellows, though it be the maiming and deformity of the whole; how much more is
it her doctrine to sever by incision, not a true limb so much, though that be
lawful, but an adherent, a sore, the gangrene of a limb, to the recovery of a
whole man. But if in these words we shall make Adam to erect a new
establishment of marriage in the mere flesh, which God so lately had instituted,
and founded in the sweet and mild familiarity of love and solace and mutual
fitnes, what do we but use the mouth of our general parent, the first time it
opens, to an arrogant opposition, and correcting of Gods wiser ordinance. These
words therefore cannot import any thing new in marriage, but either that which
belongs to Adam only, or to us in reference only to the instituting words of
God which made a meet help against lonelines. Adam spoke like Adam the words of
flesh and bones, the shell and rind of matrimony: but God spoke like God, of
love and solace and meet help, the soul both of Adams words and of matrimony.

V. 24. Therefore shall a man leav his father and his mother, and shall cleav
unto his wife; and they shall be one flesh.
This verse, as our common heed expounds it, is the great knot tier, which has
undon by tying, and by tangling, millions of guiltles consciences: this is that
greisly Porter, who having drawn men and wisest men by subtle allurement within
the train of an unhappy matrimony, claps the dungeon gate upon them, as
irrecoverable as the grave. But if we view him well, and hear him with not too
hasty and prejudicant ears, we shall find no such terror in him. For first, it
is not here said absolutely without all reason he shall cleave to his wife, be
it to his weal or to his destruction as it happens, but he shall do this upon
the premises and considerations of that meet help and society before mentioned,
Therefore he shall cleave to his wife, no otherwise a wife, then a fit help. He
is not bid to leave the dear cohabitation of his father, mother, brothers and
sisters, to link himself inseparably with the mere carcas of a Marriage, perhaps
an enemy. This joining particle Therefore is in all equity, nay in all
necessity of construction to comprehend first and most principally what God
spoke concerning the inward essence of Marriage in his institution: that we may
learn how far to attend what Adam spoke of the outward materials thereof in his
approbation. For if we shall bind these words of Adam only to a corporal
meaning, and that the force of this injunction upon all us his sons to live
individually with any woman which has befaln us in the most mistak'n wedlock,
shall consist not in those moral and relative causes of Eves creation, but in
the mere anatomy of a rib, and that Adams insight concerning wedlock reached no
further, we shall make him as very an idiot as the Socinians make him; which
would not be reverently don of us. Let us be content to allow our great
forefather so much wisdom, as to take the instituting words of God along with
him into this sentence, which if they be well minded, will assure us that flesh
and ribs are but of a weak and dead efficacy to keep Marriage united where there
is no other fitnes. The rib of Marriage, to all since Adam, is a relation much
rather then a bone; the nerves and sinews thereof are love and meet help, they
knit not every couple that mary's, and where they knit they seldom break, but
where they break, which for the most part is where they never truly joined, to
such at the same instant both flesh and rib cease to be in common; so that here
they argue nothing to the continuance of a false or violated Marriage, but must
be led back to receive their meaning from those institutive words of God which
give them all the life and vigor they have.

[Therefore shall a man leav his father, etc.] What to a man's thinking more
plain by this appointment, that the fatherly power should give place to
conjugall prerogative? yet it is generally held by reformed writers against the
Papist, that though in persons at discretion the Marriage in it selfbe never so
fit, though it be fully accomplished with benediction, board and bed, yet the
father not consenting, his main will without dispute shall dissolv all. And
this they affirm only from collective reason, not any direct law: for that in
Exodus 22. 17. which is most particular, speaks that a father may refuse to
marry his daughter to one who has deflour'd her, not that he may take her away
from one who has soberly married her. Yet because the general honor due to
parents is great, they hold he may, and perhaps hold not amiss. But again when
the question is of barsh and rugged parents who deferr to bestow their childern
seasonably, they agree jointly that the Church or Magistrate may bestow them,
though without the Fathers consent: and for this they have no express authority
in Scripture. So that they may see by their own handling of this very place,
that it is not the stubborn letter must govern us, but the divine and softning
breath of charity which turns and winds the dictat of every positive command,
and shapes it to the good of mankind. Shall the outward accessory of a Fathers
will wanting, rend the fittest and most affectionat marriage in twain, after all
nuptial consummations, and shall not the want of love and the privation of all
civil and religious concord, which is the inward essence of wedlock, do as
much to part those who were never truly wedded? shall a Father have this power
to vindicate his own wilful honor and authority to the utter breach of a most
dearly-united marriage, and shall not a man in his own power have the permission
to free his Soul, his life, and all his comfort of life from the disastre of a
no-mariage. Shall fatherhood, which is but man, for his own pleasure dissolve
matrimony, and shall not matrimony, which is Gods Ordinance, for its own honor
and better conservation, dissolv it self, when it is wrong, and not fitted to
any of the chief ends which it owes us?

[And they shall be one flesh.] These words also infer that there ought to
be an individualty in Marriage; but without all question presuppose the joining
causes. Not a rule yet that we have met with, so universal in this whole
institution, but has admitted limitations and conditions according to human
necessity. The very foundation of Matrimony, though God laid it so deliberatly,
that it is not good for man to be alone holds not always, if the Apostle can
secure us. Soon after we are bid leav Father and Mother, and cleav to a Wife,
but must understand the Fathers consent withal, else not. Cleav to a Wife, but
let her be a wife, let her be a meet help, a solace, not a nothing, not an
adversary, not a defertrice; can any law or command be so unreasonable as to
make men cleav to calamity, to ruin, to perdition? In like manner here, They
shall be one flesh: but let the causes hold, and be made really good, which
only have the possibility to make them one flesh. We know that flesh can
neither join, nor keep together two bodies of it self; what is it then must
make them one flesh, but likeness, but fitnes of mind and disposition, which may
breed the Spirit of concord, and union between them? If that be not in the
nature of either, and that there has bin a remediles mistake, as vain we go
about to compel them into one flesh, as if we undertook to weav a garment of
dry sand. It were more easy to compel the vegetable and nutritive power of
nature to assimilations and mixtures which are not alterable each by other; or
force the concoctive stomach to turn that into flesh which is so totally unlike
that substance, as not to be wrought on. For as the unity of mind is nearer
and greater then the union of bodies, so doubtless, is the dissimilitude
greater, and more dividuall, as that which makes between bodies all difference
and distinction. Especially when as besides the singular and substantial
differences of every Soul, there is an intimat quality of good or evil, through
the whole progeny of Adam, which like a radical heat, or mortal chilnes joins
them, or disjoyns them irresistibly. In whom therefore either the will, or the
faculty is found to have never joined, or now not to continue so, it is not to
say, they shall be one flesh, for they cannot be one flesh. God commands not
impossibilities; and all the Ecclesiastical glue, that Liturgy, or Laymen can
compound, is not able to soder up two such incongruous natures into the one
flesh of a true beseeming Marriage. Why did Moses then set down their uniting
into one flesh? And I again ask, why the Gospel so often repeats the eating of
our Saviors flesh, the drinking of his blood? That we are one body with him,
the members of his body, flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone. Ephesians. 5. Yet
lest we should be Capernaitans, as we are told there that the flesh profits
nothing, so we are told here, if we be not as deaf as adders, that this union
of the flesh proceeds from the union of a fit help and solace. We know that
there was never a more spiritual mystery then this Gospel taught us under the
terms of body and flesh; yet nothing less intended then that we should stick
there. What a stupidnes then is it, that in Marriage, which is the nearest
resemblance of our union with Christ, we should deject our selves to such a
sluggish and underfoot Philosophy, as to esteem the validity of Marriage merely
by the flesh; though never so brokn and disjoynted from love and peace, which
only can give a human qualification to that act of the flesh, and distinguish
it from bestial. The Text therefore uses this phrase, that they shall be one
flesh, to justify and make legitimat the rites of Marriage bed; which was not
unneedfull, if for all this warrant, they were suspected of pollution by some
sects of Philosophy, and Religions of old, and latelier among the Papists, and
other heretics elder then they. Some think there is a high mystery in those
words, from that which Paul says of them, Ephesians. 5. This is a great mystery,
but I speak of Christ and the Church: and thence they would conclude marriage to
be inseparable. For me I dispute not now whether matrimony be a mystery or no;
if it be of Christ and his Church, certainly it is not meant of every ungodly
and miswedded marriage, but then only mysterious, when it is a holy, happy, and
peaceful match. But when a Saint is joined with a reprobate, or both alike,
wicked with wicked, fool with fool, a he drunkard with a she, when the bed
has bin nothing else for twenty years or more, but an old haunt of lust and
malice mixed together, no love, no goodness, no loyalty, but counterplotting, and
secret wishing one another dissolution, this is to me the greatest mystery in
the world, if such a marriage as this, can be the mystery of ought, unless it
be the mystery of iniquity: According to that which Paraeus cites out of
Chrysostom, that a bad wife is a help for the devil, and the like may be said
of a bad husband. Since therefore none but a fit and pious matrimony can signify
the union of Christ and his Church, there cannot hence be any hindrance of
divorce to that wedlock wherein there can be no good mystery. Rather it might to
a Christian Conscience be matter of finding it self so much less satisfied
then before, in the continuance of an unhappy yoke, wherein there can be no
representation either of Christ, or of his Church.

Thus having inquired the institution how it was in the beginning, both from
the 1 Chap. of Gen, where it was only mentioned in part, and from the second,
where it was plainly and evidently instituted, and having attended each clause
and word necessary, with a diligence not drousy, we shall now fix with some
advantage; and by a short view backward gather up the ground we have gone; and
sum up the strength we have, into one argumentative head, with that organic
force that logic proffers us. All arts acknowledge that then only we know
certainly, when we can define; for definition is that which refines the pure
essence of things from the circumstance. If therefore we can attain in this our
Controversy to define exactly what marriage is, we shall soon lern, when there
is a nullity thereof, and when a divorce.

The part therefore of this Chapter which has bin here treated, does orderly
and readily resolv it self into a definition of marriage, and a consectary from
thence. To the definition these words chiefly contribute. It is not good, etc.
I will make, etc. Where the consectary begins this connection Therefore informs
us, Therefore shall a man, etc. Definition is decreed by Logicians to consist
only of causes constituting the essence of a thing, What is not therefore among
the causes constituting marriage, must not stay in the definition. Those causes
are concluded to be matter, and, as the Artist calls it, Form. But inasmuch as
the same thing may be a cause more ways then one, and that in relations and
institutions which have no corporal subsistence, but only a respective being,
the Form by which the thing is what it is, is often so slender and
undistinguishable, that it would soon confuse, were it not sustained by the
efficient and final causes, which concur to make up the form invalid
otherwise of it self, it will be needful to take in all the fowr causes into
the definition. First therefore the material cause of matrimony is man and
woman; the Author and efficient, God and their consent, the internal Form and
soul of this relation, is conjugal love arising from a mutual fitnes to the
final causes of wedlock, help and society in Religious, Civil and Domestic
conversation, which includes as an inferior end the fulfilling of natural
desire, and specifical increase; these are the final causes both moving the
efficient, and perfeting the form. And although copulation be considered among
the ends of marriage, yet the act thereof in a right esteem can no longer be
matrimonial, then it is an effect of conjugal love. When love finds it self
utterly unmatcht, and justly vanishes, nay rather cannot but vanish, the
fleshly act indeed may continue, but not holy, not pure, not beseeming the
sacred bond of marriage; being at best but an animal excretion, but more truly
wors and more ignoble then that mute kindlyness among the herds and flocks: in
that proceeding as it ought from intellective principles, it participates of
nothing rational, but that which the field and the fould equals. For in human
actions the soul is the agent, the body in a manner passive. If then the body
do out of sensitive force, what the soul complies not with, how can man, and
not rather something beneath man be thought the doer.

But to proceed in the persute of an accurat definition, it will a vail us
something, and whet our thoughts, to examine what fabric heerof others have
already reard. Paraeus on Genesis defines Marriage to be an indissoluble
conjunction of one man and one woman to an individual and intimat conversation,
and mutual benevolence, etc. Wherein is to be marked his placing of intimat
conversation before bodily benevolence; for bodily is meant, though indeed
benevolence rather sounds will then body. Why then shall divorce be granted for
want of bodily performance, and not for want of fitnes to intimat conversation,
when as corporal benevolence cannot in any human fashion be without this? Thus
his definition places the ends of Marriage in one order, and esteems them in
another. His Tautology also of indissoluble and individual is not to be
imitated; especially since neither indissoluble, nor individual has ought to
do in the exact definition, being but a consectary flowing from thence, as
appears by plain Scripture, Therefore shall a man leav, etc. For Marriage is not
true marriage by being individual, but therefore individual, if it be true
Marriage. No argument but causes enter the definition; a Consectary is but the
effect of those causes. Besides, that Marriage is indissoluble, is not
Catholickly true; we know it dissoluble for Adultery, and for desertion by the
verdit of all Reformed Churches. Dr. Ames defines it an individual conjunction
of one man and one woman, to communion of body and mutual society of life; But
this perverts the order of God, who in the institution places meet help and
society of life before communion of body. And vulgar estimation undervalues
beyond comparison all society of life and communion of mind beneath the
communion of body; granting no divorce, but to the want, or miscommunicating of
that. Hemingius, an approved Author, Melanchtons Scholar, and who next to
Bucer and Erasmus writes of divorce most like a Divine, thus comprises, Marriage
is a conjunction of one man and one woman lawfully consenting, into one flesh,
for mutual helps sake, ordained of God. And in his explanation stands
punctually upon the conditions of consent, that it be not in any main matter
deluded, as being the life of wedloc, and no true marriage without a true
consent. Into one flesh he expounds into one mind, as well as one body, and
makes it the formal cause: Heerin only missing, while he puts the effect into
his definition instead of the cause which the Text affords him. For one flesh
is not the formal essence of wedloc, but one end, or one effect of a meet help;
The end often times being the effect and fruit of the form, as Logic teaches:
Else many aged and holy matrimonies, and more eminently that of Joseph and Mary,
would be no true marriage. And that maxim generally received, would be falls,
that consent alone, though copulation never follow, makes the marriage.
Therefore to consent lawfully into one flesh, is not the formal cause of
Matrimony, but only one of the effects. The Civil Lawyers, and first Justinian
or Tribonian defines Matrimony a conjunction of man and woman containing
individual accustom of life. Wherein first, individual is not so bad as
indissoluble put in by others: And although much cavil might be made in the
distinguishing between indivisible, and individual, yet the one taken for
possible, the other for actual, neither the one nor the other can belong to
the essence of marriage; especially when a Civilian defines, by which Law
marriage is actually divorc't for many causes, and with good leav, by mutual
consent. Therefore where conjunction is said, they who comment the Institutes,
agree that conjunction of mind is by the Law meant, not necessarily
conjunction of body. That Law then had good reason attending to its own
definition, that divorce should be granted for the breaking of that conjunction
which it holds necessary, sooner then for the want of that conjunction which it
holds not necessary. And whereas Tuningus a famous Lawyer excuses individual as
the purpos of Marriage, not always the success, it suffices not. Purpos is not
able to constitute the essence of a thing. Nature her self the universal Mother
intends nothing but her own perfection and preservation; yet is not the more
indissoluble for that. The Pandects out of Modestinus, though not define, yet
well describe Marriage, the conjunction of male and female, the society of all
life, the communion of divine and human right: which Bucer also imitates on the
fifth to the Ephesians. But it seems rather to comprehend the several ends of
Marriage, then to contain the more constituting cause that makes it what it is.

That I therefore among others (for who sings not Hylas) may give as well as
take matter to be judged on, it will be looked I should produce another
definition then these which have not stood the trial. Thus then I suppose that
Marriage by the natural and plain order of Gods institution in the Text may be
more demonstratively and essentially defined. Marriage is a divine institution
joining man and woman in a love fitly disposed to the helps and comforts of
domestic life. A divine institution. This contains the prime efficient cause of
Marriage; as for consent of Parents and Guardians, it seems rather a concurrence
then a cause; for as many, that marry are in their own power as not; and where
they are not their own, yet are they not subjected beyond reason. Now though
efficient causes are not requisite in a definition, yet divine institution has
such influence upon the Form, and is so a conserving cause of it, that without
it the Form is not sufficient to distinguish matrimony from other conjunctions
of male and female, which are not to be counted marriage. Joining man and woman
in a love, etc. This brings in the parties consent; until which be, the marriage
has no true being. When I say consent, I mean not error, for error is not
properly consent: And why should not consent be here understood with equity and
good to either part, as in all other freindly covnants, and not be strained and
cruelly urged to the mischief and destruction of both? Neither do I mean that
singular act of consent which made the contract, for that may remain, and yet
the marriage not true nor lawful; and that may cease, and yet the marriage both
true and lawful, to their sin that break it. So that either as no efficient at
all, or but a transitory, it comes not into the definition. That consent I mean
which is a love fitly disposed to mutual help and comfort of life; this is that
happy Form of marriage naturally arising from the very heart of divine
institution in the Text, in all the former definitions either obscurely, and
under mistak'n terms expressed, or not at all. This gives marriage all her due,
all her benefits, all her being, all her distinct and proper being. This
makes a marriage not a bondage, a blessing not a curse, a gift of God not a
snare. Unless there be a love, and that love born of fitnes, how can it last?
unless it last how can the best and sweetest purposes of marriage be attained,
and they not attained, which are the chief ends, and with a lawful love
constitute the formal cause it self of marriage, how can the essence thereof
subsist, how can it be indeed what it goes for? Conclude therefore by all the
power of reason, that where this essence of marriage is not, there can be no
true marriage; and the parties either one of them, or both are free, and without
fault rather by a nullity, then by a divorce may betake them to a second choys;
if their present condition be not tolerable to them. If any shall ask, why
domestic in the definition? I answer, that because both in the Scriptures, and
in the gravest Poets and Philosophers I find the properties and excellencies
of a wife set out only from domestic virtues; if they extend further, it
diffuses them into the notion of some more common duty then matrimonial.

Thus far of the definition; the Consectary which flows from thence, and
altogether depends thereon, is manifestly brought in by this connexive particle
Therefore; and branches it self into a double consequence; First individual
Society, therefore shall a man leav father and mother: Secondly conjugal
benevolence, and they shall be one flesh. Which as was shown, is not without
cause here mentioned, to prevent and to abolish the suspect of pollution in
that natural and undefiled act. These consequences therefore cannot either in
Religion, Law, or Reason be bound, and posted upon mankind to his sorrow and
misery, but receiv what force they have from the meetnes of help and solace,
which is the formal cause and end of that definition that sustains them. And
although it be not for the Majesty of Scripture to humble her self in
artificial theorems, and definitions, and Corollaries, like a professor in the
Schools, but looks to be analys'd, and interpreted by the logical industry of
her Disciples and followers, and to be reduced by them, as often as need is,
into those Sciential rules, which are the implements of instruction, yet Moses,
as if foreseeing the miserable work that man's ignorance and pusillanimity would
make in this matrimonious business, and endeavoring his utmost to prevent it,
condescends in this place to such a methodical and Schoollike way of defining,
and consequencing, as in no place of the whole Law more.

Thus we have seen, and if we be not contentious, may know what was Marriage
in the beginning, to which in the Gospel we are referred; and what from hence
to judge of nullity, or divorce, Here I esteem the work don; in this field the
controversy decided; but because other places of Scripture seem to look
aversly upon this our decision, although indeed they keep all harmony with it,
and because it is a better work to reconcile the seeming diversities of
Scripture, then the real dissentions of nearest friends, I shall assay in
three following Discourses to perform that Office.

Deuteronomy. 24. 1, 2. 1. When a man has taken a Wife, and married her, and it come
to pass that she find no favor in his eyes, because he has found some
uncleannes in her, then let him write her a bill of divercement, and give it in
her hand, and send her out of his house. 2 And when she is departed out of his
house, she may go and be another man's wife.
THat which is the only discommodity of speaking in a clear matter, the
abundance of argument that presses to be uttered, and the suspense of
judgment what to choose, and how in the multitude of reason, to be not
tedious, is the greatest difficulty which I expect here to meet with. Yet much
has bin said formerly concerning this Law in the Doctrins of divorce; Whereof I
shall repeat no more then what is necessary. Two things are here doubted:
First, and that but of late, whether this be a Law or no, next what this
reason of uncleannes might mean for which the Law is granted; That it is a
plain Law no man ever questioned, till Vatablus within these hundred years
professed Hebrew at Paris, a man of no Religion, as Beza deciphers him. Yet some
there be who follow him, not only against the current of all antiquity, both
Jewish and Christian, but the evidence of Scripture also, Malach. 2. 16. Let
him who hates put away says the Lord God of Israel. Although this place also
has bin tampered with, as if it were to be thus rendered, The Lord God says,
that he hates putting away. But this new interpretation rests only in the
authority of Junius; for neither Calvin, nor Vatablus himself, nor any other
known Divine so interpreted before. And they of best note who have translated
the Scripture since, and Diodati for one, follow not his reading. And perhaps
they might reject it, if for nothing else, for these two reasons: First, it
introduces in a new manner the person of God speaking less Majestic then he is
ever wont; When God speaks by his Profet, he ever speaks in the first person;
thereby signifying his Majesty and omni-presence. He would have said, I hate
putting away, says the Lord; and not sent word by Malachi in a sudden fallen
style, The Lord God says that he hates putting away: that were a phrase to
shrink the glorious omnipresence of God speaking, into a kind of
circumscriptive absence. And were as if a Herald in the Atcheivment of a King,
should commit the indecorum to set his helmet sidewaies and close, not full
faced and open in the posture of direction and command. We cannot think
therefore that this last Profet would thus in a new fashion absent the person of
God from his own words as if he came not along with them. For it would also be
wide from the proper scope of this place: he that reads attentively will soon
perceav, that God blames not here the Jews for putting away their wives, but for
keeping strange Concubines, to the profaning of Juda's holiness, and the
vexation of their Hebrew wives, v. 11. and 14. Judah has married the daughter of
a strange God: And exhorts them rather to put their wives away whom they hate,
as the Law permitted, then to keep them under such affronts. And it is received
that this Profet livd in those times of Ezra and Nehemiah (nay by some is
thought to be Ezra himself) when the people were forced by these two Worthies
to put their strange wives away. So that what the story of those times, and the
plain context of the 11 verse, from whence this rebuke begins, can give us to
conjecture of the obscure and curt Ebraisms that follow, this Profet does not
forbid putting away, but forbids keeping, and commands putting away according
to Gods Law, which is the plainest interpreter both of what God will, and what
he can best suffer. Thus much evinces that God there commanded divorce by
Malachi, and this confirms that he commands it also here by Moses.

I may the less doubt to mention by the way an Author, though counted
Apocryphal, yet of no small account for piety and wisdom, the Author of
Ecclesiasticus. Which Book begun by the Grandfather of that Jesus who is
called the Son of Sirach, might have bin writt'n in part, not much after the
time when Malachi livd; if we compute by the Reign of Ptolemaeus Euergetes.
It professes to explain the Law and the Profets; and yet exhorts us to divorce
for incurable causes, and to cut off from the flesh those whom it there
describes, Ecclesiastic. 25. 26. Which doubtless that wise and ancient Writer
would never have advised, had either Malachi so lately forbidd'n it, or the Law
by a full precept not left it lawful* But I urge not this for want of better
prooff; our Savior himself allows divorce to be a command, Mark. 10. 3. 5.
Neither do they weak'n this assertion, who say it was only a sufferance, as
shall be proved at large in that place of Matthew. But suppose it were not a
writt'n Law, they never can deny it was a custom, and so effect nothing. For
the same reasons that induce them why it should not be a law, will strair'n
them as hard why it should be allowed a custom. All custom is either evil or
not evil; if it be evil, this is the very end of Law-giving, to abolish evil
customs by wholesome Laws; unless we imagine Moses weaker then every negligent
and startling Politician. If it be, as they make this of divorce to be, a
custom against nature, against justice, against chastity, how, upon this most
impure custom tolerated, could the God of pureness erect a nice and precise Law,
that the wife married after divorce could not return to her former husband, as
being defiled? What was all this following nicenes worth, built upon the lewd
foundation of a wicked thing allowed? In few words then, this custom of divorce
either was allowable, or not allowable; if not allowable, how could it be
allowed? if it were allowable, all who understand Law will consent, that a
tolerated custom has the force of a Law, and is indeed no other but an
unwritt'n Law, as Justinian calls it, and is as prevalent as any writt'n
statute. So that their shift of turning this Law into a custom wheels about, and
gives the onset upon their own flanks; not disproving, but concluding it to be
the more firm law, because it was without controversy a granted custom; as
clear in the reason of common life, as those given rules whereon Euclides builds
his propositions.

Thus being every way a Law of God, who can without blasphemy doubt it to be a
just and pure Law. Moses continually disavows the giving them any statute, or
judgment, but what he learnt of God; of whom also in his Song he says,
Deuteronomy. 32. He is the rock, his work is perfet, all his ways are judgment, a
God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he. And David testifies,
the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. Not partly right
and partly wrong, much less wrong altogether, as Divines of now adays dare
censure them. Moses again of that people to whom he gave this Law says, Deuteronomy.
14. Ye are the childern of the Lord your God, the Lord has chosen thee to be
a peculiar people to himself above all the nations upon the earth, that thou
should keep all his Commandments; and be high in praise, in name, and in
honor, holy to the Lord, Chap. 26. And in the fourth, Behold I have taught you
statutes and judgments eevn as the Lord my God commanded me, keep therefore
and do them. For this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of
Nations that shall hear all these Statutes and say, surely this great Nation is
a wise and understanding people. For what Nation is there so great, who has God
so nigh to them? and what Nation that has Statutes and Judgments so righteons
as all this Law which I set before you this day? Thus whether we look at the
purity and justice of God himself, the jealousy of his honor among other
Nations, the holiness and moral perfection which he intended by his Law to
teach this people, we cannot possibly think how he could endure to let them
slugg and grow inveteratly wicked, under base allowances, and whole adulterous
lives by dispensation. They might not eat, they might not touch an unclean
thing; to what hypocrisy then were they trained up, if by prescription of the
same Law, they might be unjust, they might be adulterous for term of life?
forbid to soil their garments with a coy imaginary pollution, but not forbid,
but countnanc't and animated by Law to soil their souls with deepest
defilements. What more unlike to God, what more like that God should hate, then
that his Law should be so curious to wash vestures; and so careless to leav
unwasht, unregarded, so foul a scab of Egypt in their Souls? what would we
more? the Statutes of the Lord are all pure and just: and if all, then this of
Divorce.

Because he has found some uncleannes in her. That we may not esteem this law
to be a mere authorizing of license, as the Pharisees took it, Moses adds the
reason, for some uncleannes found. Some heertofore have bin so ignorant, as to
have thought, that this uncleannes means adultery. But Erasmus, who for having
writ an excellent Treatise of Divorce, was wrote against by some burly standard
Divine, perhaps of Cullen, or of Lovain, who calls himself Phimostomus, shows
learnedly out of the Fathers with other Testimonies and Reasons, that
uncleannes is not here so understood; defends his former work, though new to
that age, and perhaps counted licentious, and fears not to engage all his fame
on the Argument. Afterward, when Expositers began to understand the Hebrew
Text, which they had not done of many ages before, they translated word for
word not uncleannes, but the nakedness of any thing; and considering that
nakedness is usually referred in Scripture to the mind as well as to the body,
they constantly expound it any defect, annoyance, or ill quality in nature,
which to be joined with, makes life tedious, and such company wors then
solitude. So that here will be no cause to vary from the general consent of
exposition, which gives us freely that God permitted divorce, for whatever was
unalterably distastful, whether in body or mind. But with this admonishment,
that if the Roman law especially in contracts and dowries left many things to
equity with these cautions, exfide bona, quod aequius melius erit, ut inter
bonos been agier, we will not grudge to think that God intended not license
here to every humor, but to such remediles greevances as might move a good, and
honest, and faithful man then to divorce, when it can no more be peace or
comfort to either of them continuing thus joined. And although it could not be
avoided, bat that men of hard hearts would abuse this liberty, yet doubtless it
was intended as all other privileges in Law are, to good men principally, to
bad only by accident. So that the sin was not in the permission, nor simply in
the action of divorce (for then the permitting also had bin sin) but only in
the abuse. But that this Law should, as it were, be wrung from God and Moses,
only to serve the hard heartednes, and the lust of injurious men, how remote it
is from all sense, and law, and honesty, and therefore surely from the meaning
of Christ, shall abundantly be manifest in due order.

Now although Moses needed not to add other reason of this law then that one
there expressed, yet to these ages wherein Canons, and Scotisms, and Lumbard Laws,
have dulled, and almost obliterated the lively Sculpture of ancient reason, and
humanity, it will be requisite to heap reason upon reason, and all little enough
to vindicat the whitenes and the innocence of this divine Law, from the calumny
it finds at this day, of being a door to license and confusion. When as
indeed there is not a judicial point in all Moses, consisting of more true
equity, high wisdom, and God-like pity then this Law; not derogating, but
preserving the honor and peace of Marriage, and exactly agreeing with the sense
and mind of that institution in Genesis.

For first, if Marriage be but an ordained relation, as it seems not more, it
cannot take place above the prime dictats of nature; and if it be of natural
right, yet it must yield to that which is more natural, and before it by
eldership and precedence in nature. Now it is not natural that Hugh marries
Beatrice, or Thomas Rebecca, being only a civil contract, and full of many
chances, but that these men seek them meet helps, that only is natural; and
that they espouse them such, that only is marriage. But if they find them
neither fit helps, nor tolerable society, what thing more natural, more
original and first in nature then to depart from that which is irksom,
greevous, actively hateful, and injurious eevn to hostility, especially in a
conjugal respect, wherein antipathies are invincible, and where the forced
abiding of the one, can be no true good, no real comfort to the other. For if
he find no contentment from the other, how can he return it from himself, or
no acceptance, how can he mutually accept? what more equal, more pious then to
untie a civil knot for a natural enmity held by violence from parting, to
dissolv an accidental conjunction of this or that man and woman, for the most
natural and most necessary disagreement of meet from unmeet, guilty from
guiltles, contrary from contrary? It being certain that the mystical and
blessed unity of marriage can be no way more unhallowed and profaned, then by
the forcible uniting of such disunions and separations. Which if we see often
times they cannot join or piece up to a common friendship, or to a willing
conversation in the same house, how should they possibly agree to the most
familiar and united amity of wedlock? Abraham and Lot, though dear friends and
brethren in a strange Country, chose rather to part asunder, then to infect
their friendship with the strife of their servants: Paul and Barnabas joined
together by the Holy Ghost to a Spiritual work, thought it better to separate
when once they grew at variance. If these great Saints joynd by nature,
friendship, religion, high providence, and revelation, could not so govern a
casual difference, a sudden passion, but must in wisdom divide from the outward
duties of a friendship, or a Collegueship in the same family, or in the same
journey, lest it should grow to a wors division, can any thing be more absurd
and barbarous then that they whom only error, casualty, art or plot has joynd,
should be compelled, not against a sudden passion but against the permanent and
radical discords of nature, to the most intimat and incorporating duties of
love and imbracement, therein only rational and human, as they are free and
voluntary; being else an abject and servile yoke, scars not brutish. And that
there is in man such a peculiar sway of liking, or disliking in the affairs of
matrimony is evidently seen before marriage among those who can be freindly,
can respect each other yet to marry each other would not for any persuasion. If
then this unfitnes and disparity be not till after marriage discovered, through
many causes, and colors, and concealements, that may overshadow; undoubtedly
it will produce the same effects and perhaps with more vehemence, that such a
mistakn pair, would give the world to be unmarried again. And their condition
Solomon to the plain justification of divorce expresses, Prove. 30. 21. 23.
Where he rells us of his own accord, that a hated, or a hateful woman, when
she is married, is a thing for which the earth is disquieted and cannot bear
it; thus giving divine testimony to this divine Law, which bids us nothing more
then is the first and most innocent lesson of nature, to turn away peaceably
from what afflicts and hazards our destruction; especially when our staying can
do no good, and is exposed to all evil.

Secondly, It is unjust that any Ordinance ordained to the good and comfort of
man, where that end is missing, without his fault, should be forced upon him to
an unsufferable misery and discomfort, if not commonly ruin. All Ordinances are
established in their end; the end of Law is the virtue, is the righteousness of
Law. And therefore him we count an ill Expounder who urges Law against the
intention thereof. The general end of every Ordinance, of every severest, every
divinest, eevn of Sabbath is the good of man, yea his temporal good not
excluded. But marriage is one of the benignest ordinances of God to man, whereof
both the general and particular end is the peace and contentment of man's mind,
as the institution declares. Contentment of body they grant, which if it be
defrauded, the plea of frigidity shall divorce: But here lies the fadomles
absurdity, that granting this for bodily defect, they will not grant it for any
defect of the mind, any violation of religious or civil society. When as, if
the argument of Christ be firm against the ruler of the Synagogue, Luke 13.
Thou hypocrite, does not each of you on the Sabbath day loos'n his Ox or his
Ass from the stall, and lead him to watering, and should not I unbind a
daughter of Abraham from this bond of Satan? it stands as good here, ye have
regard in marriage to the greevance of body, should you not regard more the
greevances of the mind, seeing the Soul as much excells the body, as the
outward man excells the Ass and more; for that animal is yet a living creature,
perfet in it self; but the body without the Soul is a mere senseles trunck. No
Ordinance therefore givn particularly to the good both spiritual and temporal of
man, can be urged upon him to his mischief, and if they yield this to the
unworthier part, the body, wherabout are they in their principles, that they
yield it not to the more worthy, the mind of a good man?

Thirdly, As no Ordinance, so no Covenant, no not between God and man, much less
between man and man, being as all are, intended to the good of both parties,
can hold to the deluding or making miserable of them both. For equity is
understood in every Covenant, eevn between enemies, though the terms be not
expressed. If equity therefore made it, extremity may dissolv it. But Marriage,
they use to say, is the Covenant of God. Undoubted: and so is any covenant
frequently called in Scripture, wherein God is called to witness: the covenant of
freindship between David and Jonathan, is called the Covenant of the Lord, 1 Samuel 20. The covenant of Zedechiah with the King of Babel, a Covenant to be
doubted whether lawful or no, yet in respect of God invok't thereto, is called
the Oath, and the Covenant of God, Ezech. 17. Marriage also is called the Covenant
of God, Prove. 2. 17. Why, but as before, because God is the witness thereof,
Malach. 2. 14. So that this denomination adds nothing to the Covenant of
Marriage, above any other civil and solemn contract: nor is it more indissoluble
for this reason then any other against the end of its own ordination, nor is
any vow or Oath to God exacted with such a rigor, where superstition reigns
not. For look how much divine the Covenant is, so much the more equal; So much
the more to be expected that every article thereof should be fairly made good,
no falls dealing, or unperforming should be thrust upon men without redress, if
the covenant be so divine. But faith they say must be kept in Covenant, though
to our damage. I answer, that only holds true, where the other side performs,
which failing, he is no longer bound. Again, this is true, when the keeping of
faith can be of any use, or benefit to the other. But in Marriage a league of
love and willingness, if faith be not willingly kept, it scars is worth the
keeping; nor can be any delight to a generous mind, with whom it is forcibly
kept: and the question still supposes the one brought to an impossibility of
keeping it as he ought, by the others default, and to keep it formally, not
only with a thousand shifts and dissimulations, but with open anguish,
perpetual sadness and disturbance, no willingness, no cheerfulnes, no
contentment, cannot be any good to a mind not basely poor and shallow, with
whom the contract of love is so kept. A Covenant therefore brought to that pass,
is on the unfaulty side without injury dissolved.

Fourthly, The Law is not to neglect men under greatest sufferances, but to see
Covnants of greatest moment faithfullest performed. And what injury comparable
to that sustained in a frustrat and falls dealing Marriage, to loose, for
another fault against him, the best portion of his temporal comforts, and of
his spiritual too, as it may fall out. It was the Law, that for man's good and
quiet, reduced things to propriety, which were at first in common; how much
more Law-like were it to assist nature in disappropriating that evil which by
continuing proper becomes destructive. But he might have bewar'd. So he might
in any other covenant, wherein the Law does not constrain error to so dear a
forfeit. And yet in these matters wherein the wisest are apt to err, all the
warines that can be, often times nothing avails. But the Law can compel the
offending party to be more duteous. Yes, if all these kind of offenses were
fit in public to be complained on, or being compelled were any satisfaction
to a mate not sottish, or malicious. And these injuries work so vehemently,
that if the Law remedy them not, by separating the cause when no way else will
pacify, the person not releev'd betakes him either to such disorderly courses,
or to such a dull dejection, as renders him either infamous, or useles to the
service of God and his Country. Which the Law ought to prevent as a thing
pernicious to the Common wealth; and what better prevention then this which
Moses used?

Fifthly, The Law is to tender the liberty and the human dignity of them that
live under the Law, whether it be the man's right above the woman, or the
woman's just appeal against wrong, and servitude. But the duties of marriage
contain in them a duty of benevolence, which to do by compulsion against the
Soul, where there can be neither peace, nor joy, nor love, but an enthrallment
to one who either cannot, or will not be mutual in the godliest and the
civilest ends of that society, is the ignoblest, and the lowest slavery that a
human shape can be put to. This Law therefore justly and piously provides
against such an unmanly task of bondage as this. The civil Law, though it
favored the setting free of a slave, yet if he proved ungrateful to his
Patron, reduced him to a servil condition. If that Law did well to reduce from
liberty to bondage for an ingratitude not the greatest, much more became it the
Law of God to enact the restorement of a free born man from an unpurpos'd, and
unworthy bondage to a rightful liberty for the most unnatural fraud and
ingratitude that can be committed against him. And if that Civilian Emperor in
his tide of Donations, permit the giver to recall his gift from him who proves
unthankful toward him, yea, though he had subscribed and signed in the deed
of his gift, not to recall it though for this very cause of ingratitude, with
much more equity does Moses permit here the giver to recall no petty gift, but
the gift of himself from one who most injuriously and deceitfully uses him
against the main ends and conditions of his giving himself, expressed in Gods
institution.

Sixthly, Although there be nothing in the plain words of this Law, that seems
to regard the afflictions of a wife, how great so ever, yet Expositers
determine, and doubtless determine rightly, that God was not uncompassionat of
them also in the framing of this Law. For should the rescript of Antoninus in
the Civil Law give release to servants flying for refuge to the Emperors
statue, by giving leav to change their cruel Masters, and should God who in his
Law also is good to injured servants, by granting them their freedom in diverse
cases, not consider the wrongs and miseries of a wife which is no servant.
Though heerin the counter sense of our Divines, to me, I must confess seems
admirable; who teach that God gave this as a merciful Law, not for man whom he
here names, and to whom by name he gives this power, but for the wife whom he
names not, and to whom by name he gives no power at all. For certainly if man
beliable to injuries in marriage, as well as woman, and man be the worthier
person, it were a preposterous law to respect only the less worthy; her whom
God made for marriage, and not him at all for whom marriage was made.

Seventhly, The Law of marriage gives place to the power of Parents: for we
hold that consent of Parents not had may break the wedlock, though else
accomplished. It gives place to maisterly power, for the Master might take away
from an Hebrew servant the wife which he gave him, Exodus 21. If it be answered
that the marriage of servants is no matrimony: it is replied, that this in the
ancient Roman Law is true, not in the Mosaic. If it be added, she was a
stranger not an Hebrew, therefore easily divorc't, it will be answered that
strangers not being Canaanites, and they also being Converts might be
lawfully married, as Rahab was. And her conversion is here supposed; for an
Hebrew master could not lawfully give a heathen wife to an Hebrew servant.
However, the divorcing of an Israelitish woman was as easy by the Law, as the
divorcing of a stranger, and almost in the same words permitted, Deuteronomy. 24. and
Deuteronomy. 21. Lastly, it gives place to the right of war, for a captiv woman
lawfully married, and afterward not beloved, might be dismissed, only without
ransom. Deuteronomy. 21. If marriage may be dissolved by so many exterior powers, not
superior, as we think, why may not the power of marriage it self for its own
peace and honor dissolv it self, where the persons wedded be free persons, why
may not a greater and more natural power complaining dissolv marriage? for the
ends why matrimony was ordained, are certainly and by all Logic above the
Ordinance it self, why may not that dissolv marriage without which that
institution has no force at all? for the prime ends of marriage, are the whole
strength and validity thereof, without which matrimony is like an Idol, nothing
in the world. But those former allowances were all for hardness of heart. Be
that granted, until we come where to understand it better: if the Law suffer
thus far the obstinacy of a bad man, is it not more righteous here, to do
willingly what is but equal, to remove in season the extremities of a good man?

Eighthly, If a man had deflowered a Virgin, or brought an ill name on his wife
that she came not a Virgin to him, he was amerc't in certain shekles of
Silver, and bound never to divorce her all his days, Deuteronomy. 22. which shows
that the Law gave no liberty to divorce, where the injury was palpable; and that
the absolute forbidding to divorce, was in part the punishment of a deflowrer,
and a defamer. Yet not so but that the wife questionles might depart when she
pleased. Otherwise this course had not so much righted her, as deliverd her up
to more spite and cruel usage. This Law therefore does justly distinguish the
privilege of an honest and blameles man in the matter of divorce from the
punishment of a notorious offender.

Ninthly, Suppose it might be imputed to a man, that he was too rash in his
choice and why took he not better heed, let him now smart, and bear his folly
as he may; although the Law of God, that terrible law do not thus upbraid the
infirmities and unwilling mistakes of man in his integrity: But suppose these
and the like proud aggravations of some stern hypocrite, more merciles in his
mercies, then any literal Law in the vigor of severity, must be patiently
heard; yet all Law, and Gods Law especially grants every where to error easy
remitments, eevn where the utmost penalty exacted were no undoing. With great
reason therefore and mercy does it here not torment an error, if it be so, with
the endurance of a whole life lost to all household comfort and society, a
punishment of too vast and huge dimension for an error, and the more
unreasonable for that the like objection may be opposed against the plea of
divorcing for adultery; he might have looked better before to her breeding
under religious Parents: why did he not then more diligently inquire into her
manners, into what company she kept? every glaunce of her eye, every step of
her gate would have propheci'd adultery, if the quick sent of these discerners
had bin took along; they had the divination to have foretold you all this; as
they have now the divinity to punish an error inhumanly. As good reason to be
content, and forced to be content with your adultress, if these objecters might
be the judges of human frailty. But God more mild and good to man, then man to
his brother, in all this liberty givn to divorcement, mentions not a word of
our past errors and mistakes, if any were, which these men objecting from their
own inventions prosecute with all violence and iniquity. For if the one be to
look so narrowly what he takes, at the peril of ever keeping, why should not
the other be made as wary what is promised, by the peril of loosing? for
without those promises the treaty of marriage had not proceeded. Why should his
own error bind him, rather then the others fraud acquit him? Let the buyer
beware, says the old Law-beaten termer. Belike then there is no more honesty,
nor ingenuity in the bargain of a wedloc, then in the buying of a colt: We
must it seems drive it on as craftily with those whose affinity we seek, as if
they were a pack of sale men and complotters. But the deceiver deceives himself
in the unprosperous marriage, and therein is sufficiently punished. I answer, that
the most of those who deceiv, are such as either understand not, or value not
the true purposes of marriage; they have the prey they seek, not the punishment:
yet say it prove to them some cross, it is not equal that error and fraud should
be linkt in the same degree of forfeture, but rather that error should be
acquitted, and fraud bereaved his morsel: if the mistake were not on both
sides, for then on both sides the acquitment will be reasonable, if the bondage
be intolerable; which this Law graciously determins, not unmindful of the wife,
as was granted willingly to the common Expositers, though beyond the letter of
this law, yet not beyond the spirit of charity.

Tenthly, Marriage is a solemn thing, some say a holy, the resemblance of Christ
and his Church; and so indeed it is where the persons are truly religious; and
we know all Sacred things not performed sincerely as they ought, are no way
acceptable to God in their outward formality. And that wherein it differs from
personal duties, if they be not truly don, the fault is in our selves; but
marriage to be a true and pious marriage is not in the single power of any
person; the essence whereof, as of all other Covnants is in relation to
another, the making and maintaining causes thereof are all mutual, and must be
a communion of spiritual and temporal comforts. If then either of them cannot,
or obstinatly will not be answerable in these duties, so as that the other can
have no peaceful living, or enduring the want of what he justly seeks, and sees
no hope, then strait from that dwelling love, which is the soul of wedloc,
takes his flight, leaving only some cold performances of civil and common
respects, but the true bond of marriage, if there were ever any there, is
already burst like a rott'n thread. Then follows dissimulation, suspicion, falls
colors, falls pretenses, and wors then these, disturbance, annoyance, vexation,
sorrow, temtation eevn in the faultles person, weary of himself, and of all
action public or domestic; then comes disorder, neglect, hatred, and perpetual
strife, all these the enemies of holiness and christianity, and every one of
these persisted in, a remediles violation to matrimony. Therefore God who hates
all faining and formality, where there should be all faith and sincerenes, and
abhorrs to see inevitable discord, where there should be greatest concord, when
through another default, faith and concord cannot be, counts it neither just
to punish the innocent with the transgressor, nor holy, nor honorable for the
sanctity of marriage, that should be the unlon of peace and love, to be made
the commitment, and close fight of enmity and hate. And therefore does in this
Law, what best agrees with his goodness, loosning a sacred thing to peace and
charity, rather then binding it to hatred and contention; loosning only the
outward and formal tie of that which is already inwardly, and really brokn, or
else was really never joined.

Eleventhly, One of the chief matrimonial ends is said to seek a holy seed; but
where an unfit marriage administers continual cause of hatred and distemper,
there, as was heard before, cannot choose but much unholines abide. Nothing
more unhallows a man, more unprepares him to the service of God in any duty,
then a habit of wrath and perturbation, arising from the importunity of
troublous causes never absent. And where the household stands in this plight,
what love can there be to the unfortunat issue, what care of their breeding,
which is of main conducement to their being holy. God therefore knowing how
unhappy it would be for children to bee-born in such a family, gives this Law
either as a prevention, that being an unhappy pair, they should not add to
be unhappy parents, or else as a remedy that if there be childern, while they
are fewest, they may follow either parent, as shall be agreed, or judged, from
the house of hatred and discord, to a place of more holy and peaceable
education.

Twelfthly, All Law is available to some good end, but the final prohibition of
divorce a vails to no good end, causing only the endless aggravation of evil,
and therefore this permission of divorce was givn to the Jews by the wisdom and
fatherly providence of God; who knew that Law cannot command love, without
which, matrimony has no true being, no good, no solace, nothing of Gods
instituting, nothing but so sordid and so low, as to be disdained of any
generous person. Law cannot enable natural inability either of body, or mind,
which gives the greevance; it cannot make equal those inequalities, it cannot
make fit those unfitnesses: and where there is malice more then defect of
nature, it cannot hinder ten thousand injuries, and bitter actions of despite
too subtle and too unapparent for Law to deal with. And while it seeks to
remedy more outward wrongs, it exposes the injured person to other more inward
and more cutting. All these evils unavoidably will redound upon the children,
if any be, and the whole family. It degenerates and disorders the best spirits,
leaves them to unsettl'd imaginations, and degraded hopes, careless of themselves,
their household and their friends, unactive to all public service, dead to the
Commonwealth; wherein they are by one mishapp, and no willing trespass of
theirs, outlawed from all the benefits and comforts of married life and
posterity. It conferrs as little to the honor and inviolable keeping of
Matrimony, but sooner stirrs up temptations, and occasions to secret
adulteries, and unchaste roaving. But it maintains public honesty. Public folly
rather, who shall judge of public honesty? the Law of God, and of ancientest
Christians, and all Civil Nations, or the illegitimat Law of Monks and
Canonists, the most malevolent, most unexperienc't, and incompetent judges of
Matrimony?

These reasons, and many more that might be alleged, afford us plainly to
perceav, both what good cause this Law had to do for good men in mischances,
and what necessity it had to suffer accidentally the hard heartednes of bad
men, which it could not certainly discover, or discovering could not subdue, no
nor endeavor to restrain without multiplying sorrow to them, for whom all was
endeavored. The guiltles therefore were not deprived their needful redresses,
and the hard hearts of others unchastisable in those judicial Courts, were so
remitted there, as bound over to the higher Session of Conscience.

Notwithstanding all this, there is a loud exception against this Law of God,
nor can the holy Author save his Law from this exception, that it opens a door
to all license and confusion. But this is the rudest, I was almost saying the
most graceles objection, and with the least reverence to God and Moses, that
could be devised: This is to cite God before man's Tribunal, to arrogate a
wisdom and holiness above him. Did not God then foresee what event of license or
confusion could follow? did not he know how to ponder these abuses with more
prevailing respects, in the most eevn balance of his justice and pureness, till
these correctors cameup to show him better? The Law is, if it stir up sin any
way, to stir it up by forbidding, as one contrary excites another, Romans 7.
but if it once come to provoke sin, by granting license to sin, according to
Laws that have no other honest end, but only to permit the fulfilling of
obstinat lust, how is God not made the contradicter of himself? No man denies
that best things may be abused: but it is a rule resulting from many pregnant
experiences, that what does most harm in the abusing, used rightly does most
good. And such a good to take a way from honest men, for being abused by such
as abuse all things, is the greatest abuse of all. That the whole Law is no
further useful, then as a man uses it lawfully, St. Paul teaches 1 Timothy 1. And
that Christian liberty may be used for an occasion to the flesh, the same
Apostle confesses, Galat. 5. yet thinks not of removing it for that, but bidds
us rather Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has freed us, and not be
held again in the yoke of bondage. The very permission which Christ gave to
divorce for adultery, may be foully abused, by any whose hardness of heart can
either fain adultery, or dares committ, that he may divorce. And for this
cause the Pope, and hitherto the Church of England, forbid all divorce from the
bond of marriage, though for openest adultery. If then it be righteous to
hinder for the fear of abuse, that which Gods Law notwithstanding that caution,
has warranted to be don, does not our righteousness come short of Antichrist,
or do we not rather heerin conform our selves to his unrighteousnes in this
undue and unwise fear. For God regards more to releev by this Law the just
complaints of good men, then to curb the license of wicked men, to the crushing
withal, and the overwhelming of his afflicted servants. He loves more that his
Law should look with pity upon the difficulties of his own, then with rigor
upon the boundless riots of them who serve another Master, and hindered here
by strictnes, will break another way to wors enormities. If this Law therefore
have many good reasons for which God gave it, and no intention of giving scope
to leudnes, but as abuse by accident comes in with every good Law, and every
good thing, it cannot be wisdom in us, while we can content us with Gods
wisdom, nor can be purity, if his purity will suffice us, to except against
this Law, as if it fostered license. But if they affirm this Law had no other
end, but to permit obdurat lust, because it would be obdurat, making the Law
of God intentionally to proclaim and enact sin lawful, as if the will of God
were become sinful, or sin stronger then his direct and Law-giving will, the
men would be admonisht to look well to it, that while they are so eager to
shut the door against license, they do not open a wors door to blasphemy. And
yet they shall be here further shown their iniquity; what more foul and common
sin among us then drnnkennes, and who can be ignorant, that if the importation
of Wine, and the use of all strong drink were forbid, it would both clean rid
the possibility of committing that odious vice, and men might afterward live
happily and healthfully, without the use of those intoxicating licors. Yet who
is there the severest of them all, that ever propounded to loos his Sack, his
Ale, toward the certain abolishing of so great a sin, who is there of them, the
holiest, that less loves his rich Canary at meals, though it be fetched from
places that hazard the Religion of them who fetch it, and though it make his
neighbor drunk out of the same Tun? While they forbid not therefore the use
of that liquid Merchandise, which forbidd'n would utterly remove a most
loathsome sin, and not impair either the health, or the refreshment of mankind,
supplied many other ways, why do they forbid a Law of God, the forbidding
whereof brings into an excessive bondage, often times the best of men, and betters
not the wors? He to remove a National vice, will not pardon his cupps, nor
think it concerns him to forbear the quaffing of that outlandish Grape, in his
unnecessary fullnes, though other men abuse it never so much, nor is he so
abstemious as to intercede with the Magistrate that all matter of drunkenness be
banished the Commonwealth, and yet for the fear of a less inconvenience
unpardnably requires of his brethren, in their extreme necessity to debar
themselves the use of Gods permissive Law, though it might be their saving, and
no man's indangering the more. Thus this peremptory strictnes we may discern of
what sort it is, how unequal, and how unjust.

But it will breed confusion. What confusion it would breed, God himself took
the care to prevent in the fourth verse of this Chapter, that the divorc't
being married to another, might not return to her former Husband. And
Justinians law counsels the same in his Title of Nuptials. And what confusion
else can there be in separation, to separat, upon extrem urgency, the Religious
from the irreligious, the fit from the unfit, the willing from the wilful, the
abused from the abuser, such a separation is quite contrary to confusion. But
to bind and mix together holy with Atheist, hevnly with hellish, fitnes with
unfitnes, light with darkness, antipathy with antipathy, the injured with the
injurer, and force them into the most inward neernes of a detested union, this
doubtless is the most horrid, the most unnatural mixture, the greatest confusion
that can be confused?

Thus by this plain and Christian Talmud vindicating the Law of God from
irreverent and unwary expositions, I trust, where it shall meet with
intelligible perufers, some stay at least of men's thoughts will be obtained, to
consider these many prudent and righteous ends of this divorcing permission.
That it may have, for the great Authors sake, hereafter some competent allowance
to be counted a little purer then the prerogative of a legal and public
ribaldry, granted to that holy seed. So that from hence we shall hope to find
the way still more open to the reconciling of those places which treat this
matter in the Gospel. And thither now without interruption the course of method
brings us.

TETRACHORDON,
MATT. 5. 31, 32. 31 It has been said whosoever shall put away his wife, let
him give her a writing of divorcement. 32 But I say unto you that whosoever
shall put away his wife, etc.
MATT. 19. 3, 4. etc. 3 And the Pharisees also came unto him tempting him, etc.
IT has been said.] What hitherto has been spoke upon the law of God
touching Matrimony or divorce, he who will deny to have bin argued according
to reason, and all equity of Scripture, I cannot edify how, or by what rule of
proportion that man's virtue calculates, what his elements are, not what his
analytics. Confidently to those who have read good books, and to those whose
reason is not an illiterate book to themselves I appeal, whether they would
not confess all this to be the commentary of truth and justice, were it not
for these recited words of our Savior. And if they take not back that which
they thus grant, nothing sooner might persuade them that Christ here teaches no
new precept, and nothing sooner might direct them to find his meaning, then to
compare and measure it by the rules of nature and eternal righteousness, which
no writt'n law extinguishes, and the Gospel least of all. For what can be more
opposite and disparaging to the covenant of love, of freedom, and of our
manhood in grace, then to be made the yoaking pedagogue of new severities, the
scribe of syllables and rigid letters, not only greevous to the best of men,
but different and strange from the light of reason in them, save only as they
are fain to stretch and distort their apprehensions, for fear of displeasing
the verbal straightness of a text, which our own servil fear gives us not
the leisure to understand aright. If the law of Christ shall be writt'n in our
hearts, as was promised to the Gospel, Jer. 31, how can this in the vulgar and
superficial sense be a law of Christ, so far from being writt'n in our
hearts, that it injures and dissallowes not only the free dictates of nature
and moral law, but of charity also and religion in our hearts. Our Saviors
doctrine is, that the end, and the fulfilling of every command is charity; no
faith without it, no truth without it, no worship, no works pleasing to God
but as they partake of charity. He himself sets us an example, breaking the
solemnest and the strictest ordinance of religious rest, and justified the
breaking, not to cure a dying man, but such whose cure might without danger
have been deserr'd. And wherefore needs must the sick man's bed be carried
home on that day by his appointment, and why were the Disciples who could not
forbear on that day to pluck the corn, so industriously desended, but to show
us that if he preferred the slightest occasions of man's good before the
observing of highest and severest ordinances, he gave us much more easy leave
to break the intolerable yoke of a never well joined wedlock for the
removing of our heaviest afflictions. Therefore it is that the most of
evangelick precepts are given us in proverbiall forms, to drive us from the
letter, though we love ever to be sticking there. For no other cause did Christ
assure us that whatsoever things we bind, or slacken on earth are so in
heaven, but to signify that the christian arbitrament of charity is supreme
decider of all controversy, and supreme resolver of all Scripture; not as the
Pope determines for his own tyrany, but as the Church ought to determine for
its own true liberty. Hence Eusebius not far from beginning his History,
compares the state of Christians to that of Noah and the Patriarchs before the
Law. And this indeed was the reason, why Apostolic tradition in the ancient
Church was counted nigh equal to the writt'n word, though it carried them at
length awry, for want of considering that tradition was not left to be imposed
as law, but to be a pattern of that Christian prudence, and liberty which holy
men by right assumed of old, which truth was so evident, that it found entrance
even into the Council of Trent, when the point of tradition came to be
discusst. And Marinaro a learned Carmelite for approaching too near the true
cause that gave esteem to tradition, that is to say, the difference between
the Old and New Testament, the one punctually prescribing writt'n Law, the
other guiding by the inward spirit, was reprehended by Cardinal Poole as one
that had spoken more worthy a German Collequie, then a general council. I
omit many instances, many proofs and arguments of this kind, which alone would
compile a just volume, and shall content me here to have shown briefly, that
the great and almost only commandment of the Gospel, is to command nothing
against the good of man, and much more no civil command, against his civil
good. If we understand not this, we are but cracked cimbals, we do but tinckle,
we know nothing, we do nothing, all the sweat of our toilsomest obedience will
but mock us. And what we suffer superstitiously returns us no thanks. Thus
med'cining our eyes we need not doubt to see more into the meaning of these
our Saviors words, then many who have gone before us.

[It has been said, whosoever shall put away his wife.] Our Savior was by
the doctors of his time suspected of intending to dissolve the law. In this
chapter he wipes off this aspersion upon his accusers, and shows how they were
the law brea kers. In every common wealth when it decays, corruption makes two
maine steps; first when men cease to do according to the inward and
uncompell'd actions of virtue, caring only to live by the outward constraint of
law, and turn the Simplicity of real good, into the craft of seeming so by
law. To this hypocritical honesty was Rome declined in that age, wherein Horace
lived and discovered it to Quintius.

Whom do we count a good man, whom but he
Who keeps the laws and statutes of the Senate,
Who judges in great suits and controversies,
Whose witness and opinion winnes the cause;
But his own house, and the whole neighborhood
Sees his foul inside through his whited skin.
The next declining is, when law becomes now too straight for the secular
manners, and those too loose for the cincture of law. This brings in false and
crooked interpretations to ecke out law, and invents the subtle encroachment of
obscure traditions hard to be disproved. To both these descents the Pharisees
themselves were fallen. Our Savior therefore shows them both where they broke
the law in not marking the divine intent thereof, but only the letter, and
where they depraved the letter also with sophistical expositions. This law of
divorse they had depraved both ways. First, by teaching that to give a bill of
divorse was all the duty which that law required, what ever the cause were.
Next by running to divorse for any trivial, accidental cause; whenas the law
evidently stays in the grave causes of natural and immutable dislike. [It
has been said says he Christ does not put any contempt or disesteeme upon the
law (...) struct, but if he discern his willingness and candor made use of to
intrapp him, will suddenly draw in himself, and laying aside the facil vein
of perspicuity, will know his time to utter clouds and riddles; If he be not
less wise then that noted Fish, when as he should be not unwiser then the
Serpent. Our Savior at no time expressed any great desire to teach the obstinate
and unteachable Pharisees; but when they came to tempt him, then least of all.
As now about the liberty of divorce, so another time about the punishment of
adultery they came to sound him, and what satisfaction got they from his
answer, either to themselves or to us, that might direct a law under the
Gospel, new from that of Moses, unless we draw his absolution of adultery into
an edict. So about the tribute, who is there can pick out a full solution,
what and when we must give to Caesar, by the answer which he gave the Pharisees?
If we must give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and all be Caesar's, which has
his image, we must either new stamp our Coin, or we may go new stamp our
Foreheads with the superscription of slaves in stead of freemen. Besides it is
a general precept, not only of Christ, but of all other Sages, not to instruct
the unworthy and the conceited who love tradition more then truth, but to
perplex and stumble them purposely with contrived obscurities. No wonder then
if they who would determine of divorce by this place, have ever found it
difficult, and unfatisfying through all the ages of the Church, as Austine
himself and other great writers confess. Lastly it is manifest to be the
principal scope of our Savior both here, and in the 5. of Mat. to convince the
Pharisees of what they being evil did licentiously, not to explain what others
being good and blameless men might be permitted to do in case of extremity.
Neither was it seasonable to talk of honest and conscientious liberty among
them who had abused legal and civil liberty to uncivil license. We do not say
to a servant what we say to a son; nor was it expedient to preach freedom to
those who had transgrest in wantonness. When we rebuke a Prodigal, we admonish
him of thrift, not of magnificence, or bounty. And to school a proud man we
labor to make him humble, not magnanimous. So Christ to retort these arrogant
inquisitors their own, took the course to lay their hautinesse under a
severity which they deserved; not to acquaint them, or to make them judges
either of the just man's right and privilege or of the afflicted man's necessity.
And if we may have leave to conjecture, there is a likelihood offered us by
Tertullian in his 4. against Marcion, whereby it may seem very probable that
the Pharisees had a private drifr of malice against our Saviors life in
proposing this question; and our Savior had a peculiar aim in the rigor of his
answer, both to let them know the freedom of his spirit, and the sharpness
of his discerning. This I must now show, says Tertullian, Whence our Lord
deduced this sentence, and which way he directed it, whereby it will more fully
appear that he intended not to dissolve Moses. And there upon tells us that
the vehemence of this our Saviors speech was chiefly darted against Herod and
Herodias. The story is out of Josephus: Herod had been a long time married to
the daughter of Aretas King of Petra, til happening on his jorney toward Rome to
be entertained at his brother Philips house, he cast his eye unlawfully and
unguestlike upon Herodias there, the wife of Philip, but daughter to
Aristobulus their common brother, and durst make words of marrying her his
Niece from his brothers bed. She assented upon agreement he should expel his
former wife. All was accomplished, and by the Baptist rebuk't with the loss of
his head. Though doubtless that staid not the various discourses of men upon
the fact, which while the Herodian flatterers, and not a few perhaps among the
Pharisees endevout'd to defend by wresting the law, it might be a means to
bring the question of divorce into a hot agitation among the people, how far
Moses gave allowance. The Pharisees therefore knowing our Savior to be a friend
of John the Baptist, and no doubt but having heard much of his Sermon in the
Mount, wherein he spoke rigidly against the license of divorce, they put him
this question both in hope to find him a contradicter of Moses, and a condemner
of Herod; so to ensnare him within compass of the same accusation which had
ended his friend; and our Savior so orders his answer, as that they might
perceive Herod and his Adultresse only not named; so lively it concerned them
both what he spoke. No wonder then if the sentence of our Savior sounded
stricter then his custom was; which his conscious attempters doubtless
apprehended sooner then his other auditors. Thus much we gain from hence to
inform us, that what Christ intends to speak here of divorce, will be rather
the forbidding of of what we may not do herein passionately and abusively, as
Herod and Herodias did, then the discussing of what herein we may do
reasonably and necessarily.

[Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife] It might be rendered more
exactly from the Greek, to loosen or to set free; which though it seem to
have a milder fignification then the two Hebrew words commonly used for
divorce, yet Interpreters have noted, that the Greek also is read in the
Septuagint, for an act which is not without constraint. As when Achish drove
from his presence David counterfeting madness. Psalm. 34. the Greek word is
the same with this here, to put away. And Erasmus quotes Hilary rendering it by
an expression, not so soft. Whence may be doubted, whether the Pharisees did not
state this question in the strict right of the man, not tarrying for the wives
consent. And if our Savior answer directly according to what was asked in the
term of putting away, it may be questionable, whether the rigor of his
sentence did not forbid only such putting away as is without mutual consent*
in a violent and and harsh manner, or without any reason, but will, as the
Tetrarch did. Which might be the cause that those Christian Emperors feared
not in their constitutions to dissolve marriage by mutual consent; In that our
Savior seems here, as the case is most likely, not to condemn all divorce
but all injury and violence in divorce. But no injury can be done to them who
seek it, as the Ethics of Aristotle sufficiently prove. True it is, that an
unjust thing may be done to one though willing, and so may justly be forbid'n:
But divorce being in it self no unjust or evil thing, but only as it is
joined with injury, or lust, injury it cannot be at law, if consent be, and
Aristotle err not. And lust it may as frequently not be, while charity has
the judging of so many private greevances in a misfortun'd Wedlock, which may
pard'nably seek a redemption. But whether it be or not, the law cannot
discern, or examine lust, so long as it walks from one lawful term to
another, from divorce to marriage both in themselves indifferent. For if the
law cannot take hold to punish many actions apparently covetous, ambitious,
ungrateful, proud, how can it forbid and punish that for lust, which is but
only surmis'd so, and can no more be certainly proved in the divorcing now,
then before in the marrying. Whence if divorce be no unjust thing, but through
lust, a cause not discernable by law, as law is wont to discern in other
cases, and can be no injury where consent is, there can be nothing in the
equity of law, why divorce by consent may not be lawful: leaving secrecies to
conscience, the thing which our Savior here aims to rectify, not to revoke
the statutes of Moses. In the mean while the wotd To put away, being in the
Gteeke, to loosen or disolve, utterly takes away that vain papisticall
distinction of divorce from bed, and divorce from bond, evincing plainly that
both Christ and the Pharisees mean here that divorce which finally disolves the
bond and frees both parties to a second marriage.

[For every cause.] This the Pharisees held, that for every cause they might
divorce, for every accidental cause, any quarrel or difference that might
happ'n. So both Josephus and Philo, men who lived in the same age, explain; and
the Syriac translater, whose antiquity is thought parallel to the Evangelists
themselves, reads it conformably upon any occasion or pretense. Divines also
generally agree that thus the Pharisees meant. Cameron a late writer much
applauded, commenting this place not undiligently, affirms that the Greek
preposition (...) translated unusually (For) has a force in it implying the
suddenness of those Pharisaic divorces; and that their question was to this
effect, whether for any cause, whatever it chanced to be, straight as it rose,
the divorse might be lawful. This he freely gives what ever moved him, and I
as freely take, nor can deny his observation to be acute and learned. If
therefore we insist upon the word of putting away, that it imports a constraint
without consent, as might be insisted, and may enjoy what Cameron bestows on
us, that for every cause is to be understood, according as any cause may
happen, with a relation to the speediness of those divorces and that Herodian
act especially, as is already brought us, the sentence of our Savior will
appear nothing so strict a prohibition as has been long conceived,
forbidding only to divorce for casual and temporary causes, that may be soon
ended, or soon remedied; and likewise forbidding to divorce rashly, and on
thesudden heat, except it be for adultery. If these qualifications may be
admitted, as partly we offer them, partly are offered them by some of their own
opinion, and that where nothing is repugnant why they should not be admitted,
nothing can wrest them from us, the severe sentence of our Savior will
straight unbend the seeming frown into that gentleness and compassion which
was so abundant in all his actions, his office and his doctrine, from all which
otherwise it stands off at no mean distance.

Verse. 4. And he answered and said unto them, have ye not read that he which
made them at the beginning, made them Male and Female? Verse. 5. And said, for
this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his wife,
and they twain shall be one flesh? Verse. 6. Wherefore they are no more twain
but one flesh, what therefore God has joined together, let no man put asunder.
[4. and 5 Made them Male and Female, And said for this cause, etc.] We see it
here undeniably, that the law which our Savior cites to prove that divorce was
forbidd'n, is not an absolute and tyrannical command without reason, as now
adays we make it little better, but is grounded upon some rational cause not
difficult to be apprehended, being in a matter which equally concerns the
meanest and the plainest sort of persons in a household life. Our next way then
will be to inquire if there be not more reasons then one, and if there be,
whether this be the best and chiefest. That we shall find by turning to the
first institution, to which Christ referrs our own reading; He himself having
to deal with treacherous affailants, uses brevity, and lighting on the first
place in Genesis that mentions any thing tending to Marriage in the first
chapter, joins it immediately to the 24. verse of the 2 chapter, omitting all
the prime words between, which create the institution, and contain the noblest
and purest ends of Matrimony, without which attained, that conjunction has
nothing in it above what is common to us with beasts. So likewise beneath in
this very chapter, to the young man who came not tempting him, but to learn of
him, asking him which commandments he should keep, he neither repeates the
first table, nor all the second, nor that in order which he repeates. If here
then being tempted, he desire to be the shorter, and the darker in his
conference, and omit to cite that from the second of Genesis, which all
Divines confess is a commentary to what he cites out of the first, the making
them Male and Female; what are we to do, but to search the institution our
selves; and we shall find there his own authority giving other manner of
reasons why such firm union is to be in matrimony, without which reasons
their being male and female can be no cause of joining them unseparably: for if
it be, then no Adultery can sever. Therefore the prohibition of divorce depends
not upon this reason here expressed to the Pharisees, but upon the plainer and
more eminent causes omitted here and referred to the institution; which causes
not being found in a particular and casual Matrimony, this sensitive and
materious cause alone can no more hinder a divorce against those higher and
more human reasons urging it, then it can alone without them to warrant a
copulation, but leaves it arbitrary to those who in their chance of marriage
find not why divorce is farbidd them, but why it is permitted them; and find
both here and in Genesis, that the forbidding is not absolute, but according to
the reasons there taught us, not here. And that our Savior taught them no
better, but uses the most vulgar, most animal and corporal argument to convince
them, is first to show us, that as through their licentious divorces they made
no more of marriage then as if to marry, were no more then to be male and
female, so he goes no higher in his confutation; deeming them unworthy to be
talked with in a higher strain, but to be tied in marriage by the mere
material cause thereof, since their own license testified that nothing
matrimonial was in their thought but to be male and female. Next it might be
don to discover the brute ignorance of these carnal Doctors, who taking on
them to dispute of marriage and divorce, were put to silence with such a
slender opposition as this, and outed from their hold with scarce one quarter
of an argument. That we may believe this, his entertainment of the young man
soon after may persuade us. Whom, though he came to preach eternal life by
faith only, he dismisses with a salvation taught him by works only. On which
place Paraeus notes. That this man was to be convinced by a false persuasion;
and that Christ is wont otherwise to answer hypocrites, otherwise those that
are docible. Much rather then may we think that in handling these tempters, he
forgot not so to frame his prudent ambiguities and concealements, as was to the
troubling of those peremtory disputants most wholesome. When therefore we would
know what right there may be, in ill accidents, to divorce, we must repair
thither where God professes to teach his servants by the prime institution, and
not where we see him intending to dazzle sophisters: We must not read he made
them Male and Female, and not understand he made them more intendedly a meet
help to remove the evil of being alone. We must take both these together, and
then we may infer completely as from the whole cause why a man shall cleave
to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh: but if the full and chief
cause why we may not divorce, be wanting here, this place may skirmish with the
rabbis while it will, but to the true christian it prohibits nothing beyond
the full reason of it is own prohibiting, which is best known by the
institution.

Verse. 6. [Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh.] This is true in
the general right of marriage, but not in the chance medley of every
particular match. For if they who were once undoubtedly one flesh, yet become
twain by adultery, then sure they who were never one flesh rightly, never helps
meet for each other according to the plain prescript of God, may with less
ado then a volume be concluded still twain. And so long as we account a
Magistrate no Magistrate, if there be but a flaw in his election, why should we
not much rather count a Matrimony no Matrimony, if it cannot be in any
reasonable manner according to the words of Gods institution.

[What therefore God has joined, let no man put asunder.] But hear the
christian prudence lies to consider what God has joined; shall we say that
God has joined error, fraud, unfitness, wrath, contention, perpetual
loneliness, perpetual discord; what ever lust, or wine, or witchery, threate,
or inticement, avarice or ambition has joined together, faithful with
unfaithful, christian with antichristian, hate with hate, or hate with love,
shall we say this is Gods joining?

[Let not man put a sunder.] That is to say, what God has joined; for if it
be, as how often we see it may be, not of Gods joining, and his law tells us he
joins not unmachable things but hates to join them, as an abominable
confusion, then the divine law of Moses puts them asunder, his own divine will
in the institution puts them asunder, as often as the reasons be not extant, for
which only God ordained their joining. Man only puts asunder when his
inordinate desires, his passion, his violence, his injury makes the breach: not
when the utter want of that which lawfully was the end of his joining, when
wrongs and extremities, and unsupportable greevances compel him to disjoyne:
when such as Herod and the pharisees divorce beside law, or against law, then
only man separates, and to such only this prohibition belongs. In a word, if it
be unlawful for man to put asunder that which God has joined, let man take
heed it be not detestable to join that by compulsion which God has put
assunder.

Verse. 7. They say unto him, why did Moses then command to give a writing of
divorcement, and to put her away? Verse. 8. He says unto them, Moses because of
the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives, but from the
beginning it was not so.
[Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you.] Henee the
divinity now current argues that this judicial Moses is abolisht. But suppose
it were so, though it has bin proved otherwise, the firmness of such right
to divorce as here pleads, is fetched from the prime institution, does not stand
or fall with the judicial Jew, but is as moral as what is moralest. Yet as I
have shown positively that this law cannot be abrogated, both by the words of
our Savior pronouncing the contrary, and by that unabolishable equity which it
convaies to us, so I shall now bring to view those appearances of strength
which are levied from this text to maintain the most gross and massy paradox
that ever did violence to reason and religion, bred only under the shadow of
these words, to all other piety or philosophy strange and insolent, that God by
act of law drew out a line of adultery almost two thousand years long:
although to detect the prodigy of this surmise, the former book set forth on
this argument has already been copious. I shall not repeat much though I
might borrow of mine own, but shall endeavor to add something either yet
untoucht, or not largely anough explained First it shall be manifest that the
common exposition cannot possibly consist with christian doctrine: next a truer
meaning of this our Saviors reply shall be left in the room. The received
exposition is, that God though not approving did enact a law to permit adultery
by divorcement simply unlawful. And this conceit they feed with fond
supposals that have not the least footing in Scripture. As that the Jews learnt
this custom of divorce in Egypt, and therefore God would not unteach it them
till Christ came, but let it stick as a notorious botch of deformity in the
midst of his most perfect and severe law. And yet he says, Levit. the 18th
after the doings of Egypt ye shall not do. Another while they invent a slander
(as what thing more bold then teaching Ignorance when he shifts to hide his
nakedness) that the Jews were naturally to their wives the cruellest men in the
world; would poison, brain, and do I know not what, if they might not
divorce. Certain, if it were a fault heavily punished, to bring an evil report
upon the land which God gave, what is it to raise a groundles calumny against
the people which God made choice of? But that this bold interpretament, how
commonly so ever sided with, cannot stand a minute with any competent reverence
to God or his law, or his people, nor with any other maxim of religion, or good
manners, might be proved through all the heads and Topics of argumentation:
but I shall willingly be as concise as possible. First the law, not only the
moral, but the judicial given by Moses is just and pure; for such is God who
gave it. Harken O Israel, says Moses, Dent. 4. unto the statutes and the
judgments which I teach you, to do them, that ye may live, etc. ye shall not
add unto the word which J command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from
it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command
you. And onward in the chapter, Behold I have taught you statutes and
judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me. Keep therefore and do them,
for this is your wisdom and your understanding. For what nation has God so
nigh unto them, and what-nation has statutes and judgments so righteous as
all this law which I set before ye this day. Is it imaginable there should be
among these a law which God allowed not, a law giving permissions laxative to
unmarry a wife and marry a lust, a law to suffer a kind of tribunal adultery?
Many other scriptures might be brought to assert the purity of this judicial
law, and many I have alleged before; this law therefore is pure and just. But
if it permit, if it teach, if it defend that which is both unjust and impure,
as by the common doctrine it does, what think we? The three general doctrines
of Justinians law, are To live in honesty, To hurt no man, To give every one
his due. Shall the Roman civil law observe these three things, as the only end
of law, and shall a statute be found in the civil law of God, enacted simply
and totally against all these three precepts of nature and morality?

Secondly, the gifts of God are all perfet, and certainly the law is of all
his other gifts one of the perfetest. But if it give that outwardly which it
takes away really, and give that seemingly, which, if a man take it, wraps him
into sin and damns him, what gift of an enemy can be more dangerous and
destroying then this.

Thirdly, Moses every where commends his laws, preferrs them before all of
other nations, and warrants them to be the way of life and safety to all that
walk therein, Levit. 18. But if they contain statutes which God approves not,
and train men unweeting to committ injustice and adultery, under the shelter
of law, if those things be sin, and death sins wages, what is this law but the
snare of death?

Fourthly, the statutes and judgments of the Lord, which without exception are
often told us to be such, as doing we may live by them, are doubtless to be
counted the rule of knowledge and of conscience. For I had not known lust,
says the Apostle, but by the law. But if the law come down from the state of
her incorruptible majesty to grant lust his boon, palpably it darkns and
confounds both knowledge and conscience; it goes against the common office of
all goodness and freindlinesse, which is at lest to counsel and admonish; it
subverts the rules of all sober education; and is it self a most negligent and
debaushing tutor.

Fifthly, if the law permit a thing unlawful, it permitts that which else where
it has forbid; so that hereby it contradicts it self, and transgresses it
self. But if the law become a transgressor, it stands guilty to it self, and
how then shall it save another; it makes a confederacy with sin, how then can
it justly condemn a sinner? and thus reducing it self to the stateof neither
saving nor condemning, it will not fail to expire solemnly ridiculous.

Sixthly, the Prophets in Scripture declare severely against the decreeing of
that which is unjust, Psalm. 94. 20. Isaiah the 10th. But it was done, they say,
for heardnesse of heart; To which objection the Apostles rule, not to do evil
that good may come thereby, gives an invincible repuls; and here especially,
where it cannot be shown how any good came by doing this evil, how rather more
evil did not hereon abound; for the giving way to hardness of heart hard'ns
the more, and adds more to the number. God to an evil and adulterous generation
would not grant a sign; much less would he for their hardness of heatt
pollute his law with an adulterous permission. Yea but to permit evil is not
to do evil. Yes, it is in a most eminent manner to do evil: where else are
all our grave and faithful sayings, that he whose office is to forbid and
forbids not, bids, exhorts, encourages. Why has God denounced his anger
against parents, masters, friends, magistrates neglectfull of forbidding what
they ought, if law the common father, master, friend, and perpetual
magistrate shall not only not forbidd, but enact, exhibit, and uphold with
countnance and protection a deed every way dishonest, what ever the pretense
be. If it were of those inward vices, which the law cannot by outward
constraint remedy, but leaves to conscience and persuasion, it had bin
guiltless in being silent: but to write a decree of that which can be no way
lawful, and might with ease be hindered, makes law by the doom of law it
self accessory in the highest degree.

Seventhly, it makes God the direct author of sin, For although he be not made
the author of what he silently permitts in his providence, yet in his law, the
image of his will, when in plain expression he constitutes and ordaines a fact
utterly unlawful, what wants he to authorize it, and what wants that to be
the author?

Eighthly, to establish by law a thing wholly unlawful and dishonest, is an
affirmation was never heard of before in any law, reason, philosophy, or
religion, till it was raised by inconsideratglossists from the mistake of this
text. And though the Civilians have bin contented to chew this opinion, after
the canon had subdued them, yet they never could bring example or authority
either from divine writ, or human learning, or human practice in any nation,
or well-form'd republic, but only from the customary abuse of this text.
Usually they allege the Epistle of Cicero to Atticus; wherein Cato is blamed
for giving sentence to the scumme of Romulus, as if he were in Plato's common
wealth. Cato would have called some great one into judgeme^t for bribery,
Cicero as the time stood, advised against it. Cato, not to endammage the public
treasury, would not grant to the Roman Knights, that the Asian taxes might be
farmed them at a less rate. Cicero wished it granted. Nothing in all this will
be like the establishing of a law to sin: here are no laws made, here only
the execution of law is craved might be suspended: between which and our
question is a broad difference. And what if human law givers have confessed they
could not frame their laws to that perfection which they desired, we hear of
no such confession from Moses concerning the laws of God, but rather all
praise and high testimony of perfection given them. And although man's nature
cannot bear exactest laws, yet still within the confines of good it may and
must; so long as less good is far anough from altogether evil. As for what
they instance of usury, let them first prove usury to be wholly unlawful, as
the law allows it; which learned men as numerous on the other side will deny
them. Or if it be altogether unlawful, why is it tolerated more then divorce?
he who said divorse not, said also lend hoping for nothing again, Luke 6. 35.
But then they put in, that trade could not stand. And so to serve the commodity
of insatiable trading, usury shall be permitted, but divorce, the only means
often times to right the innocent, and outrageously wronged, shall be utterly
forbid. This is egregious doctrine, and for which one day charity will much
thank them. Beza not finding how to salve this perplexity, and Cameron since
him, would secure us; although the latter confesses that to permit a wicked
thing by law, is a wickedness from which God abhorrs; yet to limit sin, and
prescribe it a certain measure, is good. First this evasion will not help
here; for this law bounded no man; he might put away whatever found not favor
in his eyes. And how could it forbid to divorce, whom it could not forbidd to
dislike, or command to love. If these be the limits of law to restrain sin,
who so lame a sinner but may hoppe over them more easily then over those
Romulean circumscriptions, not as Remus did with hard succes, but with all
indemnity. Such a limiting as this were not worth the mischief that accompanies
it. This law therefore not bounding the supposed sin, by permitting enlarges
it, gives it enfranchisement. And never greater confusion, then when law and
sin move their land marks, mix their territories, and correspond, have
intercourse and traffic together. When law contracts a kindred and hospitality
with transgression, becomes the godfather of sin and names it Lawful; when
sin revels and gossips within the arcenal of law, plays, and dandles the
artillery of justice that should be bent against her, this is a fair
limitation indeed. Besides it is an absurdity to say that law can measure sin,
or moderate sin; sin is not in a predicament to be measured and modified, but
is always an excess. The least sin that is, exceeds the measure of the
largest law that can be good; and is as boundless as that vacuity beyond the
world. If once it square to the measure of Law, it ceases to be an excess, and
consequently ceases to be a sin; or else law conforming it self to the
obliquity of sin, betraies it self to be not strait, but crooked, and so
immediately no law. And the improper conceit of moderating sin by law will
appear, if we can imagine any lawgiver so senseless as to decree that so
far a man may steal, and thus far be drunk, that moderately he may cozen,
and moderatly committ adultery. To the same extent it would be as pithily
absurd to publish that a man may moderately divorce, if to do that be entirely
naught. But to end this moot, the law of Moses is manifest to fix no limit
therein at all, or such at lest as impeaches the fraudulent abuser no more then
if it were not set; only requires the dismissive writing without other caution,
leaves that to the inner man, and the bar of conscience. But it stopped other
sins. This is as vain as the rest, and dangerously uncertain: the contrary to
be feared rather, that one sin admitted courteously by law, opened the gate to
another. However evil must not be don for good. And it were a fall to be
lamented, an indignity unspeakable, if law should become tributary to sin her
slave, and forced to yield up into his hands her awful minister Punishment,
should buy out her peace with sin for sin, paying as it were her so many
Philistian foreskins to the proud demand of Trangression. But suppose it any
way possible to limit sin, to put a girdle about that Chaos, suppose it also
good; yet if to permit sin by Law be an abomination in the eyes of God, as
Cameron acknowledges, the evil of permitting will eat out the good of
limiting. For though sin be not limited, there can but evil come out of evil;
but if it be permitted and decreed lawful by divine law, of force then sin
must proceed from the infinite Good, which is a dreadful thought. But if the
restraining of sin by this permission being good, as this author testifies,
be more good then the permission of more sin by the restraint of divorce, and
that God waighing both these like two ingots in the perfet scales of his
justice and providence found them so, and others coming without authority from
God, shall change this counter poise, and judge it better to let fin multiply
by setting a judicial restraint upon divorce, which Christ never set, then to
limit sin by this permission, as God himself thought best to permit it, it
will behoove them to consult betimes whether these their balances be not falls
and abominable; and this their limiting that which God loosened, and their
loosning the sins that he limited, which they confess was good to do: and
were it possible to do by law, doubtless it would be most morally good; and
they so believing, as we hear they do, and yet abolishing a law so good and
moral, the limiter of sin, what are they else but contrary to themselves? for
they can never bring us to that time wherein it will not be good to limit
sin, and they can never limit it better then so as God prescribed in his law.

Others conceav it a more defensible retirement to say this permission to
divorce sinfully for hardness of heart was a dispensation. But surely they
either know not, or attend not what a dispensation means. A dispensation is
for no long time, is particular to some persons rather then general to a whole
people; always has charity the end, is granted to necessities and
infirmities, not to obstinat lust. This permission is another creatnre, has
all those evils and absurdities following the name of a dispensation, as when
it was named a law; and is the very antarctic pole against charity, nothing
more advers, ensnaring and ruining those that trust in it, or use it; so lewd
and criminous as never durst enter into the head of any Politician, Jew, or
Proselyte, till they became the apt Scholars of this canonistic exposition.
Ought in it, that can allude in the lest manner to charity, or goodness, belongs
with more full right to the chrian under grace and liberty, then to the Jew
under law and bondage. To Jewish ignorance it could not be dispensed, without a
horrid imputation laid upon the law, to dispense foully, in stead of teaching
fairly; like that dispensation that first polluted Christendom with idolatry,
permitting to lay men images in stead of books and preaching. Sloth or malice
in the law would they have this called? But what ignorance can be pretended for
the Jews, who had all the same precepts about marriage, that we now: for Christ
referrs all to the institution. It was as reasonable for them to know then as
for us now, and concerned them alike: for wherein has the gospel altered the
nature of matrimony: All these considerations, or many of them have bin further
amplify'd in the doctrine of divorce. And what Rivetus and Paraeus has
objected, or given over as past cure has bin there discusst. Whereby it may be
plain anough to men of eyes, that the vulgar exposition of a permittance by law
to an entire fin, what ever the color may be, is an opinion both ungodly,
unpolitic, unvertuous, and void of all honesty and civil sense. It appertains
therefore to every zealous Christian both for the honor of Gods law and the
vindication of our Saviors words, that such an irreligious depravement no
longer may be soothed and flattered through custom, but with all diligence and
speed solidly refuted, and in the room a better explanation given; which is now
our next endeavor.

[Moses suffered you to put away, etc.] Not commanded you, says the common
observer, and therefore cared not how soon it were abolisht, being but
suffered; heerin declaring his annotation to be slight and nothing law prudent.
For in this place commanded and suffered are interehangeably used in the same
sense both by our Savior and the Pharisees. Our Savior who here says, Moses
suffered you, in the 10th of Mark says, Moses wrote you this command. And the
Pharisees who here say, Moses commanded, and would mainly have it a command, in
that place of Mark say Moses suffered, which had made against them in their
own mouths, if the word of suffering had weakn'd the command. So that
suffered and commanded is here taken for the same thing on both sides of the
controversy: as Cameron also and others on this place acknowledge. And Lawyers
know that all the precepts of law are divided into obligatorie and permissive,
containing either what we must do, or what we may do; and of this latter
sort are as many precepts, as of the former, and all as lawful. Tutelage, an
ordainment then which nothing more just, being for the defense of Orfanes, the
Justitutes of Justinian, say is given and permitted by the civil law: and to
parents it is permitted to choose and appoint by will the guardians of their
children. What more equal, and yet the civil law calls this permission. So
likewise to manumise, to adopt, to make a will, and to be made an heir is
called permission by law. Marriage it self, and this which is already granted,
to divorce for adultery, obliges no man, is but a permission by law, is but
suffered. By this we may see how weakly it has bin thought that all divorce is
utterly unlawful, because the law is said to suffer it: whenas to suffer is
but the legal phrase denoting what by law a man may do or not do.

[Because of the hardness of your hearts] Hence they argue that therefore he
allowd it not; and therefore it must be abolisht. But the contrary to this will
sooner follow, that because he suffered it for a cause, therefore in relation
to that cause he allowed it. Next, if he in his wisdom, and in the midst of
his severity allowed it for hardness of heart, it can be nothing better then
arrogance and presumption to take stricter courses against hardness of heart
then God ever set an example and that under the Gospel which warrants them to
no judicial act of compulsion in this matter, much less to be more severe
against hardness of extremity, then God thought good to be against hardness of
heart. He suffered it, rather then worse inconveniences; these men wiser as
they make themselves, will suffer the worst and hainousest inconveniences to
follow, rather then they will suffer what God suffered. Although they can know
when they please, that Christ spoke only to the conscience, did not judge on
the civil bench, but always disavow'd it. What can be more contrary to the
ways of God then these their doings. If they be such enemies to hardness of
heart, although this groundless rigor proclaims it to be in themselves, they
may yet learn, or consider that hardness of heart has a twofould acception
in the Gospel. One, when it is in a good man taken for infirmity, and
imperfection, which was in all the Apostles, whose weakness only, not utter
want of belief is called hardness of heart, Mark 16. partly for this hardness
of heart, the imperfection and decay of man from original righteousness, it
was that God suffered not divorce only, but all that which by Civilians is
termed the secondary law of nature and of nations. He suffered his own people
to wast and spoil and slay by war, to lead captives, to be some masters, some
servants, some to be princes, others to be subjects, he suffered propriety to
divide all things by several possession trade and commerce, not with out
usury; in his common wealth some to be undeservedly rich, others to be
undeservingly poor. All which till hardness of heart came in, was most
unjust; whenas prime Nature made us all equal, made us equal coheirs by
common right and dominion over all creatures. In the same manner, and for the
same cause he suffered divorce as well as marriage, our imperfet and degenerat
condition of necessity requiring this law among the rest, as a remedy against
intolerable wrong and servitude above the patience of man to bear. Nor was it
given only because our infirmity, or if it must be so called, hardness of
heart could not endure all things, but because the hardness of another heart
might not inflict all things upon an innocent person, whom far other ends
brought into a league of love and not of bondage and indignity. If therefore we
abolish divorce as only suffered for hardness of heart, we may as well abolish
the whole law of nations, as only sufferd for the same cause; it being shown us
by Saint Paul 1 Cor. 6. that the very seeking of a man's right by law, and at
the hands of a worldly magistrate, is not without the hardness of our hearts.
For why do ye not rather take wrong, says he, why suffer ye not rather your
selves to be defrauded? If nothing now must be suffered for hardness of heart, I
say the very prosecution of our right by way of civil justice can no more be
suffered among Christians, for the hardness of heart wherewith most men pursue
it. And that would next remove all our judicial laws, and this restraint of
divorce also in the number; which would more then half end the controversy.
But if it be plain that the whole juridical law and civil power is only
suffered under the Gospel, for the hardness of our hearts, then wherefore should
not that which Moses suffered, be suffered still by the same reason?

In a second signification hardness of heart is taken for a stubborn resolution
to do evil. And that God ever makes any law purposely to such, I deny; for he
voutsafes not to enter gov'nant with them, but as they fortune to be mixed with
good men, and pass undiscovered; much less that he should decree an unlawful
thing only to serve their licentiousnes. But that God suffers this reprobate
hardness of heart I affirm, not only in this law of divorce, but throughout all
his best and purest commandments. He commands all to worship in singlenes of
heart according to all his Ordinances; and yet suffers the wicked man to
perform all the rites of religion hypocritically and in the hardness of his
heart. He gives us general statutes and privileges in all civil matters, just
and good of themselves, yet suffers unworthiest men, to use them and by themt,
o prosecute their own right, or any color of right, though for the most part
maliciously, covetously, nigorously, revengefully. He allowed by law the
discreet father and husband to forbidd, if he thought fit, the religious vows
of his wife or daughter: Number. 30. and in the same law suffered the hard
heartednes of impious and covetous fathers or husbands abusing this law to
forbidd their wives or daughters in their offerings and devotions of greatest
zeal. If then God suffer hardness of heart equally in the best laws as in this
of divorce, there can be no reason that for this cause this law should be
abolisht. But other laws, they object, may be well used, this never. How often
shall I answer both from the institution of marriage, and from other general
rules in Scripture, that this law of divorce has many wise and charitable ends
besides the being suffered for hardness of heart; which is indeed no end, but an
accident happning through the whole law; which gives to good men right, and to
bad men who abuse right under false pretenses, gives only sufferance. Now
although Christ express no other reasons here, but only what was suffered, it
nothing follows that this law had no other reason to be permitted but for
hardness of heart. The Scripture seldom, or never in one place sets down all
the reasons of what it grants or commands, especially when it talks to enemies
and tempters. St Paul permitting marriage, 1 Cor. 7, seems to permit even that
also for hardness of heart only, lest we should run into fornication; yet no
intelligent man thence concludes marriage allowed in the Gospel only to avoid an
evil, because no other end is there expressed. Thus Moses of necessity suffered
many to put away their wives for hardness of heart; but enacted the law of
divorce doubtless for other good causes, not for this only sufferance. He
permitted not divorce by law as an evil, for that was impossible to divine law,
but permitted by accident the evil of them who divorc't against the laws
intention undiscoverably This also may be thought not improbably, that Christ
stirred up in his spirit against these tempting Pharisees, answered them in a
certain form of indignation usual among good authors; whereby the question, or
the truth is not directly answered, but some thing which is fitter for them, who
ask, to hear. So in the ecclesiastical stories one demanding how God employed
himself before the world was made, had answer; that he was making hell for
curious questioners. Another (and Libanius the Sophist as I remember) asking in
derision some Christian, what the Carpenter, meaning our Savior, was doing, now
that Julian so prevailed, had it returned him, that the Carpenter was making a
coffin for the Apostat. So Christ being demanded maliciously why Moses made the
law of divorce, answers them in a vehement scheme, not telling them the cause
why he made it, but what was fittest to be told them, that for the hardness of
their hearts he suffered them to abuse it. And all beit Mark say not he
suffered you, but to you he wrote this precept; Mark may be warrantably
expounded by Matthew the larger. And whether he suffered, or gave precept, being
all one as was heard, it changes not the trope of indignation, fittest account
for such askers. Next for the hardness of your hearts to you he wrote this
precept, inferrs not therefore for this cause only he wrote it, as was
paralleled by other Scriptures. Lastly, It may be worththe observing, that
Christ speaking to the Pharisees does not say in general that for hardness of
heart he gave this precept, but you he suffered, and to you he gave this
precept for your hardness of heart. It cannot be easily thought that Christ here
included all the children of Israel under the person of these tempting Pharisees
but that he conceals wherefore he gave the better sort of them this law, and
expresses by saying emphatically To you how he gave it to the worser, such as
the Pharisees best represented, that is to say for the hardness of your hearts:
as indeed to wicked men and hardn'd hearts he gives the whole law and the
Gospel also, to hard'n them the more. Thus many ways it may orthod oxally be
understood how God or Moses suffered such as the demanders were, to divorce for
hardness of heart. Whereas the vulgar expositer beset with contradictions and
absurdities round, and resolving at any peril to make an exposition of it, as
there is nothing more violent and boistrous then a reverend ignorance in fear
to be convicted, rushes brutely and impetuously against all the principles both
of nature, piety, and moral goodness; and in the sury of his literal expounding
overturns them all.

[But from the the beginning it was not so.] Not how from the beginning do
they suppose, that men might not divorce at all, not necessarily, not
deliberatly except for adultery, but that some law, like canon law presently
attacht them both before and after the flood, till stricter Moses came, and
with law brought license into the world? that were a fancy indeed to smile at.
Undoubtedly as to point of judicial law, divorce was more permissive from the
beginning before Moses then under Moses. But from the beginning, that is to
say, by the institution in Paradise it was not intended that matrimony should
dissolve for every trivial cause as you Pharisees accustom. But that it was not
thus suffered from the beginning ever since the race of men corrupted, and laws
were made, he who will affirm, must have found out other antiquities then are
yer known. Besides we must consider now, what can be so as from the beginning,
not only what should be so. In the beginning, had men continued perfet, it had
bin just that all things should have remained, as they began to Adam and Eve.
But after that the sons of men grew violent and injurious, it altered the lore
of justice, and put the government of things into a new frame. While man and
woman were both perfet each to other, there needed no divorce; but when they
both degenerated to imperfection, and often times grew to be an intolerable evil
each to other, then law more justly did permit the alienating of that evil
which mistake made proper, then it did the appropriating of that good which
Nature at first made common. For if the absence of outward good be not so bad
as the presence of a close evil, and that propriety, whether by covenant or
possession, be but the attainment of some outward good, it is more natural and
righteous that the law should sever us from an intimat evil, then appropriate
any outward good to us from the community of nature. The Gospel indeed tending
ever to that which is perfetest, aim'dat the restorement of all things, as they
were in the beginning. And therefore all things were in common to those
primitive Christians in the Acts, which Ananias and Sapphira dearly felt. That
custom also continued more or less till the time of Justin Martyr, as may be
read in his 2d Apology, which might be writ after that act of communion
perhaps some. 40. years above a hundred. But who will be the man shall
introduce this kind of common wealth, as christianity now goes? If then marriage
must be as in the beginning, the persons that marry must be such as then were,
the institution must make good, in some tolerable sort, what it promises
toeeither party. If not, it is but madness to drag this one ordinance back to
the beginning, and draw down all other to the present necessity, and condition
far from the beginning even to the tolerating of extortions and opp ressions.
Christ only told us that from the beginning it was not so; that is to say, not
so as the Pharisees manu^'d the business; did not command us that it should be
forcibly so again in all points, as at the beginning; or so at least in our
intentions and desires, but so in execution, as reason, and present nature can
bear. Although we are not to seek, that the institution it self from the first
beginning was never but conditional, as all cov'nants are: because thus and
thus, therefore so and so; if not thus, then not so. Then moreover was
perfetest to fulfill each law in it self; now is perfetest in this estate of
things, to ask of charity how much law may be fulfilled: else the fulfilling,
often times is the greatest breaking. If any therefore demand, which is now most
perfection, to ease an extremity by divorce, or to enrage and fester it by the
greevous observance of a miserable wedloc, I am not destitute to say which is
most perfection (although some who beleev they think favorably of divorce,
esteem it only venial to infirmity) Him I hold more in the way to perfection
who forgoes an unfit ungodly and discordant wedloc, to live according to peace
and love, and Gods institution in a fitter chois, then he who debarrs himself
the happy experience of all godly, which is peaceful conversatio^ in his
family, to live a contentious, and unchritian life not to be avoided, in
temptations not to be lived in, only for the false keeping of a most unreal
nullity, a marriage that has no affinity with Gods intention, a daring
phantasm, a mere toy of terror awing weak senses, to the lamentable
superstition of ruining themselves, the remedy whereof God in his law voutsafes
us. Which not to dare use, he warranting, is not our perfection, is our
infirmity, our little faith, our timorous and low conceit of charity: and in
them who force us, it is their masking pride and vanity, to seem holier and
more circumspect then God. So far is it that we need impute to him infirmity,
who thus divorces: since the rule of perfection is not so much that which was
don in the beginning, as that which now is nearest to the rule of charity. This
is the greatest, the perfetest, the highest commandment.

V. 9. And I say unto you, who so shall put away his wife, except it be for
Fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery; and whose marries
her which is put away, does commit adultery.
[And I say unto you] That this restrictive denouncement of Christ contradicts
and refutes that permissive precept of Moses, common expositers themselves
disclaim: and that it does not traverse from the closet of conscience to the
courts of civil or canon law, with any Christian rightly commenc't requires not
long evincing. If Christ then did not here check permissive Moses, nor did
reduce matrimony to the beginning more then all other things, as the reason of
man's condition could bear, we would know precisely what it was which he did,
and what the end was of his declaring thus austerely against divorce. For this
is a confesst oracle in law, that he who looks not at the intention of a
precept, the more superstitions he is of the letter, the more he misinterprets.
Was it to shame Moses? that had been monstrous: or all those purest ages of
Israel, to whom the permission was granted? that were as incredible. Or was it
that he who came to abrogate the burden of law, not the equity, should put this
yoke upon a blameless person, to league himself in chains with a begirting
mischief, not to separat till death? he who taught us that no man puts a piece
of new cloth upon an old garment, nor new wine into old bottles, that he should
sow this patch of strictnes upon the old apparel of our frailty, to make a rent
more incurable, when as in all other amendments his doctrine still charges,
that regard be had to the garment, and to the vessel, what it can endure; this
were an irregular and single piece of rigor, not only sounding disproportion
to the whole Gospel, but outstretching the most rigorous nervs of law and rigor
it self. No other end therefore can be left imaginable of this excessive
restraint, but to bridle those erroneous and licentious postillers the
Pharisees; not by telling them what may be done in necessity, but what censure
they deserve who divorce abusively, which their Tetrarch had done. And as the
offense was in one extreme, so the rebuke, to bring more efficaciously to a
rectitude and mediocrity, stands not in the middle way of duty, but in the
other extreme. Which art of powerful reclaiming, wisest men have also taught
in their ethical precepts and gnomologies; resembling it, as when we bend a
crooked wand the contrary way; not that it should stand so bent, but that the
overbending might reduce it to a straitness by its own reluctance. And as the
Physician cures him who has taken down poison, not by the middling temper of
nourishment, but by the other extreme of antidote, so Christ administers here a
sharp and corrosive sentence against a foul and putrid license; not to eat
into the flesh, but into the sore. And knowing that our divines through all
their comments make no scruple, where they please, to soften the high and vehem
ent speeches of our Savior, which they call hyperbolics, why in this one text
should they be such crabbed masorites of the Letter, as not to mollify a
transcendence of literal rigidity, which they confess to find often elsewhere
in his manner of delivery, but must make their exposition here such an obdurat
Cyclops, to have but one eye for this text, and that only open to cruelty and
enthralment, such as no divine, or human law before ever heard of. No, let the
foppish canouist with his fardel of matrimonial cases go and be vendible where
men be so unhappy as to cheap'n him; the words of Christ shall be asserted
from such elementall notaries, and resolved by the now-only lawgiving mouth of
charity; which may be done undoubtedly by understanding them as follows.

[Whosoever shall put away his wife.] That is to say, shall so away as the
propounders of this question, the Pharisees were wont to do and covertly
defended Herod for so doing; whom to rebuke, our Savior here mainely intends,
and not to determine all the cases of divorce, as appears by Saint Paul.
Whosoever shall put away, either violently without mutual consent for urgent
reasons, or conspiringly by plot of lust, or cunning malice, shall put away for
any sudden mood, or contingency of disagreement, which is not daily practice,
but may blow soon over, and be reconciled, except it be fornication;
whosoever shall put away rashly, as his choler prompts him, without due time of
deliberating, and think his conscience discharged only by the bill of divorce
given, and the outward law satisfied; whosoever lastly shall put away his wife,
that is a wife indeed, and not in name only, such a one who both can and is
willing to be a meet help toward the chief ends of marriage both civil, and
sanctified, except fornication be the cause, that man, or that pair committ
adulcery. Not he who puts away by mutual consent, with all the considerations
and respects of humanity and gentleness without malicious or lustful drift.
Not he who after sober and cool experience, and long debate within himself
puts away whom though he cannot love or suffer as a wife, with that sincere
affection that marriage requires, yet loves at lest with that civility and
goodness, as not to keep her under a neglected and unwelcom residence, where
nothing can be hearty, and not being, it must needs be both unjoyous and
injurious to any perceaving person so detained, and more injurious, then to be
freely, and upon good terms dismissed. Nor does he put away adulterously who
complains of causes rooted in immutable nature, utter unfitness, utter
disconformity, not concileable, because not to be amended without a miracle.
Nor he who puts away an unquenshable vexation from his bosom, and flies an
evil then which a greater cannot befall human society. Nor he who puts away
with the the full suffrage and applause of his conscience, not relying on the
writt'n bill of law, but claiming by faith and fulness of persuasion the rights
and promises of Gods institution, of which he finds himself in a mistak'n
wedlock defrauded. Doubtless this man has bail anough to be no adulterer
giving divorc: for these causes.

[His Wife.] This word is not to be idle here, a mere word without a sense,
much less a fallacious word signifying contrary to what it pretends; but
faithfully signifies a wife, that is, a comfortable help and society, as God
instituted; does not signify deceitfully under this name, an intolerable
adversary, not a helpelesse, unaffectionate and sullen mass whose very company
represents the visible and exactest figure of lonelines it self. Such an
associate he who puts away, divorces not a wife, but disjoyns a nullity which
God never joined, if she be neither willing, nor to her proper and requisite
duties sufficient, as the words of God institute her. And this also is Bucers
explicat^on of this place.

[Except it be for fornication, or saving for the cause of fornication, as
Matt. 5th. This declares what kind of causes our Savior meant; fornication
being no natural and perpetual cause, but only accidental and temporary;
therefore shows that head of causes from whence it is excepted, to be meant
of the same sort. For exceptions are not logically deduc't from a diverse kind,
as to say who so puts away for any natural cause except fornication, the
exception would want salt. And if they understand it, who so for any cause what
ever, they cast themselves; granting divorce for frigidity a natural cause of
their own allowing, though not here expressed, and for desertion without
infidelity when as he who marries, as they allow him for a desertion, deserts
as well as is deserted, and finally puts away, for another cause besides
adultery. It will with all due reason therefore be thus better understood, who
so puts away for any accidental and temporary causes, except one of them, which
is fornication. Thus this exception finds out the causes from whence it is
excepted, to be of the same kind, that is, casual, not continual.

[Saving for the cause of fornication.] The New Testament, though it be said
originally writ in Greek, yet has nothing near so many Atticisms as
Hebraisms, and Syriacisms which was the Majesty of God, not filing the tongue
of Scripture to a Gentilish Idiom, but in a princely manner offering to them as
to Gentiles and Foreiners grace and mercy, though not in foreign words, yet in a
foreign style that might induce them to the fountains; and though their calling
were high and happy, yet still to acknowledge Gods ancient people their
betters, and that language the Metropolitan language. He therefore who thinks
to Scholiaze upon the Gospel, though Greek, according to his Greek Analogies,
and has not bin Auditor to the oriental dialects, shall want in the heat of
his Analysis no accommodation to stumble. In this place, as the 5th of Matthew,
reads it, Saving for the cause of fornication, the Greek, such as it is, sounds
it, except for the word, report, speech, or proportion of fornication. In which
regard with other inducements, many ancient and learned writers have understood
this exception as comprehending any fault equivalent and proportional to
fornication But truth is, the Evangelist here Hebraizes, taking word or speech
for cause or matter in the common eastern phrase, meaning perhaps no more then
if he had said for fornication, as in this 19th chapter. And yet the word is
found in the 5th of Exodus also fignifying Proportion; where the Israelites are
commanded to do their tasks, The matter of each day in his day. A task we know
is a proportion of work not doing the same thing absolutely every day, but so
much. Whereby it may be doubtful yet, whether here be not excepted not only
fornication it self, but other causes equipollent, and proportional to
fornication. Which very word also to understand rightly, we must of necessity
have recours again to the Ebrew. For in the Greek and Latin sense by
fornication is meant the common prostitution of body for sale. So that they who
are so exact for the letter, shall be dealt with by the Lexicon, and the
Etymologicon too if they please, and must be bound to forbidd divorce for
adultery also, until it come to open whoredom and trade, like that for which
Claudius divorc't Messalina. Since therefore they take not here the word
fornication in the common significance, for an open exercise in the stews, but
grant divorce for one single act of privatest adultery, notwithstanding that
the word speaks a public and notorious frequency of fact, not without price,
we may reason with as good leav, and as little straining to the text, that our
Savior on set purpose chose this word Fornication, improperly applied to the
lapse of adultery, that we might not think our selves bound from all divorce,
except when that fault has bin actually committed. For the language of
Scripture signifies by fornication (and others beside St. Austin so expounded
it) not only the trespass of body nor perhaps that between married persons,
unless in a degree or quality as shameless as the Bordello, but signifies also
any notable disobedience, or intractable carriage of the wife to the husband, as
Judge. the 192. Whereof at large in the Doctrine of Divorce. l. 2. c. 18 Secondly
signifies the apparent alienation of mind not to idolatry, (which may seem to
answer the act of adultery) but far on this side, to any point of will
worship, though to the true God; some times it notes the love of earthly
things, or worldly pleasures though in a right believer, some times the least
suspicion of unwitting idolatry. As Number. 15. 39. willsull disobedience to any
the least of Gods commandments is called fornication. Psalm. 73. 26, 27. A
distrust only in God, and withdrawing from that neernes of zeal and confidence
which ought to be, is called fornication. We may be sure it could not import
thus much less then Idolatry in the borrowed metaphor between God and man,
unless it signified as much less then adultery in the ordinary acception
between man and wife. Add also that there was no need our Savior should grant
divorce for adultery, it being death by law, and law then in force. Which was
the cause why Joseph sought to put away his betrothed wife privately, least he
should make her an example of capital punishment, as lernedest expounders
affirm, Herod being a great zelot of the Mosaic law, and the Pharisees great
masters of the text, as the woman taken in adultery doubtless had cause to
fear. Or if they can prove it was neglected, which they cannot do, why did our
Savior shape his answer to the corruption of that age, and not rather tell
them of their neglect? If they say he came not to meddle with their
judicatures, much less then was it in his thought to make them new ones, or
that divorce should be judicially restrained in a stricter manner by these his
words, more then adultery judicially acquitted by those his words to the
adultres. His sentence does no more by law forbidd divorce here, then by law it
does absolve adultery there. To them therefore, who have drawn this yoke upon
Christians from his words thus wrested, nothing remains but the guilt of a
presumption and perverseness which will be hard for them to answer. Thus much
that the word fornication is to be understood as the language of Christ
understands it, for a constant alienation and disaffection of mind, or for the
continual practice of disobedience and crossnes from the duties of love and
peace, that is in sum, when to be a tolerable wife is either naturally not in
their power, or obstinatly not in their will, and this opinion also is St.
Austins, least it should hap to be suspected of novelty. Yet grant the thing
here meant were only adultery, the reason of things will afford more to our
assertion, then did the reason of words. For why is divorce unlawful but only
for adultery? because, say they, that crime only breaks the matrimony. But
this, I reply, the institution itself gainsaies: for that which is most
contrary to the words and meaning of the institution, that most breaks the
matrimony; but a perpetual unmeetnes and unwillingnesse to all the duties of
help, of love and tranquillity is most contrary to the words and meaning of
the institution; that therefore much more breaks matrimony then the act of
adultery though repeated. For this, as it is not felt, nor troubles him who
perceaves it not, so being perceav'd, may be soon repented, soon amended,
soon, if it can be pardoned, may be redeemed with the more ardent love and duty
in her who has the pardon. But this natural unmeetnes both cannot be unknown
long, and ever after cannot be amended, if it be natural, and will not, if it
be farregon obstinat. So that wanting ought in the instant to be as great a
breach as adultery, it gains it in the perpetuity to be greater. Next adultery
does not exclude her other fitnes, her other pleasingnes; she may be otherwise
both loving and prevalent, as many adultresses be; but in this general unfitnes
or alienation she can be nothing to him that can please. In adultery nothing is
given from the husband, which he misses, or enjoyes the less, as it may be
suttly given: but this unfitnes defrauds him of the whole contentment which is
sought in wedloc. And what benefit to him, though nothing be given by the
stealth of adultery to another, if that which there is to give, whether it be
solace, or society, be not such as may justly content him? and so not only
deprives him of what it should give him, but gives him sorrow and affliction,
which it did not ow him. Besides is adultery the greatest breach of matrimony
in respect of the offense to God, or of the injury to man? if in the former,
then other sins may offend God more, and sooner cause him to disunite his
servant from being one flesh with such an offender. If in respect of the
latter, other injuries are demonstrated therein more heavy to man's nature then
the iterated act of adultery. God therefore in his wisdom would not so dispose
his remedies, as to provide them for the less injuries, and not allow them for
the greater. Thus is won both from the word fornication, and the reason of
adultery, that the exception of divorce is not limited to that act, but
enlarged to the causes above specified.

[And who so marieth her which is put away does committ adultery.

By this clause alone, if by nothing else, we may assure us, that Christ
intended not to deliver here the whole doctrine of divorce, but only to condemn
abuses. Otherwise to marry after desertion, which the Apostle, and the reformed
Churches at this day permit, is here forbid, as adultery. Be she never so
wrongfully deserted, or put away, as the law then suffered, if thus forsak'n
and expulst, she accept the refuge and protection of any honester man who would
love her better, and give her self in marriage to him, by what the letter guides
us, it shall be present adultery to them both. This is either harsh and cruel,
or all the Churches teaching as they do the contrary, are loos and remiss;
besides that the Apostle himself stands deeply fined in a contradiction
against our Savior. What shall we make of this? what rather the common
interpreter can make of it, for they be his own markets, let him now try; let
him try which way he can wind in his Vertumnian distinctions and evasions, if
his canonical gabardine of text and letter do not now sit too close about him,
and pinch his activity; which if I err not, has here hampered it self in a
spring fit for those who put their confidence in Alphabets. Spanheim a writer
of Evangelic doubts comes now and confesses that our Saviors words are to be
limited beyond the limitation there expressed and excepted beyond their own
exception, as not speaking of what happn'd rarely, but what most commonly. Is
it so rare Spanheim, to be deserted, or was it then so rare to put away
injuriously, that a person so hatefully expelled, should to the heaping of more
injury be turned like an infectious thing out of all married fruition upon pain
of adultery, as not considerable to the brevity of this half sentence? Of what
then speaks our Savior? of that collusion, says he, which was then most
frequent among the Jews of changing wives and husbands, through inconstancy and
unchaste desires. Colluders your selves, as violent to this law of God by your
unmercifull binding, as the Pharisees by their unbounded loosning! Have
thousands of Christian souls perished as to this life, and God knows what has
betided their consciences, for want of this healing explanation, and is it now
at last obscurely drawn forth, only to cure a scratch, and leave the main wound
spouting? Who so ever puts away his wife except for fornication commits
adultery; That shall be spoke of all ages, and all men, though never so justly
otherwise moved to divorce: in the very next breath, And who so marieth her
which is put away commits adultery, the men are new and miraculous, they
tell you now you are to limit it to that age, when it was in fashion to chop
matrimonies; and must be meant of him who puts away with his wives consent
through the lightness, and leudnes of them both. But what rule of Logic, or
indeed of reason is our commission to understand the Anteeedent one way and the
Consequent another; for in that habitude this whole verse may be fider'd: or at
least to take the parts of a copulat axiom, both absolutely affirmative, and to
say the first is absolutely true, the other not, but must be limited to a
certain time and custom; which is no less then to say they are both false.
For in this compound axiom, be the parts never so many, if one of them do but
falter, and be not equally absolute and general, the rest are all falls. If
therefore, that he who marries her which is put away committs adultery, be not
generally true, neither is it generally true that he committs adultery who puts
away for other cause then fornication. And if the marrying her which is put
away must be understood limited, which they cannot but yield it must, with the
same limitation must be understood the putting away. Thus does the common
exposition confound it self, and justify this which is here brought; that our
Savior as well in the first part of this sentence as in the second, prohibited
only such divorses as the Jews then made through malice or through plotted
license, not those which are for necessary and just causes; where charity and
wisdom disjoyns, that which not God, but Error and Disastre joined.

And there is yet to this our exposition, a stronger siding friend, then any
can be an adversary, unless Saint Paul be doubted, who repeating a command
concerning divorce, 1 Cor. 7. which is agreed by writers to be the same with
this of our Savior, and appointing that the wife remain unmaried, or be
reconciled to her husband, leaves it infallible that our Savior spoke chiefly
against putting away for casual and choleric disagreements, or any other cause
which may with human patience and wisdom be reconciled, not hereby meaning to
hale and dash together the irreconcilable aversations of nature, nor to tie up
a faultlesse person like a parricide, as it were into one sack with an enemy,
to be his causeless tormenter and executioner the length of a long life.
Lastly, let this sentence of Christ be understood how it will, yet that it was
never intended for a judicial law, to be enforced by the Magistrate, besides
that the office of our Savior had no such purpose in the Gospel, this latter
part of the sentence may assure us, And who so marries her which is put away
committs adultery. Shall the exception for adultery belong to this clause or
not? if not, it would be strange, that he who marries a woman really divorc't
for adultery, as Christ permitted, should become an adulter by marrying one who
is now no other man's wife, himself being also free, who might by this means
reclaim her from common whordome. And if the exception must belong hither, then
it follows that he who marries an adultresse divorced, commits no adultry;
which would soon discover to us what an absurd and senseles piece of injustice
this would be, to make a civil statute of, in penal courts: whereby the
adultresse put away may marry another safely, and without a crime to him that
marries her: but the innocent and wrongfully divorced shall not marry again
without the guilt of adultery both to her self and to her second husband. This
saying of Christ therefore cannot be made a temporal law, were it but for this
reason. Nor is it easy to say what coherence there is at all in it from the
letter, to any perfet sense not obnoxious to some absurdity, and seems much
less agreeable to what ever else of the Gospel is left us written; doubtless by
our Savior spok'n in that fiercenes and abstruse intricacy, first to amuse his
tempters, and admonish in general the abusers of that Mosaic law; next to let
Herod know a second knower of his unlawful act, though the Baptist were
beheaded; last that his Disciples and all good men might learn to expound him
in this place, as in all other his precepts, not by the written letter, but by
that unerring paraphrase of Christian love and Charity, which is the sum of
all commands, and the perfection.

Verse. 10. His Disciples say unto him, if the case of the man be so with his
wife, it is not good to marry.
This verse I add, to leave no objection behind unanswered: for some may
think, if this our Saviors sentence be so fair, as not commanding ought that
patience or nature cannot brook, why then did the Disciples murmur and say, it
is not good to marry. I answer that the Disciples had bin longer bred up under
the Pharisaean doctrine, then under that of Christ, and so no marvel though they
yet retained the infection of loving old licentious customs; no marvel though
they thought it hard they might not for any offense that thoroughly angered
them, divorce a wife, as well as put away a servant; since it was but giving
her a bill, as they were taught. Secondly, it was no unwonted thing with them
not to understand our Savior in matters far easier. So that be it granted
their conceit of this text was the same which is now commonly conceived,
according to the usual rate of their capacity then, it will not hurt a better
interpretation. But why did not Christ seeing their error inform them? for
good cause; it was his professed method not to teach them all things at all
times, but each thing in due place and season. Christ said Luke 22. that he
who had no sword should sell his garment and buy one: the Disciples took it in
a manifest wrong sense, yet our Savior did not there inform them better. He
told them it was easier for a Camel to go through a needles eye, then a rich
man in at heaven gate. They were amazed exceedingly: he explained himself to
mean of those who trust in riches, Mark 10. They were amazed then out of
measure, for so Mark relates it; as if his explaining had increased their
amazement, in such a plain case, and which concerned so nearly their calling
to be informed in Good reason therefore, if Christ at that time did not stand
amplifying, to the thick prejudice and tradition where in they were, this
question of more difficulty, and less concernment to any perhaps of them in
particular. Yet did he not omit to sow within them the seeds of a sufficient
determining, again the time that his promised spirit should bring all things to
their memory. He had declared in their hearing not long before, how distant
he was from abolishing the law it self of divorce; he had referred them to
the institution; and after all this, gives them a set answer, from which they
might collect what was clear anough, that all men cannot receive all sayings,
verse 11. If such regard be had to each man's receiving of marriage or single
life, what can arise, that the same christian regard should not be had in most
necessary divorce? All which instructed both them and us, that it beseem'd his
Disciples to learn the deciding of this question, which has nothing new in
it, first by the institution, then by the general grounds of religion, not by
a particular saying here or there, tempered and levelled only to an incident
occasion, the riddance of a tempting assault. For what can this be but weak
and shallow apprehension, to forsake the standard principles of institution,
faith, and charity; then to be blanke and various at every occurrence in
Scripture, and in a cold Spasm of scruple, to rear peculiar doctrines upon the
place; that shall bid the gray authority of most unchangeable and sovran rules
to stand by and be contradicted. Thus to this Evangelic precept of famous
difficulty, which for these many ages weakly understood, and violently put in
practice, has made a shambles rather then an ordinance of matrimony, I am
firm a truer exposition cannot be given. If this or that argument here used,
please not every one, there is no scarsity of arguments, any half of them will
suffice, Or should they all fail, as Truth it self can fail as soon, I
should content me with the institution alone to wage this controversy, and not
distrust to evince. If any need it not, the happier; yet Christians ought to
study earnestly what may be another need. But if, as mortal mischances are,
some hap to need it, let them be sure they abuse not, and give God his thanks,
who has revived this remedy, not too late for them, and scowr'd off an
inveterat misexposition from the Gospel: a work not to perish by the vain
breath or doom of this age. Our next industry shall be, under the same
guidance, to try with what fidelity that remaining passage in the Epistles
touching this matter, has bin commented.

1 COR. 7. 10, etc. 10. And unto the married I command, etc. 11. And let not the
husband put away his wife.
THis intimates but what our Savior taught before, that divorce is no rashly
to be made, but reconcilement to be persuaded and endevo'rd, as often as the
cause can have to do with reconcilement, and is not under the dominion of
blameles nature; which may have reason to depart though seldomest and last from
charitable love, yet sometimes from friendly, and familiar, and something oftener
from conjugal love, which requires not only moral, but natural causes to the
making and maintayning; and may be warrantably excused to retire from the
deception of what it justly seeks, and the ill requitals which unjustly it
finds. For Nature has her Zodiac also, keeps her great annual circuit over
human things as truly as the Sun and Planers in the firmament; has her
anomalies, has her obliquities in ascensions and declinations, accesses and
recesses, as blamelesly as they in heaven. And sitting in her planetary Orb
with two rains in each hand, one strait, the other loos, tempers the course of
minds as well as bodies to several conjunctions and oppositions, freindly, or
unfriendly aspects, consenting oftest with reason, but never contrary. This in
the effect no man of meanest reach but daily sees; and though to every one it
appear not in the cause, yet to a clear capacity, well nurtured with good
reading and observation, it cannot but be plain and visible. Other exposition
therefore then has bin given to former places that give light to these two
summary verses, will not be needful: save only that these precepts are meant
to those married who differ not in religion.

[But to the rest speak I, not the Lord; if any brother has a wife that
believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away.

Now follows what is to be done, if the persons wedded be of a different
faith. The common belief is, that a christian is here commanded not to divorce,
if the infidel please to stay, though it be but to vex, or to deride, or to
seduce the christian. This doctrine will be the easy work of a refutation. The
other opinion is, that a christian is here conditionally permitted to hold
wedloc with a misbeleever only upon hopes limited by christian prudence, which
without much difficulty shall be defended. That this here spoken by Paul, not
by the Lord cannot be a command, these reas avouch. First the law of Moses,
Exodus 34. 16. Dent. 7. 3. 6. interpreted by Ezra, and Nehemiah two infallible
authors, commands to divorce an infidel not for the fear only of a
ceremonious defilement, but of an irreligious seducem ent, feared both in
respect of the believer himself, and of his children in danger to be
perverted by the misbeleeving parent. Nehem. 13. 24. 26 and Peter Martyr
thought this a convincing reason. If therefore the legal pollution vanishing
have abrogated the ceremony of this law, so that a christian may be permitted
to retain an infidel without uncleannes, yet the moral reason of divorcing
stands to eternity, which neither Apostle nor Angel from heaven can
countermand. All that they reply to this, is their human warrant, that God will
preserve us in our obedience to this command against the danger of seducement.
And so undoubtedly he will, if we understand his commands aright; if we turn
not this evangelic permission into a legal, and yet illegal command: If we
turn not hope into bondage, the charitable and free hope of gaining another,
into the forced and servil temptation of loosing our selves; but more of this
beneath. Thus these words of Paul by common doctrine made a command, are made a
contradiction to the moral law.

Secondly, not the law only, but the Gospel from the law, and from it self
requires even in the same chapter, where divorce between them of one religion
is so narrowly forbidd, rather then our christian love should come into danger
of backsliding, to forsake all relations how near so ever, and the wife
expressly, with promise of a high reward, Mat. 19. And he who hates not father
or mother, wife, or children hindering his christian course, much more, if they
despise or assault it, cannot be a Disciple, Luke 14. How can the Apostle then
command us, to love and continue in that matrimony, which our Savior bids us
hate, and forsake? They can as soon teach our faculty of respiration to
contract and to dilate it self at once, to breath and to fetch breath in the
same instant, as teach our minds how to do such contrary acts as these,
toward the same object, and as they must he done in the same moment. For
either the hatred of her religion, and her hatred to our religion will work
powerfully against the love of her society, or the love of that will by degrees
flatter out all our zealous hatred and forsaking and soon ensnare us to
unchristianly compliances.

Thirdly, In marriage there ought not only to be a civil love, but such a love
as Christ loves his Church; but where the religion is contrary without hope of
conversion, there can be no love, no faith, no peaceful society, (they of the
other opinion confess it) nay there ought not to be, further then in expectation
of gaining a soul; when that ceases, we know God has put enmity between the
seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent. Neither should we love them
that hate the Lord, as the Prophet told Jehosaphat. 2 Chronicles. 19. And this
Apostle himself in another place, warns us that we be not unequally yokt with
Infidels 2 Cor. 6. for that there can be no fellowship, no communion, no
concord between such. Outward commerce and civil intercours cannot perhaps be
avoided; but true friendship and familiarity there can be none. How vainly
therefore, not to say how impiously would the most inward and dear alliance of
marriage or continuance in marriage be commanded, where true friendship is
confessed impossible. For say they, we are forbidd here to marry with an
infidel, not bid to divorce. But to rob the words thus of their full sense will
not be allowed them: it is not said, enter not into yoke, but be not unequally
yokt; which plainly forbids the thing in present act, as well as in purpose;
and his manitest conclu^ion is, not only that we should not touch, but that
having touched, we should come out from among them, and be separat; with the
promise of a blessing thereupon that God will receave us, will be our father,
and we his sons and daughters. v. 17. 18. Why we should stay with an Infidel
after the expense of all our hopes, can be but for a civil relation; but why we
should depart from a seducer, setting afide the misconstruction of this place,
is from a religious necessity of departing. The wors cause therefore of staying
(if it be any cause at all, for civil government forces it not) must not
overtop the religious cause of separating, executed with such an urgent zeal,
and such a prostrate humiliation by Ezra and Nehemiah. What God hates to join,
certainly he cannot love should continue joined: it being all one in matter of
ill consequence, to marry, or to continue married with an Infidel, save only so
long as we wait willingly, and with a safe hope. St. Paul therefore citing here
a command of the Lord Almighty, for so he terms it, that we should separate,
cannot have bound us with that which he calls his own whether command or
counsel that we should not separate.

Which is the fourth reason, for he himself takes care least we should mistake
him, [But to the rest speak If not the Lord.] If the Lord spoke not, then man
spoke it and man has no Lordship to command the conscience: yet modern
interpreters will have it a command maugre St. Paul himself, they will make
him a Prophet like Caiaphas to speak the word of the Lord not thinking, nay
denying to think; though he disavow to have received it from the Lord, his word
shall not be taken, though an Apostle, he shall be born down in his own
Epistle, by a race of expositers who presume to know from whom he spoke, better
then he himself. Paul deposes that the Lord speaks not this, they, that the
Lord speaks it: can this be less then to brave him with a full faced
contradiction? Certainly to such a violence as this, for I cannot call it an
expounding, what a man should answer I know not, unless that if it be their
pleasure next to put a gag into the Apostles mouth, they are already surnisht
with a commodious audacity toward the attempt. Beza would seem to shun the
contradictory by telling us that the Lord spoke it not in person, as he did the
former precept. But how many other doctrines does St. Paul deliver which the
Lord spoke not in person, and yet never uses this preamble but in things
indifferent? So long as we receave him for a messenger of God, for him to stand
sorting sentences what the Lord spoke in person, and what he, not the Lord in
person, would be but a chill trifling, and his readers might catch an ague the
while. But if we shall supply the grammatical Ellipsis regularly, and as we
must in the sam tense, all will be then clear, for we cannot supply it thus, to
the rest I speak, the Lord spoke not, but I speak, the Lord speaks not. If
then the Lord neither spoke in person nor speaks it now, the Apostle
testifying both, it follows duly, that this can be no command. Forsooth the
fear is, least this not being a command, would prove an evangelic counsel, and
so make way for supererogations. As if the Apostle could not speak his mind in
things indifferent, as he does in fowr or five several places of this chapter
with the like preface of not commanding, but that the doubted inconvenience of
supererogating must needs rush in. And how adds it to the word of the Lord,
(for this also they object) when as the Apostle by his christian prudence guids
us in the liberty which God has left us to, without command? could not the
spirit of God instruct us by him what was free, as well as what was not? But
what need I more, when Cameron an ingenuous writer, and in high esteem, solidly
confutes the surmise of a command here, and among other words has these. That
when Paul speaks as an Apostle, he uses this form, The Lord says, not I v 10.
but as a private man he says, I speak, not the Lord. And thus also all the
prime fathers Austin, Jerome, and the rest understood this place.

Fifthly, The very stating of the question declares this to be no command; If
any brother has an unbeleeuing wife, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let
him not put her away. For the Greek word (...) does not imply only her being
pleased to stay, but his being pleased to let her stay; it must be a consent of
them both. Nor can the force of this word be rendered less, without either much
negligence or iniquity of him that otherwise translates it. And thus the Greek
Church also and their Synods understood it, who best knew what their own
language meant, as appears by Matthaeus Monachus an author set forth by
Leunclauius and of antiquity perhaps not inferior to Balsamon who writes upon
the canons of the Apostles; this Author in his chap. that marriage is not to be
made with heretics, thus recites the second canon of the 6. Synod, As to the
Corinthians Paul determins, If the believing wife choos to live with the
unbeleeving husband, or the believing husband with the unbeleeving wife. Mark
says he, how the Apostle here condescends, if the believer please to dwell
with the unbeleever; so that if he please not, out of doubt the marriage is
dissolved. And I am persuaded it was so in the beginning, and thus preached.
And thereupon gives an example of one, who though not deserted, yet by the
decree of Theodotus the Patriarch divorc't an unbeleeving wife. What therefore
depends in the plain state of this question on the consent and well liking of
them both, must not be a command. Lay next the latter end of the 11. v, to the
twelf (for wherefore else is Logic taught us) in a discrete axiom, as it can be
no other by the phrase, The Lord says, let not the husband put away his wife,
But I say let him not put away a misbeleeving wife; this sounds as if by the
judgment of Paul, a man might put away any wife but the misbeleeving; or else
the parts are not discrete, or dissentanie, for both conclude not putting away,
and consequently in such a form the proposition is ridiculous. Of necessity
therefore the former part of this sentence must be conceav'd, as understood, and
silently granted, that although the Lord command to divorce an infidel, yet I,
not the Lord command you? No, but give my judgment, that for some evangelic
reasons a christian may be permitted not to divorce her. Thus while we reduce
the brevity of St. Paul to a plainer sense, by the needful supply of that
which was granted between him and the Corinthians, the very logic of his speech
extracts him confessing that the Lords command lay in a seeming contrariety to
this his counsel: and that he meant not to thrust out a command of the Lord by
a new one of his own, as one nail drives another, but to release us from the
rigor of it, by the right of the Gospel, so far forth as a charitable cause
leads us on in the hope of winning another soul without the peril of loosing
our own. For this is the glory of the Gospel to teach us that the end of the
commandment is charity, 1 Timothy 1. not the drudging out a poor and worthless
duty forced from us by the tax, and tail of so many letters. This doctrine
therefore can be no command, but it must contradict the moral law, the Gospel,
and the Apostle himself both else where, and here also eevn in the act of
speaking.

If then it be no command, it must remain to be a permission, and that not
absolute, for so it would be still contrary to the law, but with such a caution
as breaks not the law, but as the manner of the Gospel is, fulfills it through
charity. The law had two reasons, the one was ceremonial, the pollution that
all Gentiles were to the Jews; this the vision of Peter had abolisht, Acts 10.
and clens'd all creatures to the use of a Christian. The Corinthians understood
not this, but feared lest dwelling in matrimony with an unbeleever, they were
defiled. The Apostle discusses that scruple with an Evangelic reason, showing
them that although God heretofore under the law, not intending the conversion
of the Gentiles, except some special ones, held them as polluted things to the
Jew, yet now purposing to call them in, he has purified them from that legal
uncleanness wherein they stood, to use and to be used in a pure manner.

For says he, The unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbeleeving wife, is sanctified by the husband, else were your children
unclean; but now they are holy. That is, they are sanctified to you, from that
legal impurity which you so fear; and are brought into a near capacity to be
holy, if they believe, and to have free access to holy things. In the mean
time, as being Gods creatures, a christian has power to use them according to
their proper use; in as much as now, all things to the pure are become pure. In
this legal respect therefore ye need not doubt to continue in marriage with an
unbeleever. Thus others also expound this place and Cameron especially. This
reason warrants us only what we may do without fear of pollution, does not
bind us that we must. But the other reason of the law to divorce an infidel
was moral, the avoiding of enticement from the true faith. This cannot shrink;
but remains in as full force as ever, to save the actual christian from the
snare of a misbeleever. Yet if a Christian full of grace and spiritual gifts
finding the misbeleever not frowardly affected, fears not a seducing, but
hopes rather a gaining, who sees not that this moral reason is not violated by
not divorcing, which the law commanded to do, but better fulfilled by the
excellence of the Gospel working through charity. For neither the faithful is
seduc't, and the unfaithful is either saved, or with all discharge of love,
and evangelic duty sought to be saved. But contrariwise if the infirm
Christian shall be commanded here against his mind, against his hope, and
against his strength, to dwell with all the scandals, the household
persecutions, or alluring temptations of an infidel, how is not the Gospel by
this made harsher then the law, and more yoaking? Therefore the Apostle ere he
deliver this other reason why we need not in all have put away an infidel, his
mind misgiving him least he should seem to be the imposer of a new command,
stays not for method, but with an abrupt speed inserts the declaration of
their liberty in this matter.

But if the unbeleeving depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister is not
under bondage in such cases: but God has called us to peace.

[But if the unbeleeving depart.] This cannot be restrained to local departure
only; for who knows not that an offencive society is worse then a forsaking. If
his purpose of cohabitation be to endanger the life, or the conscience, Beza
himself is half persuaded, that this may purchase to the faithful person the
same freedom that a desertion may; and so Gerard and others whom he cites. If
therefore he depart in affection, if he depart from giving hope of his
conversion, if he disturb, or scoff at religion, seduce, or tempt, if he rage,
doubtless not the weak only, but the strong may leave him, if not for fear,
yet for the dignities sake of religion, which cannot be liable to all base
affronts, merely for the worshipping of a civil marriage. I take therefore
departing to be as large as the negative of being well pleased: that is, if he
be not pleased for the present to live lovingly, quietly, inoffensively, so as
may give good hope; which appears well by that which follows.

[A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such cases.] If Saint Paul
provide seriously against the bondage of a christian, it is not the only
bondage to live unmaried for a deserting infidel, but to endure his presence
intolerably, to bear indignities against his religion in words or deeds, to
be wearied with seducements, to have idolatries and superstitions ever before
his eyes, to be tormented with impure and profane conversation, this must
needs be bondage to a christian; is this left all unprovided for, without
remedy, or freedom granted? undoubtedly no, for, the Apostle leaves it further to
be considered with prudence, what bondage a brother or sister is not under, not
only in this case, but as he speaks himself plurally, in such cases.

[But God has called us to peace.] To peace, not to bondage, not to brabbles
and contentions with him who is not pleased to live peaceably, as marriage and
christianity requires. And where strise arises from a cause hopeless to be
allayd, what better way to peace then by separating that which is ill joined.
It is not divorce, that first breaks the peace of family, as some fondly comment
on this place, but it is peace already brok'n, which, when other cures fail can
only be restored to the faultles person by a necessary divorce. And Saint Paul
here warrants us to seek peace, rather then to remain in bondage. If God has
called us to peace, why should we not follow him, why should we miserably stay
in perpetual discord under a servitude not required?

[For what know thou O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband, etc.] St.
Paul having thus cleared himself, not to go about the mining of our christian
liberty, not to cast a snare upon us, which to do he so much hated, returns
now to the second reason of that law to put away an infidel, for fear of
seducement, which he does not here contradict with a command now to venture
that; but if neither the infirmity of the Christian, nor the strength of the
unbeleever be feared, but hopes appearing that he may be won, he judges it no
breaking of that law, though the believer be permitted to forbear divorce, and
can abide, without the peril of seducement, to offer the charity of a salvation
to wife or husband, which is the fulfilling, not the transgressing of that law;
and well worth the undertaking with much hazard and patience. For what know
thou whether thou shall save thy wife, that is, till all means convenient and
possible with discretion and probability, as human things are, have bin used.
For Christ himself sends not our hope on pilgrimage to the worlds end; but
sets it bounds beyond which we need not wait on a brother, much less on an
infidel. If after such a time we may count a professing Christian no better
then a heathen, after less time perhaps we may cease to hope of a heathen,
that he will turn christian. Otherwise, to bind us harder then the law, and
tell us we are not under bondage, is mere mockery. If till the unbeleever
please to part, we may not stir from the house of our bondage, then certain
this our liberty is not grounded in the purchase of Christ, but in the pleasure
of a miscreant. What knows the loyal husband whether he may not save the
adulteress, he is not therefore bound to receive her. What knows the wife but
she may reclaim her husband who has deserted her? yet the reformed Churches
do not enjoin her to wait longer then after the contempt of an Ecclesiastical
Summons. Beza himself here befriends us with a remarkable speech, what could
be firmly constituted in human matters if under pretense of expecting grace
from above, it should be never lawful for us to seek our right. And yet in
other cases not less reasonable to obtain a most just and needful remedy by
divorce he turns the innocent party to a task of prayers beyond the multitude
of beads and rosaries, to beg the gift of chastity in recompense of an
injurious marriage. But the Apostle is evident anough, we are not under bondage,
trusting that he writes to those who are not ignorant what bondage is, to let
supercilious determiners cheat them of their freedom. God has called us to
peace, and so doubtless has left in our hands how to obtain it seasonably;
if it be not our own choice to sit ever like novices wretchedly servile.

Thus much the Apostle on this question between Christian and Pagan, to us now
of little use; yet supposing it written for our instruction as it may be
rightly applied, I doubt not but that the difference between a true believer
and a heretic, or any one truly religious either deserted or seeking divorce
from any one grossly erroneous or profane may be referred hither. For St. Paul
seaves us here the solution not of this case only, which little concerns us,
but of such like cases, which may occurr to us. For where the reasons directly
square, who can forbid why the verdit should not be the same? But this the
common writers allow us not. And yet from this text which in plain words gives
liberty to none unless deserted by an infidel, they collect the same freedom
though the desertion be not for religion, which, as I conceive, they need not
do; but may without straining reduce it to the cause of fornication. For first
they confess that desertion is seldom without a just suspicion of adultery:
next it is a breach of marriage in the same kind, and in some sort worse: for
adultery though it give to another, yet it bereaves not al; but the deserter
wholly denies all right, and makes one flesh twain, which is counted the
absolutest breach of matrimony, and causes the other, as much as in him lies,
to commit sin, by being so left. Nevertheless those reasons which they bring
of establishing by this place the like liberty from any desertion, are fair
and solid: and if the thing be lawful, and can be proved so, more ways then
one, so much the safer. Their arguments I shall here recite, and that they may
not com idle, shall use them to make good the like freedom to divorce for
other causes; and that we are no more under bondage to any heinous default
against the main ends of matrimony, then to a desertion: First they allege that
to Tim. 1. 5. 8. If any provide not for those of his own house, he has denied
the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. But a deserter, say they, can have no
care of them who are most his own, therefore the deserted party is not less
to be righted against such a one then against an infidel. With the same
evidence I argue, that man or wife who hates in wedloc, is perpetually
unsociable, unpeacefull, or unduteous, either not being able, or not willing to
perform what the maine ends of marriage demand in help and solace, cannot be
said to care for who should be dearest in the house; therefore is worse then
an infidel in both regards, either in undertaking a duty which he cannot
perform, to the undeserved and unspeakable injury of the other party so
defrauded and betrayed, or not performing what he has undertaken, whenas he
may or might have, to the perjury of himself more irreligious then
heathenisme. The blameless person therefore has as good a plea to sue out his
delivery from this bondage, as from the desertion of an infidel. Since most
writers cannot but grant that desertion is not only a local absence, but an
intolerable society; or if they grant it not, the reasons of Saint Paul grant
it, with all as much leave as they grant to enlarge a particular freedom from
paganism, into a general freedom from any desertion. Secondly, they reafon
from the likeness of either fact, the same loss redounds to the deserted by a
christian, as by an infidel, the same peril of temptation. And I in like manner
affirm that if honest and free persons may be allowed to know what is most to
their own loss, the same loss and discontent, but worse disquiet with
continual misery and temptation resides in the company, or better called the
persecution of an unfit, or an unpeaceable consort, then by his desertion. For
then the deserted may enjoy himself at least. And he who deserts is more
favorable to the party whom his presence afflicts, then that importunat thing
which is and will be ever conversant before the eyes a loyal and individual
vexation. As for those who still rudely urge it no loss to marriage, no
desertion, so long as the flesh is present and offers a benevolence that hates,
or is justly hated, I am not of that vulgar and low persuasion, to think such
forced embracements as these worth the honor, or the humanity of marriage, but
far beneath the soul of a rational and freeborne man. Thirdly they say, it is
not the infidelity of the deserter, but the desertion of the infidel from which
the Apostle gives this freedom; and I join that the Apostle could as little
require our subjection to an unfit and injurious bondage present, as to an
infidel absent. To free us from that which is an evil by being distant, and not
from that which is an inmate, and in the bosom evil, argues an improvident and
careless deliverer. And thus all occasions, which way so ever they turn, are not
unofficious to administer something which may conduce to explain, or to defend
the assertion of this book touching divorce. I complain of nothing, but that it
is indeed too copious to be the matter of a dispute, or a defense, rather to be
yielded, as in the best ages, a thing of common reason, not of controversy.
What have I left to say? I fear to be more elaborat in such a perspicuity as
this; lest I should seem not to teach, but to upbraid the dulnes of an age; not
to commun with reason in men, but to deplore the loss of reason from among men:
this only, and not the want of more to say, is the limit of my discourse.

Who among the sathers have interpreted the words of Christ concerning divorce,
as is here interpreted; and what the civil law of Christian Emperors in the
primitive Church determi'nd. Although testimony be in Logic an argument rightly
called inartificial, and does not solidly fetch the truth by multiplicity of
Authors, nor argue a thing false by the few that hold so, yet seeing most men
from their youth so accustom, as not to scanne reason, nor clearly to apprehend
it, but to trust for that the names and numbers of such, as have got, and many
times undeservedly, the reputation among them to know much, and because there
is a vulgar also of teachers, who are as blindly by whom they fancy led, as
they lead the people, it will not be amiss for them who had rather list
themselves under this weaker sort, and follow authorities, to take notice that
this opinion which I bring, has bin favored, and by some of those affirmed,
who in their time were able to carry what they taught, had they urged it,
through all Christendom; or to have left it such a credit with all good men, as
they who could not bouldly use the opinion, would have feared to censure it.
But since by his appointment on whom the times and seasons wait, every point of
doctrine is not fatal to be thoroughly sifted out in every age, it will be
anough for me to find, that the thoughts of wisest heads heertofore, and hearts
no less reverenc't for devotion have tended this way, and contributed their lot
in some good measure toward this which has bin here attained. Others of them
and modern especially, have bin as full in the assertion, though not so full in
the reason; so that either in this regard, or in the former, I shall be
manifest in a middle fortune to meet the praise or dispraise of being something
first. But I deferr not what I undertook to show, that in the Church both
primitive and reformed, the words of Christ have bin understood to grant
divorce for other causes then adultery; and that the word fornication in
marriage has a larger sense then that commonly supposed.

Justin Martyr in his first Apology writt'n within 50. years after St. John
died, relates a story which Eusebius transcribes, that a certain matron of
Rome, the wife of a vicious husband, her self also formerly vicious, but
converted to the faith, and persuading the same to her husband, at lest the
amendment of his wicked life, upon his not yiedling to her daily entreaties and
persuasions in this behalf, procured by law to be divorc't from him. This was
neither for adultery, nor desertion, but as the relation says, Esteeming it an
ungodly thing to be the consort of bed with him, who against the law of nature
and of right sought out voluptuous ways. Suppose he endeavored some unnatural
abuse, as the Greek admitts that meaning, it cannot yet be called adultery; it
therefore could be thought worthy of divorce no otherwise then as equivalent,
or wors; and other vices will appear in other respects as much divorsive. Next
it is said her friends advised her to stay a while; and what reason gave they?
not because they held unlawful what she purposed, but because they thought she
might longer yet hope his repentance. She obeyed, till the man going to
Alexandria, and from thence reported to grow still more impenitent, not for any
adultery or desertion, whereof neither can be gathered, but, says the Martyr,
and speaks it like one approving, lest she should be partaker of his
unrighteous and ungodly deeds, remaining in wedloc, the communion of bed and
board with such a person, she left him by a lawful divorce. This cannot but
give us the judgment of the Church in those pure and next to Apostolic times.
For how else could the woman have bin permitted, or here not reprehended; and if
a wife might then do this without reprooff, a husband certainly might no less,
if not more.

Tertullian in the same age writing his 4. book against Marcion witnesses that
Christ by his answer to the Pharisees protected the constitution of Moses as his
own, and directed the institution of the creator, for I alter not his
Carthaginian phrase; he excused rather then destroi'd the constitution of
Moses; I say he forbidd conditionally, if any one therefore put away that he
may marry another: so that if he prohibited conditionally, then not wholly; and
what he forbadd not wholly, he permitted otherwise, where the cause ceases for
which he prohibited: that is when a man makes it not the cause of his putting
away, merely that he may marry again. Christ teaches not contrary to Moses, the
justice of divorce has Christ the asserter: he would not have marriage separat,
nor kept with ignominy, permitting then a divorce, and guesses that this
vehemence of our Saviors sentence was chiefly bent against Herod, as was cited
before. Which leaves it evident how Tertullian interpreted this prohibition of
our Savior; for whereas the text is, Whosoever puts away and marieth
another, wherefore should Tertullian explain it, Whosoever puts away that he
may marry another, but to signify his opinion that our Savior did not forbidd
divorce from an unworthy yoke, but forbidd the malice or the lust of a needles
change and chiefly those plotted divorces then in use.

Origin in the next century testifies to have known certain who had the
government of Churches in his time, who permitted some to marry, while yet their
former husbands lived, and excuses the deed, as don not without cause, though
without Scripture, which confirms that cause not to be adultery; for how then
was it against Scripture that they married again. And a little beneath, for I
cite his 7. homily on Matthew, says he, To endure faults wors then adultery
and fornication, seems a thing unreasonable, and disputes therefore that Christ
did not speak by way of precept, but as it were expounding. By which and the
like speeches Origin declares his mind far from thinking that our Savior
confined all the causes of divorce to actual adultery.

Lactantius of the age that succeeded speaking of this matter in the 6. of his
institutions, has these words. But lest any think he may circumscribe divine
precepts, let this be added, that all misinterpreting, and occasion of fraud,
or death may be removed, he commits adultery who marries the divorc't wife,
and, besides the crime of adultery, divorces a wife that he may marry another.
To divorce and marry another, and to divorce that he may marry another, are two
different things; and imply that Lactantius thought not this place the
forbidding of all necessary divorce, but such only as proceeded from the wanton
desire of a future chois, not from the burden of a present affliction.

About this time the Council of Eliberis in Spain decreed the husband
excommunicat, If he kept his wife being an adultress; but if he left her, he
might after ten years be received into communion, if he retained her any while
in his house after the adultery known. The council of Neocaesarea in the year
314. decreed, that if the wife of any Laic were convicted of adultery, that man
could not be admitted into the ministry: if after ordination it were
committed, he was to divorce her; if not, he could not hold his ministry. The
council of Nantes condemned in 7. years penance the husband that would
reconcile with an adultress. But how proves this that other causes may divorce?
it proves thus; there can be but two causes why these councels enjoined so
strictly the divorsing of an adultress, either as an offender against God, or
against the husband; in the latter respect they could not impose on him to
divorce; for every man is the master of his own forgivenes; who shall hinder
him to pardon the injuries don against himself? It follows therefore that the
divorce of an adultress was commanded by these three councels, as it was a sin
against God; and by all consequence they could not but believe that other sins
as heinous might with equal justice be the ground of a divorce.

Basil in his 73. rule, as Chamier numbers it, thus determins, that divorce
ought not to be, unless for adultery, or the hindrance to a godly life. What
does this but proclaim aloud more causes of divorce then adultery, if by other
sins besides this, in wife or husband, the godliness of the better person may be
certainly hindered, and endangered.

Epiphanius no less ancient, writing against Heretics, and therefore should
himself be orthodoxal above others, acquaints us in his second book Tom. 1, not
that his private persuasion was, but that the whole Church in his time
generally thought other causes of divorce lawful besides adultery, as
comprehended under that name; If, says he, a divorce happ'n for any cause
either fornication, or adultery, or any heinous fault, the word of God blames
not either the man or wife marrying again, nor cutts them off from the
congregation, or from life, but bears with the infirmity; not that he may keep
both wives, but that leaving the former he may be lawfully joined to the
latter, the holy word, and the holy Church of God commiserates this man,
especially, if he be otherwise of good conversation, and live according to Gods
law. This place is cleerer then exposition, and needs no comment.

Ambrose on the 16. of Luke, teaches that all wedloc is not Gods joining and to
the 19. of Pro. That a wife is prepared of the Lord, as the old latin translates
it, he answers that the septuagint renders it, a wife is fitted by the Lord,
and tempered to a kind of harmony; and where that harmony is there God joins;
where it is not, there dissension reigns, which is not from God, for God is
love. This he brings to prove the marrying of Christian with Gentile to be no
marriage, and consequently divorc't without sin: but he who sees not this
argument how plainly it serves to divorce any untunable, or unattonable
matrimony, sees little. On the 1 to the Cor, 7, he grants a woman may leave her
husband not for only fornication, but for Apostasy, and inverting nature,
though not marry again; but the man may: here are causes of divorce assigned
other then adultery. And going on he affirms, that the cause of God is greater
then the cause of matrimony; that the reverence of wedloc is not due to him who
hates the author thereof; that no matrimony is firm without devotion to God;
that dishonor don to God acquitts the other being deserted from the bond of
matrimony; that the faith of marriage is not to be kept with such. If these
contorted sentences be ought worth, it is not the desertion that breaks what is
broken, but the impiety; and who then may not for that cause better divorce,
then tarry to be deserted? or these grave sayings of St. Ambrose are but knacks.

Jerome on the 19. of Matthew explains, that for the cause of fornication, or
the suspicion thereof a man may freely divorce. What can breed that suspicion,
but sundry faults leading that way? by Jeroms consent therefore divorce is free
not only for actual adultery, but for any cause that may incline a wise man to
the just suspicion thereof.

Austin also must be remembered among those who hold that this instance
offornication gives equal inference to other faults equally hateful, for which
to divorce: and therefore in his books to Pollentius he disputes that
infidelity, as being a greater sin then adultery, ought so much the rather
cause a divorce. And on the Sermon in the Mount, under the name of fornication
will have idolatry, or any harmfull superstition contained, which are not
thought to disturb matrimony so directly as some other obstinacies and
dissaffections, more against the daily duties of that covenant, and in the
eastern tongues not unfrequently called fornication, as has bin shown. Hence
is understood, faith he, that not only for bodily fornication, but for that
which draws the mind from Gods law, and foully corrupts it, a man may without
fault put away his wife, and a wife her husband, because the Lord excepts the
cause of fornication, which fornication we are constrained to interpret in a
general sense. And in the first book of his retractations chap. 16. he retracts
not this his opinion, but commends it to serious consideration; and explains
that he counted not there all sin to be fornication, but the more detestable
sort of sins. The cause of fornication therefore is not in this discourse newly
interpreted to signify other faults infringing the duties of wedloc, besides
adultery.

Lastly the council of Agatba in the year 506. can. 25. decreed, that if lay
men who divorc't without some great fault, or giving no probable cause,
therefore divorc't, that they might marry some unlawful person, or some other
man's, if before the provincial Bishops were made acquainted, or judgment
past; they presumed this, excommunication was the penalty. Whence it follows,
that if the cause of divorce were some great offense, or that they gave probable
causes for what they did, and did not therefore divorce that they might presume
with some unlawful person, or what was another man's, the censure of Church in
those days did not touch them.

Thus having alleged anough to show after what manner the primitive Church for
above 500. years understood our Saviors words touching divorce, I shall now
with a labor less dispersed, and sooner dispatched, bring under view what the
civil law of those times constituted about this matter: I say the civil law,
which is the honor of every true Civilian to stand for, rather then to count
that for law, which the pontificiall Canon has enthralled them to, and in
stead of interpreting a generous and elegant law, made them the drudges of a
blockish Rubric.

Theodosius and Valentinian, pious Emperors both, ordained that as by consent
lawful marriages were made, so by consent, but not without the bill of divorce,
they might be dissolved; and to dissolve was the more difficult, only in
favor of the children. We see the wisdom and piety of that age one of the
purest and learnedest since Christ, conceav'd no hindrance in the words of our
Savior, but that a divorce mutually consented, might be suffered by the law,
especially if there were no children, or if there were, careful provision was
made. And further says that law (supposing there wanted the consent of either)
we design the causes of divorce by this most wholesome law; for as we forbid
the dissolving of marriage without just cause, so we desire that a husband or a
wife distressed by some advers necessity, should be freed, though by an unhappy,
yet a necessary relief. What dramm of wisdom, or religion (for charity is
truest religion) could there be in that knowing age, which is not virtually
summed up in this most just law? As for those other Christian Emperors, from
Constantine the first of them, finding the Roman law in this point so
answerable to the Mosaic, it might be the likeliest cause why they altered
nothing to restraint, but if ought, rather to liberty, for the help, and
consideration of the weaker sex, according as the Gospel seems to make the
wife more equal to her husband in these conjugal respects then the law of Moses
does. Therefore if a man were absent from his wife four years, and in that
space not heard of, though gone to war in the service of the Empire, she might
divorce, and mary another by the edict of Constantine to Dalmatius. Co. l. 5.
tit. 17. And this was an age of the Church both ancient, and cried up still for
the most flourishing in knowledge and pious government since the Apostles. But
to return to this law of Theodosius, with this observation by the way, that
still as the Church corrupted, as the Clergy grew more ignorant, and yet more
usurping on the Magistrate, who also now declined, so still divorce grew more
restrained; though certainly if better times permitted the thing that worse
times restrained, it would not weakly argue that the permission was better, and
the restraint worse. This law therefore of Theodosius wiser in this then the
most of his successors though not wiser then God and Moses, reduced the causes
of divorce to a certain number which by the judicial law of God, and all
recorded humanity were left before to the breast of each husband, provided that
the dismiss was not without reasonable conditions to the wife. But this was a
restraint not yet come to extremes. For besides adultery and that not only
actual, but suspected by many signs there set down, any fault equally
punishable with adultery, or equally infamous might be the cause of a divorce.
Which informs us how the wisest of those ages understood that place in the
Gospel, whereby, not the pilfering of a benevolence was considered as the main
and only breach of wedloc, as is now thought, but the breach of love and peace,
a more holy union then that of the flesh; and the dignity of an honest person
was regarded, not to be held in bondage with one whose ignominy was
infectious. To this purpose was constituted Cod. l. 5. tit. 17. and Authent.
collat. 4. tit. 1. Novell. 22. where Justinian added three causes more. In the
117. Novell. most of the same causes are allowed, but the liberty of divorcing
by consent is repealed: but by whom? by Justinian, not a wiser, not a more
religious emperor then either of the former, but noted by judicious writers for
his fickle head in making and unmaking laws; and how Procopius a good
historian, and a counselor of state then living deciphers him in his other
actions, I willingly omit. Nor was the Church then in better case, but had the
corruption of a 100. declining year swept on it, when the statute of consent
was called in; which as I said, gives us every way more reason to suspect this
restraint, more then that liberty: which therefore in the reign of Justin the
succeeding Emperor was recalled, Novel. 140. and established with a preface more
wise and christianly then for those times, declaring the necessity to restore
that Theodosian law, if no other means of reconcilement could be found. And by
whom this law was abrogated, or how long after, I do not find; but that those
other causes remained in force, as long as the Greek empire subsisted, and were
assented by that Church, is to be read in the Canons and edicts compared by
Photius the Patriarch, with the avertiments of Balsamon, and Matthaeus Monachus
thereon.

But long before those days Leo the son of Basilius, Macedo reigning about the
year 886. and for his excellent wisdom surnamed the Philosopher, constituted
that in case of madness the husband might divorce after three years, the wife
after 5. Constitut. Leon. 111. 112. this declares how he expounded our
Savior, and derived his reasons from the institution, which in his preface
with great eloquence are set down; whereof a passage or two may give some
proof, though better not divided from the rest. There is not, says he, a
thing more necessary to preserve mankind, then the help given him from his own
rib; both God and nature so teaching us: which being so, it was requisite that
the providence of law, or if any other care be to the good of man, should teach
and ordain those things which are to the help and comfort of married persons,
and confirm the end of marriage purposed in the beginning, not those things
which afflict and bring perpetual misery to them. Then answers the objection
that they are one flesh; if Matrimony had held so as God ordained it, he were
wicked that would dissolve it. But if we respect this in matrimony, that it be
contracted to the good of both, how shall he, who for some great evil feared,
persuades not to marry though contracted, not persuade to unmarry, if after
marriage a calamity befall? should we bid beware least any fall into an evil,
and leave him helpless who by humane error is fallen therein? This were as if
we should use remedies to prevent a disease, but let the sick die without
remedy. The rest will be worth reading in the author.

And thus we have the judgment first of primitive fathers; next of the
imperial law not disallowed by the universal Church in ages of her best
authority; and lastly of the whole Greek Church and civil state, incorporating
their Canons and edicts together, that divorce was lawful for other causes
equivalent to adultery, contained under the word fornication. So that the
exposition of our saviors sentence here alleged has all these ancient and
great asserters, is therefore neither new nor licentious, as some now would
persuade the commonalty; although it be nearer truth that nothing is more new
then those teachers themselves, and nothing more licentious then some known to
be, whose hypocrisy yet shames not to take offense at this doctrine for
license; when as indeed they fear it would remove license, and leave them but
few companions.

That the Popes Canon law incroaching upon civil Magistracy abolisht all
divorce eevn for adultery. What the reformed Divines have recovered; and that
the famousest of them have taught according to the assertion of this book. But
in these western parts of the empire it will appear almost unquestionable that
the cited law of Theodosius and Valentinian stood in force until the blindest
and corruptest times of Popedom displac't it. For that the volumes of Justinian
never came into Italy, or beyond Illiricum, is the opinion of good Antiquaries.
And that only manuscript thereof found in Apulia by Lotharius the Saxon, and
given to the state of Pisa for their aid at sea against the Normans of Sicily,
was received as a rarity not to be matched. And although the Goths, and after
them the Lombards and Franks who overrun the most of Europ except this Island
(unless we make our Saxons and Normans a limm of them) brought in their own
customs, yet that they followed the Roman laws in their contracts and
marriages, Agathias the historian is alleged. And other testimonies relate that
Alaricus and Theodoric their Kings writ their statutes out of this Theodosian
Code which has the recited law of Divorce. Nevertheless while the Monarchs of
Christendom were yet barbarous, and but half Christian, the Popes took this
advantage of their weak superstition, to raise a corpulent law out of the
canons and decretals of audacious priests; and presumed also to set this in the
front; That the constitutions of princes are not above the constitutions of
clergy, but beneath them. Using this very instance of divorce as the first prop
of their tyranny; by a false consequence drawn from a passage of Ambrose upon
Luke where he says, though Man's law grant it, yet Gods law probibits it,
Whence Gregory the Pope writing to Theoctista inferrs that Ecclesiastical
Courts cannot be dissolved by the Magistrate. A fair conclusion from a double
error. First in saying that the divine law prohibited divorce, for what will
he make of Moses; next supposing that it did, how will it follow, that what
ever Christ for bids in his Evangelic precepts, should be haled into a judicial
constraint against the pattern of a divine law: Certainly the Gospel came not
to enact such compulsions. In the mean while we may note here that the
restraint of divorce was one of the first fair seeming pleas which the Pope
had, to step into secular authority, and with his Antichristian rigor to
abolish the permissive law of Christian princes conforming to a sacred
lawgiver. Which if we consider, this papal and unjust restriction of divorce
need not be so dear to us, since the plausible restraining of that, was in a
manner the first loosning of Antichrist; and as it were the substance of his
eldest horn. Nor do we less remarkably ow the first means of his fall here in
England to the contemning of that restraint by Henry 8. whose divorce he
opposed. Yet was not that rigor executed anciently in spiritual Courts until
Alexander the third, who trod upon the neck of Frederic Barbarossa the Emperor,
and summond our Henry 2. into Normandy about the death of Becket. He it was,
that the worthy author may be known, who first actually repealed the imperial
law of divorce, and decreed this tyranous decree, that matrimony for no cause
should be disolv'd, though for many causes it might separate; as may be seen
decret, Gregor. l. 4. tit. 19. and in other places of the Canonical Tomes. The
main good of which invention, wherein it consists who can tell? but that it
has one virtue incomparable, to fill all christendom with whordomes, and
adulteries beyond the art of Balaams or of devils. Yet neither can these,
though so perverse, but acknowledge that the words of Christ under the name of
fornication allow putting away for other causes then adultery both from bed and
board, but not from the bond; their only reason is, because marriage they believe
to be a Sacrament. But our Divines who would seem long since to have renounced
that reason, have so forgot them selves, as yet to hold the absurdity, which
but for that reason, unless there be some mystery of Satan in it, perhaps the
Papist would not hold. It Is true, we grant divorce for actual and proved
adultery, and not for less then many tedious and unreparable years of
desertion, wherein a man shall loose all his hope of posterity, which great and
holy men have bewailed, ere he can be righted; and then perhaps on the confines
of his old age, when all is not worth the while. But grant this were seasonably
don; what are these two cases to many other, which afflict the state of marriage
as bad, and yet find no redress? What has the soul of man deserved, if it be
in the way of salvation, that it should be morgag'd thus, and may not redeem it
self according to conscience out of the hands of such ignorant and slothful
teachers as these, who are neither able nor mindful to give due tendance to
that precious cure which they rashly undertake; nor have in them the noble
goodness to consider these distresses and accidents of man's life; but are bent
rather to fill their mouths with Tithe and oblation. Yet if they can learn to
follow, as well as they can seek to be followed, I shall direct them to a
fair number of renowned men, worthy to be their leaders, who will commend to
them a doctrine in this point wiser then their own, and if they be
not-impatient, it will be the same doctrine which this treatis has defended.

Wicklef that Englishman honored of God to be the first preacher of a general
reformation to all Europe, was not in this thing better taught of God, then to
teach among his chiefest recoveries of truth, that divorce is lawful to the
christian for many other causes equal to adultery. This book indeed through
the poverty of our Libraries I am forced to cite from Arnisaeus of Halberstad
on the right of marriage, who cites it from Corasius of Tolouse c. 4. Cent. Sct.
and he from Wicklef. l. 4. Dial. c. 21. So much the sorrier, for that I never
looked into author cited by his adversary upon this occasion, but found him more
conducible to the question, then his quotation rendered him.

Next Luther, how great a servant of God, in his book of conjugal life quoted
by Gerard out of the Dutch, allows divorce for the obstinate denial of
conjugal duty; and that a man may send away a proud Vasthi, and marry an Esther
in her stead. It seems if this example shall not be impertinent, that Luther
meant not only the refusal of benevolence, but a stubborn denial of any main
conjugal duty; or if he did not, it will be evinc't from what he allows. For
out of question, with men that are not barbarous, love and peace, and fitness
will be yielded as essential to marriage, as corporal benevolence. Though I give
my body to be burnt, says Saint Paul, and have not charity, it profits me
nothing. So though the body prostitute it self to whom the mind affords no
other love or peace, but constant malice and vexation, can this bodily
benevolence deserv to be called a marriage between Christians and rational
creatures.

Melanchton, the third great luminary of reformation in his book concerning
marriage grants divorce for cruel usage, and danger of life, urging the
authority of that Theodosian law, which he esteems written with the grave
deliberation of godly men; and that they who reject this law, and think it
disagreeing from the Gospel, understand not the difference of law and Gospel;
that the Magistrate ought not only to defend life, but to succor the weak
conscience, lest broke with grief and indignation it relinquish prayer, and
turn to some unlawful thing What if this heavy plight of despair arise from
other discontents in wedloc which may go to the soul of a good man more then
the danger of his life, or cruel using, which a man cannot be liable to,
suppose it be ungrateful usage, suppose it be perpetual spite and
disobedience, suppose a hatred, shall not the Magistrate free him from this
disquiet which interrupts his prayers, and disturbs the course of his service to
God and his Country all as much, and brings him such a misery, as that he more
desires to leave his life then fears to loose it: Shall not this equally
concern the office of civil protection, and much more the charity of a true
Church to remedy?

Erasmus who for learning was the wonder of his age, both in his notes on
Matthew, and on the first to the Corinthians in a large and eloquent discourse,
and in his answer to Phimostonus a Papist, maintains (and no protestant then
living contradicted him) that the words of Christ comprehend many other causes
of divorce under the name of fornication.

Bucer, whom our famous Dr Rainolds was wont to prefer before Calvin, in his
comment on Matthew, and in his second book of the Kingdom of Christ, treats
of divorce at large to the same effect, as is written in the doctrine and
discipline of divorce lately published, and the translation is extant: whom lest
I should be thought to have wrested to mine own purpose, take something more out
of his 49. Chap. which I then for brevity omitted. It will be the duty of pious
princes, and all who govern Church, or common wealth, if any, whether husband
or wife, shall affirm their want of such who either will, or can tolerably
perform the necessary duties of married life, to grant that they may seek them
such, and marry them; if they make it appear that such they have not. This
book he wrote here in England, where he lived the greatest admired man, and
this he dedicated to Edward the sixth.

Fagius rankt among the famous divines of Germany, whom Frederic at that time
the Palatine sent for to be the reformer of his Dominion, and whom afterward
England sought to, and obtained of him to come and teach her, differs not in
this opinion from Bucer, as his notes on the Chaldey paraphrast well testify.

The whole Church of Strasburgh in her most flourishing time, when Zellius,
Hedio, Capito, and other great Divines taught there, and those two renouned
magistrates Farrerus and Sturmius governed that common wealth and Academy to
the admiration of all Germany, has thus in the 21. Article. We teach that if
according to the word of God, yea or against it, divorces happen, to do
according to Gods word, Devt. 24. 1. Mat. 19. 1 Cor. 7. and the observation of
the primitive Church, and the Christian constitution of pious Caesar's.

Peter Martyr seems in word our easy adversary, but is in deed for us: toward
which though it be something when he says of this opinion, that it is not
wicked, and can hardly be refuted, this which follows is much more, I speak
not here says he, Of natural impediments which may so happ'n, that the
matrimony can no longer hold: but adding, that he often wondered, how the
ancient and most christian Emperors established those laws of divorce, and
neither Ambrose, who had such influence upon the laws of Theodosius, nor any
of those holy fathers found fault, nor any of the Churches, why the Magistrates
of this day should be so loath to constitute the same. Perhaps, they fear an
inundation of divorces, which is not likely, whenas we read not either among
the Ebrews, Greeks, or Romans that they were much frequent where they were most
permitted. If they judge christian men worse then Jews or Pagans. they both
injure that name, and by this reason will be constrained to grant divorces the
rather; because it was permitted as a remedy of evil, for who would remove the
medcin, while the disease is yet so rife? This being read both in his common
places, and on the first to the Corinthians, with what we shall relate more of
him yet ere the end, sets him absolutely on this side. Not to insist that in
both these, and other places of his commentaries he grants divorce not only
for desertion, but for the seducement and scandalous demeanor of a heretical
consort.

Musculus a divine of no obscure fame distinguishes between the religious and
the civil determination of divorce; and leaving the civil wholly to the
lawyers, pronounces a conscionable divorce for importence not only natural, but
accidental, if it be durable. His equity it seems, can enlarge the words of
Christ to one cause more then adultery; why may not the reason of another man
as wise, enlarge them to another cause.

Gualter of Zuric a well known judicious commentator in his Homilies on
Matthew, allows divorce for Leprosy, or any other cause which renders unfit
for wedloc, and calls this rather a nullity of marriage then a divorce, and who,
that is not himself a mere body, can restrain all the unfitnes of marriage only
to a corporal defect.

Hemingius an Author highly esteemed, and his works printed at Geneva, writing
of divorce, confesses that learned men vary in this question, some granting
three causes thereof, some five, others many more; he himself gives us six,
adultery, desertion, inability, error, evil usage, and impiety, using argument
that Christ under one special contains the whole kind, and under the name and
example of fornication he includes other causes equipollent. This discourse he
wrote at the request of many who had the judging of these causes in Denmark and
Norway, who by all likely hood followed his advice.

Hunnius a Doctor of Wittenberg, well known both in Divinity and other arts, on
the 19. of Matt. affirms that the exception of fornicationexprest by our
Savior excludes not other causes equalling adultery, or destructive to the
substantials of matrimony; but was opposed to the custom of the Jews who made
divorce for every light cause.

Felix Bidenbachius an eminent Divine in the Duchy of Wirtemberg affirms that
the obstinat refusal of conjugal due is a lawful cause of divorce, and gives an
instance that the consistory of that state sojudg'd.

Gerard cites Harbardus an author not unknown, and Arnisaeus cites Wigandus,
both yielding divorce in case of cruel usage; and another author who testifies
to have seen in a dukedom of Germany marriages disjoynd for some implacable
enmities arising.

Beza one of the strictest against divorce, denies it not for danger of life
from a Heretic, or importunat solicitation to do ought against religion: and
counts it all one whether the heretic desert, or would stay upon intolerable
conditions. But this decision well examined will be found of no solidity. For
Beza would be asked why, if God so strictly exact our stay in any kind of
wedloc, we had not better stay and hazard a murdering for Religion at the hand
of a wife, or husband, as he and others enjoin us to stay and venture it for
all other causes but that? and why a man's life is not as well and warrantably
saved by divorcing from an orthodox murderer, as a heretical? Again, if
desertion be confessed by him to consist not only in the forsaking, but in the
unsufferable conditions of staying, a man may as well deduce the lawfulness of
divorcing from any intolerable conditions (if his grant be good that we may
divorce thereupon from a heretic) as he can deduce it lawful to divorce from
any deserter, by finding it lawful to divorce from a deserting infidel. For
this is plain, if Saint Paul's permission to divorce an infidel deserter,
infer it lawful for any malicious desertion, then does Beza's definition of
a deserter transferr it self with like facility from the cause of religion to
the cause of malice, and proves it as good to divorce from him who intolerably
stays as from him who purposely departs; and leaves it as lawful to depart
from him who urgently requires a wicked thing, though professing the same
religion, as from him who urges a heathenish or superstitious compliance in a
different faith. For if there be such necessity of our abiding, we ought
rather to abide the utmost for religion then for any other cause; seeing both
the cause of our stay is pretended our religion to marriage, and the cause of
our suffering is supposed our constant marriage to religion. Beza therefore by
his own definition of a deserter justifies a divorce from any wicked or
intolerable conditions rather in the same religion then in a different.

Aretius a famous Divine of Bern approves many causes of divorce in his
Problemes, and adds that the laws and consistories of Swizzerland approve them
also. As first, adultery, and that not actual only, but intentional, all eging
Matthew the fifth, Whosoever looks to lust, has committed adultery already
in his heart. Where by says he, our Savior shows that the breach of matrimony
may be not only by outward act, but by the heart and desire; when that has
once possessed, it renders the conversation intolerable, and commonly the fact
follows. Other causes to the number of 9. or 10. consenting in most with the
imperial laws, may be read in the author himself, who averrs them to be
grave and weighty. All these are men of name in Divinity, and to these if need
were, might be added more. Nor have the Civilians bin all so blinded by the
Canon, as not to avouch the justice of those old permissions touching divorce.

Alciat of Millain, a man of extraordinary wisdom and learning, in the sixth
book of his Parerga defends those imperial laws, not repugnant to the Gospel,
as the Church then interpreted. For says he, the ancients understood him
separat by man, whom passions and corrupt affections divorc't, not, if the
provincial Bishops first heard the matter, and judged, as the council of Agatha
declares; and on some part of the Code he names Isidorus Hispalensis the first
computer of Canons, to be in the same mind. And in the former place gives his
opinion that divorce might be more lawfully permitted then usury.

Corasius recorded by Helvicus among the famous Lawyers has been already cited
of the same judgment.

Wesembechius a much named Civilian in his comment on this law defends it, and
afficms that our Savior excluded not other faults equal to adultery; and that
the word fornication signifies larger among the Hebrews then with us,
comprehending every fault which alienates from him to whom obedience is due,
and that the primitive Church interpreted so.

Grotius yet living, and of prime note among learned men retires plainly from
the Canon to the ancient civility, yea to the Mosaic law, as being most just
and undecevable. On the fifth of Matt. he says, that Christ made no civil
laws, but taught us how to use law: that the law sent not a husband to the
Judge about this matter of divorce, but left him to his own conscience; that
Christ therefore cannot be thought to send him; that adultery may be judged by a
vehement suspicion; that the exception of adultery seems an example of other
like offenses; proves it from the manner of speech, the maxims of law, the
reason of charity, and common equity.

These authorities without long search I had to produce, all excellent men, some
of them such as many ages had brought forth none greater: almost the meanest of
them might deserve to obtain credit in a singularity; what might not then all
of them joined in an opinion so consonant to reason? For although some speak of
this cause, others of that, why divorce may be, yet all agreeing in the
necessary enlargement of that textual straitnes, leave the matter to equity,
not to literal bondage, and so the opinion closes. Nor could I have wanted more
testimonies, had the cause needed a more sollicitous enquiry. But herein the
satisfaction of others has bin studied, not the gaining of more assurance to
mine own persuasion: although authorities contributing reason withal, be a
good confirmation and a welcome. But God, I solemnly attest him, with held from
my knowledge the consenting judgment of these men so late, until they could
not be my instructers, but only my unexpected witnesses to partial men, that
in this work I had not given the worst experiment of an industry joined with
integrity and the free utterance though of an unpopular truth. Which yet to the
people of England may, if God so please, prove a memorable informing; certainly
a benefit which was intended them long since by men of highest repute for
wisdom and piety Bucer and Erasmus. Only this one authority more, whether in
place or out of place, I am not to omit; which if any can think a small one, I
must be patitient it is no smaller then the whole assembled authority of
England both Church and State; and in those times which are on record for the
purest and sincerest that ever shon yet on the reformation of this Island, the
time of Edward the 6th. That worthy Prince having utterly abolisht the Canon
Law out of his Dominions, as his Father did before him, appointed by full vote
of Parliament, a Committy of two and thirty chosen men, Divines and Lawyers, of
whom Cranmer the Archbishop, Peter Martyr, and Walter Haddon, (not without the
assistance of Sir John Cheek the Kings Tutor a man at that time counted the
learnedest of Englishmen, and for piety not inferior) were the chief, to frame
anew some Ecclesiastical Laws, that might be in stead of what was abrogated. The
work with great diligence was finished, and with as great approbation of that
reforming age was received; and had bin doubtless, as the learned Preface
thereof testifies, established by Act of Parliament, had not the good Kings death
so soon ensuing, arrested the further growth of Religion also, from that season
to this. Those laws, thus founded on the memorable wisdom and piety of that
religious Parliament and Synod, allow divorce and second marriage not only for
adultery or desertion, but for any capital cnmity or plot laid against the
others life, and likewise for evil and fierce usage? nay the 12. Chap. of that
title by plain consequence declares, that lesser contentions, if they be
perpetual, may obtain divorce: which is all one really with the position by me
held in the former treatise published on this argument, herein only differing
that there the cause of perpetual strife was put for example in the
unchangeable discord of some natures; but in these laws intended us by the best
of our ancestors, the effect of continual strife is determined no unjust plea
of divorce, whether the cause be natural or wilful. Whereby the wariness and
deliberation from which that discourse proceeded, will appear, and that God
has aided us to make no bad conclusion of this point; seeing the opinion which
of late has undergon ill censures among the vulgar, has now proved to have
don no violence to Scripture, unless all these famous Authors alleged have
done the like; nor has affirmed ought more then what indeed the most nominated
Fathers of the Church both ancient and modern are unexpectedly found affirming,
the laws of Gods peculiar people, and of primitive Christendom found to have
practiced, reformed Churches and states to have imitated, and especially the
most pious Church-times of this Kingdom to have framed and published, and, but
for sad hindrances in the sudden change of religion, had enacted by Parliament.
Hence forth let them who condemn the assertion of this book for new and
licentious, be sorry; lest, while they think to be of the graver sort, and take
on them to be teachers, they expose themselves rather to be pledged up and down
by men who intimatly know them, to the discovery and contempt of their
ignorance and presumption.

The End.
Errata.
Page 57. lin. 16. and by them to prosecute, no comma between. Page 88. lin. 3.
Basilius Macedo, no comma between.

