Mercies for Men.

Prepared in, and by Christ, even for such as neither know them, nor him.

Discovered, that they might know, and enjoy them.

OR A Discourse of the Interest there is for All men in, and by Christ in the
end, and usefulness of the Believers peculiar Privileges and Service.

In which is also some Information about that Service to which the Grace of
God, that brings salvation to All men, instructs, and obliges the Believer
for the good of them All, according to capacity, and opportunity given him.

Likewise some directions for, and concerning Christian Magistrates

In the opening some Instructions arising from the Apostles Exhortation to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

Delivered in November 1653. at the Monday meetings at Blackfriars: And
because what then was spoken, met with some public opposition, this is now
published for further satisfaction.

Written by THOMAS MOOR, Junior.

Psalm. 4. 2, 3. Oh ye Sons of men, How long will ye turn my glory into shame,
etc. Joh. 17. 15, 17, 21, 22, 23. I pray not that thou should take them out
of the world; But that thou should keep them from the evil, etc. Jona 2. 8.
They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. LONDON, Printed by
R. I. and are to be sold in Popes-Head-Alley. 1654.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader:
THe occasion of the penning and publishing the ensuing Discourse was this;
Being at London in November. 1653. I was invited to a public Meeting at Black
Friars, the end of which, as I was informed, was to seek the face of God for
the peace and welfare of the Nation, and for his direction and blessing on the
Authority over us, to that end; as likewise for instructing themselves, and
others, what ground of encouragement they had, and in what manner they ought to
seek and pursue the same. Upon which account I was also requested to join with
them, in presenting a word of instruction, or exhortation, to that purpose. I
could not on a sudden think wherein I might more pertinently, and profitably
spend that little time I had amongst them, and on such an occasion, than in the
opening those two verses the subject of the following Discourse; And having but
about an hours time permitted me there, some after-considerations moved me to
make them more public with some enlargement, (which then I had not opportunity
for, though the principal heads of instruction within mentioned were then
briefly spoken to) and that for these Reasons.

1 I perceived some in the first hearing of them were not fully satisfied, and
some did then testify their dis-satisfaction (at least as to the pertinency of
the matter to the present occasion) though not in any thing particularly, nor
in such manner as they might have answer with meekness, for which neither was
there opportunity at that time; for which cause I thought it was needful for
me, by this means to speak more fully and plainly to the things then but
briefly touched, especially considering herewith also that which follows.

2 That I am very apprehensive of some suitableness of the matters here
treated of, not only to that present occasion, but to the needs of the present
time, being sensible, that the last and perrilous times are coming upon us; in
which though for present there is, as sometimes past there has been (through
the mercy of God) some abatement of bodily persecution (as Dan. 11. 33, 34.)
yet by means of many (in such a time as this, when profession of godliness is
almost grown into fashion) cleaving to them by flatteries; and likewise, many
of them of understanding falling to the pernicious and deceivable ways of the
spirit of Antichrist, (as Dan. 11. 34, 35.) Iniquity abounds under specious
pretenses, and forms of godliness, by means of which Vizards it gets
enlargement abundantly, and indiscernably; and the love of many waxes cold, to
Jesus Christ, and to the simplicity of the Gospel, and to the people that keep
the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus; and so that love to
all men for Christ's sake, that the grace of God bringing salvation to all,
instructs and leads too, and that unfeigned love among Believers one to
another; There is a general decay of love, through the general over-spreading
and abounding of iniquity; And knowing that in such a time especially it is
needful, and a suitable conversation to the Gospel, for all Believers according
to their capacity to strive together, yea to contend, though with meekness,
yet with earnestness, for the faith of the common Salvation, as it was once
delivered to the Saints, to be held forth to the world for the good of all; and
also to consider one another to provoke to love, and to good works, and that,
so much the more as they are sensible of the day approaching, exhorting one
another daily, while it is called to day, lest any be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin; yea, to be instant in season, and out of season, in
preaching the Word, reproving, rebuking, exhorting, with all long-suffering,
and Doctrine; to watch in all things, endure affliction, do the work of
Evangelists, or Messengers of peace, each according to that furniture God has
given them, that the truth of the Gospel, and the love of that truth may remain
with those that are upright in heart; and others may be admonished by it, that
their feet may be turned unto his testimonies. These considerations moved me to
be willing (at the request of others) to let my weakness appear, if happily
through it God may be glorified, and others may reap the benefit. Which that
they may, I desire the Scriptures may be searched, and compared. And that the
Lord may give us understanding in all things according to our needs, and
capacities, and as he sees good for us, is the prayer of

The unworthiest of all the Servants of God, and of those indebted to all men
for Christ's sake the most in Arrears. Tho. Moore junior.
From my house at Linn, Febr. 22. 1653.
The Contents, being the principal heads of the ensuing Discourse.
Three Instructions propounded from the consideration of 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

1 FRom the occasion, and end of the Exhortation. The occasion being, Timothy
his being furnished and appointed to peculiar service in the Gospel; and the
end, That he might war a good warfare therein: Therefore Prayers to be made for
all men. Page 1, 2 Hence this Instruction; That the service not only of the
first Apostles, but also of the secondary and succeeding Ministers in the
Gospel of Christ, It was and is to be exercised amongst and for the good of all
men, indefinitly, and generally, where ever by Gods providence they are set. p.
3. etc. Uses of this Instruction. 1 To inform of the great love of God to the
world, to all men. p. 7 2 To reprove such as forbid, or hinder the preaching of
the Gospel to all, or any of them, that they might be saved. p. 10 3 To exhort
Believers, to mind the main design for which they are set and preserved in the
world; The glory of God in the good of all men. p. 11 Motives thereto to be
considered by them are, 1 Their engagement, they are debtors to all men. p. 13
2 The love of God in Christ to all men. p. 14 3 The many examples of Gods
servants before. p. 15 4 The recompense of Reward, both present and eternal. p.
17 2 From the first and general part of the Exhortation, as considered in it
self, and with relation to the occasion fore-shewed, This Instruction, That in
pursuance of that great Design, for the good of all men, and that to that
purpose Believers ministration may be blessed, and succesful among them. First
of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks are to be
made for all men. p. 18 For more distinct opening this, 1 Who are the All men
for whom Prayers and Thanksgiving are to be made. All mankind, every of them,
in an acceptable time. p. 19, etc. 2 Who those are by whom such Prayers etc.
are to be made; In answer to which, That all men every where as natural men
considered, have an effectual door opened, and liberty afforded, and are
invited to seek the Lord while he may be found, and call on him while he is
near: But that it is especially required of Believers, who are therefore
furnished to it to make Prayers and Thanks-givings for themselves and others,
even for all men; And of them, That men as opposed to women, pray every where,
women being not permitted as the mouth of the rest to speak in every place, not
in public and mixed Assemblies. p 26, etc. 3 What those Supplications, Prayers,
and Intercessions are which are to be made for all men. That is first showed
according to the signification of the several terms. p. 31 And then by ranking
them under two general heads. 1 The petitioning of good things in the behalf of
them all, that are not directly for them all, or for blessings to be conferred
on them all: But for them in respect of their end and tendency for the good of
all. p. 32 And of these first, Those prayers for peculiar blessings to be
conferred on Beleovers in the World (according to their capacity) to furnish
them for the good of others; yea for peculiar National blessings on those
Nations, on which his name is called; And that also for the good of other
Nations. p. 33 2. Those prayers that are directly against many particular
persons, and Nations, as walking in their evil purposes and ways ( viz.) for
the blasting and confusion of them therein: Yet those in respect of their end,
and tendency, are generally for the good of all men, yea particularly for the
good of all those persons or Nations against whom they are made, while yet they
are not wholly reprobated. p. 36 2 The Entreating, Supplicating, or making
Intercession directly for them, or for mercies and good things to be conferred
on them according to their needs and capacities. p. 40 4 What are those
Thanks-givings joined with Prayers to be made for all men; There first it is
showed, That all manner of right prayer is joined with Thanksgiving; and then,
that explicated to be a commemoration, and thankful acknowledgement of Gods
goodness in what he has already done for the giving us ground and
encouragement to ask for those things we want; And this such as in which Gods
goodness and glory is magnified, and not our own. p. 42 This showed distinctly
in several sorts, or occasions of Thanksgivings (suitable to several prayers or
petitions to be made for several persons) which yet are all after some
considerations for all men, and do all meet in the root of them, and spring
from one, and the same foundation, The plentious redemption wrought in Christ
for all men, and the love of God to manward in and through him. p. 46 5 The
ground or account upon which Prayers and Thanksgivings are to be made for all
men, That showed to be the truth and verity of that which is the bottome-cause,
and occasion of giving thanks to God in the Name of Christ for all men; And
that first, by a brief opening the following verses to the Text. p 50 And then
by propounding these particular Instructions from the consideration of those
verses. 1 That Jesus Christ by the will and appointment of the Father has
given himself, and is accepted a ransom for all men, so as therein he has
redeemed them, in, and by himself, from the curse of the Law being made a curse
for them; and obtained and received into himself for them (that in coming in to
him any of them might enjoy it) a perfect restoration of all their loss, yea
eternal redemption and life. p. 53 2 That he is by virtue thereof become a
standing and powerful Mediator between God and men. p. 61 3 That by virtue of
his Ransom accepted, and by means of his mediation continually made for them,
he is of the Father to them, a testimony in due time, 1. In affording to all as
they come to capacity, and need of it, opportunity, space, and means to
repentance. p. 66 2 In sending forth his good Spirit in the supernatural light
and power of it, in, and with those mercies and means to bring the light and
understanding of his goodness to the heart, and thereby to reprove their
evils, and turn them to God. p. 69 And that in all this, God is light, and in
him is no darkness at all. p. 75 3 From the last and particular part of the
Exhortation, as considered in it self (comparing the second with the first
verse) and with relation to the occasion, and end of the Exhortation
foreshewed. Thence this Instruction, That in pursuance of that great Design for
the good of all men, and particularly (as mainly tending to the furtherance of
the same) That Believers may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness,
and honesty, Prayers, and Thanksgivings are to be made (as in general for all
men, so) particularly for Kings, and for all that are in Authority. This opened
in these branches. 1 That it tends very much to the good of all men, That
Believers lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness, and honesty, among
them. And in this first branch, 1 What it is to lead a quiet and peaceable life
in all godliness and honesty. p. 78 And therein, what is godliness, and how
the believer to be exercised therein. p. 79 And what is honesty in the
believer, and how he to lead his life therein. p. 83 And how these two answer
to those two great Commands of the Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, etc. and thy Neighbor as thy self, and are found in those two
great Commands of the Gospel, To believe on the Name of him whom God has sent*
and love one another, as he has given us Commandment. p. 87 And then what is
that quiet and peaceable life, which the grace of God instructs the believer to
lead, in, and according to godliness and honesty. And there, after some several
significations of quietness, and peaceablenesse briefly hinted, p. 88 Its
especially applied in such a sense, as opposed to war, strife, or contention.
p. 90 And so the believer, in, and according to godliness and honesty, is to
lead his life quitly and peaceably. 1 With reference to those in authority over
him. p. 91 2 Toward all men. p. 95 3 Especially one with another. p. 98 2 How
the Believers leading a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty,
tends so much to the good of all men. That showed in two things. 1 It tends
much to the believers own advantage, profit, and furniture for the good of
others. p. 102 2 It tends to the adorning the Name and Doctrine of God our
Savior, amongst, and before them. And that showed in diverse particulars. p.
104 2 That therefore God likes it well in* and requires it of those whom he sets
in place of Authority, that they should all of them have a special eye at this,
That his people that worship him, and would live quietly in the Land, may lead
a quiet and peaceable life under their protection and government, p. 110, etc.
3. What those things are in general that will tend to this, and which are
therefore required of Governors, that Believers may lead such a life. 1 They
are to afford them liberty, and protection in such liberty, for quiet, and
peaceable worshipping of God* and endeavoring the good of others, as the grace
of God by Christ, their Great Lawgiver instructs them, p. 113 And by way of
removing some scruple in this, it is showed, That they are to let the Tares and
Wheat grow together, till the end of the world, and so to afford that liberty*
and protection in that liberty, to all that pretend to desire to seek and
worship God in Christ, according to his Word, or Scriptures; if under such
pretense they do not grossly blaspheme, or cast off the outward acknowledgement
of that name, or do that which directly tends to the injury or damage of
others, in name, estate, or life; or move sedition; and so they shall afford
such liberty and protection to all that are quiet in the Land. p. 115 2 They
are to give unto them those things that are just and equal, by an equal
distribution of Justice, and thoroughly executing judgment between a man and his
neighbor, p. 121 3 They are to seek peace and pursue it, among those under
their Government, and with other Nations; As much as is possible, live
peaceably with all men, p. 122 Some scruples against this raised from some
mis-apprehensions of Prophecies answered; in which is showed, That in the Wars*
and Commotions of the latter days, toward, and yet before the end, Saints as
Saints, and for their Kingdom, are not to be actors in them; but after that
consideration only spectators of them, though after other considerations, as
Members of the Nation where they live* they may in some cases act with the
rest; and that they are part of the sorrows, evils, or judgments of the latter
days; and that though God occasionally brings forth much good by them, to the
restraint and hinderance of bodily Persecution, yet they are accompanied with
more abounding of Spiritual iniquity. And that though these Judgments and
Battles be of the Lords permission, and gracious ordering, and such as in which
he begins to stain the pride of the glory of such as have lifted up the Horn
against him, yet the instruments for the stirring up the Nations to them are
unclean spirits. p. 124, etc. And that those Prophesies of the total
destruction of all enemies, and bringing down their power, and giving the
Kingdoms under the whole Heavens to the Saints, is not to be accomplished
till the Resurrection of the just, and so not till the Lord himself come, and
bring all that sleep in Jesus with him, and then it shall be accomplished
together, by a wonderful and more immediate putting forth of the Arm of the
Lord, yea all his Saints from first to last shall then have that honor with
him, and no other. p. 128. Some use of these considerations* p. 132 4 What that
is that will especially furnish Governors to the doing those things required
of them, and so is especially to be desired for them. And that is showed to be
wisdom in the knowledge of Christ, and the glory of God, as appearing in the
face of him, as to us declared in the Gospel. p. 138
The Reader is desired to correct these faults, escaped in the Printing, as
follow.
PAge 5. line 25. add of, p. 6. l 7. r. have, p. 10. l. 11. r father, p. 18.
l. 22. blot out may, p. 20. l. 38. r. provision, p. 28. l. 10* r. them* p. 31.
l. 32. r. the view. p. 37. l. 5. r. yea, p. 43. l. 18. r* according. p. 50. l.
32. r. that it is, p. 51. l. 9. r. come, p. 56. l. 39. r. hating, p. 57. l. 18.
r* distraction, p. 58. l. 11. r. raising, l. 27. r. enjoyed, p. 59. l. 1. blot
out the first in, p. 61. l. 20. r. his* l. 30. add of, p. 62. l. 33. blot out
to, p. 63. l. 4. r. given, r. become, l. 15. r. while, l. 33. r. Mediator, p.
64. l. 11. r. every, p. 67. l. 36. r. taken me out of, p. 68. l. 28. r.
distraction, p. 75. l. 13. r. propounds, p. 82. l. 32. r. as, p. 85 l. 35. r.
children, p. 90. l. 25. r. fruit, p 93. l. 10. r. an, l. 30. r. Kings, l. 32.
r. 2 King, p. 96. l. 15. to 2 Timothy* add 2. p. 97. l. 19. blot out not, p. 116.
l. 15. r. persons p. 130* l. 3. to desire, add, and pray. p. 140. l. 6. r.
hereby, on the top of p. 33. for 35. r. 33.

All men's Interest by Christ, in the end and usefulness of Believers peculiar
privileges, and service: Showed in the opening some Instructions arising from 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
I exhort therefore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
and giving of Thanks be made for all men; for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.
THe Apostle Paul having committed the faithful Word of the glorious Gospel of
Christ* that great Commandment, Even the word which was preached from the
beginning, but now more fully come forth and declared, 1 Timothy 6. 14. with 1 John 1. 1, 2. and 2. 7, 8. which was more immediately revealed to him* and
committed to his trust for more peculiar service therein, from the Lord Jesus,
as 1 Timothy 1. 1. 11. with Gal. 1. 11, 12. and Ephesians. 3. 1* 9. He having committed
this Word, or Commandment unto Timothy, and with it this charge, To hold it
fast, and keep it by the Holy Ghost which was given unto him, 2 Timothy 1. 14, 15.
Faithfully to preach it in season, out of season, to do the work of an
Evangelist, etc. Chap. 4. 1. 5. To keep it without spot unrebukeable unto the
appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. And to that purpose, To charge
some, that they did teach no other Doctrine, nor give heed to fables, etc. And
to abide, or stay long at Ephesus for the doing this, That so such charges
might be insinuated, and charged home, not by rash and hasty censures, and
restraints by a compulsive Law, as the Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship
over them, Mat. 20. 25. 28. and 23. 8. 11. But by holding forth the faithful
word amongst them, and that with long-suffering, and doctrine, as has been
taught, and going before others therein, in all things showing himself a
pattern, etc. as 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 5. and 2. 24, 25. Tit. 1. 9, 11. and 2. 1. 7.
The Apostle having, I say, committed this Commandment and charge to Timothy,
Chap. 1. 3, 4, 15, 18. That according to the Prophesies that went before on
him, and by that furniture of Instruction, Gifts, and Grace conferred on him,
he might war a good warfare, holding faith, and a good conscience, etc. this
service to which he was furnished and appointed, being weighty, and that it
might be blessed and succesful, He does therefore, in these two verses that we
have read, exhort, that first of All, in the first place, always, and in order
of nature as the first thing, in, and unto All his service, not only himself,
but All his Brethren with him that have their faces Sion-ward, whose hearts
join in the promoting and furtherance of such service, should have their eye,
or heart directed unto God, for Accommodation, Preservation, Blessing, in, and
unto such service, as he appoints them too, Even as the eyes of a servant are
to the hand of his master, and of a maid to the hand of her mistress, Psalm.
123. 1, 2. And that this is the occasion, end and scope of this exhortation,
appears, not only by considering the word therefore, as it has relation to
the latter end of the foregoing Chapter, but also by comparing herewith the 7.
and 8. verses of this Chapter, which also clearly show the word Therefore in
the first verse, to have relation especially, and directly, to the 18. and the
beginning of the 19 verses of the first Chapter; In that 7. and 8. verses of
this second Chapter, the Apostle declaring his own Ordination, Appointment,
and Furniture, to be one of the prime Apostles, and Teachers of the Gentiles,
in the faith and verity of the Testimony of God concerning Christ, mentioned in
the 4, 5, and 6. verses, as now come forth, and committed to them; he
Therefore, on this occasion, and to the end his ministration may be blessed,
profitable and succesfull, does will or desire that men pray every where,
lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting; So here having commit ted
this Commandment and Charge unto Timothy, as one of those secondary Ministers,
who having believed, and been reconciled, and received the word of
reconciliation in believing, by Jesus Christ, and mediately through their word,
as Joh. 17. 20. with 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18, 19, 20. were to carry on the same work,
holding fast the platform of sound Doctrine which they had received from them,
and so building upon, and according to the foundation of Doctrine as laid by
them, who as wise masterbuilders had laid the foundation, 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14.
Tit. 1. 11. 15. 1 Cor. 3. 10. He exhorts that first of all prayers be made,
etc. And in this exhortation to the making Prayers and Thanksgivings, thus
occasioned, and to this end, he exhorts that the said Prayers and Thanksgivings
be made for All men.

Now in That the Apostle in such an exhortation to Prayers and Thanksgivings,
thus occasioned, and to such an end, That the servants of Christ in the Gospel
might war a good warfare, etc. as foreshewed, does exhort, That Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for All men.

It does fully imply, and signify to us this note of Instruction.

That the service, or warfare, not only of the first Apostles, but that also
to which Timothy, and so the succeeding, secondary Ministers in the Gospel of
Christ, are furnished and appointed, It was, and is to be exercised Amongst,
and for the good of All men indefinitely, and generally where ever by Gods
providence they are set.

Like as John the forerunner of Christ was sent for a witness, to bear witness
of the light, That all men through him, that light witnessed by him, might
believe, Joh. 1. 7. And our Savior himself in his own personal Ministration
while he was in the world, was so the light of the world, Joh. 9. 5. Though in
respect of that his personal Ministration, he was primely sent to the lost or
scattered sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 15. 24. (and yet to All of them,
Act. 3. 26.) And therefore limited his Disciples Commission while he was on
earth, Mat. 10. 6. yet he was therefore a Minister of the Circumcision, not
only therein to confirm the promises of God made to the Fathers, but also
that thereby the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, as it is written,
For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, or Heathen, I will
sing unto thy name; Again, he says, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people, and
land him all ye Nations, Romans 15. 8, 9, 10, 11. So those his first Apostles or
Messengers, were by him sent into the world, as the Father sent him in respect
of his Mission for Ministration of the Gospel, Joh. 17. 18. And after his
Resurrection, as his Ambassadors, their Commission was enlarged by him, on the
Account of his own as to the extent of his Ministration, or plain preaching
the peace he had made, being enlarged by the Father, Mat. 28. 18, 19. They were
to go into All the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, To preach
among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ, in such manner as before
it had not been named, to which they were immediately furnished and
commissionated; and to make All men see, etc. Mark. 16. 15. with Ephesians. 3. 8, 9.
and Romans 15. 15 - 21. And this grace and Apostleship they received for
obedience to the Faith among all Nations for his name, Romans 1. 5. And therefore
according to the Commandment of the everlasting God, they were to make known
the mystery, as so revealed, and that out of the Scriptures of the former
Prophets, unto them All, that they might believe, Romans 16. 25, 26. And that
they might make all men see, what is the fellowship of the mystery, which had
been hid from generations past; As they were to baptize the Nations with their
word or doctrine as the first and maine part of the work to which they were
sent, 1 Cor. 1. 17. sprinkling or dropping that on them, as Isa. 52. 15. Deuteronomy.
32. 1, 2, 3. with Romans 15. 21. So also together there with as an outward seal
of the truth thereof, they were to baptize them with water also in his name,
even the Nations, whosoever of them would, them, and theirs, every one of them,
even as the Jailer was baptized, he, and all his, streight-way on his first
owning and listening to the report of the Gospel, and being willing to be
instructed therein; and therein also as well as by their word, they preached
the word of the Lord to him, and to all that were in his house, Act. 16. 32,
33. which also is according to Peter's Doctrine opening the Commission, Act. 2.
38, 39. comparing the 39. verse, with a place speaking of a like business in
our Types, to which the Apostle there seems to have apt and evident Allusion,
Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 14. And then also to teach these Nations, as they had outwardly
baptized them, in the name, and unto the acknowledgement of Jesus Christ as
come in the flesh, to observe whatever Jesus Christ did command his Disciples;
And all this they were to do for the discipling the Nations, the gathering or
drawing them to Christ from their former state of darkness, and shadow of
Death, in which they were without any true acknowledgement, and worship of God,
to acknowledge him, and come to him as their Lord, and Gods salvation for, and
to them; and in professed subjection to him, and thankful acknowledgement of
his grace, to bring all that by Gods providence are theirs, given them to bring
up for him, even their little ones with them; So the Jailer beleevingly
rejoicing, he did it with all his house, Act. 16. 34. as Joshua would engage
himself, and his house with him that were under his tuition, to the
acknowledgement and service of the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. And as in considering
Israel after the flesh (to which for Instruction in such cases we have our
warrantize, 1 Cor. 10. 18.) we are directed in those evident Types of this
discipling Nations, Exodus 10. 9, 10, 11. Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12, 13. And as our
Savior also instructs, That such should be permitted to come to him, being
brought in their arms, to whom by Gods providence they are given to bring up
for him; for of such is the Kingdom: And having so done, That they may all of
them, not only be instructed themselves, but taught to learn their children,
as they are capable, and bring them up in the nurture, and admonition of the
Lord Jesus; To the end that all the ends of the earth might look to him, and be
saved, who is Gods salvation to the ends of the earth, That they might come in
to the acknowledgement of him, and so into his house where they might be
trained up, and educated for him, being therein especially made partakers of
his promise in Christ by the Gospel, for sending forth his Spirit to reprove
the world of Sin, Righteousness, and of Judgment, according to the distinct
Revelation of Christ in the Gospel as now come forth, and as men are turning at
his reproves, To teach and lead them into all truth by the same Spirit, still
opening, and making known the same word. Ephesians. 3. 6. Act. 2. 39. Joh. 16. 8, 9,
10, 13, 14. Prove. 1. 20, 23.

In pursuance of this great Design of God for the good of All, Paul was
furnished, and appointed the great Apostle of the Gentiles, Act. 26. 16, 17,
18. For this purpose the Lord Jesus appeared unto him, to make him a witness,
etc. delivering him from the people, and from the Gentiles, to whom then he
sent him, To turn them, even his persecuters, from whom yet he should be
delivered, and amongst whom preserved, for this end, To turn them from
darkness to light, etc. That so they may receive forgiveness, and inheritance
among them that are sanctified; And that to this end, he should preach among
the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ, and to make All men see, What
is the fellowship of the mystery, etc. as aforesaid, Ephesians 3. 8 9.

And therefore also has God preserved a succeeding Generation of such as
through the tastes of his graciousness in the appearance of his love in Christ
to man-ward, having been drawn to him, built upon him, and so reconciled to God
by Jesus Christ, and received the word of Reconciliation. God has preserved
them in the world, and from the evil of it, to this end; and therefore also
furnished them with gifts from his right hand, though more mediately in their
believing, and exercising faith through, and according the Apostles word, yet
still to this as the first and great part of the work of their Ministry in the
world; to carry on that great work amongst, and for the good of all men, as
secondary Instruments and Ministers, building upon, and according to the
foundation laid by the Apostles; to the intent, that now by the Church, by the
whole body of them jointly, and by each according to their capacity, and
opportunity in the place where God has set them, might be made known to
Principalities, and Powers, and so to all Nations, and people under them, The
manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3. 10. That by them the world may know, That God
has sent Christ the Savior of the world; And that he has loved them that
have received this Testimony with the heart, even with the same love wherewith
he has loved his Son, Joh. 17. 15, 20, 21, 23. And that in being Instruments
of saving them that hear* or listen to the word as held forth by them, Their
profiting may appear to All, 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16. Gods Saints generally, even
those that have made a Covenant with him by sacrifice, Psalm. 50. 5. namely that
are reconciled to God by Jesus Christ, and have received that word of
Reconciliation in their hearts, 2 Cor. 5. (each to exercise, according to
fitness and furniture of Gifts, Romans 12. 3, 4 etc. all the Gifts for
continuance being given among these, Ephesians. 4. 7, 11, 12.) They are appointed,
and called to this great service, even now, To call the earth from the rising
of the Sun, to the going down of the same, as well as also afterward to
reign, Judge, and execute Judgment with him, Psalm. 50. 1. 5. As his
Ambassadors, whose first personal coming, and his present coming by his Spirit,
in the Gospel, and other means, is not to judge or condemn the world, but that
through him they might be saved, even such as do hear his words, and reject
them* his gracious end and desire is that they should hear and believe, and
therefore he continues his mediation for them, and mercies to them, Joh. 12.
47* 48. and 3. 17. though he shall appear personally the second time, then to
judge and execute judgment according to the Gospel; so these his servants, and
Ambassadors in this world, are now to make it their great work to persuade all
men, and every man, as they have capacity, and opportunity, to be reconciled to
God, telling them, All things are ready, 2 Cor. 15. 17, 18, 19 20. Luke 14. 17,
21, 23. with meekness instructing the ignorant, and such as oppose themselves,
If God peradventure at any time may give them repentance, etc. They are set in
the world to this end, to be the salt of the earth, the light of the world,
Mat. 5. 13, 14. Instruments by bearing witness of Christ, of reproving the
world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, etc. Joh. 15. 26. with Chap.
16 8, 9, 10. And of making manifest the savor of his knowledge in every place;
A company of spiritual Priests, to serve about holy things for the good of
others; A chosen generation, that they should show forth the praises of him
that has called them, even among the Gentiles, and that both by word and work,
that they may glorify God, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 3, 4, 9. 12. with Mat. 5. 16.
Servants they are of the house, but in their service and warfare, sent out of
the house into the field of the world, Prove. 9. 1, 2, 3 4. Cant. 7. 11. Unto a
generation of* men that are crooked, Amongst whom they live, to shine as
lights, holding forth the word of life, Phil. 2. 15, 16. The Children of the
Kingdom are seed sown in the field of the world, where amongst them, and like
unto them, will be always tares until the end of this world, Matthew. 13. 38,
39. yet they are preserved from the evil, to the end they might bring forth
fruit to God and that there might be none barren among them.

This consideration may be useful, First, to inform of the great love of God
to the world; to All men, which is herein exceedingly commended; for as God
sent not his Son, so neither does he send the Gospel, and Servan^s, and
Spirit of his Son, into the world to condemn, the world, but that the world
through him might be saved; This is the Condemnation, that when light is come
into the world men love darkness. God does not cover hatred with lying lips
pretending love, he is not such as many men are, who hiding the Vision of all
from the people, honor him with their lips, but their heart is far removed
from him, Isa. 29. 11. 13. nor is he, as they would render him to men, such a
one as themselves, Psalm 50. 20, 21. That has burning lips pretending love, and
offering grace, and yet a wicked heart. That while he hates, yet dissembleth
with his lips, and lays up his deceit within him, That while he speaks fair,
yet may not be believed, because mean while he has the perfection of
abominations in his heart against the men to whom he so speaks fair; This he
abhors as greatest folly and wickedness in others, Prove. 10. 18. and 26. 23,
24, 25, 26. He does not thus graciously call, and proclaim his provision
prepared, and with arguments of that nature send his servants to them all, and
invite them to be reconciled, And yet all this but in pretense of love, and for
their good, but it is really so. We may well argue with that good woman, Judge.
13. 23. If God had intended to slay us, he would not have found out, and
accepted such a sacrifice for us* nor would he have sent his Messengers, to
show us, and tell* us such things as these: I say, we may well thus argue,
seeing God himself argues, and positively affirms on his Word and Oath, the
truth and cordialnesse of his love to man-ward, from the latter of these only,
namely his sending his Messengers to call and warn them, (which indeed also
shows the truth of the former, the provision prepared, and way opened for them
all to turn to him; the declaration of which is the sum of their message
received of him, 1 John 1. 1-5. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. which if it were not so, he
would not have told them) see Ezekiel. 33. 7. 10, 11. God having set Ezekiel as a
Watchman, and other Watchmen, to hear the word at his mouth, and to warn the
people; He did thus reason against their unbeleefe and murmuring, whereas they
said, Though he by his Watchmen called and warned them, yet he did not therein
lift up the yoke of thraldom on their Jaws, as he says he does while he
sets meat before them, Hos. 11. 4. but left them necessarily under the power
and bondage of their iniquities, under which they were naturally; so that when
he called, they could not* hear and turn, and how should they then live? To
this God answers, and argues it from his having set Watchmen among them,
Therefore say unto them, As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, of such wicked men as do dye, Ezekiel. 18. 31. he has now
no pleasure, none at all, after any consideration, neither secret, nor
revealed, in their death, but that they should turn and live; though afterward
when the day of his grace and patience is at an end toward them, his heart
will stand otherwise affected toward them, though no change in him; their
condition being wholly changed, they being become perfectly one of the Seed of
the Serpent, wholly rejected of God; Then he will laugh at their calamity, and
mock when their fear comes: But now he is slow to anger, and his very
forbearance is salvation, and shows that he is not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance, and be saved, 2 Pet. 3. 9. 16.
And that appears as we have noted by his Declaration of himself, and heart
toward them, in sending his servants, and using other means to proclaim his
goodness to them, and call, and lead them to repentance, Romans 2. 4. For I the
Lord (says he) speak righteousness, and declare things that are right, and
therefore have not spoken in secret, or covertly, as one that would not that
all should understand me, or take me at my word, nor have willed my servants to
use hidden things of dishonesty. But as 2 Cor. 4. 1, 2. So here, I have not
said in vain to the house of Israel, seek ye me; Therefore seeing I also call
to all the ends of the earth, look to me, and be ye saved, for I am a just God
and Savior, Isa. 45. 19-22. As one that has no pleasure in your destruction,
I have sent to call you; and because I know you have no strength in your
selves, as of your selves, but are naturally dead in trespasses and sins,
Therefore all the day long while I have been calling you to behold me, I
stretched out my hand to a rebellious people, Isa. 65. 1, 2. He spoke in his
Spirit by the hand of the former Prophets, Zach. 7. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20.
Wherefore then when I called was there none to answer, have I no power? etc.
Isa. 50. 2. Turn you, Turn you, why will ye dye? While God by Jesus Christ, in
any means, but especially in the declarations and invitations of his Gospel, is
calling to any of us; This is indeed a time of finding with him, and so urged
as a motive to persuade us to seek him now, and that the wicked should forsake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to the Lord, who
assures us he will multiply pardon, of which he has given his Son for a
standing witness, not only to make propitiation for them, but also by verttue
of his mediation with the Father for them to be a continual testimony in due
time unto them; And thus graciously to call them, Isa. 55. 1, 4, 7. Therefore
says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 1. 2. We beseech you receive not this Grace of God
in vain, speaking of Gods furnishing and sending his servants with the word of
reconciliation to beseech them to be reconciled. For (says he) he (namely God)
says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, in a day of salvation have I
helped thee; Behold now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. The
first part of the saying we have in Isa 49. 7, 8. spoken, and applied
particularly to the Person of Christ; Gods hearing him is spoken with reference
to his Intercession, or Mediation with the Fathers for us, presenting the
infinite and abiding virtue of his sufferings in that sacrifice of his own body
perfected through them, Psalm. 20. Gods helping, or upholding him is spoken with
evident reference to his Ministration, which is now carried on by his servants;
The Scriptures compared show, First, It Is by virtue of his Intercession, who is
the Mediator between God and men, by and with the virtues of his having given
himself a ransom for All, that the Servants of Christ, or the Messengers he
sends of any sort, are preserved and continued in the world, that so ill
requite, and rebel against him, yet to bear witness of him, and call to him;
and so it appears in the following verses of this Chapter, That on the account
of his Mediation daily made, by virtue of the ransom once given for all, he is
also a testimony, or testified in due time, to men in their several ages, and
to every man in season, while it might be for his good. Secondly, That while
the Mediation or Intercession of Christ being continued with the Father, so far
prevails for forbearance, that such testimonies of his goodness, and means of
persuading, and calling to repentance, in which also his good Spirit is
certainly conversant, are still continued and extended unto any, This is still
the accepted time, the time in which they may be accepted; yea the heart of God
is cordially desirous they should come in his Drawings, and be accepted, now is
the day of salvation; Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and
for his wonderful works for the children of men.

2 This Doctrine gives occasion of reproof, unto such as endeavor to forbid,
or hinder the plain preaching and asserting the truth of the Gospel to the
Gentiles, to every, or any man, as men considered, that they might be saved,
which do they, that though they pretend to honor and magnify Christ, yet do
hide that Vision of all which God has revealed in him, from the people, or
render it as a sealed Book, a Riddle, whose meaning lies not in its
expressions, or is according to the Import of them, they therein take away the
Key of Knowledge, and neither enter themselves by the door, which is that
opened in Christ for all men to the Father, nor suffer those that are entering
to go in; and they also (though happily not at so high a rate, if that be all)
that forbid little children to come to Christ being brought in their arms, or
by their appointment, to whom by Gods Providence they are given to bring up for
him, and them to be blessed in his name, or the truth of the Gospels
Declaration concerning them, and the promise in Christ by it, to be witnessed
and sealed in baptizing them in his name; They do also therein forbid that
kind of preaching Gospel to those Parents, and so to all men with them, that
they might be saved. These please not God, and they are contrary to his great
design, the good of all men, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16.

3 Saints may here be exhorted, to mind their main and great design, for which
they are set and preserved in the world; Look not every man on his own things,
but every man also on the things of others; Let the same mind be in you which
was in Christ Jesus, who being equal with God, yet took on him the form of a
servant, and humbled himself to the death of the Cross, that so the grace of
God bringing salvation might come to us, wherefore God has highly exalted him,
and made him a Prince and Savior to be so worshipped, and acknowledged by us;
Herein you shall yield obedience to him, and render that which is but your
reasonable service, in suffering this grace to mould you to the same mind in
love and compassion to others, in becoming servants to, and for them, that they
may be saved. Work out therefore your own salvation, That which is wrought and
perfect in Christ, for all men, which you have received by faith; and the
efficacies of this (believed) in you, even the salvation of your souls, vent
it, show it forth, according as this is boiling up, leading, and framing you to
desire, and endeavor the good of others; For this is God that works in you,
both to will, and to do, and that of good pleasure. Go on confidently therefore
in this your might, and do all things, unto which, by, and according to the
instructions and persuasions of this grace of the Gospel, which is Gods Arm,
you are lead, and that without murmurings and disputings with your own reason,
and wisdom, against any thing this salvation moves you too for others good,
lest therein you be fighters against God, and fail of experimenting his
presence and fellowship with you, or the working of his mighty power in the
efficacies of this salvation in, and by you, or make your selves unapt to his
acceptable service; but that on the other hand, you may be blameless,
harmless, the Sons of God, in the midst of a crooked generation, amongst whom
shine ye as lights in the world, and ye shall so shine by holding forth the
faithful word amongst them, then also shall those servants of Christ that have
been isntrumental for you, Rejoice that they have not run in vain; for if you
have no savor of the knowledge of God, and his goodness, so as you make it
manifest to all men, in every place, according to capacity and opportunity
given you, you are fit for nothing, you come not yet up to the great design of
God in calling and furnishing you by his grace, and setting you in the world,
and so it may seem as in respect of you, that they have run in vain, that have
been instruments of good to you, though their work shall be with their God. Be
exhorted therefore to suffer the grace of God to make you one with him in his
Design; and in pursuance of it, Let your light so shine before men that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven, Phil. 2.
Mat. 5. 13. 15. Dearly beloved (says Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12.) I beseech you
as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts that war against the soul,
having your conversation honest, seasoned with gravity, and sincerity, single
and chaste to God, and your main design to glorify him amongst others, and for
their good, that the Gentiles in the day of their visitation may glorify God;
who when the instructions and reproofs of the Gospel begin to light on their
hearts, will presently turn their eyes upon you, supposing, if there be indeed
truth in this Gospel, and in the instructions thereof, leading them so to
worship God; If there be such preciousnesse in Christ, such sweetness and
satisfaction in the love of God to Man-ward therein discovered; that then those
that do indeed know it, and have tasted the graciousnesse of the Lord, as you
have professed among them, must needs be men in their conversation, full of
honesty, walking in all good conscience toward God and men, not loving the
world, nor the things thereof, not easily provoked by any injuries of any sort
extending only to themselves, but willingly rather suffering wrong, not
high-minded, self-willed, or conformed to this world, in the customs, ways,
or fashions of it, according to their former lusts in their ignorance; And if
accordingly they behold your light herein shining, your lamps burning, and you
as strangers, travelers, and as men ready waiting for the appearing of your
Lord; this will be a great and effectual means to lead them to glorify God,
and acknowledge, As we have heard, so we have seen in the house of our God,
they will then believe his word, and the instructions thereof to be good, and
true; whereas on the other hand, if they behold the contrary in you, it will be
an occasion of stumble to them, and lead them to blaspheme the holy name called
upon by you. Oh therefore ly down, and deny your selves in this, and be willing
to take up your cross daily that you may follow him in pursuance of his Design
for the good of all men. And to provoke, and constrain you hereto; Consider
these Motives.

1 You are debtors to all men, Greeks, Barbarians, wise, unwise, bond, and
free; And that upon this account you have been acquainted with that grace of
God that brings salvation to all men, Romans 1. 15. Tit. 2. 10, 11. Its that
grace that you have received (for to such I speak) and in the receiving which,
you have been saved, who were sometimes such, as the worstamongst whom you
live; but that grace that is in God toward them, in its appearing to you, has
saved you; And therein you have received that word of Reconciliation in some
distinct understanding of it, and fitness to hold it forth, according to which
your selves have been reconciled to God, that holds forth matter of concernment
to every one of them, that one dyed for all, and rose again; And that this was
not only sufficient, but effectual with the Father in the public Person, as
if all had dyed; And that all this was so effectual with the Father for them,
and cordially, that it might be effectual in them, that they which live, every
man in his proper age, should not henceforth after this grace is manif^sted to
him, live to himself, but to him that dyed for them, and rose again; that in
that Death and Resurrection of Christ, God was in Christ reconciling the world
to himself, and now by his Ambassadors does on that ground persuade them to be
reconciled in themselves by Christ, whom he has sent to bless them, in
turning every one of them from all their iniquities, Tit. 3. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 5.
14, 15-21. Act. 3. 26. such is the word of Reconciliation he has put in you,
Tidings of great joy to all people, Luke 2. 10, 14. you are herein according to
your measure made Stewards of the manifold grace of God, Moreover it is
required of Stewards that a man be found faithful, 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 4.
1, 2. Do not you therefore withold good from them to whom it is due, or put
your light under a bushel, that was given you to show light to all the house.

2 Yea let the love of Christ, and so of God in Christ to all men, be herewith
considered, as effectually witnessed, in that he has done for them, and does
to them, according as declared in this Gospel committed to your trust, and it
will constrain you; True it is, it does not constrain or lead to such love, or
service of love, but upon principles of certainty and truth; it leads not to
run at an uncertain, or to fight as those that beat the Air; nor are there
other principles of certainty and truth, but these, and their companions, upon
which it so persuades; that is to say, The love of Christ does not constrain or
lead any man to preach the Gospel to, or persuade any other man to be
reconciled to God, for whom the testimony of it does not assure him upon
principles of certainty and truth, That Christ dyed, and rose for him, and that
so effectually with the Father, and cordially in respect of its tendency
toward him (as foreshewed.) Its true, many do preach, and exhort, and fight
very much, that do not thus judge; but on what account, or the love of what
leads them to it, we examine not, doubtless some one thing, some another: But
let this love which you have seen, and believed to be in God toward all men in
sending his Son the Savior of the world, be considered by you, and from these
principles of truth received in your judgment, it will constrain or hemn you
in to this service, by filling you with the same love, and zeal, for their
good, that will not be let or hindered by any thing; seeing also your
understanding from the same principles is furnished with knowledge of the
greatness of the terror of the Lord, against those which turn such grace into
wantonness, tread under foot such precious blood, denying him that bought
them, bring on themselves destruction; which terror you could not otherwise
have rightly read, but in that face of Christ; For who knows the power of his
Anger? (surely none) But here we have a rule given us, according to which you
may have some discerning of the nature and greatness of it, according to thy
fear or worship (that name and grace of thine declared, in, and through thy
Son, according to which thou might have been feared or worshipped by those
men to their everlasting health and comfort) such is, and will be thy wrath
against all ungodly men that turn thy grace into wantonness, Psalm. 90. 11.
Therefore in the belief of the exceeding greatness of his love to Man-ward,
you have a view of the greatness of his Terror against all such ungodly ones
as turn it into wantonness, and therefore while yet there may be a prevention,
and the Decree is not gone forth against them, or any of them, you cannot but
in the constraining operation of this love of Christ earnestly beseech and
persuade them, and lay down your selves to win them; Let that therefore be
considered by you.

3 Mind also for your provocation hereto, and direction herein, the many
examples of Christ's servants before you. See David, evermore on the
commemorating any enlargement in distress, love testified, or mercy received
from God, he was led out, and enlarged with more earnestness on such occasions,
to desire, invite and endeavor, that all others with him would acknowledge and
bless the name of God for his goodness, that they would come to him, trust in
him, pour out their hearts before him, make proof of his graciousnesse and
readiness to do them good, signifying, That ^he bottome-matter of his glorying
or rejoicing, the ground and foundation whence such mercy issued to him, and
upon the account of which God was such a refuge for him, was such, and so
really prepared with God, and full of virtue for all others, that any other
might certainly expect the same, or the like, according to their needs and
capacity, from it that he had met with in looking to him, according as his
grace witnessed in that he has already done for them leads them, Ps. 4. and
34. and 62. 5-8 and 66. 5-8. and 95. and 96. and 98, and 100, and 107. 1-8-15,
16, etc. So Paul mentions it as one great end of Gods showing chief mercy to
him a chief sinner, for a pattern to others that should after believe; yea for
an encouragement to such, as being obliged and invited to believe the truth of
Gods goodness, and propitiousnes toward them, by the grace manifested in what
he has done for them (as all are) might discourage themselves from the
consideration of the greatness of their sins, and so delay, or defer to believe
(as some say, and we have good reason to believe, from the end and scope of the
place, the words may be read) and in consideration hereof is enlarged in heart
to commend that saying, which he had proved so full of faithfulness, as worthy
of all acceptance by every one of them, at all times, and in all cases, and
needs, while yet the day of grace is extended toward them, God holding open
the door, and by any means calling them to believe, That Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 12-15, 16. See also how he sets his
example before us in this matter, 1 Cor. 10. 31, 32, 33. Whether therefore you
eat, or drink, or whatever else you do (even in things of that nature, as
buying, selling, wearing apparel, in words and gestures, 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31. and
6, 7. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3. and 1. 13-18. with 2. 11, 12, etc.
and 4. 3-11. Ephesians. 4. 24, 25. to the end and 5. Tit. 2. 1-10, 11. Romans 12, and
13. Do all to the glory of God (And how that? in all these things) giving none
offense, no just occasion of scandal or stumble to the Jew, nor to the Gentile,
nor to the Church of God, even as I (says the Apostle, please all men in all
things (that is not in having fellowship with their evil ways, and unfruitful
works of darkness, Ephesians. 4. 11. 8-11. 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4. But so as may be for
their good to edification, and to the adorning the name and doctrine of God our
Savior, before and among them, in all goodness, gentleness, honesty,
moderation, or sobriety, quiet bearing reproach and evils from them, etc. as
Romans 15. 2. 3.) not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many that they
may be saved; be ye herein followers of me, says he, even as I also am of
Christ, Chap. 11. 1. with Romans 15. 2. 3.

4 Forget not the recompense of the Reward, both present and eternal; you shall
have in this life a hundredfold more in things infinitely better then those you
deny your selves in, and forsake for Christ's sake, and the Gospels, and in
prosecuting this great design, the good of all men, better name, better
kindred, better treasures, etc. though with persecution, and in that world that
is to come eternal life; a full enjoyment and possession of it without
persecution, or molestation, Mar. 10. 29, 30. You shall herein now render your
selves as children of your Father, who causes his Sun to shine, and Rain to
fall on the just, and unjust, and is kind to the unkind, and evil, Mat. 5. 44,
45. Lu. 6. 35. 36. whose grace even in these things brings salvation to all
men, Tit. 2. 11. Romans 2. 4. he having so loved them, as to give his only
begotten Son for them, the Savior of the world, Joh. 3. 16. with 1 John 4. 14.
which is both the fountain of, and witnessed in, all these mercies, Psalm. 85.
10, 11, 12. Act. 14. 17. you shall herein render your selves one with your
Lord, Husband, and Head, in his main Design for the good of all, yea hereby
grow into more likeness and oneness with him, even as he and his Father are
one, J^^. 17. 21, 22, 23. yea herein is his Father and yours glorified in your
bringing forth much fruit, Joh. 15. 8. who also will honor you with his
presence, fellowship and approbation; however men reproach you, and cast out
your name as evil under heaven, and afford you room and entertainment where
your Lord and Master is, nor will suffer you to have worse use then your Lord
and Master had, and in his Gospel, and spiritual presence in this world still
has; which may administer to you joy and boldness in any day of trial here,
because as he is, so are we in this world; for it is enough for the Disciple to
be as his Master, etc. Joh. 12. 26. and 14. 21, 23. 1 John 4. 17. with Matthew.
10. 24, 25, 40. Yea in following his steps in the prosecution of this great
Design, you shall heap coals of fire on the heads of your enemies, that shall
either tend to the melting them now, or if now they will not suffer the melting
operation of them, to their everlasting burning hereafter; ye shall be a savor
of life unto life, or of death unto death unto them, Romans 12. 18. 20 31. with 2
Cor. 2. 15, 16. And for the time to come, he has spoken of things yet
infinitely greater. Though now being sent into the field of the world, you bear
forth your precious seed in tears, which are occasioned by the hardness of the
work, the little profit it seems to have with men in respect of the many whose
good is aimed at in it; the storms of opposition and tribulations of diverse
sorts you meet with, yet doubtless you shall return again with rejoicing,
bringing your sheaves, Psalm. 126. And for your shame you shall have double, in
your own land, you shall possess it, everlasting joy shall be upon you Isa. 61.
4. 7.

The second general Instruction we shall propound, is no other but that which
is fully expressed, and lies whole in the first verse, as considered in it self,
and with relation to the occasion foreshewed; namely,

That in pursuance of this great Design for the good of all men, and that to
that purpose, The believers ministration may be blessed and successeful among
them; First of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks
are to be made for all men.

For proof of this Proposition in these terms, I need add no more, it is so
plain in the words, considering the occasion of them, yet it is again confirmed
in the 7. and 8. verses, Paul being appointed an Herald, or Crier to the
Gentiles, in faith and verity of the testimony of God concerning Christ, he
wills* therefore, seeing he is appointed to such service amongst them, and for
their good, that men may pray every where, ever more, in every place, in all
cases, yea for All men, as is signified in the following words, without wrath
or doubting; which signifies, that many of those for whom prayers are to be
made, that the warfare of the servants of Christ may be blessed and profitable
to them, are such, as against whom they shall have occasion of wrath, and
concerning whom, occasion, or cause of doubting, if they consider them
according to outward appearance, yet even for such, the worst sorts, and so All
men, unto, and amongst whom they are sent, Prayers, and Thanksgivings are to be
made, to this end, that they may war a good warfare amongst them; And therefore
the Apostles giving up themselves wholly to the service of Christ in the Gospel
of his Son, were said to give themselves continually in the first place to
Prayer, and so and there withal to the Ministry of the word, Act. 6. 4.

But for more distinct opening, and usefulness of this Proposition, Consider,

1 Who are the All men for whom Prayers, and Thanksgiving are to be made. 2 Who
are those men by whom they are to be made. 3 What are those Supplications,
Prayers, and Intercessions that are to be made for all men. 4 What those
Thanksgivings that are to be joined with Prayers* and made for all men. 5 What
foundation we have, or upon what account and ground we are exhorted to make
Supplications, Prayers, etc. for all men.
1 Who are the all men here meant in the Text for whom Prayers, etc. are to be
made, let the Text speak; They are all those men whom God would have saved, and
come to the knowledge of the truth, verse 4. That good will in God toward
them, being rendered as the ground of praying for them, plainly shows they are
all to be prayed for toward whom there is such good will in God, and who they
are, see and compare these Scriptures, Tit. 2. 11. The grace of God brings
salvation to all men, 2 Pet. 3. 9. He would not that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance, Eze. 33. 11. with Chapter 18. 31. He has no
pleasure in the death of the wicked; of such wicked men as do dye, but that
they should turn and live; For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn
the world, but that the world through him might be saved, Joh. 3. 17. even
such, as by rejecting when they hear, do bring upon themselves everlasting
condemnation, verse 19. with Chap. 12. 47, 48. They are all those whose nature
Jesus Christ took, and for whom therein he gave himself a ransom, and between
whom and the Father he is the Mediator, that he might be testified in due time,
which are as the following verses say, Men, as opposed to God, which signifies
the whole species or kind of that creature man, none excepted but the Mediator
who is of both, God and man. All other of the whole kind every one of that
nature, as Heb. 2. 9. and 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. And so other Scriptures plentifully
tell us, He has redeemed, ransomed, or bought all men, even those that deny
the Lord that bought them, and bring on themselves swift destruction by so
denying him, 2 Pet. 3. 2. And does make Intercession for the Transgressors,
even for such Transgressors, and that a long time, as afterward for their
wilful unprofitableness and rebellion, he justly leaves to be cut off for ever
Isa. 53. 12. Luke 13. 6. 9. as for those that crucified him, he prayed, Father
forgive him, Luke 23. 33. 34. Do not yet lay sin to their charge, so as to
execute Judgment speedily on them, but grant forbearance yet unto them, and
further means for admonishing them to repentance, and his prayer was heard for
them, and they were spared that time that had a hand in that, and had special
means used by the Apostles to instruct and admonish them to repentance, for the
blessing them, in turning every one of them from all his iniquities, Act. 3.
19, 25. even those very persons that afterward persecuting the Apostles, and
rejecting the Gospel as preached by them also, filled up the measure of their
sin, till wrath came upon them to the uttermost, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14, 15, 16. see
particularly in the case of Judas; our Savior affirms, his body was given to
be broken, and offered for him, his blood shed for him, even then it was
virtually done, and accepted for him as one of the rest of mankind (the works
being virtually finished before the actual accomplishment of them) Luke 22.
19, 20, 21. giving the Bread, and the Cup to his Disciples, and to them all
there present, and speaking to them, he says, This is my body which is given
for you, This is my blood which is shed for you: But behold the hand of him
that betrayeth me is with me on the Table. But behold, etc. as if he should
say, notwithstanding this forementioned is true for you all, and I have thus
declared it to you, and given you this as a witness and seal of the truth of
it, which still makes the sin so much the the greater, yet even one of you will
betray me; neither did our Savior in this or by any fore-purpose necessitate
Judas, or willingly give him over, or leave him to this sin, to betray his
Master, but here evidently, as often before, did faithfully and timely admonish
him, while it might have been for his good, even for the preventing him in the
accomplishment of his wicked enterprise, and that that was the first end and
intention of it toward him appears by considering the next verse with Matthew.
26. 24, 25. and the whole current of Scripture as to this point; nor did God
stand in need of his help with the destruction of his soul to bring to pass
his enterprise, he could have brought that about some other way if Judas had
received his Masters warning, as God desired, and indeed this warning of our
Savior to Judas, in both the parts thereof, is of like nature with that Psalm.
68. 18* 19-21. Thou have ascended on high, thou have lead Captivity captive,
Thou have received gifts in the Man for men, even for the Rebellious, that God
might dwell among them; And hence also does daily load us, etc. But (says the
Text) God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a
one as goes on still (that is, notwithstanding the truth of the former, the
permission really prepared in Christ, and the means and Spirit with them to
reclaim him cordially extended by Christ) in his trespasses. Both Scriptures
show, that the things before affirmed concerning them were true and cordially
for them, which also will be the great reason of their everlasting condemnation
in a second Death, they rejecting these timely admonitions. Further also, not
only was our Saviors body given, and blood shed for Judas* But likewise our
Savior, even while he was thus in time admonishing Judas, that he might be
such a testimony in due time to him, and while it might have been for his good,
he as the great Mediator between God and man, was earnestly making Intercession
for him, even while Judas was conceiving his wicked thought and enterprise
against him, and till he was so wholly given over, and left of God to Satan,
that our Saviors prayer returned again into his bosom, and his prayer (namely
Judas) became sin, there being no door for repentance or turning left, which we
cannot conclude to be fully done till after that last time of his being wrought
upon to repentance, and sight and owning of his sin, Mat. 27. 3. which
doubtless might have this tendency to lead him yet again to look to his Master
with whom was forgiveness; but then running from his Master, and to the
Priests for help, he was wholly left to his madness and desperateness, verse
4, 5. whence that seems to be mentioned as the time and thing in which his sin
was filled up, and so wrath came upon him to the uttermost, Act. 1. 18. but
when, or whereinsoever that was, this we say, till such time as sin was
finished in him, and had brought forth death, occasioned an utter separation
from God, our Savior was with earnestness (as one heartily and much desiring
to prevent his destruction) praying for him, as appears Psalm. 109. 4, 5, 6, 7.
(which Scripture the Holy Ghost spoke concerning Judas, compare verse 8. with
Act. 1. 16, 17, 20.) For my love, they are my adversaries, but I to prayer, or
I give my self to prayer; And that the Holy Ghost hereby means prayer for him,
and so them, other such adversaries* even then while they were acting as
adversaries, appears by the next verse, in which he seems to have reference to
this, as a testimony of his goodness toward them, They have rewarded me evil
for good, and hatred for my love; and also by that which follows in the 7.
verse as aptly opposed to, or set against this, Let his prayer become sin, as
who should say, because in time he would not suffer the love testified in, and
grace extended by means of my praying* for him, to have its efficacy upon him;
yea further, it appears that this prayer to which our Savior did diligently
give, or set himself, while there was any opportunity, was for Judas, and so
for such Adversaries, even for such good for and to them, as by which their
destruction, yea the finishing their sin thereto might yet have been
prevented, while he was so making intercession for them, by comparing this,
Psalm. 109. with Psalm. 35. which is equivalent with this, and indeed clearly
opens it, see ver. 7, 8. Without cause they are my adversaries, etc. therefore
let destruction come upon him, etc. See again, ver. 11, 12, 13. compared with
Psalm. 109. 3, 4, 5. They rewarded me evil for good, says the text; but as for
me, my clothing was sackcloath, I humbled my Soul with fasting, and my prayer
returned into my bosom; but not to be larger in this, it appears by what has
been said, that the Ransom, and Mediation of Christ is true and cordial, for
such men as by turning his grace therein into wantonness, and denying him that
bought them, do afterward bring upon themselves swift destruction, and so for
all and every of Mankind, and those are the All men here in the text to be
prayed for, even all those for whom he gave himself a ransom, and is the
Mediator, that he might be to them a testimony in due time.

Yea further it appears, that by all men to be prayed for, he means all
Mankind, without exception of any, in their several and proper Ages, in that
instancing but one sort or degree of them particularly, he says expressly, All
of them, though they were then generally the worst, and those concerning whom
there might be most occasion of wrath, and doubting in the Believer, looking
upon them as they were in themselves, for Kings, and for all in authority; so
our Savior exhorts, to pray for them that despitefully use us, and persecute
us, Mat. 5. 44. according to his example, Luke 23. 34. so Stephen prayed
earnestly when he breathed his last for that very people, who had now added
this to their former wickedness, they had rejected the Gospel, as brought and
confirmed by the Apostles, and now stoned him for Christ's sake, whom before
they had Crucified, yet kneeling down he cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay
not this sin to their charge, Act. 7. 60. So Paul, even when they were in part
and in a great measure given up to their blindness and hardness* though yet
not wholly as afterward, while there was any hope of prevention, or recovery,
(see Romans 10. 1.) Brethren, my hearts desire, and prayer to God for Isr^el is,
that they might be saved; and suitable to all this is that instruction, 1 John
2. 1, 2. Having in the latter part of the first Chapter propounded a remedy
against, and a way of clensing from the sins of Believers distinct, in the
beginning of this Chapter he first tells them, These things he has written to
them that they sin not, and then proceeds in his instruction, to enlarge and
show the infinite virtue and usefulness of the same remedy for taking away
other men's sins also* if those that yet believe not, If any man sin; before
he said, if we sin, now, if any man, distinct from we or us, and how to
understand what he means by any man, as distinguished from, and opposed to us,
or we, see 1 John 5. 19. 20. We know that we are of God, and the whole world
lies in wickedness. Thus then we are to understand him according to his own
explication, These things I write, that ye that are of God, and have known
him that is from the beginning; as 1 John 2. 12-14. sin* not; and then also, if
any other man sin, any of the world that yet lies in wickedness, any one
whatsoever that we have occasion to converse with, and so see his sin, We have
(that is, Believers have) an Advocate with the Father, that we may boldly make
use of, to present all our needs, and matters* that are according to the will of
God, for our selves, and others, and he that is our Advocate, He is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole world; and therefore we may through and by him, make our prayers for any
man's sin; which is equivalent with, and full as large as this for all men; we
shall add no more for proof of this but only this caution, for a right
understanding of what is said* that it is possible, and sometime found, some
men before their Natural l^fe be snatched from them, may have put themselves out
of the number of this All men to be prayed for, men may have so filled up the
measure of their sin, as to have finished it, so as it has occasioned, or
brought forth Death, in an utter rejection, and separation from God, Jam. 1. 15
with 1 John 5. 16, 17. Jer. 6. 30. now if any have sinned so far as unto
Death in such a sense, God having wholly rejected them, and we see, or discern
the same, that we may so judge according to the instructions of the Gospel,
then the Gospel says not we should pray for that sin, and yet this infringes
not at all the truth of the Proposition, in the terms in which it is
delivered; that prayers, etc. are to be made for all men, for these reasons:

1 These were of that number All of them once, and some time (for God is slow
to anger, it is his strange and unpleasing work wholly to give up any, Isa.
28. 21.) and so were then to be prayed for; there are none that are not to be
prayed for, or to be absolutely prayed against, but such as have been before
prayed for, as comparing the forementioned Scriptures, it appears we are not
to cease praying for them* until their sin be unto death, which it is not,
til finished, then all the time before while it is not finished, those persons
were to be prayed for, upon the same ground and principles of certainty and
truth that any others are. The truth of this is confirmed in those Scriptures,
Jer. 7. 16. and 11. 14. and 14. 11. where the Prophet is required, not to pray
any more for that people, nor to lift up a cry or prayer for them, the reason
we have in the foregoing and following Verses of those Chapters, like unto
that, Prove. 1. 24, 25. etc. and Isa. 65. 12, 13. and 66. 1-4. because God had
long cried unto them in his Spirit, by the Prophets and other means, as Zech.
7. 9-11, 12. with Jer. 7. 3-12 13. to amend their ways, not to trust in lying
words, etc. and waited long that he might be gracious to them, and yet they
would not hear, he had called, and they answered not, but set at naught all his
counsel, and would none of his reproof; which shows, that all that time while
he had done so, his Servants according to his good and acceptable will, were not
to cease praying for them; so that even these were to be prayed for, and that
in an acceptable time.

2 When Sin is so wholly finished, as it has brought forth death, in an
utter separation from God, then they being so rejected of him, are left to the
power of the Tempter, and their own delusions they have chosen, in which
condition they are become one with Satan, and so of the seed of the Serpent in
a full sense, of the Devil, and so in far worse state than that which is
merely Natural, as derived from Adam; These are no longer numbered among all
men, as men, or children of men considered, but are distinguished from them,
and set out by names far worse than any, generally applied to Mankind, even
the children of the wicked one, distinct from the field of the world, Mat. 13.
38* vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, Romans 9. 22. Sons of Belial, 1 Samuel
2. 12. 2 Samuel 23. 6* 7. the wicked, and ungodly in the highest sense, trees
twice dead, plucked up by the roots, for whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever, 2 Pet. 2. 9. and Jud. 12. 15. so that though there may be
some at some time living amongst men, that are not to be prayed so* yet the
Proposition remains generally true, That all men, every where, and in all
Ages, are to be prayed for, and every particular of them, until in any of them
we see according to the instructions of the Gospel, that Sin is finished, and
has brought forth Death, and then they are not to be reckoned by us amongst
the residue of men, as natural men considered; yea God will discriminate them
by some distinguishing notes, As giving them up wholly to a reprobate sense,
Romans 1. 28. 2 Timothy 3. 8. to have pleasure, and that without reproof (having
their conscience feared) 1 Timothy 4. 2. in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. And
in his providence not vouchfasing any more to reprove, or call them, by
enlarging his servants hearts, opening their mouths, and giving them
opportunity to preach to, and persuade them (which he usually does, while it is
an accepted time, or day of salvation, toward a man or people, 2 Cor. 6. 1,
2-11.) Ezekiel. 33. 33. Amos 8. 11-14. or by adding his lesser and favorable
chastisements, and changes in his providence with them, as with others, Isa.
1. 5. Psalm. 55. 19. Hos. 4. 14. So that the spiritual man shall in some measure
be able to know, and note them as reprobate silver, that God has rejected.

Yet here let me give this as my advice; Let none of us be too hasty in passing
sentence or judgment on men as such, or in ceasing* to pray for them on such
an account, and that for these Reasons.

First, because God is slow to anger; And it is his strange work to reprobate,
or give up any to perdition, neither does he it usually at once, but with a
great deal of slownesse* and by degrees, and is exceedingly unwilling when he
has begun, to do it fully, Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give thee up, how shall I
set thee as Admah and Zeboim? etc. Its generally true, He is slow to anger, of
great compassions, and repents him of the evil. The truth of it may be
abundantly seen in the case of Pharaoh, whom though God often left to his
hardness, after he had stubbornly and voluntarily hardened himself, and made
himself a meet vessel for such judgments, yet he did not wholly nor
altogether leave him therein, but in part, and graciously admonished and
wrought on his heart* by his judgments and admonitions, again and again, and
did so many a time soften him after such his beginnings of hardening before he
fully left him to it, after which he was not long spared; so likewise in that
case of Jerusalem, weeping over it he said, How often would I have gathered
thee? etc. Matthew. 23. 37. Luke 19. 42. The truth is, it is mentioned as very
rare, That God does spare any time in this natural life such vessels of wrath
as are wholly fitted and given over to destruction, though sometimes some he
may for wise and holy ends, as Romans 9. 22. yet it is generally true, The
forbearance of the Lord is salvation, and it is better to be A living Dog, than
a dead Lion.

Secondly, The beginnings or first comings forth of his judgments of that
nature have always a merciful tendency, to warn and admonish to jealousy of
themselves, and turning to him, that so the full coming forth of them may be
prevented, Hos. 5. 15. Amos 4. 12. Romans 11. 11.

And further to instruct* us to this, see the frame of spirit found in those
holy men of God, that well knew his mind, when God bad Moses let him alone that
his wrath might wax hot against that people to consume them, yet he besought
the Lord again for them, and the Lord was entreated of him, and repented of the
evil he thought to do unto them, Exodus 32. 9, 10, 11, 14. So in those
instances in Jeremy after he was forbidden to pray for the people, Chap. 7. 16.
yet see how he makes supplication for them* Chap. 10. 23, 24. yea after he is
forbidden again, Chap. 11. 14. yet see with what earnestness and affection he
makes his prayer again for them, Chap. 14. 7, 8, 9. yea God himself after he
had forbidden him the third time, Chap. 14. 11. yet instructs him to teach them
to humble themselves before him, and acknowledge their iniquity, and turn to
the Lord (in the latter end of that Chapter) with whom they might find mercy
and healing of their backslidings, in turning, according to the movings, and
leadings of his grace, as Chap. 3. 12. 14. 22. Though persisting in their
stubbornness, his mind could not be turned toward them, Chap. 15. 1, 2.
Prayers then are to be made for all men in a time when God may be found, as is
showed.

We come secondly to consider by whom they are to be made; this is not expressly
answered, or spoken to in this verse; but in verse 8. it is, which gives us
occasion here to consider it: And it is there answered in an indefinite and
general term, That men pray every where; And that* may be understood, First,
either with relation to the foregoing verse for the understanding the word Men;
There Paul tells us he was appointed a Herald, or Crier, a Teacher of the
Gentiles in faith and verity, and here he wills therefore that men every where
pray, etc. And so by men we may understand all men every where even among the
Gentiles, to whom he was sent, as Act. 17. 30. God now by his Gospel commands
all men every where to repent; Yea to seek the Lord, verse 27. So here Paul
proclaims liberty, and therefore also admonishes and calls upon them all, and
every where, to make prayers to God by Jesus Christ, to seek him while he may
be found, and call upon him while he is near, as Isa. 55. 6. That so they
receive not this grace of God in sending the Gospel among them in vain, as 2
Cor. 6. 1, 2. Or secondly, it may be understood with relation to the following
verses for understanding the word Men. In those following verses, 9, 10. He
adds this exhortation to the women also, that they demean themselves as women
professing godliness, and not only amongst or toward all men, but also in
the Church, or General Assemblies of Believers of which he signifies they
were, whom he so requires or exhorts. Understand men in the 8. verse
equivalently, and as opposed to women, verse 9. And then it is all men
indefinitly and generally, unto whom these instructions and exhortations were
primely and especially dedicated, to prepare instruct, and furnish them to seek
the good of others, that is, men professing godliness (the whole Church, the
Assemblies or Fellowships of Believers, they all, and every one of them, men
and women are to join together in both Prayers and Prophesyings for the good of
all.) But in the public Assemblies of them together in one place that men only
speak as the mouth of the whole* in presenting Supplications, Prayers*
Intercessions, and Thanksgivings for all men; as well as in crying or
proclaiming Gospel to them, or teaching them in such general Assemblies, verse
10, 11. with 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. yet women also are to be teachers of good
things to others, especially the aged women, and that as their greatest
ornament, Tit. 2. 3, 4. yea they may (and its commendable in them) not only
join with men, but be fellow-helpers, and laborers with them in the Gospel,
in both instructing and helping forward with their prayers for the good of all
men* and that with* and among, even in some private Societies and meetings of
their brethren, though not every where (as may be seen in comparing, Phil. 4.
3. with Act. 1. 13, 14.) However then they are of the number by whom
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, are to be made for
all men (though not by them as the mouth of the rest, in every place, not in
such general or public Assemblies, where the Church or whole Congregation is
met together in any one place, yet) they with the rest as before, and so all
Believers, not Timothy, or some prime ones amongst them only, but all
indefinitely and together, yea one and other of them that have known and
believed the great love of God in Christ to manward, are especially required
and called upon to pray for others, even for all men; and according to this
twofold reading of verse. 8. this we shall find plentifully in other Scriptures;

That all men every where and in all Ages have an effectual door opened for
their liberty, or allowance afforded them, and are exhorted and called upon to
seek and pray unto God, and that more especially, now since the full coming
forth of the Gospel, in the name of Christ, but that it is especially required,
and expected of Believers, who only are, and are therefore furnished with
knowledge, and tastes of his graciousnesse to manward, the love of Christ
instructing, and constraining them, to make their prayers unto God in the name
of Christ, for others also, even for all men.

To the first part of this Proposition, see Act. 17. 27* with Isa. 55. 1-4-6,
7. God furnishes with all the mercies of this natural life, that men in and by
them might be led to seek him, etc. and by his Gospel more strongly obliges
and calls them (with the Declaration of his Son, by whom the way is made
for them, and who is given for a witness to the people) to seek the Lord while
he may be found, to call upon him while he is near, even such as are walking in
their wicked ways, harboring their unrighteous thoughts, laboring for that
which is not Bread, are there graciously invited and admonished thereto upon
such good ground, so equivalent to this, that men pray every where without
wrath, or doubting, the Psalmist invites all the people to trust in him at all
times, and with trust or confidence to pour out their hearts before him, and
that on this account, God is a refuge for us, Psalm. 62. 8. suitable to which is
that acknowledgement, and magnifying the riches of Gods grace, through the
plenteousnesse of the redemption with him, Psalm. 65. 2. O God that hear
prayer, to thee shall all flesh come; and those invitations, and admonitions,
Psalm. 65. 1-6. and 96. 7, 8. and 100. and that, Jam. 1. 5. If any man lack
wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives liberally to all men, and upbraideth
none; yea let him ask in faith, according as the goodness of God manifested
moves and encourages him; and if he be in darkness and see no light, yet
let him look, come unto the name of God as declared in his Son; Let him come
without money and price, and seek unto God for those waters, the Lord will hear
them, the God of Israel will not for sake them, but will open rivers in dry
places, and fountains in the deserts, Isa. 41. 17, 18. and 50. 10. and 55. 1
True it is, The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, by how much
the more he comes with a wicked mind, Prove. 15. 8. and 21. 27. and 28. 9. But
this is not to put a bar against wicked and sinful men, that they should not
seek the Lord, or call upon him as they are exhorted, Isa. 55. 6, 7. but to
instruct and direct them, and all others, to seek him indeed, and with the
whole heart, not feignedly; for even righteous men may offer the sacrifices of
the wicked, and then shall not be therein heard, and it is for their good they
are not. If I, (says David) regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear me, Psa. 66. 18. Every one that sets up the Idol of his iniquity in his
heart, and puts the stumbling block of it before his face, sets that in his
eye, and design, to reserve his own purpose, and makes that the end of his
prayer, the Lord will set his face against him, for they seek not him, but
themselves, Ezekiel. 14. 3. 7. Isa. 58. Zech. 7. 5, 6, 7. They refuse to hear the
Law, or receive his instruction, or reproof, hide their evil deeds from the
light, and yet for a pretense seek him, and are zealous in multiplying
sacrifices, as Prove. 28. 9. Zech. 7. 5-7. and on the other hand* sinfuland evil
men, through his goodness in mercies or chastisements, may be humbled before
him, and heartily seek help and mercy of him and shall be therein accepted as
Ahab, 1 King. 21. 29. This is generally true, Every one that seeks finds,
and to him that knocks it shall be opened; let that grace of God therefore
that brings Salvation to all men, move, encourage, and provoke every man to
seek the Lord while he may be found, etc* Look unto me, and be ye saved, all
the ends of the earth.

To the second part of the Proposition, and so for more direct answer to the
query, Who those are by whom especially prayers are to be made for others, even
for all men, of whom it is required and expected; they are all those that by
faith in Jesus Christ have such enjoyment and usefulness of him as their
Advocate with the Father; If any man sin, we have an Advocate; we that have
believed is him, have through faith such usefulness of him with the Father, as
to present, and make out, and manage our matters we have through his grace,
according to his will, to present to him for others as well as for our selves,
even for any man; therefore if any of us that have believed on the name of the
Son of God (for so we have good reason to understand* the word any man, 1 John
5. 16. from the foregoing Verses, where he is speaking of Believers seeking,
and confidence of acceptance, and from thence here encourages them all, and so
any of them, to ask) it is not, as 1 John 2. 1, 2. where any man, and the whole
world is evidently opposed to us, and we, as 1 John 5. 19. but here the word
Any man is only joined with, or added to ( us and we) in such a case or
business as in which the same is affirmed, concerning the us or we
forementioned, and in the same manner, here only he enlarges his instruction
and exhortation to every particular of them; If any man (of you, that through
grace believe, and are therein Spiritualized to discern other men, and things
in their right colors) see his Brother (or any man with whom we live, as all
men are our Brethren after some considerations) sin a sin that is not unto
death, he shall ask, and God shall give him life; they that through the tastes
of his graciousnesse come to him, are reconciled to God by Jesus Christ, are
therein, being built on him, made a company of Spiritual Priests, to offer up
Spiritual sacrifices (even for others) acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1
Pet. 2. 3. Therefore the Lord speaking unto Abimelech concerning Abraham, tells
him, He is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live, Genesis 20.
7. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much, Jam. 5. 16.
The prayer of the upright is his delight, Prove. 15. 8. It Is comely for them to
have their hearts desire, and prayer to God for all men in an acceptable time,
and that without ceasing, and therefore also especially required and expected
of them; because they are acquainted with the good will of God concerning men,
as manifested in Christ, showing them good reason, ground, and foundation for
it, and from thence moving and constraining them to it; Of them to whom much is
given shall much be required: Let me then say to such, Seeing ye are appointed
and furnished to such excellent service with God for the good of others, and it
is of so continual and general concernment. Be ye clean ye that bear the
vessels of the Lord, touch not the unclean thing, suffer the grace of God to
separate you more and more from the pollutions, intanglements, and snares of
this world, and to instruct and lead you to deny your selves; and take heed
also of being unequally yoaked* Believers with unbeleevers, such as with whom
you cannot have fellowship together in drawing on this maine design, or who
being joined with you, may pull you back, and tend to the streightning of you,
2 Cor. 6* 13, 14. and that you dwell and walk together, and one toward another,
and toward all, according to knowledge as the understanding of the grace of
God in Christ, as declared in the Gospel, instructs you; that so you be not
streightened in your own bowels, nor your prayers hindered, Isa. 52. 10, 11.
with 2 Cor. 6. 12-16. and 1 Pet. 3. 7. And further let me add, according to
the instructions of the grace of God, continue instant in prayer, seeing ye
are thereunto appointed and furnished; ye that are the Lords remembrancers,
give him not rest, pray without ceasing, ask him concerning the works of his
hands, even all the ends of the earth, and instruct and invite them also,
whosoever will, to look to him with you, and be saved, to seek him in a time of
finding, assuring them that his House, his dewlling place, in his Son, and
with his people, is a House of Prayer for all people, and God shall make you and
them together joyful therein; and for your further instruction and direction
herein, mind well that which follows.

3 What are those Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions that are to be made
for all men; we may say in some sense, and after diverse considerations, All
manner of prayers and supplications are to be made for all men, according to
the signification of the several expressions, or terms, in which we are
instructed to it, Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions; though also the
several terms do signify the same things, and are often put one for another,
and often put together, and the same expressions doubled for more vehement urging
the matter exhorted to (as Ephesians. 5. 18.) yet there may also be considered some
distinct signification in the terms, for directing us what, and in what manner
prayers are to be made for all men; and so first by Supplications, and Prayers,
may be signified generally all those petitions for good things for them, or in
the behalf of them, that may tend to their greatest good, and those to be made
with humility, and being abased before him in the sight and acknowledgement of
our own vileness, and the sinfulness and iniquity of our selves and others,
for whom good things are desired, and yet with earnestness and boldness, in
review and acknowledgement of Gods great goodness, and readiness to pardon,
and do us good; and especially such humble and earnest petitioning of good
things for them, or in the behalf of them, as are in order of Nature to be the
first things in our prayers for them, and distinct from and before those
signified distinctly by Intercessions; which properly and distinctly note to us
an appearing as a Third, or middle Person, for an offending Person to the party
offended, and so direct us unto prayers or entreaties to be made, not only in
their behalf, and for good things for them, but also more directly for some
present favor, sparing, or mercy in pardoning Iniquity, or reversing
judgment, that might tend to their destruction or cutting off, to be at
present conferred on them, according to their needs and capacities; The need of
which Intercessions, or stepping in between God and men, and for the obtaining
forbearance, and mercies of that nature directly for them, or to them, is
occasioned by their abuse of the goodness of God in answering the
forementioned Supplications and Prayers in providing so well, and doing things
for them, about them, and in behalf of them, that had such real tendencie to
their good; for some more particular opening these distinct sorts of praying,
and the manner of their being for all men, we may put them into these two
heads. First, The petitioning of good things in the behalf of them, that are
not directly for them, or for mercies and blessings to be conferred on them,
but for them in respect of their end or tendencie. Secondly, The entreating,
supplicating, or making intercession directly for them, and for mercies and
good things to be given to them, or conferred on them, according to their needs
and capacities.

1 The petitioning of good things in the behalf of them, that in respect of
their end and tendency may be for the good of them, that yet are not directly
for them, or for blessings to be personally conferred on them, that prayers of
this sort may be called prayers made for them, because the end and tendencie of
the things desired are for the good of them; and so also the doing those things
desired, are as testimonies of respect and love toward them, is like to that
language of the Scripture, where Gods giving to Solomon great furniture of
Wisdom, and Blessing, and strengthening him to the building an house to his
name, is called, Great things done for David his servant, and for Israel his
people, 1 King. 8. 66. And when Paul's sufferings are said to be for them, by
whom or for whom they were not directly occasioned, Col. 1. 24. for they had
never seen his face in the flesh, Col. 2. 1. because the end and tendencie of
his Ministration which occasioned his sufferings, and so the issue and fruit of
them was for their good, and where the great works God did directly for his
people Israel, and to them in gathering them out of the lands, and preserving
and delivering them out of their distresses in the Wilderness, and leading
them to a City of habitation, is called Gods great goodness, and wonderful
works toward, or for the children of men in general, because the end and
tendencie of his blessing, and causing the light of his countenance to shine
upon them herein, was for the good of other people and Nations, That his way
might be known upon earth, and his saving health among all Nations, Psalm. 107.
2. 8. with 67 1-3. and so also all the Gentiles have cause to glorify God for
his great goodness toward them, and wonderful works for them, in sending
Jesus Christ a Minister of the Circumcision to confirm the promises of God made
unto the Fathers, Romans 15. 8, 9, 10. So those Supplications and Prayers for
good things, or for things that may have a good end and tendencie toward them,
may be truly said to be for them, in respect of that their end and tendencie,
though not directly or in the first place for them, or for blessings to be
given to, or conferred on them. Such are,

First, Those Prayers that are directly made for others that live among them,
and yet are distinguished from the generality of all men, even all Saints, that
are not of the world, but a people chosen out of the world, for their peculiar
blessing, sanctifying, and furniture to and in all their service of Christ, and
suffering for him in the world, which are such blessings as they only are
capable of; The end of these things desired directly for them according to
their capacity, being for the preserving and furnishing them to do good to
others, That they may shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of
life, Phil. 2. 15, 16. That men seeing their good works, may glorify their
Father, Mat. 5. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 12. These prayers are in the sense first
mentioned for all men; Though the things directly petitioned for, are not
desired so for them, as to be conferred upon them, they being not yet capable
subjects thereof: Yet for as much as one main and great end of their being
desired to be conferred on the Saints as they are capable of receiving them, is
for the good of others, these prayers, I say, in respect of their end and
tendencie are for all men; Of this nature is that prayer of our Savior, Joh.
17. 9. he says, He does not pray for the world, that is directly, and in the
first place, in these Petitions, or for these Blessings to be conferred on
them, they being not capable subjects of them; But for them that the Father had
given him (through the prevalency of the heavenly Call) out of the world; not
that they might be taken out of the world, but still a seed or generation of
them preserved in the world, and therein kept from the evil of it, verse 15.
And that they might be sanctified through the truth, to peculiar service of him
in the world, as he had sent them into the world, even as the Father sent him
in respect of his Ministration, to be the light of the world, verse 17, 18.
with Joh. 9. 5* and Mat. 5. 14. And this not only for the first Apostles, but
also for all those that should after believe through their word, that they may
be one with him and his Father, in their Design, love, and endeavor for the
good of the world; All this, says he, verse. 21. 23. he prays for, for them,
That the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them, (namely,
all such as through grace receive this word) as thou have loved me; so that all
these prayers in respect of their end and tendency were for all men; And with
this agrees Psalm. 67. God be merciful to us and bless us, and cause the light
of thy countenance to shine upon us; That thy way may be known upon earth, and
thy saving health among all Nations. The first verse we may take either as a
prayer, especially, and more peculiarly, for all the Israel of God, but then
for all of them, not only of the Jews, but of the Gentiles also, even all
such as in his calling are persuaded to come to him, to receive him according
to the manifestations afforded them, to know the grace of God in truth, in
every Nation; for such there are, even children of the Kingdom, as good seed
sown all over the world; And then compared with the next verse, it instructs,
that peculiar, and special particular blessings, as before, protections in, and
preservations from the evil of the world, sanctification and furniture through
his truth, according to the manifestations given them, the light of his
countenance shining upon them, in more abundant opening his glorious grace, as
appearing in, or through his Son unto them; And in, and with all this, his
merciful pardoning and passing by their iniquities that otherwise might keep
these good things from them, they being of a higher nature, and deeper dye,
than other men's sinner. That these things are to be desired and prayed for
only for the Israel of God, to be directly conferred upon them according to
their needs and capacities. But to this end these prayers are to be prayed for
them, that in Gods gracious answering, and so by them, as they are by Gods
providence sent to, or scattered among all Nations, His way may be known upon
earth, and his saving health among all Nations, to the end that all men, even
all the people, may praise him. Or,

Secondly, we may take the first verse as a Prayer generally for all Israel
after the flesh, for the whole Nation, as a Nation to whom God had made known
his Word, his Statutes, and Judgments, as he had not done to other Nations,
and upon whom his Name was called, that by them it might be proclaimed and known
to other Nations; a Prayer for such peculiar National blessings, protections,
and Salvations among other Nations, and more abundant manifesting himself
amongst them, as a people called by his Name; but then in such a sense it was a
prayer peculiarly and only for that Nation; so Numb. 6. 23, 24, etc. The
blessing wherewith the whole House of Israel was to be blessed, and so
compared with the next verse, it instructs us, That peculiar or special,
general or National blessings, such as by which among other Nations they may be
known, as a People whom God has respect unto for his Namesake, are to be
prayed for, for such Nations as upon which the name of God in Christ is called,
that have his Word, Ordinances, and hold the profession and acknowledgement of
him (though too generally, not in truth, nor in righteousness) and so to be
more abundantly, and especially desired, for, and upon such, as on whom his
Name is more abundantly* or more rightly called; but to this end they are so to
be prayed for, and blessed in his Name, that so by means of or through them,
His way may be known upon earth, and his saving health among all Nations; to
the end that all the people may praise him.

And such is that prayer of Solomon, 1 King. 8. 59, 60. which is much of the
end and sum of all the former Petitions, that he may maintain the cause of
his Servant, and of his people Israel at all times; That all the people of the
earth may know that the Lord is God, and there is none else; which is that
which being known by all, or any of the ends of the earth, will move them to
look to him, and be saved, Isa. 45. 22. so that even these prayers for peculiar
National blessings, though directly only for those Nations on whom his name is
called, as well as also those forementioned prayers for peculiar, particular,
and personal blessings, though directly only for the Saints and Servants of God
in the world, yet and upon a like account the one and the other are prayers
made for all men, for as much as one maine and last end of the things desired,
and of the desiring of them, is for the good of all men* even for their best
good. Of this nature are those prayers for all Saints, exhorted to Ephesians. 6. 18,
19. Praying always, with all prayer, and supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all Saints, and
for me, that utterance may be given me (to what end?) that I may open my mouth
boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel; which is equivalent with
this, 1 Timothy 2. 7, 8. Paul being appointed and furnished a Herald, or Crier of
this Message to the Gentiles, he wills therefore that men pray every where
(namely) that he and others, with, and after him, may be ever furnished to,
preserved, and blessed in this service, for the good of all those Gentiles
amongst whom they are sent, And that this is the first sort of Prayers, and
first sense in which prayers are to be made for all men, that is meant in this
text, also appears by the scope of the text as fore-considered.

2 Those prayers that are made directly against them (in their evil purposes,
and ways, against his Name, his Gospel and people) or against some particular
persons, and whole Nations of them in such their evil enterprises, are yet for
them in respect of their end and tendencie, even for those against whom
directly they are made, and for the good of all men generally; such prayers, as
in which Gods Judgments, to the blasting of them, and confounding them in
their evil ways, his breaking and crossing them therein, his wrath, or the
testimonies of his displeasure to be testified against them, are earnestly
desired, are yet in respect of their end and tendency, for their good, and the
good of all, for as much as the end of the Judgments, and breakings desired
against them, and so consequently of such desires of them, is the sealing home
admonition, and instruction to them, that they may be ashamed, and turn from
the evils reproved, and that others also may by Gods Judgments on them, and
crossing of them, learn to beware of such evils. Of this nature those prayers,
and heavy imprecations against the Families of Edom (in the first place) Moab,
Ishmael, etc. and against all that joined with them, in their consultations
against his people, Psalm. 83. Do to them as to the Midianites, as to Jabin and
Sisera* Persecute them with thy Tempests, make them afraid with thy Storm;
fill their faces with shame (ver. 16.) that they, even those very people, while
thy hand is lifted up, and thy Judgments on them and the survivors of them, in
all the opportunities given them, may seek thy name, O Lord, Let them be
confounded, and troubled for ev^r, yea let them be put to shame and perish
(that is in their consultations and enterprises against his people, mentioned
in the former part of the Psalm) to what end are these sad imprecations? that
men, they, and all others, in whose sight Gods Judgments are, may know that
thou whose name alone is Jehovah, art the most high over all the earth (compare
1 King. 8. 60. with Joh. 17. 21-23.) that so the inhabitants of the world may
learn righteousness, when his Judgments are upon the earth; yet that the
particular Persons, Families, or Nations, on whom his hand is lifted up, may
see, and pour out their Prayer when his chastening is upon them, according to
the desire and expectation of God, whence it is a note still of greater
wickedness if they will not do so, Isa. 26. 8, 9-11-16.

Doubtless, if we diligently consider, and compare that, Psalm. 83. (as also
compared with the Scriptures forecited) with Romans 9. 13. and that with Mal. 1.
2, 3, 4, 5. and Obadiah, and Ezekiel. 35. and 36. 1-7. where the execution of
those Judgments desired against them in their evil purposes, and ways, in
that 83 Psalm is denounced and threatened in Ezekiel. and Obadi, and declared as
done in Mal. 1. and Romans 9. we shall see clearly, that that hatred testified
against the whole Family of Esau, or Edom, in such their evil ways (in respect
of the first end and tendency of it, in either the imprecations, or executions
of it) was not tending to their eternal destruction (though to their perishing
for ever in those enterprises, and that there might be none remaining of that
Family or Kingdom in that state and posture, in which they had some power, and
opportunity for accomplishing their enterprises, as Psalm. 83. 17. with Ezekiel.
35. 9. Obad. 18. Mal. 1. 4.) But on the other hand, that they and the residue
of the Heathen might be ashamed, and seek the Lord, etc. compare Psalm. 83.
16-18. with Ezekiel. 35. 9-12. and 36. 7. And to the same end also after God had
thus testified his displeasure, and executed his hatred against them in their
evil ways, he so raised up Saviors on Mount Sion, sent Ambassadors with
terms of Peace by the Gospel, as coming from Christ exalted, to Edom and all
the Heathen, that now they might be judged in righteousness according to that
Gospel, by which therefore he first admonished them all, and in every place to
repentance, Obad. 21. with Act. 17* 30, 31. and therefore did he raise up the
tabernacles of David, in the Dispensation of Christ, in and by his Apostles,
that they might poss^sse the remnant of Edom (that before-hated people) and of
all the other Heathen Nations (against whom those imprecations and Judgments,
Psalm. 83. Ezekiel. 35. and 36.) upon whom by the grace of the Gospel his name is
called, and out of whom a people gathered and preserved, or set amongst them
for his Name, that the residue of men, even all the Gentiles, might seek the
Lord. Compare Amos 9. 11, 12. with Act. 15. 14, 15, 16, 17.

Likewise those more grievous imprecations, prayers for, and threatening of
Judgments of a higher and worse nature upon the house of Israel, the beloved
people, as considered in their evil purposes, and ways, against the more
plentiful means and grace afforded them, that were executed in the beginnings
of them, in and at the time of the Babylonian Captivity, and more fully, when
their sin was grown full, in the rejecting of the Gospel, in and at the time
of the destruction of their place and Nation by the Romans, which was prayed
for, and threatened against them, (they persisting in, and going on farther to
contract, and commit those iniquities against which they were denounced) Psalm.
69. 22, 23, 24, 25. and Isa. 6. 9-11. 13. and 29. 10. In which God is said, for
their great ungodliness (as before concerning Edom, so in these Judgments on
his peculiar people) to hate his heritage, Jer. 12. 8. to abhor the excellency
of Jacob, and hate his Palaces, Amos 6. 8. concerning this the Apostle
propounds the question, Romans 11. 11. telling us, That now the generality of
that people or Nation (before so peculiarly loved) even all that were not
chosen, and pulled out from having fellowship with the rest in that rejection
of Christ at so high a rate, through the grace of God proclaimed and extended
unto them all to that purpose, they, even all the residue, were now given up to
that fearful blindness and Judgment, according to those Prophesies, and to
those Prayers, or Imprecations of David forecited, to which he alludes; his
Question concerning them upon this Declaration is, Have they stumbled, has God
given them over to this in part (for it was not yet in full, as verse. 25. then
indeed there will be no remedy, but has God done this even in these beginnings
of Judgments of Reprobation) and that accotding to those imprecations in
David, has God done it to this end (and so consequently was this the first end
or intention of David, in making such intercession against Israel) that they
should fall? Did God intend in these beginnings of such fearful Judgments,
or did David intend in praying for them, or therein desire their eternal and
everlasting destruction by them? And in answer to this question he says; God
forbid, far be it from us to entertain such a thought; but on the other
hand, God has suffered them in part to fall, and through their fall occasioned
the bringing Salvation to the Gentiles; the end of both is, to provoke them to
jealousy, to admonish them to be jealous of themselves selves, and their
ways, and bethink themselves of the Grace they had sinned against, that so
they might not abide in their unbelief; and therefore the Apostle knowing the
cordialnesse of God herein, being one with him in his design, did strive, if
by any means he might provoke them to emulation, that he might be an instrument
of saving some of them, verse 14. His hearts desire and prayer to God for whole
Israel (now in part rejected) being, that they might be saved, Chap. 10. 1. So
that prayer against the heathen, Psalm. 79. 6. breathed forth also by Jer. Chap.
10. 25. That God would pour out his wrath upon them, etc. (namely in their
Rebellious enterprises, and lifting up themselves against his name and people)
For they, says the Text in both places, have devoured Jacob, and made him
desolate, yet the first end and tendencie of these prayers, so directly against
them in their evil ways, were for their good, considering that (as we
aforeshewed in Psalm. 67.) for Israel to be preserved among the heathen, and
defended from their rage and malice, seeing it was to this end, That by them
his way might be known upon earth, and his saving health among all Nations, was
of all mercies, the most conducing to their good; Therefore in the posture they
were in, there could be no better prayer for the generality of them, than for
God to pour out his wrath upon them, in revenging the blood of his servants,
and so blasting and breaking their enterprises, that his people might yet be
preserved amongst them; though in these judgments many of the heathen might be
suddenly destroyed and snatched away, yet even those might receive admonition,
and reproof from God, who doubtless was not wanting in giving it in due time
while it might be for their good, even while his judgments were on them to the
destroying them from the earth, if they had not so long provoked him before by
their rebellions, that he had wholly rejected them.

And however the snatching away some in their stubbornness and rebellion, so
as Gods hand might be seen in it for his names sake, was much conducing; and
therefore often used by God as a gracious instrument to the general admonition
and good of all the surviving enemies, as Luke 13. 1-6. That they might see and
fear, and do no more so wickedly, lest they also perish in like manner;
Therefore also is this prayer of David in the following verses, delivered in
such terms; See Psalm. 79. 10. (equivalent with Psalm. 83. 16, 17.) Let God be
known among the heathen, in our sight, by revenging* etc. and so the first and
direct end of these prayers, verse 13. is, that his people, and the sheep of
his pasture, may give him thanks, and praise him to all generations; which is
for this cause that the Gentiles may glorify God for his mercy, and come in
and laud him with them, compare herewith, Romans 15. 8, 9, 10. with Psalm. 67. So
that even these prayers, in respect of their end, and tendencie, were for the
heathen, against whom directly they were made. And in such manner are these
prayers to be made for all men. But

2 There are also Entreaties, Supplications and Intercessions to be made more
directly for all men, even for mercies, favors, and good things to be
conferred on them, according to their needs and capacities; And such as may
conduce to the great Design of God, and his people, for their good, and those
such as may be more directly and properly signified by Intercessions. Prayers
are to be made for all men, for Gods gracious extension of such pardon of their
iniquities, in which they ill requite, rebel, and sin against the grace of God
bringing salvation to them all in the means forementioned, and so in all
mercies, and chastisements, that judgments tending to their utter cutting off,
may yet be kept off through the mediation of Christ, and for his sake, that it
may not be speedily executed, but liberty, occasion, and opportunity yet put in
their hands to enjoy the mercies of God that may lead them to repentance, and
to repent and turn to him, as we have noted before; Stephen at his last
breathing kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Father forgive them, or do
not lay this sin to their charge, to execute judgment speedily, but give them
time yet again to repent, that in repenting they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance. So the Apostle generally instructs us, If any man see
his brother sin a sin not unto death, he shall pray, and God shall give give
him life; such pardon of the sin to the sinner as that judgment be not
executed, he not be cut off, but breathing-time afforded that he might repent;
and in owning his sin as grace discovers, and reproves, in repenting and
turning to him, he shall give him life in a further sense; the cleansing of the
conscience, and healing of the nature, peace with God through our Lord Jesus,
and hope of the glory to be revealed; neither are prayers to be made for them
otherwise, or on other terms, and if we pray according to his will, we know he
hears us; But on those terms, according to men's need and capacity, and as
the Gospel instructs, we are to be instant in prayer, not to cease to pray
for them. Though God having many times in such cases, even when judgments have
been prepared for them, graciously delivered them, and not stirred up all his
wrath against them, and in such a sense forgiven their iniquity, as Psalm. 78.
38. not laid it yet to their charge, that they might turn to him and be
healed; yet they are sinning still to provoke him to anger, and hardening their
hearts against his goodness that leads them to repentance; yet still prayers
are to be made for them, and with so much the more earnestness, while it may
be in due time, God yet giving opportunity, not having utterly separated them;
That forbearance may yet be granted, That God may yet wait to be gracious, and
not yet cut them up for their unthankfulness, and unfruitfulnesse, as in that
Parable, Luke 13. 6-9. our Saviors example instructs us, and also in his
praying for those that added that to all their former iniquities of abusing the
former servants they crucified him that was the Heir, Yet Father forgive them,
and by his Spirit leading Stephen, after they had added yet more iniquity to
iniquity, still to intercede for pardon, and so he instructs us, To pray for
them that persecute us, Bless them that curse us, in such manner, and for such
things, as in which we may be one in Gods Design, and render our selves like
him, who graciously, through the Mediation of his Son, extends such
forgiveness, and longsuffering, and to such ends, That he still causes his
Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall, and therein is really pitiful and kind
to the unthankful and evil, witnessing his goodness to lead them to
repentance, Matthew. 5. 45, 46. Luke 6. 35, 36. Act. 14. 17. Romans 2. 4.

These considerations of what the prayers are, and in what manner all prayers
are to be made for all men, may afford us some direction in our prayers, to
pray as we ought, which the holy Spirit teaches, as he does all other things,
by opening the Testimony of Jesus, and showing the things, of him, Romans 8. 26.
with Joh. 16. 13, 14. As therein he presents us with good ground and foundation
of Prayer (as we shall after show) so thereby he instructs us what to pray
for, and in what manner for all men, and how to pray as we ought for every man,
in teaching us to pray, according to his will, as declared in that declaration
of his name in his Son, for such things as the Father has appointed him to
give unto men, by virtue of his Sacrifice and Mediation, to each according to
his need and capacity, and so as according to the wisdom of God may be for his
good; and so we are here directed, not to pray for those peculiar blessings,
which men become capable and meet subjects to partake of only in believing and
coming to Christ, as Col. 1. 9-13. 1 Pet. 2. 3, 4. such as sanctifying and
furniture to, and blessing in the ministration of the Gospel, and the like for
any that is yet in the state, fellowship, and way of the world, and so of it,
yet to pray for these things for all Saints, that the world may be the better
for them, as to the best good, Job. 17. 9-21, 23. neither may we pray for Gods
prospering any man in his evil way, or for special National protections,
ownings, and salvations, to be afforded to any people or Nation openly set in
opposition to him, or to any people that are called by his name, and especially
if for his names sake called upon them; But we are to suffer the grace of God
to teach and lead us, as it certainly will, to pray against their evil works
and inventions, and so against them as abiding in the said ways, and for
special protections, ownings, and salvations to be afforded to that people or
Nation upon whom his name is called, or that do more rightly worship and
acknowledge him, and that for his names sake, and both these intentionally for
the good, not only of those people for whom the prayers are directly made, but
of their enemies also, and so of all men. Our Saviors Admonition and
Instruction to his Disciples, when upon some peoples unthankfulness, and not
receiving him, they would have prayed for fire to come down from heaven and
consume them, as Elias did, may here seasonably be considered by us, Ye know
not what manner of spirit ye are of, for the Son of man came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9. 55, 56. And therefore also, Though we are
not, nor is it according to his will, to pray for forgiveness, peace, and joy,
in a full and proper sense, to be given to any man abiding in his evil way, or
in his natural state and condition, yet we may, and are taught by his grace, to
pray for such pardon, forbearance and renewing of goodness to be conferred on
them, and in due time, as may give them opportunity, and have tendency, and
efficacy in it, to lead them to repentance, That so they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance with those that are sanctified by says
that is in Christ. And so the end of all prayers for all men, is, that they
might be saved. We come next to consider,

Fourthly, What are those thanksgivings joined with prayers to be made for all
men. This the Scripture plentifully sets before us, That al manner of right
prayer, is joined with Thanksgiving, Phil. 4. 6. In every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God. So
Psalm. 50. 14, 15. and 95. 2. Come into his presence with Thanksgiving, offer
sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and call upon him: Yea all men are invited so to do.
Now what this Thanksgiving is, that is so inseparably joined with all right
praying, we shall also find in those Scriptures that speak to this matter,
that it is such a commemoration and thankful acknowledgement of, and blessing
God for, his great love and mercy testified in what he has already done for
us, as in which Gods goodness is only commended and glorified (and not ours
with it, as in that of the Pharisee, God I thank thee that I am not etc. Luke
18. 11.) and that so, as in the minding and consideration thereof, we have
encouragement presented, to expect, and pray in faith for those further
streamings forth of mercy, and good things, according to our needs and
capacity, which through the knowledge of his name we are lead to desire, and
ask accordingly to his will. So our Savior teaches us in that doctrine of
Prayer, Mat. 6. 9. to acknowledge and commemorate the honor and praise due to
his name, for what he has done in, and by his Son, in the forefront of all the
Petitions we ask of him, that therein we may glorify him, and yield him the
praise of his grace, who also for his names sake meets with him that
rejoices in acknowledging it, Though to us belong nothing but shame, that
therein also we may be minded of that which may enlarge and draw out our hearts
with encouragement in God, though abasement in our selves further to pray
according to his will. And so the holy Spirit for the helping of our
infirmities, and teaching us how to pray as we ought, as he takes of the things
of Jesus, and shows (as is showed before) so therein he glorifies him, in,
and according to the Gospel, minding us what cause of Thanksgiving we have to
God, continually, by and in the name of Jesus Christ, and how that serves for
our instruction, and encouragement further to pray; see examples and
instructions to this. And first in those Thanksgivings that are joined with
Prayers made for all Saints, and for such peculiar blessings to be conferred on
them, as of which they only are capable subjects, though in respect of their
end and tendencie these are also for all men, as before is showed: In all these
Thanksgivings, there is not only an acknowledgement of that true in Christ for
men as the bottom cause of all thanksgivings, and of the great love and
goodness of God to manward, as manifested therein; but with this there is
always an acknowledgement, and commemoration of Gods great goodness in those
special streamings forth of the issues and ver^ues of that Redemption, and
grace of God in Christ to manward, which they have met with, and through his
grace have had efficacy in them, to the saving them, and making them meet to
partake of the inheritance of the Saints, in those peculiar blessings desired
and prayed for, for them; See our Saviors Prayer, Joh. 17. 7, 8. Now they have
known says he, that all things what soever thou have given me are of thee, for
I have given them the words thou gave me, and they have known surely that I
came out from thee; I pray for them (says he) namely, that the peculiar
blessings, of which they through the prevalency of the grace of God are made
capable subjects, may be conferred on them. I pray not (namely) this Prayer,
these Petitions, and in this manner for the world, for whom yet he was sent a
Savior, 1 John 4. 14. and that not to condemn them, but that through him they
might be saved.

He does not make this Prayer, and in this manner, for all for whom he dyed,
and gave himself a ransom, nor for any of them, until by the prevalency of
the grace of God upon them they be given him out of the world, and so there is
that as a peculiar matter of thanksgiving also to be made for them. So Col. 1.
8-12. Since the day (says the Apostle) that we heard of your love in the
Spirit, we cease not to pray, that ye might be filled with the knowledge of
his will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding, etc. Giving thanks unto
the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance, which
knowing, we make our requests for the conferring of such peculiar blessings as
therein you are made capable subjects of with joy, as Phil. 1. 3, 4-9, 10. 1
These. 2. 4, 5. This gives us occasion to consider as the ground and reason of
it, that it was not the end or intention of God in sending his Son into the
world, the Savior of the world, appointing him by the grace of God to taste
Death for every man, and exalting him by virtue of his sufferings, a Prince,
and a Savior; nor is it his mind, or will, according to which all Prayers are
to be made, that having done that in and by his Son for them, his Son should
therefore necessarily give eternal Life to all of them for whom he dyed, and is
become such a Savior, or to any of them in their particulars, while remaining
in their Natural state and condition, but only to those that through grace
according to the discoveries of him vouchsafed, believe in him; It Is true, he
was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him;
not that all for whom he was made sin must necessarily be thereupon made the
righteousness of God, but that they might be made so in and through him, and so
those only of all for whom he was made sin; that by faith of the opperation of
God come in to him, are therein, and so in him to be made the righteousness of
God 2 Cor. 5. 21. our Savior therefore, as the reason of his praying in such
manner, Joh. 17. namely, for such peculiar blessings to be conferred only on
such persons as for whom there was such peculiar matter of Thanksgiving to be
made as before, he first lays down this Doctrine, ver. 2. That the Father has
given him power over all flesh, (not only over all Creatures for administation
of the Government of God amongst men, Mat. 28. 18. but also over all Mankind,
as a Prince and Savior for them) That he should give eternal Life (he says
not to all Flesh, or to all Men who are given to him, and committed to his
dispose and judgment by virtue of his sufferings) but to as many as the Father
has given him; where the Fathers giving is evidently to be understood in a
sense peculiar, and distinct from that sense of his giving, after which it is
said, That in giving him power over all flesh, or committing the whole dispose
and judgment of all men to him, as Joh. 5. 22. he has therein given and
delivered over all men, even all the ends of the earth, and all things into his
hands, as his proper inheritance, by virtue of his sufferings, Psalm. 2. 6. 8.
Man. 11. 27. and Joh. 13. 3. with Phil. 2. 8, 9-11. and that also in respect of
the first end toward All, not to condemn, but to save the world of Mankind,
and that through him they might be saved, and brought back to God. The Fathers
giving all men to him in this sense, and to this end as the first end toward
All, is evidently signified in the first part of the verse, The Father has
given him power over all flesh, as is seen by comparing it with other
Scriptures; therefore seeing he distinguishes from these some persons that the
Father has given him, he must needs mean in a peculiar sense of giving, so as
all given him, and into his dispose, by virtue of his suffering for them, that
through him they might be saved, yet are not so given him, even a giving by an
actual Election, or choice out from the residue of all Flesh, into his special
charge, and protection, and so explicated, ver. 9. with Joh. 15. 19. Given him
out of the world, of which sometime they were; but now are actually chosen out
of it, redeemed from among men, in respect of their condition, way, fellowship,
etc. through the prevailing force of the grace of God in Christ to Man-ward,
discerned, and believed by them; It is the will of the Father concerning
Christ, and the ends and virtues of his coming down from heaven, and now being
invested with all power, That he should give eternal life to such, according to
that, Joh. 6. 39. 40. It is the will of him that sent him, that he might be
empowered to accomplish which he first came down from heaven, That of all that
he has given him (not out of others, Joh. 17. 2. 9. but in a general and large
sense without distinguishing or opposing them to other things or persons, All
whatsoever the Father has given him) he should lose nothing, but raise it up
at the last day. Now when he speaks in such a full sense without limitation or
distinguishing from, and opposing to other things, or other senses of giving,
we can by no means exclude any thing that is in any sense given him, according
to the Apostles reasoning, Heb. 2. 8. with 1 Cor. 15. 27. Now all persons and
things being given and delivered to him, as we showed before, Its the Fathers
will he should lose nothing, but in the issue bring all to him, Raising it up
at the last day; The Glory, Kingdom, Dominion, though now men detract much of
it from him, and by reason of sin, the creature is yet subject to the bondage
of corruption; yet it shall all arrive at him, and be shall raise it up at the
last day, when every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth,
and every tongue confess, etc. And so neither shall he lose any of those
persons redeemed by him, though many of them lose and bring destruction upon
themselves by denying him that bought them, yet they shall not be lost to him,
But he shall raise them up at the last day, and bring them to his judgment
seat, as verse 37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me, even such as
now will not come to him that they might have life, though graciously drawn by
the Father, as verse. 35, 36. Them will he bring to be slain for ever before his
face, because they would not that he should reign over them, who is their
lawful Lord, and unto whom they were all given, that through him they might
have been saved.

But then it follows as another part of the Fathers will concerning him, That
whosoever sees the Son, and believes in him, or as v. 37. he that comes to
him, speaking in the present tense, for as the same verse says, All shall
come, either here, or hereafter; but he that now in this day of Gods grace and
patience, comes in the Fathers drawings, which answers the Fathers giving to
Christ, Joh. 17. 2. or at least is that in which they are made capable subjects
of such giving* It is the will of the Father concerning Christ that he should
give unto such eternal life; For God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son (the Savior of it, 1 John 4. 14.) That whosoever of the world so
loved by him, and to whom love is so testified in, and through the Son; does
through this grace believe in him (implying that all so loved by him, do not so
answer his love again) that they should not perish, but have everlasting life,
Joh. 3. 16. And this is the reason that such prayers for the peculiar blessings
of eternal life to be conferred on persons, are only to be prayed for; for
those on the behalf of whom there is also such peculiar matter of Thanksgivings
to be made; And such and of like nature, are those Thanksgivings to be joined
with prayers of the first sort, as already mentioned, and is to be seen in the
Scriptures quoted; and although in them there be many things acknowledged and
commemorated to Gods glory, and for our encouragement to pray those prayers
unto him, which are peculiar privileges of the Saints, for whom such further
things are directly desired, as they only are capable of, yet for as much as
those peculiar mercies acknowledged, as well as those desired, are in respect
of their end, and tendency for the good of all men, as we see in that example
of our Savior, Joh. 17. 18, 21, 23. and those of like nature, Psalm. 4. 1, 2.
etc. and 56. 9-13 and 116. 16-18. even these Thanksgivings also, in a like
sense, as the prayers of this sort forementioned, may be truly said to be made
for all men. According to that of our Savior, Joh. 11. 41, 42. Father I thank
thee that thou have heard me; And I know that thou hear me always, but
because of the people that stand by I said it, That they may believe that thou
have sent me; Therefore his praise is of him in the great Congregation, because
of Gods furnishing, and upholding, and hearing him for their good, Psalm. 22.
22, 25. And for this cause he will confess to him among the Gentiles, and sing
unto his name; Again he says, Rejoice ye Gentiles, with his people, and laud
him all ye Nations, Romans 15. 8, 9, 10. there also is further to be considered,
That the bottom matter of all Thanksgivings, the foundation and root of all
those things for which thanks is to be given to the Father by Jesus Christ,
That from which all the other springs, is nothing else, but that which is true
in Christ for all men, namely Gods so loving the world, as not to spare his
only begotten Son, But to deliver him to death for us all; That he by the grace
of God should taste of death for every man, and give himself a ransom for
All; A Testimony in due time: This being true and cordially done, and the ends
and virtues of this with the Father, is the only cause and reason, That with
him, in, and through him, he gives all things pertaining to life and
godliness, Romans 8. 32. with 2 Pet. 1. 1, 3. So as whosoever believes in him,
and so receives and closes with him in the knowledge and faith of what he
has done, and is become for all men, and the love of God in him to Man-ward,
does therein receive, and is made capable of further receiving that eternal
life in him by faith of it in him for them, and with him to be given them, and
so in a first fruits of spiritual enjoyment, Joh. 3. 16. and 1. 12. 1 John 5.
11, 12. Romans 5. 6-11. Therefore this is made the bottom matter of all the
Thanksgiving, and acknowledgement, as being the foundation root, and cause of
all the rest, Col. 1. 14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even
the forgiveness of sins; So Ephesians. 1. 7. Psalm. 130. yea this the bottom of the
rejoicing song to Eternity, Thou wast slain, and out of the bowels and virtues
of this, and of the love of God to Man-ward, and that was so to us even when we
were dead in sins and trespasses, through Christ Jesus it issued; And in the
discoveries and presentation of this was effected, That they were redeemed from
among men, etc. Rev. 5. 9. with 1 Pet. 1. 18. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 8. Joh. 3. 16. Tit.
3. 4, 5.

And for this namely, That done, and perfect in Christ, and that cordially to
this end, That the other might be done in them, as 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. 21. And
the furniture and faithfulness of Christ in the name of the Father for being a
testimony to men in due time, affording means, and therein inlightning,
reproving, teaching, according to men's needs and capacity for the bringing them
back to God. All men have cause to praise the Lord for his goodness, and for
his wonderful works to the children of men. And if they will not, yet let the
Redeemed of the Lord, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy, do it
for themselves and them, Psalm. 107. 1, 2, 8, 15, 16. etc. For he has broken
the Gates of brass in pieces, and cut the Bars of Iron asunder, slain the
enmity in himself that was between God and mankind, that he might reconcile
man to God, Ephesians. 2. 16. So that*

There is great Thanksgiving to be made directly for all men to the glory and
praise of God, and the encouragement of his people to pray in faith for those
good things in their behalf, and for the good of them, and for good things to
be directly bestowed on them according to their needs and capacities, that may
tend to the furtherance of the great Design of God for the good of all men:
And that not only for the great love of God in the gift of his Son, and the
redemption wrought in him for them; But also for all those mercies and
accommodations of the natural life, means leading to repentance and
forbearance hitherto extended, and his good Spirit accompanying the same,
inlightning, reproving, etc. And all to bring men to God, That they might seek
him and live, as Job 33. 29, 30. Romans 2. 2. 4. Act. 17. 27. And such is that
great acknowledgement and Thanksgiving to God by Jesus Christ, or in the name
of Jesus, Psalm. 68. 18, 19, 20. Thou have ascended on high (namely the Lord
Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 8. He who first descended into the lower parts of the earth)
Thou have lead Captivity captive (destroyed him that had the power of death,
that is the Devil, That he might deliver those who through fear of Death, were
all their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14.) And received gifts in the
man, and for men (as we may take it in both readings) even for the Rebellious,
yea for such as persisting in their Rebellions against this grace of God That
brings salvation to all men, denying him that bought them, Do after bring upon
themselves swift destruction, as appears by comparing these 18. and 19. verses,
with verse 21. yet for them the present and first end of his working
Redemption, destroying Satan's works, and receiving gifts in himself for them,
is, That now they might dwell with the Lord, and so that misery and
destruction, which they after bring on themselves, might in time be prevented
to them; And therefore it follows farther in the Thanksgiving or
acknowledgement of what God has further done to that end; and of that as
issuing out of the bowels of the former, and being nothing else but a streaming
forth of the ends and virtues thereof. Blessed be the Lord God in Christ, That
now on the account of his having ascended and received gifts, daily loadeth us;
The God of our salvations, Selah. He that is thus our God, and a God of such
salvations to us in and through his Son; he is the God of salvation in a more
general latitude; The Savior of all men, especially of them that believe; And
therefore we are instructed to give thanks always, and for all things in the
name of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5. 20. yea the Apostle exhorting us to follow that
which is good, both among our selves, and toward all men, directs us in
pursuance hereof to Rejoice evermore, to pray without ceasing, and in every
thing give thanks, For this, says he, is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning you, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15, 16-18. And so here in pursuance of the great
Design forementioned, To pray with Thanksgiving for all men; There is not a man
to be prayed for, for whom there is not Thanksgiving to be made to God in his
behalf, and that in the name of Christ, nor any thing to be prayed for, for any
man, for our encouragement, to which, we have not something suitable in, and by
Christ, for, and toward that man to give thanks for. And this leads us to
consider,

Fifthly, The ground or account upon which Prayers and Thanksgivings are to be
made for all men; And that is no other, but the truth and verity of that which
we have already mentioned, as the bottom cause, and occasion of Thanksgiving
which we have to God, in and by Christ for them; See for this the following
verses, as joined with this first, and so the word therefore verse 1. though as
it refers to the end of the exhortation, and thing exhorted to, it points to
the foregoing Chapter, as we have seen; yet as it has reference to the ground
of the exhortation, or things exhorted to; so it leads us to the following
verses for finding out and understanding it, as will appear by considering
them. I exhort therefore that Prayers, and Thanksgivings be made for all men,
etc. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will
have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth; For one
God, or God is one (as Gal. 3. 20. And there is one Mediator between God and
men, The Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for All, a Testimony, or
to be testified in due time, whereunto I am ordained a Preacher, and an
Apostle, a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity. I will therefore that
men pray every where, etc. The ground of praying for all men, is here clearly
rendered by the Apostle, To be. The verity, and certainty of the love and good
will of God to Manward, to all men as manifested in that great Witness and
Testimony thereof in that done in, and by Christ for them; As it is a general
ground and rule of all right prayer that is according to his will, 1 John 5.
14. For our better understanding this, and how it gives good ground of Prayers,
and Thanksgivings to be made for all men, and that without wrath, or doubting.
Let us take a brief view of the words; See verse 4. God will have all men to
be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. Some understand this as
a Declaration of Gods absolute will concerning Christ, and what should
certainly be accomplished by him.

First, That he should save all men, with such salvation, as foreruns the
knowledge of the truth, yea in respect of the greatest work of it, such as
foreruns their being called to it, as 2 Timothy 1. 9. He has saved us, and called
us; That is, first Work salvation in himself for them, and so save, or recover
the whole nature in himself as the public Person. And secondly, that in the
Administration of Gods Government, by virtue of what he has done, and is
perfect in him for them, he should save them, and so they should be preserved
by him, as they came to have beings given and continued here) to the
comfortable enjoyment of the natural life, the mercies, and accommodations
thereof, and so from perishing in, or under the shadows of the first Death.
Thirdly, That he should procure, and extend forbearance of sins, committed
against the light, and grace of Redemption, and fruits thereof, save, or keep
from Judgments, that being speedily executed, might cut off for ever, That so
they may yet enjoy him a Testimony in due time to them; And so he is the
Savior of All men, according to the will of his Father concerning him. And
Secondly, That he should bring them all to the knowledge of the truth, either
now in this day while it might be to their everlasting comfort, or else
hereafter, if here they wilfully reject till they be rejected of him, when it
will be to their everlasting terror, Isa. 45. 23. Phil 2. 8, 9. with Psalm. 2.
5, 6, etc. And so the will of God concerning what he was to do that men might
be saved, affording good and large ground to pray for them; and the terror
appearing in that which shall after be accomplished to their woe if now his grace
be rejected affording motive to press to earnestness in praying and beseeching
both them, and God for them, while it is an accepted time. Now all these
instructions arising from such a reading of the words are true, and suitable to
those which appear fully in the following words. But here this verse, seems
more properly to be read, as a Declaration of Gods good will, love, and desire
toward men, and concerning them* as considered in their fallen, lost, and
sinful estate, which was such, as in which he would have them saved out of it,
and brought back again to him; Such his great compassions, slownesse to anger,
and riches in mercy, That he had no pleasure in their destruction, but that
they should turn and live. And therefore desired they should come to the
knowledge of the truth of his love and goodness toward them that so they
might be drawn into love of him, and conformity to him, that were so full of
hatred, and antipathy against him. And then as a real demonstration of this his
love, and desire for them and declaration of the way and means prepared that
this might be (for though God loved them, and desired their good, yet they
could have enjoyed no streamings forth, or manifestations of it, or benefit by
it. If he had not devised means that his banished might not be expelled, as 2 Samuel 14. 14.) He further tells us, That God is one, and unchangeable in all his
holy Attributes; and therefore in love to man, as his creature, and the end of
his other creation, and while he was not yet become wholly one with, and of
Satan, that had tempted and prevailed over him, could not yet give him up; And
so in holiness and truth, and therefore could by no means in clearing, clear
the guilty, or forgive sin without a fulfilling of his truth, and satisfying of
his Justice; And so likewise in infinite wisdom and goodness in all, and
therefore knew how to find out a way of recovery that mercy and truth might
meet together for man's recovery and helpfulnesse in this lost condition (as
well as to make him of nothing a creature to such excellent glory, and has
done it, God is light, and in him is no darkness: And that appears in this
that follows, There is one Mediator of God and man, and so between God and man,
Christ Jesus; A Mediator is not a Mediator of one; But God is one, Gal. 3. 20.
A Mediator is of, and between two parties at a distance, and so is ours; But
whereas the usual work of Mediators between man and man, is to lay his hand on
both, and prevail with one to abate something, and the other to pay or satisfy
something; so is not ours, for God is one, He was not turned enemy, but loved
us when we were enemies, so as he sent the Mediator, He is one, and so infinite
and perfect in holiness, and can abate nothing of what his Truth and Justice
requires, and therefore must have full and perfect satisfaction, though we are
so weak we can make none; The work therefore of our Mediator is to make full
satisfaction, pay the full price, come up to Gods terms; and then to bring us
up to, and enable us to accept of those terms in him made, and accepted for
us; And so in the whole, and in each part of his work, That with God, and that
with men, It is to reconcile man to God; The first in, and by himself without
them, The second in their particular persons through him, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20, 21.
And for the accomplishing this* He that is the one Mediator of God and man, and
that he might be a standing Mediator between them; Gave himself a ransom for
all men; A Testimony, or to be testified in due time, That so through him they
might come to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved.

For understanding the large ground of praying for All men, here set before us,
consider some of the particular instructions herein presented.

1 That Jesus Christ by the will and appointment of the Father has given
himself, and is accepted A Ransom for All. 2 That he is by virtue hereof
become a standing and powerful Mediator between God and men. 3 That by virtue,
and by means of his Ransom accepted, and his Mediation continually made for
them, he is of the Father to them, A Testimony in due time, That they might
come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved. And in all this, God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all.

For the first, That Jesus Christ by the appointment of the Father, has given
himself, and is accepted a Ransom for All, a price of Redemption, so as he
has redeemed and bought them All, as has been showed already, as to the
persons for whom now we shall apply our selves to the consideration of the
work herein done for them.

And so first, he has in and by himself redeemed them from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for them, Gal. 3. 13.

Secondly, He has by that his one offering for all, perfected through
suffering, and now presented to the Father, obtained and received into himself
eternal redemption, a full and perfect Recovery and Restoration of all that
loss contracted by sin as charged on them by the first Testament, Heb. 9.
12. 15.

First, Jesus Christ has in, and by himself redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. where that he speaks not of that
redeeming the heart and conscience from under the bondage and accusation of sin
by the Law, which is only wrought in the spirit of the believer, through the
discovery of that done in Christ for all men; but of that done, namely of the
redemption wrought in Christ for them before they knew it This is evident in
that he says, the Redemption here spoke of was done, and finished, by his
being made a curse for us; whereas the other, though done by virtue thereof,
yet is not effected, but through the discoveries thereof, and in the receipt by
faith (as before) yea it is still more evident, in that he mentions this as
perfectly done, that means might be used for the doing the other, namely, the
redeeming men in their particular persons, and that that might be wrought or
received through faith. He has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham, the preaching of peace by
Jesus Christ, (Ephesians. 2. 14. 17. and 3. 6.) might come on the Gentiles, that we
(namely whoever believes) might receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith; according to that, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son (namely, the Savior of the world, 1 John 4. 14.) that
whoever of the world so loved by him, through this grace believes in him whom
he has sent, should not perish, but have everlasting life; and so that, Gal 3.
13. is opened, Gal 4. 4, 5* where the query is fully answered, who they are
encluded under the word us, Gal. 3. 13. that he has redeemed from the curse of
the Law, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem
them that were under the Law, that we (there the person is changed) namely,
whoever believes might receive the adoption of children; but that done in
Christ that this might be done, was done for all them that were under the Law,
and who those are, see Romans 3. 19. though under it as a testament all Covenant,
were only all Israel after the flesh, yet under the condemnation penalty and
curse of it, and so by it declared and concluded were all the world, for what
the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God* By one man sin
entered into the world, and Death by Sin, for that all have sinned, Romans 5.
12. Compare that with ver. 18. As the disobedience of one was unto, or upon all
in the first public man to condemnation, so the righteousnnesse of one is
unto, or upon all in the second public man, unto justification of life, his
one righteousness has so prevailed with the Father, that he is justified in
the nature and room of all (That one dyed for all, is accepted with the Father
as if all had dyed, 2 Cor. 5. 14.) that they might live; and to that end live,
that after this Grace appears, they might not henceforth live to themselves,
but to him that dyed for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 15.

So that in Jesus the second public Person, the whole nature is delivered from
the first condemnation and judgment; The truth and verity of which is proved
in that Romans 5. 19. from this reason, For as by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners (namely in their particular persons) and that is so many as ever
came to have being from him, even from the beginning, verse 13* 14 which fully
shows, That that offense, was unto, or upon the whole nature in him as the
public Man to condemnation, before any of the individuals had their particular
beings from him, seeing there needs no other work or medium on their part, but
deriving beings from him, to make them sinners in their own persons, Even so,
by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous (even in their particular
persons, by way of imputation, and application of the Righteousness of another
to them, Romans 3. 22. and 4. 3, 4.) And that is so many as receive that
abundance of grace testified in that already done in Christ for men, and that
gift of righteousness by faith, verse 17. and so come to have being in him, in
believing on his name, That Righteousness that is unto All, it comes upon All
that believe (even in their particulars) which fully shows, that one
Righteousness was unto, or upon the whole nature of man (as men considered) in
him the second public Man, to the justification of life, while all were out of
him, seeing there needs no other work or medium on their part, no discovery, or
receite of any peculiar grace or gift of grace for them while sinners and
enemies that was not for others, nor any thing else is requisite for any one of
this nature of man, to make them righteous in their particulars, but a
receiving by faith that true in Christ, for, and toward them as men and
sinners with the rest, even that abundance of grace, that love of God to
Manward, Tit. 3. 4. Romans 5. 6, 8. and that gift of righteousness, The Son of
God sent the Savior of the world, Joh. 3. 16. and 4. 14. Therein they are made
righteous by the imputation and application of the righteousness of another to
them. By him all that believe are therein through his name justified from all,
from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 10. 43. and
13. 39. which shows the truth of Justification and Righteousness perfect in
him for them as men, and sinners considered, that so in believing in him,
without the works of the Law, or any other medium it might be received by any
of that nature, the whole nature is justified, and acquit of that first
disobedience, and so of the guilt or condemnation of that sinfulnes in them, as
merely and necessarily derived from it; In that he in the common nature, and in
the room of them all as the second public man, is justified for them; In his
Resurrection, he was taken from the prison, and from the judgment, Isa. 53 8.
And this so verily, and vertu^lly for them all; That the Father now judges no
man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, Joh. 5. 22. He does not go to
Law, or proceed to Judgment with men, according to that Law and Judgment, by
which without a Savior they stood as condemned before him, under which Christ
was made for them; Though men still according to his Ordinance pass through
the first mortality, and death, as the fruit of sin, yet not as the due, and
proper wages thereof, and therefore shall not perish in that death, he having
taken out the sting and poison, that would have made it destructrive, by his
coming, and passing through it, and so abolished it, 2 Timothy 1. 10. nor
according to that Judgment.

The truth of which appears, not only in these serious and full Assertions of
it, but likewise by diverse arguments, or reasons used by the Scripture to
evince it; As,

First, The nature of all present and eternal condemnations in the Scripture,
They are not because the fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens
teeth, are thereby necessarily set on edge, but every one for his own proper
iniquity, Ezekiel. 18. 2-4. no man condemned, or abiding under the wrath of God
for present, or shall be eternally condemned, merely because he was simple or
in darkness, or because he was filthy and poluted, but because he loved his
simplicity when the wisdom of God was often, and long reproving him, Prove. 1.
22, 23, 24. etc. When light came they loved darkness rather, Joh. 3. 19.
Because in thy filthiness was lewdness, or stubbornness, and that thus
evidenced, and of this nature;* I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged
Ezekiel. 24 13. They hardened their own hearts wilfully, when he spoke in his
Spirit by the hand of the Prophets, Therefore came there a great wrath upon
them from the Lord, Zech. 7. 9. 11, 12. And this could not have been the nature
of condemnations, present or eternal* neither had the world been capable of
sinning sins of that nature, as for which they are now charged, and under
condemnation, if Christ had not done for them the things mentioned in this
Text, given himself a Ransom for them, and become a Mediator, and by virtue
thereof a Testimony in due time unto them. See our Savior so reasoning, Joh.
15. 22. 24. If he had not done that for them which never man did, or could do
(namely, redeem his brother, or give to God a Ransom for his soul, Psalm, 49.
7.) yea if also he had not spoken to them, preached by his Spirit to their
spirits in the means he used. They had not known, or been capable of sins after
this consideration, as now they are charged on them, that is of both seeing and
healing when by the light coming to them they see both him and his Father.

2. The truth of that ransoming or redemption from the curse of the Law perfect
in Christ for men, appears further, from the grace of God extended unto men in
the mercies and accommodations of the natural life; yea, in the severest of his
chastisements there appears a great abatement, or taking off the greatest part
of the stroke, and that it is not sustained as the full and proper wages of
sin, but is far less then our iniquities deserve: the truth and holiness of God
was engaged, that the soul that sins must dye: and the death was such as was
wholly destructive, and no intermission or mixture of any mercy; but the soul
to have been continually filled with madness and confusion, the body with pains
and all diseases in the extremity, till it had been wholly turned to dust; the
rain of the land, powder and dust; we to eat our bread in sorrow and anguish of
our hearts all our days; all curses to follow and overtake us till we perish;
this was our portion, Genesis 3. 17, etc. with Deuteronomy. 28. 15, etc. neither may the
truth and holiness of God suffer the least impeachment* he cannot in clearing
clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. Therefore in that man is preserved from so much
of the destruction and confusion in his mind, and of the pains and anguish in
his body in this natural life, as that he is a capable subject of beholding,
conversing with, and comfortable enjoyment of the works of Gods creation and
providence; that instead of the rain of our land being powder and dust* the
Lord gives rain from heaven; and instead of eating our bread in the sorrow of
our heart all our days, the Lord gives food and gladness; instead of thorns
thistles, that the Lord in any measure gives that which is good* and our land
yields her increase; herein Gods goodness is witnessed, so as through a
Savior, and leading to repentance, all these having in them a testimony of a
door opened again to God, mercy and truth met, redemption wrought in another
for us, Psalm. 85. 9, 12, 13. Acts 14. 17. Romans 2. 4. upon that account it is,
that God demeans himself toward men in his government ^ow by Christ, as if he
did not see their iniquities, because he is well pleased for his righteousness
sake, (Isai. 42. 19, 21.) in whom truth is sprung out of the earth, etc.

3. The truth of this further appears, in that all shall be raised from the
first death, and then be judged according to the Gospel; which they could not
have been, if one had not by the grace of God died for them and rose again. 2
Cor. 5. 10, 14, 15. Acts 17. 30, 31. Romans 2. 16. yea, if Christ be not raised
for them, then can there be no resurrection of them: For since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die*
so in Christ shall all be made alive. 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. Neither could there be
any reason or rule for judging men according to the Gospel, for whom there was
no truth in the Gospels Declarations propounded to them to be believed, if no
grace extended, by which they might have been saved. They must have perished
(if Christ had not died for them) in the first death: but there could have been
no ransoming out of it, and so no second death. But to proceed.

2. As Jesus Christ by giving himself a ransom has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, and therein saved us from perishing in that first death and misery,
having in and by himself taken away our sins from before the Father, the sin of
the world after the first consideration, as passing and being found on them,
simply and necessarily through the first disobedience: so he has therein, and
by virtue thereof obtained eternal redemption, even redemption of the
transgressions under the first Testament, Heb. 9. 12, 15. A perfect restoration
of all that was lost by that sin, and according to that judgment, a
restoration of it, not into their persons, but into himself for them; that it
might be enjoyed by faith, and in the first fruits of the Spirit, and the hope
of the harvest by any of them in believing in him through his name: there it is
perfect in him, as in a public person, or treasury for us, who will never
lose it; That in coming in to him, it might be enjoined by us. In him God has
given us eternal life. He (of us to whom life is given in Christ) that has the
Son, has life, and he that has not the Son, has not life. And yet it is given
him in Christ, as before, 1 John 5. 11, 12. The sum of our loss, and that in
which eternal life consists, is capacity and liberty to the enjoyment of the
delightful favor of, and fellowship with God, in which is life. All have
sinned and come short of the glory of God* unto which they were created in the
first public man. Sin makes separation between God and men; forasmuch as by
it we lost that Image of God, in which we were created, which was such, as in
Soul and Body together we were capable subjects of immediate fellowship with
our Creator, and in also our liberty to such enjoyment, we are in our selves,
and as in relation to the first man, justly banished, as well as enemies in our
minds, and so at a distance, strangers to the life of God: but Jesus Christ in
our nature, as the second public man, and for us, has perfectly recovered
that Image of God which we lost, and in a better manner, and that both in Soul
and Body; so as he is in our nature, and as the public person, a capable
subject of immediate fellowship with God, and has also liberty: he is
entertained to such enjoyment, that now for us through sufferings, he is
entered into the actual possession of glory, that he may appear effectually in
the presence of God for us, and that whosoever comes in to him by faith, may in
him appear perfect and righteous before the Father; yea, the fullness of the
Godhead dwells in him bodily, according to that John 17. 4* 5. I have finished
the work thou gave me to do on earth, and now I come to thee: holy Father,
glorify me with thine own self, with the glory I had with thee before the
world was. Compared with Col. 1. 14. 15. In him we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins. Who is the Image of the invisible God, etc.
It Is true, the 15. verse is a description of the excellency of his person, In
whom we have redemption: but it is also clearly a demonstration of the
redemption we have in him, the Image of God recovered into our nature, that
through faith in him, it may be enjoyed by any of us whose nature he took, as
aforesaid. Seeing whatever Jesus Christ is invested with, or is become now in
our nature, though it be no other then what he had, and was before, as the
eternal Son of God; yet his being so in our nature, is as the public person
for us, and on a new account by virtue of his suffering for us, and so he is,
and has it in our nature, and for us, by way of redemption or recovery. Like
to this is that Heb. 1. 3, 4. God has spoken to us in these last days by his
Son, who being the brightness of his glory and the express image of his person:
when he had by himself purged our sin, sat down the right hand of God: and
so herein he has restored our nature in himself, to all those glorious
privileges, as Lordship over the creatures, as in their first creation.
Compare Psalm* 8. with Heb. 2. 8. and so the restoration of the creatures to
their first state and purity is obtained, and in his hands for us, to give us
some fruits or streams of the virtues of it now for our good, and to draw us to
him, in whom is all fullness: but the revelation of the thing it self in the
full accomplishment, is reserved till the manifestation of the Sons of God,
which will be at, and not before the second appearing of Christ, Acts 3. 19,
20. Romans 8. 18, 19. Isa. 11.

But we see Jesus who was made a little lower then the Angels, for the
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God
should taste death for every man. The infinite virtues of his sufferings
foreconsidered and eyed by the Father, was that by virtue and on the account of
which, he was counted worthy of that honor, to be set as the second public
man, to undertake and do that for all men, which none could have done for
himself or his brother; as well as also by reason of the virtues and
efficaciousness of those sufferings with the Father, he having by the grace of
God tasted death for every man, he is actually possessed of all the glory of
God in our nature, and for us; for it became him for whom are all things. It
did behove and was suitable to Gods greatness, and the holiness of his nature,
in, or for the bringing many Sons to glory, to make the Captain of their
salvation perfect through sufferings. 1. As all are Sons of God by creation,
Mal. 2. 10. Have we not all one Father? has not one God created us? so for the
bringing back the whole nature in the second public man, who have all sinned
in the first, and come short of the glory of God; and therein for the opening
an effectual door for their being delivered, and brought back to God in their
particulars, as verse. 14, 15. 1 Pet. 3. 18. For this it was necessary that the
Captain of their salvation should be made perfect in himself for them, through
sufferings for sin. And 2. as all that with the heart believe unto
righteousness, are therein Sons of God by faith in Jesus; so for the preserving
them through faith in him, and bringing them to the enjoyment of the
inheritance, who have yet much evil and sinfulness in them, the same was also
necessary, that the Captain of their salvation should be perfect through
sufferings, who being first in himself made perfect, a perfect Savior,
Redeemer, and Recoverer of the loss for all men, is become the Author of
eternal Salvation to all that obey him, Heb. 2. 14, 15. and 5. 9. Jesus Christ
then according to the will and appointment of his Father, has given himself a
ransom or price of redemption for all men; which he has redeemed them from
under the first judgment, the curse of the Law, and to be at his dispose, and
judged by him according to the Gospel; and obtained eternal redemption and
recovery of their loss into himself for them as before. In which by strong hand
he has also redeemed or ransomed us from under the will and compulsive power
and slavery of Satan having destroyed him that had the power of death, that is
the devil, in spoiling his first work, in which he had prevailed, abolishing
that death by his coming, in and by which he has triumphed over him, and all
the enemies of our salvation in himself, and received all power to administer
the Government of God over us, having led and leading captivity captive for us,
that he might deliver those in their particulars, that were all their life
subject to bondage. And here we shall come to the second particular
instruction, propounded for opening the large ground of praying for all men,
here set before us, to which we shall speak more briefly, having been large in
this which is the ground of it.

2. That Jesus Christ by virtue of his having given himself, and being accepted
a ransom for all men, he is become a powerful and standing Mediator between
God and men. By this mediation, may be signified his whole work, in what he
has done, and is become, and does as our Savior; and so he did officiate as
the great Mediator between God and man, in giving himself a ransom to God for
us, of which we have spoken already; and does officiate as the Mediator, in
being a testimony of God and his goodness, in due time to us: of which we shall
speak distinctly in the next place: but that which we shall in this place speak
to under the terms of his being a Mediator, by, and with the virtues of the
offering of his own body once for all, is his continued work with the Father
for us, for the covering and taking away the sins the world, as now charged on
them, by and according to the Gospel: God has given him all power as a Prince
and Savior, by virtue of his sufferings, and the sacrifice perfected through
them, (the obtaining of which was one great end of his sufferings) to take away
following evils, by presenting the infinite virtues of his blood in that
perfect sacrifice of his own body, before the Father for them; By appearing in
the presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24. Where he ever lives to make
intercession for us, chap. 7. 25. to procure and give forbearance, and to keep
off Gods displeasure and judgments from being executed, that are provoked by
their daily fins of a new nature, that so the door of life may be held open,
and he may be still a testimony in due time of the Fathers goodness to them, in
continuing yet means and mercies leading to repentance; and that in coming to
him, they may receive forgiveness, and inheritance with those that are
sanctified by faith in Jesus: our high Priest needs not, as the former, to
offer sacrifice daily, first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the
people: for this he did once, when he offered up himself. Heb. 7. 27. The first
end of that one offering of his, was, that therein and thereby he might
perfectly take away from before the Father, those sins of the world after the
first consideration, as necessarily derived and found upon it through the first
disobedience, which sins were charged upon him and acknowledged as his, though
made so by way of imputation, for he knew no sin. Psalm. 40, 12. with 2 Cor. 5.
21. And this he has perfectly done, he has by himself purged our sin, and is
set down on the right hand of majesty. But this was also a secondary end of the
same one offering, yea, the end of the first end, That by virtue of the
infinite satisfaction for sin made in his sufferings, and the perfect
righteousness completed in his sacrifice, he might be empowered in the name and
majesty of his Father, to take away daily the sins of the people after the
second consideration even as they are now charged upon them, and the wrath of
God abiding on them because of them: namely, all sins as wilfully continued in,
and multiplied against the light and grace of the redemption extended: he needs
not come down again to suffer, or make a new offering for the taking away any
sin, but ever lives and continues in the presence of God, presenting the
virtues of that one offering, and thereby daily so takes away the sin of the
world, as now charged on them, even their wilful ignorance and unbelief of the
grace of God by Christ, and so all other sins, as the love of them against
light is the occasion of their hardening in wilful ignorance to and unbelief of
the light that reproves them, that comes to save them; and so as the continuing
under the pollution and power of them, is occasioned by such their wilful
ignorance and unbelief: sins of this nature, I say, he so takes away, from
before the Father, by his continual intercession for the transgressors, as Isa.
53. 12. Luke 13. that judgment is not speedily executed, but the for bearance,
patience, and renewed goodness of God, yet extended, to admonish, allure, and
lead to repentance, until any have wholly filled up the measure of their sin,
giving up themselves to, and becoming one with Satan, and so fully made
themselves vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: and to leave or give men up
wholly thereto, also God is very slow, through the continuance and prevailing
of Christ's mediation for men, and for all them that turn in his reprovings,
through his name believe in him, that he should give them forgiveness of sins,
eternal life, and so through his name save them to the utmost; he is fully
empowered on the same account of the ends and virtues of his one offering,
seeing he ever lives with it, to make intercession for us. Heb. 7. 25. See how
all this is set before us. 1 John 2. 1, 2. in that ground given us for praying
for any man's sin, which it does not appear to us to be so wholly finished, as
to have occasioned or brought forth death in an utter separation from God. The
Apostle having before directed them to the same fountain for forgiveness and
healing of their own sins; in the beginning of this chapter he gives them this
caution, that the end of his thus instructing them to a fountain for their
cleansing, is, Not that they should continue in sin, that grace may abound; but
that they sin not: and then proceeds to instruct and direct them to an
usefulness of, and running to the same fountain for other men's sins; If any man
sin we (believers) have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous: we have or enjoy him by faith, and such usefulness of him, as our
Advocate appearing especially for us, to plead our cause, and present our
matters according to his wisdom, and with the odors of his incense, the virtues
of his sacrifice: and therefore we may present all our needs and matters to,
and by him, because he that is our Advocate* is also the propitiation for our
sins, that having made peace by the blood of his Cross, is also the standing
propitiation, or Mercy-Seat with the Father; The sin-offering, and so the great
and constant mediation for the daily covering and taking away the iniquities
and mixtures, that otherwise might hinder our prayers. And therefore we may
make such use of him, as for the presenting our supplications for pardon of any
man's sin, according to his will declared in the Gospel, because he that is the
propitiation for our sins, is also the propitiation for the sins of the whole
world, even such as yet lie in wickedness, that being the explication of the
whole world, as opposed to believers by this Apostle. 1 John 5. 18, 19.

The sins for which he here is said to be the propitiation, are such, or sins
after such a consideration, as in which we are to pray for pardon of them
daily, as we see them in our selves or others, which are only sins after the
second consideration, that is, all or any sins, as they are found in us,
continued in, or multiplied against the light, or powerful instructions and
reproofs of the grace of God that brings salvation to all men, and come to
redeem or save them from any of their iniquities, as Acts 3. 26. Tit. 2. 11.
It Is after this consideration only, that God by Jesus Christ charges sin upon
us as our sin, and for which his wrath or displeasure abides upon us, that when
light comes, Men love and willingly choose darkness rather, because their deeds
are evil. All the wrath on the former account being taken away, and the sin
perfectly covered and purged in Christ; now, it is our sins as they are against
this grace in so delivering or ransoming us in and by Christ, and bringing this
Salvation to us, for which he is angry; and that does stir up new wrath and
displeasure; for the removal or taking away of which, we are daily to pray with
thanksgiving for the other perfectly done, as the ground that this may be done
for us. See this clear in our types, Psalm. 85. 1, 4. As for sin in either guilt
or pollution, as it passed on us, and yet may be considered as in or upon us,
merely and necessarily through the first disobedience, and the poison of it, so
we are not to pray for the pardon of it, or that it may be taken away from
before the Father, and he may not lay it to our charge, or to the charge of any
man: but in all our prayers to acknowledge and give thanks for that as already
perfectly done in and by Christ; which if it had not, we had had neither ground
nor door to approach or pray to the Father for any thing; and therefore with
thanksgiving to God in the name of Christ for this as already done, we are to
pray that both our eyes, and the eyes of others, may be opened to see and
understand how great things he has done for us: and as this instructs, we
are to pray on this ground for pardon and healing of sin as wilfully contracted
in us against light, etc. or either as the occasion or fruit of ignorance or
unbebelief in Christ as before; that sin as found in us and others after this
consideration, may not be laid to our charge, but forbearance and forgiveness
administered according to the Gospel: now for these sins, or sins after this
consideration it is, that he is here said to be the propitiation, the standing
propitiatory sacrifice or mercy-seat, for the daily covering with the infinite
virtues of his satisfaction, and offering for sin once made, and so taking away
daily from before the Father the sins of the world after this consideration,
and so his being the propitation for our sins, which might hinder our prayers,
and for the pardon of which, we have daily to pray, and not only for ours but
also for the sins of the whole world, is equivalent and the same with his being
the continual and standing Mediator between God and men, by, and with the
virtues of that one offering of himself. It Is true, his making the atonement,
or propitiation and peace in himself for us, in that at first perfectly done in
giving himself a ransom, is here more strongly employed and signified, seeing
without it, or if that had not been done and perfect for them in Christ, this
could not have been done for them by him: if he had not made peace, he could
not have been a standing propitiation for sin; but that which is here directly
spoken to, and signified by his being affirmed to be the propitiation, is
according to the latter sense.

And so God has set him forth to be a standing propitiation, that through him
his righteousness may be declared, not only in giving the forgiveness of sins
through faith in his blood, but in granting forbearance of the same to men that
do not believe, that they might have opportunity and space afforded thereto: as
well as also to be a propitiation to, or in them, and so of them in their
particular persons, through faith in his blood, as Col. 1. 22. 2 Cor. 5. 18.
And all this through, by virtue, and by means of the redemption that is in him,
Romans 3. 24, 25. Behold then that Lamb of God that having by himself perfectly
purged our sin, is now set down on the right hand of God, and there daily
taking away the sin of the world as now charged on it, the great Mediator
between God and men, by, and with the virtues of his having given himself a
ransom for all men, and that he may be so viewed by us, consider,

3. That by virtue of his ransom given and accepted, and his Mediation
continually made with the Father for all men, he is in the name of the Father a
Testimony, or to be testified to them in due time, to each in their several and
proper ages, and to every one at such time and seasons, as may be most for
their advantage and good; and now in these last ages, (the most seasonable time
for that, for diverse considerations) by the coming of Christ, and his bringing
light, and immortality to light, by the Gospel to the Gentiles, 2 Timothy 1. 10.
Heb. 1. 1, 3. of which more directly is here spoken, in which the ground of
making prayers with thanks givings for all men, is more opened then formerly;
though it was the same in Christ before. But he^e for brevity sake we shall
only show how in general he is, and always was unto all men every where, and
in every age by virtue of his sacrifice, accepted and virtuous with the Father
from the beginning, a Testimony in due time, of the truth of the redemption in
him, and the Fathers goodness through him; And that in these two things.

1. In affording to all as they come to capacity and need of it, means,
opportunity, and space to repent.

2. In sending forth his good Spirit, in the supernatural light and power of
it, in, and with those mercies and means to bring the light, and understanding
of his goodness to the heart, and thereby to reprove men of their evils, and
turn them to God.

1. In affording to all as they come to capacity and need of it, means and
opportunity to repentance: for children that know not any thing, and so are not
capable of actual doing good or evil, as they are not capable of hearing and
rejecting the word of Christ, of voluntary choosing and setting up idols in
their heart, and departing from the Lord, under whose special care and
protection, and gracious government by Christ they are: so there is no
condemnation or charge of sin upon them, by, or according to the Gospel, and so
no repentance needful, or required of them: for though born under the guilt of
sin according to the Law, (under which Christ was made for them) and so with a
corrupt and polluted nature; yet by reason of him that has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law, they are not by God held under condemnation on that
account neither, nor shall perish in that death.

And as they have no capacity in their particulars personally to adhere to, and
close with the grace of God in Christ, and so actually to believe in him; so
neither is that required of them by him, that requires not, but according to
what he has sown, and in his givings furnished to, yea, he that imputes
righteousness without works, and does not charge with unbelief, where there is
not a hearing and rejecting, (as John 3. 19. and 12. 47.) does graciously
accept and own them, by virtue of the Redemption wrought in Christ for them;
yea, and reckons them as believers, and so of the kingdom; and as a testimony
of that, would have them brought to him, and accepts that as their coming, and
says, Whosoever shall receive one such little child in his name, therein
receives and acknowledges him, Mat. 18. 5, 6. and 19. 13, 14. yet in them
Christ is a testimony of the truth of the Redemption in him, and the Fathers
goodness through him unto all men, in preserving their natural life, while he
continues it to them, to the comfortable enjoyment of his mercies, and free
from the sting and poison of the first death, and easing them of so much of the
pains and miseries of those shadows of that death and mortality that is upon
them, as he sees good for them and for us. In which as there is no
destructiveness in that which remains, so there is a great abatement and
taking off, even of the greatest part of the stroke or curse which the truth of
God required should have been executed upon us in them, by reason of our sin;
not only to bring forth in sorrow, but for trouble without case, Cursed shall
thou be in the fruit of thy body, Genesis 3. 16. Deuteronomy. 28. 18. we may say, (as
sometimes concerning Joseph, Genesis 45. 7.) It appears by Gods present gracious
dealing with us in them, that God has sent a Jesoph into our condition of
misery, and made him under our Law and curse before us, and he is now through
sufferings entered into glory, become a Prince and a Savior. All is committed
into his hands, to preserve to us a posterity in the earth, and to save our
lives together, to the comfortable enjoyment of his mercies by a great
deliverance; yea, this will be to them a testimony of Gods goodness through the
Redemption, when they come to be capable of considering it, and such as may be
so discerned by them, and useful to them, if they put not from them the
instructions of the grace of God, as it was to David, Psalm. 71. 6. Thou art he
that have preserved or holden me up from the womb, as well as taken me of my
Mothers Bowels: my praise shall be continually of thee. Whence we are exhorted
in youth, and its the first and main thing we should mind our children of, as
they are capable, To remember our Creator, to call to mind his goodness in
creating, and so in preserving us hitherto, that through his goodness in his
Son may be so comfortably and profitably remembered by us: but as they come to
capacity to know any thing and act accordingly, though the grace of God that
brings solvation to all men, instruct and require of them to close with it
according to the means and capacities afforded, yet they are all generally
going astray naturally, and not regarding to understand or know the way of
peace, but closing their eyes against the light, and corrupting themselves more
and more; notwithstanding which, such is the love of God to manward, He would
not that any should perish but come to repentance, and be saved: he heartily
desires, they should according to the instructions and reproofs of his
goodness, turn from their dumb Idols and evil ways, unto the living God; and
as a testimony of it, having opened in and by his Son, such a large and
effectual door to this purpose, and that at so costly a rate, he also gives his
Son in the issues and streamings forth of the virtue of his sacrifice, a
continual witness or testimony to them while it is in due time. And so
concerning such we say, Jesus Christ is by virtue of his sacrifice and
mediation, still preserving this natural life (while he pleases to continue it)
unto the comfortable enjoyment of his mercies, and renewing gracious means and
opportunities to them, That they might repent and seek after God, who is not
far off from every one of them, but near them in the gracious operations of his
hands, and in his good affection and desire of their good by them: for
therefore, in by or through him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17.
24* 27. And so by him they are preseved from so much of the destruction and
confusion of mind, and of the pains and torments on the body, that is the
proper wages of our sin* that they are (unless in some rare examples, in whom
God also requires not more or otherwise, then according to what he has sown or
furnished with) capable subjects of beholding and considering the mercies of
God and understanding, and making such use of them* as may tend to the
comfortable being of the natural life; and so of conversing with, and attending
to those outward mediums, in which Gods Spirit is conversant and working to
lead them to repentance, (of which more anon.) And indeed all those mercies and
accommodations of the natural life are made such mediums, and to that purpose
is he also by virtue of the same sacrifice and mediation, continuing and
renewing in his providence as he sees good, his mercies, in Creatures,
Scriptures, or both; and ordering also favorable chastisements, in which he
debates with them in measure, and changing his providence about them, that
they may not settle on their l^es. All these things works God often times with
man, to bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the living, Job 33. 29 30. to give them space and opportunity to repent. And
herein is Jesus Christ a great and continual Witness of Gods goodness and
propitiousness toward them, and of the truth of the Redemption in him declared
in the Gospel, as is foreshewed in the second Reason propounded for
demonstration of the truth of his having redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
being made a curse for us.

2. Jesus Christ is also a Testimony, and so he, and the Father in him
testified to men in due time, in sending forth the supernatural light and power
of his good Spirit, in, and with all these outward means, to bring the light of
the knowledge of his goodness to their hearts, and therein open their ears, and
give capacity by his words and in his calling, that men might hear and answer:
for though the former be done, the natural life preserved, the outward mediums
afforded, and man a capable subject of beholding, enjoying, and attending to
those mediums without distraction; yet is he not simply hereby, or by any power
in him, as naturally of him, capable of finding out the knowledge of the things
of God in Christ, or closing with them, as declared and witnessed in those
mediums: the world by wisdom found not out God in the wisdom of God; the carnal
mind is enmity to God; it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
it be, so that they that are in the flesh, all have flesh in them; but they
that are in it, wholly given up to it, swayed and guided by the teaching or
operation of the wisdom, affections, or lusts of the flesh, they cannot please
God; we have no sufficiency in our selves, as of our selves, not so much as to
think any thing as we ought; But our sufficiency is of God, and so of God, as
not of our selves; not by a mere natural blessing, or stirring up and
strengthening any thing that is naturally of us* though those natural faculties
and powers may be well employed as far as renewed by grace, but then they must
be renewed and acted by such light and power of the grace of God given and
heeded, as though certainly administered in, and through outward mediums, yet is
supernatural to us, 1 Cor. 1. 21. and 2. t^t. Romans 8. 6, 7* 8. 2 Co 3. 5. so
that the natural man, as a natural man, by any thing natural in him receives
not the things of God.

There is therefore requisite such a manner of putting forth of light, and
exercise of the power of Gods Spirit in the natural faculties of the Soul or
Spirit of man, to make it capable of comprehending, perceiving, or closing with
the things of God in Christ, as is to man supernatural, he being naturally, in
and of himself, as incapable of hearing the voice of the Son of God in the
Gospel, as those that are in the graves are in and of themselves incapable of
hearing and complying with that voice of the Son of God, by which they shall be
raised; and therefore those deaths are compared the one to the other, John 5.
25, 28. though these are capable (as before showed) of attending to those
means, in which the supernatural light and force of the Spirit of God is put
forth and exercised for bringing the voice of the Son of God nigh to them, and
opening their ears, and giving capacity to hear it, and quickening by it,
answerable to which the other have no such capacity; And therefore the voice of
the Son of God shall come forth to that immediately: however then it is
requisite, that in, or through those outward mediums there be such a manner of
coming forth and operation of the Spirit of God, as is answerable to that by
which Jesus Christ was raised from the dead, and the dead shall be raised: it is
the same Spirit by which he moved, and acted, and walked up and down in his
life, in the flesh, or in the days of his weakness and mortality, and so the
same Spirit by which men are taught and strengthened to their natural motions,
actions, or employments in things tending to the good or comfortable being of
the natural life, but not in the same manner put forth or exercised; but as we
may say, In a natural or ordinary way, by blessing natural faculties, and
abilities, in, and according to a natural improvement, in such manner, as the
nature of man by that which God has already furnished it withal, is capable
of receiving* and complying with* But for this, though that light and power of
the Spirit is to ^e put forth into, and exercised in the dark heart and dead
faculties of the soul that they may be renewed and strengthened by it; yet it
must be such as brings with it its light, strength, and capacity for the
receiving it, such as has in it a supernatural force, or manner of operation,
for opening the deaf ears, and the blind eyes, etc. (Isai. 42. 18. 7. and 49.
9.) that they may see and receive what it discovers. There being no such
capacity before, or naturally in the subject to which it comes. Therefore the A
postle desiring for the believing Ephesians, That they might through the
knowledge of him more abundantly experiment the exceeding greatness of his
mighty power or arm that is in the Gospel, that it might more have its
prevalency with them, as it is put forth through that knowledge of him for the
special saving of them that believe, Romans 1. 16, 17. he compares it to the
manner of the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ Jesus,
when he raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 17, 19, 20. Now this is that which we
have here further to say on Gods behalf, ascribing righteousness to our maker;
That according to man's need by reason of his natural weakness and depravedness
God is certainly liberally giving to all men without upbraiding any, such gifts
as may conduce to their getting wisdom in the knowledge of him* and so being
reconciled to him; for he gives nothing but good and perfect givings, not only
out of a cordial heart and affection, but such as would produce what they come
for, and insinuate themselves by their own light and force, and make the
subject capable of receiving and complying with them, and this is given us as a
general ground for any man to ask wisdom of God ( Jam. 1. 5, 17.) and that
without wrath or doubting, and not to murmur or rebel against him in his
Gospel, or the instruction thereof, in which his arm is thus stretched out: so
Psalm. 68. 18, 19. Thou have ascended on high, and led captivity captive, and
received gifts in the Man, for men, even for the rebellious, that they might
dwell with the Lord. And from thence it follows* Blessed be the Lord that daily
loadeth us, etc. Yea, (to show this truth in expressions suitable to those, in
which we have demonstrated the nature of man's weakness and necessity) see 1
Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20. By that Spirit by which Jesus Christ was raised from the
dead, or by such manner of the putting forth of the light and power of that
Spirit, he went and preached not to their ears only, but to their Spirits,
which are now in prison for their disobedience to his Spirit then, when the
long-sufferings of God waited on them in the ministration of Noah; and so his
Spirit was then, and before striving with them in all the means vouchsafed
them, and that all the day long, and in due time, whence that, my Spirit shall
not always strive with man: yea, after, he spoke in his Spirit in the light,
evidence and power of it by the hands of his servants the Prophets: and that so
to their hearts, as that in rejecting or refusing to hear them, they were said
to harden their hearts against his softning and melting operations, Zech. 7. 9*
11, 12. yea, all the day long while in those means he used he was calling them
to behold him, he also therein, in and with his words, stretched out his hands,
his power or Spirit unto a rebellious people* that yet were not overcome
thereby, Isa. 65. 1, 2. He did lift up the yoke of thraldom while he set meat
before them, though they would take no notice of his healing them, he was in
all ages in the world, though the world would not know him; the light shines
in darkness, though the darkness comprehend it not; he came unto his own,
though they received him not; so when the voice of the Son of God came forth in
the Gospel, it was his promise, The dead should hear it; and that so, as
hearing, in hearing, or according to the capacity given, they should live, Joh.
1. 3. 10. and 5. 25. And therefore God gives up men in his just Judgment to
blindness, That hearing they should hear, and not understand etc. because they
made it first their voluntary sin, in hearing not to hear; but closing their
eyes, stopping their ears, shunning the light when it came, because their deeds
were reproved by it, and lest they should be converted from them. Mat. 13. 11,
13, 15. John 3. 19. They received not the love of the truth that they might be
saved. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. Hosea 11. 27. Ezekiel. 24. 11, 13* It Is true, no man
can come to Jesus Christ, except the Father which has sent him, draw them.
John 6. 44. which signifies the necessity of using or putting forth some such
power, in, and with those Arguments he uses to persuade, as is to the man
supernatural: and it is as true, that the Father was then drawing, and had
before drawn those very persons, verse. 35, 36. He that comes to me, shall
never hunger: he that believes on me, shall never thirst: but I said unto you,
That ye also have seen and believe not: which (comparing it with the former
verse, where believing is the explication of coming) is as much as if he had
said, You have been drawn and come not, as those Hosea 11. 2, 7. but did break
his bands by murmuring among themselves, as Psalm. 2. 3, 5. so here compare
verse. 43. and 44. The doctrine in 44. verse. No man can come unless the Father
draw, or it be given him of my Father, verse. 6 5. is a ground of the
admonition, v. 43. Murmur not among your selves: signifying, that his Father
was now in his ministration drawing them with special and powerful cords
leading them to repentance; and therefore he admonishes, not still to break
his bonds by murmuring, because without them they could not come; and it might
be much feared God would restrain his Spirit from striving any longer, if such
special influences of him, in such special means were rejected.

Therefore even now more earnestly and heartily to receive, while the Father
was giving to them, as he affirms the Father was then giving to them, or did
then give them the true bread, though they did not accept or feed on it, verse.
32. And thus it fully agrees with that, John 12. 35, 36. Yet a little while is
the Light with you; walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come, and then
ye cannot walk: and that, Jam. 1. 18, 19, 20, etc. Of his own good will, or
willingly begat he us through the word of truth, (which is preached to every
man, Col. 1. 27, 28, 29.) wherefore let every man be swift to hear, slow to
speak, slow to wrath, or murmuring against that Word of truth, seeing it is Gods
Arm sent to save him: and like to this, that, Phil. 2. 12, 13. It is God that
works in you both to will and to do, etc. Do all things without murmuring and
disputings, that ye may not fail of the efficacies of his grace in you, as Heb.
12. 15, 16. And indeed the grace of God brings salvation to all men, in all
the several appearances and streamings forth thereof, in his mercies,
chastisements, providence, though more fully and plainly in the records and
plain Declaration of the Gospel, and especially as now come forth: yet even in
his works of creation and providence, which by virtue of the redemption wrought
in Christ, men do behold, and have a comfortable enjoyment of, even where they
do not enjoy the other more plain Declarations of Jesus Christ, the choice
means; yet therein, and to them, in and with those means they have, Jesus
Christ by his Spirit is witnessing the goodness of God to their spirits, so
that God is not without a witness in those mercies they enjoy, Acts 14. 17.
yea, the word or testimony of Gods goodness as preached in them, is not afar
off, but nigh them, in their heart, in their mouth, that it might be seen and
acknowledged; and it is leading, persuading, and drawing their hearts to
repeatance in the acknowledgement of the truth: that which may be known of God
in those discoveries of him vouchsafed, is manifest in them, and that is Gospel
or good news of goodness and propitiousness in God; yea, so as through a
Savior, this is preached in every creature, though that Savior is not
distinctly revealed as in the Scriptures, Acts 17. 24, 27. Romans 1. 19, 21.
Colos. 1. 23. Neither does God require of them any Repentance, Faith, or
Acknowledgement of him, but according to the capacities and manifestations
given them; and is very favorable and full of forbrearance, though all men
generally fail and come short of that; and is yet waiting to be gracious to
them, in continuing the mediums of calling, and while he is doing so,
stretching out his hand all the day long: and if God see it good for them or
any of them, to give them some more distinct revelation and discovery of the
person and work of Christ, as he has also promised, that in turning in his
reproofs, he will still further pour out his Spirit* and make known his words:
and however, I say, what discovery or revelation of Christ soever he sees good
and needful for any of them, though they have not the Scriptures, the outward
means thereto, he can teach the same things without them; yea, where by his
providence they are not vouchsafed, his Spirit is so conversant, and in such
manner with the books of creation and providence, as to teach and lead to that
use of them, which by the Scriptures he teaches us to make of them, as it has
been seen in the cases of such as have been deaf and dumb; God has taught them
the same things concerning Christ, and his goodness through him, by those
things which they saw and had to do with, which others have learned through
discourse, and in use of those Organs they wanted: and if they had wanted the
other also, he could have taught the same things without that too, for he
speaks to the heart, and gives wisdom to the inward parts; none teaches like
him; and though he ever make use of outward mediums where and according to what
he vouchsafes, yet he is bound to none of them; and is also especially tender
toward such as enjoy least of them, being by his providence deprived, in
requiring less of them, and no more then according to what he gives, and by his
providence, in keeping strong temptations and stumbling blocks from before
them, and out of their way, and in dealing with them according to their need
and wants; whence exhorting us to be like him, he directs particularly in this,
Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind,
Levit. 19. 1, 14. but especially open thy mouth for them, etc. Prove. 31. 8, 9,
yea, expressly they have all heard, and that so, as by sent Preachers, and that
so, as that they might believe; and to that end see Romans 10. 15, 18. After he
has told us, that they cannot believe without sent Preachers among them;
making this conclusion, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing, even capacity to
hear, by or with the word, according to the preaching thereof vouchsafed: then
he propound the question, I say then, Have they not all heard? and answers
generally, Yes, they have; and particularly to those that have not obeyed, yet
they have heard, and that by means of sent Preachers too, which by the next
verse, alluding to Psalm. 19. the works of creation and providence are, whose
line is gone out into all the world, and their words to the ends of the earth,
and by them he says, All have heard; and then distinctly speaks of Isreal's
having more special means of knowledge. Jesus Christ then is the true light,
that enlightneth every man that comes into the world: he is to all, by virtue
of his ransom, a Testimony in due time, the Light of the world, etc. See, for
further understanding and usefulness of this, the first instruction propounded
by way of usefulness of the first proposition, and particularly the explication
of those two Scriptures compared* Isa. 49. 8. 2 Cor. 6. 2. I shall not here
otherwise in large to usefulness, having been already more large then I
intended, in this demonstration or opening of the ground of praying with
thanksgiving for all, in these three heads: That Christ by the gracious will
and appointment of God, gave himself, and is an accepted ransom for all: And
that by virtue of this, he is become a standing Mediator between God and men,
appearing in the presence of God for them: And by means of both these, that he
is in the name and majesty of the Father, a testimony in due time to them:
only here let me add, In all this, and this is the summing up of the message,
God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; he is perfectly one and the
same according to this manifestation of his good will, that men should be saved
and come to the knowledge of the truth, in and through the Mediator.

There is not two divided and contrary wills in God, one revealed, and another
secret: he is one in his will, as well as in his Essence, and in all his holy
and glorious Attributes, and that one will of God is a good, perfect, and
acceptable will for men to know, Romans 12. 2. and revealed, that it may be
understood, Ephesians. 5. 17. Therefore they shall be beaten that did not know it
according to the manifestations given them, because though of themselves they
could not, yet by his grace bringing salvation to all men, they might have
known it, Luke 12. 48. Tit. 2. 11. And though there be many distinct things in
that will of God (as John 6. 39, 40. see the opening of that before, in the
Explication of the Thanksgivings to be joined with Prayers made for all men,)
yet no clashings or contradictions; for if his Kingdom be divided against it
self, it cannot stand; according to our Saviors Argument. And therefore though
many things in it not before so revealed as now they are, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. with
Ephesians. 3. 3, 9.) By the appearing of Christ, who has brought life and
immortality to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. and many things not yet so
revealed as they shall be at the second appearing of Christ, 1 John 3. 2. yet
there is nothing in those Revelations we have contrary to those before, but
more full Declarations and openings of that life that was from the beginning,
and of the love of God to manward, as appearing in the face of Christ, 1 John
1. 1, 5. Romans 16. 25, 26. with Acts 26. 22. And so neither is there any thing
not revealed, contrary to that which is already revealed; but the truth and
goodness of that as revealed, shall more fully and brightly be manifested, for
God is one, and there is one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all men, a Testimony in due time.

These things considered, afford plentiful ground to make Prayers and
Thanksgivings for all men, 1. For the end of all Prayers for them, that Gods
way may be known upon Earth, and his saving health among all Nations; that men's
eyes might be opened to see it, that so they might be turned from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God, etc. that they might be saved, there
is good ground for Prayers to be made with Thanksgivings to this end. For,
first, There is certainly and truth in the grace of God to manward, as
manifested in and through Christ; and secondly, That is, and is to be
manifested to all men by one means or other, and in due time, so as, and to
that end, that it might be known, that through him they might be saved: God
will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. Men not
believing this, must needs pray such Prayers doubtingly.

2. For those particulars of forgiveness, or forbearance of sins, and renewed
patience and goodness to be extended, so as may conduce to the great end of all
Prayers for them; good ground to make our Prayers with Thansgiving, and without
wrath and doubting: for Jesus Christ by virtue of his ransom given for all, is
the great Mediator between God and them, that he may be testified in due time.

The Apostle wills therefore, that men pray everywhere; and that therein
Supplication, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of Thanks be made for all men.
It follows,

For Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

We shall hence note a third general Instruction, which is fully contained in
this verse, as compared with the former, and with the occasion of the
exhortation before showed; and in the opening of which, we may meet with the
understanding and usefulness of what is set before us in this part of the
Apostles exhortation and instruction. Namely,

3. That in pursuance of this great design, for the good of all men, and more
particularly, as mainly tending to the furtherance of the same; that believers
may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: Prayers, and
Thanksgivings, are to be made (as in general for all men, so) particularly for
Kings, and for all that are in Authority. We shall open it in these branches:

1. That it tends very much to the good of all men, that believers lead a quiet
and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty among them.

2. That therefore God likes it well, and requires it, that those whom he sets
in Authority, or eminent place, places of Government, should all of them have a
special eye at this, that his people that worship him, and would live quietly
in the land, that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty, under their protection and Government.

3. We shall consider, what those things are in general that will tend to this,
and which are required of Governors, that believers may lead such a life.

4. What that is that will especially furnish them to these things, and so is
especially to be desired for them.

1. That it tends very much to the good of all men, that believers lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty among them. We shall here,

1. Consider what it is to lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.

2. See how this tends so much to the good of all men to be desired by us.

1. For the first, what it is to lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. Note, That it is not every, or any kind of leading the
life quietly or peaceably, that is commendable in the believer, and will be
profitable unto others; but the leading a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty: like that, Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord: holiness, and so here
godliness and honesty is the main thing to be pursued, and in which the
believer is always to continue and be exercised; and holding fast and
exercising himself therein, he is to follow peace with all men, to study to be
quiet, as much as is possible to live peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 17, 18.
He is not to wave, swerve, nor shrink from his continuance in, and exercise of
godliness and honesty, to get peace with any, or live quietly with them: that
will be worthily reputed a loving the things of the world, and the love and
fellowships of, or peace with men more then him, or the praise of men more then
the praise that comes of God alone, and will render a man unworthy of him, Mat.
10. 32, 39. John 12. 42, 43. Yet a man living in all godliness and honestly, he
may lead his life quietly and peaceably, with and amongst those that are
ungodly, turbulent, unjust, and devising deceitful matters against him, and
that for Christ's sake and the Gospels; or at least he may endeavor it as much
as is possible, by being for peace even while they are for war, Psalm. 35. 13,
14, 20. and 120. 6* 7. and yet not join or comport with them in their ungodly
principles or ways, nor allow or have fellowship with their unfruitful works
of darkness; but in a constant holding fast faith and a good conscience
exercising himself in godliness and honesty, be always fleeing from and
avoiding them, departing from iniquity according to the teaching, of that name
and grace of Christ professed by him, and so reproving them, bearing witness
and striving against their sin, and that with meekness, long-suffering, and
doctrine, and yet with constancy, Heb. 12. 3, 4. 2 Timothy 2. 19, 26. and 4. 1, 5.

However then, this is first to be minded; the Saints of God, such as through
grace believe, they are to lead their lives, and be continually exercised, each
according to their capacity, in godliness and honesty.

Godliness is the true or right worshipping of God, the honoring or glorifying
of him, and walking in a right acknowledgement of him in all things, and so in
service of him according to the teachings of that grace, that brings salvation
to all men, which in that appearance of it by Christ: teaches that denying all
ungodliness, -- we should live godly. See it explicated by this Apostle, 1 Timothy
4. 8, 10. Having exhorted Timothy to exercise himself to godliness on this
account* that it is profitable to all things, he proves that thus, verse 10. For
therefore we both labor, and suffer reproach because we trust in the living
God* who is the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe: where
comparing the verses, it appears, that the trusting in, and so the whole
worshipping of the living God in and according to that declaration of his name
in his Son, where he has revealed himself to be the living God, the Savior of
all men, especially of them that believe; This is godliness or right
worshipping of God: and so to be exercised herein and hereto, was to exercise
himself to godliness, which he should find profitable to all things, even to
his teaching and strengthening in this present day to all his service and
suffering. And so with this 1 Timothy 4. 7, 8, 10. agrees that description of a
godly person, Psalm. 1. He that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly nor
stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful, he
refuses foolish and unlearned questions and positions of science falsely so
called, such teachings, counsels, and documents, about the worship and
acknowledgement of God or of Christ, as in which God in Christ is not honored
according to his word; But the great testimony of God concerning him, which is
the sum of all the matter of the Fathers teaching or learning, ( Joh. 6. 45.
Ephesians. 4. 20, 22.) and the key of knowledge for opening all things pertaining to
the knowledge and worship of God, is laid by. And so the fear and worship taught
by the precepts of men, or after the wisdom of this world, which is foolishness
with God, and teaches enmity to the truth, and way of worshipping God as it is
in Jesus: he avoids, refuses, and shuns such ungodliness, and also flees
youthful, and fleshly or worldly lusts, and exercises himself to godliness: (1 Timothy 4. 7. and 6. 11. 2 Timothy 2. 22, 23.) that is, as in the Psalm, his delight
and continual exercise is in the law or doctrine of the Lord, the old
Commandment preached from the beginning, the testimony of God concerning Christ
the law of liberty, as explicated James 1. 25. he looks into it, and
continues therein; his faith, his fear, his whole worship, acknowledgement,
and service, is taught by and according thereto; he shall be stable,
successful, and so blessed in his deed: and accordingly we have a description
of ungodly persons, though having a form of godliness, yet denying the power,
the root and life thereof. And with it a declaration of the general reason they
are so unstable and easily tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, (as
Psalm. 1. 4. with Ephesians. 4. 14.) and do so much miscarry in their apprehensions of
all things pertaining to the knowledge and worship of God, They err in vision,
they stumble in judgment: Isa. 28. 7. and 29. 9. the description of them, I
say* and the general reason of such their erring and instability, we have, Isa.
29. 11. The vision of all was become unto them as the words of a book that is
sealed, etc. and so rendered by them to others: and this fundamental blindness,
it may seem, God had now in part given them up unto; but it was because they
had first wilfully closed their own eyes* and made it their own proper wilful
iniquity, against the light and reproof of grace, (as Isa. 28. 10, 11, 12, 13.
with Mat. 13. 13* 14* 15.)

The Vision of all is Jesus Christ, as declared in the Gospel, in whose face
now God has manifested the light of his glory, so as he that sees him, sees
him that sent him; he that believes on him, believes on him that sent him,
John 12. 44, 46. 2 Cor. 4. 6. yea, he is that true light, that in revealing the
Father, does manifest all things in their proper colors. The Light of the
world, John 8. 12. and 12. 46. with Ephesians. 5. 13. That vision spoken of, Hab. 2.
2, 3. compare Heb. 10. 37. It Is to us Jesus Christ, as now declared in that
preaching of the Cross who was before witnessed in the Law and Prophets:
compare Isa. 29. 11, 14. with 1 Cor. 1. 18, 19. etc.

This therefore called the Vision of all, because it is the Vision of all
Visions; the foundation and key of knowledge for the opening of all doctrines,
the great things of Gods Law, Hosea 8. 12. Mat. 23. 13, 23. Luke 11. 52. and
also because it is the Vision of, for, and to all men; the light of the world;
it holds forth tidings of great joy, of greatest and most excellent concernment
for them all, and at all times, Luke 1. 10, 11, 14. Prove. 8. 1, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 1.
15. This is rendered as a sealed book, when the Gospel as preached by the
Prophets and Apostles, in, and according to the import of its own expressions,
is looked upon and presented as a Riddle, or hidden thing, in which truth is
not plainly manifested, but one thing spoken, and another meant; or the meaning
locked or sealed up from us under other expressions (contrary to 2 Cor. 4. 1,
4.) when the pen of the Scribe, especially in those things main and
fundamenttal, is rendered as vain and too empty to give his sense and meaning:
and yet men pretend wisdom, and that they have the Law of the Lord with them,
Jer. 8. 8, 9.

This Vision of all being a sealed book, upon this account it is affirmed of
such, Their whole fear and worship, though they honor him with their lips, is
taught by men's precepts, and therefore not right worshipping.

The reason of such an Assertion concerning the whole worship merely on this
account, is this: The sum of the Gospel being hid* they are lost, or out of
the way, and cannot have any right understanding, or usefulness of the
instructions of the word of the Lord, as to their worship of him, having
rejected the sum and fundamentals of it; and that in which the fellowship of
the Spirit is to be met with for opening the rest. They have therein rejected
the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8. 8, 9. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

And this is the reason of their roeling and erring in all things hard to be
understood, they are unlearned and unstable, 2 Pet. 3. 16. that is, not having
learned Christ aright; and so all truth as it is in Jesus, that Vision of all;
or not attending and waiting to learn, and have the usefulness of all truth,
according to their needs and capacities, through the knowledge and usefulness
of that sum of the Gospel, the testimony of God concerning him, as Isa. 28.
10, 11, 12, 14, 16. John 6. 45* 46. Ephesians. 4. 21. They therefore presently
pervert those things in the Scriptures hard to be understood; and then also to
frame their apprehensions in every thing to such pervertings of the Scriptures,
in things hard, they pervert all other Scriptures to their own destruction.
These are such ungodly ones* as yet have a form of godliness, but deny the
power, resist and oppose the truth, as it is in Jesus. The Father is not
rightly honored or worshipped by them: The true Worshippers worship the Father
in Spirit and truth* John 4. 23. The truth of all types, promises, and former
revelations of God to men* in, and according to which the Father is to be
worshipped, is Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 3. The testimony of Jesus, as now come
forth, is to us the Spirit of prophecy, through, and according to which the
Father and Son, God in Christ is to be acknowledged, believed in and worshipped
by us, Rev. 19. 10. And thus our Savior explicates that John 4. 23. according
to these two Scriptures compared, in John 5. 22, 23, 24. The Father judges no
man, (that is, otherwise then as follows) but has committed all judgment to
the Son, to this end, that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father: that now in honoring the Son, as come forth and glorified in our
nature through sufferings, they may therein truly and acceptably honor or
worship the Father. And for further opening how and wherein the Son is rightly
honored* and so the Father in him, he adds, He that hears my word, (that
revelation of the Father, that he was delivered to death for our offenses, and
raised for our justification, as declared in the Gospel gives) and through and
according to it beliveeth on him that sent me, he has ever lasting life, etc.
Therefore believers are exhorted to hold fast the believing remembrance of the
things heard from the beginning, the word of the beginning of Christ, and to
have recourse thereto, (as to that Spirit or Unction; it being the immediate
birth or offspring of the Spirit it self, and so Spirit, according to that
rule, John 3. 6. His name an oynment poured forth, Cant. 1. 2.) for
understanding all things, for preserving from every evil word and work, for
direction and furniture to all service and suffering, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 4. 2 Timothy
2. 7, 8. 1 John 2. 20, 24, 27. And therein, and so they shall be found
exercising themselves to godliness.

Honesty signifies righteousness, equity or justice in our demeanor toward
all men, and that such as in which there is chastity or sincerity to the main
design for which we are set in the world; purity of heart, and cleanness of
hands, in prosecuting the good of all men, working righteousness, or walking
righteously in all our conversation with and amongst them, as Psalm. 15. and 24.
Isa. 33. 15. According to the teachings of that grace of God, that brings
salvation to all men: and so in like expressions, it is joined with living
godly, in that Tit. 2. 11, 12. and opposed to worldly lusts: The grace of God
that brings salvation to all men, has appeared, teaching us, That denying
ungodliness, and wordly lusts, we should live righteously, soberly, and godly
in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the mighty God our Savior: who gave himsef for us, to redeem us
from all iniquity, that he might purify to himself a peculiar people zealous
of good works. So 1 Pet. 2. 11* 12. it is opposed to fleshly lusts; which being
heeded and listened to, do hinder the Soul of so living honestly. Therefore
dearly beloved, (says Peter) I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts that war against the Soul, having your conversation honest
among the Gentiles, that in the day of their visitation they may glorify God.
Like that, Phil. 2. 15, 16. Do all things without murmurings and disputings,
that ye may be blameless, harmless* the Sons of God in the midst of a crooked
generation; amongst whom shine ye as lights in the world* holding forth the
word of life; and that both in word and conversation. The doing that which is
just and equal between man and man, and so unto all, or that which is so in the
sight of men, this is certainly here meant by, or contained in living honestly,
as Phil. 2. 16. Romans 12. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 15. and 3. 16. But this alone is too
scant a definition of the living honestly here meant: yet all that is signified
by it, is no more, but a walking righteously, and doing that which is lawful
and right; but that which is so in the sight of God* and according to the
teachings of that grace of God that brings salvation to all men, goes further
then that which is so in the sight of men: and they are both together in this
living honestly, as may be seen in one instance, 2 Cor. 8. 20, 21. That no man
might blame them in the abundance administered by them, they did provide things
honest not only in the sight of God, but also in the sight of men: signifying,
that they did provide things honest, or walk honestly in the sight of God, in
administering abundantly of whatever God had given them for the good of others;
which was so far beyond what men would have required as their reasonable
service, or judged to have been but their honesty, that they would rather watch
for advantages against them to blame them, as if their zeal and forwardness in
freely and abundantly administering such as they had, for the good of others,
did hinder them from looking well to themselves, or their own house or
relations, or made them incapable of walking justly in all their dealings. They
could not (they thought) do so much, and be so free in spending themselves in
such services, if they did not defraud or wrong some body. But this blame, or
all just cause of it is avoided by us, says the Apostle, in providing things
honest also in the sight of all men, even in such cases as aforementioned: the
mercies of God, (as Romans 12. 1.) even that grace that brings salvation to all
men, teaches and requires of us, as our reasonable service, as that which on
the account of that grace is due from us to all men, (as has been showed
before) even as we would not be unjust or injurious in withholding good from
them to whom its due, so to hold forth the faithful word in the midst of a
crooked generation, according to all that capacity and opportunity for the
same, he is pleased to furnish us with, and whatever we may lose or suffer
therein; and to do this cordially and fervently for the good of others, that
they may be saved, and therefore in simplicity and godly sincerity, renouncing
the hidden things of dishonesty, in such our service, nor cloaking covetousness
over with it, or desire of glory from men, or the like, such is the Apostles
demonstration of their honesty or living honestly, 2 Cor. 1. 12, 13. Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity we have had our conversation, etc. which is thus showed, for we
write none other things unto you, then what you read, etc. we intend not to
signify in our writing any other thing then what we plainly express in our
words. So 2 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Seeing we have this ministry as we have received
mercy; (so in the former) by the grace of God minded by us, the instructions
and operations thereof, we have thus had our conversation, according to that
Romans 12. 1. By these mercies give up your bodies, etc. As we have received
mercy, says he, we faint not, but have renounced the hidden things of
dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God
deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth: commending, declaring, and
committing our selves, our mind or meaning, and principles to every man in our
words, so as in the sight of God; who otherwise would charge us with
dishonesty, though men could not, if we did either for fear or shame, hide any
thing that he has made known to us, that may tend to the good of others, and
was made known to us, to be made known to them; or if in administering it, we
used fleshly wisdom or policy, reserving much of that which might most expose
us to sufferings, though most material and needful to be most plainly uttered,
or for other causes reserving the inside of our thoughts and meaning to our
selves and so handling the word of God deceitfully* and happily to such ends
following cunningly-devised fables, as 2 Pet. 1. 16. But this, says he, we
have renounced; and thus they lived honestly among their neighbors, and thus
have they by the mercies of God charged and exhorted every one of us so to live
amongst men, according to what capacity and opportunity God gives us. See 1 Thessalonians. 2. 3 11, 12. When he has told them their Exhortation was not of deceit,
nor of uncle anness, nor in guile; but as they were allowed of God so they
spoke; not as pleasing men, but God, which tries the hearts: and further adds
and appeals to their consciences for testimony, They had not used flattering
words, nor a cloak of covetousness, nor had sought glory of men, or been
burdensome, when, and as they might as the Apostles of Christ: and herein
walked holily, justly, unblameably: he then adds this, As also you know how we
exhorted every one of you, even as a father his child, etc. like that Phil. 2.
13, 15, 16. and Romans 12. 1, 2. Yea, this grace teaches that as our reasonable
service, to hold forth this faithful word in conversation, that they that will
not be won by the word, and it may be not to hear it, as holden forth by
believers under reproach, yet may be allured and overcome by the chaste and
honest conversation coupled with fear; When they see our good works, they may
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Therefore to show forth his virtues in
all chastity or honesty, as opposed to fornication and all uncleanness,
filthiness, or foolish talking or jesting, Ephesians. 5. 2, 3. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. 4, 5. 1
Pet. 2. 11, 12. and so as opposed to covetousness which is idolatry, and the
fruits thereof, fraudulency, or endeavoring to go beyond or circumvent any in
buying selling, or the like, as in the forecited Scriptures; and so in all
sobriety and moderation in the use and enjoyment of any thing of this world, as
strangers and pilgrims, or in lusting and pursuing after them, fleeing from
such things; yea, in all goodness, righteonsness and truth, which is, and as it
is the fruit of the Spirit, bringing and opening the instructions and grace of
the Gospel, leading and moving thereto. And this cordially also, in simplicity
and godly sincerity, and for the profit of others, that they may be saved. All
this is but out reasonable service by the mercies of God, even toward all men:
though they will neither challenge the greatest part of this debt of us, nor
any of it upon such an account, nor will they respect or look upon our service
as such; yet as that man that is betrusted with much treasure, or the tidings,
discoveries, and patterns of it, that belongs, and is to be showed to others,
of purpose to let them know of it, and where and how they may come to enjoy it,
though they to whom such treasures and the tidings or patterns of it belong and
ought to be showed by him, being ignorant, though happily wilfully so, do not
desire or expect any such thing from him, nor happily will easily be persuaded
to accept or regard the same, though matter of greatest concernment to them;
yet seeing he knows of what concernment it is, and to what end he is furnished
with the knowledge* experience, and patterns of it, as a Steward for them; he
is not an honest man, or faithful Steward if he conceal the same, but very
injurious; It Is required of Stewards* that a man be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4.
2. Even so those that are called out of darkness into his mavelous light,
that they should show forth the praises of him that has called them, and that
amongst and for the good of others; though those among whom they live, neither
acknowledge it, nor desire it, yet are to prosecute it as their main design, to
give them that which is due to them; namely, To let them know of, and see the
grace of God in Christ toward them, and the instructions and reproofs thereof
in the tidings and patterns of it, according to capacity and opportunity given
them, and therefore to abstain from fleshly lusts, and to deny themselves in
whatever might hinder them; as the grace of God in Christ, that brings
salvation to all men, teaches them, for the good of others; and in so doing
shall live honestly.

These two, godliness and honesty, are answerable to those two great Commands,
on which hang all the Law and the Prophets: (the grace of God that brings
salvation to all men requiring and affording motive and motion to the same)
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with
all thy soul, with all thy strength. The second is like unto it, a Spring or
Fruit of it: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Yea, these are
contained and found in those two great Commands of the Gospel, which it gives
ground for, and moves to, and writes in the heart of the believing receiver of
it: To believe on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, in which the Father is
believed in, loved, and so rightly worshipped, as is foreshewn. The other is
like unto it, and indeed but the Fruit of it, and part of the same Commandment;
and therefore both are called one Commandment, 1 John 3. 23. That we love one
another, as he by the grace of the Gospel obliges, and has given us
Commandment. And so this living in godliness and honesty answers to, and gives
explication of that chap. 1. 18. Holding faith and a good conscience; which are
begotten and ingendered, and we strenghthened to hold fast and walk in them,
through his grace, as declared in that name of his in his Son, in our looking,
seeking, or adhering to it, according as by that grace extended, we are
directed and strengthened. Therefore the Psalmist, Psalm. 24. after he has
given this description of those persons that are capable subjects of
everlasting dwelling, abiding, and having fellowship with God, verse. 4. He that
has clean hands, and a pure heart, that has not lift up his soul to vanity,
nor sworn deceitfully: which verse in each of the parts answers to godliness
and honesty here. Then in verse. 6. he gives the fundamental, or
bottom-description of them; or rather, a declaration who they are in whom the
truth of the former description found: This is the generation of them that seek
him, that seek thy face, O God of Jacob: now the glorious face of God is
clearly manifested in the face of his Son, as delivered to death for our
offenses and raised again for our justification: and in seeking, looking to, or
beholding his face as there revealed in righteousness, the heart is therein
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and the body washed with pure water, as Heb.
10. 22. 2 Cor. 3. 18. the heart purified through obedience to the truth, to
unfeigned love of God and Brethren. 1 Pet. 1. 22. For therefore has God
condemned sin in the flesh, in condemning his Son in the flesh for sin, that
the righteousness of the Law, not only life and peace the end of it, but even
the righteous affections and services toward God and men which it required,
but gave no strength to perform, might be fulfilled in them who walk not after
the flesh, consulting with it, or minding the things of it; but after the
Spirit, that bears witness of, and glorifies Jesus, and the glory of God as in
the face of him; and so such use of the Law is good, as is according to and
taught by that glorious Gospel, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 11, 15. Thus having seen what that is in which the believer
is continually to be exercised and lead his life, as here expressed under these
terms, In all godliness and honesty; We come here to consider, How in this
exercise, not neglecting, wavering or shrinking from it, but in all godliness
and honesty, the grace of God teaches them, and for the good of others, to lead
a quiet and peaceable life.

Quietness and peaceableness, is sometime opposed to timerousness, doubtfulness
and hastiness; and signifies, quietness, patience, and confidence in waiting
for the accomplishment of Gods word, and his own bringing to pass the good
things he has promised in his own time and way, without making such
unreasonable haste* as is unsuitable to believing in God for the accomplishment
of his word; as sometimes Abraham began to do, in concluding Eleazer to be his
heir; and after, in taking Sarahs advice, to go in to his Maid; and then
because that brought forth something suitable to their expectation, concluding
presently, that birth of the wisdom and strength of the flesh was the promised
seed; in this sense quietness is to be understood in that counsel to Ahaz, Take
heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be faint-hearted: -- if ye will not
believe, surely ye shall not be established, Isa. 7. 4, 9. And that to Israel,
Isa. 30. 15. Thus says the Lord, In returning and rest shall ye be saved, in
quietness and confidence shall be your strength; though they would not take it,
but would trust to their strength and swiftness. And so also quietness and
assurance, Isa. 32. 17. may in the first place signify; for the work of
righteousness that is already wrought in Christ is peace, He has made peace by
the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things: take out the enmity
that came in by sin, and restore the whole creation, which yet waits for the
manifestation of the Sons of God; but shall then as certainly be accomplished,
as that which he has already actually finished in himself, that the other may
be brought to pass by him, when he shall take to him his great power and reign,
and bring those that sleep in Jesus with him: Then shall his people dwell in a
quite habitation, and sure resting places, and their eyes that now sleep in
him, shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, etc. compare the whole chapter
with chap. 32* 22, etc. and chap. 11, and 12. Now the effect of this
righteousness of God, as manifested in that done, and from thence expected in
accomplishing that to come, is quietness and assurance for ever. It being
believed, begets and works quietness and confidence in waiting now* as well as
it shall bring forth quietness, and assured rest and peace for ever, in
enjoyment by way of actual possession then, when that King shall reign in
righteousness, etc. And so also the words quietness and assurance are here to
be understood: surely it is good both to hope and quietly to wait for the
salvation of God* Lam. 3. 26. Yea, he that truly hopes for those things he
sees not, will with patience wait for them: it is to be feared, our hopes are
for some sensual glory, as if Christ's Kingdom were of this world; and that
makes us imagine and strive by sensual means, and carnal weapons to bring it
about: and having no ground for such hope in the word of the truth of the
Gospel, (though did we believe it, we might there have good ground for that
which is infinitely better) we are also making haste, and catching at every
thing we see, and ready to conclude, Lo here is Christ, or there is Christ; in
this part of the world, or in that; in this form of Government, or in that; and
many the like. We must needs be in a confusion, when there is scarcely found
faith confidently to expect, and quietly to wait for the appearing of Jesus
Christ from Heaven; rather scoffing at that promise of his coming* and every
one taking up short, in something or other, before the time.

Quietness and peaceableness in our demeanor toward men, is sometimes opposed
to much noise, clamor, or stir, that is made either in proclaming men's own
goodness, or in crying up this and that Order, Worship or Precepts of men, or
in crying down and clamouring others; so in that Eccles. 9. 17. The words of
wise men are heard in quiet, (when there are no such tumultuous noises stirred
up) more then the cry of him that rules among fools.

But more frequently it is opposed to war, strife, contention, or envy,
vexation, and frowardness of Spirit against any, So Prove. 17. 1. Eccles. 4. 6.
Psalm. 120. 7. Eccles. 3. 8. So to our present business, see Jam. 3. 13, 17 Who
is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you? let him show out of a good
conversation his works with meekness of wisdom: but if ye have bitter envying
and strife in your hearts, glory not, lie not against the truth; for where
envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work: but the wisdom
from above, is first pure, showing forth it self, and directing the subject in
all godliness and honesty: then peaceable gentle, and easy to be entreated;
full of mercy and good fruits, and that without partiality or hypocrisy. It
directs to lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: for
the fruits of righteousness, which is by Jesus Christ, is sown in peace, in
quietness (as opposed to wrath and hastiness) of them that make peace, who
through the grace of God bringing salvation to all men, are made peacemakers,
set for the good of all men, and therefore making prayers and intercessions
with thanksgivings for them* From whence then come wars and fightings? etc.
chap. 4. 1, etc.

The grace of God instructs and teaches the believing receiver thereof* in all
his exercise and walking in godliness and honesty amongst all men, and for the
good of them therein and according thereto and as they are taught by that grace
of God that brings salvation to all men, to lead a quiet and peaceable life, 1.
With reference to those in place of Government, 2. Toward all men. 3.
Especially one with another.

1. The quiet and peaceable life that is according to godliness and honesty,
and to which we are instructed in the Gospel and grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as with reference to those that by Gods providence are in eminent place
or in authority over us, whether as particular Masters, or as public
Magistrates, Stands in a quiet submission or subjection to their power,
living under it without murmuring or disputing against it disturbance,
molestation, or resisting of it. My business is not here to dispute what
believers as public men, set in any public place of trust and authority for
the good of the Nation or people where they live, may or ought to do, with
reference to some others in place of trust and authority with them; nor what
any private Christian, as joined in a politic or national body, or required
and so called out by some higher powers, may or ought to do with reference to
some other powers or persons in authority, that are oppressive or destructive
to them. About these, I say, I have not here to dispute or speak: but how
believers as private Christians, in their several places, or as members of, or
joined in any Societies or Congregations, if never so many, for and in the
worship and acknowledgement of God, and waiting upon, and service of him as
Christians in his Ordinances, and for the good of others; (for so also they are
considerable as private Christians, and to live under Government) and how they
are to be in subjection, and to demean themselves with reference to Governors
or Magistrates by Gods providence set over them, is that we have here to speak
to.

1. They are to account and acknowledge them worthy or meet for all that
honor, those places of trust and authority over them, that God has pleased by
his providence to put upon them, or permit unto them; and so in their demeanor
to testify such their account and acknowledgement of them. 1 Timothy 6. 1. Let as
many servants as are under the yoke, count their masters, (though unbelieving
ones, as is fully signified, by comparing this with the next verse) worthy of
all honor: of all that honor that by their place is due from us to them. It Is
the same in the case between the people, and so believers as private
Christians, and their Governors, Romans 13. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 17* 18. And herein they
are every soul to be subject to those powers that be (that at any time at
present are over them) without dispute about the lawfulness or rightness of
their being set up there; they being by Gods providence or permission in such
place of mastership or authority over them, they are to yield them that fear,
honor, reverence and acknowledgement, that by reason of the place in which God
has set them, is due to them, and account it meet it should be so, because God
sees it good, and in his infinite wisdom has ordered the same to us. And if
their Masters or Governors be believers, then neither are other believers, as
private Christians, Servants or Subjects to despise them, because they are
brethren, as if therefore they should not yield them such respect, honor and
acknowledgement as is due to them by their place of trust and power put in
their hands, because they are brethren and all one in Christ; for grace
destroys not nor confounds either natural or civil relations. It Is according to
the wisdom of God, that there should be such degrees among men, as the Rulers
and Ruled, Master and Servant, and that for the order, benefit and good of them
all. Therefore the rather do them service, and yield them all the honor due
according to their place, because they are faithful and beloved. And if any man
teach otherwise, he therein consents not to the words of our Lord Jesus, nor to
the doctrine which is according to godliness; yea, such are proud, etc. To this
therefore consider,

1. That it is by the wisdom and power of God, as exercised in and through
Christ for the good of men, which otherwise it could not have been, That Kings
reign, and Princes decree justice: that Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the
Judges of the earth, Prove. 8. 15, 16. And for him, that they should do his
will, Col. 1. 16. The most high rules in the kingdom of men, and yet gives
it, or commits the outward administration of it in this world into the hands of
men, and reserves it in his own hands and pleasure, to give it to whomsoever he
will, Dan. 4. 32. God stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he is as it
were at the stern of Government, and his eyes are upon them, to see whether
they will observe his counsel: which because they will not, he will take away
their places and power from them one after another: but in the mean time, while
he continues it to them, he has said, They are Gods, and all of them children
or resemblers of the most high, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
Psalm. 82. 1, 6. For promotion comes not from the East, or West, or North, or
South: but God is the Judge; he puts down one, and sets up another.

2. Consider his instructions and counsel to us, directing us in what manner
honor and acknowledgement is to be yielded them from us, Exodus 22. 28. Thou
shall not revile the Gods* nor curse the Ruler of thy people: which the Apostle
Paul citing, Acts 23. 5. by what he says upon it, signifies, That had he wist
that had been Gods high Priest, he would not have reprehended him in such manner
of expressions, with so little reverence or respect to his person, as in that
saying, God shall smite thee, thon whited wall: he would rather have observed
that counsel he gives to others, Not to rebuke and Elder, but so as with humble
submission and entreaties, as a Father, 1 Timothy 5. 1. where if by Elders he mean
Elders in the Church, such as went before others in the word of the Lord, yet
then by Fathers, to which in respect of honor or reverence due to them, he
compares them, must needs be meant after the flesh, in natural and civil
relation; and so Children are to honor their Parents, Servants their Masters,
Subjects their Rulers. Curse not the King, despise not, contemn not, as if not
meet for that place or honor that God has put upon him over thee; no not in
thy Bedchamber or thought, Eccles. 10. 20. If God should by his providence
order over us, as our Parents, Masters, or Rulers, such as themselves were
evil, and so give us sometime a Governor or Governors in anger, and as a
chastisement; yet while they are by him so ordained and set over us, they are
to be honored and acknowledged by us as such, and we to be subject to them.
Saul was a King given unto Israel in Gods anger, yet when by providence he was
set over them, they were reputed sons of Belial that despised him, and refused
to acknowledge him, by bringing him presents, and reviled him, saying, How can
this man save us? 1 Samuel 10. 27. Yea, the people of God when in Babylon under
captivity, yet have owned and acknowledged those things, and the power given
them over them as of God, and yielded honor and subjection to them; see Dan.
2. 37, 38. Thou Oh King art the King of Kings, for the God of Heaven has given
thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory: and wheresoever the children of
men dwell* -- he has made thee Ruler over all. So did Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego acknowledge and repute him worthy the honor of being King, while God
did give him that power, though he so ill used it, Dan. 3. 17, 18. so Daniel
again, chap. 6. 21, 22. so Paul to King Agrippa, Acts 26. 2, 13, 19* and so in
all their complaints to God of the greatest idolatries and wickedness found in
them, yet they have accounted them worthy of that honor, to be owned and
acknowledged as their Kings and Princes, while God had not rejected them from
being so, Ezra. 9. 7. Nehem. 9. 34. yea, the subjection required, and to which
the grace of God in Christ that brings salvation to all men instructs, goes
further then only to account them worthy all honor, and yield the reverence
and fear due; namely,

2. To obey them, to be subject to their power in obedience to their Commands
and Ordinances, either by doing the things required, and that with more
readiness if good works* and without gainsaying also to do the things required,
though oppressive, if it may stand with godliness and honesty, with holding
fast faith and a good conscience: and where the doing of the things required
will not stand with that, that we cannot obey them in the Lord by doing, yet
then to obey and be subject to their power by suffering, yea, if we in such a
capacity as private Christians (as before) could resist* yet we are exhorted to
be subject; for he that resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, of
whom it is ordained to be his instrument, and so they in whom it is as his
ministers, for the punishing of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do
well; and he often makes use of them as instruments for the doing this in things
within their sphere, though they be evil men, and know him not, and sometimes
otherwise then they thought or intended; and though they too frequently lift up
the horn, and use their power contrary to his counsel, and against his people,
yet forasmuch as they are Gods ministers appointed to better service, and for
general good, they must not be resisted, their power not despised, while God
sees good to continue them in it: therefore says the Apostle, Ye must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, or because you are forced to it, and cannot avoid
it, but if you might, yet for conscience sake, Romans 13. 1, 5. So Peter
exhorting to show forth the virtues of Christ, and to have the conversation
honest among the Gentiles, abstaining from fleshly lusts, etc. he adds, 1 Pet.
2. 13, 18. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; as
in the case of servants* Ephesians. 6. 5. Obey in all things your Masters, in
singleness of heart as unto Christ: so here every Ordinance of man, either by
doing or suffering, as may stand with, and be in the acknowledgement and
service of the Lord the great Master, and for his sake, whether it be to the
King as Supreme, or so to any power that is by his providence the Supreme power
over us; or unto Governors as sent by them, etc. and so the nature of the
subjection required (as before opened) to be either in doing, or in quiet and
patient suffering, though wrongfully, yet not resisting the power, is showed in
the case of servants to their masters* following this, and propounded as
equivalent with it, in ver. 18, 19. and so the Apostle Paul to Titus, mentions
this as one of those things which the grace of God that brings salvation to all
men, teaches the believing receiver of it, To be subject to principalities and
powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work: signifying, that
we are to be subject to, and obey the power, where we cannot with cheerfulness,
or if not at all do the work required, Tit. 3. 1. with chap. 2. 11, 12. they
well knew that it would be found too frequent in these latter days, especially
in such as retaining a form of godliness, a great show and pretense of
worshipping God, yet deny the power of it (that Vision of all, the truth as in
Jesus) not only without fear to speak evil of dignities, and despise dominion,
as Jude 8, 9. but also to be proudly disobedient to Parents, truce breakers,
incontinent, fierce, traitors, heady, high-minded, loving pleasures, ease,
kingdom, glory, and to have their will here, more then God, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 5. and
therefore have so plentifully instructed, exhorted, and charged us in this
particular.

2. The believers life in all godliness and honesty is to be led quietly and
peaceably, toward, and as much as is possible with all men, with whom he leads
his life and conversation, or has occasion to converse: toward all men, he is
to demean himself quietly and peaceably in his holding forth the tidings and
patterns of that grace of God that brings salvation to them; though therein
he shall have occasion to contend earnestly for the faith with some, and to
rebuke and reprove others, yet he is to do this with all long suffering and
doctrine: Let him show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of
wisdom* though not the wisdom of this world, or such meekness as that teaches
to hide mince, or be ashamed of his words before an adulterous generation; to
be negligent, remiss, or sparing in striving for the truth of the Gospel, or
against men's sin, as the truth we have learned in Jesus instructs and leads
us; that is so far from being the meekness and gentleness of Christ, that it is
on the other hand, ungodliness, dishonesty, and a shunning the Cross of Christ:
yet in doing the work of an Evangelist, or holding forth the faithful word, and
showing forth the virtues of Christ, and that both in season and out of season,
with diligence and constancy, we are therein, and according thereto, to show
forth all meekness to all men, gentleness easiness to be entreated, Jam. 3. 13,
17. 2 Timothy 4. 1* 5. For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God,
and therefore we are to avoid foolish and unlearned questions, and strife of
words, which tend to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers from a
right and plain understanding, knowing that they do gender strifes; and the
servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,
patient in meekness, instructing the ignorant and them that oppose themselves,
etc. 2 Timothy 23. 25. and so therein patiently enduring and suffering, not only
Gods chastisements, his gracious afflictions more immediately ordered from his
own hand; but also their wrongs and injuries: Let every one of us please his
neighbor, for his good to edification: for even Christ pleased not himself;
but as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell on me,
Romans 15. 2, 3. which in the place where it is written, Psalm. 69. 9. is joined
with this other saying, The zeal of thine house has eaten me up: which is
applied to, and said to be verified in his driving the buyers and sellers out
of the temple; in which action (mentioned John 2. 14, 17, 18, etc.) he did not
directly please them, but as may appear by the Evangelist compared with the
Psalm, did therein render himself and became a stranger to his brethren, etc.
Psalm. 69. 8. he displeased them, and was despised in their eye, and they
thought it strange, as John 2. 18. but though he could not please them in
winking at, and suffering without sharp reproof their profanation of his
Fathers house, the truth of which as now come forth, is the temple of his Body,
his person as delivered to death by the Father, destroyed and crucified by
them* and raised up again in three days, as plainly explicated by himself in
the following verses of that John 2. neither would it have been for their good,
therein or so to have pleased them; yet, in doing that, and having done it, and
so in all his doings among them, he pleased them for their good to edification,
in not regarding or seeking in any of these things to please himself, or to
glorify and get honor and praise to himself among them; doing nothing through
strife and vainglory, but in lowliness of mind preferring them before himself
in giving honor to them, so as in tendering of them, and bearing with their
evil manners, enduring their contradictions quietly and patiently, suffering
them without reviling again: he in all his zeal and constancy for his Fathers
name and glory, yet therein pleased not himself, but as it is writien, The
reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell upon me: and he willingly without
striving or retorting bore and suffered them. So though we cannot at any hand
please them in having fellowship with them in their unfruitful works, in their
notions and ways of ungodliness, nor in their fleshly lusts, not run with them
to the same excess of riot, wherein they will think it strange, 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4.
Ephesians. 5. 4, 11. neither would it be for their good to edification, therein or so
to please them: The grace of God that brings salvation to all men, teaches us
rather and for their good to reprove them, and not by any means, or whatever
befall us from them, not to desist from striving against their sin, but this so
as with meekness of wisdom; and in doing this, not to please our selves, seek
our own glory or praise from or amongst men, but quietly bearing their
injuries, reproaches, wrongs, without retorting the like on them, or seeking to
vindicate our own name, or walking unlovingly toward them, and this will be a
means to please them, and that, so as for their good to edification: therefore
Paul's exhortation to Timothy (2 Timothy 4.) is, To exhort, rebuke, repove, in his
preaching the word, with all longsuffering and doctrine, and therein to endure
affliction; and still go on, doing the work of an Evangelist or Messenger of
peace: True, they are to strive together for the faith of the Gospel, and in
nothing to be terrified by their adversaries, from their holding fast faith and
a good conscience, or walking in godliness and honesty, Phil. 1. 27. but yet
they are therein to go on in a quiet enduring the contradiction of sinners they
meet with, still striving against their sin and so resisting their
contradictons, with patient enduring and passing by even unto blood; (as well
as also neither despising nor fainting under his chastisements, but suffering
patience to have its perfect work in all tribulation, which brings forth the
quiet and peaceable fruit of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby,
Heb. 12. 1, 3* 4, 9.) Recompense to no man evil for evil, nor railing for
railing, but contrariwise, blessing, knowing, that ye are thereunto called,
that ye should inherit a blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 9. Provide things honest in the
sight of all men, as much as is possible live peaceably with all men, Dearly
beloved* avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath: yea, if
thine Enemy hunger, feed him, etc. Romans 12. 17, 18, 19. Ye have heard, says
our Savior, An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: but I say unto you, that
ye resist not evil, that is, with evil, as Romans 12. 17. Nay, rather suffer
wrong, and suffer your selves to be defrauded then strive to avenge or right
your selves; yea, love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, bless, and
curse not, Mat. 5. 38, 39, 44, 45. Luke 6. 27, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 6. 7, 8. And to
all this also, That grace of God that brings salvation to all men,
instructs and teaches the believing receiver of it, and therefore not only
in Romans 12. it is one of those things to which we are exhorted by the mercies of
God verse. 1. both as the motive and motion to the doing of it, but in Tit. 3.
compared with chap. 2. it is added to that before mentioned, as one of those
things which that grace teaches, To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers,
but gentle; to show all meekness to all men: for we our selves were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, deceived serving diverse lusts, living in envy and malice,
hateful, and hating one another: but after the kindeness and pity of God our
Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have
wrought, but according to his mercy he saved us, etc.

3. They are also in all godliness and honesty, To follow peace, espectally
with all that call on the Lord out of a pure heart, 2 Timothy 2. 22. To endeavor
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. That unity or
oneness into which the Spirit of God, bringing and opening the testimony of
Jesus, brings the believing receiver thereof: in which, There is one Body,
one Spirit, even as they are called in one hope of their calling: one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, etc. But unto every one of them
is given grace in the manifestation of the Spirit, or gifts of grace to profit
withal diversely, according to the gift and good pleasure of Christ; in the
exercising of which by each, and so in their several administrations, as well
as in their acknowledgement, Faith and Fellowship in those things
forementioned, in which there is such absolute oneness* The unity of the Spirit
is to be endeavored to be kept in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 3, 7. with 1 Cor.
12. Therefore the Apostle exhorting to be of one mind, adds, Live in peace,
and the God of love and peace shall be with you, to preserve you in that one
mind, heart, and way, and* so through faith unto the salvation ready to be
revealed, 2 Cor. 13. 11. See this exhortation explicated, Phil. 2. 2, 3, etc.
If any consolation in Christ, any comfort of Love, any fellowship of the
Spirit, etc. Then fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same
love, being of one accord, of one mind: (it follows as a direction to the
showing forth, and walking in this, as well as to the way in which they might
be preserved and grow therein) let nothing be done through strife or
vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better then
themselves: always fitter to be born with, tendered and served. So Romans 12. 2.
Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in honor preferring
one another: look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others, Phil. 2. 3, 5. Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the
grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and there
by many be defiled, Heb. 12. 15, 16. which roots of bitterness, envies, evil
surmises, and suchlike may be occasioned diverse ways; as sometimes by
partiality or respect of persons among brethren generally, or with reference to
such instruments, as by whom the word of the Lord has been brought or opened
to us; as when one says, I am of Paul; another, I am of Apollo; another, I am
of Cephas; which occasions some to run out in another extreme, and they will
not only be of neither of these, but they will be of Christ immediately, and
as not needing, or loose from any of their brethren or such instruments.
Therefore the Apostle admonishing the Thessalonians, To know them which are
over them in the Lord, and admonish them, and to esteem them very highly in
love for their works sakes; he adds, And be at peace among your selves, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. And how they may be so in observing the forementioned
counsel, he explicates, 1 Timothy 5. 17, 21. Let the Elders that rule well, be
counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and
doctrine. It follows, I charge thee before God, and the elect Angels, that thou
observe these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality (namely, in the things forementioned, as well as also in those
things mentioned verse. 19. 20.) Against an Elder receive not an accusation, but
before two or three witnesses: them that sin (especially of the Elders, or such
as should go before others in the word of the Lord:) and in things common and
public, tending to public scandal or harm, and being so convict as aforesaid,
or it evidently appearing:) rebuke before all, that others also may fear.

Likewise such roots of bitterness and breach of the peace among Christians,
may be occasioned through too harsh censuring or judging one another, in the
doing or not doing things that are in themselves so circumstantial, and may be
either done or let alone, as that eating or not eating, Romans 14. or in the
manner of the observance of some of Gods Ordinances. Therefore the Apostle
counsels us, verse. 17, 18, 19, 20. whatever things they are in which the
Kingdom consists not, as righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, are
the things in which it does consist, and in which he says, He that constantly
and steadfastly serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and profitable to men; for
any other thing, he would not have us be stiff, or earnest to bring men to our
practice, until grace set free thereto; nor in judging them if they join not
with us, lest so we destroy the work of God; but on the other hand, to follow
after those things that make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify
another. And in so doing, if in any thing the whole or part be otherwise minded
then is right, God shall in due time reveal even that unto them. Nevertheless
whereto we have attained through the light and instructions of the Gospel, that
Vision of all, the Key of knowledge for the opening all particular Precepts and
Ordinances; Let us walk or go an end by the same Rule, not laying down any of
his Ordinances, because others cannot join with us in them: though we may and
are to lay down any thing merely indifferent, and so any thing circumstantial
in Ordinances, as to the manner of observance, as far as is indifferent, and may
be without evil, when and as it may be for the greatest good of our brethren,
and to avoid offense; yet not to throw by any of his gracious appointments, but
to go on in such observance of them as grace teaches us, minding the same
thing, without severity or rigidness toward, or judging of our brethren that
are scrupulous in many of the things we do. Phil. 3. 14, 15. Diverse other
occasions we might have mentioned of disturbing and breaking the peace among
believers, which therefore as, well as because they are otherwise hurtful, and
in themselves very evil, we are admonished of; as idleness, or being tatlers,
busybodies, not diligently, and so as may be in and with fervency of Spirit
serving the Lord, minding their own business; that (after any consideration in
spiritual or temporal affairs) which God by his providence lays before them,
and according to the instructions of the Gospel requires of them, but being
slothful and negligent therein, and meddling with the matters of others, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 10, 11, 12. 1 Timothy 5. 13, 14. 1 Pet. 4. 15. Those
exhortations are to this purpose good and needful, Romans 12. 9, 10, 11. as also
they have reference to the foregoing verses; likewise readiness to entertain or
harbor evil reports or thoughts of others, or keeping in mind the weakness,
evils, or things injurious to us, found in any of our brethren; with many the
like, (which I shall not particularly mention) will be occasions of disturbing
the peace and quiet of the believers in all godliness and honesty among
themselves. To conclude therefore, I may say as the Apostle Peter, Finally, that
our prayers for all men, for our selves and others be not hindered, Be all of
one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be
courteous, etc. 1 Pet. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Let all bitterness, wrath, clamor
and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice; and be ye kind one
to another, tender hearted, forgiving and forbearing one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you: who did forbear and walk tenderly toward
you, before you did acknowledge any evil, and until by his goodness you were
moved thereto; and then gave you forgiveness, and entertained you into
fellowship again without upraiding: And let nothing be done through strife or
vainglory, nor in hypocrisy, or with partiality, Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. Phil. 2. 3
4. Romans 12. 9, 11. Jam. 3. 17. That so you may be at peace among your selves;
for God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, 1 Cor. 14. 33. Thus
having seen what it is for the believer to lead a quiet and peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty; We come in the next place to consider,

2. How the believers leading a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty, tends so much to the good of all men. We shall show it in these two
things,

1. It tends much to the believers own advantage, profit, and furniture for the
good of others.

2. It tends to the adorning the name and doctrine of our God and Savior, and
so manifesting the truth and goodness of the Gospel, and way of it before them.

1. This tends much to the believers own advantage, furtherance and growth in
grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, which is for the good of all, and
to be made to appear unto them. Therefore the Apostle exhorts Timothy, To
exercise himself to Godliness, to give himself wholly to these things, that he
might be a good minister to others, by growing himself; being nourished up in
the words of faith, and of good doctrine, whereunto he had attained, that his
profiting might appear to all; for in doing this (says he) thou shall save thy
self, and them that hear thee, 1 Timothy 4. 6 7, 15, 16. Great is the gain of
godliness, if the believer walk honestly in it, and be content with what he
has, 1 Timothy 6. 6, 11. It Is the way in which the believer shall certainly meet
with strength against, preservation and deliverance from the evil of Satan's
temptations, and his snares laid, in something or other of this world, after
which we are naturally lusting, Ephesians. 6. 10, 16. 1 Pet. 5. 7, 8, 9. Yea, Satan
will be herein deprived of the opportunity he desires for getting advantage
over us, 2 Cor. 2. 2, 10, 11. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, in the
light, instruction, motion, and direction of the Spirit, which is in and with
the testimony of Jesus; and of the glory of God as manifested in the face of
him, taking and showing of the things of him, and so lifting up and glorifying
him; and so by that Vision of all, leading into all truth, instructing and
directing to and in all godliness and honesty: Walk in the Spirit, if we live
in it, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5. 16. Yea, it is
the way by which we shall get more victory, and be daily more instructed and
strengthened to turn from those idols of iniquity set up in our hearts, (that
hinder our Prayers, Ezekiel. 14, 4, 7. 1 Pet. 3. 7.) and to wait for his Son from
Heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3 9, 10. and so meet with saving to the utmost, Romans 1. 16.
17. 1 Cor. 15. 1. 3 4. Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that
believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 1 John 5. 4, 5. Whose keeps his word,
in him verily is the love of God perfected, 1 John 2. 5. Therefore thy word
have I hid in my heart, (says David) that I might not sin against thee. And
again, Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over
me, Psalm. 119. 11, 133. For by that Law of liberty, or joyful sound, as then
witnessed in the Law, Oracles, and Prophets, was he warned; and in keeping
thereof had great reward, as to the discovery and purging out secret iniquity,
and preventing presumptuous transgression, Psalm. 19. Yea, hereby these things
being in us and abounding, a more abundant entrance shall be administered to us,
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior. Yea, they will make us,
that we shall be neither barren nor unfruitful therein; but he that lacks
these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and has forgoten that he was
purged from his old sins, 2 Pet. 1. 11. In abiding and walking in Jesus Christ,
as we have received him, we shall grow more rooted in him, and built upon him,
established in the faith as we have been taught, abounding therein with
thanksgiving, Col. 2. 6, 7. For being justified by faith, (of what Jesus Christ
has done, and is become in himself for us, by being delivered to death for our
offenses, and raised again from the dead for our justification:) and so having
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, we have also by him through the
same faith in him, according to his name, daily more access into that grace of
God to manward, appearing in and through that gift of Righteousness, (which was
that grace in which they stood) so as to be made able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the height, length, depth, and breadth of that love that
passes knowledge, and more to prove and taste the sweetness and virtues of it;
and so through it to rejoice in hope of the glory of God; and not only so, but
to rejoice in tribulations also, (meeting with this knowledge and proof of the
truth of it, in having daily access or inlet into that grace) That tribulation
works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes
not ashamed; and all from hence, the love of God being shed abroad in our
hearts: while we have our recourse and access thereinto, by a believing
mindefulness thereof in all things, the same is more displayed and opened to
us, by the holy Ghost which is given unto us; still further reminding us of,
and opening to us this testimony of Jesus, That when we were yet without
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. Rom 4. 24. with chap. 5. 1,
6. Therefore says our Savior, If ye abide in me, and my words in you,
continue in my love, keeping my Commands, etc. ye shall ask what ye will; and
it shall be done unto you; (for thereby you shall be taught to pray as you
ought, Romans 8. 26.) for nothing but according to his will, (1 John 5. 13, 15.)
and for that without wrath or doubting, (1 Timothy 2. 1, 8.) Yea, and ye shall
bring forth much fruit; and herein is my Father glorified, John 15. 1, 6, 8,
11. And this leads us to the next.

2. The believers leading a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty, tends very much to the adorning the name and doctrine of God our
Savior, and to the manifesting the truth and goodness of his Gospel and Way
before them. Hence that is one great end propounded, to move Servants to such
demeanor toward their Masters, and every Soul to the higher powers; and so all
Christians in their several places toward one another, and toward all men, as
is according to godliness and honesty, Even as that grace of God that brings
salvation to all men teaches, That the name of God and his doctrine be not
blasphemed, 1 Timothy 6. 1. That they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior
in all things, Tit. 2. 10. That ye may be blameless, harmless, the Sons of God
without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked generation; amongst whom, shine ye as
lights in the world, holding forth the word of life, Phil. 2. 15, 16. And that
so, as men seeing your good works may glorify your Father; the Gentiles in the
day of their visitation may glorify God, Mat. 5. 13, 16. 1 Pet. 2. 12. And
this general council, a full direction in every case, Only let your
conversation be such as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. For a little
demonstration hereof, see it in some particulars.

1. The believer in all godliness and honesty living under Government, being
subject to the higher Powers as ordained of God over him, yea, though there be
no such justice or righteousness issuing from them as he could desire, as well
as in other parts of such demeanor as is forementioned; he declares plainly to
others thereby, That the grace of God in Christ instructs and leads to such
high esteem of the infinite wisdom, goodness, and faithfulness of God, that
has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up to death for us all, and that
in due time: and to such assurance that the same wisdom, goodness, truth and
faithfulness, is exercised in all his orderings and dispensations toward us;
according to that standing testimony of it in his Son, whom he has given to be
a continual witness of his love and glory, in the exercise of all his holy
attributes for our good, in all his dealings with and about us, and in ordering
to us mercies and chastisements, that though by sense in most particular
matters, at present it be not so discernable, yet by faith in him we may be
helped to keep such right judgment at all times, and from such right
judgment, taught and strengthened to all things through him; and so for the
Lords sake that has done so much for us, willingly submit to any Power or
Ordinance of men, that God by his providence orders over us, and that either in
doing or suffering so as in the Lord, as judging that place and condition of
servitude, and under such a master or power, to be at the present the best for
us, most seasonable for the accomplishing of Gods will, in either mercy or
chastisement for our good. And seeing his will is good and acceptable toward
us in both, (as manifested in his Son) that grace instructs not to be
solicitous or hastily inquisitive to know, whether for one or for another it be
so ordered, yet quietly to wait for that also; that as he is by grace enabled
to understand or perceive it, so he may receive and mind others of the
instruction suitably in it; considering, that it is the great Master of us and
them that is in Heaven; yea, it is he that gave his Son to the death for us, and
now governs all things by his word; and in the same exercise of wisdom grace,
and faithfulness in and through his Son, that has ordered to us such an
inferior Master or Government, and us to such place of subjection. Hence in
those particular exhortations as to this matter, we are so often exhorted to do
the honor and service, and yield the subjection to them, as to the Lord, the
great Master that has so ordered them over us, to be submitted to by us; and
not as to men, or as men-pleasers; kowing that it is he that pulls down and sets
up at his pleasure; And for this cause to pay tribute also, for they are Gods
Ministers. Servants and Instruments, permitted and ordered over us by him,
attending continually upon this very thing; render therefore to all their dues,
etc. as unto the Lord, and so in submission and reverence to the great Master
in Heaven, Romans 13. 5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 6. 6, 7, 8. Col. 3. 22, 23. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
hallowing his name:

2. Herein also, as likewise in those other branches forementioned of leading a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, he plainly declares,
That whatsoever good thing any man does, in either service or suffering for his
name sake, or for the good of others, this grace does and will instruct them to
know and assuredly expect, they shall receive their reward from the hand of
their great Master the Lord, that has ordered them to such service; and so
shall others for the wrong they do, whether Bond or Free, Subject or Governor,
for there is no respect of persons with God: and therefore to be patient and
contented, though such reward be not equally administered from the hands of men;
yea, to rejoice in the glory to be revealed, expect and wait for the kingdom to
come, and therein and then, look for the great and total salvation of all those
that love and wait for his second appearing, who shall certainly appear to
their glory, and then render every man according to his work; and therefore not
to seek great things, as glory, kingdom, or ease and freedom from trouble in
this world; but to be contented here to serve and suffer, as those longing and
yet patiently waiting for his appearing; knowing that when their Lord comes,
and all his Saints with him, they shall sit down with him in his kingdom, Ephesians.
6. 7 8. Col. 3. 23, 24, 25. 1 Timothy ^. 11, 12, 15. 2 Timothy 4. 6. 7, 8. Isa. 66.
5. Heb. 9. 28.

3. The believer being adorned with such demeanor as aforesaid, further
declares or manifests, That such is the great satisfaction and consolation
that is found and met with in Jesus Christ, in the believing, mindefulness and
consideration of him, according to that which is already done in and by him, to
make way for the goodness of God to be extended, in and through all his
dealings; and as a standing witness (as before) in which the name of God is so
gloriously declared, and in minding also the hope laid up for them in Heaven.
as they have been instructed in it, in the word of the truth of the Gospel; and
so in that expectation and looking for it, begotten in them from the
consideration of that already done; yea, the promise of this life and that to
come, given them in Christ, appropriated to godliness; such the comfort and
encouragement of Gods love therein met with, such the fellowship of the Spirit,
etc. therein enjoyed, that these waters being drunk, will and do certainly and
abundantly preserve from thirsting after other waters, and make careless of
themselves or their own things; yea, willing to lay down and deny themselves in
any thing, that his will may be done, and for the prosecuting the great design
that is according to it, the one thing needful for our selves and others, more
knowledge of and conformity to his grace; and therefore cheerful in whatever we
may suffer therein; and knowing that the will of God is one and good, perfect
and acceptable, this grace instructs and leads to desire that may be done, and
to rejoice in the doing of it, or in it being done, though in things unpleasing
to the flesh, even in tribulations, Great peace have they (it appears in such
demeanor as aforesaid, not by sense, but by faith;) that love Gods Law, nothing
shall offend them; they manifest to all men, that that teaches them, though
free, yet not to use their liberty in Christ as a cloak of maliciousness or
pride; That so with well-doing, they may put to silence the ignorance of folish
men, knowing that so is the will of God, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 15, 16, etc. Psalm. 119.
164, 165, 166. 2 Cor. 4. 15, 18. and 5. 1. 7.

4. They likewise show forth in such their demeanor as aforesaid, how that
grace teaches them to account of themselves as Strangers, Travelers and
Pilgrims here, and that as those that are seeking and looking for another and
better Country, Kingdom and Glory, even one to come, the new Heavens and new
Earth, in which dwells Righteousness. They should not, nor have cause to be
mindeful of the Country out of which they are called, nor solicitous or careful
for the things of it, only their daily bread in it as he sees good for them;
that is, their Conductor and Leader in and through it; such protection,
accommodation and preservation by the way, and according as every days need
requires, and as may in the wisdom of their Leader most tend to their
furtherance in the journey, and their strengthening and accommodation in their
service and suffering for him. Heb. 11. 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Pet. 2. 11,
12. Seeking the Kingdom of Heaven and the Righteousness thereof, not being
careful in any thing else; but presenting their needs and committing their
matters to him, to add all other things as he sees good, and in a subserviency
to the main design, and the great things of his love, to which is the desire
of the Soul in all. Psalm. 119. 17, 18, 19, 20. Mat. 6. 32, 33* 34. with Phil.
4. 5 6.

5. They likewise manifest to all men in such their demeanor, that this grace
of God that brings salvation to all men, teaches even the believers, To look
at themselves as great sinners and very unworthy, and so much the more, as
their evils are against such grace conferred on them: and therefore have no
cause to boast or lift up themselves above others; but great need themselves to
come with them daily to that common fountain, owning their evils, and seeking
pardon and healing on the account of, and through that precious blood, and
prevalent mediation, which is also for others to come unto God with them by:
and that the heart being seasoned with the apprehension of Gods great goodness,
and the infinite virtues of the blood of Jesus, in so gracious pardoning,
healing and helping them, that will make them, that they cannot be rigid
toward or against others, and move them to be kind, tenderhearted,
forgiving, as Christ has forgiven them. Mat. 18. 21, 33. Ephesians. 4, 32. And so
also by such love, so like to the love of God in Christ, and so expressed in
such lowliness and meekness, they are manifested before all men to be his
Disciples. And the name of God and his grace exceedingly magnified and
commended in them: Yea,

6. They do also by such demeanor (as aforesaid) testify, That they are
evermore by that grace of God in Christ minded, and in heeding of it made
sensible of their own weakness, and the subtilty, evil, and poison of the
temptations of Satan and the World; and therefore will not, nor dare
presumptuously sin against God, in rushing into temptations, or willingly
entangling themselves with the occasions of them, being instructed, warned, and
awed by that grace to serve the Lord with fear, and though with rejoicing also,
being made willing and cheerful in all their service, through the sweetness and
powerfulness of the Arguments of his grace; and also confident, rejoicing in
hope, and so patient in tribulation; yet thus to rejoice before him with godly
fear and trembling, and that for loves sake, left they sin against so good a
God, knowing that so many are the occasions within and without them, to entice
and provoke them thereto, and so deprive themselves of such infinite mercies,
and of such abundant entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior, the enjoyment of which is set before them in and with Christ, and do
therein also deprive others of the mercies they might and should have by them,
and therefore with this rejoicing in hope, and patience in tribulation, it
instructs also to continue instant in Prayer; yea, withal to make no provision
for the flesh to avoid the occasions and appearances of evil to flee from them
as from death, lest of them they should reap corruption, and so be led into and
overcome of the evil of the temptation. Psalm. 2. 11. Heb. 12. 28. Romans 12. 12.
Gal. 6. 7, 8. Romans 13. 14. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. 11. 2 Timothy 2* 10,
20, 22. Jam. 1. 13, 14, 16.

All which Ornaments are put on in putting on Christ, being nothing else but
the motions and operations of the new man, (the enlightened judgment and
disposition or inclination of the heart, begotten and framed according to it)
which after God is created in holiness and righteousness, through the truth as
learned in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 4. 17, 20. 21, 25, etc. And do render the persons
so adorned, abundantly more meet to make their Prayers and Thansgivings for all
men, and to have their mouths filled with the Declarations of his goodness
before them; they appearing while they are leading a quiet and peaceable life
in all godliness and honesty, thus molded in all these things to a right
praying frame and temper of Spirit, and earnestly and rightly set for the good
of all, and profitably to prosecute it: and this adorning the doctrine of God
our Savior by the believer, being clothed with such ornaments, and so shining
as lights in the world, will prove a powerful and effectual means, to the
drawing and alluring others to listen to the Gospel of Christ, and enquire
after him with us. That which the Apostle Peter applies to the believing Wives,
with reference to their unbelieving Husbands, we may also apply, or say the
like concerning Believers in general, with reference to their unbelieving
Neighbors, That even such as obey not the word, might without the word be
won, by the conversation of the Believers among and toward them, while they
behold their chaste, upright or honest conversation coupled with fear, with
godliness, awfulness, reverence and humility; whose adorning is not that
outward, nor do they therein conform to the World, according to the former
lusts in their ignorance, in plaiting of Hair, (changing any Ornament God has
given them, or priding themselves with it) wearing of Gold, (signifying any
costly Array) or putting on of Aparel (be it never so mean, when they can get no
better they may make that their Ornament; the neat or spruce putting on, or
trimming themselves with what they have:) compare with this 1 Pet. 3. 1, 4. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10, 11. 1 Pet. 1. 13, 14, 15, 18. 2 Pet. 3. 11, 14. But their
adorning is the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible: the
fruits or operations of that which others see not appears in their being
adorned by it, and putting on the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, a thing
in the sight of God of great price; and so being clothed with humility, and
filled with those fruits of righteousness that are by Jesus Christ.

Oh then let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity, by
the mercies of God; let them go on, purging themselves from all filthiness of
flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, that they may be
vessels prepared for their Masters use. 2 Timothy 2. 1, 7, 8, 19, 20, 22, 25. Tit.
2. 10, 12, 14.

Thus we have done with this first branch of the last general instruction
propounded; namely, we have showed, That it tends very much to the good of all
men, That believers lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty among them: we shall endeavor brevity in what follows.

2. That therefore God likes it well in, and requires it of those whom he sets
in Authority, or eminent place, places of Government, that they should all of
them have a special eye at this, That his people that worship him, and would
live quietly in the Land, that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty, under their protection and Government. All Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities and Powers are of God, created, ordained and set by
Jesus Christ, and for him; the Earth he has given to the children of men, and
set over it whom he please; sometimes the basest of men, that they should as
his Ministers, administer the Government for him, and according to his
appointment and counsel given them, Col. 1. 16. Romans 13. 14. with 1 Pet. 2. 14.
Psalm. 115. 16. Dan. 4. 17. Psalm. 75. and 82. Yea, It Is he that gives salvation
to Kings, Psalm. 144. 10. Therefore it is his great and general counsel to them
the Rulers of both Jews and Gentiles, that they should serve the Lord with
fear, etc. and that in kissing, acknowledging, serving and honoring the Son.
Psalm. 2. 11, 12. with John 5. 22, 23. And what that is in which mainly they are
required to acknowledge, do homage to, and serve the Son, and that it is
according to that general rule, What is done to the least of his, that desire
to worship him in sincerity and truth, though never so despicable here, he
accounts as done to himself, Mat. 25. 40 45 and 10* 40, 41, 42. may also appear
in that Psalm. 2. by considering what that is that is reproved in them, and
charged; as their consulting together, and rebelling against him the Lords
anointed: They said, Let us break their bands asunder, let us cast away their
cords from as; namely, those bands and cords of love, those reproofs and
Arguments of the Gospel, to persuade them to accept of Gods counsel, to be wise
and instructed now to serve the Lord, etc. which were administered to them
mediately by the Church of Christ, his despised people, whom he has set in the
World, that by them might be made known even to Principalities and Powers, the
manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3. 10. As the Rulers of the Jews, Jer. 18. 18.
consulted together, and said, Let us devise devices against Jeremiah, let us
smite him with or for the tongue, let us not give heed to any of his words. And
as those Rulers, Acts 4. 15, 16, 17, 18. They conferred together, saying, What
shall we do to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle has been done by
them, is manifest, etc. But that it spread no further, let us straightly
threaten and charge them, that they speak no more in this name: and these
consultations and threatenings against them, in which they endeavored to break
their bonds, and cast away their cords from them, are mentioned as their
standing up and gathering together against the Lord and his Christ, as well as
their injuries done to his person when he was among them, and so in both a
verifying those complaints against them, Psalm. 2. See that Acts 4. 25, 29. and
so both are joined together, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16. Their crucifying the Lord, and
persecuting his servants, forbiding them to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles,
that they may be saved; and for this, wrath shall come upon them to the
uttermost, when the measure of their sin is full, they shall perish from the
way, as Psalm. 2. 12. Therefore they are now in time admonished, that such
judgment may be prevented before the decree come forth, and they be as chaff
that passes suddenly, Not to touch his Anointed, or do his Prophets any harm,
Psalm. 105. 15. but to afford them liberty and protection, that they may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, to acknowledge, do
homage to, and serve the Son, in succouring, defending and helping his people;
for him they have not always, but his poor they have always with them:
compare this Psalm. 2. with Gods counsel to Moab, Isa. 16. 1. Send ye the Lamb
to the Ruler of the Land: kiss, acknowledge, send presents to the Son; and then
as a direction how or wherein they may do that, see verse. 3, 4. Take counsel,
execute judgment, make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noon day,
hide mine outcasts, bewray not him that wandereth, let them dwell with thee,
be a covert to them from the face of the spoiler. Yea, expressly concerning the
Kings of the Gentiles in these last days, since the rejection of the Jews, and
the free coming forth of the Gospel to the Gentiles, It Is said, either by way
of prophecy, or as counsel to them, or both, They shall be nourishers, or
nursing Fathers to his people, and their Queens nursing Mothers to them, Isa.
49. 23. which if it be understood as a prophecy of the glorious return and
bringing back of the Jews, or of something to be then more clearly and fully
accomplished; yet it evidently declares that to be the good pleasure of God
concerning them at all times, and that which he especially now requires of them
by his Gospel sent to them, That the Rulers among the Gentiles, should be
nourishers to his people, his Israel among them, even the called, whether of
Jews or Gentiles; and to that therefore they are now timely admonished, while
they have opportunity, to do it willingly, and it may tend so much to their
advantage with this motive of instruction for their warning, that if now they
will not nourish and favor them, while they are as Servants among them, the
time will come when they shall reign, and then those their enemies shall lick
the dust at their feet, etc. compare with this, Isa. 49. 23. Psalm. 72. 8* 9.
and Micah 7. 10, 16, 17. and so it agrees with that, Psalm. 2. Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, serve the Lord with
fear, rejoice before him with trembling: kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the way, etc. Take heed that ye offend not, or do harm, ^o any of
these little ones; that will be reputed as your touching his anointed; for he
that touches them touches the apple of his eye. Jerusalem even the holy City,
the Congregation of the firstborn, though now trod under foot even by those
Gentiles in the outward Court of the Church; yet shall be exalted above the top
of all Mountains in that day, when God shall send us Jesus his Servant, the
Branch that is now preached to us, whom the Heavens must retain till the time
come for the restitution of all things. Isa. 2. 1, 4. Micah 4. 1, 4. with Isa.
11. 1, 11. Acts 3. 20. 21. Then will he contend with them that contend with
her, and will feed them that now oppress her with their own flesh, Isa. 49. 25,
26. Yea, there may be beginnings of these judgments to them before, by one
clashing and battering against another; but when he comes, he will utterly cut
off the horns of the wicked, but the horns of the righteous shall be exalted,
Psalm. 75. 10. Jerusalem will prove a Cup of trembling, a but then some Stone to
all that meddle with her, to vex and abuse her; but they shall prosper that
love her, Zech. 12. 2, 3. Psalm. 1 22. 6. The way therefore for you to be hid in
the day of the Lords anger, when he comes to plead the controversies of Sion,
is, not to lift up the horn, or magnify your selves against the people of the
Lord of Hosts; but to judge righteously, defend and succor the poor of his
people; seek righteousness, seek meekness, etc. compare Zeph. 2. 2, 3, 8 10.
with Isa. 10, 1, 2, 3. Righteousness exalts a Nation, and so a Power or
Government; but sin is a shame to any people. Further therefore for instruction
and direction to a right observance of this counsel, consider*

3. What those things are in general that will tend to this, and which are
therefore required of Governors, that believers may lead such a life.

1. They are to afford them liberty and potection in their quiet and peaceable
worshipping of God, and endeavoring the good of others, according as the grace
of God that brings salvation to all men, instructs them: in matters of their
faith and worship, they are not to touch them, so as to limit, appoint or
regulate them, by or according to the precepts of men, for therein they will
surely hinder and do harm to them* they are to know that believers as private
Christians, though they are to be subject to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, in either doing or suffering quietly, yet they are not to have
their fear toward God, taught by the Precepts or Ordinances of men: if men
will go about so to regulate them, and Authority allow it, they must rather
suffer when it falls upon them, for conscience sake toward God, then resist
the power; but they must not so become the Servants of men, as to call any man
on Earth their Rabbi in that respect, for one is their Master even Christ, and
all they from the highest to the lowest are Brethren, to receive each of them,
and together, the Law from his mouth. Such therefore as would be greatest or
chief among or over their brethren, if they would demean themselves as
Christian Magistrates or Rulers, are not in the matters and things of Christ,
(as before) to exercise Lorship over their Brethren, as the Princes among the
Gentiles, ever since the outward Court came* into the hands of the Gentiles,
have used to do; but rather to become Servants to all in those things,
earnestly seeking with them, and by them as instruments, to understand the will
and mind of their great Lawgiver, in attending on his sayings, and so to all
helps for the understanding and usefulness of them; they having in that
particular, for direction in those weighty affairs lying upon them, more
especial need of being well furnished with wisdom in the knowledge of him, and
teachings of his grace, Mat. 23. 8, 9, 10, 11. and 20. 25, 26. Yea, they are to
defend and protect them from being hindered or regulated by any other worldly
or humane power under them, in matters of their faith or fear toward God: they
should set up no Lords in the room of Christ, over the consciences of men, nor
to disturb them in their quiet and peaceable service of him in their
generation, or limit them therein, unless in matters of circumstance, as to
places and times, and the like, for some public services. God has set Rulers
to be a terror to evil works; and it will surely be a very evil work in any,
to be Lords over Gods heritage in the forementioned respects, though under
pretense of being Pastors or Feeders of them. 1 Pet. 5. 3. The Decree made by
Darius that we read of, Ezra. 6. 6, 7, 10. may be here commended to them* the
like in some cases may be needful and good for them to make now: Therefore
Tatnai, Shether, Boznai, and your companions, let the work of this house of God
alone; do not hinder it directly or indirectly, by withholding from them any
thing to their furtherance, allowed them by the Law or Authority of the Nation,
That they may pray for the King and his Sons. Yea verse. 12. he prophesies, The
God of Heaven, that has caused his name to dwell there, destroy all Kings and
people, that shall put to their hand to destroy or alter this house of God at
Jerusalem: the truth of which is Jesus Christ as now declared in the Gospel to
us in these last days, and dwelling in the hearts and societies of those that
receive and keep his sayings: and as this demeanor of his to the Jews in that
case was acceptable then, so will it be acceptable now in the Rulers of the
Gentiles; and the grace of God especially obliges and requires it of Christian
Magistrates, so to demean themselves toward the Servants of God under their
Government, that they may have liberty and encouragement afforded them under
their protection, to lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.

But it may be here said, How shall they know which are the Saints of God and
right worshippers, that they only may be so permitted and protected in their
liberty by them?

To this I answer: They can hardly so perfectly know them, as to distinguish
them from all others that are like to them, especially in these last days,
there being so many that have specious shows and pretenses of godliness, by
whom yet the power of it is denied; so many Tares, that bring another and
contrary fruit, that yet in their springing up are so like the Wheat, that they
can scarcely be discerned or distinguished from the Weat by the Servants, till
by their fruit they appear. Mat. 13. 25, 26, 27. Likewise they when they are
discerned, yet they are so mixed together with the Wheat, and growing so near
and like unto them, and seemingly from the same root or kernel, that they
cannot be plucked up without much danger and detriment to the Wheat. There can
be no Laws made, or course taken for the pulling out of the one, that will not
tend to the infringement, disturbance, if not rooting up of the other also.
Therefore though the Servants of the householder, that as his Ministers are
Rulers in the Field of the World, at any time should be such as can and do
discern and distinguish between the Tares and the Wheat, and be assured of the
rightness of their judgment according to the word of God the testimony of
Jesus; (which is the key of knowledge) yet they are not to endeavor by their
Laws, or in the exercise of their Power and Authority to gather out the Tares,
but let them alone also, and so let both grow together until the time of the
Harvest, left they pluck up the Wheat also: verse. 29. Yea, it is to be feared
and has been formerly found true, If they enterprise such a work, they will
pluck up more Wheat then Tares; Let them grow together therefore till the time
of the Harvest. And this counsel of our Savior they may take, without learning
that voluntary humility, under the pretense of charity, in which is sometimes
more policy then grace, to own and acknowledge all that have any such
profession, appearance, or forms of godliness, as the true Wheat, or godly
Person, the right worshippers, the one as contrary to another, at least in the
issue and fruit of their doctrines and ways, as light is to darkness: if in
listening to the testimony of Jesus, and of the grace of God as manifested in
him, which are the great things of his Law, they have been helped to understand
and know the voice of the Son of God, the great and true Shepherd, and so where
he feeds; which grace is much to be desired and followed after, in inquiring at
the mouth of his testimony, as declared in the Gospel, as Cant. 1. 7, 8. Then
as by it they are also helped to discern and distinguish the voice of a
stranger, they are not to follow it, but to avoid and have no fellowship with
such (as by the true light they discern to have a form of godliness, but deny
the power thereof) in their unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
them, yea, to note them to others, and admonish them, To mark and avoid such as
cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which we have learned of
the first Apostles: for such serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own lust,
appetite or will, and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of
the simple: and so to reprove them with all long suffering and doctrine
according to their capacity, Joh. 10. 4, 5. Romans 16. 17, 18, 19. Ephesians. 5. 11,
15. 2 Timothy 3. and 4. 1, 2, 3. such instructions and counsel is generally good
and needful to be heeded of all Christians as Christians, the Rulers as well as
the ruled, Psalm. 101. 1. 4. and 40. 4. But for plucking up and gathering into
bundles to cast into the fire, they must let that alone till the end of this
corruptible world, even this world, (as Luke 20. 34, 35.) in which the children
of it marry and are given in marriage; as opposed to that World, in which they
that shall be counted worthy to obtain it, and the Resurrection from the dead,
neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God: of this
World, the glorious, peaceable and righteous Kingdom and Government of Christ
is not, John 18. 36. Therefore in this World his Servants must have
tribulation, Joh. 16. 33. either by bodily persecution they that will live
godly in Christ Jesus shall fall by the sword, by flame, by captivity and
spoil, the brother delivering up the brother to death etc. and so they have
suffered already many days, as Dan. 11. 33. Mat. 24. 9, 10. 2 Timothy 3. 12. or
else also and more abundantly in the latter days, and especially when through
Gods: stirring up the hearts of the Kings of the Earth, to hate the whore and
burn her flesh with fire, Rev. 17. 16. there shall be some abatement of the
other more gross and bodily persecution, they shall be helped with a little
help; then shall they have great tibulation and vexation to their righteous
souls, by means of many cleaving to them by flatteries; and then also many of
them of understanding, falling to the pernicious ways of the spirit of
antichrist, coming with greater deceiveableness of unrighteousness, then ever;
and this for trial to the rest by them: which kind of trial must continue, for
the making them white, till the time of the end, Dan. 11. 34, 35. at which time
of the end, Daniel must stand up in his lot, chap. 12. 13. mean time, and still
more abundantly in these latter days, Many false Prophets shall arise, and
shall deceive many, saying, Lo here is Christ, and lo there, and because
iniquity shall abound, yea, evil men and seducers, shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived; because also under more specious pretenses of
godliness, Therefore the love of many shall wax cold, and so cold, as there
shall be scarcely any faith left in the glorious and high-spirited professors
of it, to expect and wait for, nor any love to or desire of his appearing the
second time; but every one taking up short in some fancy or shadow, instead of
the substance, Mat. 24. 11, 12, 13. 2 Timothy 3. 13. Luke 18. 8. with Mat. 24. 23,
27. This is not the time for our mighty God and Savior to come, and all his
Saints with him, and take to him his great Power and Reign on the Earth. Zech.
14. 5. Rev. 11. 17. with chap. 5. 9, 10. and 20. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14 15, 16, 17.
But when this world shall be at an end, then will he send his Angels (men, as
men, are too weak and insufficient for such a work) to gather out of his
Kingdom all things that offend, and them that do iniquity; Then shall the
Righteous shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13. 24, 30, 36,
43. In the mean time it is his counsel to all the Servants, Let them both grow
together, as aforesaid. All then that the most Christian Rulers, or
Magistrates, are capabable of doing in this matter for the Servants of God, the
chilof the Kingdom in this World, and more is not required of them, is, to
afford such liberty, and protection in that liberty, that believers may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty under them; which yet
will be so, as the beloved among the daughters, many of which are as lions set
on fire of hell; their teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp
sword, Psalm. 57. 4. As the Lilly among Thorns, that will be shooting and
scratching at them privily, when they cannot more openly, as Psalm. 11. 2. and
64. 2* 5. and so under ignominy and reproach, as Gods hidden ones, and
suffering tribulations still. The Magistrates themselves, if they will live
godly in Christ Jesus, must as Christians come under the same reproach and
cross of Christ, they cannot free themselves nor others of it, neither is it a
good Spirit that leads to desire freedom from it here, where Christ suffered
it; they cannot bring forth the Righteousness of his people that have waited
for him as the light, and their judgment as the Noonday: they, if they will
demean themselves as Christians, with the rest of their brethren, must rest in
the Lord, and wait patiently for him for the accomplishing that; when all evil
doers shall be cut off, so as they shall not be* Then the meek shall inherit
the Earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace, Psalm. 37. 5,
6, 11, etc. The perfect and full accomplishment of those Prophecies, Psalm. 101.
5, 8. will be found in and by the true David, the Son of David, the Lord
Christ, when he shall receive the Congregation; and of him it is spoken, as
Psalm. 75. 2, 3, 10. and 2. Whosoever privily slandereth his Neighbor, he will cut
off; yea, him that has a high look and proud heart, he will not suffer: It Is
the Lord only that searches the heart, and tries the reins, yea, he will
early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that he may cut off all wicked doers
from the City of the Lord; pluck up all the Tares and every thing that offends,
out of his Kingdom; all the horns of the wicked he will cut off, and break
them as a Potters vessel, that can never gather together, or be made whole
again: Then shall the World be established, and settled in a standing posture,
that it shall never be changed, moved or altered, nor the Government given to
another people, for he shall judge the people righteously, Psalm. 96. 10. But it
is the World to come, of which we speak, which is fully to be in subjection
unto, and under the Government of Jesus Christ: till then, there will be
nothing but mutations: compare Psalm. 102. 25, 26, 28. and Heb. 1. 10, 11. with
Heb. 2. 5, 6, 8. In the mean time, as no man is found capable of, or worthy to
do such things; so neither is it required of them; and the aspiring at high
things, or things beyond their sphere, will prove very dangerous and
destructive to them. David's example and instruction, Psalm. 131. is good for
them to observe. It were well if they would observe Gods counsel in doing those
things they might do, and which he requires of them, which according to the
instructions of the Gospel fore*considered, appears in this matter to be this:

That Christian Magistrates, or Rulers of the people, afford liberty and
protection as aforesaid, unto all that do profess or pretend to desire to
worship, acknowledge, and serve God in Christ according to his Word or
Scriptures: I say, to defend and protect them in their worship and service, if
under such pretense, and seeming or outward profession, they do not grossly
blespheme Him, his Son, his Word and Name, as therein plainly declared, so as
they therein relinquish and cast off the outward acknowledgement of Him and his
Name, as Levit. 24. 11, 16. Deuteronomy. 17. 1, 6. or if under such pretenses, or
otherwise, they do not bend themselves to do any thing wittingly, tending to
the damage, injury, or harm of others, in body, estate or name, in vilifying or
reproaching their persons, or being otherwise injurious to them in such things,
as Levit. 24. 18, 23. and Deuteronomy. 19. 11, 14* 16, 21. Those things fall within
the reach and power of the Magistrate to discern, and he is Gods Minister to
execute wrath accordingly: yet even in such things as those, and with allusion
to those very Scriptures, where it is written, An eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth, (Levit. 24. 20. Deuteronomy. 19. 21. Exodus 21. 24.) our Savior gives this
general instruction to believers, as his Disciples, That they should not be
strict or exact in requiring such reparation or satisfaction by way of equal
punishment to be inflicted by the Magistrate on them that did them injury; but
rather suffer wrongs, and pass by injuries, Mat. 5. 38, 39, 40. with 1 Cor. 6.
7. according to the more abundant coming forth of the grace of God that
brings salvation to all men, in that appearance of it by Jesus Christ, more
abundantly instructing and leading to mercy, and quiet waiting for the reward
after. And such instructions being generally given to his Disciples, may be of
this use to Magistrates and Rulers, to instruct, that it is suitable to the
full coming forth of the Gospel and grace of Christ, that in their Laws of that
nature there should be provision for showing more mercy; and in the execution
of them, not such strictness and severity as was under Moses. At least when and
so as in showing mercy, they may do nothing to the greater damage of others, in
which the wisdom of God will best instruct them. (But to return to our
business.) If also under such pretenses of worshipping God (as aforesaid) or
otherwise, they do nothing tending directly to the disturbance of the peace of
the Nation where they live, to the moving or sowing sedition, or in contempt of
the Authority set over them, and so using their liberty or pretense of liberty
in Christ, for a cloak of pride and maliciousness so grossly, if so, the
Magistrate is Gods Minister to execute wrath for such things, be they committed
under what pretenses they will, as may appear, Act. 24. 5. compared with chapter
25. 8, 10, 11. where Paul acknowledges, That the doing such things, as some of
them they charged him withal, as moving sedition, offending against Authority,
doing willingly any wrong to his Neighbor, had been worthy of death, or of
bonds, according to the nature and degree of the offense: so Peter signifies, 1
Pet. 2. 14, 15 16, 20. and 3. 9. 10, 11, 13, 14.

Otherwise they are to afford liberty and protection as aforesaid, and so to
all such as are quiet in the Land; and in so doing, they shall certainly be a
protection, defense and shadow, as the Night in the midst of the Noonday, unto
Gods people that do rightly worship him, walking acording to the teachings of
that grace that brings Salvation to all men, which teaches them to lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; such a protection they
shall therein assuredly be to all such, as under their Government they may more
freely, cheerfully and with enlargement, though still bearing the Cross of
Christ, lead such quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty; which
that they may do, God likes it well, and requires it of Governors, even all in
Authority, further,

2. That they should, as public Masters or Magistrates, give unto those under
their Authority those things that are just and equal, equally distributing
justice, and thoroughly executing judgment between a Man and his Neighbor;
considering, that they have a great Master in Heaven, that has set them as his
Ministers, to be a terror to evil works, a revenger of wrath on them that do
evil, in those things within their sphere; to discern and judge which are
especially (if not only) such things, as in which one man sins against
another, 1 Samuel 2. 25. and so for the praise and encouragement of them that do
well. Romans 13. 1, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Col. 4. 1. Jer. 7. 5. Take heed of decreeing
unrighteous decrees, such as are grievous and oppressive, and tend to turn away
the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of the
people, Isa. 10. 1, 2. Oppress not the Stranger, the Fatherless and Widow, shed
not innocent blood, neither walk after other Gods, to your hurt, Jer. 7. 9.
Trust not in oppression, become not vain in robbery, Psalm. 62. 10. Undo the
heavy burdens, let the opppressed go free, break every yoke, before made to
the enslaving the people, Isa. 58. 6. God stands in the Congregation of the
mighty, he judges among the Gods: How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept
the persons of the wicked! defend the Poor and Fatherless, do justice to the
afflicted and needy, deliver and rid them out of the hand of the oppressors,
Psalm. 82. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the case of all such as are appointed
to destruction; open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the
poor and needy, Prove. 31. 8, 9. A great evil it is under the Sun, and yet too
general, The oppressed have no comforter, while on the side of the oppressors
there is power; but judgment and justice is violently perverted. Eccles. 4. 1.
and 5. 8, An evil that tends much to the straightning the believer, in his
leading a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: while their
oppressions are such, and their oppressors so empowered, It Is a great
disturbance and molestation to them in their worship and service of God; they
have not the like opportunity or freedom to it in many respects that they
should have, if justice and judgment were thoroughly executed between a Man and
his Neighbor: yea, many times by the oppressiveness of the Laws, and burdens
on the people, and room left for inequality in the execution of them, it
becomes a very hard and difficult matter, to live honestly a man with his
Neighbor, or under the Authority. It Is certainly evil, oppressive and
destructive to the well-being of a Nation, when the Laws and Ordinances of men
in it are such, and so impossible to be honestly kept and submitted to, that
men are forced to break or sin against them generally, that they may subsist in
their way of honest Trade or Merchandise: besides, it hinders the believer from
that opportunity he should have, for endeavoring the good of, and doing good
to his Neighbor, according to his capacity. And that such evils and miseries
may be avoided, and the forementioned general counsels and directions may the
better be observed, I might add a third.

3. Let them seek peace and pursue it, Psalm. 34. 14. It Is instruction and
counsel generally good to be observed by them in their places, as well as by
others in theirs; If it be possible, and as much as lies in you, live
peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18. and so with all Nations. David was a man
exercised in war from his youth, and was very valiant and successful in the
name of the Lord, and shed much blood; yet not delighting in it, but prusuing
and following after peace with his Enemies, as one earnestly desirous to obtain
it, if it might, be without war or blood, and that for their good; whence he
complains of it, as a great grief and trouble to him, My Soul has long dwelt
with him that hates peace: I am for peace, or a man of peace, but they are for
war, even when I speak of, and offer terms of peace, Psalm. 120. 6, 7. Yea, the
Psalmist makes this general Prayer, which indeed is also a certain prophecy,
and shall have its accomplishment on the subjects of it, sooner or latter,
Scatter thou the people that delight in war, Psalm. 68. 30. It is a great
national blessing, and to be desired; yea, as the conclusion of the blessing
wherewith the house of Israel was to be blessed, adding to the comfort and
sweetness of all the rest, To enjoy peace in the Land, or Nation where they
lived, Levit. 26. 6. Numb. 6. 26. Yea, therefore they were to pray also for the
peace of the Nation and City whither they were carried away Captives, that in
the peace thereof they might have peace, Jer. 29. 7. Christian Rulers then
should take heed their feet be not swift to shed blood, lest their hands be
defiled with blood, and their fingers with iniquity: Not to be forward to make
war, unless necessitated thereto, for defending and preserving the peace of the
Nation, And therefore with good advise make war, Prove. 20. 18. and 24. 6. Yea,
first sitting down and counting whether they be able (by the peoples hands and
purse, for they should consider, no King goes to war at his own charges) to
manage and bear the charge of such a war: else while the Enemy is yet a great
way off, our Savior says, Wise Governors will send an embassage, and desire
conditions of peace. To have peace in our borders, as Psalm. 147. 14. is to be
prized as one of the greatest outward mercies, if God see it good to give us
opportunity to enjoy it, though with some disadvantages. By means of it, them
that are in Authority shall have opportunity put in their hands, to take off
the heavy yokes that make the oppressed to groan, and to see to the protection
of such as do well, and to have their eyes about them, with which they may
scatter the wicked at home, and from about the Throne. Whether they will wisely
improve these opportunities to these purposes or no, that may be a question;
which if they do not, God will in his time take them from them again: For to
him that has, shall more be given; but from him that has not, (or that
retains or improveth not) shall be taken, even that which he had, seeing he
did not rightly use or improve it. Likewise,

By means of such outward peace, especially the forementioned directions being
heeded by them in Authority, the believer shall have more freedom and liberty
to worship God, without disturbance, and endeavor the good of men, according
as God has given him a heart and capacity, by being Messengers of the peace of
God to them, praying for them, and showing forth the virtues of Christ among
them; which is more suitable to their Spirit, then to be fighting with them.

Against all this, some may happily say: We speak as not understanding the
Visions or Prophesies proper to these times, or which are now to have their
fulfilling, which (say they) speak of the Saints destroying, conquering, and
bringing under all their Enemies by the material Sword, and so taking and
possessing the kingdoms of this World, and so Christ taking to him his great
power and reigning in his people, and that by such means, and in the time of
this mortality: which considered, might encourage and put forward all
Christians, the Rulers and Ruled together, to go on furiously and confidently,
without deliberate advisement, yea, without president or rule, conquering and
to conquer all that is before them, by their power and Sword, now while it is
in their hand; and not to seek peace, but rather count it their honor, as
Christians or Saints, to be further employed in war.

In answer to this, we say, We cannot indeed boast as others do, of our
understanding the Visions of the times; but freely acknowledge our great
weakness and ignorance in them, as a fruit of our more fundamental ignorance
in, or want of skill to make use of the Vision of all Visions, which is the Key
of knowledge for the opening them, and whatever else is hard to be understood:
nor desire we at this time, much to lengthen our discourse; (having been large
in it already) yet briefly this we say, first, We read something of the Visions
of these latter days opened by our Savior in his answer to the Disciples
question, Mat. 24. 3. which question had two things distinct in it, (viz.) When
shall these things be, (namely, the things he had foretold about the
destruction of Jerusalem, and their Temple) and what the sign of his coming,
and of the end of the world? It may seem the Disciples thought, that the
destruction of Jerusalem, and his second appearing, and the end of the world
should have happened together; and happily were not yet able to understand, or
bear the hearing of another and longer time for his coming and the end of the
world, then for the destruction of Jerusalem: however, our Savior answers to
both the parts of the question together: and though some of his particular
applicatory sayings, by way of direction to them, (as verse. 16, 20.) are with
more peculiar reference to the first, which was to fall out in their day; yet
all the predictions or things foretold to fall out, as forerunners of both,
are generally to be applied to each; signifying, That the same things, and much
in a like manner, that did fore-run the destruction of Jerusalem, shall also
fore-run the second appearing of Christ, and the end of the world; but still
more fully according to the predictions, as the last fulfillings of prophesies
are always the clearest and fullest. Now there we read that the Believers, the
Saints of God, the Disciples of Christ shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars:
in that he mentions wars, as distinct from rumors of wars, in Matthew and
Mark, it is clear that by wars he means, such as are near them, in those Nations
and places where they live: but then in that of them, as well as of the rumors
of wars in other places, he says, They shall hear of them, he clearly
signifies, That the Saints or Disciples of Christ, (as such) shall not be
actors or exercised in them. It Is none of their proper quarrel or fight for
their kingdom, though there may be in them much of Gods quarrel against, and
executing wrath or vengeance on many of their oppressors, by stirring them up
one against another, or stirring up some against them, that may after prove
such themselves under another form; but the Saints or Disciples of Christ,
(whose work is not to avenge themselves in this day; see Romans 12. 18, 19, 20.)
they as such are but Spectators, as Strangers and Pilgrims, looking on, and
hearing the tumults and commotions between one and another, and wisely
considering the work of God therein, and lifting up their heads, for the nigh
drawing of the day of their redemption, of which they know these are
forerunners and signs, though they look not for it by this means: yet many of
them, as part or members of the Nation where they live, may also be exercised
on the defensive part, or on that side where they understand good ground, and
that warrantably, and may be eminently instrumental, more then other men, as in
any national good work they join in; but not actors as Saints, either for their
kingdom, or by way of revenge against any: for says the Text, Nation shall
rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, (not the Saints against the
Nations or Kingdoms.) It follows, and there shall be earthquakes in diverse
places, and famines, and pestilences, and fearful sights, and great signs from
Heaven, Mat. 24. 7. Mark 13. 7. Luke 21. 9, 10, 11. and together with these,
and all this time, he says, Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ;
yea, many false Christ's, and false Prophets shall arise, with so fair pretenses
and great flourishes, and at last showing great signs and wonders, if possible
to deceive the very elect; yea, and they shall deceive many, (except those
days should be shortened, none would be saved or preserved, in the expectation
and patient waiting for the coming of Christ) telling them* Lo here is Christ
or there, in this or in that appearing the second time, and accomplishing the
promises you wait for. Or as there were false Prophets among the people, and
those the generality of the great seers of the Visions of the times, a little
before the Babylonian captivity, which did fore-run the first appearing of
Christ; that told the people, They should have assured peace in that place, and
at that time, and should get it then, by resisting the Caldean* and so by their
Sword and the help of other Nations, and so, that the issue thereof should be,
that they should neither see Sword nor Famine, but the promises of assured
peace and settlement for ever, which the Fathers died in the faith of, not
having received, should presently be accomplished: and with these (carried on
with so much violence, height of Spirit, and flourishes, as if they had it from
the oracle) they greatly deceived the people; (as Jer. 14. 13.) neither in
those days were there any Prophets of the Lord, that durst speak a word
against them, unless one or two that also sat alone, and were hooted at by
every one, because of the assembly of the mockers that devised against them, to
make their doctrine and prophesies as odious as they could, and to smite them
with the tongue, and for the tongue, and so on the cheek, (as 1 Kings 22* 24.)
so as might tend to their reproach and make them hold their peace, and resolved
not to give heed to any their words, Jer. 18. 17, 18. even so there shall be
false Teachers and Prophets arise among the Christian Gentiles, tending to
their enslaving by the spirit of Antichrist, the mystery of iniquity, which
shall fore-run the second appearing of Christ, (as a little before their
enslaving by the grosser part or flesh of Antichrist did) that will in like
manner privily, under pretense of the contrary, bring in damnable heresies,
(even such as in which the Lord that bought them is denied, the promise of his
second personal appearance, or at least the patient looking and waiting for the
blessed hope, until that glorious appearance, is by the assembly of the mockers
scoft at) telling them, They shall have assured peace in this place, that they
shall get the peaceable and glorious kingdom of Christ by the^r Sword, and the
like: But before all these, he says, (Luke 21. 12.) They shall lay their hands
on the Saints, and persecute them, and they shall be brought before Kings,
Counsels and Synagogues* and into Prisons for his names sake; Yea, they shall
kill them: which though all the three Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke,
mention after the other, yet Luke says expressly, They shall be before those
things forementioned, which shows, as we have noted before, That these wars,
commotions and abounding of Spiritual iniquity, together with them here spoken
of, are those that shall happen after bodily persecutions have been before
suffered by the Saints, and at the time in which there shall be some abatement
of them, to which abatement, these very commotions themselves shall be some
help instrumentally; yet even of these together, the wars and commotions, by
Nation battering and clashing against Nation, and the abounding of more
spiritual iniquity after some cessation of bodily persecution; These together,
says he, are the beginnings of sorrows, or calamities and miseries, the
outward occasions of sorrows, not of joys, though going before as
accomplishments of his word, and so making way; joy shall come in the morning
of the appearance of the Son of man, and the resurrection of the dead: But the
end, he says, is not by and by, these are but the beginnings of sorrows. Now
when we read of such predictions, and in such terms, and see the beginnings of
the accomplishments of them in our day, yet we do not account our selves or
Christian Magistrates, thereby obliged to put our selves forward with desire to
contend or ^ight with others, or to provoke them to wrath, or pick quarrels
against them, or to neglect any advantage or opportunity for peace with them,
any more then we account our selves obliged to join with the false Prophets,
and follow them, or else to do what we can to be occasions of furtherance to
the spreading of their principles, that we may have some work to strive and
fight with them: but if God do by his providence call us to defend our selves,
or our Nation, against those that are for war and contention, and will not be
quiet in such troublous times; And so if God in like manner call us to contend
for the Faith of the Gospel, and strive together for it; In following him, we
know we are in his way, and may expect his blessing, and have no cause to be
terrified by our adversaries: and that we may do, and yet not delight in war,
but seek peace, and be for it, even while they are for war; which we cannot but
do, knowing that it is generally true, That all wars and fightings come of men's
lusts, etc. Jam. 4. 1, etc.

Again we read, Rev. 17. 16, 17. of Gods putting it into the heart of the Kings
of the Earth, (not Saints as Saints, but earthly Rulers and Governors) to hate
the whore, and make her desolate and naked, to eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire: but not that they shall then give their power unto Christ, or into the
hands of the Saints, (they are not to come by it on that fashion) but their
power that was before in the whore, they shall establish and give into the
hands of the beast, the wordly power and magistracy, (which is a power ordained
of God) until the words of God shall be fulfilled, which will not be by and by.
There is some time for the spirit of Antichrist to be revealed and lifted up,
and that may be promoted by those powers that destroyed his flesh, or grosser
part: which yet if it should be so, yet we know we have cause to acknowledge
and thank God for his great goodness, wisdom, and power manifested and
exercised toward his people, and for the good of all, in occasioning such
enlargement and freedom from under bodily persecution and restraint, by means
of these wars and commotions, though they in themselves be evil, and not to be
desired by us on any people: being indeed at least the beginning of his
judgments and plagues for contempt of his Gospel, and despising his people:
yet out of these evils, they being but the beginnings of his judgments, God
that is infinite in wisdom, and wonderful in working, has brought forth much
good, and that for the good and benefit of these Nations: we may say, Gods
people have had more enlargement outwardly in diverse considerations, to lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, then is probable they
could have enjoyed without these wars and commotions, God having begun here to
make use of them, for burning the flesh of the whore. We may say, God has made
them, and yet does, as the Earth opening her mouth, and drinking up the flood
that the Dragon sent out of his mouth to destroy the woman, the despised Church
of God here on Earth, Rev. 12. 16. Even as when Saul was at the heels of David,
the Philistines invading the Land, occasioned his sudden taking off from his
pursuit, 1 Samuel 23. 26, 28. so we have seen, when in one generation of men,
that assumed the titles of Lords over Gods heritage, the Dragon had sent out a
great flood of persecutions and Laws, to compel to commit fornication with the
Whore. The beginning of these wars and commotions in our Nations, tended to the
drinking up the flood, and so helped the woman. And likewise when in another
generation of men, that laid aside the titles, but would have had and exercised
the same power, and more binding over the consciences of men, the Dragon had
prepared to send out a flood of like and more dangerous consequence then the
former; the continuance and often renewing of the same wars, has been opening
the mouth of the earth, to the drinking up, or obstructing the issuing out of
that hitherto; and what they would yet do, if they could be settled by Authority
in the power desired by them, or what may issue forth by a third sort or
generation of men, whose eyes are lofty, and their eyelids are lifted up, when
ever things come to a settlement, and as they get leisure and opportunity, we
yet know not, or do not determine; though cause enough to suspect, that Satan
being angry with the Woman, because he cannot have his will otherwise over her,
will by them be making such war as he can and find out, new engines not so
discernable, to be for that purpose, and therefore more dangerous, for the
wearing out the poor remnant of her Seed, that keep the Commandments of God,
and have the Testimony of Jesus: as some hinderance to which, we see God makes
use of the remaining wars and commotions, and not only of them, but of the
changes of his providence with us, pouring us from vessel to vessel: and from
these considerations we cannot but see Gods great wisdom and goodness to admire
it, even in his terrible and strange works toward the children of men; and may
further learn with thankfulness, and without murmuring, to submit to his
Government and will. Yet for all this, the grace of God and the instructions of
the Gospel, do lead us, not to desire the continuance of war and blood to our
own or other Nations or people, any more then the same grace would have
directed David to have desired the continuance of, or the renewing the
Philistines war upon Israel, because God made it an occasion of good to him;
but on the other hand, to desire the welfare of all, and not the woeful day to
any; though sometimes we are to pray for Gods ashaming, confounding and
blasting them in their enterprises, yet that so as may tend to their good* and
to the good of every of them, until any be wholly given up of God, as before we
have noted in our discourse about prayers, and as may be seen in Jer. 17. 16,
18. compared with Psalm. 83. 15, 16, 17. And so we may and are to desire with
submission to his will, for peace in our days and in our land, and more
especially where his name is, and with other Nations also; though happily when
we have it, that which is for our welfare, may become a snare through men's
abuse of it, as before; yet seeing the thing is good in it self, and a mercy to
good ends given, it is therefore to be desired and pursued by us, though with
submission to his Appointment and Government; and Christian Magistrates or
Rulers, not to be provoked or stirred up to war with any other Nation or
People, when they may have peace with them on any honest and just terms; but
rather counseled by the wisdom of God: In the multitude of people is the Kings
honor, but the want of people is the destruction of the Prince: he that is slow
to anger is of great understanding, he is an imitator of God, and like to him,
to which his grace that brings salvation to all men, now especially obliges
since the appearance or coming forth of it by Jesus Christ: For the Son of man
came not to destroy m^ns lives, but to save them, Luke 9. 56. but he that is
hasty of Spirit, exalts folly, Prove. 14. 28, 29. The Scriptures written
aforetime, are written for our instruction, on whom the ends of the World are
come; and so these general Gospel-instructions proper to our time, and so
proper, that though these battles and wars of the latter days be of the Lords
permission, and accomplishments of his word, and he brings much good out of
them and gives gracious warning to all people in them, intending much good to
the survivers by them; yet seeing they are in themselves evil things, he has
not appointed his people to be desirers and hastners of them, or delighters in
them; but it may be and is truly said by himself of the battles of the latter
days. Rev. 16. 13, 14. John saw three unclean spirits like frogs, come out of
the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the
mouth of the false Prophet: (there are evil instruments enough to be employed in
such services, good Angels need not, (1 Kings 22. 19, 20, 22.) For they are the
Spirits of Devils working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth,
and of the whole World, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty.

Yet for further answer to the apprehensions forementioned, we might here add,
That we do also read of a consumption determined upon the whole earth, in which
as the conclusion and putting an end to all battles of the Warrior, Gods anger
shall cease in the perfect destruction and conquest of all the Enemies of
Christ and his people, that they shall never rise or get head again to their
disturbance; and therefore compared to that of Midian, Judges 8. 28. and to
that of Egypt at the Red Sea, Isa. 10. 23, 25, 26, 27. And that in this all the
Saints, as children of the Resurrection coming with the Lord at his second
appearing, shall have share, and be as his Army, Isa. 24. 1, 19, 23. with Rev.
19. 11, 12, to the end. Zech. 9. 9, 10, 11, 12, 17. and 14. 5. This honor have
all his Saints, (not only some in one age) To bind their Kings in chains, and
their Nobles in fetters of iron: to execute on them the judgment written,
Psalm. 149. 5, 9. and so that Jer. 51. may be applied either to him, the Lord,
Captain and Leader, the portion of Jacob, the Former of all things, the rod of
his inheritance, the Lord of Hosts, that he is Gods Battel-Axe, with which he
will break in pieces the Nations, etc. and so he is in these beginnings of
breakings, in which he makes use of them as instruments one against another; or
it may be applied to them that are his Israel, though that word Israel is not
in the text, but put in by the Translators, because found in another place in a
like expression concerning them, Jer. 10. 16. and so they shall all, as Saints
and children of the Resurrection, have share with him, when he comes himself to
make a full end: but this here may seem more peculiarly applied to his person,
as may appear by comparing verse. 18, 19. with Isa. 41. 1, 28, 29. and chap. 42.
1, etc. and 49. 3, 7. Yet as before, all his Saints, even them that have made a
Covenant with him by sacrifice, that are reconciled to God by Jesus Christ,
shall be gathered together to the conclusion of all, in that last and great day
of battle, when our God shall come, and shall not keep silence, a fire shall
devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him: when he
shall call to the Heavens from above, and to the Earth, that he may judge his
people, Psalm. 50. 3, 4, 5. This shall be different from every Battle of the
Warrior, it shall be a perfect conquest, and breaking off the yoke, a
consumption and destruction of the Enemy, of all the persons of the maliciously
wicked and ungodly, and of all their power, by a wonderful mighty hand of God,
in the glorious appearance of Jesus Christ, and the children of the
Resurrection with him, by a two-edged Sword proceeding out of their mouth, the
quarrel of his covenant, the vengeance of his Gospel poured out in fury on the
head of the wicked, in all strange and wonderful judgments meeting together,
with burning, and fuel of fire, to make an utter consumption: and yet all this
without the use of material Weapons on their part, or any loss or detriment to
them; whereas every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, a cry on
both sides, whoever gets the Victory, and with garments rolled in blood, but
this shall be with burning and fuel of fire: for behold, the Lord will come
with fire, and his Charets like a Whirlwind, to render his anger with fury,
and his rebukes with flames of fire: for by fire and by his sword, will the
Lord plead with all flesh and the slain of the Lord shall be many, Isa. 66. 15,
16. For now the Government shall be laid upon his shoulders, that Son born to
us, Isa. 9. 4, 5, 6, 7. This could not be done before, while the Government was
on any of the servants; He looked and behold there was no man. Then his own arm
brought him salvation, etc. Isa. 59. 16, 21. and 63. 4, 5. 6, 7. compare also
Isa. 34. 1, 6, etc. to the end. and Isa. 35. total. with 2 Pet. 3. 10, 12. It Is
that day of the Lord when he shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels, when he shall apear the second time without sin to the salvation of all
that look for him, that shall burn as an oven, and that shall be herein also
different from all the battles of the warriour^ then all the proud and all that
do wickedly shall be as stubble, they shall none of them be left for
instruments in accomplishing these last sweeping desolations, as now they are
in the beginnings, neither shall any of the Saints or Righteous perish in them,
or be as fuel to that full coming forth of the fire of his jealousy, as they
may and do many of them partake of these lesser judgments, and fall among the
rest in them; but then even they shall return again with songs of deliverance,
and this shall then be the portion of their cup, to the participation of which,
there shall be none wanting, They shall tread down the wicked, for they shall
be ashes under the soles of their feet, in that day when I shall do this, says
the Lord of Hosts. We may say here, Let us stablish our hearts, and in patience
possess our souls in the hope of that day: for he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry longer then the appointed time; yea, for the Elects sake the
Lord will shorten the evil days. In the remainder of which, that we may stand,
as God counseled his people in that Mal. 3. To remember the law of Moses his
servant with the Statutes and Judgments: assuring them they had yet a time to
wait for the accomplishment of these promises; and that before the coming of
this great and notable day of the Lord, he would send them Elijah, etc. which
had a first fruits of fulfilling in John Baptist, sent in the Spirit and Power
of Elijah; but must be yet more clearly and fully accomplished to that people,
(at least) according to the expressions, a little before that second and
glorious appearing of Christ, To turn the hearts of the children to the
fathers: so our Savior as well says, Elias verily comes first, yea, must
first come: as that he was then already come, and that was he, if they would
receive him: (namely, John Baptist) which indeed had they, and been turned to
the Lord by him, there had not been that need for another accomplishment of
that Prophecy for that work: but they rejected him and the Lord too. Therefore
still to do that work, Elias must verily first come. Now I say, As the Lord
counseled them in the mean time, and till that first appearance of Christ,
before which that promise had its first fulfilling, To remember the law of
Moses his servant, so we are further counseled, as in the prophecy, Hab. 2.
2, 4. That we may be strengthened to run with patience, the race set before us;
to read the vision where it is now more plainly written, looking unto Jesus:
etc. For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds; ye have not yet resisted
unto blood, striving against sin, Heb. 12. 1, 4. Be but patient a while, the
coming of the Lord draws nigh; then you shall not need to run back to Moses,
nor to be under a Law so suitable to servitude, bondage and misery: But the Law
shall go forth out of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, to judge
the Nations; for he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong Nations
afar off: and they shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears
into Pruning-hookes and the Nations shall learn war no more: then shall the
Earth be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea, Isa.
2. 1, 4. Mic. 4. 1, 4. Isa. 11. Then for all your shame you shall have double
glory, in your own land; you shall rejoice in your portion, etc. Isa. 61. We
may not further enlarge to this, only this word: Notwithstanding the day of
the Lord draws nigh, and there is such full demonstration of it in the Gospel,
and of the blessed hope then, that were it minded, were enough to stablish the
hearts of believers in their patient waiting for the coming of the Lord, even
as the husbandman waits and has long patience for the precious fruit of the
earth: yet still we find it needful, and now as much as ever, to press the
Apostles exhortation, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2. The Apostle having instructed them,
chap. 1, 6, 7, etc. That it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you that are troubled rest with
us, not without us, or before us: those of us, or of our body, that survive,
must not prevent them of us that sleep; nor shall any one prevent another, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14, 16, etc. But they shall come together to the installing and
sitting down in that rest, which yet remains for all the people of God, Heb.
4. 9. though the high-spirited Corinthians would have been fancying and
concluding a reigning as as Kings without the Apostles, and the residue of
their brethren: but the Apostle says, He was sure if the time were come that
any of them should reign as Saints, then they also should reign with them. But
when will this righteousness of God come forth, in recompencing tribulation to
them that trouble us, and to all that are and have been troubled for him rest
together? it follows, When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with
his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence^ of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power: when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, etc. till then,
they shall none of them in these bodies sit down, nor shall their Righteousness
shine forth till he that shall come do come; nor indeed will there be any long
settling of the Kingdom or Glory upon any sort of men, (which may be a comfort
to you) nothing but overturn, overturn, overturn, till he whose right it is do
come, and God will give it him, Ezekiel. 21. 26, 27. nor till then is it your
time, as Saints, to wish for, or execute vengeance on them that as such, and
for his names sake do trouble you, Rejoice not now when thy enemy falls,
neither let thine heart be glad when he stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and it
displease him, etc. Prove. 24. 17, 18. but take the counsel following in the 19,
20, and 21. verses. compared with Romans 12. 18, 19, 20, 21. and chap. 13. 1, etc.

The Apostle, I say, having thus instructed them in the first chapter, makes
use of these two things there discoursed of, namely, The glorious appearing or
coming of our Lord, and Our being gathered together unto him, as the ground of
his Argument, or as motives for the pressing such an exhorcation by way of
usefulness. Now we beseech you brethren by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or
be troubled neither by spirit, (pretense of revelation) nor by word or letter
as from the Apostles (by any doctrine, though pretended to be drawn from their
writings) as there will be enough in these latter days, pretending to be seers
of the visions of the times, that will pervert things hard to be understood, to
make them speak out their apprehensions; the Vision of all, as plainly
declared, being to them, and so rendered by them to others, as a sealed Book.
But we are to know, That the Apostles have not intended in any of their
writings, telling us that the day is nigh, and the like, to signify any such
thing to us, as that the day of the Lord is otherwise at hand, then according
to the instructions in the first chapter. That day of rendering vegeance on
them that trouble us, and rest to the troubled, is not so at hand, as to be
made in this day, as some said of the Resurrection; or to come unto any before
the Lord be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, and we be all gathered
together unto him: which two things to be accomplished together, the Apostle
sets before us here by way of Argument or Motive, for the pressing his
exhortation; signifying to us, that there is so much sweetness and consolation
to us in them, there being such glory and excellency in the things themselves,
the glorious appearance of the Lord in that personal body glorified in our
nature, in which he suffered for us, and has through sufferings obtained
eternal Redemption, the faith of which (though yet we see him not with bodily
eyes, nor do enjoy such personal fellowship with him) leads even now to rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory; what will it be then to enjoy his
personal presence, and immediate fellowship with him and the Father, and the
holy Spirit, and so with him in his glory, (not in his weakness or abasement,
as sometimes some did, but) in that glory, which he now actually possesses in
our nature, in his own personal body for us, even in the glory of his Father,
and with his holy Angels, and we by that appearance to be changed even in our
vile bodies, into the likeness of his glorious body, and so made capable of
such sight of him as he is, and fellowship with him, and to be all gathered
together? not only Moses and Elias, but all that sleep in Jesus will God bring
with him: surely we shall have good cause to say, Let us abide here, for this
is our rest to which we were called by the Gospel; yea, and we shall be ever
together with the Lord. Such, I say, is the excellency in the things
themselves, as well as also there is every way so much suitable instruction to
instruct us, and give us reason to the matter of the exhortation, (of which we
may not here particularly treat) that the consideration thereof may and will
frame us to willingness, to wait till then patiently for our sitting down, and
for the accomplishment of the Prophesies and Promises, as to the reward of all
our service and suffering for him; yea, not to part with that hope for any
fancy, or shadow, or whatever we are capable of enjoying in this day: Therefore
comfort one another with these words, (says this Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14, 17.)
and here by these things he thus earnestly admonishes and beseeches them as
before: and for further instruction about it, as well as especially to give us
a reason why he so earnestly beseeches them, he further says, Let no man
deceive you by any means, for there shall be a great falling away first, and
the man of sin revealed, etc. as if he should say, as our Savior does,
Therefore I so earnestly admonish you to take heed, that no man by any means
deceive you, because the latter days will be so perilous through the abounding
of the mystery of iniquity, under high forms and pretenses of godliness, that
verily there will many be deceived by them; yea, such will be the tribulations
of diverse sorts, though that the most eminent, trying, and dangerous, that if
those evil days (which will be by most pretending godliness, accounted
glorious days) should not be shortened, no flesh could be saved; but for the
elects sake they shall: and this understanding of the latter instruction as a
reason of the Apostles earnestness in pressing the admonition as aforesaid, is
suitable, not only to that of our Savior forementioned, but likewise to other
Scriptures, which (to mention the sum of many) do therefore exhort and beseech
us with much earnestness, to redeem the time, and improve all present
opportunities and advantages, for being well furnished with wisdom in the
knowledge of him, and so with the Armor of God on the right hand and on the
left, to be therefore sober and vigilant, and watch unto prayer, because the
days are evil, and like to be perilous still, as they grow nigher the end, in
temptations tending to the deceiving and corrupting the believer from the
simplicity that is in Jesus, and patient waiting for his coming; and because
Satan's rage is greater, as his time waxes shorther, Ephesians. 5. 14, 16, 18. and 6.
10, 16. 1 Pet. 5. 8. with Rev. 12. 12. 2 Timothy 3. and 4. 2 Pet. 1. 12, 16. and
2, 1, 2. If any do think, that we have not a great, or the greatest part of
that defection, or the overspreading of the spirit of Antichrist, the mystery
of iniquity there especially spoken of, yet behind, though it does now already
begin to reveal it self, and not only secretly to work, (as then) yet in
respect of the more full revelation of him, and overspreading of abomination by
him, even to the further making desolate the holy place, (as before in his body
or grosser part, to the desolating the outward Court) as among us Gentiles to
be more abundantly and fully verified. If any (I say) to this do think or say,
Not so; I could be glad to say, Amen, if I could find it suitable to the
instructions and fore-warnings of the Gospel: however, we may pray the Lord in
mercy to cut short those days, for methinks the beginnings of them begin
shrewdly to make desolate; what will be the issue, especially if Christ ans
will not mind timely admonitions, but put far away the evil day? certainly
these warnings are given, that we may take heed that no man deceive us. And
were the premises considered, as it would be profitable to all Christians, so
particularly to Christian Magistrates, for their help and direction, in
observing the forementioned counsels in every part of them; for were not the
heart haughty* or the eyes lofty, lifted up and transported with the
apprehensions and desires of setting Christ on his Throne, which is a thing
done already by the Father; or of laying the whole administration of Government
upon his shoulders, which is a thing they are wholly incapable of, neither is
it required of them, or like things: they would then be contented, and better
qualified to exercise themselves in things within their compass, and might do
many things for the good of the Nation and People under their Authority, which
either they slight and neglect as things too mean, or too much beneath their
spirits and apprehensions, as to the work they aim at and propose to
themselves; or else they do refuse whatever appearance of legality and justice
might be in it, because it seems to cross or clash against such their
apprehensions and proposals to themselves of what they have to do. I shall say
no more to this, nor to this point; In which we have showed what those things
are in general, that being equally observed and done by those in Authority,
will tend much to the believers enlargement and futherance in leading a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

4. We come now to the fourth and last consideration: What that is, that will
especially furnish them to these things, and so is especially to be desired for
them, and that is wisdom in the knowledge of God in Christ, as declared in the
Gospel, as now come forth to us, to have the heart well seasoned with the
believing, apprehension, and tastes of the sweetness of the infinite
graciousness of God to man-ward, as revealed in the face of Christ bringing
salvation to all men, according to the manifestation and capacity afforded us.
This is that one thing of absolute necessity to us all, without which our souls
cannot be good, or reconciled to God, Prove. 19. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 22. nor can we
rightly worship God, or serve him acceptably and profitably in our generation:
Wherefore let us hold fast grace, (Heb. 12. 28.) whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fear. Hence the Apostle to Titus exhorting
all believers, and in the last place servants, to mind as the main end of
their whole conversation, The adorning the doctrine of our God and Savior in
all things; he propounds to them, to be diligently heeded for their instruction
and direction hereto, The grace of God that brings salvation to all men, as it
has now appeared, teaching us more fully and plainly then ever in any former
appearance, (which is suitable to that Heb. 12. 17, 18, 22, 25, 28.) that
denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously
and godly in this present w^orld, looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearance of the mighty God our Savior, etc. And as here
particularly Servants are directed to this, as that which will furnish them to
their suitable demeanor; So the same thing in sum is propounded to Masters, as
a direction to that which may furnish them to their suitable demeanor to their
servants, Ephesians. 6. after he has given particular instructions to servants,
suitable to those in Titus; and then added this general one, to furnish them to
the observance of the particulars, That they do that which they do in
singleness of heart as unto Christ: considering, how his grace both in that
which he has done for them, and in the hope set before them by him in the
Gospel, teaches them to demean themselves, as in obedience and submission to
him that has ordered and appointed them to such service: Then he further
adds, And ye masters do ye the same things to them: that cannot be with
reference to the particulars first mentioned; they are not as servants to obey
their servants, as their servants them: but with reference to the general
instruction added which he had last mentioned, in which is the key of knowledge
for opening the rest: Do ye the same things to them: that is, walk ye by the
same rule, guide and direction, as servants unto Christ in your place,
considering you have a Master in heaven, as Col. 4. 1. let the consideration of
him, his infinite wisdom, goodness, power, etc. as in Christ exercised and
manifested toward, and over you and them, and the reward after, be ever with
you for your direction. And what is thus applied in the case of Masters and
Servants, may in a suitable sense be applied in the case of more public Rulers
and Ruled, as we have fore-noted from the Apostle Peter his comparing and
joining them together, 1 Pet. 2. and indeed, this was in all former ages looked
upon by Gods Servants, as the only great thing in order to all other things
needful to be desired for Kings and by them, as in Solomon, Give therefore thy
servant an understanding or hearing heart to judge thy people, that I may
discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so a great
people? And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked wisdom, 1 Kings
3. 8, 9, 12. and what wisdom, David shows, even wisdom in the knowledge of him
the God of his Fathers, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. The great reason that the foundations
of the earth are so out of course, is, because the Rulers of it walk on (in all
their counsels and actings) in darkness, without the light and direction of
that true light of the knowledge of the glory of God as now manifested in the
face of Jesus, which they know not, neither will they understand, Psalm. 82. 5.

Herein they should be directed in all matters to a right discerning between
good and bad, and so how they ought to be a terror to evil works, and for the
praise and encouragement of them that do well, and to administer justice
equally: they should by it be enabled to scatter the wicked with their eye* and
bring the wheel over them, being through it made quick-sighted, rightly to
discern and judge them; and so directed by knowledge to demean themselves
toward them: for by mercy and truth the King is preserved; which mercy and
truth are only discerned in one, or agreeing in Jesus Christ, in whom they are
met together for us, and do thence spring jointly forth in the streams and
virtues of them, to the Kings preservation; and in the light, instructions and
teachings of them, to his direction, and so also for his preservation in the
way, And so by mercy is his throne upholden, Prove. 20. 8, 26, 28. These things
also belong to the wise; it is good not to have respect of persons in judgment,
etc. Prove. 24. 23. The Prince that wants understanding is also a great
oppressor: but he that hates covetousness, shall prolong his days, Prove. 27.
16. David setting Gods loving kindeness before his eyes, and walking by the
light and in the guidance and direction of his truth, Psalm. 26. 3. was thereby
preserved from those evils mentioned in the following part of that Psalm, that
were found in such as did not understand or seek after God, but put away his
fear before their eyes, did not seek to his name, or behold his face in
righteousness, even in his Son, but did hate and turn away their ears from
faithful reprovers, that speak uprightly: compare Psalm. 36. 1, 3. and 14. 1, 4.
with Psalm. 24. 4, 6. Isa. 33. 6, 15. Amos 5. 4, 5, 6, 12. and so for making
war, or peace with any Nation. This wisdom in the knowledge of him will direct
and frame the heart to imitate him, in not seeking the destruction of men's
lives, but to save them, Luke 9. 51, 56. and as they know more of that grace of
God in Christ, then other Princes or States, with whom they have to do, so to
demean themselves in more humility, and not to quarrel or contend for
punctilio's of honor, or for revenge of injuries, but to be ready to stoop to
lower terms, so as may stand with gracious wisdom and may not tend to the
greater detriment of the Commonwealth, or enslaving the Nation over whom they
are set. This wisdom of God says to such foolish Rulers, as every advantage
they get are lifting up the horn, Do not so, speak not with a stiff neck; for
promotion comes not from the east or west, etc. but God is Judge, he puts
down one, and sets up another. Therefore demean your selves as in the
apprehension, and as imtators of the wisdom, goodness and demeanor of your
great Master in heaven toward you: and so if they be compelled, or by Gods
providence occasionally led to make war, this wisdom in the knowledge of him,
being heeded and had recourse unto, will best direct and guide them in it; and
by it they shall be established, strengthened and successful, Prove. 24. 3, 5 6.
Yea, this is generally true, Were the great love of God to manward, as
appearing in and through Christ, more understood and believingly minded, its
efficacy and usefulness would be to season the hearts of men with charity, and
direct them how to express it, according to their several capacities in their
several places. Therefore says the wisdom of God, Get wisdom, get
understanding, forget it not, neither decline from the words of my mouth;
forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee; love her, and she shall keep
thee. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom; and with all thy
getting, get understanding: See further in that Prove. 4. 5, 6, 7 12 13. and 2.
1, 9 10. with chap. 6. 20, 21, 24. And ye Kings and Rulers, as you have more
particular need of its direction and helpfulness in your peculiar and weighty
employments, Be wise now therefore Oye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the
earth, etc. And that you may be so, improve all advantages put in your hand to
that purpose; listen diligently, and give earnest need to the still and quiet
voice of the Gospel, in which the spirit and power of God is for your direction
and protection: hearken to those instructions and counsels, by what hand soever
they be brought to you, in which Jesus Christ and the things of him are showed
to you by the Scriptures, as the great things of his Law, to be heeded and had
recourse to continually by you, for your direction and helpfulness in all other
things; and so he glorified or lifted up, according to the Apostles word or
doctrine, (as 1 John 4. 2, 3, 6. John 14. 26. and 16. 13, 14.) which that you
may know, and be well acquainted with, that by no means they may be let pass or
slip away from you, under another and false apprehension of them; Seach the
Scriptures diligently your selves, whether those things be so, (as those Act.
17. 11.) And that you may have more true profit and usefulness of the
Scriptures in your search of them (whose profit, even to the making wise to
salvation in every respect, is best attained and met with, through a
mindefulness and exercise of faith in Christ Jesus the sum of them, according
to the light of instructions, and capacity given us, 2 Timothy 3. 15. that
therefore you may meet with more of the utility of the Scriptures, to the
furnishing you with wisdom in every matter) then the Scribes and Phatisees, or
the scornful Rulers of that people in Jerusalem did, though they were very
Zealous and expert in the Scriptures; take notice of that rock, obstruction or
hinderance, that deprived them of such profit in their search of Scriptures,
that you may avoid it: see John 5. 39, 40. compared with Isa. 28. 12, 14 16.
they did scornfully and wilfully, against evident light and demonstration of
the Spirit in the Scriptures, refuse to come to close with and own Christ, (the
sum of the Scriptures testimony) as therein testified: yea, they were so
scornful, that though God had appointed and directed them to have their
recourse to that foundation laid in Sion, the life in Christ from the
beginning, according to the declarations thereof come forth, for their right
understanding and usefulness of all the Law and the Prophets, and so directed
them to that, as the center of all Scriptures, and as that rest wherewith they
might cause the weary to rest, yet they would not, but were scornful, and
conceited of their wisdom, strength and holiness, and therefore took the word
of God in pieces, and presumed to find out the mind of God, and give the
sense of every Scripture, of every Law and Statute by it self, or without such
making use of that way or rule to which they were by God directed: yea, those
great things of his Law, to which they should have brought all other things and
parts thereof, to have been helped in finding out the sense and usefulness of
them, by comparing them with, and understanding them according to the light and
instruction of that key of knowledge; those of all other things were flighted
and put from them, as things of least concernment, accounted strange things,
Hosea. 8. 12. The Vision of all, a sealed Book, Isa. 29. 11. and so they made
the word of the Lord to themselves, Line upon line, precept upon precept, here
a little, and there a little: that so while pretending to be zealous and strict
in observing that rule, yet they in such their walkings or going on fell
backward, were broken, snared and taken: and for their scornfulness, God
threatened to send or permit to them such kind of teachers, Isa. 28. 10, 11.
and leave them to such blindeness, as Mat. 13. 11, 12, 15. Take heed therefore
of that great evil, and seek to be well furnished with understanding in that
key of knowledge, the testimony of Jesus, and to learn skill to use it, as by it
you are taught: refuse not the reproofs of instruction, that by this wisdom of
God, Jesus Christ, as declared in the Gospel, are brought to you: better it is
for you, now to fall down under those bands, and not to break those cords, but
suffer them to have their operation, to the humbling you before him, then to
make your selves of that number that shall after be bound in everlasting chains
and fetters by that Word and Gospel, the reproofs of which were proudly
rejected by them, and by that despised people, that were instruments sent now
to persuade them.

You have much need of wisdom in the knowledge of Christ, and of much skill to
make use of it, that you may put on the consideration of the Lord Jesus Christ,
as to every matter. It Is true, every wise and gracious man is not meet, nor
every way furnished to be a Governor in this present World: and it is as true,
that an unwise man in the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, an ungracious man,
will not be a just Ruler, or good Magistrate. He that rules over men, must be
just, ruling in the fear of God: and so he shall be as the clear shining after
rain, and as the light of the morning when the Sun rises* even a morning
without Clouds, 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4, 5. Now though David's house be not so with God,
this was not found perfectly in him, or Solomon; and if not in them, then in no
mortal man (whose breath is in his nostrils) to be expected, but it shall be
fully verified and found true only in that Son of David, The sure mercies of
David; concerning whom, and of the everlasting righteous and peaceable Kingdom
in and by him, the everlasting Covenant was made with David, (as comparing with
this, Isa. 55. 3, 4. with Acts 13. 34.) and in this was all his desire and
salvation, though in this day he received it not: but shall as certainly when
it comes, as they that then survive. Though this is true, I say, That the truth
of this will be only perfectly found in him, at whom David also had an
especial eye; yet this also is true, That the way for Rulers now to be directed
and strengthened to rule justly, and so as they may be a refreshing and mercy
to the Nations over whom they are set, accorto such a measure as they are
capable, is, to set the fear of God before their eyes, and rule according to
the light, instructions and guidance thereof. It Is a true saying of the
Preacher, Better is a poor and wise Child, then a King that is never so old
settled in his Kingdom, or in years, or in policy after the wisdom of this
World, or in whatever other considerations besides, that yet is foolish, and
without understanding in the things of Christ, and so knows not the God of his
Fathers, Ecles. 4. 13. This therefore is the main thing to be desired for them:
and their being furnished with it, will tend much to the good of all men, and
particularly to such benefit and enlargement to Gods people under them, as may
be much to the commodity and profit of all men amongst whom they live, and is
therefore so good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, to be desired
for them Who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth.

FINIS.

