Conjectura Cabbalistica. OR, A CONJECTURAL ESSAY OF Interpreting the mind of
Moses, according to a Threefold CABBALA: Viz. Literal, Philosophical, Mystical,
or, Divinely Moral.
By HENRY MORE Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

EXODUS 34. And when Aaron and all the people of Israel saw Moses, behold, the
skin of his face shones and they were afraid to come nigh him.

Wherefore Moses while he spoke unto them, put a veil on his face.

MATTHEW. 10. There is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that
shall not be known.

What I tell you in darkness, speak you in light; and what you hear in the
ear, that preach you on the house-tops.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, and are to be sold by William Morden
Bookseller in Cambridge. 1653.

TO HIS EMINENTLY LEARNED, and truly religious friend, Dr Cudworth, Master of
Clare Hall, and Hebrew Professor in the University of Cambridge.
SIR,
COncerning the choice of the subject matter of my present pains, I have, I
think, spoke enough in the ensuing Preface. Concerning the choice of my Patron,
I shall say no more, then that the sole inducement thereto, was his singular
Learning and Piety. The former of which, is so conspicuous to the world, that
it is universally acknowledged of all; and for the latter, there is none that
can be ignorant thereof, who has ever had the happiness, though but in a
smaller measure, of his more free and intimate converse. As for my own part, I
cannot but publicly profess, I never met with any yet so truly and becomingly
religious, where the right knowledge of God and Christ bears the enlightened
mind so even, that it is as far removed from Superstition as Irreligion it
self. And my present Labors cannot find better welcome or more judicious
acceptance with any, then with such as these. For such free and unprejudiced
spirits will neither antiquate Truth for the oldnesse of the Notion, nor slight
her for looking young, or bearing the face of Novelty. Besides, there are none
that can be better assured of the sincerity and efficacy of my present Design.
For as many as are born of the Spirit, and are not mere sons of the Letter,
know very well how much the more inward and mysterious meaning of the Text
makes for the reverence of the holy Scripture, and advantage of Godliness,
when as the urging of the bare literal sense, has either made or confirmed many
an Atheist. And assuredly those men see very little in the affairs of Religion,
that do not plainly discover, that it is the Atheists highest interest, to have
it taken for granted, that there is no spiritual meaning, either in Scripture
or Sacrament, that extends further then the mere Grammatical sense in the one,
or the sensible, gross, external performance in the other. As for example,
That to be regenerated, and become a true and real Christian, is nothing else,
but to receive the outward Baptism of visible water: And, that the Mosaical
Philosophy concerning God, and the nature of things, is none other, then that
which most obviously offers it self in the mere letter of Moses. Which if the
Atheist could have fully granted to him on all sides, and get but this in also
to the bargain, That there is no knowledge of God, but what Moses his Text set
on foot in the world, or what is Traditional, he cannot but think, that
Religion in this dress, is so empty, exceptionable, and contemptible, that it
is but just with as many as are not mere fools, to look upon it as some
melancholic conceit, or cunning fiction brought into the world, to awe the
simpler sort, but behind the hangings to be freely laughed at, and derided by
those that are more wise; And that it were an easy thing in a short time to
raze the memory of it out of the minds of men, it having so little root in the
humane faculties. Which for my own part I think as hopeful, as that posterity
will be born without eyes and ears, and lose the use of speech. For I think the
knowledge of God, and a sense of Religion is as natural and essential to
mankind, as any other property in them whatsoever: And that the generations of
men shall as soon become utterly irrational, as plainly irreligious. Which, I
think, my late Treatise against Atheism will make good to any one, that with
care and judgment will peruse it.

Nor does it at all follow, because a truth is delivered by way of Tradition,
that it is unconcludable by Reason. For I do not know any one Theorem in all
Natural Philosophy, that has more sufficient reasons for it, then the motion of
the Earth, which notwithstanding is part of the Philosophic Cabbala or
Tradition of Moses, as I shall plainly show in its due place. So likewise for
the prae-existency of the Soul, which seems to have been part of the same
Tradition, it is abundantly consentaneous to Reason: And as we can give a
genuine account of all those seeming irregularities of motion in the Planets,
supposing, they and the Earth move round about the Sun: so we may open the
causes of all those astonishing Paradoxes of Providence, from this other
Hypothesis, and show that there is nothing here unsuitable to the precious
Attributes of God, if we could place the eye of our understanding in that
Center of all free motions, that steady eternal Good, and were not our selves
carried aloof off from him, amongst other wandering Planets, (as S. Jude calls
them) that at several distances play about him, and yet all of them in some
measure or other, not only pretending to him, but whether they pretend or not,
really receiving something from him. For of this First, is all, both Wisdom,
Pleasure, and Power. But it is enough to have but hinted these things briefly
and enigmatically, the wrath and ignorance of all Ages receiving the most
generous Truths, with the greatest offense.

But for my own part, I know no reason but that all wel-willers to Truth and
Godliness, should heartily thank me for my present Cabbalistical Enterprise, I
having so plainly therein vindicated the holy Mystery of the Trinity from being
(as a very bold Sect would have it) a mere Pagan invention. For it is plainly
shown here, that it is from Moses originally, not from Pythagoras, or Plato.
And seeing that Christ is nothing but Moses unveiled, I think it was a special
act of Providence that this hidden Cabbala came so seasonably to the knowledge
of the Gentiles, that it might aforehand fit them for the easier entertainment
of the whole Mystery of Christianity, when in the fullness of time it should be
more clearly revealed unto the world.

Besides this, we have also shown, That according to Moses his Philosophy, the
soul is secure both from death, and from sleep after death, which those drowsy
Nodders over the letter of the Scripture have very oscitantly collected, and
yet as boldly afterward maintained, pretending that the contrary, is more
Platonical, then Christian, or Scriptural.

Wherefore my design being so pious as it proves, I could do nothing more fit
then to make choice of so true a lover of Piety as your self for a Patron of my
present Labors. Especially you being so well able to do the most proper office
of a Patron; to defend the truth that is presented to you in them, and to make
up out of your rich Treasury of Learning, what our Penury could not reach to,
or Inadvertency may have omitted. And truly, if I may not hope this from you, I
know not whence to expect it. For I do not know where to meet with any so
universally and fully accomplished in all parts of Learning as your self, as
well in the Oriental Tongues and History, as in all the choicest kinds of
Philosophy; Any one of which Acquisitions is enough to fill, if not swell, an
ordinary man with great conceit and pride, when as it is your sole privilege,
to have them all, and yet not to take upon you, nor to be any thing more
imperious, or censorious of others, then they ought to be that know the least.

These were the true considerations that directed me in the Dedication of this
Book; Which if you accordingly please to take into your favorable Patronage,
and accept as a Monument or Remembrance of our mutual friendship, you shall
much oblige

Your affectionate friend and servant H. MORE.

THE PREFACE to the READER.
What is meant by the term Cabbala, and how warrantably the literal Exposition
of the Text may be so called. That dispensable speculations are best propounded
in a Skeptical manner. A clear description of the nature and dignity of Reason,
and what the divine Logos is. The general probabilities of the truth of this
present Cabbala. The design of the Author in publishing of it.

READER,
I Present thee here with a triple Interpretation of the three first Chapters
of Genesis, which in my Title Page I have termed a threefold Cabbala;
concerning which, for thy better direction and satisfaction, I hold it not
amiss to speak some few things by way of Preface, such as thou thy self in all
likelihood would be forward to ask of me. As; why, for example, I call this
Interpretation of mine a Cabbala, and from whom I received it; what may be the
prohabilities of the truth of it; and what my purpose is in publishing of it.

To the first I answer; That the Jewish Cabbala is conceived to be a
Traditional Doctrine or Exposition of the Pentateuch which Moses received from
the mouth of God, while he was on the Mount with him. And this sense or
interpretation of the Law or Pentateuch, as it is a doctrine received by Moses
first, and then from him by Joshua, and from Joshua by the seventy Elders, and
so on, it was called Cabbala from (...) kibbel to receive: But as it was
delivered as well as received, it was also called Massora, which signifies a
Tradition; though this latter more properly respects that Critical and
Grammatical skill of the Learned among the Jews, and therefore was profitable
for the explaining the literal sense as well as that more mysterious meaning of
the Text where it was intended. Whence without any boldness or abuse of the
word I may call the Literal interpretation which I have light upon Cabbala, as
well as the Philosophical or Moral; the literal sense it self being not so
plain and determinate, but that it may seem to require some Traditional
Doctrine or Exposition to settle it, as well as those other senses that are
more mystical.

And therefore I thought fit to call this threefold interpretation that I have
hit upon, Cabbala's, as if I had indeed light upon the true Cabbala of Moses in
all the three senses of the Text, such as might have become his own mouth to
have uttered for the instruction of a willing and well prepared Disciple. And
therefore for the greater comeliness and solemnity of the matter, I bring in
Moses speaking his own mind in all the three several Expositions.

And yet I call the whole Interpretation but a Conjecture, having no desire to
seem more definitively wise then others can bear or approve of. For though in
such things as are necessary and essential to the happiness of a man, as the
belief that there is a God, and the like; it is not sufficient for a man only
to bring undeniable reasons for what he would prove, but also to profess
plainly and dogmatically, that himself gives full assent to the conclusion he
has demonstrated: So that those that do not so well understand the power of
reason, may notwithstanding thereby be encouraged to be of the same faith with
them that do, it being of so great consequence to them to believe the thing
propounded: Yet I conceive that Speculative and Dispensable Truths a man not
only may, but ought rather to propound them Sceptically to the world, there
being more prudence and modesty in offering the strongest arguments he can
without dogmatizing at all, or seeming to dote upon the conclusion, or more
earnestly to affect the winning of Proselytes to his own opinion. For where the
force of the arguments is perceived, assent will naturally follow according to
the proportion of the discovery of the force of the arguments. And an assent to
opinions merely speculative, without the reasons of them, is neither any
pleasure nor accomplishment of a rational creature.

To your second demand, I answer; That though I call this Interpretation of
mine Cabbala, yet I must confess I received it neither from Man nor Angel. Nor
came it to me by divine Inspiration, unless you will be so wise as to call the
seasonable suggestions of that divine Life and Sense that vigorously resides in
the Rational Spirit of free and well meaning Christians, by the name of
Inspiration. But such Inspiration as this is no distracter from, but an
accomplisher and an enlarger of humane faculties. And I may add, that this is
the great mystery of Christianity, that we are called to partake of, viz. The
perfecting of the humane nature by participation of the divine. Which cannot be
understood so properly of this gross flesh and external senses, as of the
inward humanity, viz. our Intellect, Reason, and Fancy. But to exclude the use
of Reason in the search of divine truth, is no dictate of the Spirit* but of
headstrong Melancholy and blind Enthusiasme, that religious frenzy men run
into, by lying passive for the reception of such impresses as have no
proportion with their faculties. Which mistake and irregularity, if they can
once away with, they put themselves in a posture of promiscuously admitting any
thing, and so in due time of growing either moped or mad, and under pretense of
being highly Christians, (the right mystery whereof they understand not) of
working themselves lower then the lowest of men.

But for mine own part, Reason seems to me to be so far from being any
contemptible Principle in man, that it must be acknowledged in some sort to be
in God himself. For what is the divine wisdom, but that steady comprehension
of the Ideas of all things, with their mutual respects one to another,
congruities and incongruities, dependences and independences; which respects do
necessarily arise from the natures of the Ideas themselves, both which the
divine Intellect looks through at once, discerning thus the order and coherence
of all things. And what is this but Ratio stabilis, a kind of steady and
immovable reason discovering the connection of all things at once? But that in
us is Ratio mobilis, or reason in evolution, we being able to apprehend things
only in a successive manner one after another. But so many as we can
comprehend at a time, while we plainly perceive and carefully view their Ideas,
we know how well they fit, or how much they disagree one with another, and so
prove or disprove one thing by another; which is really a participation of that
divine reason in God, and is a true and faithful principle in man, when it is
perfected and polished by the holy Spirit. But before, very earthly and
obscure, especially in spiritual things.

But now seeing the Logos or steady comprehensive wisdom of God, in which all
Ideas and their respects are contained, is but universal stable reason, how can
there be any pretense of being so highly inspired as to be blown above reason
it self, unless men will fancy themselves wiser then God, or their
understandings above the natures and reasons of things themselves.

Wherefore to frame a brief answer to your second demand; I say, this threefold
Cabbala you enquire after, is the dictate of the free reason of my mind*
heedfully considering the written Text of Moses, and carefully canvasing the
Expositions of such Interpreters as are ordinarily to be had upon him. And I
know nothing to the contrary, but that I have been so successeful as to have
light upon the old true Cabbala indeed.

Of which in the third place I will set down some general probabilities,
referring you for the rest to the Defense of the Cabbala's themselves, and the
Introduction thereunto.

And first that the Literal Cabbala is true, it is no contemptible argument, in
that it is carried on so evenly and consistently one part with another, every
thing also being represented so accommodately to the capacity of the people,
and so advantageously for the keeping of their minds in the fear of God, and
obedience to his law, as shall be particularly shown in the Defense of that
Cabbala. So that according to the sense of this Literal Cabbala, Moses is
discovered to be a man of the highest Political accomplishments, and true and
warrantable prudence that may be.

Nor is he to fall short in Philosophy; And therefore the Philosophical Cabbala
contains the noblest Truths, as well Theological as Natural, that the mind of
man can entertain her self with; Insomuch that Moses seems to have been
aforehand, and prevented the subtilest and abstrusest inventions of the
choicest Philosophers that ever appeared after him to this very day. And
further presumption of the truth of this Philosophical Cabbala is; that the
grand mysteries therein contained are most-what the same that those two
eximious Philosophers Pythagoras and Plato brought out of Egypt, and the parts
of Asia into Europe. And it is generally acknowledged by Christians, that they
both had their Philosophy from Moses. And Numenius the Platonist speaks out
plainly concerning his Master; What is Plato but Moses Atticus? And for
Pythagoras it is a thing incredible that he and his followers should make such
a deal of do with the mystery of Numbers, had he not been favored with a
sight of Moses his Creation of the world in six days, and had the Philosophic
Cabbala thereof communicated to him, which mainly consists in Numbers, as I
shall in the Defense of this Cabbala more particularly declare.

And the Pythagoreans oath swearing by him that taught them the mystery of the
Tetractys, or the number Four, what a ridiculous thing had it been if it had
been in reference merely to dry Numbers? But it is exceeding probable that
under that mystery of Four, Pythagoras was first himself taught the meaning of
the fourth days work in the Creation, and after delivered it to his disciples.
In which Cabbala of the fourth day Pythagoras was instructed, amongst other
things, that the Earth was a Planet, and moved about the Sun; and it is
notoriously well known, that this was ever the opinion of the Pythagoreans, and
so in all likelihood a part of the Philosophic Cabbala of Moses. Which you
will more fully understand in my Defense thereof.

In brief, all those conclusions that are comprised in the Philosophic
Cabbala, they being such as may best become that sublime and comprehensive
understanding of Moses, and being also so plainly answerable to the Phenomenon
of Nature and Attributes of God, as well as continuedly agreeable without any
force or distortion to the Historical Text; this I conceive is no small
probability that this Cabbala is true: For what can be the properties of the
true Philosophic Cabbala of Moses, if these be not which I have named?

Now for the Moral Cabbala it bears its own evidence with it all the way,
representing Moses as well experienced in all Godliness and Honesty, as he was
skilful in Politics and Philosophy.

And the edifying usefulness of this Mystical or Moral Cabbala, to answer to
your last demand, was no small invitation amongst the rest to publish this
present Exposition. For Moral and Spiritual Truth that so nearly concerns us
being so strangely and unexpectedly, and yet so fitly and appositely
represented in this History of Moses, it will in all likelihood make the more
forcible impresse upon the mind, and more powerfully carry away our affections
toward what is good and warrantable, pre-instructing us with delight concerning
the true way to Virtue and Godliness.

Nor are the Philosophic nor Literal Cabbala's destitute of their honest uses.
For in the former to the amazement of the mere Naturalist (who commonly
conceits that pious men and Patrons of Religion have no ornaments of mind but
scrupulosities about virtue, and melancholy fancies concerning a Deity) Moses
is found to have been Master of the most sublime and generous speculations that
are in all Natural Philosophy: besides that he places the soul of man many
degrees out of the reach of fate and mortality. And by the latter there is a
very charitable provision made for them that are so prone to expect rigid
precepts of Philosophy in Moses his outward Text. For this Literal Cabbala will
steer them off from that toil of endeavoring to make the bare letter speak
consonantly to the true frame of nature: Which while they attempt with more
zeal then knowledge, they both disgrace themselves and wrong Moses. For there
are unalterable and indeleble Idea's and Notions in the mind of man, into
which when we are awakened and apply to the known course and order of nature,
we can no more forsake the use of them then we can the use of our own eyes, nor
misbelieve their dictates no more, nor so much, as we may those of our outward
senses. Wherefore to men recovered into a due command of their reason, and
well-skill'd in the contemplation and experience of the nature of things, to
propound to them such kind of Mosaical Philosophy, as the boldness and
superstition of some has adventured to do for want of a right Literal Cabbala
to guide them, is as much as in them lies, to hazard the making not only of
Moses, but of Religion it self contemptible and ridiculous.

Whence it is apparent enough, I think, to what good purpose it is thus
carefully to distinguish betwixt the Literal and Philosophic Cabbala, and so
plainly and fully to set out the sense of either, apart by themselves, that
there may hereafter be no confusion or mistake. For beside that the discovering
of these weighty Truths, and high, but irrefutable Paradoxes, in Moses his
Text, does assert Religion, and vindicate her from that vile imputation of
ignorance in Philosophy and the knowledge of things, so does it also justify
those more noble results of free Reason and Philosophy from that vulgar
suspicion of Impiety and Irreligion.

THE LITERAL CABBALA.
CHAP. I.
2 The Earth at first a deep miry abyss, covered over with waters, over which
was a fierce wind, and through all darkness. 3 Day made at first without a
Sun. 6 The Earth a floor, the Heavens a transparent Canopy, or strong Tent over
it, to keep off the upper waters or blew conspicuous Sea from drowning the
world. 8 Why this Tent or Canopy was not said to be good. 9 The lower waters
commanded into one place. 11 Herbs, flowers, and fruits of Trees, before either
Sun or seasons of the year to ripen them. 14 The Sun created and added to the
day, as a peculiar ornament thereof, as the Moon and Stars to the night. 20 The
Creation of fish and fowl. 24 The Creation of beasts and creeping things. 27
Man created in the very shape and figure of God, but yet so, that there were
made females as well as males. 28 How man came to be Lord over the rest of
living creatures. 30 How it came to pass that man feeds on the better sort of
the fruits of the Earth, and the beasts on the worse.

1 WE are to recount to you in this Book the Generations and Genealogies of
the Patriarchs from Adam to Noah, from Noah to Abraham, from Abraham to Joseph,
and to continue the History to our own times. But it will not be amiss first
to inform you concerning the Creation of the world, and the original and
beginning of things; How God made Heaven and Earth, and all the garnishings of
them, before he made Man.

2 But the Earth at first was but a rude and desolate heap, devoid of herbs,
flowers, and trees, and all living creatures, being nothing but a deep miry
abyss, covered all over with waters, and there was a very fierce and strong
wind that blew upon the waters; and what made it still more horrid and
comfortless, there was as yet no light, but all was inveloped with thick
darkness, and bore the face of a pitchy black and wet tempestuous night.

3 But God let not his work lie long in this sad condition, but commanded Light
to appear, and the morning brake out upon the face of the abyss, and wheeled
about from East to West, being clearest in the middle of its course about noon,
and then abating of its brightness toward the West, at last quite
dis-appear'd, after such sort as you may often observe the daylight to break
forth in the East, and ripen to greater clearness, but at last to leave the
sky in the West, no Sun appearing all the while.

4. And God saw the Light, (for it is a thing very visible) that it was good,
and so separated the darkness from the light, that they could not both of them
be upon the face of the earth together, but had their vicissitudes, and took
their turns one after another.

5 And he called the return of the light Day, and the return of darkness he
called Night; and the evening and the morning made up the first natural day.

6. Now after God had made this Basis or floor of this greater edifice of the
world, the Earth, he sets upon the higher parts of the fabric. He commands
therefore that there should be a hollow expansion, firm and transparent, which
by its strength should bear up against the waters which are above, and keep
them from falling upon the earth in excess.

7. And so it became a partition betwixt the upper and the lower waters; so
that by virtue of this hollow Firmament, man might live safe from the violence
of such destructive inundations, as one sheltred in a well-pitch'd tent from
storm of rain: For the danger of these waters is apparent to the eye, this
ceruleous or blewcoloured Sea, that over-spreads the diaphanous Firmament,
being easily discerned through the body thereof; and there are very frequent
and copious showers of rain descend from above, when as there is no water
espied ascending up thither; wherefore it must all come from that upper Sea, if
we do but appeal to our outward sense.

8 Now therefore this diaphanous Canopy or firmly stretched Tent over the whole
pavement of the earth, though I cannot say properly that God saw it was good,
it being indeed of a nature invisible, yet the use of it shows it to be
exceeding good and necessary. And God called the whole capacity of this hollow
Firmament, Heaven. And the evening and the morning made up the second natural
day.

9 And now so sure a Defense being made against the inundation of the upper
waters, that they might not fall upon the earth, God betook himself the next
day to order the lower waters, that as yet were spread over the whole face
thereof; at his command therefore the waters fled into one place, and the dry
land did appear.

10 And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters
he called Sea: and I may now properly say, that God saw that it was good, for
the Sea and the Land are things visible enough, and fit objects of our sight.

11 And forthwith before he made either Sun, Moon* or Stars, did God command
the earth to bring forth grass, herbs and flowers, in their full beauty, and
fruit trees, yiedling delicious fruit, though there had as yet been no
vicissitude of Spring, Summer, or Autumn, nor any approach of the Sun to ripen
and concoct the fruit of those trees. Whence you may easily discern the
foolishness of the idolatrous Nations, that dote so much on second causes, as
that they forget the first, ascribing that to the Sun and Moon, that was caused
at first by the immediate command of God.

12 For at his command it was, before there was either Sun or Moon in the
Firmament, that the earth brought forth grass, and herb yiedling seed after
his kind, and the tree yiedling fruit, whose seed was in it self, after his
kind; so that the several sorts of plants might by this means be conserved
upon the earth. And God saw that it was good.

13 And the evening and the morning made up the third natural day.

14 There have three days past without a Sun, as well as three nights without
either Moon or Stars, as you your selves may happily have observed some number
of Moonless and Starlesse nights, as well as of Sunlesse days, to have
succeeded one another: and so it might have been always, had not God said, Let
there be Lights within the Firmament of heaven, to make a difference betwixt
day and night, and to be peculiar garnishings of either. Let them be also for
signs of weather* for seasons of the year, and also for periods of days,
months, and years.

15 Moreover, let them be as lights hung up within the hollow roof or Firmament
of heaven, to give light to men walking upon the pavement of the earth: and it
was so.

16 And God made two great lights; the greater one, the most glorious and
Princely object we can see by day, to be as it were the Governor and Monarch of
the day; the lesser, the most resplendent and illustrious sight we can cast our
eyes on by night, to be Governesse and Queen of the night. And he made, though
for their smalnesse they be not so considerable, the Stars also.

17 And he placed them all in the Firmament of heaven, to give light upon the
earth.

18 And to show their pre-eminence for external luster, above what ever else
appears by either day or night, and to be peculiar garnishings or ornaments to
make a notable difference betwixt the light and the darkness, the
superaddition of the Sun to adorn the day, and to invigorate the light thereof,
the Moon and the Stars to garnish the night, and to mitigate the dullness and
darkness thereof. And God saw that it was good.

19 And the evening and the morning was the fourth natural day.

20 After this, God commanded the waters to bring forth fish and fowl, which
they did in abundance, and the fowl flew above the earth in the open Firmament
of heaven.

21 And God created great whales also as well as other fishes, that move in the
waters; and God saw that it was good.

22 And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters
in the seas, and let the fowl multiply on the earth.

23 And the evening and the morning made up the fifth natural day.

24 Then God commanded the earth to bring forth all creeping things, and four
footed beasts, as before he commanded the waters to send forth fish and fowl;
and it was so.

25 And when God had made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle,
and every creeping thing after his kind, he saw that it was good.

26 And coming at last to his highest Masterpiece, Man, he encouraged himself,
saying, Go to, let us now make man, and I will make him after the same image
and shape that I bear my self; and he shall have dominion over the fish of the
Sea, and over the fowls of the Air, and over the cattle, and over all the
earth, and over every creeping thing, that creeps upon the earth.

27 So God created man in his own shape and figure, with an upright stature,
with legs, hands, arms, with a face and mouth, to speak, and command, as God
himself has: I say, in the image of God did he thus create him. But mistake me
not, whereas you conceive of God as masculine, and more perfect, yet you must
not understand me, as if God made mankind so exactly after his own image, that
he made none but males; for I tell you, he made females as well as males, as
you shall hear more particularly hereafter.

28 And having made them thus male and female, he bad them make use of the
distinction of sexes that he had given them; and blessing them, God said unto
them, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth with your offspring, and be
lords thereof, and have dominion also over the fish of the sea, and over the
fowls of the air, as well as over beasts and cattle, and every creeping thing
that moves upon the earth.

29 And God said, Behold, I give you every frugiferous herb which is upon the
face of the earth, such as the Straw-berry, the several sorts of Corn, as Rye,
Wheat, and Rice, as also the delicious fruits of Trees, to you they shall be
for meat.

30 But for the beasts of the earth, and the fowls of the air, and for every
living thing that creeps upon the earth, the worser kind of herbs, and
ordinary grass, I have assigned for them: and so it came to pass that
mankind are made lords and possessors of the choicest fruits of the earth, and
the beasts of the field are to be contented with baser herbage, and the common
grass.

31 And God viewed all the works that he had made, and behold, they were
exceeding good; and the evening and the morning was the sixth natural day.

CHAP. II.
3 The Original of the Jewish Sabbaths, from Gods resting himself from his six
days labors. 5 Herbs and Plants before either Rain, Gardning or Husbandry, and
the reason why it was so. 7 Adam made of the dust of the ground, and his soul
breathed in at his nostrils. 8 The Planting of Paradise. 9 A wonderful Tree
there, that would continue youth, and make a man immortal upon earth: Another
strange Tree, viz. the Tree of knowledge of good and evil. 11 The Rivers of
Paradise, Phasis, Gihon, Tigris, Euphrates. 18 The high commendation of
Matrimony. 19 Adam gives names to all kind of creatures, except fishes. 21
Woman is made of a rib of Adam, a deep sleep falling upon him, his mind then
also being in a trance. 24 The first Institution of Marriage.

1 THus the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all the creatures,
wherewith they were garnisht and replenisht.

2 And God having within six days perfected all his work, on the seventh day he
rested himself.

3 And so made the seventh day an holy day, a festival of rest, because himself
then first rested from his works. Whence you plainly see the reason and
original of your Sabbaths.

4 These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth, which I have so
compendiously recounted to you, as they were created in the days that the Lord
made heaven and earth, and the several garnishings of them.

5 But there are some things that I would a little more fully touch upon, and
give you notice of, to the praise of God, and the manifesting of his power unto
you. As that the herbs and plants of the field did not come up of their own
accords out of the earth, before God made them, but that God created them
before there were any seeds of any such thing in the earth, and before there
was any rain, or men to use gardning or husbandry, for the procuring their
growth: So that hereafter you may have the more firm faith in God, for the
blessings and fruits of the earth, when the ordinary course of nature shall
threaten dearth and scarcity for want of rain and seasonable showers.

6 For there had been no showers when God caused the plants, and herbs of the
field to spring up out of the earth; only as I told you at the first of all,
there was a mighty torrent of water, that rose every where above the earth, and
covered the universal face of the ground, which yet, God afterward by his
almighty power, commanded so into certain bounds, that the residue of the earth
was mere dry land.

7 And that you farther may understand how the power of God is exalted above
the course of natural causes, God taking of the the dust of his dry ground,
wrought it with his hands into such a temper, that it was matter fit to make
the body of a Man: which when he first had framed, was as yet but like a
senseless statue, till coming near unto it with his mouth, he breathed into the
nostrils thereof the breath of life; as you may observe to this day, that men
breath through their nostrils, though their mouths be closed. And thus man
became a living creature, and his name was called Adam, because he was made of
the earth.

8 But I should have told you first more at large, how the Lord God planted a
Garden Eastward of Judea in the Country of Eden, about Mesopotamia, where
afterward he put the man Adam, whom he after this wise had formed.

9 And the description of this Garden is this: Out of the ground made the Lord
God to grow every Tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food. But
amongst these several sorts of Trees, there were two of singular notice, that
stood planted in the midst of the Garden; the one of which had fruit of that
wonderful virtue, as to continue youth and strength, and to make a man immortal
upon earth, wherefore it was called the Tree of Life. There was also another
Tree planted there, of whose fruit if a man ate, it had this strange effect,
that it would make a man know the difference betwixt good and evil; for the
Lord God had so ordained, that if Adam touched the forbidden fruit thereof, he
should by his disobedience feel the sense of evil as well as good; wherefore by
way of Anticipation it was called the Tree of knowledge of good and evil.

10 And there was a River went out of Eden to water the Garden, and from thence
it was parted, and became into four heads.

11 The name of the first was Phasis, or Phasi-Tigris, which compasses the
whole Land of the Chaulateans, where there is Gold.

12 And the Gold of that Land is excellent; there is also found Bdellium and
the Onyxstone.

13 And the name of the second River is Gihon, the same is it that compasses
the whole Land of the Arabian-Aethiopia.

14 And the name of the third River is Tigris, that is that which goes toward
the East of Assyria, and the fourth River is Euphrates.

15 And the Lord God took the man Adam by the hand, and led him into the Garden
of Eden, and laid commands upon him to dress it, and look to it, and to keep
things handsome and in order in it, and that it should not be any wise spoiled
or misused by incursions or careless ramblings of the heedlesse beasts.

16 And the Lord God recommended unto Adam all the Trees of the Garden for very
wholesome and delightful food, bidding him freely eat thereof.

17 Only he excepted the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, which he strictly
charged him to forbear, for if he ever tasted thereof, he should assuredly die.

18 But to the high commendation of Matrimony be it spoken, though God had
placed Adam in so delightful a Paradise, yet his happiness was but maimed and
imperfect, till he had the society of a woman: For the Lord God said, It is not
good that man should be alone, I will make him an help meet for him.

19 Now out of the ground the Lord God had formed every beast of the field, and
every fowl of the air, and these brought he unto Adam, to see what he would
call them, and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name
thereof.

20 And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowls of the air, and to
every beast of the field, but he could not so kindly take acquaintance with any
of these, or so fully enjoy their society, but there was still some
considerable matter wanting to make up Adams full felicity, and there was a
meet help to be found out for him.

21 Wherefore the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam; and lo, as he
slept upon the ground, he fell into a dream, how God had put his hand into his
side, and pulled out one of his ribs, closing up the flesh in stead thereof:

22 And how the rib, which the Lord God had taken from him, was made into a
woman, and how God when he had thus made her, took her by the hand, and brought
her unto him. And he had no sooner awakened, but he found his dream to be true,
for God stood by him with the woman in his hand which he had brought.

23 Wherefore Adam being pre-advertised by the vision, was presently able to
pronounce, This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh: What are the
rest of the creatures to this? And he bestowed upon her also a fitting name,
calling her Woman, because she was taken out of Man.

24 And the Lord God said, Thou have spoken well, Adam: And for this cause
shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and
they two shall be one flesh: so strict and sacred a tie is the band of wedlock.

25 And they were both naked, Adam and his wife, and were not ashamed; but how
the shame of being seen naked came into the world, I shall declare unto you
hereafter.

CHAP. III.
1 A subtle Serpent in Paradise, endued with both reason, and the power of
speech, deceives the woman. 2 The Dialogue betwixt the woman and the Serpent. 7
How the shame of nakedness came into the world. 8 God walks in the Garden; and
calls to Adam. 10 The Dialogue betwixt Adam and God. 14 The reasons why
Serpents want feet, and creep upon the ground. 15 The reason of the antipathy
betwixt Men and Serpents. 16 As also of women's pangs in childbearing, and of
their being bound in subjection to their husbands. 18 Also of the barrenness
of the earth, and of man's toil and drudgery. 21 God teaches Adam and Eve the
use of leathern clothing. 24 Paradise haunted with apparitions: Adam frighted
from daring to taste of the Tree of Life, whence his posterity became mortal to
this very day.

1 AND truly it cannot but be very obvious for you to consider often with your
selves, not only how this shame of nakedness came into the world, but the toil
and drudgery of Tillage and Husbandry; the grievous pangs of Childe-bearing;
and lastly, what is most terrible of all, Death it self: Of all which, as of
some other things also, I shall give you such plain and intelligible reasons,
that your own hearts could not wish more plain and more intelligible. To what
an happy condition Adam was created, you have already heard; How he was placed
by God in a Garden of delight, where all his senses were gratified with the
most pleasing objects imaginable; his eyes with the beauty of trees and
flowers, and various delightsome forms of living creatures, his ears with the
sweet musical accents of the canorous birds, his smell with the fragrant odours
of Aromatic herbs, his taste with variety of delicious fruit, and his touch
with the soft breathings of the air in the flowery alleys of this ever-springing
Paradise. Add unto all this, that pleasure of pleasures, the delectable
conversation of his beautiful Bride, the enjoyments of whose love neither
created care to himself, nor pangs of childe-bearing to her: for all the
functions of life were performed with ease and delight; and there had been no
need for man to sweat for the provision of his family, for in this Garden of
Eden there was a perpetual Spring, and the vigor of the soil prevented man's
industry; and youth and jollity had never left the bodies of Adam and his
posterity, because old age and death were perpetually to be kept off by that
sovereign virtue of the Tree of Life. And I know, as you heartily could wish,
this state might have ever continued to Adam and his seed, so you eagerly
expect to hear the reason why he was deprived of it; and in short it is this,
His disobedience to a commandment which God had given him; the circumstances
whereof I shall declare unto you, as follows.

Amongst those several living creatures which were in Paradise, there was the
Serpent also, whom you know to this very day to be full of subtilty, and
therefore you will less wonder, if when he was in his perfection, he had not
only the use of Reason, but the power of Speech. It was therefore this Serpent
that was the first occasion of all this mischief to Adam and his posterity; for
he cunningly came unto the woman, and said unto her, Is it so indeed, that God
has commanded you that you shall not eat of any of the trees of the Garden?

2 And the woman answered unto the Serpent, You are mistaken, God has not
forbid us to eat of all the fruit of the trees of the Garden.

3 But indeed of the fruit of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, God has
strictly charged us, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye
die.

4 But the Serpent said unto the woman, Tush, I warrant you, this is only but
to terrify you, and abridge you of that liberty and happiness you are capable
of, you shall not so certainly die.

5 But God knows the virtue of that tree full well, that so soon as you eat
thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and you shall become as Gods, knowing good
and evil.

6 And when the woman saw, that the tree was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the
fruit and did eat, and gave also to her husband with her, and he did eat.

7 And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew they were naked, and
were ashamed, and therefore they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves
aprons to cover their parts of shame.

8 And the Lord God came into the Garden toward the cool of the evening, and
walking in the Garden, called for Adam; But Adam had no sooner heard his voice,
but he and his wife ran away into the thickest of the trees of the Garden, to
hide themselves from his presence.

9 But the Lord God called unto Adam the second time, and said unto him, Adam
where art thou?

10 Then Adam was forced to make answer, and said, I heard thy voice in the
Garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked, and so I hid my self.

11 Then God said unto him, Who has made thee so wise, that thou should know
that thou art naked, or want any covering? Have thou eaten of the forbidden
fruit?

12 And Adam excused himself, saying, The woman whom thou recommendedst to me
for a meet help, she gave me of the fruit, and I did eat.

13 And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou have done? And
the woman excused her self, saying, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

14 Then the Lord God gave sentence upon all three; and to the Serpent he said,
Because thou have done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every
beast of the field; and whereas hitherto thou have been able to bear thy body
aloft, and go upright, thou shall henceforth creep upon thy belly, like a worm,
and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.

15 And there shall be a perpetual antipathy betwixt not only the woman and
thee, but betwixt her seed and thy seed: For universal mankind shall abhor
thee, and hate all the cursed generations that come of thee. They indeed shall
busily lie in wait to sting men's feet, which their skill in herbs however shall
be able to cure; but they shall knock all Serpents on the head, and kill them
without pity or remorse, deservedly using thy seed as their deadly enemy.

16 And the doom of the woman was, Her sorrow and pangs in childe-bearing, and
her subjection to her husband. Which law of subjection is generally observed in
the Nations of the world unto this very day.

17 And the doom of Adam was, The toil of Husbandry upon barren ground.

18 For the earth was cursed for his sake, which is the reason that it brings
forth thorns, and thistles, and other weeds, that Husbandmen could wish would
not cumber the ground, upon which they bestow their toilsome labor.

19 Thus in the sweat of his face was Adam to eat his bread, till he return to
the dust out of which he was taken.

20 And Adam called his wife Eve, because she was the mother of all men that
ever were born into the world, and lived upon the face of the earth.

21 And the generations of men were clothed at first with the skins of wild
beasts, the use of which God taught Adam and Eve in Paradise.

22 And when they were thus accoutred for their journey, and armed for greater
hardship, God turns them both out: and the Lord God said concerning Adam,
deriding him for his disobedience, Behold, Adam is become as one of us, to know
good and evil: Let us look to him now, lest he put his hand to the Tree of
Life, and so make himself immortal.

23 Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the Garden of Eden, to till the
ground, from whence he was taken.

24 So he drove out Adam, and his wife was forced to follow him: For there was
no longer staying in Paradise, because the place was terribly haunted with
spirits, and fearful apparitions appeared at the entrance thereof, winged men
with fiery flaming swords in their hands, brandished every way, so that Adam
durst never adventure to go back to taste of the fruit of the Tree of Life:
whence it is that mankind has continued mortal to this very day.

THE PHILOSOPHIC CABBALA.
CHAP. I.
1 The world of Life or Forms, and the Potentiality of the visible Universe
created by the Tri-une God, and referred to a Monad or Unite. 6 The Universal
immense matter of the visible world created out of nothing, and referred to the
number Two. 7 Why it was not said of this matter that it was good. 9 The
ordering of an Earth or Planet for making it conveniently habitable, referred
to the number Three. 14 The immense Ethereal matter, or Heaven, contrived into
Suns or Planets, as well Primary as Secondary, viz. as well Earths as Moons,
and referred to the number Four. 20 The replenishing of an Earth with Fish and
Fowl, referred to the number Five. 24 The Creation of Beasts and Cattle, but
more chiefly of Man himself, referred to the number Six.

1 OUR design being to set out the more conspicuous parts of the external
Creation, before we descend to the Genealogies and Successions of mankind;
there are two notable objects present themselves to our understanding, which we
must first take notice of, as having an universal influence upon all that
follows: and these I do Symbolically decypher, the one by the name of Heaven
and Light; for I mean the same thing by both these terms; the other by the
name of Earth. By Heaven or Light, you are to understand The whole
comprehension of intellectual Spirits, souls of men and beasts, and the seminal
forms of all things which you may call, if you please, The world of Life. By
Earth, you are to understand the Potentiality, or Capability of the Existence
of the outward Creation: This Possibility being exhibited to our minds as the
result of the Omnipotence of God, without whom nothing would be, and is indeed
the utmost shadow and darkest projection thereof.

The Tri-une God therefore by his eternal Wisdom first created this
Symbolical Heaven and Earth.

2 And this Earth was nothing but Solitude and Emptiness, and it was a deep
bottomless capacity of being what ever God thought good to make out of it, that
employed no contradiction to be made. And there being a possibility of creating
things after sundry and manifold manners, nothing was yet determined, but this
vast Capability of things was unsettled, fluid, and of it self undeterminable
as water: But the Spirit of God, who was the Vehicle of the Eternal Wisdom,
and of the Super-essential Goodness, by a swift forecast of Counsel and
Discourse of Reason truly divine, such as at once strikes through all things,
and discerns what is best to be done, having hovered a while over all the
capacities of this fluid Possibility, forthwith settled upon what was the most
perfect and exact.

3 Wherefore the entire Deity by an inward Word, which is nothing but Wisdom
and Power, edged with actual Will, with more ease then we can present any
Notion or Idea to our own minds, exhibited really to their own view the whole
Creation of spiritual Substances, such as Angels are in their inward natures,
the Souls of men, and other Animals, and the Seminal Forms of all things, so
that all those, as many as ever were to be of them, did really and actually
exist without any dependency on corporeal matter.

4 And God approved of, and pleased himself in all this as good; but yet though
in design there was a settlement of the fluid darkness or obscure Possibility
of the outward Creation, yet it remained as yet but a dark Possibility: And a
notorious distinction indeed there was betwixt this Actual spiritual Creation,
and the dim possibility of the material or outward world.

5. Insomuch that the one might very well be called Day, and the other Night:
because the night does deface and obliterate all the distinct figures and
colors of things; but the day exhibits them all orderly and clearly to our
sight. Thus therefore was the immateriall Creature perfectly finished, being an
inexhaustible Treasury of Light and Form, for the garnishing and consummating
the material world, to afford a Morning or Active principle to every Passive
one, in the future parts of the corporeal Creation. But in this first days
work, as we will call it, the Morning and Evening are purely Metaphysical; for
the active and passive principles here are not two distinct substances, the one
material, the other spiritual. But the passive principle is matter merely
Metaphysical, and indeed no real or actual entity; and, as has been already
said, is quite divided from the light or spiritual substance, not belonging to
it, but to the outward world, whose shadowy possibility it is. But be they how
they will, this passive and active principle are the First days work: A Monad
or Unite being so fit a Symbol of the immaterial nature.

6 And God thought again, and invigorating his thought with his Will and Power,
created an immense deal of real and corporeal matter, a substance which you
must conceive to lie betwixt the foresaid fluid Possibility of Natural things,
and the Region of Seminall Forms; not that these things are distinguished
Locally, but according to a more intellectual Order.

7 And the thought of God armed with his Omnipotent will took effect, and this
immensely diffused matter was made. But he was not very forward to say it was
good, or to please himself much in it, because he foresaw what mischief
straying souls, if they were not very cautious, might bring to themselves, by
sinking themselves too deep therein. Besides it was little worth, till greater
polishings were bestowed upon it, and his Wisdom had contrived it to fitting
uses, being nothing as yet, but a boundless Ocean of rude invisible Matter.

8 Wherefore this Matter was actuated and agitated forthwith by some Universal
Spirit, yet part of the World of Life, whence it became very subtle and
Ethereal; so that this Matter was rightly called Heaven, and the Union of the
Passive and Active Principle in the Creation of this Material Heaven, is the
second days work, and the Binarie denotes the nature thereof.

9 I shall also declare unto you, how God orders a real material Earth, when
once it is made, to make it pleasant and delightful for both man and beast. But
for the very making of the Earth, it is to be referred to the following day.
For the Stars and Planets belong to that number; and as a primary Planet in
respect of its reflection of light is rightly called a Planet, so in respect of
its habitablenesse, it is as rightly termed an Earth. These Earths therefore
God orders in such sort, that they neither want water to lie upon them, nor be
covered over with water, though they be environed round with the fluid air.

10 But he makes it partly dry Land, and partly Sea, Rivers, and Springs, whose
convenience is obvious for every one to conceive.

11 He adorns the ground also with grass, herbs, and flowers, and has made a
wise provision of seed, that they bring forth, for the perpetuation of such
useful commodities upon the face of the earth.

12 For indeed these things are very good and necessary both for man and beast.

13 Therefore God prepared the matter of the Earth so, as that there was a
vital congruity of the parts thereof, with sundry sorts of seminall forms of
trees, herbs, and choicest kinds of flowers; and so the Body of the Earth drew
in sundry principles of Plantall Life, from the World of Life, that is at hand
every where; and the Passive and Active Principle thus put together, made up
the Third Days work, and the Ternary denotes the nature thereof.

14 The Ternary had allotted to it, the garnishing of an Earth with trees,
flowers, and herbs, after the distinction of Land and Sea: as the Quinary has
allotted to it, the replenishing of an Earth with fish and fowl; the Senary
with man and beast. But this Fourth Day comprehends the garnishing of the body
of the whole world, viz. That vast and immense Ethereal matter, which is called
the fluid Heaven, with infinite numbers of sundry sorts of lights, which Gods
Wisdom and Power, by union of fit and active principles drawn from the world
of life, made of this Ethereal matter, whose usefulness is plain in nature,
that they are for Prognostic signs, and seasons, and days, and years.

15 As also for administering of light to all the inhabitants of the world; That
the Planets may receive light from their fountains of light, and reflect light
one to another.

16 And there are two sorts of these Lights that all the inhabitants of the
world must acknowledge great every where, consulting with the outward sight,
from their proper stations. And the dominion of the greater of these kind of
lights is conspicuous by day; the dominion of the lesser by night: the former
we ordinarily call a Sun, the other a Moon; which Moon is truly a Planet and
opake, but reflecting light very plentifully to the beholders sight, and yet is
but a secondary or lesser kind of Planet; but he made the Primary and more
eminent Planets also, and such an one is this Earth we live upon.

17 And God placed all these sorts of lights in the thin and liquid Heaven,
that they might reflect their rays one upon another, and shine upon the
inhabitants of the world.

18 And that their beauty and resplendency might be conspicuous to the
beholders of them, whether by day or by night, which is mainly to be understood
of the Suns, that supply also the place of Stars at a far distance, but whose
chief office it is to make vicissitudes of day and night: And the Universal
dark Ether being thus adorned with the goodly and glorious furniture of those
several kinds of lights, God approved of it as good.

19 And the union of the Passive and Active principle was the Fourth days work,
and the number denotes the nature thereof.

20 And now you have heard of a verdant Earth, and a bounded Sea, and Lights to
shine through the air and water, and to gratify the eyes of all living
creatures, whereby they may see one another, and be able to seek their food,
you may seasonably expect the mention of sundry animals proper to their
elements. Wherefore God by his inward Word and Power, prepared the matter in
the waters, and near the waters with several vital congruities, so that it drew
in sundry souls from the world of Life, which actuating the parts of the
matter, caused great plenty of fish to swim in the waters, and fowls to fly
above the earth in the open air.

21 And after this manner he created great Whales also, as well as the lesser
kinds of fishes, and he approved of them all as good.

22 And the blessing of his inward Word or Wisdom was upon them for their
multiplication; for according to the preparation of the matter, the Plastical
Power of the souls that descend from the world of Life, did faithfully and
effectually work those wise contrivances of male and female, they being once
rightly united with the matter, so that by this means the fish filled the
waters in the seas, and the fowls multiplied upon the earth.

23 And the union of the Passive and Active principle was the Fifth days work,
and the Quinary denotes the nature thereof.

24 And God persisted farther in the Creation of living creatures, and by
espousing new souls from the world of Life to the more Mediterraneous parts of
the matter, created land-serpents, cattle, and the beasts of the field.

25 And when he had thus made them, he approved of them for good.

26 Then God reflecting upon his own Nature, and viewing himself, consulting
with the Super-essential Goodness, the Eternal Intellect, and unextinguishable
Love-flame of his Omnipotent Spirit, concluded to make a far higher kind of
living creature, then was as yet brought into the world; He made therefore Man
in his own Image, after his own Likeness. For after he had prepared the matter
fit for so noble a guest as an humane Soul, the world of Life was forced to let
go what the rightly prepared matter so justly called for. And Man appeared upon
the stage of the earth, Lord of all living creatures. For it was just that he
that bears the Image of the invisible God, should be Supreme Monarch of this
visible world. And what can be more like God then the soul of man, that is so
free, so rational, and so intellectual as it is? And he is not the less like
him now he is united to the terrestrial body, his soul or spirit possessing and
striking through a compendious collection of all kind of corporeal matter, and
managing it, with his understanding free to think of other things, even as God
vivificates and actuates the whole world, being yet wholly free to contemplate
himself. Wherefore God gave Man dominion over the fowls of the air, the fish of
the sea, and the beasts of the earth: for it is reasonable the worser should be
in subserviency to the better.

27 Thus God created Man in his own Image, he consisting of an intellectual
Soul, and a terrestrial Body actuated thereby. Wherefore mankind became male
and female, as other terrestrial animals are.

28 And the benediction of the Divine Wisdom for the propagation of their
kind, was manifest in the contrivance of the parts that were framed for that
purpose: And as they grew in multitudes, they lorded it over the earth, and
over-mastered by their power and policy the beasts of the field; and fed
themselves with fish and fowl, and what else pleased them, and made for their
content, for all was given to them by right of their Creation.

29 And that nothing might be wanting to their delight, behold also divine
Providence has prepared for their palate all precious and pleasant herbs for
sallads, and made them banquets of the most delicate fruit of the fruitbearing
trees.

30 But for the courser grass, and worser kind of herbs, they are intended
for the worser and baser kind of creatures: Wherefore it is free for man to
seek out his own, and make use of it.

31 And God considering every thing that he had made, approved of it as very
good; and the union of the Passive and Active principle was the Sixth days work:
and the Senary denotes the nature thereof.

CHAP. II.
2 Gods full and absolute rest from creating any thing of anew, adumbrated by
the number Seven. 4 Suns and Planets not only the furniture, but effects of the
Ethereal Matter or Heaven. 6 The manner of Man and other Animals rising out of
the earth by the power of God in nature. 8 How it was with Adam before he
descended into flesh, and became a terrestrial Animal. 10 That the four
Cardinal virtues were in Adam in his Ethereal or Paradisiacal condition. 17
Adam in Paradise forbidden to taste or relish his own will under pain of
descending into the Region of Death. 18 The Masculine and Feminine faculties in
Adam. 20 The great Pleasure and Solace of the Feminine faculties. 21 The
Masculine faculties laid asleep, the Feminine appear and act, viz. The grateful
sense of the life of the Vehicle. 25 That this sense and joy of the life of the
Vehicle is in it self without either blame or shame.

1 THUS the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all the garnishings of
them, such as are Trees, Flowers, and Herbs; Suns, Moons, and Stars; Fishes,
Fowls, and Beasts of the field, and the chiefest of all, Man himself.

2 Wherefore God having thus completed his work in the Senary, comprehending
the whole Creation in six orders of things, he ceased from ever creating any
thing more, either in this outward Material world, or in the world of Life: But
his Creative Power retiring into himself, he enjoyed his own eternal Rest,
which is his immutable and indefatigable Nature, that with ease oversees all
the whole Compass of Beings, and continues Essence, Life, and Activity to
them; and the better rectifies the worse, and all are guided by his Eternal
Word and Spirit; but no new Substance has been ever created since the six days
production of things, nor shall ever be hereafter.

3 For this Seventh day God has made an Eternal Holy day, or Festival of Rest
to himself, wherein he will only please himself, to behold the exquisite Order,
and Motion, and right Nature of things, his Wisdom, Justice, and Mercy
unavoidably insinuating themselves, according to the set frame of the world,
into all the parts of the Creation, he having Ministers of his Goodness and
Wrath prepared every where: So that himself need but to look on, and see the
effects of that Nemesis that is necessarily interwoven in the nature of the
things themselves which he has made. This therefore is that Sabbath or
Festival of Rest which God himself is said to celebrate in the Seventh day, and
indeed the number declares the nature thereof.

4 And now to open my mind more fully and plainly unto you, I must tell you
that those things which before I termed the Garnishings of the Heaven and of
the Earth, they are not only so, but the Generations of them: I say, Plants and
Animals were the generations, effects, and productions of the Earth, the
Seminal Forms and Souls of Animals insinuating themselves into the prepared
matter thereof, and Suns, Planets, or Earths were the generations or
productions of the Heavens, vigor and motion being imparted from the world of
Life to the immense body of the Universe, so that what I before called mere
Garnishings, are indeed the productions or generations of the Heavens and of
the Earth so soon as they were made; Though I do not take upon me to define the
time wherein God made the Heavens and the Earth: For he might do it at once by
his absolute Omnipotency, or he might, when he had created all Substance as
well material as immaterial, let them act one upon the other, so, and in such
periods of time, as the nature of the production of the things themselves
required.

5 But it was for pious purposes that I cast the Creation into that order of
Six days, and for the more firmly rooting in the hearts of the people this
grand and useful Truth, That the Omnipotency of God is such, that he can act
above and contrary to natural causes, that I mentioned herbs and plants of the
field, before I take notice of either rain or man to exercise Gardning and
Husbandry: For indeed according to my former narration there had been no such
kind of rain, as ordinarily nowadays waters the labors of the Husbandman.

6 But yet there went up a moist vapor from the earth, which being matur'd and
concocted by the Spirit of the world, which is very active in the heavens or
air, became a precious balmy liquour, and fit vehicle of Life, which descending
down in some sort like dewy showers upon the face of the earth, moistened the
ground, so that the warmth of the Sun gently playing upon the surface thereof,
prepared matter variously for sundry sorts, not only of Seminal forms of
Plants, but Souls of Animals also.

7 And Man himself rose out of the earth after this manner; the dust thereof
being rightly prepared and attemper'd by these unctuous showers and balmy
droppings of Heaven. For God had so contrived by his infinite Wisdom, that
matter thus or thus prepared, should by a vital congruity attract proportional
forms from the world of Life, which is every where nigh at hand, and does very
throngly inequitate the moist and unctuous air. Wherefore after this manner was
the Aereal or Ethereal Adam conveyed into an earthly body, having his most
conspicuous residence in the head or brain: And thus Adam became the Soul of a
Terrestrial living Creature.

8 But how it is with Adam before he descends into this lower condition of
life, I shall declare unto you in the Aenigmatical narration that follows,
which is this; That the Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, where he
had put the Man, which afterward he formed into a Terrestrial Animal: For Adam
was first wholly Ethereal, and placed in Paradise, that is, in an happy and
joyful condition of the Spirit; for he was placed under the invigorating beams
of the divine Intellect, and the Sun of Righteousness then shone fairly upon
him.

9 And his Soul was as the ground which God has blessed, and so brought forth
every pleasant Tree, and every goodly Plant of her heavenly Fathers own
planting; for the holy Spirit of Life had enriched the soil, that it brought
forth all manner of pleasant and profitable fruits: And the Tree of Life was in
the midst of this Garden of man's soul, to wit, the Essential Will of God, which
is the true root of Regeneration; but to so high a pitch Adam as yet had not
reached unto, and the fruit of this Tree in this Ethereal state of the Soul, had
been Immortality or Life everlasting: And the Tree of the Knowledge of good and
evil was there also, viz. His own Will.

10 And there was a very pleasant River that watered this Garden,
distinguishable into four streams, which are the four Cardinal Virtues, which
are in several degrees in the Soul, according to the several degrees of the
purity of her Vehicle.

11 And the name of the first is Pison, which is Prudence and Experience in
things that are comely to be done: For the soul of man is never idle, neither
in this world, nor in any state else, but has some Province to make good, and
is to promote his interest whose she is: For what greater gratification can
there be of a good soul, then to be a dispenser of some portion of that
Universal good, that God lets out upon the world? And there can be no external
conversation nor society of persons, be they Terrestrial, Aereab, or Ethereal,
but forthwith it implies an Use of Prudence: Wherefore Prudence is an
inseparable Accomplishment of the soul: So that Pison is rightly deemed one of
the Rivers even of that Celestial Paradise. And this is that wisdom which God
himself does show to the soul by communication of the divine Light; for it is
said to compass the Land of Havilah.

12. Where also idle and useless speculations are not regarded, as is plainly
declared by the pure and approved Gold, Bdellium, and Onyx, the commodities
thereof.

13 And the name of the second River is Gihon, which is Justice, as is
intimated from the fame of the Aethiopians, whose Land it is said to compass,
as also from the notation of the name thereof.

14 And the name of the third River is Hiddekel, which is Fortitude, that like
a rapid stream bears all down before it, and stoutly resists all the powers of
darkness, running forcibly against Assyria, which is situated Westward of it.
And the fourth River is Perath, which is Temperance, the nourisher and
cherisher of all the plants of Paradise; whereas Intemperance, or too much
addicting the mind to the pleasure of the Vehicle, or Life of the matter, be
it in what state soever, drowns and choaks those sacret Vegetables. As the
earth you know, was not at all fruitful till the waters were removed into one
place, and the dry land appeared, when as before it was drowned and slocken
with overmuch moisture.

15 In this Paradise thus described, had the Lord God placed Man to dress it,
and to keep it in such good order as he found it.

16 And the divine Word or Light in man charged him, saying, Of every tree of
Paradise thou may freely eat. For all things here are wholesome as well as
pleasant, if thou have a right care of thy self, and be obedient to my
commands.

17 But of the luscious and poisonous fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of good
and evil, that is, of thine own will, thou shall not by any means eat: For at
what time thou eatest thereof, thy soul shall contract that languor, debility,
and unsettlednesse, that in process of time thou shall slide into the earth,
and be buried in humane flesh, and become an inhabitant of the Region of
mortality and death.

18 Hitherto I have not taken much notice in the Ethereal Adam of any other
Faculties, but such as carried him upwards toward virtue and the holy
Intellect; And indeed this is the more perfect and masculine Adam, which
consists in pure subtle intellectual Knowledge: But we will now inform you of
another Faculty of the soul of man, which though it seem inferior, yet is far
from being contemptible, it being both good for himself, and convenient for the
terrestrial world; For this makes him in a capacity of being the head of all
the living creatures in the earth, as that Faculty indeed is the mother of all
mankind.

19 Those higher and more Intellectual accomplishments I must confess, made
Adam very wise, and of a quick perception. For he knew very well the natures of
the beasts of the field, and fowls of the air: I mean not only of the visible
and terrestrial creatures, but also of the fallen and unfallen Angels, or good
and bad Genii, and was able to judge aright of them, according to the
principles they consisted of, and the properties they had.

20 And his Reason and Understanding was not mistaken, but he pronounced aright
in all. But however, he could take no such pleasure in the external Creation of
God, and his various works, without having some Principle of life, congruously
joining with, and joyfully actuating the like matter themselves consisted of:
Wherefore God endued the soul of man with a faculty of being united with vital
joy and complacency to the matter, as well as of aspiring to an union with God
himself, whose divine Essence is too highly disproportioned to our poor
substances. But the divine Life is communicable in some sort to both soul and
body, whether it be Ethereal, or of grosser consistence: and those wonderful
grateful pleasures that we feel, are nothing but the kindly motions of the
souls Vehicle; from whence divine joys themselves are by a kind of reflection
strengthened and advanced. Of so great consequence is that vital principle that
joins the soul to the matter of the Universe.

21 Wherefore God to gratify Adam, made him not indefatigable in his aspirings
toward Intellectual things, but Lassitude of Contemplation, and of Affectation
of Immateriality, (he being not able to receive those things as they are, but
according to his poor capacity, which is very small in respect of the object it
is exercised about) brought upon himself remissness and drowsinesse to such
like exercises, till by degrees he fell into a more profound sleep; At what
time divine Providence having laid the plot aforehand, that lower vivificative
principle of his soul did grow so strong, and did so vigorously and with such
exultant sympathy and joy actuate his Vehicle, that in virtue of his integrity
which he yet retained, this became more dear to him, and of greater
contentment, then any thing he yet had experience of.

22 I say, when divine Providence had so lively and warmly stirred up this new
sense of his Vehicle in him,

23 He straightway acknowledged that all the sense and knowledge of any thing
he had hitherto, was more lifelesse and evanid, and seemed less congruous and
grateful unto him, and more estranged from his nature: but this was so
agreeable and consentaneous to his soul, that he looked upon it as a necessary
part of himself, and called it after his own name.

24 And he thought thus within himself, For this cause will any one leave his
over-tedious aspires to unite with the Eternal Intellect, and Universal Soul of
the world, the immensenesse of whose excellencies are too highly raised for us
to continue long in their embracements, and will cleave to the joyous and
cheerful life of his Vehicle, and account this living Vehicle and his Soul one
Person.

25 Thus Adam with his new-wedded Joy stood naked before God, but was not as
yet at all ashamed, by reason of his Innocence and Simplicity; for Adam neither
in his reason nor affection as yet had transgressed in any thing.

CHAP. III.
1 Satan tempts Adam, taking advantage upon the Invigoration of the life of his
Vehicle. 2 The Dialogue betwixt Adam and Satan. 6 The Masculine faculties in
Adam, swayed by the Feminine; assent to sin against God. 7 Adam excuses the use
of that wild Liberty he gave himself, discerning the Plastic Power somewhat
awakened in him. 8 A dispute betwixt Adam and the divine Light, arraigning him
at the Tribunal of his own Conscience. 14 Satan stricken down into the lower
Regions of the Air. 15 A Prophecy of the Incarnation of the Soul of the
Messiah, and of his Triumph over the head and highest Powers of the rebellious
Angels. 16 A decree of God to sour and disturb all the pleasures and
contentments of the Terrestrial Life. 20 Adam again excuses his fall, from the
usefulness of his Presence and Government upon Earth. 21 Adam is fully
incorporated into Flesh, and appears in the true shape of a Terrestrial Animal.
24 That Immortality is incompetible to the Earthly Adam, nor can his Soul reach
it, till she return into her Ethereal Vehicle.

1 NOw the life of the Vehicle being so highly invigorated in Adam, by the
remission of exercise in his more subtle and immaterial faculties, he was fit
with all alacrity and cheerfulness to pursue any game set before him; and
wanted nothing but fair external opportunity to call him out into action. Which
one of the evil Genii or fallen Angels observing, which had no small skill in
doing mischief, having in all likelihood practiced the same villainy upon some
of his own Orders, and was the very Ring leader of rebellion against God, and
the divine Light; For he was more perversely subtle then all the rest of the
evil Genii or beasts of the field, which God had mad^ Angels; but their
beastiality they contract^^ by their own rebellion. For every thing (...) has
sense and understanding, and wants the divine Life in it, in the judgment of
all wise and good men is truly a Beast. This old Serpent therefore the
subtilest of all the beasts of the field, cunningly assaulted Adam with such
conference as would surely please his Feminine part, which was now so
invigorated with life, that the best news to her would be the tidings of a
Commission to do any thing: Wherefore the Serpent said to the feminized Adam,
Why are you so demure, and what makes you so bound up in spirit? Is it so
indeed that God has confined you, taken away your Liberty, and forbidden you
all things that you may take pleasure in?

2 And Adam answered him, saying, No; we are not forbidden any thing that the
divine Life in us approves as good and pleasant.

3 We are only forbidden to feed on our own Will, and to seek pleasures apart
and without out the approbation of the will of God. For if our own will get
head in us, we shall assuredly descend into the Region of Mortality, and be
cast into a state of Death.

4 But the Serpent said unto Adam, Tush, this is but a Panick fear in you,
Adam, you shall not so surely die as you conceit.

5 The only matter is this; God indeed ^^ves to keep his creatures in awe, and
to hold them in from ranging too far, and reaching too high; but he knows
very well, that if you take but your liberty with us, and satiate your selves
freely with your own will, your eyes will be wonderfully opened, and you will
meet with a world of variety of experiments in things, so that you will grow
abundantly wise, and like Gods know all things whatsoever, whether good or evil.

6 Now the Feminine part in Adam was so tickled with this Doctrine of the old
Deceiver, that the Concupiscible began to be so immoderate, as to resolve to do
any thing that may promote pleasure and experience in things, and snatched away
with it Adams Will and Reason by his heedlesnesse and inadvertency. So that
Adam was wholly set upon doing things at random; according as the various
toyings and titillations of the lascivient Life of the Vehicle suggested to
him, no longer consulting with the voice of God, or taking any farther aim by
the Inlet of the divine Light.

7 And when he had tired himself with a rabble of toys, and unfruitful or
unsatisfactory devices, rising from the multifarious workings of the Particles
of his Vehicle, at last the eyes of his faculties were opened, and they
perceived how naked they were; he having as yet neither the covering of the
Heavenly Nature, nor the Terrestrial Body. Only they sewed fig leaves together,
and made some pretenses of excuse, from the vigor of the Plantal Life that now
in a thinner manner might manifest it self in Adam, and predispose him for a
more perfect exercise of his Plastic Power, when the prepared matter of the
Earth shall drink him in.

8 In the mean time the voice of God, or the divine Wisdom spoke to them in
the cool of the day, when the hurry of this mad Carreer had well slaked. But
Adam now with his wife was grown so out of order, and so much estranged from
the Life of God, that they hid themselves at the sensible approach thereof, as
wild beasts run away into the Wood at the sight of a man.

9 But the divine Light in the Conscience of Adam pursued him, and upbraided
unto him the case he was in.

10 And Adam acknowledged within himself how naked he was, having no power, nor
ornaments, nor abilities of his own, and yet that he had left his obedience and
dependence upon God: Wherefore he was ashamed, and hid himself at the approach
of the divine Light manifesting it self unto him to the reprehension and rebuke
of him.

11 And the divine Light charged all this misery and confusion that had thus
overtaken him, upon the eating of the forbidden fruit, the luscious Dictates of
his own Will.

12 But Adam again excused himself within himself, that it was the vigor and
impetuosity of that Life in the Vehicle which God himself implanted in it,
whereby he miscarried: The woman that God had given him.

13 And the divine Light spoke in Adam concerning the woman; What work has she
made here? But the woman in Adam excused her self; for she was beguiled by that
grand Deceiver the Serpent. In this confusion of mind was Adam by forsaking the
divine Light, and letting his own will get head against it. For it so changed
the nature of his Vehicle, that (whereas he might have continued in an
Angelical and Ethereal condition, and his feminine part been brought into
perfect obedience to the divine Light, and had joys multiplied upon the whole
man beyond all expression and imagination for ever) he now sunk more and more
toward a mortal and terrestrial estate, himself not being unsensible thereof,
as you shall hear, when I have told you the doom of the Eternal God concerning
the Serpent and him.

14 Things therefore having been carried on in this wise, the Eternal Lord God
decreed thus with himself concerning the Serpent and Adam: That this old
Serpent, the Prince of the rebellious Angels, should be more accursed then all
the rest; and, (whereas he lorded it aloft in the higher parts of the Air, and
could glide in the very Ethereal Region, amongst the innocent and unflan souls
of men, and the good Angels before) that he should now sweep the dust with his
belly, being cast lower toward the surface of the Earth.

15 And that there should be a general enmity and abhorrency betwixt this old
Serpent, as also all of his fellow-rebels, and betwixt Mankind. And that in
process of time the ever faithful and obedient Soul of the Messiah should take
a Body, and should trample over the power of the Devil, very notoriously here
upon Earth, and after his death should be constituted Prince of all the
Angelical Orders whatever in Heaven.

16 And concerning Adam, the Eternal Lord God decreed that he should descend
down to be an Inhabitant of the Earth, and that he should not there indulge to
himself the pleasures of the body, without the concomitants of pain and sorrow,
and that his Feminine part, his Affections should be under the chastisement and
correction of his Reason.

17 That he should have a wearisome and toilsome travail in this world,

18 The Earth bringing forth thorns and thistles, though he must subsist by the
Corn of the field.

19 Wherefore in the sweat of his brows he should eat his bread, till he
returned unto the ground, of which his terrestrial body is made. This was the
Counsel of God concerning Adam and the Serpent.

20 Now, as I was a telling you, Adam though he was sinking apace into those
lower functions of life, yet his mind was not as yet grown so fully stupid,
but he had the knowledge of his own condition, and added to all his former
Apologies, that the Feminine part in him, though it had seduced him, yet there
was some use of this mis-carriage, for the Earth would hence be inhabited by
Intellectual Animals: wherefore he called the Life of his Vehicle, EVE, because
she is indeed the Mother of all the generations of men that live upon the Earth.

21 At last the Plastic Power being fully awakened, Adams Soul descended into
the prepared matter of the Earth, and in due process of time Adam appeared
clothed in the skin of beasts; that is, he became a downright terrestrial
Animal, and a mortal creature upon earth.

22 For the Eternal God had so decreed, and his Wisdom, Mercy, and Justice did
but, if I may so speak, play and sport together in the business. And the
rather, because Adam had but precipitated himself into that condition, which in
due time might have fallen to his share by course; for it is fitting there should
be some such head among the living creatures of the earth, as a terrestrial
Adam, but to live always here were his disadvantage.

23 Wherefore when God removed him from that higher condition,

24 He made sure he should not be Immortal, nor is he in any capacity of
reaching unto the Tree of Life, without passing through his fiery Vehicle, and
becoming a pure and defecate Ethereal Spirit: Then he may be admitted to taste
the fruit of the Tree of Life and Immortality, and so live for ever.

THE MORAL CABBALA.
CHAP. I.
1 Man a Microcosme or Little World, in whom there are two Principles, Spirit
and Flesh. 2 The Earthly or Fleshly Nature appears first. 4 The Light of
Conscience unlistned to. 6 The Spirit of Savory and Affectionate discernment
betwixt good and evil. 10 The inordinate desires of the flesh driven aside and
limited. 11 Hereupon the plants of Righteousness bear fruit and flourish. 16
The hearty and sincere Love of God, and a man's neighbor, is as the Sun in the
Soul of man. Notionality and Opinions the weak and faint Light of the dispersed
Stars. 18 Those that walk in sincere Love, walk in the Day: They that are
guided by Notionality, travel in the Night. 22 The Natural Concupiscible brings
forth by the command of God, and is corrected by devotion. 24 The Irascible
also brings forth. 26 Christ the Image of God is created, being a perfect Ruler
over all the motions of the Irascible and Concupiscible. 29 The food of the
divine Life. 30 The food of the Animal Life. 31 The divine Wisdom approves of
whatsoever is simply natural, as good.

1 WE shall set before you in this History of Genesis, several eminent
examples of good and perfect men, such as Abel, Seth, Enoch, Abraham, and the
like: Wherefore we thought fit, though Aenigmatically, and in a dark Parable,
to shadow out in general the manner of progress to this divine Perfection;
Looking upon Man as a Microcosm or a Little World, who if he hold out the whole
progress of the Spiritual Creation, the process thereof will be figuratively
understood as follows Wherefore first of all, I say, that by the will of God
every man living on the face of the Earth has these two Principles in him,
Heaven and Earth, Divinity and Animality, Spirit and Flesh.

2 But that which is Animal or Natural operates first, the Spiritual or
heavenly Life lying for a while closed up at rest in its own Principle. During
which time, and indeed some while afterward too, the Animal or Fleshly Life
domineers in darkness and deformity; the mighty tempestuous Passions of the
flesh contending and struggling over that Abyss of unsatiable Desire which has
no bottom, and which in this case carries the mind to nothing but emptiness
and unprofitablenesse.

3 But by the will of God it is, that afterward the Daylight appears, though
not in so vigorous measure, out of the Heavenly or Spiritual Principle.

4 And Conscience being thus enlightened, offers her self a guide to a better
condition; and God has framed the nature of man so, that he cannot but say,
that this Light is good, and distinguish betwixt the dark tumultuous motions of
the Flesh and it:

5 And say, that there is as true a difference, as betwixt the natural Day and
Night. And thus Ignorance and Enquiry was the first days progress.

6 But though there be this principle of Light set up in the Conscience of Man,
and he cannot say any thing against it, but that it is good and true, yet has
he not presently so lively and savoury a relish in his distinction betwixt the
evil and the good: For the evil as yet wholly holds his Affections, though his
Fancy and Reason be touched a little with the Theoretical apprehensions of what
is good; wherefore by the will of God the heavenly Principle in due time
becomes a Spirit of savoury and affectionate discernment betwixt the evil and
the good; betwixt the pure waters that flow from the holy Spirit, and the muddy
and tumultuous suggestions of the Flesh.

7 And thus is Man enabled in a living manner to distinguish betwixt the
earthly and heavenly life.

8 For the heavenly Principle is now made to him a Spirit of savoury
discernment, and being taught by God after this manner, he will not fail to
pronounce, that this Principle, whereby he has so quick and lively a sense of
what is good and evil, is heavenly indeed: And thus Ignorance and Enquiry is
made the second days progress.

9 Now the sweetness of the upper waters being so well relisht by man, he has
a great nauseating against the lower feculent waters of the unbounded desires
of the flesh; So that God adding power to his will, the inordinate desires of
the flesh are driven within set limits, and he has a command over himself to
become more stayed and steady.

10 And this steadiness and command he gets over himself, he is taught by the
divine Principle in him to compare to the Earth or dry land for safenesse and
stability; but the desires of the flesh, he looks upon as a dangerous and
turbulent Sea: Wherefore the bounding of them thus, and arriving to a state of
command over a man's self, and freedom from such colluctations and collisions
as are found in the working Seas, the divine Nature in him could not but
approve as good.

11 For so it comes to pass by the will of God, and according to the nature of
things, that this state of sobriety in man, (he being in so good a measure rid
of the boisterousnesse of evil Concupiscence) gives him leisure so to cultivate
his mind with principles of Virtue and Honesty, that he is as a fruitful field
whom the Lord has blessed,

12 Sending forth out of himself sundry sorts of fruit-bearing trees, herbs,
and flowers; that is, various kinds of good works, to the praise of God, and
the help of his neighbor; and God and his own Conscience witness to him, that
this is good.

13 And thus Ignorance and Inquiry is made the third days progress.

14 Now when God has proceeded so far in the Spiritual Creation, as to raise
the heavenly Principle in man to that power and efficacy that it takes hold on
his affections, and brings forth laudable works of Righteousness, he thereupon
adds a very eminent accession of Light and Strength, setting before his eyes
sundry sorts of Luminaries in the heavenly or intellectual Nature, whereby he
may be able more notoriously to distinguish betwixt the Day and the Night; that
is, betwixt the condition of a truly illuminated soul, and one that is as yet
much benighted in ignorance, and estranged from the true knowledge of God. For
according to the difference of these Lights, it is signified to a man in what
condition himself or others are in, whether it be indeed Day or Night with
them, Summer or Winter, Spring time or Harvest, or what period or progress
they have made in the divine Life.

15 And though there be so great a difference betwixt these Lights, yet the
meanest are better then mere darkness, and serve in some measure or other to
give light to the Earthly man.

16 But among these many Lights which God makes to appear to man, there are two
more eminent by far then the rest. The greater of which two has his dominion by
day, and is a faithful guide to those which walk in the day; that is, that work
the works of righteousness. And this greater Light is but one, but does being
added, mightily invigorate the former daylight man walked by, and it is a more
full appearance of the Sun of Righteousness, which is an hearty and sincere
Love of God, and a man's neighbor. The lesser of these two great Lights has
dominion by night, and is a rule to those whose inward minds are held as yet
too strongly in the works of darkness: and it is a Principle weak, and
variable as the Moon, and is called Inconstancy of Life and Knowledge. There
are alsoan abundance of other little Lights thickly dispersed over the whole
Understanding of man, as the Stars in the Firmament, which you may call
Notionality or Multiplicity of ineffectual Opinions.

17 But the worst of all these are better then downright Sensuality and
Brutishness, and therefore God may well be said to set them up in the heavenly
part of man, his Understanding, to give what light they are able to his earthly
parts, his corrupt and inordinate Affections.

18 And as the Sun of Righteousness, that is, the hearty and sincere Love of
God, and a man's neighbor, by his single light and warmth with cheerfulness
and safety guides them that are in the day: so that more uneven and changeable
Principle, and the numerous Light of Notionality, may conduct them, as well as
they are able, that are benighted in darkness: And what is most of all
considerable, a man by the wide difference of these latter Lights from that of
the Day, may discern, when himself or another is benighted in the state of
unrighteousness. For multifarious Notionality and Inconstancy of life and
knowledge, are certain signs that a man is in the night: But the sticking to
this one, single, but vigorous and effectual Light, of the hearty and sincere
Love of God, and a man's neighbor, is a sign that a man walks in the day. And
he that is arrived to this condition, plainly discerns in the Light of God,
that all this is very good.

19 And thus Ignorance and Inquiry is made the fourth days progress.

20 And now so noble, so warm, and so vigorous a Principle or Light as the Sun
of Righteousness, being set up in the heavenly part of the Soul of man, the
unskilful may unwarily expect that the next news will be, that even the Seas
themselves are dried up with the heat thereof, that is, that the Concupiscible
in man is quite destroyed: But God does appoint far otherwise; for the waters
bring forth abundance of Fish as well as Fowl innumerable.

21 Thoughts therefore of natural delights do swim to and fro in the
Concupiscible of man, and the fervent love he bears to God causes not a many
faint ineffectual notions, but an abundance of holy affectionate meditations,
and winged Ejaculations that fly up heavenward, which returning back again,
and falling upon the numerous fry of natural Concupiscence, help to lessen
their numbers, as those fowls that frequent the waters devour the fish thereof.
And God and good men do see nothing but good in all this.

22 Wherefore God multiplies the thoughts of natural delight in the lower
Concupiscible, as well as he does those heavenly thoughts and holy meditations,
that the entire Humanity might be filled with all the degrees of good it is
capable of; and that the divine Life might have something to order and overcome.

23 And thus Ignorance and Inquiry made the fifth days progress.

24 Nor does God only cause the Waters to bring forth, but the dry Land also,
several living creatures after their kind, and makes the Irascible fruitful,
as well as the Concupiscible.

25 For God saw that they were both good, and that they were a fit subject for
the heavenly Man to exercise his Rule and Dominion over.

26 For God multiplies strength as well as occasions to employ it upon. And the
divine Life that has been under the several degrees of the advancement
thereof, so variously represented in the five foregoing progresses, God at
last works up to the height, and being complete in all things, styles it by the
name of his own Image; the divine Life arrived to this pitch being the right
Image of him indeed. Thus it is therefore, that at last God in our nature fully
manifests the true and perfect Man, whereby we our selves become good and
perfect, who does not only see and affect what is good, but has full power to
effect it in all things: For he has full dominion over the fish of the sea, can
rule and guide the fowls of the air, and with ease command the beasts of the
field, and what ever moves upon the earth.

27 Thus God creates Man in his own Image, making him as powerful a Commander
in his little World, over all the thoughts and motions of the Concupiscible and
Irascible, as himself is over the Natural frame of the Universe or greater
World. And this Image is Male and Female, consisting of a clear and free
Understanding, and divine Affection, which are now arrived to that height, that
no lower Life is able to rebel against them, and to bring them under.

28 For God blesses them and makes them fruitful, and multiplies their noble
offspring in so great and wonderful a measure that they replenish the
cultivated nature of man with such an abundance of real Truth and Equity, that
there is no living Figure, Imagination, or Motion of the Irascible or
Concupiscible, no extravagant or ignorant irregularity in religious meditations
and devotions, but they are presently moderated and rectified. For the whole
Territories of the Humane Nature is every where so well peopled with the
several beautiful shapes or Idea's of Truth and Goodness, the glorious
offspring of the heavenly Adam, Christ, that no Animal figure can offer to
move or wagge amiss, but it meets with a proper Corrector and Re-composer of
its motions.

29 And the divine Life in man being thus perfected, he is therewith instructed
by God, what is his food, as divine, and what is the food of the Animal Life in
him, viz. the most virtuous, most truly pious, and divine Actions he has given
to the heavenly Adam to feed upon, fulfilling the Will of God in all things,
which is more pleasant then the choicest sallads, or most delicate fruit the
taste can relish.

30 Nor is the Animal Life quite to be starved and pined, but regulated and
kept in subjection, and therefore they are to have their worser sort of herbs
to feed on; that is, Natural Actions consentaneous to the Principle from whence
they flow; that that Principle may also enjoy it self in the liberty of
prosecuting what its nature prompts it unto. And thus the sundry Modifications
of the Irascible and Concupiscible, as also the various Figurations of
Religious Melancholy, and Natural Devotions, (which are the Fishes, Beasts, and
Fowls in the Animal Nature of Man) are permitted to feed and refresh themselves
in those lower kinds of Operations they incline us to; provided all be
approved and rightly regulated by the heavenly Adam.

31 For the Divine Wisdom in Man sees and approves all things which God has
created in us, to be very good in their kind. And thus Ignorance and Inquiry
was the Sixth days progress.

CHAP. II.
3 The true Sabbatisme of the Sons of God. 5 A Description of men taught by
God. 7 The mystery of that Adam that comes by Water and the Spirit. 9
Obedience the Tree of Life: Disobedience the Tree of the Knowledge of good and
evil. 10 The Rivers of Paradise; the four Cardinal Virtues in the Soul of man.
17 The Life of Righteousness lost by Disobedience. 19 The mere Contemplative
and Spiritual Man sees the motions of the Animal Life, and rigidly enough
censures them. 21 That it is incompetible to Man perpetually to dwell in
Spiritual Contemplations. 22 That upon the slaking of those, the kindly Joy of
the Life of the Body springs out, which is our Eve. 23 That this kindly Joy of
the body is more grateful to Man in Innocence, then any thing else whatsoever.
25 Nor is man mistaken in his judgment thereof.

1 THUS the Heavenly and Earthly Nature in Man were finished, and fully
replenisht with all the garnishings belonging to them.

2 So the Divine Wisdom in the Humane Nature celebrated her Sabbath, having
now wrought through the toil of all the six days travel.

3 And the Divine Wisdom looked upon this Seventh day as blessed and sacred; a
day of Righteousness, Rest and Joy in the holy Ghost.

4 These were the Generations or Pullulations of the Heavenly and Earthly
Nature, of the Divine and Animal Life in Man, when God created them.

5 I mean those fruitful Plants, and pleasant and useful Herbs which he himself
planted: For I have described unto you the condition of a Man taught of God,
and instructed and cherisht up by his inward Light, where there is no external
Doctrine to distill as the rain, nor outward Gardener to intermeddle in Gods
Husbandry.

6 Only there is a Fountain of Water, which is Repentance from dead works, and
bubbles up in the earthly Adam, so as universally to wash all the ground.

7 And thus the nature of Man being prepared for further Accomplishments, God
shapes him into his own Image, which is Righteousness and true Holiness, and
breathes into him the Spirit of Life: And this is that Adam which is born of
Water and the Spirit.

8 Hitherto I have showed unto you how mankind is raised up from one degree of
Spiritual Light and Righteousness unto another, till we come at last to that
full Command and Perfection in the divine Life, that a man may be said in some
sort thus to have attained to the Kingdom of Heaven, or found a Paradise upon
Earth. The Narration that follows shall instruct you and forewarn you of those
evil courses, whereby man loses that measure of Paradisiacal happiness God
estates him in, even while he is in this world. I say therefore, that the Lord
God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put the Man whom he had
made; that is, Man living under the Intellectual rays of the Spirit, and being
guided by the morning Light of the Sun of Righteousness, is led into a very
pleasant and sweet Contentment of mind, and the testimony of a good Conscience
is his great delight.

9 And that the sundry Germinations and Springings up of the works of
Righteousness in him is a delectable Paradise to him, pleasing both the sight
and taste of that measure of divine Life that is manifested in him: But of all
the Plants that grow in him, there is none of so sovereign virtue, as that in
the midst of this Garden; to wit, the Tree of Life, which is, a Sincere
Obedience to the Will of God: Nor any that bears so lethiferous and poisonous
fruit, as the Tree of the Knowledge of good and evil, which is, Disobedience to
the Will of God, as it is manifested in Man. For the pleasure of the Soul
consists in conforming her self faithfully to what she is persuaded in her own
Conscience is the Will of God, what ever others would insinuate to the contrary.

10 And all the fruit-bearing Trees of Righteousness are watered by these four
Rivers, which wind along this Garden of Pleasure, which indeed are the four
Cardinal Virtues.

11 The name of the first is Pison, which is Prudence, not the suggestions of
fleshly craft and overreaching subtilty, but the Indications of the Spirit or
divine Intellect, what is fit and profitable and decorous to be done.

12 Here is well tried and certain approved Experience, healthful Industry, and
Alacrity to honest Labor.

13 And the name of the second River is Gihon, which is Justice.

14 And the name of the third River is Hiddekel, which is Fortitude; and the
fourth River is Euphrates, which is Temperance.

15 This is the Paradise where the Lord God had placed the Man, that he might
further cultivate it and improve it.

16 And the divine Light manifested in the Man, encouraged the Man to eat of
the fruits of Paradise freely, and to delight himself in all manner of holy
Understanding and Righteousness.

17 But withal he bade him have a special care how he relisht his own Will or
Power in any thing, but that he should be obedient to the manifest Will of God
in things great and small, or else assuredly he would lose the life he now
lived, and become dead to all Righteousness and Truth. So the man had a
special care, and his soul wrought wholly toward heavenly and divine things,
and heeded nothing but these, his more noble and Masculine Faculties being
after a manner solely set on work, but the natural Life (in which
notwithstanding, if it were rightly guided, there is no sin) being almost quite
forgot and dis-regarded.

18 But the Wisdom of God saw that it was not good for the soul of man, that
the Masculine Powers thereof should thus operate alone, but that all the
Faculties of Life should be set a float, that the whole humane Nature might be
accomplished with the divine.

19 Now the powers of the soul working so wholly upwards toward divine things,
the several Modifications or Figurations of the Animal Life (which God acting
in the frame of the humane Nature, represented to the Man, whence he had
occasion to view them and judge of them) by the quick Understanding of Man was
indeed easily discerned what they were, and he had a determinate apprehension
of every particular Figuration of the Animal Life,

20 And did censure them, or pronounce of them, though truly, yet rigidly
enough and severely; but as yet was not in a capacity of taking any delight in
them, there was not any of them fit for his turn to please himself in.

21 Wherefore divine Providence brought it so to pass, for the good of the
Man, and that he might more vigorously and fully be enriched with delight, that
the operations of the Masculine Faculties of the Soul were for a while well
slaked and consopited; during which time the Faculties themselves were
something lessened or weakened, yet in such a due measure and proportion, that
considering the future advantage that was expected, that was not missed that
was taken away, but all as handsome and complete as before.

22 For what was thus abated in the Masculine Faculties, was compensated
abundantly in exhibiting to the Man the grateful sense of the Feminine; for
there was no way but this to Create the Woman, which is to elicite that kindly
flowring joy or harmless delight of the Natural Life, and health of the Body;
which once exhibited and joined with Simplicity and Innocence of Spirit, it is
the greatest part of that Paradise a man is capable of upon Earth.

23 And the actuating of the matter being the most proper and essential
operation of a soul, man presently acknowledged this kindly flowring joy of the
Body, of nearer cognation and affinity with himself then any thing else he ever
had yet experience of, and he loved it as his own life.

24 And the Man was so mightily taken with his new Spouse, which is, The kindly
Joy of the Life of the Body, that he concluded with himself, that any one may
with a safe Conscience forgo those more earnest attempts toward the knowledge
of the Eternal God that created him, as also the performance of those more
scrupulous injunctious of his Mother the Church, so far forth as they are
incompetible with the Health and Joy of the Life of his Natural Body, and might
in such a case rather cleave to his Spouse, and become one with her; provided
he still lived in obedience to the indispensable Precepts of that Superior
Light and Power that begot him.

25 Nor had Adam's Reason or Affection transgressed at all in this; concluding
nothing but what the divine Wisdom and Equity would approve as true. Wherefore
Adam and his wife as yet sought no corners, nor covering places to shelter them
from the divine Light; but having done nothing amiss, appeared naked in the
presence of it without any shame or blushing.

CHAP. III.
1 Adam is tempted by inordinate Pleasure from the springing up of the Joy of
the invigorated Life of his Body. 2 A dialogue or dispute in the mind of Adam
betwixt The inordinate Desire of Pleasure, and the natural Joy of the body. 6
The will of Adam is drawn away to assent to inordinate Pleasure. 8 Adam having
transgressed, is impatient of the Presence of the divine Light. 10 A long
conflict of Conscience, or dispute betwixt Adams earthly mind, and the divine
Light, examining him, and setting before him both his present and future
condition, if he persisted in rebellion. 20 He adheres to the Joy of his body,
without reason or measure, notwithstanding all the castigations and monitions
of the divine Light. 21 The divine Light takes leave of Adam therefore for the
present, with deserved scorn and reproach. 22 The doom of the Eternal God
concerning lapsed Man, that will not suffer them to settle in wickedness,
according to their own depraved wills and desires.

1 BUT so it came to pass that the Life of the Body being thus invigorated in
Man, straightway the slyest and subtilest of all the Animal Figurations, the
Serpent, which is the inordinate Desire of Pleasure, craftily insinuated it
self into the Feminine part of Adam, viz. The kindly Joy of the body; and thus
assaulting Man, whispered such suggestions as these unto him. What a rigid and
severe thing is this business of Religion, and the Law of God, as they call
it, that deprives a man of all manner of Pleasure, and cuts him short of all
the contentments of Life?

2 But the Womanish part in Adam; to wit, The natural and kindly Joy of the
body, could witness against this, and answered, We may delight our selves with
the operations of all the Faculties both of soul and body, which God and Nature
has bestowed upon us.

3. Only we are to take heed of Disobedience, and of promiscuously following
our own will; but we are ever to consult with the Will of God, and the divine
Light manifested in our Understandings, and so do all things orderly and
measurably: For if we transgress against this, we shall die the death, and
lose the Life of Virtue and Righteousness, which now is awake in us.

4 But the Serpent, which is the inordinate desire of Pleasure, befooled Adam,
through the frailty of his Womanish Faculties, and made him believe he should
not die; but with safety might serve the free dictates of Pleasure or his own
Will and the Will of God, that Flesh and Spirit might both rule in him, and be
no such prejudice the one to the other:

5 But that his skill and experience in things will be more enlarged, and so
come nearer to divine Perfection indeed, and imitate that fullness of Wisdom
which is in God, who knows all things whatsoever, whether good or evil.

6 This crafty suggestion so insinuated it self into Adams Feminine Faculties,
that his fleshly Concupiscence began to be so strong, that it carried the
assent of his Will away with it, and the whole Man became a lawless and unruly
Creature: For it seemed a very pleasant thing at first sight to put in
execution what ever our own Lusts suggest unto us without control; and very
desirable to try all Conclusions to gain experience and knowledge of things.
But this brought in nothing but the wisdom of the flesh, and made Adam earthly
minded.

7 But he had not rambled very far in these dissolute courses, but his eyes
were opened, and he saw the difference, how naked now he was, and bare of all
strength and power to divine and holy things; and began to meditate with
himself some slight pretenses for his notorious folly and disobedience.

8 For the Voice of the divine Light had come unto him in the cool of the day,
when the fury and heat of his inordinate passions was something slaked: But
Adam could not endure the presence of it, but hid himself from it, meditating
what he should answer by way of Apology or Excuse.

9 But the divine Light persisted, and came up closer to him, and upbraided
unto him, that he was grown so wild and estranged from her self, demanding of
him in what condition he was, and wherefore he fled.

10 Then Adam ingenuously confessed that he found himself in such a pitiful
poor naked condition, that he was ashamed to appear in the Presence of the
divine Light; and that was the reason he hid himself from it, because it would
so manifestly upbraid to him his Nakedness and Deformity.

11 And the divine Light farther examined him, how he fell into this sensible
beggarly nakedness he was in, charging the sad event upon his Disobedience,
that he had fed upon, and taken a surfeit of the fruit of his own Will.

12 But Adam excused his rational faculties, and said, They did but follow the
natural Dictate of the Joy of the Body, the Woman that God himself bestowed
upon him for an help and delight.

13 But the divine Light again blamed Adam, that he kept his Feminine faculties
in no better order nor subjection, that they should so boldly and overcomingly
dictate to him such things as are not fit. To which he had nothing to say, but
that the subtle Serpent, the inordinate Desire of Pleasure, had beguiled both
his faculties, as well Masculine as Feminine, his Will and Affection was quite
carried away therewith.

14 Then the divine Light began to chastise the Serpent, in the hearing of
Adam, pronouncing of it, that it was more accursed, then all the Animal
Figurations beside; and that it crept basely upon the belly, tempting to Riot
and Venery, and relishing nothing but earth and dirt. This will always be the
guise of it, so long as it lives in a man.

15 But might I once descend so far into the Man, as to take possession of his
Feminine faculties, I would set the Natural Joy of the Body at defiance with
the Serpent; and though the subtilty of the Serpent may a little wound and
disorder the Woman for a while, yet her warrantable and free operations, she
being actuated by divine vigor, should afterward quite destroy and extinguish
the Seed of the Serpent; to wit, the Operations of the inordinate desire of
Pleasure.

16 And she added farther in the hearing of Adam concerning the Woman, as she
thus stood dis-joyn'd from the heavenly Life, and was not obedient to right
Reason, that by a divine Nemesis, she should conceive with sorrow, and bring
forth Vanity; And that her husband, the Earthly minded Adam, should tyrannize
over her, and weary her out, and foil her; So that the kindly Joy of the Health
and Life of the Body, should be much depraved, or made faint and languid, by
the unbridled humors, and impetuous Luxury and Intemperance of the Earthly
minded Adam.

17 And to Adam he said, who had become so Earthly minded, by listening to the
Voice of his deceived Woman, and so acting disobediently to the Will of God;
That his Flesh or Earth was accursed for his sake, with labor and toil should
he reap the fruits thereof all the while he continued in this Earthly
mindedness.

18 Cares also and Anxieties shall it bring forth unto him, and his thoughts
shall be as base as those of the beasts in the field; he shall ruminate of
nothing but what is Earthly and Sensual.

19 With sweat and anguish should he labor to satisfy his hunger and
insatiablenesse, till he returned to the Principle out of which he was taken;
for the Earthly mindedness came from this animated Earth, the Body; and is to
shrink up again into its own Principle, and to perish.

20 After all these Castigations and Premonitions of the divine Light, Adam was
not sufficiently awakened to the sense of what was good, but his mind was
straightway taken up again with the delights of the flesh, and dearly
embracing the Joy of his body, for all she was grown so inordinate, called her
My Life, professing she was the noursing Mother and chief comfort of all men
living, and none could subsist without her.

21 Then the divine Wisdom put hairy coats made of the skins of wild beasts
upon Adam and his Wife, and deservedly reproached them, saying, Now get you
gone for a couple of brutes. And Adam would have very gladly escaped so, if he
might, and set up his rest for ever in the beastiall Nature.

22 But the Eternal God of heaven, whose Providence reaches to all things, and
whose Mercy is over all his works, looking upon Adam, perceived in what a
pitiful ridiculous case he was; who seeking to be like unto God for knowledge
and freedom, made himself no better then a Beast, and could willingly have
lived for ever in that baser kind of nature; Wherefore the Eternal Lord God,
in compassion to Adam, designed the contrary, and deriding his boldness and
curiosity that made him transgress, Behold, says he, Adam is become like one
of us, knowing Good and Evil: and can of himself enlarge his pleasure, and
create new Paradises of his own, which forsooth must have also their Tree of
Life or Immortality: and Adam would for ever live in this foolish state he has
placed himself in.

23 But the Eternal Lord God would not suffer Adam to take up his rest in the
Beastial delight, which he had chosen, but drove him out of this false
Paradise, which he would have made to himself, and set him to cultivate his
fleshly members, out of which his Earthly mindedness was taken.

24 I say, he forcibly drove out Adam from this Paradise of Luxury; nor could
he settle perpetually in the brutish Life, because the Cherubim with the
flaming sword that turned every way, beat him off; that is, the Manly Faculties
of Reason and Conscience met him ever and anon in his brutish purposes, and
convinced him so of his folly, that he could not set up his rest for ever in
this bestial condition.

THE DEFENSE Of the Threefold CABBALA.

Philo Jud. (...). That is, That the whole Law of Moses is like to a living
Creature, whose Body is the literal sense; but the Soul the more inward and
hidden meaning, covered under the sense of the Letter. R. MOSES EGYPT. Non
omnia secundum literam intelligenda and accipienda esse quae dicuntur in Opere
Bereschith seu Creationis, sicut vulgus hominum existimat. Sensum enim illorum
literales vel gignunt pravas opiniones de natura Dei Opt. Max. vel certe
fundamenta legis evertunt, Heresinque aliquam introducunt. LONDON, Printed by
JAMES FLESHER. 1653.

THE PREFACE to the READER.
READER.
THE Cabbala's thou have read being in all likelihood so strange and
unexpected, especially the Philosophical, that the Defense it self, which
should cure and cese thy amazement, may not occasion in any passage thereof,
any further scruple or offense, I thought fit a while to interrupt thee, that
whatever I conjecture may less satisfy, may aforehand be strengthened by this
short Preface.

And for my own part I cannot presage what may be in any show of Reason
alleged by any man, unless it be, The unusual mystery of Numbers; The using
of the authority of the Heathen in Explication of Scripture; The adding also of
Miracles done by them for the further confirming their authority; and lastly,
the strangeness of the Philosophical Conclusions themselves.

Now for the Mystery of Numbers, that this ancient Philosophy of Moses should
be wrapped up in it, will not seem improbable, if we consider that the Cabbala
of the Creation was conserved in the hands of Abraham, and his family, who was
famous for Mathematics, (of which Arithmetic is a necessary part) first
amongst the Chaldeans, and that after he taught the Egyptians the same arts,
as Historians write. Besides Prophetical and Aenigmatical writings, that it is
usual with them to hide their secrets, as under the allusions of Names and
Etymologies, so also under the adumbrations of Numbers, it is so notoriously
known, and that in the very Scriptures themselves, that it needs no proof; I
will instance but in that one eminent example of the number of the Beast 666.

As for citing the Heathen Writers so frequently; you are to consider that they
are the wisest and the most virtuous of them, and either such as the Fathers
say, had their Philosophy from Moses and the Prophets, as Pythagoras and Plato,
or else the Disciples or Friends of these Philosophers. And therefore I thought
it very proper to use their Testimony in a thing that they seemed to be so fit
witnesses of for the main, as having received the Cabbala from the ancient
Prophets; Though I will not deny, but they have mingled their own fooleries
with it, either out of the wantonness of their Fancy, or mistake of Judgment;
Such as are the Transmigration of Humane Souls into Brutes; An utter abstinence
from Flesh; Too severe reproaches against the Pleasures of the Body;
Vilification of Marriage, and the like; which is no more Argument against the
main drift of the Cabbala, then unwarrantable superstitious Opinions, and
Practices of some deceived Churches are against the solid grounds of
Christianity.

Again, I do not allege Philosophers alone, but as occasion requires, Fathers,
and which I conceive as valid in this case, the Jewish Rabbis, who in things
where prejudice need not blind them, I should think as fit as any, to confirm
a Cabbalistical sense, especially if there be a general consent of them, and
that they do not write their private fancy, but the mind of their whole Church.

Now if any shall take offense at Pythagoras his Scholars, swearing as is
conceived by their Master that taught them the mystery of the Tetractys, (as
you shall understand more at large in the Explication of the fourth days work)
I must profess that I my self am not a little offended with it. But that high
reverence they bore to Pythagoras, as it is a sign of Vanity, and some kind of
Superstition in them; so is it also no less an Argument of a stupendous
measure of knowledge and sanctity in Pythagoras himself, that he should extort
from them so great honor, and that his Memory should be so sacred to them.
Which profound knowledge and sanctity he having got by conversing with the
Jewish Prophets, it ultimately tends to the renown of that Church, and
consequently to the Christian, which inherits those holy Oracles which were
first peculiar to the Jews.

But what the followers of Pythagoras transgressed in, is no more to be imputed
to him, then the Superstitions exhibited to the Virgin Mary can be laid to her
charge. Besides it may be a question whether in that Pythagorick Oath, (...),
etc. they did not swear by God the first Author of the Cabbala, and that
mysterious Explication of the Tetrctys, that is indeed, of all knowledge Divine
and Natural, who first gave it to Adam, and then revived or confirmed it again
to Moses. Or if it must be understood of Pythagoras, why may it not be looked
upon as a civil Oath, or Asseveration, such as Joseph's swearing by the life
of Pharaoh, and Noblemen by their Honors? neither of which notwithstanding for
my own part I can allow or assure my self that they are merely Civil, but
touch upon Religion, or rather Idolatrous Superstition.

As for the Miracles Pythagoras did, though I do not believe all that are
recorded of him are true, yet those that I have recited I hold probable enough,
they being not unbecoming the worth of the Person: but those that suppose the
transmigration of Humane Souls into the Bodies of Beasts, I look upon as
Fables, and his whispering into the ear of an Ox to forbear to eat Beans, as a
loudly. But it seems very consonant unto Divine Providence, that Pythagoras
having got the knowledge of the holy Cabbala, which God imparted to Adam and
Moses, that he should countenance it before the Nations by enabling him to do
Miracles. For so those noble and ancient Truths were more firmly radicated
amongst the Philosophers of Greece, and happily preserved to this very day.

Nor can his being carried in the Air make him suspected to be a mere Magician
or Conjurer, since the holy Prophets and Apostles themselves have been
transported after that manner, as Habakkuk from Jewry to Babylon, and Philip
after he had baptized the Eunuch to Azotus. But for my own part, I think
working of Miracles is one of the least perfections of a Man, and is nothing at
all to the happiness of him that does them, or rather seems to do them: For if
they be Miracles, he does them not, but some other power or person distinct
from him. And yet here Magicians and Witches are greatly delighted in that this
power is in some sort attributed to themselves, and that they are admired of
the people, as is manifest in Simon Magus. But thus to lord it and domineer in
the Attribute of Power with the Prince of the Air, what is it but mere Pride,
the most irrational and provoking vice that is? And with what gross folly is
it here conjoined, they priding and pleasing themselves in that they sometimes
do that, or rather suffer that, which Herns and wlde Geese, and every ordinary
Fowl can do of it self; that is, mount aloft and glide through the fleeting
Air? But holy and good men know that the greatest sweet and perfection of a
virtuous Soul, is the kindly accomplishment of her own Nature in true Wisdom
and divine Love. And if any thing miraculous happen to them, or be done by
them, it is, that that worth and knowledge that is in them may be taken notice
of, and that God thereby may be glorified, whose witnesses they are. But no
other accession of happiness accrues to them from this, but that hereby they
may be in a better capacity of making others happy, which I confess I conceive
here Pythagoras his case.

And that men may not indulge too much to their own Melancholy and Fancy, which
they ordinarily call Inspiration, if they be so great Lights to the world as
they pretend, and so high that they will not condescend to the examination of
humane Reason, it were desirable that such persons would keep in their heat to
concoct the crudities of their own Conceptions, till the warrant of a Miracle
call them out; and so they might more rightfully challenge an attention from
the people, as being authorized from above to tell us something we knew not
before, nor can so well know, as believe, the main Argument being not Reason
but Miracle.

Lastly, for the strangeness of the Philosophical Conclusions themselves, It
were the strangest thing of all, if at first sight they did not seem very
Paradoxical and strange; Else why should they be hid and concealed from the
Vulgar, but that they did transcend their capacity, and were overmuch
disproportioned to their belief? But in the behalf of these Cabbalistical
conclusions, I will only note thus much, that they are such that supposing them
true (which I shall no longer assert, then till such time as some able
Philosopher or Theologer shall convince me of their falsehood) there is nothing
of any grand consideration in Theology or Nature, that will not easily be
extricated by this Hypothesis, an eminent part whereof is the Motion of the
Earth, and the Prae-existency of Souls. The evidence of the former of which
Truths is such, that it has won the assent of the most famous Mathematicians
of our later Ages; and the reasonableness of the latter is no less: There
having never been any Philosopher that held the Soul of Man immortal, but he
held that it did also prae-exist.

But Religion not being curious to expose the full view of Truth to the people,
but only what was most necessary to keep them in the fear of a Deity and
obedience to the Law, contented her self with what merely concerned the state
of the Soul after the dissolution of the Body, concealing what ever was
conceivable concerning her condition before. Now I say, it is a pretty
privilege of falsehood, (if this Hypothesis be false) and very remarkable, that
it should better suit with the Attributes of God, the visible events of
Providence, the Phenomenon of Nature, the Reason of Man, and the holy Text it
self, where men acknowledge a mysterious Cabbala, then that which by all means
must be accounted true, viz. That there is no such Motion of the Earth about
the Sun, nor any Prae-existency of humane Souls.

Reader, I have done what lies on my part, that thou may peruse this Defense
of mine without any rub or stumbling; let me now request but one thing which
thou art bound to grant, which is, that thou read my Defense without Prejudice,
and that all along as thou go, thou make not thy recourse to the customary
conceits of thy Fancy, but consult with thy free Reason, (...), as Aristotle
somewhere speaks in his Metaphysics. For Custom is another Nature; and
therefore those conceits that are accustomary and familiar, we unawares appeal
to, as if they were indeed the natural light of the Mind, and her first common
Notions. And he gives an instance not altogether unsuitable to our present
purpose. (...). The Philosopher may be as bold as he pleases with the Ritual
laws and religious stories of the Heathens, but I do not know that he ever was
acquainted with the Law of Moses. But I think I may speak it not without due
Reverence, that there is something of Aristotle's saying Analogically true in
the very History of the Creation, and that the first impressions of the Literal
Text, which is so plainly accommodated to the capacity of mere children and
Idiots, by reason of custom have so strongly rooted themselves in the minds of
some, that they take that sense to be more true, then the true meaning of the
text indeed. Which is plain in no meaner a person then one of the Fathers;
namely, Lactantius; who looking upon the world as a Tent according to the
description in the Literal Cabbala, did very stoutly and confidently deny
Antipodes; So much did a customary fancy prevail over the free use of his
Reason.

Thus much for better caution I thought fit to preface. The rest the
Introduction to the Defense, and the very frame and nature of the Defense it
self, I hope will make good to the judicious and ingenuous Reader.

THE INTRODUCTION TO THE DEFENSE.
Diodorus his mistake concerning Moses, and other Lawgivers that have
professed themselves to have received their Laws from either God or some good
Angel. Reasons why Moses began his History with the Creation of the world. The
Sun and Moon the same with the Egyptians Osiris and Isis, and how they came to
be worshipped for Gods. The Apotheosis of mortal men, such as Bacchus and
Ceres, how it first came into the world. That the letter of the Scripture
speaks ordinarily in Philosophical things according to the sense and
imagination of the Vulgar. That there is a Philosophical sense that lies hid in
the letter of the three first Chapters of Genesis. That there is a Moral or
Mystical sense not only in these three Chapters, but in several other places of
the Scripture.

NOT to stay you with too tedious a Prologue to the matter in hand concerning
the Author of this book of Genesis, to wit, Moses; I shall look upon him mainly
in reference to that public induement, in which at the very first sight he
will appear admirable, viz. As a Politician or a Lawgiver. In which his skill
was so great, that even in the judgment of Heathen Writers he had the
pre-eminence above all the rest. Diodorus has placed him in the head of his
Catalogue of the most famous Lawgivers under the name of (...), if Justin
Martin be not mistaken, or if he be, at least he bears them company that are
reputed the best, reserved for the last and most notable instance of those that
entitled their Laws divine, and made themselves spokesmen betwixt God and the
People. This Mneves is said to receive his Laws from Mercury, as Minos from
Jupiter, Lycurgus from Apollo, Zathraustes from his (...), his good Genius,
Zamolxis from Vesta, and Moses from Iao; that is, Jehovah. (...). But he speaks
like a mere Historian in the business. (...) is the word which he boldly abuses
to the diminution of all their Authorities promiscuously. For he says they
feigned they received Laws from these Deities; and adds the reason of it too,
but like an errant Statesman, or an incredulous Philosopher, (...), (...).
Whether it be, says he, that they judged it an admirable and plainly divine
project that redounded unto the profit of a multitude, or whether they
conceived that hereby the people looking upon the greatness, and supereminence
of their Lawgivers, would be more obedient to their Laws. That saying in the
Schools is not so trivial as true. Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum
recipientis, Every thing is as it is taken, or at least appears to be so. The
tincture of our own Natures stains the appearance of all objects. So that I
wonder not that Diodorus Siculus, a man of a mere Political Spirit, (as it is
very plain how near History and Policy are akin) should count the receiving of
Laws from some Deity rather a piece of prudential fraud and political forgery,
then reality and truth.

But to leave Diodorus to his Ethnicisme and Incredulity; as for us that ought
to believe Scripture, if we will not gainsay the authority of the Greek Text,
we shall not only be fully persuaded of Moses his receiving of Laws from Gods
own mouth, but have some hints to believe that something Analogical to it may
have come to pass in other Lawgivers, Deuteronomy. 32. (...), etc. When the most
High divided the Nations, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds
of the Nations according to the number of the Angels of God, but Jacob was the
portion of Jehovah, that is, Iao, etc. So that it is not improbable but that as
the great Angel of the Covenant, (he whom Philo calls (...), That is, the
eldest of the Angels, the Archangel, the word, the Beginning, the Name of God,
which is Jehovah) I say, that as he gave Laws to his charge, so the Tutelar
Angels of other nations might be the Instructers of those that they raised up
to be Lawgivers to their charge; Though in process of time the Nations that
were at first under the Government of good Angels, by their lewdness and
disobedience might make themselves obnoxious to the power and delusion of those
(...), as they are called, deceitful and tyrannical devils. But this is but a
digression; That which I would briefly have intimated is this, That Moses the
great Lawgiver of the Jews, was a man instructed of God himself to Prudence
and true Policy. And therefore I make account if we will but with diligence
search, we may surely find the footsteps of unsophisticate Policy in all the
passages of the whole Pentateuch.

And here in the very entrance it will offer it self unto our view: Where Moses
shows himself such as that noble Spirit of Plato desires all Governors of
Commonwealths should be, who has in his Epistle to Dion and his friends
foretold, that mankind will never cease to be miserable, till such time as
either true and right Philosophers rule in the Commonwealth, or those that do
rule, apply themselves to true and sound Philosophy. And what is Moses his
Bereshith, but a fair invitation thereto, it comprehending at least the whole
fabric of Nature and conspicuous furniture of the visible world? As if he dare
appeal unto the whole Assembly of Gods Creation, to the voice of the great
Universe, if what he propounds to his people over whom God has set him, be not
righteous and true; And that by acting according to his Precepts, they would
but approve themselves Cosmopolitas, true Citizens of the world, and Loyal
Subjects to God and Nature. It is Philo's interpretation upon the place, which
how true it is in Moses veiled, I will not here dispute: that it is most true
in Moses unvailed, Christ our Lord, is true without all dispute and
controversy. And whosoever follows him, follows a Law justified by God and
the whole Creature, they speaking in several dialects the mind of their Maker.
It is a truth and life that is the safety of all Nations, and the earnest
expectation of the ends of the Earth; Christ the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever, whose dominion and Law neither time nor place does exclude. But to
return to Moses.

Another reason no less considerable, why that holy and wise Lawgiver Moses,
should begin with the Creation of the world, is this: The Laws and Ordinances
which he gave to the Israelites, were given by him as (...), as Statutes
received from God. And therefore the great argument and incitement to Obedience
should lie in this first and highest Lawgiver, God himself, the great Jehovah,
whose Wisdom, Power, and Goodness could not better be set out then by
ascribing the Creation of the whole visible world unto him. So that for his
Power he might be feared, admired for his Wisdom, and finally, for his
Goodness be loved, adored, and Deified: That as he was truly in himself the
most high God, so he should be acknowledged of the people to be so.

For certainly there is nothing that does so win away, nay, ravish or carry
captive the minds of poor mankind, as Bounty and Munificence. All men loving
themselves most affectionately, and most of all the meanest and basest spirits,
whose souls are so far from being a little raised and released from themselves,
that they do impotently and impetuously cleave and cling to their dear
carkases. Hence have they out of the strong relish, and favor of the pleasures
and conveniences thereof made no scruple of honoring them for gods, who have
by their industry, or by good luck produced any thing that might conduce for
the improvement of the happiness and comfort of the body.

From hence it is that the Sun and Moon have been accounted for the two prime
Deities by Idolatrous Antiquity, viz. from that sensible good they conferred
upon hungry mankind. The one watering as it were the Earth by her humid
influence; the other ripening the fruit of the ground by his warm rays, and
opening daily all the hid treasures of the visible world by his glorious
approach, pleasing the sight with the variety of Natures objects, and chearing
the whole body by his comfortable heat. To these as to the most conspicuous
Benefactors to mankind, was the name (...) given, (...), because they observed
that these conceived Deities were in perpetual motion.

These two are the Egyptians Osiris and Isis, and five more are added to them
as very sensible Benefactors, but subordinate to these two, and Dependents of
them. And in plain speech they are these. Fire, Spirit, Humidity, Siccity, and
Air, but in their divine Titles Vulcan, Jupiter, Oceanus, Ceres, and Minerva.
These are the (...), as Diodorus speaks. But after these mortal men were
canonized for immortal Deities (...), for their prudence and benefaction; as
you may see at large in Diodorus Siculus. I will name but two for instance,
Bacchus and Ceres, the one the Inventor of Corn, the other of Wine and Beer: So
that all may be resolved into that brutish Aphorism, (...).
That which could please or pleasure degenerate mankind in the Body, (they
having lost the Image of God in their Souls, and become mere brutes after a
manner) that must be their God.

Wherefore it was necessary for Moses having to deal with such Terrestrial
Spirits, Sons of Sense and Corporeity, to propose to them Jehovah as Maker of
this Sensible and Corporeal world, that whatever sweet they suck out of the
varieties thereof, they may attribute to him, as the first Fountain and Author,
without whom neither they nor any thing else had been, that thereby they might
be stirred up to praise his Name, and accomplish his Will revealed by his
servant Moses unto them. And this was true and sound Prudence, aiming at
nothing but the glory of God, and the good of the poor ignorant people.

And from the same Head springs the manner of his delivering of the Creation;
that is, accommodately to the apprehension of the meanest: not speaking of
things according to their very Essence and real Nature, but according to their
appearances to us. Not starting of high and intricate Questions, and concluding
them by subtle Arguments, but familiarly and condescendingly setting out the
Creation, according to the most easy and obvious conceits they themselves had
of those things they saw in the world; omitting even those grosser things that
lay hid in the bowels of the Earth, as Metals, and Minerals, and the like, as
well as those things that fall not at all under Sense, as those immaterial
Substances, Angels, or Intelligences. Thus fitly has the Wisdom and Goodness
of God accommodated the outward Cortex of the Scripture, to the most narrow and
slow apprehension of the Vulgar.

Nor does it therefore follow that the Narration must not be true, because it
is according to the appearance of things to Sense and obvious Fancy; for there
is also a Truth of Appearance, according to which Scripture most what speaks in
Philosophical matters.

And this Position is the main key, as I conceive, and I hope shall hereafter
plainly prove, whereby Moses his Bereshith may according to the outward and
literal sense be understood without any difficulty or clashing one part against
another. And my task at this time will be very easy, for it is but
transcribing what I have already elsewhere occasionally published, and
recovering of it into its proper place.

First therefore I say, that it is a thing confessed by the Learned Hebrews,
who make it a Rule for the understanding of many places of Scripture, Loquitur
lex juxta linguam humanam, That the Law speaks according to the language of the
sons of men.

And secondly, which will come more home to the purpose, I shall instance in
some places that of necessity are to be thus understood.

Genesis 19. 23. The Sun was risen upon the Earth when Lot entered into Zoar; which
implies that it was before under the Earth, which is true only according to
sense and vulgar fancy.

Deuteronom. 30. v. 4. (...), implies that the Earth is bounded at certain
places, as if there were truly an Hercules Pillar, or Non plus ultra: As it is
manifest to them that understand but the natural signification of (...) and
(...); For those words plainly import the Earth bounded by the blew Heavens,
and the Heavens bounded by the Horizon of the Earth, they touching one another
mutually; which is true only to sense and in appearance, as any man that is not
a mere Idiot, will confess.

Ecclesiastic. 27. v. 12. The discourse of a godly man is always with wisdom,
but a fool changes as the Moon. That is to be understood according to Sense
and Appearance: For if a fool changes no more then the Moon does really, he is
a wise and excellently accomplished man; Semper idem, though to the sight of
the Vulgar different. For at least an Hemisphere of the Moon is always
enlightened, and even then most when she least appears unto us.

Hitherto may be referred also that, 2 Chronicles. 4. 2. Also he made a molten Sea
ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and five cubits the height
thereof, and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about. A thing
plainly impossible that the Diameter should be ten cubits, and the
Circumference but thirty. But it pleases the Spirit of God here to speak
according to the common use and opinion of men, and not according to the
subtilty of Archimedes his demonstration.

Again Psalm 19. In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which as a
Bridegroom comes out of his chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run his
race. This, as Mr. John Calvin observes, is spoken according to the rude
apprehension of the Vulgar, whom David should in vain have endeavored to teach
the mysteries of Astronomy. And therefore he makes no mention of the course of
the Sun in the nocturnal Hemisphere. I Will add but one instance more, Joshua
10. v. 12. Sunn^ stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the Valley of
Ajalon; where it is manifest that Joshua speaks not according to the
Astronomical truth of the thing, but according to sense and appearance. For
suppose the Sun placed, and the Moon, at the best advantage you can, so that
they leave not their natural course, they were so far from being one over
Ajalon, and the other over Gibeon, that they were in very truth many hundreds
of miles distant from them. And if the Sun and Moon were on the other side of
the Equator, the distance might amount to thousands.

I might adjoyn to these proofs the suffrages of many Fathers, and Modern
Divines, as Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, Bernard, Aquinas, and the rest.
But it is already manifest enough that the Scripture speaks not according to
the exact curiosity of Truth, describing things (...), according to the very
Nature and Essence of them; but (...), according to their appearance in sense
and the vulgar opinion.

The second Rule that I would set down is ^his: That there is a various
Intertexture of Theosophical and Philosophical Truths, many Physical and
Metaphysical Theorems hinted ^o us ever and anon, through those words that at
first sight seem to bear but an ordinary gross sense, I mean especially in
these three first Chapters of Genesis. And a man will be the better assured of
the truth of this Position, if he do but consider, That the Literal Text of
Moses that sets out the Creation of the world, and offers reasons of sundry
notable Phenomenon of Nature, bears altogether a most palpable compliance with
the mere rude and ignorant conceits of the Vulgar. Wherefore the Argument of
these three Chapters being so Philosophical as it is, it seems unworthy of that
knowing Spirit of Moses, or of Religion it self, that he should not contrive
under the external contexture of this Narration, some very singular and choice
Theorems of Natural Philosophy and Metaphysics; which his pious and learned
successors should be able by some secret Traditionary Doctrine or Cabbala to
apply to his outward Text.

For what an excellent provision is this* for such of the people whose
pregnancy of parts and wit might make them rest unsatisfied, as well in the
Moral Allegory (into which they are first to be initiated) as in the outward
letter it self; and also their due obedience, humility, and integrity of life,
make them fit to receive some more secret Philosophic Cabbala from the mouth
of the knowing Priest; The strange unexpected richness of the sense whereof,
and highness of Notion suddenly shining forth, by removing aside of the vail,
might strike the soul of the honest Jew with unexpressible pleasure and
amazement, and fill his heart with joy and thankfulness to God for the good
tidings therein contained, and conciliate greater reverence then ever to Moses
and to Religion.

Wherefore such a Philosophic Cabbala as this being so convenient and
desirable, and men in all Ages having professed their expectation of solid and
severe Philosophy in this story of the Creation by their several attempts
thereupon, it seems to me abundantly probable that Moses and his successors
were furnished with some such like Cabbala; which I am still the more easily
induced to believe, from that credible fame that Pythagoras and Plato had their
Philosophy from Moses his Text, which it would not so easily have suggested
unto them, had they had no assistance from either Jewish or Egyptian Prophet
or Priest to expound it.

The third and last Rule that I would lay down is this: That Natural Things,
Persons, Motions, and Actions, declared or spoken of in Scripture, admit of
also many times a Mystical, Moral, or Allegorical sense. This is worth the
proving it concerning our Souls more nearly then the other. I know this
Spiritual sense is as great a fear to some faint and unbelieving hearts, as a
Spectre or Night-spirit. But it is a thing acknowledged by the most wise, most
pious, and most rational of the Jewish Doctors; I will instance in one who is
ad instar omnium, Moses Aegyptius, who compares the divine Oracles to Apples of
Gold in Pictures of Silver: For that the outward Nitor is very comely as Silver
curiously cut thorough and wrought, but the inward Spiritual or Mystical sense
is the Gold more precious and more beautiful, that glisters through those
Cuttings and Artificial Carvings in the Letter.

I will endeavor to prove this point by sundry passages in Scripture, Psalm 25.
(...). The easy and genuine sense of these words is, The secret of the Lord is
for them that fear him, and his Covenant is to make them know it, viz. his
Secret, which implies that the Mystery of God lies not bare to false and
adulterous eyes, but is hid and wrapped up in decent coverings from the sight
of Vulgar and Carnal men. That his Secrets are, as Aristotle answered to
Alexander concerning his (...), or Acroamatical Writings, that they were (...),
published and not published. And our Savior himself, though all Goodness, was
not so prodigal of his Pearls as to cast them to Swine. To them that were
without he spoke Parables. And upon the same Principles certainly it is not a
whit unreasonable, to conceive Moses to write Types and Allegories. And we have
sufficient ground to think so from that of the Apostle 1 Cor. chapter 10. where
when he has in short reckoned up some of the main passages that befell the
Israelites in their Journey from Egypt to Canaan, (which yet no man that has
any faith or the fear of God before his eyes, will deny to be a real History)
he closes with this expression All these things being Types befell them, but
were written for our instruction, on whom the ends of the world are come. So
Galat. chapter 4. The History of Abraham's having two sons Ishmael and Isaak, the
one of the bondwoman, the other of the free, viz. Agar and Sara, the same
Apostle there speaks out, that they are an Allegory, v. 24.

I might add many other passages to this purpose, but I will only raise one
consideration concerning many Histories of the Old Testament, and then
conclude. If so be the Spirit of God meant not something more by them then the
mere History, I mean some useful and Spiritual Truth involved in them, they
will be so far from stirring us up to Piety, that they may prove ill Precedents
for falseness and injurious dealings.

For what an easy thing is it for a man to fancy himself an Israelite, and
then to circumvent his honest neighbors under the notion of Egyptians? But we
will not confine our selves to this one solitary instance. What is Jacob but a
supplanter, a deceiver, and that of his own brother? For taking advantage of
his present necessity, he forced him to sell his birthright for a m^sse of
pottage. What a notorious piece of fraud is that of Rebecca, that while
industrious Esau is ranging the Woods and Mountains to fulfill his fathers
command, and please his aged appetite, she should substitute Jacob with his
both counterfeit hands and Venison, to carry away the blessing intended by the
good old man for his officious elder son Esau? Jacobs rods of Poplar, an ill
example to servants to defraud their masters; and Rachels stealing Labans
T^^raphim* and concealing them with a falsehood, how warrantable an act it was,
let her own husband give sentence; With whomsoever thou find thy Gods, let
him not live, Genesis 31. 32.

I might be infinite in this point; I will only add one example of Woman's
perfidious cruelty, as it will seem at first sight, and so conclude. Sisera
Captain of Jabins host being worsted by Israel, fled on his feet to the Tent of
Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, who was in league and confederacy with
Jabin: This Jael was in show so courteous as to meet Sisera, and invite him
into her Tent, saying, Turn in my Lord, turn in to me, Fear not. And when he
had turned in unto her into the Tent, she covered him with a mantle: And he
said unto her, Give me I pray thee a little water to drink; And she opened a
bottle of Milk, and gave him drink, and covered him. In short, he trusted her
with his life, and gave himself to her protection, and she suddenly so soon as
he fell asleep drove a nail with an hammer into his temples, and betrayed his
Corpse to the will of his enemies. An act certainly that the Spirit of God would
not have approved, much less applauded so much, but in reference to the
Mystery that lies under it.

My three Rules for the interpreting of Scripture, I have I hope by this time
sufficiently established, by way of a more general preparation to the Defense
of my threefold Cabbala. I shall now apply my self to a more particular
clearing and confirming the several passages therein.

THE DEFENSE OF THE LITERAL CABBALA.
CHAP. I.
1 The genuine sense of In the beginning. The difference of (...) neglected by
the Seventy, who translate (...) only (...). 2 The ground of their mistake
discovered, who conceive Moses to intimate that the Matter is uncreated. That
(...) is no more then ventus magnus. 4 That the first darkness was not properly
Night. 6 Why the Seventy translate (...) Firmamentum, and that it is in
allusion to a firmly pitched Tent. 11 That the sensible effects of the Sun
invited the Heathen to Idolatry, and that their Oracles taught them to call him
by the name of Jao. 14 That the Prophet Jeremy divides the day from the Sun,
speaking according to the vulgar capacity. 15 The reason why the Stars appear
on this side the upper caeruleous Sea. 27 The Opinion of the Anthropomorphites,
and of what great consequence it is for the Vulgar to imagine God in the shape
of a Man. Aristophanes his story in Plato of Men and Women's growing together at
first, as if they made both but one Animal.

THE first Rule that I laid down in my Introduction to the Defense of my
Threefold Cabbala, I need not here again repeat, but desire the Reader only to
carry it in mind, and it will warrant the easy and familiar sense that I
shall settle upon Moses his Text in the Literal meaning thereof. Unto which, if
I add also reasons from the pious prudence of this holy Lawgiver, showing how
every passage makes for greater faith in God, and more affectionate obedience
to his Law, there will be nothing wanting I think (though I shall sometimes
cast in some notable advantages also from Critical Learning) that may gain
belief to the truth of the Interpretation.

Verse. 1. In this first verse I put no other sense of In the beginning, then
that it denotes to us the order of the History. Which is also the opinion of
Maimonides, who deriving (...) from (...) signifying the head, rightly observes
the Analogy; that as the head is the forepart of a living creature, so (...)
signifies that which is placed first in any thing else. And that thus the
Creation of the world is the head or forepart of the History that Moses intends
to set down.

Wherefore Moses having in his mind (as is plain from the Title of this book,
Genesis, as well as the matter therein contained) to write an History and
Genealogy from the beginning of the world to his own time, it is very easy and
obvious to conceive, that in reference to what he should after add, he said, In
the beginning: As if the whole frame of his thoughts lay thus. First of all,
God made the Heavens, and the Earth, with all that they contain, the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, the Day and Night, the Plants, and living creatures that were in the
Air, Water, and on the Earth, and after all these he made Adam, and Adam begot
Cain and Abel, and so on in the full continuance of the History and Genealogies.

And this sense I conceive is more easy and natural then that of Austin,
Ambrose, and Besil, who will have In the Beginning, to signify In the
Beginning of Time, or In the Beginning of the world. And yet I thought it not
amiss to name also these, that the Reader may take his choice.

God made Heaven and Earth. Maimonides and Manasseh Ben Israel observe these
three words used in Scripture, when Creation of the world is attributed to God,
viz. (...); and that (...) signifies the production of things out of nothing,
which is the Schools Notion of Creation; (...) is the making up a thing perfect
and complete, according to its own kind and properties; (...) intimates the
dominion and right possession that God has of all things thus created or made.
But though (...) according to the mind of the Learned Jews, signifies Creation
properly so called, yet the Seventy observe no such Criticisme, but translate
it (...), which is no more then made. And vulgar men are not at leisure to
distinguish so subtly. Wherefore this latter sense I receive as the vulgar
Literal sense, the other as Philosophical. And where I use the word Creation in
this Literal Cabbala, I understand but that common and general Notion of Making
a thing, be it with what circumstances it will.

Neither do I translate (...) in the plural number, the Trinity; Because, as
Vatablus observes out of the Hebrew Doctors, that when the inferior speaks of
his superior, he speaks of him in the Plural Number. So Esaias 19. 4. Tradam
Aegyptum in manum dominorum duri. And Exodus 22. 10. Et accipiet domini ejus,
for dominus. The Text therefore necessarily requiring no such sense, and the
mystery being so abstruse, it is rightly left out in this Literal Cabbala.

Verse. 2. In the first verse there was a summary Proposal of the whole Creation
in those two main parts of it, Heaven and Earth. Now he begins the particular
prosecution of each days work. But it is not needful for him here again to
inculcate the making of the Earth: For it is the last word he spoke in his
general Proposal, and therefore it had been harsh or needless to have repeated
it presently again. And that is the reason why before the making of the Earth,
there is not prefixed, And the Lord said, Let there be an Earth. Which I
conceive has imposed upon the ignorance and inconsiderateness of some, so as to
make them believe that this confused muddy heap which is called the Earth, was
an Eternal First Matter, independent of God, and never created by him: Which if
a man appeal to his own Faculties, is impossible, as I shall again intimate
when I come to the Philosophic Cabbala.

The sense therefore is, That the Earth was made first, which was covered with
water, and on the water was the wind, and in all this a thick darkness. And God
was in this dark, windy and wet Night. So that this Globe of Earth, and Water,
and Wind, was but one dark Tempest and Sea-storm, a Night of confusion and
tumultuous Agitation. For (...) is not in the Letter any thing more then Ventus
ingens, A great and mighty wind. As the Cedars of God, and Mountains of God,
are tall Cedars, great Mountains, and so in Analogy, the Wind of God, a great
Wind.

Verse. 3. But in the midst of this tempestuous darkness, God intending to fall
to his work, does as it were light his Lamp, or set up himself a Candle in this
dark Shop. And what ever hitherto has been mentioned, are words that strike
the Fancy and Sense strongly, and are of easy perception to the rude people,
whom every dark and stormy Night may well reminde of the sad face of things
till God commanded the comfortable Day to spring forth, the sole Author of
Light, that so pleases the eyes, and chears the spirits of Man.

And that Daylight is a thing independent of the Sun, as well as the Night of
the Stars, is a conceit wondrous suitable to the imaginations of the Vulgar, as
I have my self found out by conversing with them. They are also prone to think,
unless there be a sensible wind stirring, that there is nothing betwixt the
Earth and the Clouds, but that it is a mere vacuity. Wherefore I have not
translated (...) the Air, as Maimonides somewhere does, but a mighty wind; For
that the rude people are sensible of, and making the first deformed face of
things so dismal and tempestuous, it will cause them to remember the first
morning light with more thankfulness and devotion.

Verse. 4. For it is a thing very visible. See what is said upon the eighth
verse.

Verse. 5. By Evening and Morning, is meant the Artificial Day, and the
Artificial Night, by a Synecdoche, as Castellio in his Notes tells us.
Therefore this Artificial Day and Night put together, make one (...), or
Natural Day. And the Evening is put before the Morning, Night before Day,
because Darkness is before Light. But that Primitive darkness was not properly
Night: For Night is (...) as Aristotle describes it, one great Shadow cast
from the Earth, which implies Light of one side thereof. And therefore Night
properly so called could not be before Light. But the illiterate people trouble
themselves with no such curiosities, nor easily conceive any such difference
betwixt that determinate Conical shadow of the Earth, which is Night, and that
infinite primitive Darkness, that had no bounds before there was any Light. And
therefore that same Darkness prefixed to an Artificial Day makes up one Natural
Day to them. Which Hesiod also swallows down without chewing, whether following
his own fancy, or this Text of Moses, I know not.

(...). That is, But of the Night both Day and Sky were born.

Verse. 6. This Basis or Floor. That the Earth seems like a round Floor, plain
and running out so every way, as to join with the bottom of the Heavens, I
have in my Introduction hinted to you already, and that it is looked upon as
such in the phrase of Scripture, accommodating it self to our outward senses
and vulgar conceit. Upon this Floor stands the hollow Firmament, as a Tent
pitched upon the ground, which is the very expression of the Prophet Esaias,
describing the Power of God; That stretches out the Heavens like a Curtain,
and spreads them out as a Tent to dwell in. And the word (...) which is
usually rendered Firmament, signifies diduction, expansion, or spreading out.
But how the Seventy come to interpret it (...) Firmamentum, Fuller in his
Miscellanies gives a very ingenious reason, and such as makes very much to our
purpose. Nam coelum seu (...) says he, quandoquidem Tentoxio saepissime in
sacris literis assimilatur, (...) dicitur, quatenus expanditur. Sic enim
expandi solent Tent^ria, quum alligatis ad paxillos in terram depactos funibus
distenduntur, atque hoc etiam pacto firmantur. Itaque (...) immensum quoddam ut
ita dicam (...), ideoque and (...) non inepte appelletur. The sense of which in
brief is nothing but this: That the Seventy translate (...), that is,
Firmamentum, because the Heavens are spread out like a wellfastned and firmly
pitched Ten. And I add also, that they are so stiffely stretched, that they
will strongly bear against the weight of the upper waters; so that they are not
able to break them down, and therewith to drown the world. Which conceit as it
is easy and agreeable with the fancy of the people, so it is so far from doing
them any hurt, that it will make them more sensible of the divine Power and
Providence, who thus by main force keeps off a Sea of water that hangs over
their heads, which they discern through the transparent Firmament, (for it
looks blew as other Seas do) and would rush at once upon them and drown them,
did not the Power of God, and the strength of the Firmament hold it off.

Verse. 7. See what has been already said upon the sixth verse. I will only here
add, That the nearness of these upper waters makes them still the more
formidable, and so are greater spurs to devotion: For as they are brought so
near as to touch the Earth at the bottom, so outward sense still being Judge,
they are to be within a small distance of the Clouds at the top. And that these
upper waters are no higher then so, it is manifest from other passages in
Scripture, that place the habitation of God but amongst the Clouds, who yet is
called the most High. Psalm 104. 3. Deuteronomy. 33. 26. Nahum 1. 3. Psalm ^8. 4. But
of this I have treated so fully elsewhere, that I hold it needless to add any
thing more.

Ver. 8. I cannot say properly that God saw it was good. In the whole story of
the three first Chapters, it is evident, that God is represented in the person
of a Man, speaking with a mouth, and seeing with eyes. Hence it is that the
Firmament being of it self invisible, that Moses omits the saying, that God saw
it was good: For the nature of the eye is only to see things visible.

Some say, God made Hell the second day, and that that is the reason it was not
recorded, that he saw it was good. But if he did not approve of it as good, why
did he make it? However that can be none of the Literal sense, and so
impertinent to this present Cabbala.

Ver. 10. And I may now properly say, etc. See what has been said already upon
verse the eight.

Ver. 11. Whence you may easily discern, etc. This Observation is Philo the
Jew's, which you may read at large in his (...). And it was very fit for Moses
who in his Law, which he received from God, does so much insist upon temporal
blessings, and eating of the good things of the Land, as a reward of their
obedience, to lay down such principles as should beget a firm belief of the
absolute power of God over Nature. That he could give them rain, and fruitful
seasons, and a plentiful year when he pleased; when as he could cause the Earth
to bring forth without rain, or any thing else to further her births, as he did
at the first Creation. The Meditation whereof might well cause such an holy
resolution as that in the Prophet Habakkuk, Although the fig tree shall not
blossom, neither fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive fail, and the
fields yield no meat; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my salvation. But that prudent and pious caution of Moses against Idolatry, how
requisite it was, is plain if we consider that the power of the Sun is so
manifest, and his operation so sensible upon the Earth for the production of
things below, especially of Plants, that he has generally drawn aside the rude
and simple Heathen to idolize him for a God: And their nimble Oracles have
snatched away the sacred Name of the God of Israel, the true God, to bestow
upon him, calling him Jao, which is Jehovah, as is plain from that Clarian
Oracle in Macrobius:

(...),
(...),
(...).
Which I have translated thus in my Poems:

That Heavenly Power which Jao hight,
The highest of all the Gods thou may declare
In Spring named Zeus, in Summer Helios bright,
In Autumn called Jao, Aides in brumal night.
These names do plainly denotate the Sun
In Spring called Zeus from life or kindly heat;
In Winter 'cause the day's so quickly done,
He Aides hight, he is not long in sight;
In Summer 'cause he strongly does us smite
With his hot darts, then Helios we him name
From Eloim or Eloah so hight;
In Autumn Jao, Jehovan is the same,
So is the word depraved by an uncertain fame.
This Oracle Cornelius Labeo interprets of Bacchus, which is the same with the
Sun, who is the God of the Vintage, and is here described according to the four
Quarters of the year.

And so Virgil, Heathen-like attributes to the Sun and Moon under the name of
Bacchus and Ceres, that great blessing of Corn and Grain.

-- Vestro si numine Tellus
Chaoniam pingui glandem mutavit arista.
If by your providence the Earth has born
For course Chaonian Acorns, full-ear'd Corn.
But of this I have said so much in my Introduction, that I need add nothing
more.

Ver. 12. See ver. 11.

Ver. 14. See ver. 3. I have there shown how easily the fancy of the rude
people admit of days without a Sun. To whose capacities the Prophet Jeremy
accommodating his speech, Her Sun, says he, is gone down while it was yet day.
How can it be day when the Sun is down, unless the day be Independent of the
Sun, according to the fancy of the rude and illiterate? Which is wonderfully
consonant to the outward letter of Moses, that speaks not of the Sun as the
cause of the Day, but as a badge of distinction from the Night, though he does
admit that it does increase the light thereof.

Ver. 15. In the hollow Roof etc. Though the caeruleous upper Sea seems so near
us, as I have already signified, yet the Lights of Heaven seem something on
this side it, as white will stand off drawn upon a darker color, as you may
see in the describing solid Figures on a blew slate; they will more easily rise
to your eye then black upon white: so that the people may very well, consulting
with their sight, Imagine the Firmament to be betwixt the Lights of Heaven, and
the upper Waters, or that blew Sea they look upon, not on this side, nor
properly betwixt the Lights or Stars.

Ver. 16. Two great Lights, etc. This is in counter-distinction to the Stars,
which indeed seem much less to our sight then the Sun or Moon, when as
notwithstanding many Stars according to Astronomers computation, are bigger
then the Sun, all far bigger then the Moon: So that it is plain the Scripture
speaks sometimes according to the appearance of things to our sight, not
according to their absolute affections and properties. And he that will not
here yield this for a truth, is, I think, justly to be suspected of more
Ignorance then Religion, and of more Superstition then Reason.

For their smalnesse, etc. The Stars indeed seem very small to our sight, and
therefore Moses seems to cast them in but by the by, complying therein with the
ignorance of the unlearned. But Astronomers who have made it their business to
understand their magnitudes, they that make the most frugal computation
concerning the bigger Stars, pronounce them no less then sixty eight times
bigger then the Earth, others much more.

Ver. 18. To be peculiar garnishings. See verse 14.

Ver. 20. Fish and Fowl. I suppose the mention of the Fowl is made here with
the Fish by reason that the greatest and more eminent sorts of that kind of
creature, most of all frequent the waters, as Swannes, Geese, Ducks, Herons,
and the like.

Ver. 20. In his own shape. It was the opinion of the Anthropomorphites, that
God had all the parts of a Man, and that we are in this sense made according to
his Image: Which though it be an opinion in it self, if not rightly understood,
vain and ridiculous; yet theirs seem little better to me, that imagine God a
finite Being, and take care to place him out of the stink of this terrestrial
Globe, that he may sit (...), and so confine him to Heaven, as Aristotle seems
to do, if he be the Author of that book De Mundo: For it is a contradiction to
the very Idea of God to be finite, and consequently to have Figure or Parts.
But it is so difficult a thing for the rude multitude to venture at a Notion of
a Being Immatorial and Infinite, that it seems their advantage to conceive of
God as of some all-powerful Person, that can do what ever he pleases, can make
Heavens and Earths, and bestow his blessings in what measure and manner he
lists, and what is chief of all, if need be, can personally appear to them, can
chide them, and rebuke them, and, if they be obstinate, do horrible vengeance
upon them. This I say, will more strongly strike the inward Sense and
Imagination of the vulgar, then Omnipotency placed in a Thin, Subtle,
Invisible, Immaterial Being, of which they can have no perception at all, nor
any tolerable conceit.

Wherefore it being requisite for the ignorant, to be permitted to have some
finite and figurate apprehension of God, what can be more fit then the shape of
a Man in the highest excellencies that it is capable of, for Beauty, Strength,
and Bigness. And the Prophet Esaias seems to speak of God after this Notion, God
sits upon the circle of the Earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as
Grasshoppers; intimating that men to God bear as little proportion, as
Grasshoppers to a man when he sits on the grass amongst them. And now there
being this necessity of permitting the people some such like apprehensions as
this, concerning God, (and it is true Prudence, and pious Policy to comply with
their weakness for their good) there was the most strict injunctions laid upon
them against Idolatry and worshipping of Images that might be.

But if any one will say this was the next way to bring them into Idolatry, to
let them entertain a conceit of God as in humane shape; I say it is not any
more, then by acknowledging Man to be God, as our Religion does, in Christ.
Nay, I add moreover, that Christ is the true Deus Figuratus: And for his sake
was it the more easily permitted unto the Jews to think of God in the shape of
a Man.

And that there ought to be such a thing as Christ, that is, God in Humane
shape, I think it most reasonable, that he may apparently visit the Earth, and
to their very outward senses confound the Atheist and mis-believer at the last
day. As he witnesses of himself, The Father judges none, but he has given all
Judgment unto the Son. And, that no man can see the Father, but as he is
united unto the Son. For the Eternal God is Immaterial and Invisible to our
outward senses: But he has thought good to treat with us both in mercy and
judgment, by a Mediator and Vicegerent, that partakes of our nature as well as
his own. Wherefore it is not at all absurd for Moses to suffer the Jews to
conceive of God as in a corporeal and humane shape, since all men shall be
judged by God in that shape at the last day.

He made Females as well as Males. That story in Plato his Symposion, how men
and women grew together at first till God cut them asunder, is a very probable
argument that the Philosopher had seen or heard something of this Mosaical
History. But that it was his opinion it was so, I see no probability at all:
For the story is told by that ridiculous Comedian Aristophanes, with whom I
conceive he is in some sort quit, for abusing his good old Friend and Tutor
Socrates, whom he brought in upon the stage (...), treading the Air in a
basket, to make him a laughing stock to all Athens.

The Text is indeed capable of such a sense, but there being no reason to put
that sense upon it, neither being a thing so accommodate to the capacity and
conceit of the vulgar, I thought it not fit to admit it, no not so much as into
this Literal Cabbala.

Ver. 29. Frugiferous. Castellio translates it so, Herbas frugiferas, which
must be such like herbs as I have named, Strawberries, Wheat, Rice, and the
like.

CHAP. II.
7 The notation of (...) answerable to the breathing of Adams soul into his
nostrils. 8 The exact situation of Paradise. That Gihon is part of Euphrates;
Pison, Phasis, or Phasi-tigris. That the Madianites are called Aethiopians.
That Paradise was seated about Mesopotamia, argued by six Reasons. That it was
more particularly seated where now Apamia stands in Ptolemee's Maps. 18 The
Prudence of Moses in the commendation of Matrimony. 19 Why Adam is not recorded
to have given names to the Fishes. 24 Abraham Ben Ezra's conceit of the names
of Adam and Eve as they are called (...) and (...). 25 Moses his wise
Anthypophora concerning the natural shame of nakedness.

IN the four first verses all is so clear and plain, that there is no need of
any further Explication or Defense, saving that you may take notice that in the
second verse where I write Within six days, the Seventies Translation will
warrant it, who render it (...), on the sixth day.

Ver. 5. See what has been said on the eleventh verse of the first Chapter.

Ver. 7. The dust. The Hebrew word signifies so, and I make no mention of any
moistning of it with water. For God is here set out acting according to his
absolute power and Omnipotency. And it is as easy to make men of dry dust, as
hard stones. And yet God is able even of stones to raise up children unto
Abraham.

Blew into the nostrils. Breathing is so palpable an effect of life, that the
ancient rude Greeks also gave the Soul its name from that operation, calling it
(...) from (...) to breathe or to blow.

Ver. 8. Eastward of Judea. For so Interpreters expound Eastward in Scripture,
in reference to Judea.

To prevent any further trouble in making good the sense I have put upon the
following verses concerning Paradise, I shall here at once set down what I
find most probable concerning the situation thereof, out of Vatablus and
Cornelius a Lapide, adding also somewhat out of Dionysius the Geographical
Poet. In general therefore we are led by the four Rivers to the right situation
of Paradise. And Gihon, says Vatablus; is tractus inferior Euphratis illabens
in sinum Persicum; is a lower tract or stream of Euphrates that slides into the
Persian Gulf. Pison is Phasis or Phasitigris, that runs through Havilah, a
region near Persis; so that Pison is a branch of Tigris, as Gihon is of
Euphrates. Thus Vatablus. And that Gihon may have his Aethiopia, Cornelius a
Lapide notes, that the Madianites and others near the Persian Gulf, are called
Aethiopians; and therefore he concludes first at large, that Paradise was
seated about Mosopotamia and Armenia, from these reasons following.

First, because these Regions are called Eastern in Scripture, (which as I have
said is to be understood always in reference to Judea) according to the rule of
Expositors. And the Lord is said to have planted this Garden of Paradise
Eastward.

Secondly, because Man being cast out of Paradise these Regions were inhabited
first, both before the Flood, (for Cain is said to inhabit Eden, Genesis 4. 16.)
and also after the Flood, as being nearer Paradise, and more fertile, Genesis 8.
4. also 11. 2.

Thirdly, Paradise was in Eden, but Eden was near Haran; Ezekiel. 27. 23. Haran,
and Caunuch, and Eden: but Haran was about Mesopotamia, being a City of Parthia
where Crassus was slain; Authors call it Charra.

Fourthly, Paradise is where Euphrates and Tigris are. And these are in
Mesopotamia and Armenia. They denominate Mesopotamia, it lying betwixt them.

(...),
(...).
That is,

The land 'twixt Tigris and Euphrates stream,
All this Mesopotamia they name.
Fifthly, because these Regions are most fruitful and pleasant. And that Adam
was made not far from thence, is not improbable from the excellency of that
place, as well for the goodliness of the men that it breeds, as the fertility
of the soil.

(...)
(...)
(...).
That is,

So excellent is that Soil for Herbage green,
For flowery Meads, and such fair godly Men,
As if the offspring of the Gods the had been.
As the same Geographer writes.

Sixthly, and lastly, there is yet a further probability alleged, that Paradise
was about Mesopotamia, that Country being not far distant from Judea. For it
is the tradition of the Fathers, that Adam when he was ejected out of Paradise,
having traveled over some parts of the world, that he came at last to Judea,
and there died, and was buried in a Mount, which his posterity, because the
head of the first Man was laid there, called Mount Calvary, where Christ was
crucified for the expiation of the sin of Adam, the first transgressor. If the
story be not true, it is pity but it should be, it has so venerable assertors,
as Cyprian, Athanasius, Basil, Origin, and others of the Fathers, as Cornelius
affirms.

But now for the more exact situation of Paradise, the same Author ventures to
place it at the very meeting of Tigris and Euphrates, where the City of Apamia
now stands in Ptolemees Maps, eighty degrees Longitude, and some thirty four
degrees and thirty scruples Latitude.

Thus have we according to the Letter found Paradise which Adam lost, but if we
find no better one in the Philosophic and Moral Cabbala, we shall but have
our labor for our travel.

Ver. 9. That stood planted in the midst of the Garden. For in this verse the
Tree of Life is planted in the midst of the Garden, and in the third Chapter
the third verse, the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil is placed there
also.

For the Lord God bad so ordained. Expositors seem not to suspect any hurt in
the Tree it self, but that the fruit thereof was naturally good, only God
interdicted it to try the goodness of Adam. So that this law that prohibited
Adam the eating of the fruit, was merely Thetical, or Positive, not
Indispensable and Natural.

Ver. 10. From thence it was parted. This is the cause that Paradise is
conceived to have been situated where Apamia stands, as I have above intimated.

Ver. 11. Phasis. See verse 8.

Chaulateans. The affinity of Name is apparent betwixt Havilah and Chaulateans,
whom Strabo places in Arabia near Mesopotamia.

Ver. 13. Arabian Aethiopia. See verse 8.

Ver. 17. See verse 9.

Ver. 18. High commendations of Matrimony. Moses plainly recommends to the Jews
the use of Matrimony, and does after a manner encourage them to that condition:
which he does like a right Lawgiver and Father of the people. For in the
multitude of people is the Kings honor, but in the want of people is the
destruction of the Prince, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 14. Besides, there was no
small policy in religiously commending that to them, that most would be carried
fast enough too on their own accords. For those Laws are best liked that suit
with the pleasure of the people, and they will have a better conceit of the
Lawgiver for it.

Ver. 19. These brought he unto Adam. viz. The Beasts and Fowls; but there is
no mention of the Fishes, they being not fitted to journey in the same Element.
It had been over harsh and affected to have either brought the Fishes from the
Sea, or to have carried Adam to the Shore, to appoint names to all the Fishes
flocking thither to him. But after he might have opportunity to give them
names, as they came occasionally to his view.

Ver. 20. See verse 18,

Ver. 21. Fell into a dream. For the Seventy have (...), God cast Adam into an
ecstasy; and in that ecstasy he might very well see what God did all the while
he slept.

Ver. 23. See verse 21. and 24.

Ver. 24. So strict and sacred a Tie, etc. That Is the scope of the story. To
beget a very fast and indissoluble affection betwixt man and wife, that they
should look upon one another as one and the same person. And in this has Moses
wisely provided for the happiness of his people in instilling such a Principle
into them, as is the root of all Oeconomical order, delight, and contentment:
while the husband looks upon his wife as on himself in the Feminine gender, and
she on her husband as on her self in the Masculine. For Grammarians can discern
no other difference then so, betwixt (...) and (...) Vir and Virissa. But R.
Abraham Ben Ezra has found a mystery in these names more then Grammatical. For
in (...) and (...) says he, is the contracted name of Jehovah contained, viz.
(...), for there is (...) and (...). So long therefore as the married couple
live in Gods fear and mutual love, God is with them as well as in their names.
But if they cast God off by disobedience, and make not good what they owe one
to the other, then is their condition what their names denotate to them, the
name of God being taken out, viz. (...) and (...). The fire of discord and
contention here, and the eternal fire of Hell hereafter. This is the conceit of
that pious and witty Rabbi.

Ver. 25. And were not ashamed. Matrimony and the knowledge of women being so
effectually recommended unto the Jews in the foregoing story, the wisdom of
Moses did foresee that it would be obvious for the people to think with
themselves, how so good and commendable a thing should have so much shame and
diffidency hovering about it. For there is a general bashfulness in men and
women in these matters, and they ever desire to transact these affairs in
secret out of the sight of others. Wherefore Moses to satisfy their curiosity,
continues his History further, and gives the reason of this shame in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. III.
1 How much it saves the credit of our first Parents, that the Serpent was
found the prime Author of the Transgression. That according to S. Basil all the
living creatures of Paradise could speak: undeniable reasons that the Serpent
could, according to the Literal Cabbala. 9 The opinion of the Anthropomorphites
true, according to the Literal Cabbala. 14 That the Serpent went upright before
the fall, was the opinion of S. Basil. 16 A story of the easy delivery of a
certain poor woman of Liguria. 19 That the general calamities that lie upon
mankind, came by the transgression of a positive Law, how well accommodate it
is to the scope of Moses. 23 That Paradise was not the whole Earth. 24 The
Apparitions in Paradise called by Theodoret (...).

IN this third Chapter, there are causes laid down, of some of the most
notable, and most concerning accidents in Nature. As of the hard travail and
toil upon the sons of men, to get themselves a livelihood. Of the Antipathy
betwixt Men and Serpents. Of the encumbrance of the ground with troublesome
weeds. Of the shame of Venery. Of the pangs of childebearing; and of Death it
self. Of all these Moses his wisdom held fit to give an account accommodately
to the capacity of the people. For these fall into that grand Question in
Philosophy, (...); whence sprung up Evil? which has exercised the wits of all
Ages to this very day. And every fool is able to make the Question, but few men
so wise, as to be either able to give, or fit to receive a sufficient answer to
it, according to the depth of the matter it self.

But it was very necessary for Moses to hold on in his History, and to
communicate to them those plain and intelligible Causes of the Evils that ever
lay before their eyes; he having so fully asserted God the Creator of Heaven
and Earth, and Contriver of all things that we see: Adding also that the Laws
that he propounded to them were delivered to him from God, and that all
prosperity and happiness would accompany them, if they observed the same. That
they should eat the good things of the Land, and live a long and healthful age.

Now it was easy for the people, though they were but rude, and newly taken
from making Bricks for Pharaoh in Egypt, to think thus with themselves; If God
made all things, how is it that they are no better then they are? Why do our
wives bring forth their children with pain? Why are we obnoxious to be stung
with Serpents? Why may not God give us an endless life, as well as a long
life? and the like. To which Moses in general answers, (to the great advantage
of the people, and for the faster binding them to the Laws he delivered them
from God) That it was disobedience to his will, that brought all this mischief
into the world; which is most certainly true. But by what particular
circumstances it is set out, you may here read in this third Chapter.

Ver. 1. The Serpent also. It had been too harsh and boistrous, and too
grossly redounding to the dishonor of our first Parents Adam and Eve, if they
had immediately done violence to so express a command of God, and shown
themselves professed rebels against him. And their posterity would have been
scarce able to have remembered them without cursings and bitterness, for being
so bold and apert Authors of so much misery to them. But so it came to pass,
that it was not of themselves, but by the subtilty of the Serpent that they
were deceived into disobedience, being overshort by his false suggestions. So
that their mistake may be looked upon with pardon and pity, and our selves are
fairly admonished to take heed that we forfeit not the rest.

But the power of Speech. I cannot be so large in my belief, as S. Basil, who
affirms, That all living creatures in Paradise could speak, and understand one
another. But according to the Literal Cabbala, I think it is manifest that the
Serpent could; and that it was not the Devil in the Serpent, as some
Interpreters would have it. For, why should the Serpent be cursed for the
Devils sake? And beside, the whole business is attributed to the cunning and
subtilty of the Serpent, as doing it by the power of his own nature. Therefore
this were to confound two Cabbala's into one, to talk thus of the Serpent and
the Devil at once.

Not eat of any of the Trees. So Chrysostom, Rupertus, and S. Augustine; as if
the cunning Serpent had made use of that damnable Maxim, Calumniare fortiter,
aliquid adhaerebit: So at first he lays his charge high against God, as if he
would debar them of necessary food, and starve them, that at last he might
gain so much, at least that he did unnecessarily abridge them of what made
mightily for their pleasure and perfection.

Ver. 4. See verse 1.

Ver. 7. And the eyes of them both were opened. Some gather from hence, that
Adam and Eve were blind till they tasted of the forbidden fruit. Which is so
foolish a gloss, that none but a blind man could ever have stumbled upon it.
For the greatest pleasure of Paradise had been lost, if they had wanted their
sight. Therefore as gross as it is, that can be no part of any Literal
Cabbala, it having nothing at all of probability in it. It is not (...).

Ver. 9. God's walking in the Garden, his calling after Adam, his pronouncing
the doom upon him, his wife, and the Serpent, and sundry passages before, do
again and again inculcate the opinion of the Anthropomorphites, that God has an
humane shape; which I have already acknowledged to be the meaning of the
Literal Cabbala.

Ver. 13. Here the first Original of Mischief is resolved into the Serpent,
whereby Adam and Eves credits are something saved, and the root of misery to
mankind is plainly discovered.

Ver. 14. Creep upon thy belly. It is plain according to the Letter, that the
Serpent went upright, which is the opinion also of S. Basil, else his doom
signifies nothing, if he crept upon his belly before.

Ver. 15. Perpetual Antipathy. See verse 1.

Ver. 16. Her sorrows and pangs in childe-bearing. See verse 1. But these pains
are much increased to women by their luxury and rotten delicateness, that
weakens Nature, and enfeebles the Spirits, so that they can endure nothing,
when as those that are used to hardship and labor escape better. There is a
notorious instance of it in a woman of Liguria, who, as Diodorus Siculus
writes, being hard at work in the field, was overtaken with that other labor.
But she went but aside a while, and disburthening her self, with a quick
dispatch, laid her child as gainly as she could in some fresh leaves and
grass, and came immediately again to her task, and would not have desisted
from her work, but that he that hired her, in commiseration to the infant paid
her the whole days wages to be shut of her. As if Providence had absolved her
from the curse of Eve, she voluntarily undergoing so much of Adams, which was
sweating in the field.

Ver. 18. See verse 1.

Ver. 19. Observe the great wisdom of Moses; The Statutes and Ordinances which
he delivered unto the people, they being most of them not (...), but (...), not
natural and intrinsecally good, but positive and dispensable in themselves;
here according to this History, all those grand evils of toil and labor upon a
barren ground, of pains in childbed, and of death it self, are imputed to the
transgression of a Law that was but merely Positive; whereby the Lawgiver does
handsomely engage the people with all care and diligence to observe all the
ceremonies and ordinances he gave them from God; the whole posterity of Adam
finding the mischief of the breaking but that one Positive Law in Paradise, the
eating of the fruit of such a tree that was forbidden. When as otherwise
Positive Laws of themselves would have been very subject to be slighted and
neglected.

Ver. 20. Called his wife Eve. (...) signifies life.

Ver. 21. The use of which God taught. The two great comforts and necessaries
of life, are Food and Clothing. Wherefore it was fit to record this passage
also to indear the peoples minds to God, and increase their devotion and
thankfulness to him, who was so particularly and circumstantially the Author of
those great supports of life.

Ver. 23. Forth from the Garden of Eden. That shows plainly that Paradise was
not the whole Earth, as some would have it. For he was brought into Paradise by
God, and now he is driven out again; but he was not driven out of the world.

Ver. 24. Haunted with Spirits. This phrase is very significant of the nature
of the thing it is to express, and fitly sets out the condition of Paradise,
when Adam was driven out of it, and could no more return thither by reason of
those Spirits that had visibly taken possession of the way thereunto, and of
the place. Nor am I alone in this Exposition, Theodoret and Precopius bearing
me company, who call these Apparitions at the entrance of Paradise (...), and
Spectra terribili forma. And I think that this may very well go for the literal
sense of this verse, the existence of Spirits and Apparitions being
acknowledged in all Nations, be they never so rude or slow-witted.

THE DEFENSE Of the PHILOSOPHIC CABBALA.
CHAP. I.
1 Why Heaven and Light are both made Symbols of the same thing, viz. The World
of Life. That (...) intimate a Trinity. That (...) is a title of the Eternal
Wisdom the Son of God, who is called also (...) and (...) and (...) as well in
Philo as the New Testament. That (...) is the holy Ghost. 2 The fit agreement
of Plato's Triad with the Trinity of the present Cabbala. 5 The Pythagorick
names or nature of a Monad or Unite applied to the first days work. 6 What are
the upper waters: and that Souls that descend (...), are the Naides or water
Nymphs in Porphyrius. 8 That Matter of it self is unmovable. R. Bechai his
notation of (...) very happily explained out of Des Carts his Philosophy. That
Universal Matter is the second days Creation, fully made good by the names and
property of the number Two. 13 The nature of the third days work set off by the
number Three. 16 That the most learned do agree that the Creation was perfected
at once. The notation of (...) strangely agreeing with the most notorious
conclusions of the Cartesian Philosophy. 19 That the corporeal world was
universally erected into Form and Motion on the fourth day, is most notably
confirmed by the titles and property of the number Four. The true meaning of
the Pythagorick oath, wherein they swore by him that taught them the mystery
of the Tetractys. That the Tetractys was a Symbol of the whole Philosophic
Cabbala, that lay couched under the Text of Moses. 20 Why Fish and Fowl created
in the same day. 23 Why living creatures were said to be made in the Fifth and
Sixth days. 31 And why the whole Creation was comprehended within the number Six.

I Have plainly and faithfully set forth the meaning of Moses his Text,
according to the Literal Cabbala, and made his incomparable Policy, and pious
Prudence manifest to all the world. For whether he had this History of Adam and
Eve, and of the Creation immediately from God on the Mount, or whether it was a
very ancient tradition long before in the Eastern parts, as some Rabbines will
have it, but approved of by God in the Mount; Moses certainly could not have
begun his Pentateuch with any thing more proper and more material to his scope
and purpose then this. And it is nothing but the ignorance of the Atheist that
can make him look upon it as contemptible, it being in it self as highly
removed above contempt, as true Prudence and Staidness is above Madness and
Folly.

And yet I confess, I think there is still a greater depth and richness of
wisdom in it, then has been hitherto opened in this Literal Cabbala, and such
as shall represent Moses as profoundly seen in Philosophy, and divine Morality,
as he is in Politics. And against which the Atheist shall have nothing at all
to allege, unless ignorance and confidence furnish his brain with impertinent
arguments.

For he shall not hear Moses in this Philosophic Cabbala either tasking God to
his six days labor, or bounding the world at the Clouds, or making the Moon
bigger then the Stars, or numbering days without Suns, or bringing in a Serpent
talking with a woman, or any such like passages, which the Atheists
misunderstanding and perverseness makes them take offense at; But they shall
find him more large and more free then any, and laying down such conclusions
as the wisest Naturalists, and Theosophers in all Ages have looked upon as the
choicest and most precious. Such, I say, are those in the Philosophic Cabbala
you have read, and I am now come to defend it, and make it good, that it is
indeed the meaning of Moses his Text. And one great Key for the understanding
of it in this first Chapter, will be those Pythagorical Mysteries of Numbers,
as I have intimated already in my Preface.

Ver. 1. I mean the same thing by both. And there is good reason there should
be meant the same thing by both. For, besides that those actual conspicuous
Lights are in Heaven, viz. the Sun, and Stars, Heaven or the Aetherial Matter
has in it all over the Principles of Light; which are the round Particles, and
that very fine and subtle Matter that lies in the intervals of the round
Particles. He that is but a little acquainted with the French Philosophy,
understands the business plainly. And in the expounding of Moses, I think I may
lay down this for a safe Principle, that there is no considerable truth in
Nature or Divinity, that Moses was ignorant of, and so if it be found agreeable
to his Text, I may very well attribute it to him. At least the Divine Wisdom
wherewith Moses was inspired, prevents all the inventions of Men.

But now that I understand this Heaven and Earth in the first verse, as things
distinct from Heaven and Earth afterward mentioned, the very Text of Moses
favors it, emphatically calling this Heaven and Earth (...) and (...), when as
the Heaven and Earth in the second and third days Creation he calls but plain
(...) and (...).

I may add also the authority of Philo, who expounds not this Heaven and Earth
of the visible and tangible Heaven and Earth which are mentioned in the second
and third day, but of an Heaven and Earth quite different from them: As also
the suffrage of S. Augustine, who understands likewise by Heaven and Light, one
and the same thing, to wit, the Angels; and by Earth the first Matter: which is
something like the sense of this present Cabbala, only for his Physical Matter,
we set down a Metaphysical one, that other belonging most properly to the
second day; and for Angels we have the World of Life, which comprehends not
Angels only, but all substantial Forms and Spirits whatever.

And that Heaven or Light should be Symboles of the World of Life or Form, it
is no wonder: For you may find a sufficient reason in the Cabbala it self, at
the fifth verse of this present Chapter, and Plotinus assimilates Form to Light,
(...), for Form is Light.

And lastly, in the second verse of this same Chapter, there be plain reasons
also laid down, why the mere Possibility of the outward Creation is called the
Earth, according to the description of the Earth in the second verse of the
first Chapter of Moses his Text: unto which you may further add, that as the
Earth is looked upon as the Basis of the world, so the Possibility of the
outward Creation is in some sense the Basis thereof.

The Tri-une Godhead. The Hebrew words (...) do handsomely intimate a
plurality, and singularity, the Noun being in the Plural, the Verb in the
Singular Number. Whence I conceive there may be very well here included the
Mystery of the Trinity and Unity of the Godhead, or (...). And Vatablus
himself, though he shuffles with his Grammatical Notions here, yet he does
apertly acknowledge three Persons in one God, at the twenty sixth verse of this
Chapter. And that this was the Philosophic Cabbala of Moses and the Learned
and Pious of the Jews, it is no small argument, because the Notion of the
Trinity is so much insisted upon by the Platonists and Pythagoreans, whom all
acknowledge (and I think I shall make it more plain then ever) to have got
their Philosophy from Moses.

By his Eternal Wisdom. Ambrose, Basil, and Origin interpret In Principio, to
be as much as In Filio; and Colossians the first, there the Apostle speaking of
the Son of God, he says, that he is the Firstborn of every creature, and that
by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth. And
that he is before all things, and by him all things consist. This is the
Wisdom of God, or the Idea according to which he framed all things. And
therefore must be before all things the Beginning of the creatures of God. And
very answerable to this of the Apostle are those two attributes Philo gives to
the same subject, calling him (...), The Firstborn Word of God, or the
Firstborn Form of God; and (...) the Beginning. He calls him also simply
(...), which is, the Word, Form, Reason, or Wisdom. And one of the Chaldee
Paraphrasts also interprets In Principio, In Sapientia. And this agrees
exceedingly well with that of Solomon (...) The Lord possessed me (...)
Principium viae suae, that is, operum suorum, as Vatablus expounds it, and the
Text makes it good. (...) Oriens operum suorum ab antiquo, The Sunrise of his
works of old. For there is no necessity of making of (...) and (...) Adverbs,
they are Substantives. And here Wisdom is called (...) and (...) the Principle
and Morning of the Works of God, not by way of diminution, but as supposing the
East and the Morning to be the womb of light, from whence springs all Light and
Form, and Form is Light, as I told you before out of Plotinus.

And this Notion of (...) suits well with that passage in Trismegist, where
Hermes speaks thus; (...), etc. where (...) which is the same with (...) must
signify the divine Intellect, the bright Morning Star, the Wisdom of God: To
which Wisdom called in the eight of the Proverbs (...) and (...) the Beginning
and Morning of his Works, is ascribed the Creation of the world by Solomon, as
you may there see at large. I will only add, that what the Hebrew Text here in
Genesis calls (...), the Chaldee calls (...), which is all one with (...).
Wherefore (...) is the Essential Wisdom of God, not an habit or property, but
a substance that is Wisdom. For true wisdom is substance. (...), it is the
same that Plotinus speaks. Whence he is called in the Apocalypse, (...), which
is but a Periphrasis of Jehovah, Essence, or (...), which name (...) contains
the future, present, and time past in it, in (...) and (...) as Zanchius
observes: This is the second Hypostasis in the holy Trinity, the Logos, which
was in the beginning of the world with God. All things were made by him, and
without him was nothing made that was made, John 1.

First created this. I cannot impute it to any reason at all, but to the
slownesse of Fancy, and heavy unweildinesse of Melancholy, or the load of
Blood and Flesh, that makes men imagine, that Creation is incompetible even to
God himself; when as I think, I have no less then demonstrated in my Antidote
against Atheism, that it is impossible but God should have the power of
Creation, or else he would not be God. But because our Will and Mind can
create no Substance distinct from our selves, we foolishly conceit, measuring
the Power of God by our own, that he cannot create any Substance distinct from
himself. Which is but a weak conclusion fallen from our own dullness and
inadvertency.

Ver. 2. Solitude and Emptiness. The very word signifies so in the Original,
as Vatablus will tell you. Which being abstract terms (as the Schools call
them) do very fittingly agree with the Notion we have put upon this Symbolical
Earth, affirming it no real actual subject, either spiritual or corporeal, that
may be said to be void and empty; but to be Vacuity and Emptiness it self,
only joined with a capacity of being something. It is, as I have often
intimated, the Ens Potentiale of the whole outward Creation.

But the Spirit of God. Not a great Wind, but the holy Ghost. This is the
Interpretation general of the Fathers. And it is a sign that it is according to
the true Mosaical Cabbala, it being so consonant to Plato's School, which
School I suspect now has more of that Cabbala, then the Jews themselves have at
this day.

Having hovered a while. The word in the Original is (...), which signifies a
hovering or brooding over a thing as a Bird does over her nest, or on her young
ones. Hence it is not unlikely is Aristophanes his Egg.

(...).
To this sense,

Under the wind below in dark some shade,
There the black-winged Night her first Egg laid.
And this manner of brooding thus is an Emblem of dearest affection; and who
knows but that from this Text the Poets took occasion of feigning that ancient
Cupid the Father of all the Gods, the Creator of all things, and Maker of
Mankind? For so he is described by Hesiod and Orpheus, and here in this place
of Aristophanes, from whence I took the forecited verse.

Simmias Rhodius describes this ancient Love in verses which represent a pair
of wings. I will not say according to this conceit of Aristophanes his Egg,
which they should brood and hatch. But the longest Quill of one of them writes
thus:

(...).
To this sense:

I am the King of the deep-bosom'd Earth,
My strength gave to the Sea both bounds and birth.
This Spirit of God then, or the divine Love which was from everlasting, will
prove the third divine Hypostasis. The first was (...), which signifies
strength, and a word rather common to the whole Trinity. But Jehovah, as the
Rabbines observe, is a name of God as he is merciful and gracious, which may be
answerable to Plato his (...), but that name is also communicated to Christ, as
we have already acknowledged. The second is (...), which is Wisdom, as has
been proved out of the Proverbs and answers to the Platonical (...). The third
we have now light upon, which must be Love, and it has a lucky coincidence also
with the third Hypostasis in the Platonic Triad (...), whom Plotinus calls
(...), the Celestial Venus. And to this after a more immediate manner is the
Creation of the world ascribed by that Philosopher, as also by Plato; as here
in Moses the Spirit of God is said to lie close brooding upon the humid Matter
for the actual Production of this outward world.

Ver. 3. Exist independently of Corporeal Matter. That which exists first it is
plain is independent of what follows, and Philo makes all Immateriate Beeings
to be created in this first day: Whence the Souls of Men are removed far from
all fear of fate and mortality, which is the grand Tenent of Plato's School.

Ver. 5. Matter merely Metaphysical. See Hyle in my Interpretation general at
the end of my Poems; where you shall find that I have settled the same Notion I
make use of here, though I had no design then of expounding Moses.

Monad or Unite. The fitness of the number to the nature of every days work,
you shall observe to be wonderful. Whence we may well conclude, that it was
ordered so on purpose, and that in all probability Pythagoras was acquainted
with this Cabbala; And that that was the reason the Pythagoreans made such a
deal of do with numbers, putting other conceits upon them, then any other
Arithmeticians do; and that therefore if such Theorems as the Pythagoreans
held, be found suitable and compliable with Moses his Text, it is a shrewd
presumption that that is the right Philosophic Cabbala thereof.

Philo makes this first day spent in the Creation of Immateral and Spiritual
Beeings, of the Intellectual world, taking it in a large sense, or the Mundus
vitae, as Ficinus calls it, The World of Life and Forms. And the Pythagoreans
call an Unite (...), Form, and (...), Life. They call it also (...), or the
Tower of Jupiter, giving also the same name to a Point or Center, by which they
understand the vital formative Center of things, the Rations Seminales: and
they call an Unite also (...), which is Seminal Form. But a very short and
sufficient account of Philo's pronouncing that Spiritual Substances are the
first days work, is, That as an Unite is indivisible in Numbers, so is the
nature of Spirits indivisible; you cannot make two of one of them, as you may
make of one piece of Corporeal Matter two, by actual division or severing them
one piece from another. Wherefore what was truly and properly created the first
day; was Immaterial, Indivisible, and Independent of the Matter, from the
highest Angel, to the meanest Seminal Form.

And for the Potentiality of the outward Creation, since it is not so properly
any real Being, it can breed no difficulty, but whatever it is, it is
referrable fitly enough to Incorporeal things, it being no object of Sense, but
of Intellect, and being also impassible and undiminishable, and so in a sort
indivisible. For the Power of God being undiminishable, the Possibility of the
Creature must be also undiminishable, it being an adaequate consequence of his
Power. Wherefore this Potentiality being ever one, it is rightly referred to
the first day. And in respect of this the Pythagoreans call an Unite (...), as
well as the Binary, as also (...), and (...), which names plainly glance at the
dark Potentiality of things, set out by Moses in the first days Creation.

Ver. 6. Created an immense deal, etc. He creates now Corporeal Matter, (as
before the World of Life) out of nothing. Which universal Matter may well be
called (...) For extension is very proper to Corporeal Matter. Castellio
translates it Liquidum, and this universal Matter is most what fluid still, all
over the world, but at first it was fluid universally.

Betwixt the aforesaid fluid Possibility, etc. But here it may be you will
enquire, how this Corporeal Matter shall be conceived to be betwixt the waters
above, and these underneath. For what can be the waters above, Maimonides
requires no such continued Analogy in the hidden sense of Scripture, as you may
see in his Preface to his Moreh Nevochim. But I need not fly to that general
refuge. For me thinks that the Seminal Forms that descend through the Matter,
and so reach the Possibility of the parts of the outward Creation, and make
them spring up into act, are not unlike the drops of rain that descend through
the Heaven or Air, and make the Earth fruitful. Besides, the Seminal Forms of
things lie round, as I may so speak, and contracted at first, but spread when
they bring any part of the Possibility of the outward Creation into act, as
drops of rain spread when they are fallen to the ground. So that the Analogy is
palpable enough, though it may seem too elaborate and curious. We may add to
all this concerning the Naides or Water Nymphs, that the Ancients understood by
them (...), All manner of Souls that descend into the Matter and Generation.
Wherefore the watery Powers (as Porphyrius also calls these Nymphs) it is not at
all harsh to conceive, that they may be here indigitated by the name of the
Upper waters. See Porphyrius in his De Antro Nympharum.

Ver. 7. What mischief straying Souls. The frequent complaints that that noble
Spirit in Pythagoreans and Platonists makes against the encumbrances and
disadvantages of the Body, makes this Cabbala very probable. And it is
something like our Divines fancying Hell to be created this day.

Ver. 8. Actuated and agitated. This is consonant to Plato's School, who makes
the Matter unmovable of it self, which is most reasonable. For if it were of
its own nature movable, nothing for a moment would hold together, but dissolve
it self into infinitely little Particles; whence it is manifest, that there
must be something besides the Matter, either to bind it or to move it; So that
the Creation of Immaterial Beeings, is in that respect also necessary.

Rightly called Heaven. I mean (...). For this agitation of the Matter brought
it to Des Carts his second Principle, which is the true Ether, or rather
(...). For it is liquid as water, and yet has in it the fierce Principle of
Fire, which is the first Element and most subtle of all. The thing is at first
sight understood by Cartesians, who will easily admit of that Notation of the
Rabbines in the word (...), as being from (...) Fire, and (...) Water. For so
R. Bechai, The Heavens, says he, were created from the beginning, and are
called (...), because they are (...) and (...) Fire and Water; which no
Philosophy makes good so well as the Cartesian. For the round particles, like
water, (though they be not of the same Figure) flake the fierceness of the
first Principle, which is the purest Fire. And yet this Fire in some measure
always lies within the Triangular Intervals of the round Particles, as that
Philosophy declares at large.

And the Binary. How fitly again does the number agree with the nature of the
work of this day, which is the Creation of Corporeal Matter And the
Pythagoreans call the number Two (...) Matter. Simplicius upon Aristotle's
Physics, speaking of the Pythagoreans (...). They might well, says he, call
One, Form, as defining and terminating to certain shape and property whatever
it takes holds of. And Two they might well call Matter, it being undeterminate,
and the cause of Bigness and Divisibility. And they have very copiously heaped
upon the number Two, such appellations as are most proper to Corporeal Matter.
As (...), Vnfigured, Vndeterminated, Unlimited. For such is Matter of it self
till Form take hold of it. It is called also (...) from the fluidity of the
Matter. (...), because it affords substance to the Heavens and Stars. (...),
Contention, Fate, and Death, for these are the consequencies of the Souls being
joined with corporeal Matter, (...), Motion, Generation, and Division, which
are Properties plainly appertaining to Bodies. They call this number also
(...), because it is the (...), the Subject that endures and undergoes all the
changes and alterations, the active Forms put upon it. Wherefore it is plain
that the Pythagoreans understood Corporeal Matter by the number Two* which no
man can deny but that it is a very fit Symbol of Division, that eminent
Property of Matter.

But we might cast in a further reason of the (...) being created the second
day: for the Celestial Matter does consist of two plainly distinguishable
parts, to wit, the first Element, and the second; or the Materia subtilissima,
and the round Particles, as I have already intimated out of Des Carts his
Philosophy.

Ver. 9. It is referred to the following day. You are to understand that these
Six numbers, or days, do not signify any order of time, but the nature of the
things that were said to be made in them. But for any thing in Moses his
Philosophic Cabbala, all might be made at once, or in such periods of time, as
is most suitable to the nature of the things themselves. What is said upon this
ninth verse, will be better understood, and with more full satisfaction, when
we come to the fourth days work.

Ver. 13. And the Ternary denotes. In this third day was the waters commanded
into one place, the Earth adorned with all manner of Plants, Paradise, and all
the pleasure and plenty of it created, wherein the Serpent beguiled Eve, and so
forth. What can therefore be more likely, then that the Pythagoreans use their
numbers as certain remembrancers of the particular passages of this History of
the Creation; when as they call the number Three, (...) and (...), i. e. Triton
and Lord of the Sea; which is in reference to Gods commanding the water into
one place, and making thereof a Sea. They call also the Ternary (...), and
(...): The former intimates the plenty of Paradise, the latter relates to the
Serpent there. But now besides this we shall find the Ternary very significant
of the nature of this days work. For first, the Earth consists of the third
Element in the Cartesian Philosophy, (for the truth of that Philosophy will
force it self in whether I will or no) and then again there are three grand
parts of this third Element necessary to make an Earth habitable, the dry Land,
the Sea, (whence are Springs and Rivers and the Air; and lastly, there are in
Vegetables, which is the main work of this day, three eminent properties,
according to Aristotle, viz. Nutrition, Accretion, Generation; and also, if you
consider their duration, there be these three Cardinal points of it, Ortus,
Acme, Interitus. You may cast in also that Minerals which belong to this day as
well as Plants, that both Plants and they, and in general, all Terrestrial
Bodies have the three Chemical Principles in them, Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury.

Ver. 16. Such as is the Earth we live upon. As the Matter of the Universe came
out in the second day, so the contriving of this Matter into Suns and
Planets, is contained in this fourth day, the Earth her self not excepted,
though according to the Letter she is made in the first day, and as she is the
Nurse of Plants, said to be uncovered in the third, yet as she is a receptacle
of Light, and shines with borrowed rays like the Moon and other Plants, she
may well be referred to this fourth days Creation.

Nor will this at all seem bold or harsh, if we consider that the most learned
have already agreed that all the whole Creation was made at once. As for
example, The most rational of all the Jewish Doctors, R. Moses Aegyptius, Philo
Judeus, Procopius Gazeus, Cardinal Cajetan^, S. Augustine, and the Schools of
Hillel and Samai, as Manasseh Ben Israel writes. So that that leisurely order
of days is thus quite taken away, and all the scruples that may rise from that
Hypothesis.

Wherefore I say, the Earth as one of the primary Planets was created this
fourth day. And I translate (...) Primary Planets. Primary, because of (...)
Emphatical, and Planets, because the very notation of their name implies their
nature; for (...) is plainly from (...) Vstio, or burning, and (...)
extinction, Nouns made from (...) and (...) as (...) and (...) from (...) and
(...), according to unexceptionable Analogy. And the Earth, as also the rest of
the Planets, their nature is such, as if they had once been burning and shining
Suns, but their light and heat being extinguished, they afterward became opake
Planets. This conclusion seems here plainly to be contained in Moses, but is at
large demonstrated in Des Carts his Philosophy. Nor is this Notation of (...)
enervated by alleging that the word is ordinarily used to signify the fixed
Stars, as well as the Planets. For I do not deny but that in a vulgar Notion it
may be competible to them also. For the fixed Stars according to the
imagination of the rude people, may be said to be lighted up, and extinguished,
so often as they appear and disappear; for they measure all by obvious sense
and fancy, and may well look upon them as so many Candles set up by divine
Providence in the Night, but by Day frugally put out, for wasting: And I
remember Theodoret in his (...), has so glibly swallowed down the Notion, that
he uses it as a special argument of Providence, that they can burn thus with
their heads downwards, and not presently sweal out and be extinguished, as our
ordinary Candles are. Wherefore the word (...), may very well be attributed to
all the Stars as well Fixed, as Planets, but to the Fixed only upon vulgar
seeming grounds, to the Planets upon true and natural. And we may be sure that
that is that which Moses would aim at, and lay stresse upon in his Philosophic
Cabbala. Wherefore in brief, (...) Emphatical in (...) contains a double
Emphasis, intimating those true (...) or Planets, and then the most eminent
amongst those truly so termed. Nor is it at all strange, that so abstruse
conclusion of Philosophy should be lodged in this Mosaical Text. For, as I have
elsewhere intimated, Moses has been aforehand with Cartesius. The ancient
Patriarchs having had wit, and by reason of their long lives leisure enough to
invent as curious and subtle Theorems in Philosophy, as ever any of their
posterity could hit upon, besides what they might have had by tradition from
Adam. And if we find the Earth a Planet, it must be acknowledged forthwith
that it runs about the Sun, which is pure Pythagorisme again, and a shrewd
presumption that he was taught that mystery by this Mosaical Cabbala. But that
the Earth is a Planet, besides the Notation we have already insisted upon, the
necessity of being created in this fourth day amongst the other Planets, is a
further Argument. For there is no mention of its Creation in any day else,
according to this Philosophic Cabbala.

Ver. 17. Inhabitants of the world. The Hebrew is (...). And I have made bold
to interpret (...), not of this one Individual Earth, but of the whole Species;
and therefore I render it the World at large. As (...) in the twenty seventh of
this Chapter, is not an Individual Man, but Mankind in general. And so ver.
16. (...) viz. (...) and (...), are interpreted after the same manner, rendering
them the greater sort of Lights, and the lesser sort of Lights. So that no
Grammatical violence is done to the Text of Moses all this time.

Ver. 19. And the number denotes. This fourth days Creation is the contrivance
of Matter into Suns and Planets, or into Suns, Moons, and Earths. For the
Ethereal Vortices were then set a going, and the Corporeal world had got into
an useful order and shape. And the ordering and framing of the Corporeal world,
may very well be said to be transacted in the number Four; Four being the first
body in numbers an Aequilateral Pyramid, which Figure also is a right Symbol
of Light, the rays entering the eye in a Pyramidal form. And Lights now are set
up in all the vast Region of the Ethereal Matter, which is Heaven. The
Pythagoreans also call this number (...), and (...), Body, and the World,
intimating the Creation of the Corporeal world therein. And further, signifying
in what excellent proportion and harmony the world was made, they call this
number Four: (...) and (...), and (...). Harmony, Urania, and the Stirrer up of
divine Fury and Ecstasy; Insinuating that all things are so sweetly and
fittingly ordered in the world, that the several motions thereof are as a
comely Dance, or ravishing Music, and are able to carry away a contemplative
Soul into Rapture and Ecstasy upon a clear view, and attentive Animadversion of
the Order and Economy of the Universe. And Philo, who does much Pythagorize in
his Exposition of Moses, observes, That this number Four contains the most
perfect proportions in Musical Symphonies, viz. Diatessaron, Diapente,
Diapason, and Disdiapason, (...), etc. For the proportion of Diatessaron is as
Four to Three, of Diapente as Three to Two, of Diapason as Two to One, or Four
to Two, of Disdiapason as Four to One. We might cast in also the consideration
of that divine Nemesis, which God has placed in the frame and nature of the
Universal Creation, as he is a Distributer to every one according to his works.
From whence himself is also called Nemesis, by Aristotle, (...), Because he
every where distributes what is due to every one. This is in ordinary language
Justice, and both Philo and Plotinus out of the Pythagoreans, affirms, that the
number Four is a Symbol of Justice. All which, makes toward what I drive at,
that the whole Creation is concerned in this number Four, which is called the
Fourth day. And for further eviction, we may yet add, that as all numbers are
contained in Four virtually, (by all numbers is meant Ten, for when we come to
Ten, we go back again) so the root and foundation of all the Corporeal Creation
is laid in this fourth days work, wherein Suns, Earths, and Moons are made, and
the ever whirling Vortices. For as Philo observes, Pythagorean-like, Ten (which
they call also (...), and (...), the World, Heaven, and All-perfectnesse) is
made by the scattering of the parts of Four: thus, 1, 2, 3, 4. Put these
together now and they are Ten. (...), The Universe. And this was such a secret
amongst Pythagoras his disciples, that it was a solemn oath with them to swear
by him that delivered to them the mystery of the Tetractys, Tetrad or number
Four.

(...)
(...).
By him that did to us disclose
The Tetrads mystery,
Where Natures Fount that ever flows,
And hidden root does lie.
Thus they swore by Pythagoras as is conceived, who taught them this mysterious
tradition. And had it not been a right worshipful mystery think you indeed,
and worthy of the solemnity of Religion and of an Oath, to understand that 1,
2, 3, 4. make Ten. And that Ten is All, which rude mankind told first upon
their fingers, and Arithmeticians discover it by calling them Digits at this
very day.

There is no likelihood that so wise a man as Pythagoras was, should lay any
stress upon such trifles, or that his Scholars should be such fools as to be
taken with them. But it is well known that the Pythagoreans held the Motion of
the Earth about the Sun, which is plainly implied according to the Philosophic
Cabbala of this Fourth days work. So much of his secrets got out to common
knowledge and fame. But it is very highly probable, that he had the whole
Philosophic Cabbala of the Creation opened to him by some knowing Priest or
Philosopher (as we now call them) in the Oriental parts, that under this
mystery of numbers set out to him the choicest and most precious conclusions
in Natural Philosophy, interpreting as I conceive, the Text of Moses in some
such way as I have light upon, and making all those generous and ample
conclusions good by Demonstration and Reason. And so Pythagoras being well
furnished with the knowledge of things, was willing to impart them to those
whose piety and capacity was fit to receive them; Not laying aside that outward
form of numbers, which they were first conveied to himself in. But such
Arithmetical nugacities as are ordinarily recorded for his, in dry numbers, to
have been the riches of the Wisdom of so famous a Philosopher, is a thing
beyond all credit or probability.

Wherefore I conceive, that the choicest and most precious treasures of
knowledge, being laid open in the Cabbala of the Fourth day; from thence it was
that so much Solemnity and Religion was put upon that number, which he called
his Tetractys, which seems to have been of two kinds, the one, the single
number Four, the other Thirty six, made of the four first Masculine numbers,
and the four first Feminine, viz. of 1, 3, 5, 7. and of 2, 4, 6, 8. wherein you
see that the former and more simple Tetractys is still included and made use
of; for Four here takes place again in the Assignment of the Masculine and
Feminine Numbers. Whence I further conceive, that under the number of this more
complex Tetrad which contains also the other in it, he taught his disciples the
mystery of the whole Creation, opening to them the nature of all things as
well Spiritual as Corporeal. (...), as a certain Author writes; For an even
Number carries along with it divisibility, and passibility. But an odd Number,
indivisibility, impassibility, and activity, wherefore that is called Feminine,
this Masculine.

Wherefore the putting together of the four first Masculine Numbers to the four
first Feminine, is the joining of the active and passive Principles together,
matching the parts of the Matter, with congruous Forms from the World of life.
So that I conceive the Tetractys was a a Symbol of the whole Systeme of
Pythagoras his Philosophy, which we may very justly suspect to be the same with
the Mosaical Cabbala. And the root of this Tetractys is Six, which again hits
upon Moses* and remindes us of the Six days work of the Creation.

Ver. 20. Fish and Fowl are made in the same day. And here Moses does plainly
play the Philosopher in joining them together; for there is more affinity
betwixt them then is easily discerned by the heedlesse vulgar: for besides that
Fowls frequent the waters very much, many kinds of them I mean, these Elements
themselves of Air and Water, for their thinness and liquidity, are very like
one another. Besides, the sins of fishes and the wings of birds, the feathers
of one and the scales of the other, are very Analogical. They are both also
destitute of Vreters, Dugges, and Milk, and are Oviparous. Further, their
motions are mainly alike, the fishes as it were flying in the water, and the
fowls swimming in the Air, according to that of the Poet concerning Daedalus,
when he had made himself wings;

Insuetum per iter gelidas enavit ad Arctos.

Cast in this also, that as some fowls dive and swim under water, so some
fishes fly above the water in the air, for a considerable space till their
finnes begin to be something stiff and dry.

Ver. 23. And the Quinary denotes. Philo does not here omit that obvious
consideration of the Five senses in Animals. But it is a strange coincidence,
if it was not intended that living creatures should be said to be made in the
Fifth and Sixth day, those Numbers according to the Pythagorical mystery being
so fitly significant of the nature of them. For Five is acknowledged by them to
be Male and Female, consisting of Three and Two, the two first Masculine and
Feminine numbers. It is also an Emblem of Generation, for the number Five drawn
into Five brings about Five again, as you see in Five times Five, which is
Twenty Five. So an Eagle ingendring with an Eagle, brings forth an Eagle; and a
Dolphin ingendring with a Dolphin, a Dolphin; and so in the rest. Whence the
Pythagoreans call this number Five Cytherea, that is, Venus, and (...),
Marriage; and in Birds it is evident that they choose their mates. Concerning
the number Six, I shall speak in its proper place.

Ver. 26. That it is so free, so rational. That the Image of God consists in
this rather then in the dominion over the creature, I take to be the right
sense, and more Philosophical, the other more Political; and Philo interprets
it after that manner we have made choice of, which is also more suitable to
Platonisme and Pythagorisme, the best Cabbala that I know of Moses his Text.

Ver. 27. Male and Female. It is a wonder, says Grotius, to see how the
Explications of the Rabbines upon this place, and those passages in Plato's
Symposion agree one with another, which notwithstanding from whatsoever they
proceeded, I make no question, says he, but they are false and vain. And I
must confess I am fully of the same opinion. But this strange agreement
betwixt Aristophanes his Narration, in the forenamed Symposion, and the
comments of the Rabbines upon this Text, is no small argument that Plato had
some knowledge of Moses, which may well add the greater authority and credit
to this our Cabbala. But it was the wisdom of Plato to own the true Cabbala
himself, but such unwarrantable Fancies as might rise from the Text, to cast
upon such a ridiculous shallow companion as Aristophanes, it was good enough
for him to utter in that Clubbe of Wits, that Philosophic Symposion of Plato.

Ver. 28. They Lorded it. The Seventy have it (...), which is to domineer with
an high hand, Matthew. 20.

Ver. 31. And the Senary denotes. The Senary or the number Six has a double
reference, the one to this particular days work, the other to the whole
Creation. For the particular days work, it is the Creation of sundry sorts of
Land Animals, divided into Male and Female. And the number Six is made up of
Male and Female. For Two into Three is Six. The conceit is Philo's; and hence
the Pythagoreans called this Number, (...), Matrimony, as Clemens also
observes, adding moreover that they did it in reference to the Creation of the
world, set down by Moses. This number also in the same sort that the number
Five, is a fit Emblem of Procreation. For Six drawn into Six, makes Thirty
Six. The conceit is Plutarchs in his De Ei apud Delphos, though he speak it of
an inferior kind of Generation: But me thinks it is most proper to Animals.
Here is something also that respects Man, particularly the choicest result of
this Sixth days labor. The number of the brutish Nature was Five, according to
Philo; but here is an Unite superadded in Man, Reason reaching out to the
knowledge of a God. And this Unite added to the former Five, makes Six.

But now for the reference that Six bears to the whole Creation, that the
Pythagoreans did conceive it was significant thereof, appears by the titles
they have given it. For they call it (...). The articulate and complete
efformation of the Universe, the Anvill, and the World. I suppose they call it
the Anvill from that indefatigable shaping out of new Forms and Figures upon
the Matter of the Universe, by virtue of the Active Principle that ever busies
it self every where. But how the Senary should Emblematize the World, you shall
understand thus: The world is self-compleat, filled and perfected by its own
parts; so is the Senarius, which has no denominated part but a Sixth, Third, and
Second, viz. 1, 2, 3. which put together make Six, and Euclide defines a
perfect Number from this property, (...). A perfect Number is that which is
equal to its parts. Wherefore this number sets out the perfection of the
world, and you know God in the close of all, saw that all that he made was very
good. Then again the world is (...), Mas and Foemina, that is, it consists of
an active and passive Principle, the one brought down into the other from the
World of life; And the Senary is made by the drawing of the first Masculine
Number into the first Feminine, for Three into Two is Six.

Thus you see continuedly, that the property of the Number sets off the nature
of the work of every day, according to those mysteries that the Pythagoreans
have observed in them; and besides this, that the Numbers have ordinarily got
Names answerable to each days work; which, as I have often intimated, is a very
high probability, that the Pythagoreans had a Cabbala referring to Moses his
Text, and the History of the Creation. And Philo, though not in so punctual a
way, has offered at the opening of the mind of Moses by this Key. But I hope I
have made it so plain, that it will not hereafter be scrupled, but that this is
the genuine way of interpreting the Philosophic meaning of the Mosaical Text
in this first Chapter of Genesis.

CHAP. II.
3 The number Seven a fit Symbol of the Sabbath, or Rest of God. 7 Of Adams
rising out of the ground, as other creatures did. 11 That Pison is from (...)
or (...), and denotes Prudence. The mystical meaning of Havilah. 13 That Gihon
is the same that Nilus, Sihor, or Siris, and that Pison is Ganges. The Justice
of the Aethiopians. That Gihon is from (...), and denotes that virtue. 14 As
Hiddekel, Fortitude. 17 That those expressions of the Souls sleep, and death in
the Body, so frequent amongst the Platonists, were borrowed from the Mosaical
Cabbala. 19. Fallen Angels assimilated to the beasts of the field. The meaning
of those Platonical phrases (...), and the like. That (...) in Platonisme is
the same that (...) in Moses, that signifies Angels as well as God. 22 That
there are three principles in Man, according to Plato's School; (...), and
that this last is Eve.

IN this second Chapter Moses having spoke of the Sabbath, returns to a more
particular Declaration of the Creation of Adam, which is referrable to the Sixth
days work. Then he falls upon that mysterious story of Paradise, which runs out
into the next Chapter.

Ver. 3. And the number declares the nature. The Hebdomad or Septenary is a fit
Symbol of God, as he is considered having finished these six days Creation.
For then, as this Cabbala intimates, he creates nothing further. And therefore
his condition is then very fitly set out by the number Seven. All numbers
within the Decad, are cast into three ranks, as Philo observes. (...). Some
beget, but are not begotten; others are begotten, but do not beget; the last
both beget, and are begotten. The number Seven is only excepted, that is
neither begotten, nor begets any number, which is a perfect Emblem of God
celebrating this Sabbath. For he now creates nothing of anew, as himself is
uncreatable. So that the creating and infusing of souls as occasion should
offer, is quite contrary to this Mosaical Cabbala. But the Cabbala is very
consonant to it self, which declares that all souls were created at once in the
first day, and will in these following Chapters declare also the manner of
their falling into the body.

Ver. 4. Productions of the Heavens. The Original has it (...). Here the Suns
and Planets are plainly said to be generated by the Heavens, or Ethereal
Matter, which is again wonderfully consonant to the Cartesian Philosophy, but
after what manner Planets and Stars are thus generated, you may see there at
large. It cannot but be acknowledged; that there was a faddome-lesse depth of
Wisdom in Moses, whose skill in Philosophy thus plainly prevents the subtilest
and most capacious reaches of all the wits of the world that ever wrote after
him.

Take upon me to define. That no set time is understood by the six days
Creation, has been witnessed already out of approved Authors, and the present
Cabbala plainly confirms it, showing that the mystery of numbers is meant, not
the order or succession of days.

Ver. 6. Like dewy showers of Rain. Vatablus plainly interprets the place of
Rain. But I conceive it better interpreted of something Analogical to the
common Rain, that now descends upon the Earth, which is less oily a great
deal, and not so full of vital vigor and principles of life.

Ver. 7. And Man himself rose out of the Earth. That God should shape earth
with his own hands like a Statuary, into the figure of a Man, and then blow
breath into the nostrils of it, and so make it become alive, is not likely to
be the Philosophic Cabbala, it being more palpably accommodated to vulgar
concern. But mention of Rain immediately before the making of Man, may very
well insinuate such preparations of the ground, to have some causal concourse
for his production. And if it be at all credible, that other living creatures
rose out of the Earth in this manner, it is as likely that man did so likewise;
for the same words are used concerning them both: for the Text of Moses, ver.
19. says, That out of the ground God formed every Beast of the Field, and
every Fowl of the Air, as it says in the seventh verse, that he formed Man of
the dust of the ground. Whence Euripides the Tragedian (one that Socrates loved
and respected much for his great knowledge and virtue, and would of his own
accord be a spectator of his Tragedies, when as they could scarce force him to
see other Plays, as Aelian writes) this Euripides, I say, pronouncing of the
first generation of men, and the rest of living creatures, affirmed that they
were born all after the same manner, and that they rose out of the Earth. And
that Euripides was tinctured with the same doctrines that were in Pythagoras,
and Plato's School, both the friendship betwixt him and Socrates, as also the
(...) or Moral and Philosophic sentences in his Tragedies are no
inconsiderable arguments. And as I have already intimated, the best
Philosophic Cabbala of Moses that is, I suspect to be in their Philosophy, I
mean of Plato and Pythagoras.

Ver. 8. Where he had put the Man. For there is no Praeterpluperfect Tense in
the Hebrew, and therefore as Vatablus observes, if the sense require, the
Praeterperfect Tense stands for it.

Wholly Ethereal. For that is the pure Heavenly and undefiled Vehicle of the
soul, according to Platonisme.

Beams of the divine Intellect. I have already more at large showed how the Son
of God or the divine Intellect is set out by the similitude of the Sunrising,
or East, which I may again here further confirm out of Philo; (...). In his
(...). So that the placing of Paradise under the Sunrise, signifies the
condition of a Soul irrigated by the rays of the divine Intellect, which she
is most capable of in her Ethereal Vehicle. But that the souls of men were
from the beginning of the world, is the general opinion of the Learned Jews,
as well as of the Pythagoreans and Platonists, and therefore a very warrantable
Hypothesis in the Philosophic Cabbala.

Ver. 9. The Essential Will of God. By the Essential Will of God, is understood
the Will of God becoming Life and Essence to the Soul of Man; whereby is
signified a more thorough union betwixt the divine and humane nature, such as
is in them that are firmly regenerated and radicated in what is good. Philo
makes the Tree of Life to be (...), that is, Piety or Religion, but the best
Religion and Piety is to be of one will with God: see John 1. 12.

Ver. 10. The Four Cardinal Virtues. It is Philo's Exposition upon the place;
and then the River it self to be (...), That general goodness distinguishable
into these four heads of virtue.

Ver. 11. Is Pison. From (...) or (...) to spread and diffuse it self, to
multiply and abound. This is Wisdom or Prudence, called Pison, partly because
it diffuses it self into all our actions, and regulates the exercise of the
other Three virtues, and partly because Wisdom and Truth, fills and increases,
and spreads out every day more then other. For Truth is very fruitful, and
there are ever new occasions that add experience of things.

(...).
According to our English Proverb, The older the wiser.

In the Land of Havilah. From (...) and (...) or (...), Deus indicavit, God
has shown it.

Ver. 12. Pure Gold, etc. An easy Emblem of tried Experience, the mother of
true Wisdom and Prudence. And the virtue of Bdellium is not unproper for
diseases that arise from Phlegmatic laziness; and the very name and nature of
the Onyx stone also points out the signification of it, though there be no
necessity, as I have told you already out of Maimonides, to give an account in
this manner of every particular passage in an Allegory or Parable. Wherefore if
any man think me too curious, they may omit these expositions, and let them go
for naught.

Ver. 13. River is Gihon. According to the History or Letter we have made
Pison, Phasis, and Gihon a branch of Euphrates. But the ancient Fathers,
Epiphanius, Augustine, Ambrose, Hieronymus, Theodoret, Damascen, and several
others make Pison, Ganges, and Gihon, Nilus. And they have no contemptible
arguments for it. For first, Jerem. 2. 18. Sihor, is a River of Egypt, which
is not questioned to be any other then Nilus, and its Etymon seems to bewray
the truth of it, from (...) denigrari, from the muddy blackness of the River.
And Nilus is notorious for this quality, and therefore has its denomination
thence in the Greek, quasi (...), acording to which is that of Dionysius.

(...),
(...).
That is,

For there is no River can compare with Nile,
For casting mud, and fattening the soil.
But now to recite the very words of the Prophet, What have thou to do with the
way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor? the Latin has it, ut bibas aquam
turbidam. This is Nilu^, But the Seventy translate it (...), To drink the water
of Gihon; which is the name of this very River of Paradise: And the Abyssines
also even to this day call Nilus by the name of Guion. Add unto this, that
Gihon runs in Aethiopia, so does Nilus, and is Siris, as it runs through
Aethiopia, which is from Sihor it is likely, and then the Greek termination
makes it Sioris, after by contraction Siris.

(...)
(...)
That is, The Ethiopian him Siris calls,
Syene, Nilus, when by her he crawls.


As the same Author writes in his Geographical Poems. And that Pison is Ganges,
has also its probabilities. Ganges being in India a Country famous for Gold
and precious Stones. Besides, the notation of the name agrees with the nature
of the River. Pison being from (...) multiplicare. And there is no less a
number then Ten, and those great Rivers that exonerate themselves into Ganges:
as there must be a conflux of multifarious experience to fill up and complete
that virtue of Wisdom or Prudence. So that we shall see that the four Rivers
of Paradise have got such names, as are most advantageous and favorable to the
mysterious sense of the story.

Wherefore regardlesse here of all Geographical scrupulosities, we will say
that Gihon is Nilus or Siris, the River of the Aethiopians, that is, of the
Just, and the virtue is here determinately set off from the subject wherein it
does reside: For by the fame of the Justice and Innocence of the Aethiopians,
we are assured which of the Cardinal Virtues is meant by Gihon. And the ancient
fame of their honesty and uprightness was such, that Homer has made it their
Epithet, calling them (...), The blameless Aethiopians; adding further, that
Jupiter used to banquet with them, he being so much taken with the integrity of
their conversation. And Dionysius calls them (...), The divine, or Deiforme
Aethiopians: and they were so styled (...), by reason of their Justice, as
Eustathius comments upon the place. Herodotus also speaking of them says, they
are very goodly men, and much civilized, and of a very long life, which is the
reward of Righteousness. So that by the place where Gihon runs, it is plainly
signified to us, what Cardinal Virtue is to be understood thereby.

Notation of the name thereof. The name Gihon as you have seen, fairly incites
us to acknowledge it a River of Aethiopia. The notation thereof does very
sutably agree with the nature of Justice, for it is from (...) erumpere. And
Justice is (...), Bonum alienum, as the Philosopher notes, not confined within
a man's self, but breaks out rather upon others, bestowing upon every one what
is their due.

Ver. 14. Is Hiddekell. The word is compounded, says Vatablus, from two words
that signify velox and rapidum, and this virtue like a swift and rapid stream,
bears down all before it, as you have it in the Cabbala.

And stoutly resists. Philo uses here the word (...), to resist, which he takes
occasion from the Seventies (...), which he interprets against the Assyrians.
The Hebrew has it, Eastward of Assyria, and therefore Assyria is situated
Westward of it. Now the West is that quarter of the world where the Sun bidding
us adieu, leaves us to darkness, whence (...), the West wind, in Eustathius,
has its name from (...) and (...), the wind that blows from the dark Quarter.
Assyria therefore is that false state of seeming happiness, and power of
wickedness, which is called the kingdom of darkness. And this is the most
noble object of Fortitude, to destroy the power of this kingdom within our
selves.

Perath. From (...) Fructificavit.

Ver. 17. In process of time, etc. This is according to the mind of the
Pythagoreans and Origin. And that Pythagoras had the favor of having the
Mosaical Cabbala communicated to him by some knowing Priest of the Jews, or
some holy man or other, I think I have continuedly in the former Chapter made
it exceeding probable.

The Region of mortality and death. Nothing is more frequent with the
Platonists, then the calling of the body a Sepulcher, and this life we live
here upon Earth, either sleep or death. Which expressions are so suitable with
this Cabbala, and the Cabbala with the Text of Moses, that mentions the death
and sleep of Adam, that it is a shrewd presumption that these Phrases and
Notions came first from thence. And Philo acknowledges that Heraclitus, that
mysterious and abstruse Philosopher, (whom Porphyrius also has cited to the
same purpose, in his De antro Nympharum) has even hit upon the very meaning
that Moses intends in this death of Adam, in that famous saying of his, (...).
We live their death, (to wit, of the souls out of the body) but we are dead to
their life. And Euripides that friend of Socrates, and fellow-traveller of
Plato's, in his Tragedies speaks much to the same purpose. (...),
(...);
Who knows whether to live, be not to die, and to die, to live? So that the
Philosophic sense concerning Adams death, must be this, that he shall be dead
to the Ethereal life he lived before, while he is restrained to the
Terrestrial, and that when as he might have lived for ever in the Ethereal
Life, he shall in a shorter time assuredly die to the Terrestrial: That the
sons of men cannot escape either the certainty or speed of death.

Ver. 18. Both good for himself, etc. For the words of the Text do not confine
it to Adams convenience alone, but speaks at large without any restraint, in
this present verse. Wherefore there being a double convenience, it was more
explicit to mention both in the Cabbala.

Ver. 19. Fallen and unfallen Angels. The fallen Angels are here assimilated to
the Beasts of the Field, the unfallen to the Fowls of the Air. How fitly the
fallen Spirits are reckoned amongst the Beasts of the Field, you shall
understand more fully in the following Chapter. In the mean time you may take
notice that the Platonists, indeed Plato himself, in his Phaedrus, makes the
Soul of Man before it falls into this Terrestrial Region, a winged Creature.
And that such phrases as these, (...), and (...), and (...), and the like, are
proper expressions of that School. And Plato does very plainly define what he
means by these wings of the soul, (and there is the same reason of all other
spirits whatsoever) after this manner, (...). That the nature of the wing of
the soul is such, as to be able to carry upward, that which otherwise would
slugge downwards, and to bear it aloft and place it there, where we may have
more sensible communion with God, and his holy Angels. For so (...) in the
plural number, is most sutably translated in such passages as these, and most
congruously to the thing it self, and the truth of Christianity. And it may
well seem the less strange, that (...) should signify Angels in the Greek
Philosophers, especially such as have been acquainted with Moses, when as with
him (...) signifies so too, viz. Angels as well as God. Wherefore to conclude,
the loss of that Principle that keeps us in this divine condition, is the
losing of our wings, which fallen Angels have done, and therefore they may be
very well assimilated to Terrestrial Beasts.

Ver. 20. A faculty of being united, etc. This vital aptitude in the soul of
being united with corporeal Matter, being so essential to her and proper, the
invigorating the exercise of that faculty, cannot but be very grateful and
acceptable to her, and a very considerable share of her happiness. Else what
means the Resurrection of the dead, or Bodies in the other world? which yet is
an Article of the Christian Faith.

Ver. 22. This new sense of his Vehicle. There be three Principles in Man
according to the Platonists, (...). The first is Intellect, Spirit, or divine
Light; the second the Soul her self, which is Adam the Man, Animus cujusque is
est quisque, the Soul of every man that is the Man; the third is the image of
the Soul, which is her vital Energie upon the Body, wherewith she does enliven
it, and if that life be in good tune, and due vigor, it is a very grateful
sense to the soul, whether in this Body, or in a more thin Vehicle. This
Ficinus makes our Eve. This is the Feminine Faculty in the Soul of Man, which
awakes then easiliest into act, when the Soul to Intellectuals falls asleep.

Ver. 24. Over-tedious aspires. (...), is a solemn monition of Aristotle
somewhere in his Ethics. And it is a great point of wisdom indeed, and mainly
necessary, to know the true laws and bounds of humane happiness, that the heat
of melancholy drive not men up beyond what is competible to humane nature, and
the reach of all the faculties thereof: Nor the too savoury relish of the
pleasures of the flesh, or Animal Life, keep them down many thousand degrees
below what they are capable of. But the man that truly fears God, will be
delivered from them both. What I have spoken is directed more properly to the
soul in the flesh, but may Analogically be understood of a soul in any Vehicle,
for they are peccable in them all.

Ver. 25. Stood naked before God. Adam was as truly clothed in Corporeity now
as ever after; for the Ether is as true a body as the Earth: But the meaning
is, Adam had a sense of the divine Presence, very feelingly assured in his own
mind, that his whole Being lay naked and bare before God, and that nothing
could be hid from his sight, which pierced also to the very thoughts, and
inward frame of his spirit. But yet though Adam stood thus naked before him,
notwithstanding he found no want of any covering to hide himself from that
presentifick sense of him, nor indeed felt himself as naked in that notion of
nakedness. For that sense of nakedness, and want of further covering and
sheltring from the divine Presence, arose from his disobedience and rebellion
against the commands of God, which as yet he had not fallen into.

Not at all ashamed. Shame is, (...), the fear of just reprehension* as Gellius
out of the Philosophers defines it. But Adam having not acted any thing yet at
random, after the swing of his own will, he had done nothing that the divine
Light would reprehend him for. He had not yet become obnoxious to any sentence
from his own condemning Conscience; for he kept himself hitherto within the
bounds of that divine Law written in his soul, and had attempted nothing
against the Will of God. So that there being no sin, there could not as yet be
any shame in Adam.

CHAP. III.
1 The Serpent (...) in Pherecydes Syrus. (...), and (...) names of Spirits
haunting Fields and desolate places. The right Notation of (...). 13 That Satan
upon his tempting Adam, was cast down lower toward the Earth, with all his
Accomplices. 15 Plato's Prophecy of Christ. The reasonableness of divine
Providence in exalting Christ above the highest Angels. 20 That Adams
descension into his Terrestrial Body, was a kind of death. 22 How incongruous
it is to the divine Goodness, Sarcastically to insult over frait Man fallen
into Tragical misery. 24 That it is a great mercy of God that we are not
immortal upon Earth. That (...) are all one. A Summary representation of the
strength of the whole Philosophic Cabbala. Pythagoras deemed the son of
Apollo, That he was acquainted with the Cabbala of Moses: That he did miracles;
as also Abaris, Empedocles, and Epimenides, being instructed by him. Plato also
deemed the son of Apollo. Socrates his dream concerning him. That he was
learned in the Mosaical Cabbala. The miraculous power of Plotinus his Soul.
Cartesius compared with Bezaliel and Aholiab, and whether he was inspired or
no. The Cabbalists Apology.

THE first verse. This old Serpent therefore. In Pherecydes Syrus, Pythagoras
his Master, there is mention of one (...), Princeps mali, as Grotius cites him
on this place, which is a further argument of Pythagoras his being acquainted
with this Mosaical Philosophy. And that according to the Philosophic Cabbala,
it was an evil spirit, not a natural Serpent, that supplanted Adam, and brought
such mischief upon mankind.

The Beasts of the Field. But now that these evil spirits should be reckoned as
beasts of the field, besides what reason is given in the Cabbala it self, we
may add further, that the haunt of these unclean spirits is in solitudes, and
waste fields, and desolate places, as is evident in the Prophet Esaias his
description of the desolation of Babylon, where he says it shall be a place
for the (...), and (...), the Fauni and Sylvani, as Castellis translates it, or
(...), and (...), as the Seventy: And these Onocentauri in Hesychius are (...).
A kind of spirit that frequents the woods, and is of a dark color. There is
mention made also by the Prophet (in the same description) of the (...) and
(...) and of (...), all which Expositors interpret of Spirits. For (...) are
interpreted by the Seventy (...), by Castellio Satyri, (...) Castellio renders
Fauni, the Seventy (...) Clamores, Strepitus, Grotius suspects they wrote
(...). Out of both you may guess, that they were such a kind of spirit, as
causes a noise and a stir in those desolate places, according to that of
Lucretius:

Haec loca capripedes Satyros, Nymphasque tenere
Finitimi fingunt, and Faunos esse loquuntur;
Quorum noctivago strepitu ludoque jocanti
Affirmant vulgo taciturna silentia rumpi.
To this sense:

These are the places where the Nymphs do won,
The Fawns and Satyrs with their cloven feet,
Whose noise, and shouts, and laughters loud do run
Through the still Air, and wake the silent Night.
But the Poet puts it off with this conceit, that it is only the Shepherds
that are merry with their Lasses. But no man can gloss upon this Text after
that manner: For the Prophet says, No shepherd shall pitch his fold there, nor
shall any man pass through it for ever. The last strange creature in these
direful solitudes, is (...), which Interpreters ordinarily translate Lamia, a
Witch; and for mine own part, I give so much credit to sundry stories, that I
have read and heard, that I should rather interpret those noises in the Night,
which Luoretius speaks of, to be the Conventicles of Witches and Devils* then
the merriment of Shepherds and their Shepheardesses. But the Jews understand
by (...) a she devil, an enemy to women in childe-bed; whence it is, that they
write on the walls of the room where the woman lies in, (...) Adam, Eve, out of
doors Lilith.

And what I have alleged already, I conceive is authority enough to
countenance the sense of the Cabbala, that supposes evil spirits to be reckoned
among, or to be Analogical to the beasts of the field. But something may be
added yet further, Matthew. 12. 43. There our Savior Christ plainly allows of
this doctrine, that evil spirits have their haunts in the wide fields and
deserts, which Grotius observes to be the opinion of the Jews, and that (...),
Daemones, have their name for that reason, from (...) Ager* the Field; for if
it were from (...), it would be rather (...) then (...), Shiddim, then Shedhim,
as Grammatical Analogy requires.

Ver. 2. And Adam answered him. Though the Serpent here be looked upon as a
distant person from Adam, and externally accosting him, yet it is not at all
incongruous to make Eve merely an Internal Faculty of him. For as she is said
to proceed fromhim, so she is said still to be one with him, which is
wonderfully agreeable with the faculties of the soul; for though they be from
the soul, yet they are really one with her, as they that understand any thing
in Philosophy will easily admit.

Ver. 5. Know all things. (...). All men have a natural desire of knowledge. It
is an Aphorism in Aristotle; and this desire is most strong in those, whose
spirits are most thin and subtle. And therefore this bait could not but be
much taking with Adam in his thinner Vehicle. But what ever is natural to the
soul, unless it be regulated and bounded with the divine Light, will prove her
mischief and bane, whether in this lower state, or in what state soever the
soul is placed in.

Ver. 7. Neither the covering of the heavenly nature. For Adam by the indulging
to every careless suggestion, at last destroyed and spoiled the pure frame of
his Ethereal or Heavenly Vehicle, and wrought himself into a dislike of the
sordid ruins and distempered relics of it, and in some measure awakening
that lower Plantal life, which yet had not come near enough the Terrestrial
matter, and with which he was as yet unclothed, found himself naked of what he
presaged would very fitly suit with him, and ease the trouble of his present
condition: See 2 Cor. chapter 5. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Ver. 8. That they hid themselves. They hate the Light, because their deeds are
evil. This is true of all rebellious spirits, be they in what Vehicle they will.

Ver. 9. Pursued him. Praestantiorem Animae facultatem esse ducem hominis atque
Daemonem. It is Ficinus his out of Timaeus, viz. That the best faculty that the
soul is any thing awaked to, is her guide and good Genius. But if we be
rebellious to it, it is our Demon in the worse sense, and we are afraid of it,
and cannot endure the sight of it.

Ver. 10. No power nor ornaments. For he found that though he could spoil and
disorder his Vehicle, it was not in his power so easily to bring it in order
again.

Ver. 12. It was the vigor and impetuosity. There is some kind of offer
toward a real excuse in Adam, but it is manifest that he cannot clear himself
from sin, because it was in his power to have regulated the motions of the Life
of his Vehicle, according to the rule of the divine Light in him.

Ver. 13. What work has she made here. Adam touched in some sort with the
conviction of the divine Light, bemoans that sad Catastrophe, which the
vigorous life of the Vehicle had occasioned; But then he again excuses himself
from the deceivablenesse of that faculty, especially it being wrought upon, by
so cunning and powerful an Assailant as the old Serpent the Devil.

Imagination for ever. That is, (...).

The Eternal God. It being a thing acknowledged, that God both speaks in a man,
as in other intellectual creatures, by his divine Light residing there, and
that he also speaks in himself, concerning things or persons; which speeches
are nothing else but his decrees: It is not at all harsh, in the reading of
Moses, to understand the speakings of God, according as the circumstances of
the Matter naturally imply, nor to bring God in as a third Person, in corporeal
and visible shape, unless there were an exigency that did extort it from us.
For his inward word, whereby he either creates or decrees any thing that shall
come to pass, as also that divine Light whereby he does instruct those souls
that receive him, Philosophy will easilier admit of these for the speakings of
God, then any audible articulate voice pronounced by him in humane shape,
unless it were by Christ himself, for otherwise in all likelihood it is but a
message by some Angel.

Ver. 14. The Prince of the rebellious Angels. For the mighty shall be mightily
tormented; and the nature of the thing also implies it, because disgrace,
adversity, and being trampled on, is far more painful and vexatious to those
that have been in great place, then to those of a more inferior rank. From
whence naturally this Chieftain of the Devils, as Mr. Mede calls him, will be
struck more deeply with the curse, then any of the rest of his Accomplices.

In the higher parts of the Air, etc. This is very consonant to the opinion of
the ancient Fathers, whether you understand it of Satan himself, or of the
whole kingdom of those rebellious spirits. And it is no more absurd, that for
a time the bad went amongst the good in the Ethereal Region, then it is now
that there are good spirits amongst the bad in this lower Air. But after that
villainy Satan committed upon Adam, he was commanded down lower, and the fear of
the Lord of Hosts so changed his Vehicle, and slaked his fire, that he sunk
toward the Earth, and at last was fain to lick the dust of the ground, see Mr.
Mede in his Discourse upon 2 Pet. 2. 4.

Ver. 15. Messiah should take a Body. That the Soul of the Messiah* and all
souls else did pre-exist, is the opinion of the Jews, and that admitted, there
is no difficulty in the Cabbala. Plato, whether from this passage alone, or
whether it was that he was instructed out of other places also of the holy
Writ, (if what Ficinus writes is true) seems to have had some knowledge and
presage of the coming of Christ, in that being asked, how long men should
attend to his writings; he answered, till some more holy and divine Person
appear in the world, whom all should follow.

Notoriously here upon Earth. As it came to pass in his casting out Devils,
and silencing Oracles, or making them cry out.

(...) --
Christ bruises the head of Satan by destroying his kingdom and sovereignty,
and by being so highly exalted above all Powers whatsoever. And it is a very
great and precious mystery; That dear Compassion of our fellow creatures, and
faithful and fast Obedience to the will of God, (which were so eminently and
transcendently in Christ) should be lifted above all Power and Knowledge
whatsoever, in those higher Orders of Angels. For none of them that were, as
they should be, would take offense at it, but be glad of it. But those that
were proud, or valued Power and Knowledge before Goodness and Obedience, it
was but a just affront to them, and a fit rebuke of their Pride.

But now how does Satan bruise the heel of Christ? Thus: He falls upon the
rear, the lowest part of those that profess Christianity, Hypocrites, and
ignorant souls, such as he often makes witches of; but the Church Triumphant is
secure, and the sincere part of the Church Militant. So Mr. Mede upon the place.

Ver. 16. The Concomitance of Pain and Sorrow. And it is the common complaint
of all Mortals, that they that speed the best, have the experience of a
vicissitude of sorrow as well as joy. And the very frame of our bodies as well
as the accidents of Fortune, are such, that to indulge to pleasure, is but to
lay the seed of sorrow or sadness by Diseases, Satiety, or Melancholy* Besides
many spinosities and cutting passages that often happen unawares in the
conversation of those from whom we expect the greatest solace and contents. To
say nothing of the assaults of a man's own mind, and pricking of Conscience,
which ordinarily disturb those that follow after the pleasures of the body.
Lucretius, though an Atheist, will fully witness to the truth of all this in
his fourth book, De rerum Natura, where you may read upon this subject at large.

Ver. 18. Thorns and Thistles. Moses instances in one kind of life, Husbandry,
but there is the same reason in all.

-- Nil sine magno
Vita laebore dedit mortalibus --
Life nothing gratis unto men does give;
But with great labor and sad toil we live.
Ver* 20. Euripides the friend of Socrates, and a favourer of the Pythagorean
Philosophy, writes somewhere in his Tragedies, as I have already told you, to
this sense; Who knows, says he, whether to live, be to die; and whether again,
to die, be not to live? Which question is very agreeable to this present
Cabbala: for Adam is here as it were dying to that better world and condition
of life he was in, and like as one here upon Earth on his deathbed, prophec^es
many times, and professes what he presages concerning his own state to come,
that he shall be with God, that he shall be in Heaven amongst the holy Angels,
and the Saints departed, and the like: So Adam here utters his Apologetical
Prophecy, that this change of his, and departure from this present state,
though it may prove ill enough for himself, yet it has its use and convenience,
and that it is better for the Universe; for he shall live upon Earth, and be a
Ruler there amongst the Terrestrial creatures, and help to order and govern
that part of the world.

The Life of his Vehicle Eve. For Eve signifies Life, that life which the soul
derives to what Vehicle or Body soever she actuates and possesses.

Ver. 21. Skin of Beasts. This Origin understands of Adams being incorporated
and clothed with humane flesh and skin. Ridiculum enim est dicere, says he,
quod Deus fuerit Adami coriarius and pellium suitor. And no man will much wonder
at the confidence of this Pious and Learned Father, if he do but consider, that
the pre-existency of souls before they come into the body, is generally held by
all the Learned of the Jews, and so in all likelihood was a part of this
Philosophic Cabbala. And how fitly things fall in together, and agree with the
very Text of Moses, let any man judge.

Ver. 22. But play and sport. This I conceive a far better Decorum, then to
make God sarcastically to jeer at Adam, and triumph over him in so great and
universal a mischief, as some make it; and destitute of any concomitant
convenience; Especially there being a Principle in Adam, that was so easily
deceivable, which surely has something of the nature of an excuse in it. But to
jeer at a man that through his own weakness, and the overreaching subtilty of
his adversary, has fallen into some dreadful and tragical evil and misery, is a
thing so far from becoming God, that it utterly misbeseems any good man.

Ver. 24. He made sure he should not be immortal. For it is our advantage, as
Rupertus upon the place has observed out of Plotinus. Misericordiae Dei
fuisse, quod hominem ficerit mortalem, ne perpetuis cruciaretur hujus vitae
aerumnis. That it is the mercy of God that he made man mortal, that he might
not always be tormented with the miseries and sorrows of this present life.

Passing through his fiery Vehicle. The following words explain the meaning of
the Cabbala; it is according to the sense of that Plato amongst the Poets, (as
Severus called him) Virgil, in the sixth Book of his Aeneids:

Donec longa dies perfecto temporis orb
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
Aethereum sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem.
To this sense:

Till that long day at last be come about,
That wasted has all filth and foul desire;
And leaves the Soul Ethereal throughout,
Bathing her Senses in pure liquid Fire.
Which we shall yet back very fittingly with the two last Golden Verses, as
they are called of the Pythagoreans, who add immortality to this Ethereal
condition:

(...)
(...).
Rid of this body, if the Ether free
You reach, henceforth immortal you shall be.
The Greek has it, you shall be an Immortal God which Hierocles interprets, you
shall imitate the Deity in this, in becoming immortal. And Plutarch in his
Defect of Oracles, drives on this Apotheosis, according to the order of the
Elements, Earth refined to Water, Water to Air, Air to Fire: So man to become
of a Terrestrial Animal one of the Heroes, of an Heroes a Demon, or good
Genius, of a Genius a God, which he calls (...), to partake of Divinity, which
is no more then to become one of the (...), or Immortal Angels, who are instar
flammae, as Maimonides writes, they are according to their Vehicles, a
versatile fire, turning themselves Proteus-like into any shape. They are the
very words of the forenamed Rabbi upon the place.

And Philo Judaeus, page 234. (...). For there is, says he, in the Air, a most
holy company of unbodied Souls; and presently he adjoins, (...), and these
Souls the holy Writ uses to call Angels. And in another place page 398. he
speaking of the more pure Souls, calls them, (...) (...), i. e. The Officers of
the Generalissimo of the World, that are as the Eyes and Ears of the great
King, seeing and hearing all things; and then he adds, (...). These, other
Philosophers call the Genii, but the Scripture Angels. And in another place he
says, That (...), that a Soul, Genius, and Angel, are three words that signify
both one and the same thing. As Xenocrates also made (...) and (...) all one,
adding that he was (...), happy, that had (...), a virtuous Soul. Wherefore not
to weary my Reader, nor my self with overmuch Philogy, we conclude, that the
meaning of Moses in this last verse, is this: That Adam is here condemned to a
mortal, flitting, and impermanent state, till he reach his Ethereal or pure
fiery Vehicle, and become, as our Savior Christ speaks, (...), as one of the
Angels. This, I say, is the condition of mankind, according to the
Philosophic Cabbala of Moses.

Let us now take a general view of this whole Cabbala, and more summarily
consider the strength thereof; which we may refer to these two heads, viz. the
nature of the Truths herein contained, and the dignity of those persons that
have owned them in foregoing Ages. And as for the Truths themselves, first,
they are such as may well become so holy and worthy a person as Moses, if he
would Philosophize; they being very precious and choice Truths, and very highly
removed above the conceit of the vulgar, and so the more likely to have been
delivered to him, or to Adam first by God for a special mystery.

Secondly, they are such, that the more they are examined, the more irrefutable
they will be found, no Hypothesis that was ever yet propounded to men, so
exquisitely well agreeing with the Phenomenon of Nature, the Attributes of God,
the Passages of Providence, and the rational Faculties of our own minds.

Thirdly, there is a continued sutablenesse and applicability to the Text of
Moses all along, without any force or violence done to Grammar or Criticisme.

Fourthly and lastly, there is a great usefulness, if not necessity, at least
of some of them, they being such substantial Props of Religion, and so great
encouragements, to a sedulous purification of our minds, and study of true
piety.

Now for the dignity of the persons, such as were Pythagoras, Plato, and
Plotinus, it will be argued from the constant fame of that high degree of
virtue and righteousness, and devout love of the Deity that is every where
acknowledged in them, besides whatsoever miraculous has happened to them, or
been performed by them.

And as for Pythagoras, if you consult his life in Iamblichus, he was held in
so great admiration by those in his time, that he was thought by some to be the
son of Apollo, whom he begot of Parthenis his known mother; and of this opinion
was Epimenides, Eudoxus, and Xenocrates, which conceit Iamblichus does soberly
and earnestly reject, but afterward acknowledges, that his looks and speeches
did so wonderfully carry away the minds of all that conversed with him, that
they could not withhold from affirming, that he was (...), the offspring of
God. Which is not to be taken in our strict Theological sense, but according to
the mode of the ancient Greeks, who looked upon men heroically, and eminently
good and virtuous, to be divine souls, and of a celestial extract. And
Aristotle takes notice particularly of the Lacedaemonians, that they termed
such as were (...), very good, (...) i. e. (...), divine men. According to
which sense, he interprets that verse in Homer concerning Hector.

-- (...)
(...).
But to return to him of whom we were speaking before. This eminency of his
acknowledged amongst the Heathen, will seem more credible, if we but consider
the advantage of his conversation with the wisest men then upon Earth; to wit,
the Jewish Priests and Prophets, who had their knowledge from God, as
Pythagoras had from them. From whence I conceive that of Iamblichus to be true,
which he writes concerning Pythagoras his Philosophy: That it is (...). That it
is a Philosophy that at first was delivered by God, or his holy Angels.

But that Pythagoras was acquainted with the Mosaical or Jewish Philosophy,
there is ample testimony of it in Writers; as of Aristobulus an Egyptian Jew,
in Clemens Alexandrinus, and Josephus against Appion. S. Ambrose adds, that he
was a Jew himself. Clemens calls him (...), the Hebrew Philosopher. I might
cast hither the suffrages of Justine, Johannes Philoponus, Theodoret, Hermippus
in Origin against Celsus, Porphyrius, and Clemens again, who writes, that it
was a common fame that Pythagoras was a disciple of the Prophet Ezekiel. And
though he gives no belief to the report, yet that Learned Antiquary Mr. Seldom
seems inclinable enough to think it true, in his first Book De Jure Naturali
juxta Hebraos, where you may peruse more fully the citations of the forenamed
Authors. Besides all these, Iamblichus also affirms, that he lived at Sidon,
his Native Country, where he fell acquainted with the Prophets, and Successors
of one Mochus, the Physiologer, or Natural Philosopher. (...). Which, as Mr.
Seldom judiciously conjectures, is to be read, (...), with the Prophets that
succeeded Moses the Philosopher.

Wherefore it is very plain, that Pythagoras had his Philosophy from Moses. And
that Philosophy which to this very day is acknowledged to be his, we seeing
that it is so fitly applicable to the Text all the way, what greater argument
can there be desired to prove that it is the true Philosophic Cabbala thereof?

But there is yet another argument to prove further the likelihood of his
conversing with the Prophets, which will also further set out the dignity of
his person; and that is the Miracles that are recorded of him. For it should
seem Pythagoras was not only initiated into the Mosaical Theory, but had
arrived also to the power of working Miracles, as Moses and the succeeding
Prophets did, and very strange Facts are recorded both in Porphyrius and
Iamblichus: As that Pythagoras when he was going over a River with several of
his companions, (Iamblichus calls the River Nessus, Porphyrius Caucasus) that
he speaking to the River, the River answered him again with an audible and
clear voice, (...), Salve Pythagora. That he showed his Thigh to Abaris the
Priest, and that he affirmed that it glistered like Gold, and thence pronounced
that he was Apollo. That he was known to converse with his friends at
Metapontium, and Tauromenium (the one a Town in Italy, the other in Sicily, and
many days journey distant) in one and the same day. To these and many others
which I willingly omit, I shall only add his predictions of Earthquakes, or
rather, because that may seem more natural, his present slaking of plagues in
Cities, his silencing of violent winds, and tempests; his calming the rage of
Seas, and Rivers, and the like. Which skill Empedocles, Epimenides, and Abaris
having got from him, they grew so famous, that Empedocles was surnamed
Alexanemus, Epimenides, Cathartes, and Abaris, Aethrobates, from the power they
had in suppressing of storms and winds, in freeing of Cities from the plague,
and in walking aloft in the Air: Which skill enabled Pythagoras to visit his
friends after that manner at Metapontium, and Tauromenium in one and the same
day.

And now I have said thus much of Pythagoras, (and might say a great deal more)
there will be less need to insist upon Plato and Plotinus, their Philosophy
being the same that Pythagoras his was, and so alike applicable to Moses his
Text. Plato's exemplarity of life and virtue, together with his high knowledge
in the more sacred mysteries of God, and the state of the soul of man in this
world, and that other, deservedly got to himself the title of Divine, (...).

But as for Miracles, I know none he did, though something highly miraculous
happened, if that fame at Athens was true, that Speusippus, Clearchus, and
Anaxilides report to have been, concerning his birth, which is, that Aristo his
reputed father, when he would forcibly have had to do with Perictione, she
being indeed exceeding fair and beautiful, fell short of his purpose, and
surceasing from his attempt, that he saw Apollo in a vision, and so abstained
from meddling with his wife till she brought forth her son Aristocles, who after
was called Plato But that is far more credible which is reported, concerning
the commending of him to his Tutor Socrates, who the day before he came,
dreamed that he had a young Swan in his lap, which putting forth feathers a
pace, of a sudden flew up into the Air, and sung very sweetly. Wherefore the
next day when Plato was brought to him by his father, (...), he presently said,
this is the bird, and so willingly received him for his Pupil.

But for his acquaintance with the Mosaical Learning, as it is more credible in
it self, so I have also better proof; As Aristobulus the Jew in Clemens
Alexandrinus* S. Ambrose, Hermippus in Josephus against Appion; and lastly,
Numenius the Platonist, who ingenuously confesses, (...); what is Plato, but
Moses in Greek? as I have else where alleged.

As for Plotinus, that which Porphyrius records of him, falls little short of a
Miracle, as being able by the Majesty of his own Mind, as his enemy Olympius
confessed, to retort that Magic upon him which he practiced against Plotinus,
and that sedately sitting amongst his friends, he would tell them; Now Olympius
his body it gathered like a purse, and his limbs beat one against another. And
though he was not instructed by the Jewish Priests and Prophets, yet he was a
familiar friend of that hearty and devout Christian and Learned Father of the
Church, Origin; whose authority I would also cast in, together with the whole
consent of the Learned amongst the Jews. For there is nothing strange in the
Metaphysical part of this Cabbala, but what they have constantly affirmed to be
true. But the unmannerly superstition of many is such that they will give more
to an accustomed opinion, which they have either taken up of themselves* or has
been conveyed unto them by the confidence of some private Theologer, then to
the Authority of either Fathers, Churches, Workers of Miracles, or what is best
of all, the most solid reasons that can be propounded; which if they were
capable of, they could not take any offense at my admittance of the Cartesian
Philosophy into this present Cabbala. The Principles, and the more notorious
conclusions thereof, offering themselves so freely, and unaffectedly, and so
aptly, and sittingly taking their place in the Text, that I knew not how with
Judgment and Conscience to keep them out.

For I cannot but surmise, that he has happily and unexpectedly light upon
that, which will prove a true restoration of that part of the Mosaical
Philosophy, which is ordinarily called Natural, and in which Pythagoras may be
justly deemed to have had no small insight. And that Des Carts may bear up in
some likely Equipage with the forenamed noble and divine Spirits though the
unskilfulnesse in men commonly acknowledge more of Supernatural assistance in
hot unsettled fancies, and perplexed Melancholy, then in the calm and distinct
use of Reason; yet for mine own part, (but not without submission to better
Judgments) I should look upon Des Carts as a man more truly inspired in the
knowledge of Nature, then any that have professed themselves so this six^een
hundred years; and being even ravished with admiration of his transcendent
Mechanical inventions, for the salving the Phenomenon in the world, I should
not stick to compare him with Bezaliel and Aholiab, those skilful and cunning
workers of the Tabernacle, who, as Moses testifies, were filled with the Spirit
of God, and they were of an excellent understanding to find out all manner of
curious works.

Nor is it any more argument, that Des Carts was not inspired, because he did
not say he was, then that others are inspired, because they say they are; which
to me is no argument at all. But the suppression of what so happened, would
argue much more sobriety and modesty, when as the profession of it with sober
men would be suspected of some spice of melancholy and distraction, especially
in Natural Philosophy, where the grand pleasure is the evidence and exercise of
Reason, not a bare belief, or an ineffable sense of life, in respect whereof
there is no true Christian but he is inspired.

THUS much in Defense of my Philosophic Cabbala. It will not be unseasonable
to subjoin something by way of Apology for the Cabbalist: For I find my self
liable to no less then three several imputations, viz. of trifling Curiosity,
of Rashness, and of Inconstancy of Judgment.

And as for the first, I know that men that are more severely Philosophical and
rational, will condemn me of too much curious pains in applying Natural and
Metaphysical Truths to an uncertain and lubricous Text or Letter, when as they
are better known, and more fitly conveied by their proper proof and arguments,
then by fancying they are aimed at in such obscure and Aenigmatical Writings.

But I answer, there is that fit and full congruity of the Cabbala with the
Text, besides the backing of it with advantages from the History of the first
rise of the Pythagorical or Platonical Philosophy, that it ought not to be
deemed a fancy, but a very high probability, that there is such a Cabbala as
this belonging to the Mosaical Letter, especially if you call but to mind how
luckily the nature of Numbers sets off the work of every day, according to the
sense of the Cabbala.

And then again, for mine own part, I account no pains either curious or
tedious, that tend to a common good: and I conceive no smaller a part of
mankind, concerned in my labors, then the whole Nation of the Jews, and
Christendom; to say nothing of the ingenious Persian, nor to despair of the
Turk though he be for the present no friend to Allegories.

Wherefore we have not placed our pains inconsiderately, having recommended so
weighty and useful Truths in so religious a manner to so great a part of the
world.

But for the imputation of Rashness, in making it my business to divulge
those secrets or mysteries that Moses had so sedulously covered in his obscure
Text: I say, it is the privilege of Christianity, the times now more then ever
requiring it to pull off the vail from Moses his face: And that though they be
grand truths that I have discovered, yet they are as useful as sublime, and
cannot but highly gratify every good and holy man that can competently judge
of them.

Lastly, for Inconstancy of Judgment, which men may suspect me of, having
heretofore declared the Scripture does not teach men Philosophy: I say, the
change of a man's judgment for the better, is no part of inconstancy, but a
virtue, when as to persist in what we find false, is nothing but perverseness
and pride. And it will prove no small argument for the truth of this present
Cabbala, in that the evidence thereof has fetched me out of my former opinion
wherein I seemed engaged.

But to say the truth, I am not at all inconsistent with my self, for I am
still of opinion, that the Letter of the Scripture teaches not any precept of
Philosophy, concerning which there can be any controversy amongst men. And
when you venture beyond the Literal sense, you are not taught by the Scripture,
but what you have learned some other way, you apply thereto. And they ought to
be no trash, nor trivial Notions, nor confutable by Reason, or more solid
Principles of Philosophy, that a man should dare to cast upon so sacred a Text,
but such as one is well assured, will bear the strictest examination, and that
lead to the more full knowledge of God, and do more clearly fit the Phenomenon
of Nature, and external Providence to his most precious Attributes, and tend to
the furthering of the holy Life, which I do again profess is the sole end of
the Scripture. And he that ventures beyond the Letter without that guide, will
soon be bewildered, and lose himself in his own fancies. Wherefore if this
Philosophic Cabbala of mine, amongst those many other advantages I have
recited, had not this also added unto it, the aim of advancing the divine Life
in the world, I should look upon it as both false and unprofitable, and should
have rested satisfied with the Moral Cabbala. For the divine Life is above all
Natural and Metaphysical knowledge whatsoever. And that man is a perfect man
that is truly righteous and prudent, whom I know I cannot but gratify with my
Moral Cabbala that follows. But if any more zealous pretender to prudence and
righteousness, wanting either leisure or ability to examine my Philosophic
Cabbala to the bottom, shall notwithstanding either condemn it or admire it,
he has unbecomingly and indiscreetly ventured out of his own sphere, and I
cannot acquit him of Injustice, or Folly.

Nor did I place my Cabbala's in this order, out of more affection and esteem
of Philosophy, then of true holiness, but have ranked them thus according to
the order of Nature: the holy and divine Life being not at all, or else being
easily lost in man, if it be not produced and conserved by a radicated
acknowledgement of those grand truths in the Philosophic Cabbala, viz. The
existence of the Eternal God, and a certain expectation of more consummate
happiness upon the dissolution of this mortal body: for to pretend to virtue
and holiness, without reference to God, and a life to come, is but to fall
into a more dull and flat kind of Stoicisme, or to be content to feed our
Cattle on this side of Jordan in a more discreet and religious way of
Epicurisme, or at least of degenerate Familisme.

THE DEFENSE OF THE MORAL CABBALA.
CHAP. I.
What is meant by Moral, explained out of Philo. 3 That the Light in the first
day improved to the height, is Adam, in the sixth, Christ, according to the
Spirit. 4 In what sense we our selves may be said to do what God does in us. 5
Why (...) and (...), are rendered Ignorance and Inquiry. 18. Plato's (...). The
Pythagoreans (...), applied to the Fourth days progress. 22 That Virtue is not
an extirpation, but regulation of the Passions, according to the mind of the
Pythagoreans. 24 Plotinus his (...), applied to the Sixth days progress. 26
What the Image of God is, plainly set down out of S. Paul and Plato. The divine
Principle in us, (...), out of Plotinus 28 The distinction of the Heavenly and
Earthly Man, out of Philo. 31 The Imposture of still and fixed Melancholy, and
that it is not the true divine Rest, and precious Sabbath of the Soul. A
compendious rehearsal of the whole Allegory of the Six days Creation.

WE are now come to the Moral Cabbala, which I do not call Moral in that low
sense the generality of men understand Morality. For the process and growth,
as likewise the failing and decay of the divine Life, is very intelligibly set
forth in this present Cabbala. But I call it Moral, in counter-distinction to
Philosophical or Physical; as Philo also uses this term Moral, in divine
matters. As when he speaks of Gods breathing into Adam the breath of Life,
(...), says he, (...), God breathes into Adams face Physically and Morally.
Physically, by placing there the Senses, viz. in the head. Morally, by
inspiring his Intellect with divine knowledge, which is the highest Faculty of
the Soul, as the Head is the chief part of the Body. Wherefore by Morality. I
understand here divine Morality, such as is engendered in the Soul by the
operations of the holy Spirit, that inward living Principle of all godliness
and honesty. I shall be the more brief in the Defense of this Cabbala, it being
of it self so plain and sensible to any that has the experience of the life I
describe; but to them that have it not, nothing will make it plain, or any
thing at all probable.

Ver. 1. A Microcosme or little World. Nothing is more ordinary or trivial,
then to compare Man to the Universe, and make him a little compendious World of
himself. Wherefore it was not hard to premise that, which may be so easily
understood. And the Apostle supposes it, when he applies the Creation of Light
here in this Chapter, to the illumination of the Soul as you shall hear
hereafter.

Ver. 2. But that which is animal or natural operates first. According to that
of the Apostle, That which is Spiritual is not first, but that which is Animal
or Natural; afterward that which is Spiritual. The first Man is of the Earth,
earthy; the second Man is the Lord from Heaven. But what this earthy condition
is, is very lively set out by Moses in this first days work. For here we have
Earth, Water, and Wind, or one tumultuous dark Chaos, and confusion of dirt and
water, blown on heaps and waves; and unquiet night-storm, an unruly black
tempest.

And it is observable, that it is not here said of this deformed Globe, Let
there be Earth; Let there be Water; Let there be Wind; but all this is the
(...), The subject matter; a thing 'made already, viz. The rude Soul of Man in
this disorder that is described; sad Melancholy like the drowned Earth lies at
the bottom, whence Care, and Grief, and Discontent, torturous Suspicion, and
horrid Fear, are washed up by the unquiet watery Desire, or irregular
suggestions of the Concupiscible, wherein most eminently is seated base Lust
and Sensuality; and above these is boisterous Wrath, and storming
Revengefulnesse, foolhardy Confidence, and indefatigable Contention about vain
objects. In short, whatever Passion and Distemper is in fallen Man, it may be
referred to these Elements. But God leaves not his creature in this evil
condition; but that all this disorder may be discovered, and so quelled in us,
and avoided by us, he says, Let there be Light, as you read in the following
verse.

Ver. 3. The daylight appears. To this alludes S. Paul, when he says, God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, shine in our hearts to give the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. Where
the Apostle seems to me to have struck through the whole Six days of this
Spiritual Creation at once. The highest manifestation of that Light created in
the first day, being the face of Jesus Christ, the Heavenly Adam, fully
completed in the sixth day. Wherefore when it is said, Let there be Light, that
Light is understood that enlightens every man that comes into the world, which
is the divine Intellect as it is communicable to humane souls. And the first
day is the first appearance thereof, as yet weaker and too much disjoined from
our affections, but at last it amounts to the true and plain Image and
Character of the Lord from Heaven, Christ according to the Spirit.

Ver. 4. And God has framed the Nature of Man so, that he cannot but say, etc.
God working in second causes, there is nothing more ordinary then to ascribe
that to him that is done by men, even then when the actions seem less
competible to the Nature of God. Wherefore it cannot seem harsh, if in this
Moral Cabbala we admit that man does that by the power of God working in the
soul, that the Text says God does; as the approving of the Light as good, and
the distinguishing betwixt Light and Darkness, and the like; which things in
the mystical sense are competible both to God and Man. And we speaking in a
Moral or Mystical sense, of God acting in us, the nature of the thing requires
that what he is said to do there, we should be understood also to do the same
through his assistance.

For the soul of man is not merely passive as a piece of wood or stone, but is
forthwith made active by being acted upon; and therefore if God in us rules, we
rule with him; if he contend against sin in us, we also contend together with
him against the same; if he see in us what is good or evil, we, ipso facto, see
by him; In his light we see light: and so in the rest. Wherefore the
supposition is very easy in this Moral Cablala, to take the liberty, where
either the sense or more compendious expression requires it, to attribute that
to man, though not to man alone, which God alone does, when we recur to the
Literal meaning of the Text. And this is but consonant to the Apostle, I live,
and yet not I. For if the life of God or Christ was in him; surely he did live,
or else what did that life there? Only he did not proudly attribute that life
to himself, as his own, but acknowledged it to be from God.

Ver. 5. As betwixt the Natural Day and Night. It is very frequent with the
Apostles to set out by Day and Night, the Spiritual and Natural condition of
man. As in such phrases as these; The night is far spent, the day is at hand.
Walk as children of the Light. And elsewhere, Let us who are of the day; and in
the same place, You are all the sons of light, and sons of the day. We are not
of the night, nor of darkness. But this is too obvious to insist upon.

And thus Ignorance and Inquiry. The soul of man is never quiet, but in
perpetual search till she has found out her own happiness, which is the
heavenly Adam, Christ, the Image of God, into which Image and likeness when we
are thoroughly awakened, we are fully satisfied therewith; till then we are in
Ignorance and Confusion, as the Hebrew word (...) does fitly signify. This
Ignorance, Confusion, and Dissatisfaction; puts us upon seeking, according to
that measure of the Morning light that has already visited us. And (...) is
from (...) to seek, to consider, and inquire. This is the Generation of those
that seek thy face, O Jacob, that is, the face of Jesus Christ, the result of
the Sixth days work, as I have intimated before.

Ver. 6. Of savoury and affectionate discernment. Wherefore he will not assent
to Solomon's whore, who says, Stolen water is sweet; but will rather use the
words of the Samaritane woman to Christ, when he had told her of those waters
of the Spirit, though she did not so perfectly reach his meaning; Sir, give me
this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw. For who would seek
to satisfy himself with the toilsome pleasures of the world, when he may
quench his desires with the delicious draughts of that true, and yet
easie-flowing Nectar of the Spirit of God?

Ver. 10. To compare to the Earth. Origin compares this condition to the Earth
for fruitfulness; but I thought it not impertinent to take notice of the
steadiness of the Earth also. But the condition of the ungodly is like the
raging waves of the Sea; or as the Prophet speaks, The wicked are as the
troubled Sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, Esaias 57.

Ver. 11. He is a fruitful field. This Interpretation is Origens, as I
intimated before.

Ver. 14. According to the difference of these lights. What this difference is,
you will understand out of the sixteenth and eighteenth verses.

Ver. 18. To this one single, but vigorous and effectual Light. For indeed, a
true and sincere sense of this one, comprehends all. For all the Law is
fulfilled in one word; to wit, in this, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and all thy soul, and thy neighbor as thy self; and, to do so
to others, as we our selves would be done to. Wherefore for men to make nothing
of this Royal Law of Christ, and yet to pretend to be more accurate Indagators
into matters of Religion, and more affectionate Lovers of Piety then ordinary,
is either to be abominably hypocritical, or grossly ignorant in the most
precious and necessary parts of Christianity; and they walk by Starlight, and
Moonlight, not under the clear and warm enlivening rays of the Sun of
Righteousness.

It is an excellent saying of Plato's, in an Epistle of his to Dionysius,
(...), That Truth lies in a little room: and assuredly that which is best and
most precious does; when as the folly of every man notwithstanding so
mis-guides him, that his toil and study is but to adorn himself after the mode
of the most ridiculous fellow in all the Grecian Army, Thersites, of whom the
Poet gives this testimony, that he was -- (...),
That he had a rabble of disordered Notions, and fruitless Observations; but
that neither he, nor any body else could make either head or foot of them, nor
himself became either more wise or more honest by having them.

That Precept of the Pythagoreans, (...), Simplifie your self, Reduce your self
to One, How wise, how holy, how true is it? What a sure foundation is it of
life, liberty, and easy sagacity in things belonging to Virtue, Religion, and
Justice? I think no man is born naturally so stupid, but that if he will keep
close to this single Light of divine Love, in due time, nay, in a short time,
he will be no more to seek what is to be done in the carriage of his life to
God or man, then an unblemished eye will be at a loss to distinguish colors.
But if he forsake this One Light, he will necessarily be benighted, and his
mind distracted with a multitude of needless and uncomfortable
scrupulosities, and faint and ineffectual Notions; and every body will be ready
to take him up for a night-wanderer, and to chastise him for being out of his
way; and after, it may be, as friendly offer himself a guide to another path,
that will prove as little to the purpose, unless he bring him into this Via
Regia, or (...), as Saint James calls it, This Royal Law of the sincere love of
God, and a man's neighbor.

Ver. 20. That is, that the Concupiscible in man. That the waters are an Emblem
of this Concupiscible, Venus her being born of the Sea does intimate; which
were not so much to the purpose, did not Natural Philosophy and Experience
certify, that Concupiscence is lodged in moisture. Whence is that of
Heraclitus (...) (in Porphyrius his De antro Nympharum) i. e. Anima sicca
sapientissima. And without all question the inordinate use of the
Concupiscible, does mightily before the soul, and makes her very incapable of
divine Sense and Knowledge. And yet to endeavor after an utter insensibility of
the pleasures of the body, is as groundless and unwarrantable. But concerning
this I shall speak more fully on the 22. and 31. verses of this Chapter.

Ver. 21. Winged Ejaculations. Whether mental or vocal, they are not unfitly
resembled to Fowls, according to that of Homer,

-- (...).
And if vocal words have wings, the inward desires of the soul may well be said
to have wings also, they being the words of the mind, as the other are of the
mouth, and fly further for the most part, and get sooner to Heaven then the
other.

Note also, that Origin likewise makes a difference here betwixt the Fish and
the Fowl, and makes the Fowl to be good cogitations, the Fish evil. But I
account them rather both indifferent, and to be regulated, not extirpated by
the Mystical Adam Christ, the Image of God in Man. And these strong Heats and
Ejaculations are the effects of Melancholy, wherein the divine Principle in
man, when it actuates it, works very fiercely and sharply, and is a great
waster of the delightful moisture of the Concupiscible, and weakens much the
pleasures of the body, to the great advantage of the mind, if it be done with
discretion and due moderation, otherways if this passion be overmuch indulged
to, it may lead to Hecticks, Phrenzies and Distractions.

The contrivance of the Text mentioning only such Fowls as frequent the waters,
naturally points to this sense we have given it; but if our imagination strike
out further to other winged creatures, as the Fowls of the Mountains, and
sundry sorts of Birds, they may also have their proper meanings, and are a part
of those Animal Figurations, that are to be subdued and regulated by the
Mystical Adam, the Spirit of Christ in us.

Ver. 22. Might have something to order. But if you take away all the Passions
from the Soul, the Mind of man will be as a General without an Army, or an
Army without an Enemy. The Pythagoreans define Righteousness, (...), The peace
of the whole Soul, the parts thereof being in good tune or harmony; according
to that other definition of theirs, describing Righteousness to be (...), That
it is the Harmony or Agreement of the Irrational Parts of the Soul with the
Rational. But quite to take away all the Passions of the Mind in stead of
composing them to the right rule of Reason and the divine Light, is as if a man
should cut away all the strings of an Instrument, in stead of tuning it.

Ver. 24. And makes the Irascible fruitful. Religious devotions helped on by
Melancholy, dry the body very much, and heat it, and make it very subject to
wrath; which if it be placed upon holy matters, men call Zeal; but if it be
inordinate and hypocritical, the Apostle will teach us to call it bitter zeal.
This more fierce and fiery affection in man is Plotinus his (...), The
Lion-like nature in us, which if Adam keep in subjection, there is no hurt in
it, but good. And it is evident in the Gospel, that our Savior Christ was one
while deeply impassionated with Sorrow, another while very strongly carried
away with Zeal and Anger, as you may observe in the stories of his raising up
Lazarus, and whipping the Money Changers out of the Temple. And this is no
imperfection, but rather a perfection; the divine Life, when it has reached the
Passions and Body of a man, becoming thereby more palpable, full and sensible.
But all the danger is of being impotently passionate, and when as the body is
carried away by its own distemper, or by the hypocrisy of the mind,
notwithstanding to imagine or pretend, that it is the impulse of the divine
Spirit. This is too frequent a mistake God knows, but such as was impossible to
happen in our Savior; and therefore the Passions of his Mind were rather
Perfections then Imperfections, as they are to all them that are close and
sincere followers of him, especially when they have reached the Sixth days
progress.

Ver. 26. By the name of his own Image. What this Image of God is, Plato who
was acquainted with these Mosaical Writings, as the holy Fathers of the Church
so generally have told us, plainly expresses in these words, (...). To be like
unto God, is to be Just, Holy, and Wise. Like that of the Apostle to the
Colossians, And have put on the new Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after
the Image of him that created him: And that more full passage in the fourth of
the Ephesians; And that you put on the new Man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness. There are all the Three members of that
divine Image, Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness, which are mentioned in
that foregoing description of Plato's, as if Plato had been pre-instructed by
men of the same Spirit with the Apostle.

The true and perfect Man. Plotinus calls that divine Principle in us (...),
the true Man. The rest is the brutish nature, the (...), as I said before.

But has full power. Wherefore if this definition of the Image or Likeness of
God which Plato has made, does not involve this power in it in the word (...),
according to the description of Justice by the Pythagoreans, above recited,
(which implies that the rational and divine part of the Soul has the Passions
at its command) I should add to (...), this one word more, (...), that the
description may un thus; To be like unto God, is to be Holy and Just, together
with Wisdom and Power. But I rather think that this Power is comprehended in
Holiness and Justice: For unless we have arrived to that Power as to be able
constantly to act according to these Virtues, we are rather well-willers to
Holiness and Righteousness, then properly and formally righteous and holy.

Ver. 27. In his little World. They are the words of Philo, (...), That Man is
a little World, and that the World is one great Man; which Analogy is supposed,
as I said at first, in the Moral Cabbala of this present Chapter, and Origin
upon this Chapter calls Man Minorem Mundum, a Microcosme.

Ver. 28. The Heavenly Adam, Christ. Philo makes mention of the Heavenly and
Earthly Man, in these words; (...). Man is of two sorts, the one Heavenly, the
other Earthly. And S. Paul calls Christ the Heavenly Adam, and Philo's heavenly
Adam is (...), Created after the Image of God, as Saint Paul in the forecited
places to the Colossians and Ephesians also speaks concerning Christ.

Ver. 29. The heavenly Adam to feed upon, fulfilling the Will of God. As Christ
professes of himself, It is my meat and drink to do the will of him that sent
me.

Ver. 30. Nor is the Animal Life quite to be starved. For a good man is
merciful to his beast. See Origin upon the place.

Ver. 31. Approves all things which God has created in us to be very good. Not
only the divine Principle, but also the Fishes, Beasts, and Birds* Vult enim
Deus ut insignis ista Dei factura, Homo, non solum immaculatus sit ab his sed
and dominetur eis: For it is the Will of God, says Origin, not only that we
should be free from any soil of these, (which would be more certainly effected,
if we were utterly rid of them, and they quite extirpated out of our nature)
but that we should rule over them without being any thing at all blemished, or
discomposed by them. And for mine own part, I do not understand, how that the
Kingdom of Heaven which is to be within us, can be any Kingdom at all, if
there be no Subjects at all there to be ruled over, and to obey. Wherefore the
Passions of the Body are not to be quite extinguished, but regulated, that
there may be the greater plenitude of life in the whole man.

And those that endeavor after so still, so silent, and demure condition of
mind, that they would have the sense of nothing there but peace and rest,
striving to make their whole nature desolate of all Animal Figurations
whatsoever, what do they effect but a clear Day, shining upon a barren Heath,
that feeds neither Cow nor Horse, neither Sheep nor Shepherd is to be seen
there, but only a waste silent Solitude, and one uniform parchednesse and
vacuity. And yet while a man fancies himself thus wholly divine, he is not
aware how he is even then held down by his Animal Nature; and that it is
nothing but the stillness and fixednesse of Melancholy, that thus abuses him,
and in stead of the true divine Principle, would take the Government to it
self, and in this usurped tyranny cruelly destroy all the rest of the Animal
Figurations; But the true divine Life would destroy nothing that is in Nature,
but only regulate things, and order them for the more full and sincere
enjoyments of man, reproaching nothing but sinfulness and enormity, entituling
Sanguine and Choler to as much Virtue and Religion as either Phlegm or
Melancholy* For the divine Life as it is to take into it self the humane nature
in general, so it is not abhorrent from any of the complexions thereof. But the
squabbles in the world are ordinarily not about true Piety and Virtue, but
which of the Complexions, or what Humor shall ascend the Throne, and fit there
in stead of Christ himself. But I will not expatiate too much upon one Theme; I
shall rather take a short view of the whole Allegory of the Chapter.

In the first Day there is Earth, Water and Wind, over which, and through
which, there is nothing but disconsolate darkness, and tumultuous agitation;
The Winds ruffling up the Waters into mighty waves, the waves washing up the
mire and dirt into the water; all becoming but a rude heap of confusion and
desolation. This is the state of the (...), or Earthly Adam, as Philo calls
him, till God command the Light to shine out of Darkness, offering him a guide
to a better condition.

In the second day, is the Firmament created, dividing the upper and the lower
Waters, that it may feel the strong impulses, or taste the different relishes
of either. Thus is the will of man touched from above and beneath, and this is
the day wherein is set before him Life and Death, Good and Evil, and he may put
out his hand and take his choice.

In the third day, is the Earth uncovered of the Waters, for the planting of
fruit-bearing trees; By their fruits you shall know them, says our Savior,
that is, by their works.

In the fourth day, there appears a more full accession of divine Light, and
the Sun of Righteousness warms the soul with a sincere love both of God and
man.

In the fifth day, that this Light of Righteousness, and bright Eye of divine
Reason may not brandish its rays in the empty field, where there is nothing
either to subdue, or guide and order; God sends out whole sholes of Fishes in
the Waters, and numerous flights of Fowls in the Air, besides part of the sixth
days work, wherein all kind of Beasts are created.

In these are decyphered the sundry suggestions and cogitations of the mind,
sprung from these lower Elements of the humane nature, viz. Earth and Water,
Flesh and Blood; all these man beholds in the Light of the Sun of
Righteousness, discovers what they are, knows what to call them, can rule over
them, and is not wrought to be overruled by them. This is Adam, the
Masterpiece of Gods Creation, and Lord of all the creatures, framed after the
Image of God, Christ according to the Spirit, under whose feet is subdued the
whole Animal Life, with its sundry Motions, Forms and Shapes. He will call
every thing by its proper name, and set every creature in its proper place; The
vile person shall be no longer called liberal, nor the churl bountiful. Woe be
unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that call the light darkness,
and the darkness light. He will not call bitter Passion, holy Zeal; nor
plausible meretricious Courtesy, Friendship; nor a false soft abhorrency from
punishing the ill-deserving, Pity; nor Cruelty, Justice; nor Revenge,
Magnanimity; nor Unfaithfulness, Policy; nor Verbosity, either Wisdom or
Piety. But I have run my self into the second Chapter before I am aware.

In this first Adam is said only to have dominion over all the living
creatures, and to feed upon the fruit of the Plants. And what is Pride, but a
mighty Mountainous Whale; Lust, a Goat; the Lion, and Bear, wilful dominion;
Craft, a Fox; and worldly toil, an Ox? Over these and a thousand more is the
rule of Man; I mean of Adam, the Image of God. But his meat and drink is to do
the will of his Maker; this is the fruit he feeds upon.

Behold therefore, O Man, what thou art, and whereunto thou art called, even to
be a mighty Prince amongst the creatures of God, and to bear rule in that
Province he has assigned thee, to discern the Motions of thine own heart, and
to be Lord over the suggestions of thine own natural spirit, not to listen to
the counsel of the flesh, nor conspire with the Serpent against thy Creator.
But to keep thy heart free and faithful to thy God; so may thou with
innocence and unblameablenesse see all the Motions of Life, and bear rule with
God over the whole Creation committed to thee. This shall be thy Paradise and
harmless sport on Earth, till God shall transplant thee to an higher condition
of happiness in Heaven.

CHAP. II.
The full sense of that (...), that keeps men from entering into the true
Sabbath. 4 The great necessity of distinguishing the innocent motions of Nature
from the suggestions of Sin. 5 That the growth of a true Christian indeed does
not adaequately depend upon the lips of the Priest. 7 The meaning of This is he
that comes by Water and Blood. 8 The meaning of Repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. The seventh thousand years, the great Sabbatism of the
Church of God. That there will be then frequent converse betwixt Men and
Angels. 9 The Tree of Life, how fitly in the Mystical sense, said to be in the
midst of the Garden. 17 A twofold death contracted by Adams disobedience. The
Masculine and Feminine Faculties in Man what they are. Actuating a Body, an
Essential operation of the Soul; and the reason of that so joyful appearance of
Eve to the Humane Nature.

TO the fifth verse there is nothing but a recapitulation of what went before in
the first Chapter; and therefore wants no further proof then what has already
been alleged out of S* Paul and Origin, and other Writers. Only there is
mention of a Sabbath in the second verse of this Chapter, of which there was no
words before. And this is that Sabbatisme or Rest, that the Author to the
Hebrews exhorts them to strive to enter into, through faith and obedience. For
those that were faint-hearted, and unbelieving, and pretended that the children
of Anak, the offspring of the Giants, would be too hard for them; they could
not enter into the promised Land wherein they were to set up their rest, under
the conduct of J^shua, a Type of Jesus. And the same Author in the same place
makes mention of this very Sabbath that ensued the accomplishment of the
Creation, concluding thus: There remains therefore a Sabbatisme or Rest to
the people of God: For he that has entered into his Rest, he also has ceased
from his own works, as God did from his. Let us labor therefore to enter into
that Rest, lest any man fall after that example, of disobedience and unbelief.
For the Greek word (...), may well include both Senses, viz, Disobedience, or
the not doing the Will of God, according to that measure of Power and Knowledge
he has already given us; and Unbelief, that the divine Life and Spirit in us,
is not able to subdue the whole Creation of the little World under us, that is,
all the Animal Motions and Figurations, be they Lions, Bears, Goats, Whales, be
they what they will be, as well as to cast out the children of Anak before the
Israelites, as it is in that other Type of Christ, and of his Kingdom in the
Souls of Men.

Ver. 4. The Generations of the Animal Life when God created them. For these
are as truly the works of God, as the divine Life it self, though they are
nothing comparable unto it. Nay, indeed they are but an heap of confusion
without it. Wherefore the great accomplishment is to have these in due order
and subjection unto the Spirit or Heavenly Life in us, which is Christ; and
that you may have a more particular apprehension of these generations of the
Animal Life, I shall give you a Catalogue of some of them, though confusedly,
so as they come first to my memory.

Such therefore are Anger, Zeal, Indignation, Sorrow, Derision, Mirth, Gravity,
Open-heartednesse, Reservednesse, Stoutnesse, Flexibility, Boldness,
Fearfulness, Mildeness, Tartness, Candor, Suspicion, Peremptoriness,
Despondency, Triumph or Gloriation. All the Propensions to the exercise of
Strength, or activity of Body; as Running, Leaping, Swimming, Wrestling,
Justing, Coursing, or the like: Besides all the Courtly Preambles, necessary
Concomitants, and delightful Consequences of Marriage, which spring up from the
Love of Women, and the Pleasure of Children. To say nothing of those enjoyments
that arise from correspondent affections and mere natural friendship betwixt
man and man, or fuller companies of acquaintance; their Friendly Feastings,
Sportings, Music and Dancings. All these and many more that I am not at
leisure to reckon up, be but the genuine pullulations of the Animal Life, and
in themselves they have neither good nor hurt in them. Nay, indeed to speak
more truly and impartially, they are good, according to the Approbation of him
that made them; but they become bad only to them that are bad, and act either
without measure, or for unwarrantable ends, or with undue circumstances;
otherwise they are very good in their kind, they being regulated and moderated
by the divine Principle in us.

And I think it is of great moment for men to take notice of this truth for
these three reasons: First, because the bounds of sin, and of the innocent
Motions of Nature, being not plainly and apertly set out and defined, men
counting the several Animal Figurations and natural Motions for sins, they heap
to themselves such a task, to wit, the quite extirpating that, which it were
neither good, nor it may be possible utterly to extirpate, that they seem in
truth hereby to insinuate that it is impossible to enter into that Rest or
Sabbath of the people of God. Wherefore promiscuously sheltring themselves
under this confused cloud of sins, and infirmities, where they aggravate all,
so as if every thing were in the same measure sinful; if they be but zealous
and punctual in some, they account it passing well, and an high testimony of
their sanctimony. And their hypocrisy will be sure to pitch upon that which is
least of all to the purpose; that is, a man will spend his zeal in the behalf
of some natural temper he himself is of, and against the opposite complexion.
But for the indispensable dictates of the divine Light, he will be sure to
neglect them, as being more hard to perform, though of more concernment both
for himself and the common good. But if it were more plainly defined what is
Sin, and what is not Sin, a man might with more heart and courage fight against
his enemy, he appearing not so numerous and formidable, and he would have the
less opportunity for perverse excuses, and hypocritical tergiversations.

The second reason is, That men may not think better of themselves then they
are, for their abhorrency from those things that have no hurt in them, nor
think worser of others then they deserve, when they do but such things as are
approvable by God, and the divine Light. And this is of very great moment for
the maintaining of Christian Love, and Union amongst men.

The third and last is; That they may observe the madness and hypocrisy of the
world, whose religious contestations or secret censures are commonly but the
conflict and antipathy of the opposite Figurations of the Animal Life, who like
the wild beasts, without a Master to keep good quarter amongst them, are very
eagerly set to devour one another. But by this shall every man know, whether it
be Complexion or Religion that reigns in him, if he love God with all his
heart, and all his soul, and his neighbor as himself: And can give a
sufficient reason for all his actions and opinions from that Aeternal Light,
the Love of God shed abroad in his heart; if not, it is but a faction of the
Animal Life, sed up and fostered by either natural Temper or Custom; and he is
far from being arrived to the Kingdom of Christ, and entering into that true
Rest of the people of God.

Ver. 5. Where there is no external doctrine. Pulpits, and Preachings, and
external Ordinances, there is no such noise of them amongst the holy
Patriarchs, whose lives Moses describes; and therefore I conceive this sense I
have here given the Text more genuine and warrantable. But besides Moses
unvailed, being Christianity it self, the manner of the growth of the true
Christian is here prefigured. That he is rather taught of God, then of Men, he
having the Spirit of Life in him, and needs no man to teach him: For he has the
Unction in himself, which will teach him all things necessary to Life and
Godliness.

Ver. 6. Which is repentance from dead works. In this verse (...) in the
Philosophic Cabbala, signified a Vapor, but here I translate it a Fountain of
Water, which I am warranted to do by the Seventy, who render it (...); but that
Water is an Emblem of Repentance, it is so obvious that I need say nothing of
it: John's baptizing with Water to Repentance, is frequently repeated in the
Gospels.

Ver. 7. And breathes into him the Spirit of Life. In allusion to this passage
of Moses in all likelihood is that of the Psalmist; Thy hands have made me, and
fashioned me, O give me understanding and I shall live; as if like Adam, he
were but a statue of Earth till God breathed into him the Spirit of Life and
Holiness.

Of the Water and of the Spirit. The Water and the Spirit are the two extremes;
the first and the last that makes up the Creation of the Spiritual Adam, or
Christ, completed in us, and includes the middle which is Blood. First
therefore is Repentance from what we delighted in before. Then the killing of
that evil and corrupt life in us, which is resisting to blood, as the Apostle
speaks. And the 1 Epistle of John chapter 5. v. 4. What ever is born of God,
overcomes the world; Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes
that Jesus Christ (the divine Light and Life in us) is the Son of God? and
therefore endued with power from on high to overcome all sin and wickedness in
us. This is he that comes by Water and Blood, by repentance and perseverance
till the death of the body of sin, not by repentance only, and dislike of our
former life, but by the mortification also of it. Then the Spirit of Truth is
awakened in us, and will bear witness of whatever is right and true. And
according to this manner of testimony is it to be understood especially, That
no man can say that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, but by the Spirit of God,
as the Apostle elsewhere affirms. This is the heavenly Adam, which is true
Light and Glory to all them that have attained to the resurrection of the dead,
and into whom God has breathed the breath of Life, without which, we have no
right knowledge nor sense of God at all, (...); They are the words of Philo
upon the place. For how should the soul of man, says he, know God, if he did
not inspire her, and take hold of her by his power?

Ver. 8. To the Kingdom of Heaven. And the end of the doctrine of John, which
was Repentance, was for this purpose, that men might arrive to that comfortable
condition here described; and therefore it was a motive for them to repent. For
though sorrow endure for a night, yet joy will come in the morning. For the new
Jerusalem is to be built, and God is to pitch his Tabernacle amongst men, and
to rule by his Spirit here upon Earth; which, if I would venture upon an
Historical Cabbala of Moses, I should presage would happen in the seventh
thousand years, according to the Chronology of Scripture; when the world shall
be so spiritualized, that the work of Salvation shall be finished, and the
great Sabbath and Festival shall be then celebrated in the height: A thousand
years are but as one day, says the Apostle Peter, And therefore the seventh
thousand years may well be the seventh day: Wherefore in the end of the sixth
thousand years, the Kingdoms of the Earth will be the second Adams, the Lord
Christ's, as Adam in the Sixth day was created the Lord of the world, and all the
creatures therein; and this conquest of his will bring in the Seventh day of
rest, and peace, and joy, upon the face of the whole Earth. Which presage will
seem more credible, when I shall have unfolded unto you out of Philo Judaeus
the mystery of the number Seven; but before I fall upon that, let me a little
prepare your belief, by showing the truth of the same thing in another Figure.

Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, they died, not enjoying the
richness of Gods goodness in their bodies. But Enoch who was the seventh from
Adam, he was taken up alive into Heaven, and seems to enjoy that great bliss
in the body. The world then in the Seventh Chiliad, will be assumed up into
God, snatched up by his Spirit, inacted by his Power. The Jerusalem that comes
down from Heaven, will then in a most glorious and eminent manner flourish upon
Earth. God will, as I said, pitch his Tabernacle amongst men. And for God to be
in us, and with us, is as much as for us to be lifted up into God.

But to come now to the mystery of the Septenary, or number Seven, it is of
two kinds, the one is (...). The other (...). The Septenary within the Decade
is merely seven unites; The other is a Seventh Number, beginning at an Unite,
and holding on in a continued Geometrical Proportion, till you have gone
through Seven Proportional Terms. For the Seventh Term there is this Septenary
of the second kind, whose nature Philo fully expresses in these words: (...).
To this sense: For always beginning from an Unite, and holding on in double, or
triple, or what Proportion you will, the seventh Number of this rank is both
Square and Cube, comprehending both kinds as well the Corporeal as Incorporeal
Substanc^e; the Incorporeal, according to the Superficies which the Squares
exhibit; but the Corporeal, according to the solid dimensions which are set
out by the Cubes.

As for example; 64. or 729. these are Numbers that arise after this manner;
each of them are a Seventh from an Unite, the one arising from double
Proportion, the other from triple; and if the Proportion were Quadruple,
Quintuple, or any else, there is the same reason, some other Seventh Number
would arise, which would prove of the same nature with these, they would prove
both Cubes and Squares, that is, Corporeal and Incorporeal: For such is sixty
four, either made by multiplying eight into eight, and so it is a Square, or
else by multiplying four Cubically. For four times four times four is again
sixty four, but then it is a Cube. And so seven hundred twenty nine, is made
either by Squaring of twenty seven, or Cubically multiplying of Nine, for
either way will seven hundred twenty nine be made; and so is both Cube and
Square, Corporeal and Incorporeal. Whereby is intimated, that the world shall
not be reduced in the Seventh day to a mere Spiritual consistency, to an
Incorporeal condition, but that there shall be a co-habitation of the Spirit
with Flesh, in a Mystical or Moral sense, and that God will pitch his Tent
amongst us. Then shall be settled everlasting righteousness, and rooted in the
Earth, so long as mankind shall inhabit upon the face thereof.

And this truth of the Reign of Righteousness in this Seventh thousand years,
is still more clearly set out to us in the Septenary within Ten. (...), as
Philo calls it, the naked number Seven: For the parts it consists of are 3 and
4, which put together make 7. And these parts be the sides of the first
Orthogonion in Numbers, the very sides that include the right angle thereof.
And the Orthogonion what a foundation it is of Trigonometry, and of measuring
the altitudes, latitudes, and longitudes of things every body knows that knows
any thing at all in Mathematics. And this prefigures the uprightness of that
holy Generation, who will stand and walk (...), Inclining neither this way, nor
that way, but they will approve themselves of an upright and sincere heart. And
by this Spirit of Righteousness will these Saints be enabled to find out the
depth, and breadth, and height of the Wisdom and goodness of God, as somewhere
the Apostle himself phras^th it.

But then again in the second place, this three and four comprehend also the
conjunction of the Corporeal and Incorporeal nature; Three being the first
Superficies, and Four the first Body: and in the Seventh thousand years I do
verily conceive, that there will be so great union betwixt God and Man, that
they shall not only partake of his Spirit, but that the Inhabitants of the
Ethereal Region will openly converse with these of the Terrestrial; and such
frequent conversation and ordinary visits of our cordial friends of that other
world, will take away all the toil of life, and the fear of death amongst men,
they being very cheerful and pleasant here in the body, and being well assured
they shall be better when they are out of it: For Heaven and Earth shall then
shake hands together, or become as one house, and to die, shall be accounted
but to ascend into an higher room. And though this dispensation for the present
be but very sparingly set a foot, yet I suppose there may some few have a
glimpse of it, concerning whom accomplished Posterity may happily utter
something answerable to that of our Saviors concerning Abraham, who tasted of
Christianity before Christ himself was come in the Flesh; Abraham saw my day,
and rejoiced at it. And without all question, that plenitude of happiness that
has been reserved for future times, the presage and presensation of it, has in
all ages been a very great Joy and Triumph to all holy men and Prophets.

The Morning Light of the Sun of Righteousness. This is very suitable to the
Text, Paradise being said to be placed Eastward in Eden, and our Savior Christ
to be the bright Morning Star, and the Light that lightens every one that
comes into the world, though too many are disobedient to the dictates of this
Light, that so early visits them in their minds and consciences, but they that
follow it, it is their peace and happiness in the conclusion.

Ver. 9. Which is a sincere obedience to the Will of God. The Tree of Life is
very rightly said to be in the midst of the Garden, that is, in the midst of
the soul of man, and this is the will or desire of man, which is the most
inward of all the faculties of his soul, and is as it were the (...), or vital
Center of the rest, from whence they stream or grow. That therefore is the Tree
of Life if it be touched truly with the divine Life, and a man be heartily
obedient to the will of God. For the whole Image of divine Perfection will grow
from hence, and receives nourishment, strength, and continuance from it. But if
this will and desire be broke off from God, and become actuated by the
creature, or be a self-will, and a spirit of disobedience, it breeds most
deadly fruit, which kills the divine Life in us, and puts man into a necessity
of dying to that disorder and corruption he has thus contracted.

What ever others would insinuate to the contrary. For there is nothing so
safe, if a man be heartily sincere, as not to be led by the nose by others; For
we see the sad event of it, in Eves listening to the outward suggestions of the
Serpent.

Ver. 10. The four Cardinal Virtues. It is the Exposition of Philo. Till verse
17. there is no need of adding any thing more then what has already been said
in the Defense of the Philsophick Cabbala.

Ver. 17. Dead to all Righteousness and Truth. The mortality that Adam
contracted by his disobedience in the Mortal or Mystical sense is twofold; The
one a death to righteousness, and it is the sense of Philo upon the place,
(...). The death of the soul is the extinction of Virtue in her, and the
resuscitation of Vice; and he adds, that this must be the death here meant, it
being a real punishment indeed to forfeit the life of Virtue. The other
mortality is a necessity of dying to unrighteousness, if he ever would be
happy. Both those notions of Death, are more frequent in S. Paul's Epistles,
then that I need to give any instance.

His more noble and Masculine Faculties. What the Masculine part in man is*
Philo plainly declares in these words, (...). In us, says he, the Man is the
Intellect, the Woman the Sense of the Body. Whence you will easily understand,
that the Masculine Faculties are those that are more Spiritual and Intellectual.

Ver. 18. That the whole Humane Nature may be accomplished with the Divine.
Which is agreeable to that pious ejaculation of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. And
the God of Peace sanctify you wholly, or thoroughly; and I pray God your whole
Spirit, Soul and Body, may be kept blameless, (...), by the presence or abode
of Jesus Christ, the divine Life or heavenly Adam in you. This is the most
easy and natural sense of that place of Scripture, as it will appear to any
man, whose mind is as much set on holiness, as hard Theories. And it is very
agreeable to the Mystical sense of the second Psalm, where the Kingdom of
Christ reaches to the utmost ends of the Earth; that is, as far as Soul and
Life can animate, so that our very flesh and body is brought under the Scepter
of Christ's Kingdom.

Ver. 19. The Figurations of the Animal Life. That the motions of the Mind as
they are suggested from the Animal Life of the Body, are set forth by Fishes,
Beasts and Birds, I have already made good from the authority of Origin.

Ver. 20. In a capacity of taking delight in them. For melancholy had so
depraved the complexion of his body, that there was no grateful sense of any
thing that belonged to nature and the life of the Vehicle.

Ver. 22. The greatest part of that Paradise a man is capable of upon Earth.
This is a Truth of Sense and Experience, and is no more to be proved by Reason,
then that White is White, or Black is Black.

Ver. 23. Essential operation of the Soul. The very nature of the Soul, as it
is a Soul, is an aptitude of informing or actuating a Body; but that it should
be always an organized Body, it is but Aristotle's saying of it, he does not
prove it. But for mine own part, I am very prone to think, that the Soul is
never destitute of some Vehicle or other, though Plotinus be of another mind,
and conceives that the Soul at the height is joined with God and nothing else,
nakedly lodged in his arms. And I am the more bold to dissent from him in this
exaltation of the Soul, I being so secure in my own conceit of that other
suspected extravagancy of his, in the debasement of them, that at last they
become so drowsy and senseless, that they grow up out of the ground in that
dull function of life, the efformation of Trees and Plants. And I am not alone
in this liberty of dissenting from Plotinus: For besides my own conceit this
way, (for I must confess I have no demonstrative reasons against his opinion) I
am emboldened by the example of Ficinus, who is no small admirer of the
forenamed Author.

That which I was about to say, is this; The informing or actuating of a body
being so Indispensable and Essential an act of the Soul, the temper and
condition of the body that it thus actuates, cannot but be of mighty
consequence unto the Soul that is conscious of the plight thereof, and reaps
the joy of it or sorrow, by an universal touch and inward sense, springing up
into her cognoscence and animadversion. And we may easily imagine of what
moment the health and good plight of the body is to the mind that lodges
there, if we do but consider the condition of Plants, whose bodies we cannot
but conceive in a more grateful temper, while they flourish and are sweet and
pleasing to the eye, then when they are withered by age or drought, or born
down to the Earth by immoderate storms of rain. And so it is with the body of
man, (where there is a Soul to take notice of its condition) far better when it
is in health by discretion and moderation in diet, and exercise, then when it
is either parched up by superstitious melancholy, or slocken and drowned in
sensuality and intemperance; For they are both abaters of the joys of life,
and lessen that plenitude of happiness that man is capable of by his Mystical
Eve, the woman that God has given every one to delight himself with.

Ver. 24. So far forth as they are incompetible with the health of the body.
This is an undeniable truth, else how could that hold good that the Apostle
speaks, That Godliness is profitable for all things, having the promise of this
world, and that which is to come; when as without the health of the body, there
is nothing at all to be enjoyed in this present world? And certainly God does
not tie us to the Law of Angels, or Superior Creatures, but to precepts
suitable to the nature of man.

Obedience to the precepts of that Superior Light* For if the life of the body
grow upon us so, as to extinguish or hinder the sense of divine things, our
dependence of God, and joyful hope of the life to come; it is then become
disorderly, and is to be castigated and kept down, that it pull not us down
into an aversation from all Piety, and sink us into an utter oblivion of God
and the divine Life.

Ver. 25. Without any shame or blushing. See what has been said upon the
Philosophic Cabbala.

CHAP. III.
A story of a dispute betwixt a Prelate and a Blacksmith, concerning Adams
eating of the Apple. 1 What is meant by the subtilty or deceit of the Serpent.
That Religion wrought to its due height is a very cheerful state; And it is
only the halting and hypocrisy of men that generally have put so sour and sad
a vizard upon it. 5, 6 That worldly Wisdom, not Philosophy, is perstringed in
the Mystery of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil. 10 The meaning of Adams
flying after he had found himself naked. 20 Adam, the Earthly-minded Man,
according to Philo. 21 What is meant by Gods clothing Adam and Eve with hairy
Coats in the Mystical sense. 23 (...), or the Paradise of Luxury. That History
in Scripture is wrote very concisely, and therefore admits of modest and
judicious Supplements for clearing the sense. 24 What is meant by the Cherubim
and flaming Sword. Plato's definition of Philosophy, (...). A more large
description of dying to Sin, and of the life of Righteousness. That Christian
Religion even as it referres to the external Person of Christ, is upon no
pretense to be annulled till the Conflagration of the world.

IN this third Chapter is the said Catastrophe of the story, the Fall of Adam,
and the Original of all that misery and calamity that has befallen mankind
since the Beginning of the World. Of so horrid consequence was it, that our
Mother Eve could no better suppress her longing, but upon the easy persuasion
of the Serpent, ate the forbidden Fruit; as a famous Prelate in France, once
very tragically insisted upon the point to his attentive Auditory. But it
should seem, a certain Smith in the Church, as Bodinus relates, when he had
heard from this venerable Preacher, that Universal Mankind, saving a small
handful of Christians, were irrevocably lapsed into eternal damnation by Adams
eating of an Apple; and he having the boldness to argue the matter with the
Prelate, and receiving no satisfaction from him in his managing the Literal
sense of the Text, (and his skill it should seem went no further) the Smith at
last broke out into these words, Tam multas rixas pro re tantilla inepte
excitari; as if he should have said in plain English, What a deal of do has
there here been about the eating of an Apple? Which blasphemous saying, as
Bodinus writes, had no sooner come to the ears of the Court of France, but it
became a Proverb amongst the Courtiers. So dangerous a thing is an ignorant and
indiscreet Preacher, and a bold, immodest Auditour. Bodinus in the same place
does profess it is his Judgment, that the unskilful insisting of our Divines
upon the literal sense of Moses, has bred many hundred thousands of Atheists.
For which reason, I hope that men that are not very ignorant and humorous, but
sincere lovers of God and the divine Truth, will receive these my Cabbala's
with more favor and acceptance, especially this Moral one, it being not of too
big a sense to stop the mouth of any honest, free, inquisitive Christian. But
whatever it is, we shall further endeavor to make it good in the several
passages thereof.

Ver. 1. Inordinate desire of pleasure. It is Philo's, (...), That the Serpent
is a Symbol or representation of Pleasure; which he compares to that creature
for three reasons;

First, because a Serpent is an Animal without feet, and crawls along on the
Earth upon his belly.

Secondly, because it is said to feed upon the dust of the Earth.

Thirdly, because it has poisonous teeth that kill those that it bites. And so
he assimilates pleasure to it, being a base affection, and bearing it self upon
the belly, the seat of lust and intemperance, feeding on earthly things, (...),
but never nourishing her self with that heavenly food, which wisdom offers to
the Contemplative, by her precepts and discourses.

It is much that Philo should take no notice of that which is so particularly
set down in the Text, the subtilty of the Serpent, which me thinks is notorious
in pleasure, it looking so smoothly and innocently on it, and insinuating it
self very easily into the minds of men upon that consideration, and so
deceiving them; when as other passions cannot so slily surprise us, they
bidding more open war to the quiet and happiness of man's life, as that
judicious Poet Spencer has well observed in his Legend of Sir Guyon or
Temperance, Cant. 6.

A harder lesson to learn continence
In joyous pleasure, then in grievous pain:
For sweetness does allure the weaker sense,
So strongly that uneathes it can refrain
From that which feeble Nature covets fain;
But grief and wrath that be our enemies,
And foes of life, she better can restrain:
Yet Virtue vaunts in both her Victories,
And Guyon in them all shows goodly Masteries.
What a rigid and severe thing, etc. This is the conceit of such, as are either
utter strangers to Religion, or have not yet arrived to that comfortable result
of it, that may be expected. For God takes no delight in the perpetual rack of
those souls he came to redeem, but came to redeem us from that pain and torture
which the love of our selves, and our untamed lusts, and pride of spirit, makes
us obnoxious to; which men being loath to part with, and not having the heart to
let them be struck to the very quick, and pulled up by the roots, the work not
accomplished according to the full mind and purpose of God, there are still
the seeds of perpetual anxiety, sadness, and inevitable pain. For to be dead,
is easement, but to be still dying, is pain; and it is most ordinarily but the
due punishment of halting and hypocrisy. And men's spirits being long sowred
thus, and made sad, their profession and behavior is such, that they fright
all inexperienced young men from any tolerable compliance in matters of
Religion, thinking that when they are once engaged there, they are condemned ad
Fodinas for ever, and that they can never emerge out of this work and drudgery
in those dark Caverns, till they die there like the poor Americans, inslaved
and overwrought by the merciless Spaniard.

But verily if we have but the patience to be laid low enough, the same hand
that depressed us, will exalt us above all hope and expectation. For if we be
sufficiently baptized into the Death of Christ, we shall assuredly be made
partakers of his Resurrection to Life, and that glorious liberty of the Sons of
God, according as it is written, If the Son make you free, then are you free
indeed; free from Sin, and secure from the power of any Temptation. But if
Mortification has not had its perfect work, too mature a return of the
sweetness of the Animal Life, may prove like the Countreymans cherishing the
Snake by the fire side, which he had as he thought taken up dead in the Snow,
it will move and hiss, and bite, and sting. The strong presages of the
manifold corporeal delights, and satisfactions of the flesh, may grow so big
and boisterous in the mind, that the soul may deem her self too straightly girt
up, and begin to listen to such whispers of the Serpent as this; What a rigid
and severe thing is this business of Religion? etc. and account her self if she
be not free to every thing, that she is as good as free to nothing.

Ver. 2, 3. But the womanish part in Adam. It Is but one and the same soul in
man entertaining a dialogue with her self that is set out by these three parts:
The Serpent, Adam, and the Woman. And here the soul recollecting her self,
cannot but confess, that Religion denies her no honest, nor fitting pleasure
that is not hazardous to her greater happiness, and bethinks her self in what
peril she is of losing the divine Life, and due sense of God, if she venture
thus promiscuously to follow her own will, and not measure all her actions and
purposes by the divine Light that for the present is at hand to direct her.

Ver. 4. But the Serpent, etc. The sense of this verse is, that the eager
desire of pleasure had wrought it self so far into the sweetness of the Animal
Life, that it clouded the man's judgment, and made him fondly hope that the
being so freely alive to his own will was no prejudice to the will of the
Spirit, and the life of God which was in him, when as yet notwithstanding the
Apostle expressly writes, What fellowship is there betwixt righteousness and
unrighteousness? What communion betwixt light and darkness? What agreement
betwixt Christ and Belial? And he elsewhere tells us, That Christ gave himself
for his Church, that he might so thoroughly purge it and sanctify it, that it
should have neither spot nor wrinkle: but that it should be holy and
unblameable, a true Virgin Bride clothed with his divine Life and Glory. And
those men that are so willing to halt betwixt two, the Flesh and the Spirit,
and have house-room enough to entertain them both, (as if there could be any
friendship and communion betwixt them) let them seriously consider whether this
opinion be not the same that deceived Adam was of, and let them suspect the
same sad event, and acknowledge it to arise from the self-same Principle, the
inordinate desire of pleasing their own wills, without the allowance of the
divine Light, and consulting with the will of God.

Ver. 5. Skill and Experience in things. And some men make it no sin, but
warrantable knowledge to know the world, and account others fools that are
ignorant of that wicked mystery. For man would be no Slave or Idiot, but know
his own liberty, and gain experience, as he pretends, by the making use of it.

But that the accurate exercise of Reason in the knowledge of Gods mavelous
works in Nature, or those innocent delightful conclusions in Geometry, and
Arithmetic, and the like; that these parts of knowledge should be perstringed
by Moses in this History, it seems to me not to have the least probability in
it: for there are so very few in the world, whose minds are carried any thing
seriously to such objects, that it had not been worth the taking notice of. And
then again it is plain that the miscarriage is from the affectation of such
kind of knowledge, as the Woman, the flowring life of the body, occasioned
Adam to transgress in. Wherefore it is the fulfilling of the various desires
of the flesh, not an high aspire after Intellectual Contemplations; for they
respect the Masculine Faculties, not the Feminine, that made way to the
transgression.

Wherefore I say, the wisdom that the Serpent here promised, was not Natural
Philosophy, or Mathematics, or any of those innocuous and noble
accomplishments of the understanding of man, but it was the knowledge of the
world, and the wisdom of the flesh. For the life of the body is full of
desires, and presages of satisfaction in the obtaining of this or the other
external thing, whether it be in Honor, Riches, or Pleasure; and if they shake
off the divine Guide within them, they will have it by hook or by crook. And
this worldly wisdom is so plausible in the world, and so sweetly relished by
the mere natural man, that it were temptation enough for a Novice, if it were
but to be esteemed wise, to adventure upon such things as would initiate him
therein.

Ver. 6. But the wisdom of the flesh. The Apostle calls it (...). Which
wisdom of the flesh, he says, is enmity with God. But the free and cautious
use of Reason, the knowledge of the fabric of the world, and the course of
natural causes, to understand the Rudiments of Geometry, and the Principles of
Mechanics, and the like; what man that is not a Fool, or a Fanatic, will ever
assert that God bears any enmity to these things? For again, these kind of
Contemplations are not so properly the knowledge of Good and Evil, as of Truth
and Falsehood, the knowledge of Good and Evil referring to that experience we
gather up in Moral or Political encounters.

But those men that from this Text of Scripture would perstringe Philosophy,
and an honest and gerous enquiry into the true knowledge of God in Nature, I
suspect them partly of ignorance, and partly of a sly and partial kind of
countenancing of those pleasures that beasts have as well as men, and I think
in as high a degree, especially Baboons and Satyrs, and such like letcherous
Animals. And I fear there are no men so subject to such mis-interpretations of
Scripture, as the boldest Religionists, and Mock-Prophets, who are very full of
heat and spirits, and have their imagination too often infected with the fumes
of those lower parts, the full sense and pleasure whereof they prefer before
all the subtle delights of Reason and generous Contemplation.

But leaving these Sanguine-inspired Seers, to the sweet deception and gullery
of their own corrupted fancy, let us listen and keep close to him that can
neither deceive nor be deceived, I mean Christ, and his holy Apostles; and now
in particular, let us consider that grave and pious Monition of S. Peter,
Beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts
that war against the soul. Wherein, this holy man instructed of God, plainly
intimates that the soul in this world is as a traveller in a strange Country,
and that she is journeying on to a condition more suitable to her, then this in
the body. Whence it follows, that the tender patronizing of those pleasures
that are mortal and die with the body, is a badg of a poor, base, degenerate
mind, and unacquainted with her own nature and dignity.

Ver. 7. How naked now he was, and bare of all strength and power to divine and
holy things. This was Adams mistake, that he thought he could serve two
Masters, The will of God, and the dictates of the flesh. But thus he became
estranged to the divine Life and Power, which will not dwell in a body that is
subject unto sin; For the holy Spirit of discipline will fly deceit, and remove
from thoughts that are without understanding, (viz. such as are suggested and
pursued at random) and will not abide when unrighteousness comes in.

Ver. 8. Could not endure the presence of it. For the divine Light now was only
a convincer of his miscarriages, but administered nothing of the divine Love and
Power, as it does to them that are obedient and sincere followers of its
precepts, and therefore Adam could no more endure the presence of it, then sore
eyes the Sun or Candlelight.

Ver. 9. Persisted and came up closer to him. This divine Light is God, as he
is manifested in the Conscience of man, but his Love and Power are not fit to
be communicated to Adam in this dissolute and disobedient condition he is in,
but merely conviction, to bring him to repentance. And after the hurry of his
inordinate pleasures and passions, when he was for a time left in the suds, as
they call it, this light of Conscience did more strictly, and particularly sift
and examine him, and he might well wonder with himself that he found himself so
much afraid to commune with his own heart.

Ver. 10. Ingenuously confessed. For he presently found out the reason why he
was thus estranged from the divine Light, because he found himself naked of
that power and good affection he had in divine things before, having lost those
by promiscuously following the wild suggestions of his own inordinate will, as
you see in the following verse. Wherefore he had no mind to be convinced of
any obligation to such things as he felt in himself no power left to perform,
nor any inclination unto.

Ver. 11. The sad event upon his disobedience. Adams Conscience resolved all
this confusion of mind into his disobedience and following his own will,
without any rule or guidance from the will of God.

Ver. 12. His rational Faculties, and said. Like that in the Comedian.

Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum puto.
And so commonly men reason themselves into an allowance of sin, by pretending
humane infirmities or natural frailties.

Ver. 13. That he kept his Feminine faculties in no better order. That Is the
foolish and mischievous Sophistry amongst men, whereby they impose upon
themselves, that because such and such things may be done, and that they are
but the suggestions of nature, which is the work of God in the world, that
therefore they may do them, how, and in what measure they please; But here the
divine Light does not chastise Adam for the exercise of his Feminine faculties,
but that in the exercise of them they were not regulated by an higher and more
holy rule, and that he kept them in no more subjection unto the Masculine.

To which he had nothing to say, but, etc. The meaning is, that Adams
temptations were very strong, and so accommodate to the vigorous life of the
body, that, as he thought, he could not resist. But the will of man assisted by
God, as Adam's was, if it be sincere, what can it not do?

Ver. 14. Then the divine Light began to chastise the Serpent. From this 14
verse to the 20. there seems to be a description of the conscience of a man
plainly convincing him of all the ugliness and inconveniences of those sinful
courses he is engaged in, with some hints also of the advantages of the better
life, if he converted to it, which is like a present flame kindled in his mind
for a time, but the true love of the divine Life, and the power of grace being
not also communicated unto his soul, and his body being unpurg'd of the filth
it has contracted by former evil courses, this flame is presently extinct, and
all those monitions and representations of what so nearly concerned him are
drowned in oblivion, and he presently settles to his old ill ways again.

That it crept basely upon the belly. See what has been said out of Philo upon
ver. 1.

Ver. 15. But might I once descend so far. This the divine Light might be very
well said to speak in Adam. For his conscience might well re-minde him, how
grateful a sense of the harmless joys of the body he had in his state of
obedience and sincerity; and if the divine Light had wrought it self into a
more full and universal possession of all his faculties, the regulated joys of
the body, which had been the offspring of the woman, had so far exceeded the
tumultuous pleasures of inordinate desires, that they would like the Sunbeams
playing upon a fire, extinguish the heat thereof, as is already said in this
fifteenth verse.

Ver. 16. So that the kindly Joy of the health of the body shall be much
depraved. The divine Light in the Conscience of Adam might very well say all
this, he having had already a good taste of it in all likelihood, having found
himself after inordinate satiating his furious desires of pleasure in a dull,
languid, nauseating condition, though new recruits spurred him up to new
follies. For the Moral Cabbala does not suppose it was one single mistaken act
that brought Adam to this confusion of mind, but disobedience at large, and
leading a life unguided by the Light and Law of God.

Earthly minded Adam. Philo calls him (...), the earthly mind, page 332.

Ver. 17, 18, 19. Adams Conscience was so awakened by the divine Light and
Reason, and Experience so instructed him for the present, that he could easily
read his own doom, if he persisted in these courses of disobedience, that he
should be pricked and vexed in his wild rangings after inordinate pleasure all
the while the Earthly mind was his light and guide. But after all this
conviction, what way Adam would settle in, did not God visit him with an higher
pitch of superadvenient grace that would conveigh Faith, Power, and Affection
unto him, you see in the verse immediately following.

Ver. 20. Adam was not sufficiently. For mere conviction of Light disjoined
from Faith, Power, and Affection, may indeed disturb the mind and confound it,
but is not able of it self to compose it and settle it to good, in men that
have contracted a custom of evil.

Called her, My life. So soon as this reproof and castigation of the divine
Light manifested in Adams Conscience was over, he forthwith falls into the same
sense of things, and pursues the same resolutions that he had in design
before, and very feelingly concludes with himself, that be that as true as it
will, that his Conscience dictated unto him, yet nothing can be more true then
this; That the Joy of his body was a necessary solace of life, and therefore he
would set up his happiness in the improvement thereof. And so adhering in his
affection to it, counted it his very life, and that there was no living at all
without it. They are almost the words of Philo, speaking of the sense of the
body, in which was this corporeal Joy, (...), i. e. which corporeal sense the
earthly mind in man, properly therefore called Adam, when he saw efformed,
though it was really the death of the man, yet he called it his life. This is
Philo's Exposition of this present verse.

Ver. 21. Put hairy Coats. The Philosophic Cabbala, and the Text have a
mavelous fit and easy congruency in this place. And this Moral sense will
not seem hard, if you consider such phrases as these in Scripture; But as for
his enemies let them be clothed with shame; and elsewhere, Let them be clothed
with rebuke and dishonor; besides other places to that purpose. And to clothe
men according to their conditions and quality, what is more ordinary, or more
fit and natural? As those that are fools they ordinarily clothe them in a fools
coat. And so Adams will and affection being carried so resolvedly to the
brutish life, it is not incongruous to conceive that the divine Light judging
them very Brutes, the reproach she gives them is set out in this passage of
clothing them with the skins of beasts. The meaning therefore of this verse is,
that the divine Light in the Conscience of Adam had another bout with him, and
that Adam was convinced that he should grow a kind of a Brute, by the courses
he meant to follow. And indeed he was content so to be, as a man may well
conceive, the pleasure of sin having so weakened all the powers of that higher
life in him, that there was little or nothing, especially for the present, able
to carry him at all upwards toward Heaven and holiness.

And of a truth, vile Epicurisme, and Sensuality will make the soul of man so
degenerate and blind, that he will not only be content to slide into brutish
immorality, but please himself in this very opinion that he is a real Brute
already, an Ape, Satyr, or Baboon, and that the best of men are no better,
saving that civilizing of them and industrious education has made them appear
in a more refined shape, and long inculcate Precepts have been mistaken for
connate Principles of Honesty and Natural Knowledge, otherwise there be no
indispensable grounds of Religion and Virtue, but what has happened to be taken
up by overruling Custom. Which things, I dare say, are as easily confutable,
as any conclusion in Mathematics is demonstrable. But as many as are thus
sottish, let them enjoy their own wildeness and ignorance, it is sufficient for
a good man that he is conscious unto himself that he is more nobly descended,
better bred and born, and more skilfully taught, by the purged faculties of his
own mind.

Ver. 22. Designed the contrary. The mercy of the Almighty is such to poor man,
that his weak and dark spirit cannot be always so resolvedly wicked as he is
contented to be; wherefore it is a fond surmise of desperate men, that do all
the violence they can to the remainders of that Light and Principle of
Religion, and honesty left in them, hoping thereby to come to rest and
tranquillity of mind, by laying dead, or quite obliterating all the rules of
godliness and morality out of their souls. For it is not in their power so to
do, nor have they any reason to promise themselves they are hereby secure from
the pangs of Conscience. For some passages of Providence or other may so awaken
them, that they shall be forced to acknowledge their error and rebellion with
unexpressible bitterness and confusion of spirit. And the longer they have run
wrong, the more tedious journey they have to return back.

Wherefore it is more safe to close with that life betime, that when it is
attained to, neither deserves nor is obnoxious to any change or death; I mean
when we have arrived to the due measure of it. For this is the natural
accomplishment of the soul, all else but rust and dirt that lies upon it.

Ver. 23. Out of this Paradise of Luxury. The English Translation takes no
notice of any more Paradises then one, calling it always the Garden of Eden.
But the Seventy more favorable to our Moral Cabbala, that which they call a
Garden in Eden at first, they after name (...), which may signify the Garden
of Luxury. But whether there be any force at all in this or no, that Supplement
I have made in the foregoing verse will make good the sense of our Cabbala. And
in the very Letter and History of the Scripture, if a man take notice, he must
of necessity make a supply of something or another to pass to what follows with
due cohaesion and clearness of sense.

So in the very next Chapter, where God dooms Cain to be a Vagabond, and he
cries out that every man that meets him will kill him, according to the concise
story of the Text; there was none but Adam and Eve in the world to meet him,
and yet there is a mark set upon him by God as if there had been then several
people in the world, into whose hands he might fall, and lose his life by them.
And then again at ver. 17. Cain had no sooner got into the Land of Nod, but he
has a wife and a child by her, and he is forthwith said to build a City, when
as there is no mention of any but himself, his wife, and his child to be the
Artificers; but any ingenious Reader will easily make to himself fitting
supplements, ever supposing due distances of time and right preparations to all
that is said to be acted. And so in the story of Samson, where he is said to
take three hundred Foxes, it may be rationally supposed, that Country was full
of such creatures, that he had a competency of time, a sufficient number to
help him, and the like. That the History of Scripture is very concise, no body
can deny; and therefore where easy, natural, and agreeable supplements will
clear the sense, I conceive it is very warrantable to suppose some such
supplies, and for a Paraphrast, judiciously to interweave them.

But now that Paradise at first should signify a state of divine pleasure, and
afterward of sensual voluptuousness, it is no more harsh then that Adam one
while is the Spiritual or Intellectual Man, another while the Earthly and
Carnal. For one and the same natural thing may be a Symbol of contrary
Spiritual Mysteries. So a Lion and a Serpent are figures of Christ, as well as
of the Devil; and therefore it is not so hard to admit that this Garden of Eden
may emblematize, while Adam is discoursed of as innocent and obedient to God,
the delights of the Spirit; but after his forsaking God, the pleasures of the
Flesh; and consequently, that the fruit of the Tree of Life in the one, may be
perseverance and establishment in the divine Life; in the other, a settlement
and fixedness in the brutish and sensual.

Ver. 24. The manly faculties of Reason and Conscience. These I conceive may be
understood by the Cherubim and flaming Sword. For the Cherubim bear the Image
of a man, and Reason is a cutting, dividing thing like a Sword, the Stoics
call it (...), dividing and distinguishing Reason. For Reason is nothing but a
distinct discernment of the Idea's of things, whereby the mind is able to
sever what will not suit, and lay together what will. But if any body will like
better of Philo's interpretation here, of the Cherubim and flaming Sword, who
makes the Cherubim to signify the goodness and power of God; the flaming
Sword, (...), the effectual and operative Wisdom or Word of God; it does not
at all clash with what we have already set down. For my self also suppose, that
God by his Son the Eternal Word works upon the Reason and Conscience of man:
For that Word is living and powerful, sharper then any two-edged Sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is the discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, neither
is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are
naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.

That he could not set up his rest for ever. Assuredly a man's heart is not so
in his own hand, that he can do himself all the mischief he is contented to do.
For we are more Gods then our own, and his Goodness and Power has dominion over
us. And therefore let not a man vainly fancy, that by violently running into
all enormity of life, and extinguishing all the Principles of Piety and Virtue
in him, that he shall be able thus to hide himself from God, and never be
re-minded of him again for ever. For though a man may happen thus to forget God
for a time, yet he can never forget us, since all things lie open to his sight.
And the power of his ever-living Word will easily cut through all that
thickness and darkness, which we shroud our selves in, and wound us so, as to
make us look back with shame and sorrow at a time that we least thought of.

But that our pain may be the less, and our happiness commence the sooner, it
will be our wisdom to comply with the divine Light betimes; for the sooner we
begin, the work is the easier, and will be the more timely dispatched through
the power of God working in us. But this I must confess (and I think my self
bound, to bear witness to so true and useful a mystery wrapped up in this
Mosaical covering) that there is no other passage nor return into happiness
then by death. Whence Plato also that had been acquainted with these holy
writings, has defined Philosophy (...), The meditation of death, viz. the dying
to the lust of the flesh and inordinate desires of the body; which Purgatory if
we had once passed through, there would soon spring up that Morning Joy, the
resurrection from the dead, and our arrival to everlasting life and glory. And
there is no other way then this that is manifestable either by Scripture,
Reason, or Experience.

But those that through the grace of God and a vehement thirst after the divine
Righteousness, have born the Cross till the perfect death of the body of sin,
and make it their business to have no more sense nor relish of themselves, or
their own particular persons, then if they were not at all, they being thus
demolished as to themselves, and turned into a Chaos or dark Nothingness, as I
may so speak, they become thereby fitted for the new Creation.

And this personal life being thus destroyed, God calls unto them in the dead
of the Night, when all things are silent about them, awakes them and raises
them up, and breathes into them the breath of everlasting life, and ever after
actuates them by his own Spirit, and takes all the humane faculties unto
himself, guiding or allowing all their operations, always holding up the spirit
of man so, that he will never sink into sin; and from henceforth death and
sorrow is swallowed up for ever, for the sting of Death is Sin.

But whatever liberty and joy men take to themselves that is not founded in
this new life, is false and frivolous, and will end but in sadness, bitterness,
and intolerable thraldom. For the Corporeal life and sense will so deeply have
sunk into the soul, that it will be beyond all measure hard and painful to
dis-intangle her.

But as many as have passed the Death, have arrived to that Life that abides
for ever and ever.

And this Life is pure and immaculate Love, and this Love is God, as he is
communicable unto man, and is the sole Life and Essence of Virtue truly so
called; or rather, as all colors are but the reflection of the Rays of the Sun
so all Virtue is but this One variously colored and figured from the diversity
of Objects and Circumstances. But when she plays with ease within her own pure
and undisturbed Light, she is most lovely and amiable; and if she step out into
zeal, Satirical rebuke, and contestation, it is a condescent and debasement for
the present, but the design is, a more enlarged exaltation of her own nature,
and the getting more universal foot-hold in other persons, by dislodging her
deformed enemy.

For the divine Love is the love of the divine Beauty, and that Beauty is the
divine Life which would gladly insinuate it self, and become one with that
particular Principle of Natural life, the Soul of man. And whatever man she has
taken hold upon, and won him to her self, she does so actuate and guide, as
that whatever he has, she gets the use of, and improves it to her own interest,
that is, the advancement of her self.

But she observing that her progress and speed is not so fast as she could
wish, (that is, that mankind is not made so fully and so generally happy by
her, as she could desire, and as they are capable of) she raises in a man his
Anger and Indignation against those things that are obstacles and impediments
in her way, beating down by solid Reason such things as pretend to Reason, and
such things as are neither the genuine offspring of the humane faculties, nor
the effects of her own union with them, discountenancing them, and deriding
them as Monsters and Mongrel things, they being no accomplishment of the humane
nature, nor any gift of the divine. She observing also that mankind is very
giddily busy to improve their natural faculties without her, and promise
themselves very rare effects of their art and industry, which if they could
bring to pass, would be in the end but a scourge and plague to them, and make
them more desperately bold, sensual, Atheistical, and wicked, (for no fire but
that of Gods Spirit in a man can clear up the true knowledge of himself unto
us) she therefore takes courage (though she see her self slighted, or unknown)
and deservedly magnifies her self above all the effects of Art and humane
industry, and boldly tells the world, what petty and poor things they are if
compared unto her.

Nor does she at all stick to pour out her scorn and derision unto the full
upon those garish effects of fanatical Fancy, where Melancholy dictates strange
and uncouth dreams, out of a dark hole, like the whispers of the Heathen
Oracles. For it is not only an injury to her self, that such Antic Phantasmes
are preferred before the pure simplicity of her own beauty, but a great
mischief to her darling the Soul of man, that he should forsake those faculties
she has a mind to sanctify and take into her self, and should give himself up
to mere inconsiderate imaginations, and casual impresses, choosing them for his
guide, because they are strongest, not truest, and he will not so much as
examine them.

Such like as these and several other occasions there are, that oftentimes
figure the divine Life in good men, and sharpen it into an high degree of zeal
and anger. But whom in wrath she then wounds, she pities, as being an
affectionate Lover of universal mankind, though an unreconcileable disliker of
their vices.

I HAVE now gone through my Threefold Cabbala, which I hope all sincere and
judicious Christians will entertain with unprejudiced candor and kind
acceptance. For as I have lively set out the mysteries of the holy and precious
life of a Christian, even in the Mosaical Letter, so I have carefully and on
purpose cleared and asserted the grand essential Principles of Christianity it
self, as it is a particular Religion, avoiding that rock of scandal, that some
who are taken for no small Lights in the Christian world have cast before men,
who attenuate all so into Allegories, that they leave the very Fundamentals of
Religion suspected, especially themselves not vouchsafing to take notice, that
there is any such thing as the Person of Christ now existent, much less that
he is a Mediator with God for us, or that he was a sacrifice for sin, when he
hung at Jerusalem upon the Cross, or that there shall be again any appearance
of him in the Heavens, as it was promised by the two Angels to his Apostles
that saw him ascend; or that there is any life to come, after the dissolution
of the natural body, though our Savior Christ says expressly, that after the
Resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are like the
Angels of God. But to be so spiritual as to interpret this of a mysterious
resurrection of a man in this life, is in effect to be so truly carnal, as to
insinuate there is no such thing at all as the Life to come, and to add to
Sadducisme, Epicurisme also or worse, that is, a religious liberty of silling
one another houses with brats of the adulterous bed, under pretense that they
are now risen to that state that they may without blame commit that, which in
other mortals is downright adultery. Such unlawful sporting with the Letter as
this, is to me no sign of a spiritual man, but of one at least indiscreet and
light minded, more gross in my conceit then Hymeneus and Philetas, who yet
affirmed that the resurrection was past, and so allegorized away the faith of
the people.

For mine own part I cannot admire any man's fancies, but only his Reason,
Modesty, Discretion and Miracles, the main thing being presupposed (which yet
is the birthright of the meanest Christian) to be truly and sincerely Pious.
But if his imagination grow rampant, and he aspire to appear some strange thing
in the world, such as was never yet heard of, that man seems to me thereby
plainly to bewray his own Carnality and Ignorance. For there is no better
Truths then what are plainly set down in the Scripture already, and the best,
the plainest of all. So that if any one will step out to be so venerable an
Instructor of the world, that no man may appear to have said any thing like
unto him either in his own age, or foregoing generations; verily I am so blunt
a Fool as to make bold to pronounce, that I suspect the party not a little
seasoned with spiritual Pride and Melancholy: For God be thanked, the Gospel is
so plain a Rule of Life and Belief to the sincere and obedient soul, that no
man can add any thing to it.

But then for comparison of persons, what dotage is it for any man, because he
can read the common Alphabet of Honesty and a Pious life, in the History of the
Old and New Testament, finely allegorizing, as is conceived, those external
Transactions to a mysterious application of what concerns the inward man, to
either place himself, or for others to place him in the same level with Jesus
Christ the Son of God, the Savior of men, and Prince of the highest Angelical
Orders, who rose out of the grave by the Omnipotent hand of his Father, and was
seen to ascend into Heaven, by his Apostles that gazed upon him as he passed
through the Clouds, and whom all true Christians expect visibly to appear there
again and re-visit the world according to the promise.

Now it seems to me a very unreasonable and rash thing, if not impious and
blasphemous, to acknowledge any man whatsoever comparable to so sacred a Person
as our Savior Christ every way approved himself, and was approved by a voice
from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, hear him. If any man therefore
having none of these testimonies from above, nor being able to do any thing
more then other men, shall be so unmannerly as to place himself in the same
order and rank with Christ the Son of God, because he has got some fine fancies
and phrases, and special and peculiar interpretations of Scripture, which he
will have immediately suggested from the Spirit; I cannot forbear again to
pronounce, that this man is overtaken with an high degree of either pride or
madness, and if he can persuade any others to look upon him as so sacred a
Prophet, that it must be in them at least Inadvertency or Ignorance; Nay, I
think I shall not say amiss if I attribute their mistake to a kind of Pride
also. For Pride affects nothing more then Singularity; and therefore
undervaluing the plain simplicity of ordinary Christianity, such as at first
sight is held forth in the Gospel of Christ, they think it no small privilege
to have a Prophet of their own; especially they getting this advantage thereby,
that they can very presently, as they fancy, censure and discern the truth or
falsehood of all that venture to speak out of the Rode of their own Sect; as if
every body were bound to conne their lessons according to their Book. And it is
a fine thing to become so accurately wise at so cheap a rate, and discover who
is Spiritual, or who is the Carnal, or mere Moral man. This is indeed the folly
of all Sects, and there is no way better that I know, to be freed from such
inveiglements, then by earnestly endeavoring after that which they all pretend
to, and to become truly more holy and sincere then other men; for the thoroughly
purified man is certainly delivered from all these follies.

These things I could not forbear to speak in zeal to the honor of my Savior,
and the good and safety of his Church. For if men once get a trick to call the
world Christian, where the death of Christ on the Cross at Jerusalem is not
acknowledged a sacrifice for sin, nor himself now in his humane Person a
Mediator with God the Father, and the Head of his Church Militant and
Triumphant; nor that there is any Eternal Life nor Resurrection, but that in
the Moral or Mystical sense: assuredly this will prove the most dangerous way
imaginable, quite to take away that in time, which is most properly called
Christian Religion, out of the world, and to leave merely the name thereof
behind.

But a Religion so manifestly established by God in a most miraculous manner,
and being so perfect, that the wit of man cannot imagine any thing more
complete, and better fitted for winning souls to God: It can be nothing but
giddiness or light-mindedness, to think that this Religion can be ever
superannuated in the world, but that it shall last till Christ's Corporeal
appearance in the Clouds. For there is no reason at all that the holy Ghost
should be thought to come in the flesh of some particular man, no more then God
the Father did under the Law. For what can he tell us more or better, then
Christ already has told us; or what himself may tell us without any personal
shape? And there is no Prophecy of any such thing, but only of that which is
better, that Christ will procure for all those that are his faithful and
obedient followers, the Spirit of Truth and Righteousness, and indue them with
the divine Life, and that it shall so at length come to pass, that Justice,
Peace, and Equity shall more universally and fully flourish in the world, then
ever yet they have done. And that faith in God, and of the Life to come shall
be more vigorously sealed upon the hearts of men; and that there shall be a
nearer union and conjunction betwixt the humane and divine nature in us, then
ever, and more frequent and sensible commerce betwixt the Inhabitants of the
Ethereal and Terrestrial Region, according as I have already declared
concerning the Seventh day in this Defense of the Moral Cabbala.

But in the mean time though that full Sabbatisme be so far off, yet I doubt
not but there have been and are very sweet and joyful praelibations of it, in
sundry persons, which quickens their hopes and desires of the compleatment
thereof, and divine Providence is not idle, all things working toward this
last Catastraphe; and the heads of Sects themselves, though I never saw any yet
that my light and judgment could pronounce infallible and perfect, (as I think
there never will be any till Christ himself come again, who will appear in no
Sectarian way, for himself has given us an intimation, that if any one say,
Lo here is Christ, or there is Christ, believe it not) yet such is the gross
ignorance or hypocrisy of ordinary carnal Churches (as they call them) that
some heads of Sects, I say, have spoken very true and weighty things against
them, very lively setting them out and depainting them in their own colors,
insomuch that they will be able, not only to turn from them the affections of
all plain hearted men, that are fast friends to the eternal Righteousness of
God, and prefer that before the most specious devices of arbitrarious
Superstition, but also to raise their anger and indignation against them. But
it does not presently follow, that because a man can truly discover the gross
faults and falsities that are in another, that therefore he is utterly
blameless himself, and not at all imposed upon by his natural complexion, nor
speaks any thing that is false, nor omits any thing that is both true and
necessary. But be these Sects what they will be, the grand Churches themselves
are so naked and obnoxious, that unless they cast away from them their
hypocrisy, pride, and covetousness, they will in all likelihood raise such
storms in all Christendom, that in process of time, not only Ecclesiastical
but Civil power it self will be involved in those ruins, and Christ alone will
be exalted in that day. For before he deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, he
is to put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power; For he must reign till he
have put all his enemies under his feet; The last enemy that shall be destroyed
is Death: which as I have already signified unto you, though he be now the King
of Terrors, will in that great Festival and Sabbatisme, by reason of so
sensible and palpable union betwixt the Heavenly and Earthly nature, be but a
pleasant passage into an higher room, or to use that more mysterious expression
of the Rabbis concerning Moses, in whose writings this Sabbatisme is
adumbrated, God will draw up a man's soul to himself by an Amorous kiss; For
such was the death of that holy man Moses, who is said to have died in Moab
(...), in the kisses and embracements of God.

This shall be the condition of the Church of Christ for many hundred years;
Till the Wheel of Providence driving on further, and the Stage of things
drawing on to their last Period, men shall not only be freed from the fear and
pain of death, but there shall be no capacity of dying at all. For then shall
the day of the Lord come, wherein the Heavens shall pass away with a noise,
and the Elements melt with fervent heat, and the Earth with all the things in
it shall be burnt up. Thus Christ having done vengeance upon the obstinately
wicked and disobedient, and fully triumphed over all his enemies, he will give
up his Kingdom to his Father, whose Vicegerent hitherto he has been in the
affairs of both Men and Angels. But till then whosoever by pretending to be
more Spiritual and Mystical then other men, would smother those essential
Principles of the Christian Religion, that have reference to the external
Person of Christ, let him phrase it as well as he will, or speak as
magnificently of himself as he can, we are never to let go the plain and
warrantable Faith of the Word, for ungrounded fancies and fine sayings.

Wherefore let every man seek God apart, and search out the Truth in the holy
Scripture, preparing himself for a right understanding thereof, by steadfastly
and sincerely practicing such things as are plainly and uncontrovertedly
contained therein, and expect illumination according to the best communication
thereof, that is, answerably to our own faculties, otherwise if we bid all
Reason, and History, and Humane helps, and Acquisitions quite adieu, the world
will never be rid of Religious Lunacies and Fancies.

FINIS.
AN ACCOUNT of what is contained in the Prefaces and Chapters of this Book.
In the Preface to the Reader. What is meant by the term Cabbala, and how
warrantably the literal Exposition of the Text may be so called. That
dispensable speculations are best propounded in a Skeptical manner. A clear
description of the nature and digniety of Reason, and what the divine Logos is.
The general probabilities of the truth of this present Cabbala. The design of
the Author in publishing of it.

THE LITERAL CABBALA. CHAP. I. 2 The Earth at first a deep miry abyss, covered
over with waters, over which was a fierce wind, and through all darkness. 3
Day made at first without a Sun. 6 The Earth a floor, the Heavens a transparent
Canopy, or strong Tent over it, to keep off the upper waters or blew
conspicuous Sea from drowning the world. 8 Why this Tent or Canopy was not said
to be good. 9 The lower waters commanded into one place. 11 Herbs, flowers, and
fruits of Trees, before either Sun or seasons of the year to ripen them. 14 The
Sun created to and added the day, as a peculiar ornament thereof, as the Moon
and Stars to the night. 20 The Creation of Fish and Fowl. 24 The Creation of
beasts and creeping things. 27 Man created in the very shape and figure of God,
but yet so, that there were made females as well as males. 28 How man came to
be Lord over the rest of living creatures. 30 How it came to pass that man
feeds on the better sort of the fruits of the Earth, and the beasts on the
worse. p. 1 CHAP. II. 3 The Original of the Jewish Sabbaths, from Gods resting
himself from his six days labors. 5 Herbs and Plants before either Rain,
Gardning, or Husbandry, and the reason why it was so. 7 Adam made of the dust
of the ground, and his soul breathed in at his nosthrils. 8 The Planting of
Paradise. 9 A wonderful Tree there, that would continue youth, and make a man
immortal upon earth: Another strange Tree, viz. the Tree of knowledge of good
and evil. 11 The Rivers of Paradise, Phasis, Gihon, Tigris, Euphrates. 18 The
high commendation of Matrimony. 19 Adam gives names to all kind of creatures,
except fishes. 21 Woman is made of a rib of Adam, a deep sleep falling upon
him, his mind then also being in a trance. 24 The first Institution of
Marriage. 9 CHAP. III. 1 A subtle Serpent in Paradise, endued with both
reason, and the power of speech, deceives the woman. 2 The Dialogue betwixt the
woman and the Serpent. 7 How the shame of nakedness came into the world. 8 God
walks in the Garden, and calls to Adam. 10 The Dialogue betwixt Adam and God.
14 The reasons why Serpents want feet, and creep upon the ground. 15 The reason
of the antipathy betwixt Men and Serpents. 16 As also of women's pangs in
childe-bearing, and of their being bound in subjection to their husbands. 18
Also of the barrenness of the earth, and of man's toil and drudgery. 21 God
teaches Adam and Eve the use of leathern clothing. 24 Paradise haunted with
apparitions: Adam frighted from daring to taste of the Tree of Life, whence his
posterity became mortal to this very day. 15
THE PHILOSOPHIC CABBALA. CHAP. I. 1 The world of Life or Forms, and the
Potentiality of the visible Universe created by the Tri-une God, and referred
to a Monad or Unite. 6 The Universal immense matter of the visible world
created out of nothing, and referred to the number Two. 7 Why it was not said
of this matter that it was good. 9 The ordering of an Earth or Planet for
making it conveniently habitable, referred to the number Three. 14 The immense
Ethereal Matter, or Heaven, contrived into Suns or Planets, as well Primary as
Secondary, viz. as well Earths as Moons, and referred to the number Four. 20
The replenishing of an Earth with Fish and Fowl, referred to the number Five.
24 The Creation of Beasts and Cattle, but more chiefly of Man himself, referred
to the number Six. 22 CHAP. II. 2 Gods full and absolute rest from creating any
thing of anew, adumbrated by the number Seven. 4 Suns and Planets not only the
furniture, but effects of the Ethereal Matter or Heaven. 6 The manner of Man
and other Animals rising out of the earth by the power of God in nature. 8 How
it was with Adam before he descended into flesh, and became a Terrestrial
Animal. 10 That the four Cardinal virtues were in Adam in his Ethereal or
Paradisiacal condition. 17 Adam in Paradise forbidden to taste or relish his
own will, under pain of descending into the Region of Death. 18 The Masculine
and Feminine faculties in Adam. 20 The great Pleasure and Solace of the
Feminine faculties. 21 The Masculine faculties laid asleep, the Feminine appear
and act, viz. The grateful sense of the life of the Vehicle. 25 That this sense
and joy of the life of the Vehicle is in it self without either blame or shame.
page 33 CHAP. III. 1 Satan tempts Adam, taking advantage upon the Invigoration
of the life of his Vehicle. 2 The Dialogue betwixt Adam and Satan. 6 The
Masculine faculties in Adam swayed by the Feminine; assent to sin against God.
7 Adam excuses the use of that wild Liberty he gave himself, discerning the
Plastic Power somewhat awakened in him. 8 A dispute betwixt Adam and the
divine Light, arraigning him at the Tribunal of his own Conscience. 14 Satan
stricken down into the lower Regions of the Air. 15 A Prophecy of the
Incarnation of the Soul of the Messiah, and of his Triumph over the head and
highest Powers of the rebellious Angels. 16 A decree of God to sour and
disturb all the pleasures and contentments of the Terrestrial Life. 20 Adam
again excuses his fall, from the usefulness of his Presence and Government
upon Earth. 21 Adam is fully incorporated into Flesh, and appears in the true
shape of a Terrestrial Animal. 24 That Immortality is incompetible to the
Earthly Adam, nor can his Soul reach it, till she return into her Ethereal
Vehicle. 44
THE MORAL CABBALA. CHAP. I. 1 Man a Microcosme or Little World, in whom there
are two Principles, Spirit and Flesh. 2 The Earthly or Fleshly Nature appears
first. 4 The Light of Conscience unlistned to. 6 The Spirit of Savory and
Affectionate discernment betwixt good and evil. 10 The inordinate desires of
the flesh driven aside and limited. 11 Hereupon the plants of Righteousness
bear fruit and flourish. 16 The hearty and sincere Love of God, and a man's
neighbor, is as the Sun in the Soul of man. Notionality and Opinions the weak
and faint Light of the dispersed Stars. 18 Those that walk in sincere Love,
walk in the Day: They that are guided by Notionality, travel in the Night. 22
The Natural Concupiscible brings forth by the command of God, and is corrected
by devotion. 24 The Irascible also brings forth. 26 Christ the Image of God is
created, being a perfect Ruler over all the motions of the Irascible and
Concupiscible. 29 The food of the divine Life. 30 The food of the Animal Life.
31 The divine Wisdom approves of whatsoever is simply natural, as good. 52
CHAP. II. 3 The true Sabbatisme of the Sons of God. 5 A Description of men
taught by God. 7 The mystery of that Adam that comes by Water and the Spirit.
9 Obedience the Tree of Life: Disobedience the Tree of the Knowledge of good
and evil. 10 The Rivers of Paradise; the four Cardinal Virtues in the Soul of
man. 17 The Life of Righteousness lost by Disobedience. 19 The mere
Contemplative and Spiritual Man sees the motions of the Animal Life, and
rigidly enough censures them. 21 That it is incompetible to Man perpetually to
dwell in Spiritual Contemplations. 22 That upon the slaking of those, the
kindly Joy of the Life of the Body springs out, which is our Eve. 23 That this
kindly Joy of the Body is more grateful to Man in Innocence, then any thing
else whatsoever. 25 Nor is man mistaken in his judgment thereof. 63 CHAP. III.
1 Adam is tempted by inordinate Pleasure from the springing up of the Joy of
the Invigorated Life of his Body. 2 A dialogue or dispute in the mind of Adam
betwixt The inordinate Desire of Pleasure, and the natural Joy of the Body. 6
The will of Adam is drawn away to assent to inordinate Pleasure. 8 Adam having
transgressed, is impatient of the Presence of the divine Light. 10 A long
conflict of Conscience, or dispute betwixt Adams earthly mind, and the divine
Light, examining him, and setting before him both his present and future
condition, if he persisted in rebellion. 20 He adheres to the Joy of his body,
without reason or measure, notwithstanding all the castigations and monitions
of the divine Light. 21 The divine Light takes leave of Adam therefore for the
present, with deserved scorn and reproach. 22 The doom of the Eternal God
concerning lapsed Man, that will not suffer them to settle in wickedness,
according to their own depraved wills and desires.

The CONTENTS of THE DEFENSE OF THE THREEFOLD CABBALA.
In the Introduction to the DEFENSE. Diodorus his mistake concerning Moses, and
other Lawgivers, that have professed themselves to have received their Laws
from either God or some good Angel. Reasons why Moses began his History with
the Creation of the world. The Sun and Moon the same with the Egyptians Osiris
and Isis, and how they came to be worshipped for Gods. The Apotheosis of mortal
men, such as Bacchus and Ceres, how it first came into the world. That the
letter of the Scripture speaks ordinarily in Philosophical things according to
the sense and imagination of the Vulgar. That there is a Philosophical sense
that lies hid in the letter of the three first Chapters of Genesis. That there
is a Moral or Mystical sense, not only in these three Chapters, but in several
other places of the Scripture. 93 The CONTENTS of THE DEFENSE OF THE LITERAL
CABBALA. CHAP. I. 1 The genuine sense of In the beginning. The difference of
(...) neglected by the Seventy, who translate (...) only (...). 2 The ground of
their mistake discovered, who conceive Moses to intimate that the Matter is
uncreated. That (...) is no more then ventus magnus. 4 That the first darkness
was not properly Night. 6 Why the Seventy translate (...) Firmamentum, and that
it is in allusion to a firmly pitched Tent. 11 That the sensible effects of the
Sun invited the Heathen to Idolatry, and that their Oracles taught them to call
him by the name of Jao. 14 That the Prophet Jeremy divides the day from the
Sun, speaking according to the vulgar capacity. 15 The reason why the Stars
appear on this side the upper caeruleous Sea. 27 The Opinion of the
Anthropomorphites, and of what great consequence it is for the Vulgar to
imagine God in the shape of a Man. Aristophanes his story in Plato of Men and
Women's growing together at first, as if they made both but one Animal. 111
CHAP. II. 7 The notation of (...) answerable to the breathing of Adams soul
into his nosthrils. 8 The exact situation of Paradise. That Gihon is part of
Euphrates; Pison, Phasis, or Phasi-tigris. That the Madianites are called
Aethiopians. That Paradise was seated about Mesopotamia, argued by six Reasons.
That it was more particularly seated where now Apamia stands in Ptolemee's
Maps. 18 The Prudence of Moses in the commendation of Matrimony. 19 Why Adam is
not recorded to have given names to the Fishes. 24 Abraham Ben Ezra's conceit
of the names of Adam and Eve, as they are called (...) and (...). 25 Moses his
wise Anthypophora concerning the natural shame of nakedness. 124 CHAP. III. 1
How much it saves the credit of our first Parents, that the Serpent was found
the prime Author of the Transgression. That according to S. Basil all the
living creatures of Paradise could speak: undeniable reasons that the Serpent
could, according to the Literal Cabbala. 9 The opinion of the Anthropomorphites
true, according to the Literal Cabbala. 14 That the Serpent went upright before
the fall, was the opinion of S. Basil. 16 A story of the easy delivery of a
certain poor woman of Liguria. 19 That the general calamities that lie upon
mankind, came by the transgression of a positive Law, how well accommodate it
is to the scope of Moses. 23 That Paradise was not the whole Earth. 24 The
Apparitions in Paradise called by Theodoret (...). 130
THE DEFENSE OF THE PHILOSOPHIC CABBALA. CHAP. I. 1 Why Heaven and Light are
both made Symbols of the same thing, viz. The World of Life. That (...)
intimate a Trinity. That (...) is a title of the Eternal Wisdom the Son of
God, who is called also (...), and (...) as well in Philo as the New Testament.
That (...) is the holy Ghost. 2 The fit agreement of Plato's Triad with the
Trinity of the present Cabbala. 5 The Pythagorick names or nature of a Monad or
Unite applied to the first days work. 6 What are the upper waters: and that
Souls that descend (...), are the Naides or water Nymphs in Porphyrius. 8 That
Matter of it self is unmovable. R. Bechai his notation of (...) very happily
explained out of Des Carts his Philosophy. That Universal Matter is the second
days Creation, fully made good by the names and property of the number Two. 13
The nature of the third days work set off by the number Three. 16 That the most
learned do agree that the Creation was perfected at once. The notation of (...)
strangely agreeing with the most notorious conclusions of the Cartesian
Philosophy. 19 That the Corporeal world was universally erected into Form and
Motion on the fourth day, is most notably confirmed by the titles and property
of the number Four. The true meanning of the Pythagorick oath, wherein they
swore by him that taught them the mystery of the Tetractys. That the Tetractys
was a Symbol of the whole Philosophic Cabbala, that lay couched under the
Text of Moses. 20 Why Fish and Fowl created in the same day. 23 Why living
creatures were said to be made in the Fifth and Sixth days. 31 And why the whole
Creation was comprehended within the number Six. 135, 136 CHAP. II. 3 The
number Seven a fit Symbol of the Sabbath, or Rest of God. 7 Of Adams rising
out of the ground, as other creatures did. 11 That Pison is from (...) or
(...), and denotes Prudence. The mystical meaning of Havilah. 13 That Gihon is
the same that Nilus, Sihor, or Siris, and that Pison is Ganges. The Justice of
the Aethiopians. That Gihon is from (...), and denotes that virtue. 14 As
Hiddekel, Fortitude. 17 That those expressions of the Souls sleep, and death in
the Body, so frequent amongst the Platonists, were borrowed from the Mosaical
Cabbala. 19 Fallen Angels assimilated to the beasts of the field. The meaning
of those Platonical phrases (...), and the like. That (...) in Platonisme is
the same that (...) in Moses, that signifies Angels as well as God. 22 That
there are three principles in Man, according to Plato's School; (...), and that
this last is Eve. CHAP. III. 1 The Serpent (...) in Pherecydes Syrus. (...),
and (...) names of Spirits haunting Fields and and desolate places. The right
Notation of (...). 13 That Satan upon his tempting Adam, was cast down lower
toward the Earth, with all his Accomplices. 15 Plato's Prophecy of Christ.
The reasonableness of divine Providence in exalting Christ above the highest
Angels. 20 That Adams descension into his Terrestrial Body, was a kind of
death. 22 How incongruous it is to the divine Goodness, Sarcastically to
insult over frail Man fallen into Tragical misery. 24 That it is a great mercy
of God that we are not immortal upon Earth. That (...), and (...) are all one.
A Summary representation of the strength of the whole Philosophic Cabbala.
Pythagoras deemed the son of Apollo, That he was acquainted with the Cabbala of
Moses: That he did miracles; As also Abaris, Empedocles, and Epimenides, being
instructed by him. Plato also deemed the son of Apollo. Socrates his dream
concerning him. That he was learned in the Mosaical Cabbala. The miraculous
power of Plotinus his Soul. Cartesius compared with Bezaliel and Aholiab, and
whether he was inspired or no. The Cabbalists Apology. 172
THE DEFENSE OF THE MORAL CABBALA. CHAP. I. What is meant by Moral, explained
out of Philo. 3 That the Light in the first day improved to the height, is
Adam, in the sixth, Christ, according to the Spirit. 4 In what sense we our
selves may be said to do what God does in us. 5 Why (...) and (...), are
rendered Ignorance and Inquiry. 18 Plato's (...). The Pythagoreans (...),
applied to the Fourth days progress. 22 That Virtue is not an extirpation, but
regulation of the Passions, according to the mind of the Pythagoreans. 24
Plotinus his (...), applied to the Sixth days progress. 26 What the Image of
God is, plainly set down out of S. Paul and Plato. The divine Principle in us,
(...), out of Plotinus. 28 The distinction of the Heavenly and Earthly Man, out
of Philo. 31 The Imposture of still and fixed Melancholy, and that it is not
the true divine Rest, and precious Sabbath of the Soul. A compendious rehearsal
of the whole Allegory of the Six days Creation. p. 194 CHAP. II. The full sense
of that (...), that keeps men from entering into the true Sabbath. 4 The great
necessity of distinguishing the innocent motions of Nature from the suggestions
of Sin. 5 That the growth of a true Christian indeed does not adaequately
depend upon the lips of the Priest. 7 The meaning of This is he that comes by
Water and Blood. 8 The meaning of Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand. The seventh thousand years, the great Sabbatism of the Church of God.
That there will be then frequent converse betwixt Men and Angels. 9 The Tree of
Life, how fitly in the Mystical sense, said to be in the midst of the Garden.
17 A twofold death contracted by Adams disobedience. The Masculine and Feminine
Faculties in Man what they are. Actuating a Body, an Essential operation of the
Soul; and the reason of that so joyful appearance of Eve to the Humane Nature.
209, 210 CHAP. III. A story of a dispute betwixt a Prelate and a Blacksmith,
concerning Adams eating of the Apple. 1 What is meant by the subtilty or deceit
of the Serpent. That Religion wrought to its due height is a very cheerful
state; And it is only the halting and hypocrisy of men that generally have put
so sour and sad a vizard upon it. 5, 6 That worldly Wisdom, not Philosophy,
is perstringed in the Mystery of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil. 10
The meaning of Adams flying after he had found himself naked. 20 Adam, the
Earthly-minded Man, according to Philo. 21 What is meant by Gods clothing Adam
and Eve with hairy Coats in the Mystical sense. 23 (...), or the Paradise of
Luxury. That History in Scripture is wrote very concisely, and therefore admits
of modest and judicious Supplements for clearing the sense. 24 What is meant by
the Cherubim and flaming Sword. Plato's definition of Philosophy, (...). A more
large description of dying to Sin, and of the life of righteousness. That
Christian Religion even as it referres to the external Person of Christ, is
upon no pretense to be annulled till the Conflagration of the world. 224

ERRATA.
Page 39. lin. 24. read sacred. p. 79* l. 19. r. Sensus. p. 87. l. 14. r.
wild. p. 126. l. 26. r. goodly. p. 204. l. 35. r. run. p. 230. l. 34. r.
generous.

FINIS.

