A more exact and perfect RELATION Of the great VICTORY (By Gods providence)
obtained by the Parliaments Forces under command of Sir Tho. Fairfax In Naisby
Field, on Saturday 14. June 1645.

Where His Majesty's Army was utterly routed, and all his Infantry taken, with
many of his Horse, Bag and Baggage, Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, and what
loss was on both sides: With the number of Officers and Soldiers taken
prisoners.

Being a Letter from a Gentleman in Northampton, to his friend in London.

Published by command.

Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings head in the old Bayley. 1645.

A more exact and perfect Relation of the great Victory obtained by the
Parliaments Forces under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax.
SIR,
I Shall very briefly tell you the progress or march of our Army, under the
command of that thrice noble General Sir Thomas Fairfax; for this last week,
that may, as did his motions all tend to the great and glorious Victory
obtained this fourteenth of June. On Monday June 9. the Army moved from Only
and Sherington through Newport-Pagnell unto Stony-Stratford and the Villages
adjacent, and on Wednesday night June 11. came to Wootton two miles from
Northampton, on Thursday to Kislingbury within five miles of Daventry the Kings
head quarter, where the Army lay in the Field, and that night incountred with
some of the Kings Scouts, with loss of two of our men, and taking two of
theirs, which gave the Alarm to the Enemy. About seven at night the King being
hunting in Faulsely Park, and had no word of the so near approach of our
Army, but as soon as they perceived the General drew toward them as if he
intended to fight, they drew all on Burrow hill near Daventry, and in all
haste endeavored to get away; the news being brought to them (as a Countryman
told the General next day) that Ironsides was coming to join with the
Parliaments Army. About five of the clock on Friday morning the Kings Army
began their march out of Daventry, and about nine the Town was quite rid of
them, they having kept on horseback all night, and much running about amongst
the Foot to get the Carriages ready. That Firday morning came
Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell to the Army as they were drawing out to march
after the Kings Army, who took their way toward Leicester: The Horse at the
appearing of the Lieutenant-Generall gave a mighty shout for joy of his coming
to them: A party of our Horse were sent to Daventry to know when and which way
the Kings Army went, where they took diverse prisoners, and that night marched
to Guilsborough about six miles from Harborough the Kings head quarter: the
Van of our Horse and the Rear of his quarter in three miles each of other
until day light appeared, where the Scouts on both sides saluted one the
other, and the Army prepared to march after the Kings to find them out. The
Kings men perceiving our near approach, and that they could not march away so
fast as we pursued, having near 300. Carriages of one kind or other, they
resolved to take the advantage of ground on a large hill in Navesby Field,
about nine miles from Northampton and three from Harborough; and were ready
before we could get to them; who found another Hill about half a mile on the
South of them, equally commodious with theirs, about nine of the clock on
Saturday morning, June 14. we joined battle with them, with much resolutions
on both sides; the Kings right Wing first charging our left, and driving them
off their ground in some disorder, our right Wing doing as much for their left
Wing, the body in the mean while being strongly engaged, our Foot at first
charge gained ground of the enemy, with some loss on the enemies part, but
they being driven on by their horse, at the second charge drove ours to some
disorder, but by the care of the Field-Officers was soon drawn into a body
again, and by this time our left Wing had rallied again, and the whole Army
with one hot charge in all the parts of it did so bestirre them for almost an
hour, that they drove all the Kings men from their Ordnance (which before had
not time to do much execution on either side) and the right Wing following
their advantage they had first got, put the Kings Army to a general Rout, so
that our Army drove them quite out of the Field Horse and Foot, and that with
such speed and earnest prosecution, that no man can say yet, There was one of
the Kings Foot got away, and but few of his Horse in any order, though it be
thought near four thousand of them got out of the Field, but were pursued by
our Horse. By one of the clock in the afternoon there was not a Horse or man
of the Kings Army to be seen in Northamptonshire but the prisoners, the Horse
being in haste gone toward Leicester, and our Foot were gathering the pillage
while our Horse followed the flying Enemy. I faw the field so bestrewed with
Carcases of Horse and Men, as was most sad to behold, because Subjects under
one government, but most happy in this, because they were most of them
professed enemies of God, and the government of his Son: The Field was about a
mile broad where the Battle was fought, and from the outmost Flank of the
right, to the left Wing, took up the whole ground; The bodies lay slain about
four miles in length, the most thick on the hill the Kings men stood on; I
cannot think there was few less then four hundred men slain, and truly I
think not many more, and near 300. Horses: We took at the least four
thousand Prisoners on the ground between Navesby and Harborough, near three
hundred Carriages, whereof twelve of them were Ordnance, one drawn by twenty
six Horses, carrying a twenty four pound bullet; they carried off the ground
over Harborough Bridge (as I was told in Harborough, by one that stood to
watch) but six Carts or Wagons, one whereof was taken in the Town by our
Horse, and the other about a mile off the Town, as I was told; there was many
of the Wagons laden with rich plunder, and others with Arms and Ammunition,
about 50. loads of Muskets, Pikes, Powder, Match, and Bullets, a bundance of
Trunks, which the Soldiers soon emptied, as they did the Wagons that carried
the middle sort of Ammunition Whoores, who were full of money and rich
apparel, there being at least 150 of that tribe, the gentiler sort in Coaches,
whereof I only saw 7. Coaches with Horses taken sluffed with that commodity, and
the common rabble of common vermin on foot, 500. of them at least being taken
and kept with a guard, until order was taken to dispose of them and their
mates, many of these were Irish women, of cruel countenances, some of them were
cat by out Soldiers when they took them, there was taken above 1000. leire
Horses, and many Cows; they had robbed the Counrry of, besides many Horses with
Saddles and Pistols, it falling most on Langdales men, who were most forward in
the charge. Amongst the Prisoners there is about 100. Field Officers, I was
told, five that were sometimes Parliament men, now were Colonels, and known
gentlemen, they are secured by themselves, with others that are known to be
men of quality, one Gentleman of the Bedchamber, that stood next the King, and
cried, hold your hands the King will yield his person, which while they did,
he got away, and so escaped for this time by getting over a Forde or small
Brook that parts two Counties of Leicester and Northamptonshire.

I shall not take upon me to set forth the deportment of the General,
Lieutenant General, and our Major General, all which in their several places
behaved themselves to admiration, nor sing Encomions to the praise of this or
that Colonel, Captain, or Soldier, though I acknowledge many deserve as much
as any pen can express, but shall now tell you impartially our loss on the
place, so near as I can: The truly religious Major General Skippon has
received a wound on the right side with a Musket bullet, piercing his Armor
and body quite through, but as I heard the Chyrurgion say, it had not entered
into the hollow part of his body, it is about five or six inches between the
hole it made going in and coming out, this wound he took in bringing up the
Foot, where they were first disordered, and yet led them up after he was
wounded; there is great hopes of his recovery, and though for present he be
full of pain, he manifests much christian patience, saying, That though he
might groan, he would not grudge under it; and taking my leave of him for that
night, he called on me to beg of God a sanctified use of that affliction for
him; which I pray God we may heartily do, both for him and our selves. Colonel
Jerton is also wounded, and so is Colonel Butler with a brace of bullets in
the thigh, who gallantly charged both the Princes before he came off; Captain
Potter, one of the Commissioners of the Army, is also sore wounded in diverse
places; one Foot Captain of Colonel Pickerings Regiment slain, a Welsh man;
And the Cornet to Colonel Whaleys own Troop, a stout and godly man, as all
that knew him affirm, about 50. Common Soldiers, as near as can be at present
guessed. until they come to bury the dead. Our Horse it is said are within few
miles of Leicester, and the Foot this Saturday night quarter in
Leicestershire, our head Quarter bring Harborough this night, which was the
Kings last our Army nor at all weakened hereby, but by the access of Colonel
Rositers Horse and Dragoones, the Northampton Troops and some Foot, with other
supplies from the Associated Counties, is made more numerous. The General lost
his Headpiece in the midst of the fight, yet had no hurt. The whole Army is
very desirous to prosecute the Victory to the utmost advantage with all
faithfulness, that if it may be, an end may be put to these sad times. Which
is the earnest desire of

15 June, 1645. Your true friend.

FINIS.

