A Lost Ordinance RESTORED:
Or, Eight QUESTIONS in reference to that Principle of the Foundation of the
doctrine of Christ, termed Laying on of hands, (as they are said to be lovingly
propounded to all those Churches of Jesus Christ in London and elsewhere, that
plead or preach for the use thereof; or to any one member of the Lord Jesus
Christ that does so; By Henry Danvers Edm. Chillinden John Freeman John Mason
John Pym John Sturgion Fra: Heckman Tho. Dafen James Pitman John Howard Michael
Cole Robert Rayner Robert Jesss. John Showel Rich. Glene)
Lovingly answered, By one of the least of all Saints, and therefore writes
himself an unworthy servant to the Father of the least of Saints: John More.
FRiends, I love you, and in love do I salute you, wishing unto you grace and
peace, from God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 2. humbly
beseeching you, by the meekness and gentleness of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the expectation of his coming for our eternal rejoicing, think me not your
enemy, if in love I tell you the truth, Gal. 4. 16. For indeed, I travel in
birth with you, enjoying no rest within my self (since in your printed Paper I
understood the search you made after this truth of God) till Christ in this and
all other of his commands be perfectly formed in you, Gal. 4. 19.

Wherefore my Friends, when I had received your Paper, I was marvellously
straightened, till I had in love discharged my duty, 1 Pet. 4. 10. therefore
according to your earnest, and as I judge (in the simplicity of my soul) well
intended desires, I made haste in this my undertaking (from the word of truth,
which you in your Paper have owned, and I doubt not will own, as that rule by
which we must both be directed and judged) according to the ability that God
has given me, 1 Pet. 4. 11. in love to satisfy you according to your caution,
showing my readiness in all possible meekness (as it ought to be in every one
of us) to render a reason to all that shall ask us, 1 Pet. 3. 15. My earnest
prayer therewith to God being for you, that your hearts may be opened, Acts 16.
14. and your understandings enlightened, Ephesians. 1. 18. (by that Spirit of the
almighty God, which only leads into all truth, John 16. 12, 13. through the
hearing of faith, Gal. 3. 2. that works by love, Gal. 5. 6. and is
demonstrate in action, James 2. 14, 18.) that you may not any longer, whilst ye
ought to be teachers and are teachers of others, have need that one teach you
rightly which be the first principles of the doctrine of Christ: and so your
selves need milk, whilst you give unto others strong meat, which stand in need
of milk as well as you; which I in my present judgment do humbly conceive is
not a right dividing of the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Heb. 5. 12. 1 Cor. 3. 2. Heb.
5. 14.

Wherefore as to the Queries (in which your non-satisfaction may be the main
cause why you act thus) I shall affectionately endeavor to give you
satisfaction, and that particularly and briefly, concluding with a short
general exhortation, both to you and all the Churches that profess to love the
Lord Jesus in sincerity, wheresoever it shall come.

Quer. 1 First you desire to know, what you are commanded to say or do, that
you may be found faithful in this point, otherways to be discovered
disobedient unto a command, by the word of God, which is the only director
here, and that which shall be our judge at the last day.

Answ. To this my answer is twofold: First, to what you ought to know or say:
and secondly, what ye ought to do in reference hereunto.

First, If you will not disowne that you here allow of, (viz. the word of God)
as I have confidence you will not, you must of necessity say this is one of
those principles (which are not useless) of the very foundation of the doctrine
of Christ, Heb. 6. 1, 2.

Secondly, To the second, what ye ought to do: I answer, if this be one of the
principles of the foundation, you ought to lay no other foundation then what is
laid, of which Christ Jesus is the corner stone, 1 Cor. 3. 11. compared with
Ephesians. 2. 20.

2. If this be milk for babes, then as ye ought not to cast away the Childrens
bread, Matthew 15. 26. so ought ye not to cast away their milk, but feed them
with it, 1 Cor. 3. 2.

Thirdly, In sum, these things ye ought to say, to teach, to do, as a principle
in the foundation of the doctrine of Christ, otherways ye go about to lay
another foundation than what is laid; which is neither to be added to or taken
from, under the penalty of a sad and dreadful soulastonishing curse, Rev. 22.
18. Wherefore whosoever he be that lays a foundation with more principles
adding thereto, lays not the same, but another foundation, and woe be unto him,
Rev. 22. 18. And whosoever he be that shall lay a foundation with less
principles, taking from them (either Christ the chief Pillar or any other
pillar or principle of the foundation lays not the same foundation, but
another, and woe be unto him, Rev. 22. 19.

Quer. 2 Secondly, you desire to know some place in the word of God (if we know
of any, say you) where our Lord Jesus Christ or any of his Apostles or
Disciples preached this doctrine, viz. that Baptized believers ought to
practice, or submit unto laying on of hands.

Answ. 2. To this I answer, that from what has been already said, is
sufficiently proved, not only the teaching it, but also a teaching it as a
foundation-principle of Christ's doctrine, which was also practiced by baptized
believers with breaking of bread and prayer, Act. 21. 41.

Secondly, If it be so, as it is manifest it is, that this not only belongs to
the Doctrine of Christ, but it is also a principle in the very foundation or
groundwork of that doctrine, Heb. 5. 12. Heb. 6. 1, 2. then are they so
forward in teaching it, that they teach, whosoever transgresses and abides
not in it, has not God, 2 John 9 verse. compared with Heb. 6. 1, 2. and 1 Timothy
6. 3, 4, 5.

Thirdly, If it be so that this appertains to the doctrine of Christ, then I
say, they do not barely teach it, but also teach it to them to whom they teach
it, to teach it others, that may teach it others, 1 Timothy 4. 16. compared with 2 Timothy 3. 14. and 2. 2.

Quer. 3. You say that the reason of this Querie is, the desire of many that
baptized believers should require hands to be laid on them; Therefore you
desire of them to show you some place of Scripture (if they know any) that does
express such a behavior either of the Administrator, or the person on whom
hands were laid.

Answ. 3. To this I answer, if baptized believers are babes in Christ, they
have need of milk, Heb. 5. 13, 12. and if this be milk for them, as it is
evident it is, comparing Heb. 6. 1, 2. with 5. 12. then are they taught in
Scripture to desire it, 1 Pet. 2. 2.

Quer. 4. You desire to know, if they can tell of any of the servants of Christ
that ever did reprove or blame any sort of people, whether baptized or not,
because laying on of hands was not practiced or submitted unto by them: and the
ground of this you say is our blaming or reproving them that do not submit.

Answ. 4. To this I answer, I do not find that for the neglect of this duty
they reproved any, neither had we not occasion by their omitting of the duty,
should we, wherefore notwithstanding they had no occasion to blame or reprove
in this particular, and so did it not; yet having occasion, when the time
comes of Apostacy forespoken of, we not only may, but must, 2 Timothy 4. 2, 3,
4. Ephesians. 5. 13.

Quer. 5. You desire to know if any of them can inform you, which of all the
laying on of hands in Scripture mentioned, whether Luke 21. 12. Mark 16. 18.
Act. 9. 17. Act. 8. 17. Act. 28. 8. Act. 6. 6. Act. 13. 3. 1 Timothy 1. 4, 14.
Act. 8. 17. is called by Christ or his Apostles the foundation-principle, or
the beginning doctrine by some text in Scripture, seeing they dister one from
another, either in the qualifications of the administrators or in persons on
whom hands were laid, sometimes it being before baptism, sometimes after
baptism, sometimes to be brought before Rulers, sometimes to heal the sick,
sometimes to cure the blind, sometimes to set men apart to administer temporal
things, sometimes to set men apart to administer spiritual things, sometimes
that men might be gifted, sometimes by men gifted to give the holy Ghost to
them that were not set apart to Offices, as many of themselves say (say you)
from Act. 8. 17.

Answ. 5. To this I Answer briefly, that the knowledge of all of these is
proper to all, Romans 15. 4. but the practice of that which is the
foundation-Principle, is that particularly of gifting to be communicated or
dispensed unto every baptized believer, as milk for them whilst Babes, Act. 19.
5, 6. Act. 8. 16, 17. compared with Heb. 5. 12, 13. and 6, 1, 2.

Quer. 6. You desire to know, (seeing that Heb. 6. 2. speaks of the laying on
of hands as plural, as the Doctrine of baptismes; and does not speak of any one
laying on of hands particularly nor any other distinction, neither of any end,
purpose, or event) what safety is it for any man to conclude, that this in
Hebrews is meant but of one of them only?

Answ. 6. To this, I Answer you, first of all, as our Lord and Master Jesus
Christ answered the chief Priests, and Scribes, and Elders, as he was walking
in the Temple at Jerusalem, Mark 11. 28, 29, 30. Saying, I will ask you one
question, which whether you answer me or no, I will proceed to the further
discovery of the safety of concluding that this in Heb. 6. 2. is meant but of
one of these only in the practice, as to be ministered as milk for Babes, and
likewise of that one of gifting.

Quer. Answ. First, Then how know ye (seeing Heb. 6. 2. speaks of Baptismes as
plural, as well as laying on of hands, and does not speak of any one baptism
particularly, nor any other distinction, neither any end, purpose, or event,
more then laying on of hands does, That it is safe for any one to conclude,
that it is meant but of one of them particularly, and that of that you practice?

Answ. 2. Secondly, That this is meant (particularly) as milk for Babes, but
one of them, and that of this one of gifting, I thus prove.

First, That in Luke 21. 12. before mentioned, is no foundation-Principle to be
practiced by the Servants of Christ as milk for babes, as you may see if you
look into it.

Secondly, That in Mark. 16. 18. and Acts 28. 8. and 19. 17. is no more in the
practice milk for babes, then the former; but rather meat for strong men, that
were to go forth, and after Christ, first to divulge the Gospel of peace,
whereby they were to be confirmed as Christians, to deliver in truth the word
of God, Act. 2. 22. Heb. 6. 3. 4.

Thirdly, That in Act. 6. 6. is no more here meant as aforesaid, then either of
the former to be this milk for babes; because it properly appertains to
particular men, set apart to particular Offices for the well being of the
Church of Christ, but this as milk to all as babes in Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Heb.
5. 12. and 6. 1, 2. and 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2.

Fourthly, That in Act. 13. 3. is no more here meant as aforesaid to be milk
for babes, or particularly a foundation-Principle of the doctrine of Christ,
then any of the former; because it no more appertains unto babes, but strong
men, even those spoken of in Heb. 5. 14. who by reason of use, had their senses
exercised in discerning good or evil, who were made sit to be employed in the
work of the ministry, therefore to be separated after that manner thereunto;
such I say, as were gone beyond these spoken of in Heb. 5. 12. being in a
capacity of teaching others, having no need of laying again in them the
foundation of the Doctrine of Christ, therefore neither can this be that meant
in Heb. 6. 2. as the foundation or beginning principle which is milk for babes,
Heb. 5. 12, 13. and 6. 1, 2.

Fifthly, and lastly, seeing none of these as aforesaid can be that laying on
of hands here meant, and this of gifting 1 Timothy 4. 14. Act. 19. 6. Act. 8. 17.
may for the reasons following, it will be safe for all men to conclude, that
this in Hebrews is meant (as aforesaid, which is practically) but of one of
them only, and that of gifting.

First, Because every babe is capable hereof, which they are not of the former.

Secondly, Because every babe has need thereof, which they have not of the
former.

Thirdly, Because we find examples for it, Act. 19. 6. Act. 8. 17. as to babes
with the annexion of the reward of the submission.

Quer. 7. Seeing, say you, many draw inferences or deductions (as they call
them) from Heb. 6. 2. to maintain one laying on of hands only, and none of
them upon the forementioned considerations, neither in the end, purpose, or
event, therefore we desire to know, whether you judge it a command of our Lord
Christ, that any man's inference or deduction should be of binding force in
point of faith or obedience.

Answ. 7. To this I answer, that I have now hopes you will be fully satisfied
(as well as I) and them also that occasioned your writing, of the probability
both of the end, purpose, and event of the last of these, of being both
expected and enjoyed.

Secondly, To the second part of your Quere; If there be occasion for to answer
it, I judge not that any man's inference or deduction, as you term it from one
phrase of Scripture, should be so, father then other Scriptures, comparing
spritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 12, 13. do clearly infer the same.

Quer. 8. You desire to know of them, what they will refer you to, as a sure
rule to try inferences or deductions by, because the best of men are liable to
mistakes.

Answ. 8. To this I answer again, to the word of truth, wherein we are directed
by the Spirit of truth, John 16. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 8, 10. received from God
through the laying on of hands, Act. 19. 6. without which Spirit ye can do
nothing, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. Wherefore I shall in the name of Jesus Christ, Son
of the eternal God, and elder brother to the Saints of God, with all meekness
humbly entreat you to take into serious consideration the Scriptures I have
inserted, and let me beg your thoughts upon them, manifesting thereby the
reality of what you have professed in your paper, viz. your unfeigned search
after the truth as it is in the doctrine of Jesus: consider these, I say, I
have inserted, those I shall insert, with all others to the aforesaid purpose
you (Berean-like) may, and ought to search for, Act. 17. 11. John 5. 39. and be
persuaded in love to submit unto the will of God in this particular, which is
his approved-of way; for his bestowing of his Spirit upon us, Act. 8. 17. in
what measure he shall please, 1 Cor. 12. 11. to the searching out of all
things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. without which it is
impossible to know them, 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12. Wherefore if you have any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort in love, if the least fellowship of the
Spirit, if any bowels of mercy, fulfill ye my joy, by being like minded with us
in practicing of all the commands of all the commands of our Lord and Master
Jesus Christ, that you with us may be his friends indeed, John 15. 14. This in
love I leave with you, and proceed to a general Exhortation.

A General Exhortation to all Baptized Churches, not yet under the practice,
according to the rule of the word of God, as a foundation-principle of the
Doctrine of Christ, of laying on of hands.
IN the the name of the eternal God, do I beseech you, O ye baptized Churches,
to the Law and to the testimonies, Isa. 8. 23. and there examine you your
practices, trying, I say, if you be in the faith or no, 2 Cor. 13. 5. which
that you may do, as I have in love exhorted the world, in a general exhortation
about a year ago; so with the same affection, and much more, do I exhort you to
examine your principles, or foundation upon which you build that fabric, which
you call the temples of the most high God; if it be right, it is agreeable to
the rule and measure of the word, without adding or diminishing, which is the
rule and square, without which we may not, nay we cannot build the house of
God, 1 Cor. 3. 11. compared with Ephesians. 2. 20. 2. Cor. 10. 13, 14, 15. Rev. 11.
1. and 21. 15. Heb. 8. 5. Wherefore with all earnestness of spirit, I beseech
you take up the rule, or read the word of God, and measure by way of
examination your foundation; since if it be not the foundation already laid in
the word of truth, it is not the foundation of Christianity, since other
foundation can no man lay then what is laid, of which Christ Jesus is the chief
corner stone, 1 Cor. 3. 11. with Ephesians. 2. 30. Wherefore examine if you have laid
your foundation with this cornerstone, and repentance from dead works, faith
toward God, baptisms, laying on of hands, resurrection from the dead, and
eternal judgment as principles, Heb. 6. 1, 2. if not, know ye, according to
the discovery of the word of truth, that whether ye leave out the chief
cornerstone or principle, or whether ye leave out repentance from dead works,
or baptisms, or laying on of hands, or any other; ye thus teaching and
practsing, alter the foundation of the doctrine of Christ, as much as in you
lies: but you cannot alter it, it is not his but your own. Nevertheless, with
the Apostle, I have confidence concerning you, that ye will do the things
commanded us of God, 2 These. 3. 4. by Christ and them that heard him, Heb. 2.
3. although as yet ye do them but in part, wherefore consider I pray you,
first, that he which offends in one point, is guilty of all, James 2. 10.

2. That they are liars, whosoever they be, and how fairly soever they pretend,
that keep not the commands of God; and the truth is not in them, 1 John 2. 4.

Wherefore what shall we think of some that say they are Christians, and are
not built up upon the foundation of the doctrine of Christ? Rev. 3. 9.

Now therefore seeing you have left out but one Principle of this foundation,
and cannot truly build the house of God without it, because upon no other but
its own, take to your selves this principle of Laying on of hands as milk for
babes, Heb, 5. 12, 13. and 6. 1, 2. of so much use, and so great concernment to
the Saints of God as it is, it being God's ordinary way of bestowing gifts upon
them, Acts 8. 17, 18. and 19. 6. Wherefore I beseech you that none of you
neglect any longer that a gift should be given you by the Laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 1. 14. but submitting thereunto, expect that
some useful gift or gifts should be given you to profit withal, as many of your
friends have both expected, and found made good unto them, as they also had in
Acts 19. 6. enjoying the gifts of knowledge, faith, or prophecy; and though
not of tongues, which served for signs, 1 Cor. 14. 22. yet of useful gifts for
the Church of God to profit withal, according to 1 Cor. 12. 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
which place consider.

Wherefore, would we have our knowledge increased, our faith increased, our
gifts enlarged, and we our selves vindicated from being justly charged with
being disobeyers of the Commands of God, takers away of the childrens milk,
layers aside of one of the Principles of the foundation of Gods house, which we
should build withal; which before we have laid, we cannot go on unto
perfection, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Let us all with joint consent own the foundation of
Christ's doctrine; and own it so, that whoever brings any other, and not the
same, whether added to or diminished from, let us not countenance him, by
receiving of him into our houses, or bidding of him God speed, 2 John 10. 11.
for he comes under the curse, Rev. 22. 18, 19.

Therefore, O my friends, I humbly beg you to consider the dangerous
consequence of altering the foundation that God himself has laid, by taking
from, or adding to the same foundation; hoping and praying to God the Father,
through our Lord Christ, for a practical answer, through his enabling of you,
with readiness and willingness to close herewith, that you may indeed be the
people of the Lord our righteousness, Psalm. 110. 3. Joh. 15. 14. I rest,

A cordial friend to you, and all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and in
the truth thereof keep his commandments, wheresoever they be. John More.

FINIS.
London, Printed for Richard Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great Northdoor. 1653.


