THE CRYING SIN OF ENGLAND, Of not Caring for the POOR.

WHEREIN Enclosure, viz. such as does unpeople Towns, and uncorn Fields, is
Arraigned, Convicted, and Condemned by the Word of God.

Being the chief Heads of two SERMONS, Preached at the Lecture at Lutterworth
in Leichestershire in May last, and now published in love to CHRIST, his
Country, and the POOR.

By JOHN MOORE, Minister of Knaptoft in Liecester-Shire.

Luke 16. 14. And the Pharisees also who were covetous, heard all these things,
and they derided him.

London, Printed by T. M. for Antony Williamson, at the Queens Arms in Paul's
Church Yard, 1653.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth
of ENGLAND.
MAy it please your Honors, to pardon my boldness in presenting these lines
unto your Honorable Assembly: Because the love to our Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, and to his poor Members has set it upon my spirit to make my address
unto your Honors. For who knows (Ester 4. 14.) Whether ye are come to the
rule of this Nation for such a time as this: even to cast out that- Judas-like
spirit amongst us; Of not caring for the Poor? I durst hold my peace no longer;
because I found none to plead the Cause of the Poor and Needy, against these
Oppressors, set forth to the life in these Papers. I may be blamed by your
Honors, I have done it so bunglingly; but shamed I ought not to be, because I
have done my best in a good cause, even Christ's cause and his poore's, when
abler men would not meddle. True is that of Solomon, Prove. 14-20. The poor is
hated even of his own neighbor (has hardly one good man or neighbor to speak
or plead for him) but the rich has many friends. I am persuaded Christ stands
and looks on your Honorable Assembly what you will do for him and his poor
Members; and I hope it is none of your least design, To take care of the poor,
to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free. Isa. 58.6. I beseech your Honors ever to remember that
divine truth, Prove 29.7. The righteous considers the cause of the poor, but
the wicked regards not to know it. I bow my knee to the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye in every thing may show your selves to be the friends of
the Bridegroom and Bride Chamber too, and that this Honorable Assembly may be
styled the poor man's Friend; so shall the blessing of the poor, who are ready
to perish come upon you, Job. 29.12.13. And Christ will take it kindly as done
unto himself, Matthew. 25.40. In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least
of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. I strive to God for your Honors
in my prayers, that he would make you serviceable to God, his Church, the
Public, and the Poor, in your generations, and am

Your Honors Humble Servant, and the Churches in Christ Jesus, JOHN MOORE,
Minister of the Church of Knaptoft.

JOHN Chap. 12. ver. 6. This he said, not that he cared for the Poor.


WE have here to do with Judas, an Hypocrite, a Traitor, a Devil, both to his
Master Christ and his Poor members. An Hypocrite to his Master, he kissed him,
when he would have killed him, Matthew. 26.49. To his Poor members, he pretends
here giving to the poor, when he cared not for the poor. A Traitor to both; he
betraies one, Luke 22.48. and is a thief to the other, John 12.6. and no less
then a Devil to either. To his Master, Joh. 6.70. Have I not chosen twelve, and
one of you is a Devil? to his poor members a child of the Devil, 1 John 3. 10.
because he loves not his poor brother. We have nothing to do here with Judas as
he was all these to his Master Christ, though my soul be like Ezekiels roll of
a book, full of lamentation, mourning, and woe, to see every where such Ezech.
2. 10.
a brood of Judasses, Hypocrites, Traitors, Devils to Jesus Christ the Lord of
Glory.

This he said, not that he cared for the poor, etc. Here you see Judas has the
poor in his mouth, but not in his heart. Its the Character of a Judas then to
love a little in word and tongue, but not in truth and indeed, 1 John 3.18.
would you have a Judas stigmatized* burn the Hypocrite in his forehead with
this inscription in Capital letters, He cares not for the poor. Take notice,
this is the brand, that is set upon the stinking goats, by which Christ will
discover them at the great day; They care not for the poor. Matthew. 25. 35, 36,
37, etc. This is the mark set upon Judas the Son of perdition: He cared not for
the poor. What I intend, and this Scripture plainly speaks, and this hard
hearted Nation, and age has need of, is this Doctrine.

That they are not ordinary sinners, but Judas like sinners, that care not for
the poor. It is no little sin, but a wrath provoking sin, not to care for the
poor; yea, God, and Christ care not for those Nations, those places, those
persons that care not for the poor. And therefore it must be the care of the
Ministers of Jesus Christ to preach and pray more against this sin, of not
caring for the poor, then ever they have done. We shall open the text, and so
the doctrine. Judas is not here taxed for doing injury, or wrong to the poor,
for oppressing, or vexing them, for taking away their means of subsistence, or
turning them out of their houses, or taking away their Tradings, and treading
them under foot: he is worse then a Judas that is so barbarous, Judas is barely
taxed for not caring for the poor.

But I know it will be questioned, what poor? who are those poor we must care
for? like him in the Gospel, Luke 10.29. that was loath to love his neighbor
as himself, who presently falls a questioning Jesus, and who is my neighbor?
and so, who are these poor? A mercieless miser has so many tricks, evasions,
distinctions, put offs to keep his purse strings tied, his cubbord shut, his
garments to himself, and his charity at home, that he would make you believe
that there is hardly such a poor man living in the World, that he is bound to
take care of. What poor is meant then? Jesus Christ gave an answer to him that
could not find out a poor neighbor to love as himself, in the parable Luke 10.
30, 31, 32, 33, 34, etc. The drift of which parable being this, that we must
take care of every poor neighbor that stands in need of our help. Jesus Christ
tells us what poor we must care for, upon pain of proceeding in Judgment
against us at the great day, where we shall be arraigned, convicted, sentenced,
and execution done upon us too, merely for not caring for the poor, Matthew. 25.
ver. 35. to the end of the Chapt. The poor he there names, are the hungry,
thirsty, stranger, naked, sick, imprisoned, etc. the poor are such as are
destitue of substance, of friends, of health, of help, of limbs, of house, of
harbor; the widow, and fatherless, etc. I, but there are so many wicked poor!
Its true, there are good poor, and wicked poor: Gods poor, and the Devils poor:
the Devils poor are those whom their own idleness, ill husbandry, lewdness, or
looseness of life has made poor; or such as are as poor in goodness, as in
goods; in grace, as in purse. Gods poor are those whom Divine providence has
made poor, both for the trial of their patience, and our charity. These though
they are poor in this World, yet they are rich in faith. For answer then: the
Spirt of God teaches us to distinguish of poor, but to leave no poor out of
our care, Galat. 6. 10. Let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who
are of the household of Faith. We must take care of all, but especially before
all others, and above al others, of those who are of the household of Faith. So
then, we must take care of the wicked poor as they are our own flesh: Isaiah
58.7. To deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor, that are
cast out, to thy house; when thou see the naked, that thou cover him; and
that thou hide not thy self from thy own flesh. We must take care for them,
then as they are our natural kindred, as they are men, and women, and not be
cruel to our own flesh, but nourish it, and cherish it, Ephesians. 5.26. There is
nothing of humanity, nothing of man in that person, that has not bowels to
preserve mankind from perishing. Solomon tells us, Proverbs 22. 2: The rich and
the poor meet together, the Lord is maker of them all: the Lord made them both,
and the Lord made them both to live together, Matthew. 26. 11. and therefore to
live together, that the rich might help the poor, Deuteronomy. 15. 11. and the Lord
did not only make them as men, but as rich men and poor men; and he that made
thee rich, and him poor, might have made thee poor, and him rich. And therefore
we must do good unto all, etc. especially to the faithful. The faithful are of
our spiritual kindred, born of the same spirit. The nearness, and dearness of
the Saints one to another will appear in their oneness. For as there is oneness
betwixt Christ and Christians, so betwixt Christians and Christians, Ephesians.
4.4.5.6 There is one body, and one spirit, even as we are called in one hope of
your calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all,
etc. All the household of the faithful are all one. One body, even fellow
members of that mystical body, whereof Jesus Christ is the head: one Spirit,
all of them enlivened, and enlightened by the same Spirit. One hope of the
common Salvation of Jesus, Jude 3. One Lord in the head, one Faith in the
heart: one Baptism in the face, and profession. One God, and Father of all;
even the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead, 1 Peter 1.1.3. The faithful are all children of the
same Father, and every one that loves him that begat, loves him that is
begotten, 1 John 5.1. We are called to an especial care of the faithful,
because children of our Heavenly Father, because fellow members of our Lord
Jesus, because we are all one in Christ Jesus, Galat. 3. 28. As we must provide
for our own, especially those of our own house, 1 Timothy 5. 8. So must we do good
unto all, especially them that are of the household of Faith. Oh let us put
these poor into our bosoms, let these poor lie next to God our Father in our
hearts, and next to Jesus Christ in our nearest, and dearest affections:
because they are Gods, and because they are Christ's. Here be that has two
coats, let him impart to him that has none, and he that has meat let him do
likewise, Luke 3. 11. Woe be to him that has such good poor neighbors, and
can eat his morsels alone, and shall not warm them with the fleece of his
Sheep, Job 31. ver. 17, to the 24. A Christian indeed cannot but take care of
Gods family, as well as of his own family; of Gods children, as well of his
own children; of Gods servants, as well as his own servants; here is the
difference indeed Charity begins at home, but it does not tarry at home.

But must we give to Beggars?

Questionless we must. 1 Its Christ's precept, Matthew. 5.24. Give to him that
asks thee, etc. Secondly, Christ heals a Beggar, and never reproves him for
begging, Joh. 9.8. Thirdly, good Lazarus was a Beggar at the rich man's gate,
and he is in hell that denied him the crumbs, or scraps that fell from his
Table, that was left after meals. But David speaks Psalm. 37.25. I have been
young, and now am old, yet I have never seen the righteous forsaken, nor his
seed begging bread; as though there were no good Beggars. David here speaks out
of his own experience* A good King he was in Israel, to see put in execution
Gods commands for the care of the poor, and to keep them himself. Deuteronomy.
15.9.10.11. that there might be no Beggar in Israel. A true hearted Israelite
is merciful as his Father in Heaven is merciful, and is ready to give where he
knows there is need, before they ask, especially to the Saints, and the seed of
the Saints. Oh these melt them all into bowels. I do not here plead for
Beggars. For it is the shame of a well governed Common Wealth, to suffer so
many idle Beggars, and Rogues, and Vagrants to wander up and down out of a
calling. It is a greater shame for any Christian Society, City, or Town then,
to take no more care for the poor, then that they be forced to beg. But how
great a shame is it for a Gospel Magistracy not to suppress Make-beggers,
which make such swarms of Beggars in Countries, Cities, and Towns? And here I
cannot but cry aloud, and spare not, and lift up my voice like a Trumpet, and
tell these Make-beggers their sins, and these greedy Gripes their
transgressions, that care not how many Beggars they make, so themselves may be
Gentlemen; nor how many poor they make, so themselves may be rich. I mean the
unsociable, covetous, cruel brood of those wretches, that by their Enclosure
do unpeople Towns, and uncorn fields: who fall under the Prophets woe, Isaiah
5.8. that join house to house, and field to field, till there be no place, that
they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth, and be rid of all the poor;
Although Jesus Christ says, Joh. 12. 8. The poor you have always with you: I
wish I could cry so loud in their ears, that I could awake their consciences to
repentance, and restitution, and that they might do so no more: or that I might
cry so loud in the ears of the Supreme Magistrate, that they may loose the
bands of wickedness, and undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free,
and break every yoke, that bread may be dealt to the hungry, and that they
bring the poor, into houses, that are cast out; and that the naked may be
covered, Isai 58.6, 7. I shall (God willing) hold out these to the World to be
notorious Make-Beggers, as woeful experience, and my whole Country of
Leichestershire, with most of the Inland Counties can witness with me. Question
many of our Beggars, that go from door to door, with wife and children after
them, Where they dwell, and why they go a begging. Alas master, (say they) we
were forced out of such a Town when it was enclosed, and since we have
continued a generation of Beggars. When we take a view of the multitude of poor
in Market Towns, and fielden Towns, we see how these poor wretches were driven
out of their hive, their honey taken away. I mean their trade of plowing by
such enclosure, and glad were they to find an old house any where to put their
heads in, where they might have any employment to keep themselves, and family
alive. But to deal punctually with them (for they are ashamed of their
make-beggers trade) I must charge them home. They make four sorts of people
Beggars: first the Tennant. Secondly the Cottier. Thirdly, the children of
both. Fourthly, all those that shall stand in their way to hinder their
uncharitable, yea unjust designs. But they will plead, its besides their
intention to make beggars. Answer, It may be, it is not the end of the workman,
but sure I am, it is the end of the work of such enclosure. I shall now proceed
to my charge. For the three first sort they make Beggars. I shall begin with
them first, and so come to the fourth. And here for a ground work we must lay
this undeniable truth: viz. that the great Manufacture and Trade of
Leichestershire, and many (if not most) of the Inland Counties, is tillage. Its
the plow whereby Tennants, Cottyers, and their children were set a work, and
lived very happily, and comfortably, before there was so much of such
Enclosure: Other Countyes have other Manifactures and trading for the
commonalty, we tillage, and the plow, whereby we breed multitudes of hard men,
and Horses for the service of the Common Wealth, if need be; whereby we also
send forth abundance of all manner of corn, and grain, and pease-fed cattle to
the City to victual our Shipping at Sea, and to Countries round about us: all
fed with the Plow in the common Fields. First, they make Beggars of Tennants
upon such Enclosure, for the Tennant forthwith is discharged of tillage, and
farm, to seek a living he knows not where. Truly it would make a charitable
heart bleed to come now into our Markets, where we are now so busy upon such
Enclosures, in Leichestershire; where the Market is full of inquiry, and
complaint of such Tennants to all they meet, Can you help me to a farm, or a
little land to employ my team? I am discharged, and if I sell my Horses, and
Cattle, I shall never get a team again, or so many Milk-cowes to maintain my
families. Alas, all my money will be spent, that I shall sell them for, ere I
shall hear of any land to be set. And in some Towns there is fourteen, sixteen,
or twenty Tennants discharged of plowing, all in this sad condition, besides
many other teams, and farms of freeholders laid down in the same Towns. And
herein is the misery of the Tennant the greater, Those that have thus uncorned
the said Towns, and turned all into pasture, and discharged their Tennants,
these thus enclosed wretches become Tennants themselves, and rent land in the
open fields round about them, or near unto them, to maintain their own families
with corn, and their horses with feeding, for which l^nd they give (being able
to pay it out of their enclosed grounds) excessive rates, which if the poor
Tennant should give, heand his must forthwith come to beggary. So that they do
not only turn these poor Tennants out of enclosed Towns, but also rent those
farms and that land in the common fields, which the poor Tennants else might
have rented at an easier rate; so that in the conclusion most of these Tennants
become Cottiers. And now in the second place, we shall truly show you how they
make Cottiers Beggars.

In these enclosed Towns in laying down the plow, and taking away the crop of
corn, how many crops do they rob the poor Cottier of? This poor man had a crop
and income in every tilth of the plow, in the following tilth, in the stirring
tilth, in the airing up tilth, in the sowing tilth; he had his income in the
manuring, weeding, mowing, inning, gleaning, and threshing of the corn. And now
alas, says the poor Cottier, there is no work for me; I need not be thrust out
of the Town, I must be gone where I may get my living, and if I can get no
house else where, I, and mine must starve. And hence it comes to pass, that the
open fielden Towns have above double the Number of Cottiers they had wont to
have, so that they cannot live one by another, and so put the fielden Towns to
vast expenses in caring for those poor, that these Enclosures have made: and
what enquiring every where is there of these poor Cottiers (after the Town is
enclosed) to get an house in any place, where they may have work? Thirdly, such
enclosure make Beggars of the children both of Tennants, and Cottiers; the
children of both usually become servants to the husbandman, and brought up at
the plow, etc. But now in such enclosed Towns, where there were kept 30, 40,
50. servants, there is not above three, or four. Hence the droves of poor
children, when they are reproved for begging, are complaining, we would
willingly work, if any would set us on work. In brief, is it not palpable, that
the main inducement to such enclosure is filthy lucre, and to be rid of
Tennants, Poor, and Servants? so far are they from caring for the poor, and in
stead of bringing them into their houses, to rid them of their houses. As for
example, they being hot upon such enclosure in a Town I am well acquainted
with, One of the inhabitants gave this reason why they must do it, in these
words viz. The poor increase like fleas, and lice, and these vermin will eat
us up unless we enclose: And surely it was plain dealing, for without question
he spoke the sense of most of the rest. But they will plead, when we in close,
we give somewhat to the poor. Answer. Just Judas like, the poot was as much
respected by Judas as any of them. This they say, not that they care for the
poor. It is as unseemly for these to take the Name of the poor in their mouths,
as it was for Judas. They talk much of the poor, but they do nothing to the
purpose in respect of that they rob them of: and usually they give to the poor
with one hand, and take it away with the other, and their gratuity usually, as
it reaches but a few, and in some small trifle; so it lasts but for a while.
For depopulation comes by degrees, and the next generation usually knows
neither Tennant, nor Cottier in such enclosed places, for Towns we must call
them no longer.

I, but they plead further, we get a great deal of corn in pasture grounds. I
grant they may get five, or six crops, once in thirty, or forty years: but
where are those every years crops, and all those Tennants, Cottiers, and
servants that were wont to be kept there? let them answer this question.

I, but yet they have another Plea, Albeit this enclosure, there is now
abundance of Corn, and that very cheap too.

Answ. Blessed be the God of the Poor that has of his goodness prepared for
them, Psalm. 68.10. and that the valleys (these two years) have been covered
with corn, they shout for joy, they also sing, Psalm. 65.13. Its no thanks to
them that we have plenty; Oh that this abundance of all manner of provisions
might make poor and rich abound in thankfulness, duty, obedience to the Father
of all our Mercies, from whom we have every good thing. But if the Lord should
slack his hand but a little, and withold this more then usual increase of
Corn from us; it is such enclosure would make it a flat famine; as within these
few years, what crying for bread, and complaining in our streets of such
enclosure? if then, what will become of us now? since when there has been so
much enclosed, and even at this present they are so mad upon it, as though it
was their very project one time or other to famish the poor.

But I proceed to the fourth sort, which they make beggars, and they are those
honest hearts, who out of a tender conscience take so much care for the poor,
as they dare not comply with them in their uncharitable Designs, nor consent to
such enclosure: Against these they fret and storm, and tell them in plain
terms, they will undo them, and make them beggars; and so they do indeed, in
bringing multiplicity of Law Suites, Actions of Trespass, for nothing, or at
least for trifles, as for coming over their ground, etc. and vex them all with
long tedious Suites in Chancery, to force them to do against their consciences;
which they have brought to pass too often times: upon which some Parties have
grown distracted, and others forced thus to consent, have never lived a
comfortable hour after all the days of their lives. Oh this is a cruel
Oppression, and not to be suffered in a Land of Uprightness, and yet is done in
the face of the Sun. Alas, how many amongst us are now persecuted in this
manner, because they would keep Faith and a good Conscience pure, and
unspotted, both before God and man? and are threatened to be undone utterly,
except the Lord raise them up Deliverers; for which I bow my knees to the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. But the Lord speaks to these by the Prophet
Micah, chap. 2. ver. 1, 2, 3. Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil
upon their beds: When the morning is light they practice it, because it is in
the power of their hand; and they covet fields, and take them by violence, and
houses, and take them away: So they oppress a man and his house, even a man and
his heritage. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold against this Family do I
devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks. Let them read their
dolful Lamentation, as it is called in the subsequent verse. I must tell these
Make-beggers, that have such a spirit as is spoken, Amos 2.6, 7. That sell the
Righteous for Silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes, that pant after the
dust of the earth upon the head of the poor; that is, would be rid of all poor,
good poor, and bad poor too, for profit and a little gain; and that do so pant,
thirst, and are inflamed with Covetousness, that filthy Lucre must be had upon
the head of the poor, though they break the head, yea the very heart of the
poor; they usually upon such enclosure treble the price of their Land; and this
they get by flaying the skin off the poor. They get it (they shall one day give
an account how) out of the hide of the poor Tenant, Cottier, and poor servant.
Yea, I must tell these, that thus sell the poor for trifles, That I am
suspicious they will sell their God for Gold, and Judas like, their Christ to
fill the bag; their profession is nothing, if they care not for the poor: A
Gospel spirit is a giving spirit, etc.

Thus having showed what poor we must care for; as that also, those that do
unpeople Towns, and uncorn Fields, are so far from caring for the poor, that
they make beggars of the poor. I will briefly hold out what is meant by caring
for the poor.

Christ shows us what it is to care for the poor, in that Parable Luke 10.
from ver. 30 to the end of ver. 37. where he tells us, of a man in misery, that
had fallen amongst Thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him,
leaving him half dead: The Priest and Levite they saw him, and passed by him,
as though it nothing concernned them, and had no bowels toward him; he might
have been starved there, and might have perished of his wounds: but the good
Samaritane is said, ver. 34 to take care of him: Why? because ver. 33, 34, 35
When he saw him he had compassion on him, and went to him and bound up his
wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him
to an Inn, and took care of him; And on the morrow when he departed, he took
out two pence and gave to the Host, and said unto him, Take care of him, and
whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee. You see
here what it is to take care of the poor, viz. to have such compassion on them,
as to provide for them in their miseries, to relieve their wants, to make a
supply of what they stand in need of, etc. but Judas, nor the former
Make-beggers, which I especially aim at in this Discourse, are not of this
Spirit.

This he said, not that he cared for the poor. We shall now lay down some
Arguments to show you the greatness of this evil, of not caring for the poor. I
will but name what was delivered at large.

: For love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God, and knows
God, 1 John 4.7. A churl and a Misers name, will hardly be found in the Book
of Life. This is a sweet evidence of such as have a true Call into the state of
Grace; 1 John 3.14. We know we have passed from death to life, because we love
the brethren. This is not the cause of our passing from death to life, but the
cause of our knowledge thereof, and a true mark whereby we know it; and he that
loves not his brother abides in death; that is, has no evidence that he has
the life of the Spirit, and the life of Christ in him.

Matthew. 5. 42. 19.21 5.44, 45
spirit; giving to the poor, forgiving our enemies. A Gospel spirit is a
self-denying spirit, Matthew. 16.24. They look not every man at his own things,
but every man also at the things of others, Phil. 2.4 The care of their own
Family, does not shoulder out Gods Family. A Gospel spirit will be as careful
for to put somewhat into Christ's Treasury, as into his own Treasury; so far is
he from robbing Christ's Treasury (the poor) to fill his own. Al things that the
Saints have, are communicative, both Spirituals and Temporals; and they know
that their Heavenly Father has made them Stewards, and has not given them all
their good things for themselves alone, but for others also; so they are
exhorted, Heb. 13.16. To do good and to communicate forget not, for with such
sacrifice God is well pleased. That speech savours of Heathenism, and not of a
Gospel spirit, We may do what we list with our own. Art thou Rich? hear thy
charge from Heaven, what thou must do with thy Riches, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded; that
they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up unto themselves a sure foundation against the time to
come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

There is a twofold use of our Estates: First, A Natural use, as to provide for
our selves, wives, children, families: this use every worldly man, and that
churlish Nabal (for fo he is styled 1 Samuel 25.3) knew well enough: for says
he, ver. 11 Shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh (he is all in the
Positive, my, my, my) that I have killed for my Sheerers, and give it unto men?
etc. He was all selfish. This is sowing to the flesh, and he that sowes to the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: Such men's Charity begins at home,
and keeps at home too. 2 There is a Spiritual use of our Estates; to relieve
Christ's Members (if good poor,) and our own flesh (if evil poor) which stand in
need of our help; and this is a sowing to the Spirit, and they that sow to the
Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

Thirdly, They that care not for the poor, are full of distrust that God will
not make his word good, when as God has said, Prove. 28.27. He that gives to
the poor shall not lack: And Luke 6. 38. Give, and it shall be given unto you,
good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over. They will
not take Gods word; you can never make a worldly man believe, but that he shall
lack what he gives to the poor. Never tell an earthly minded man of full
measure, and running over, he believes he shall have the less for what he gives
away; the reason is, he lives by sense, and not by faith, and he cannot trust
God over all.

Fourthly, They may call God Father, but they are never a whit like unto their
Heavenly Father, who is the Father of mercies, and God of all Consolation, 2
Cor. 1.3. They are not merciful, as their Father in Heaven is merciful, Luke 6.
36. They are the Devils children, and none of Gods, that care not for the poor.
1 John 3.10. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
devil; whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves
not his brother.

Fifthly, Such as care not for the poor are worldlings, covetous persons, if a
man may be justly called a Covetous, a worldly man, he is of the worst of men;
such are Spiritual Idolaters, Ephesians. 5.5. Adulterers, Jam. 4.4. God abhors
them, Psalm. 10.3. and they shall never go to Heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 10. These
Worldlings are the unprofitable burdens of the earth, in whom there is no
Charity, Liberality, Hospitality, nor Humanity; such are greedy gripes, which
by their enclosure, would have no poor to live with them, nor by them, but
delight to converse with Beasts; and to this purpose turn Corn into Grass,
and men into Beasts.

Sixthly, Not to care for the poor, argues not love to God, nor love to Christ,
1 John 3. 17. He that has the worlds good, and sees his brother has need,
and shuts up his bowels of compassion, how dwells the love of God in him?
The question is put here, to put it out of Question, that such do not love God.
Its no great matter what such profess, and talk of the love of God; truth is,
that they of all the rest in the world have no love to God; For he that loves
not his brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?
1 John 4.20. They have no love to Christ, for Christ will censure of our love
to him at the day of Judgment, by that love we show unto his Members (the poor)
upon the earth, Matthew. 25. And there all flesh shall be proceeded against,
Secundum probata and alligata; and this shall be just and good proof. In as
much as you did it not to one of the least of these, ye d^d ^t not to me; by
these little ones, is not meant little in statute, like Zacheus: but little in
estate, little in esteem: As Christ said, Matthew. 18.10. Despise not one of
these little ones, for in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my
Father which is in Heaven: so take care of one of these little ones, for their
Angels, etc.

Matthew. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. The
merciful are such who are so inwardly moved with the miseries of others, that
they do outwardly receive them according to their abilites, Luke 6.36, 38. Such
shall obtain mercy in their miseries sometimes with men, but always with God.
Sweet is that of the Prophet, Isaiah 58. read the 7, 9, and 10. verses, which
are to this sense: if thou feed the hungry, harbor the houseless, cloth the
naked, and satisfy the afflicted soul, ver. 9. Then shall thou call, and the
Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am. As if the
Father of mercyes should say, What aileth my child so to call, and cry? be sure
of this, here I am, a present help in time of trouble: here I am, my presence
is the absence of all myserie: thou art in my heart, and I will help thee, for
my poor were in thine heart, and thou did help them; when they cried, thou
did refresh them; and now thou cryest, I will wipe all tears from thine eyes;
thou gave what they asked in their need, and now whatsoever thou stand in
need of, ask, and it shall be given thee: thou tookest care of them, and did
not turn away thine ear from their complaints; and I now take care of thee,
Call upon me in time of trouble, and I will deliver thee. On the contrary,
Prove. 21.13. Whosoever stopeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall
cry himself, and not be heard: such an one ere he dies, may fall into such
cruel enemies hands, or other great streights, and extreme myserie, that he may
cry, and howl for vexation of spirit, and never be heard, nor pityed, neither
by God or men: for with the same measure they mere withal, it shall be
measured to them again, Luke 6.38.

: Prove. 28.7. He that hides his eyes from the poor, shall have many a Curse;
the poor will curse them. But is it lawful for them to curse? Shimei we know
cursed David wrongfully, and yet says David, 2 Samuel 26. 10. The Lord has said
unto him, Curse David. So when the poor curse these hard hearted wretches, that
hide their eyes from them, though it be sin in them, yet there is somewhat of
God in it, to suffer them thus Ministerially to curse, to make way for the
judgments of God, that this Scripture might be fulfilled upon merciless men.
But if the poor do not curse them, shall they avoid a curse? No, Christ himself
will curse them, Matthew. 25.41. Depart from me, ye cursed; for I was hungry,
etc. Yea, the curse of God was upon them before the poor cursed them. Prove.
3.33. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked. And here I take
leave to apply this Argument a little to such who by enclosure do uncorn
fields. Another Scripture must be fulfilled upon them, viz. Prove. 11. 26. He
that withholds corn, the people shall curse him: but blessing shall be upon
the head of him (what an encouragement is here for Tillage?) that sells corn.
He does not say, He that sells Oxen, or Sheep, etc. the meaning is, that a
great blessing shall be upon them that provide bread for the poor; bread is the
staff of life, and indeed flesh is but sauce as it were, to make our bread
relish better, and to go down the glibber. Bread is the staple commodity. But
to open our Scripture a little: He that withholds Corn: that is, does
enhaunce Corn, and hoard it up to raise the rates of the poor that buy, is nigh
to a curse; yet Corn may be had here, though at excessive rates. How nigh then
are they to a curse, that use such means, that there may be no Corn, nor
seed-time, nor Harvest in the places where they inhabit? These break our
staff of Bread. This Argument prevails much with a carnal mind, and the
natural conscience does mightily perplex these Oppressors; Oh (say they) though
we have a good mind to this business, yet the Curse that follows such
Enclosure! And none of us here can be ignorant how visibly God has pursued
such enclosure with his several Judgments, having written this very sin in the
Judgment. I shall be sparing of the particular vengances that have followed
this sin; only thus much I shall say, that that prophecy of Isaiah 5. 9. is
fulfilled on them; Many houses are desolate, even great and fair, without
inhabitants: so that we may say usually of them, as the Psalmist speaks of
such, Psalm. 37.35, 36. I have seen him in great power, and spreading himself
like a green bay tree, yet he passed away, and (...) he was not; yea I sought
him, but he could not be found. His house and land has vomited him out, and
his posterity. Seldom the third generation can call those enclosed grounds his
own. This natural conscience does so terrify them, when they are upon such
cursed designs, that they can go on with no complacencie of spirit in it. When
they are agreed upon Articles of such enclosure, how every one trembles to set
his hand first to them, or to set the first spade in the ground of such
enclosure; because God many times so visibly meets with the ringleaders. In one
Town, being upon such enclosure, and to set their hands to the Articles, so
terrible was the business, that no body would begin; at last one snatched the
pen, subscribed his Name, and bid them follow him all in the Devils name. When
they have thus enclosed, you shall hardly find who was the Author of it, every
one putting it off themselves, and no body owning of it, none will acknowledge
themselves to be principal Agents in it, though they have all don it. I have
this one Word from God to speak to these Mammonists, that thus dare to stifle
conscience: 1 John 3.20. If thy heart condemn thee, God is greater then thy
heart, and knows all things.

This evil of covetousness, and of not caring for the poor, will bring the fury
and wrath of God upon the most flourishing Kingdoms, Cities, etc. as you shall
find Jer. 6.11, 12, 13. upon Gods own people* I am full of the fury of the
Lord, I am weary with holding in, I will pour it upon the children that are
abroad, and upon the assembly of young men together: For even the husband with
the wife shall be taken, the aged with him that is full of days, and their
houses shall be turned unto others, with their fields, and wives together: for
I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the Land, says the Lord;
for from the least of them even unto the greatest of them, every one is given
to covetousness. Thus may we see what covetousness will do to the most
flourishing nations; and that those that care not for the poor are the worst
enemies to a Common Wealth. This is one of those crying sins that overthrew
Sodom, and Gomorrah, Ezekiel. 16.49. For she did not strengthen the hand of the
poor, and needy. On the contrary, if God have pronounced wrath against persons,
and places, you may see upon what terms God would be pleased to suspend the
judgment, Dan. 4.27. Where Daniel advises Nebuchadnezzar (when he had his dome
to consort with beasts, and to eat grass with oxen) wherefore, O King (says
he) let my council be acceptable to thee, and break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquity by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a
lengthning of thy tranquillity, etc.

to make us open hearted, and open handed to the poor, etc.

Here let us take Notice, that it was a reprobate Judas, that cared not for the
poor, who is gone to his own place, Acts 1.25. which is the place to which all
misers, and churles must go, Mat. 25.41, 42, 43. Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For I was an
hungered, and you gave me (...) meat, etc. Observe here, Fire prepared, It is
the proper peculiar place of such as care not for the poor. For James 2.13. He
shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy. Christ has
prepared another place for a charitable heart. Matthew. 25.34. Come, ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, before the foundation of
the World. For I was a hungered, and you gave me meat, etc. For blessed are the
merciciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Matthew. 5.7. Far be it from men to
think that charity merits a place in heaven: But we must walk in love,
Ephesians 5.2 Which is the Gospel way to Heaven. Christ gives them a giving,
and forgiving spirit, whom he will forgive, and to whom he will give the
Kingdom of Heaven. When once we are born again, and are the children of the
Most High by grace, and adoption, we grow like unto our Heavenly Father in
every holy quality, though not in equality; especially in this, We are
merciful, as our Father in Heaven is merciful; and when we are once called into
the State of grace, we have this evidence of our election, Col. 3.12. We put on
(as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness, etc. and
verse. 14. above all things we put on charity, which is the bond of prefectness.
They love much who have had many sins forgiven them, Luke 7.47, etc. Here
remember we again, that it is a damned Dives that cared not for a poor Lazarus,
and that it was one of those cryings sins that brought fire and brimstone upon
Sodom and Gomorrha, even this, the not strengthening of the hands of the poor,
and needy. If it be so then, that so great terrors, and torments remain for
them, that relieve not the poor, what will become of them then that oppress the
poor, and the needy, and take away that little that they have? what will be the
end of all those former recited Make-beggers? if they be a cursed people, if
fire, prepared fire, everlasting fire with the Devil and his Angels, be their
portion that do not give bread, drink, clothing to the hungry, thirsty, naked:
into what fire shall they be cast? what torments shall they have? what great
condemnation remains for them, that rob the poor of all these? that generation
I have named so often, takes away all from them who have the least, Mich. 3.2.
They pull off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones.
To rob a man of his clothes, and leave him naked, is cruelty; to pull off a man's
skin, is more then inhumanity; and yet there is a degree further: they take not
only skin, but flesh too. These who are very poor, may be said to have nothing
but skin upon them, yet these cruel oppressors will have that too. I will
speak one word to them, that will by Law suits undo their honest neighbors,
that will not consent to such unjust Enclosures. Me thinks the controversy
betwixt them and their neighbors, is just like that betwixt the Wolf, and the
Sheep. The Sheep tells the Wolf, he has no just reason to contend with them,
for they have the juster cause; Its true, says the Wolf, but I have the longer
teeth. But let such hear their doom, Prove* 22.22, 23. Rob not the poor, because
they are poor: neither oppress the afflicted in judgment. For the Lord will
plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them.



1. To Ministers, what to preach, what to practice. They must preach up this
duty of caring for the poor. So Timothy is advised by the Apostle, and in him
all other Ministers, in that of 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. We must charge them
that are rich in the world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to
enjoy. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate, laying up unto themselves a sure foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. Ministers must not only
preach, but also practice this duty of Charity. How does Jesus Christ admonish
his Disciples to beware of covetousness, and to be of a giving spirit? etc.
The Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 2, 3. tells us, a Minister must be given to hospitality.
Although he must not live of Alms, yet he must give Alms of what he has,
Luke 12.33. Ministers without this gift of Charity, are but as sounding brass,
and tinkling Cymbals, 1 Cor. 13.1. Even like the Bells in the Steeple, that call
others to Church, but never come themselves; these may call others to heaven,
but shall never enter in themselves.

2 My consel to Magistrates shall be that of the Lord to his own people, Zech.
7.9.10. Thus speaks the Lord, saying, Execute true Judgment, and show Mercies
and compassions every man to his neighbor, and oppress not the widow, nor the
fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor, etc. Such a good Magistrate was Josiah,
and so it was well with him, and his people too. Jerem. 22.15, 16. Did not thy
father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with
him? He judged the cause of the poor and needy, and then it was well with him:
Was not this to know me, says the Lord? etc. I shall propose Gods servant Job
a pattern for Magistrates, Job 29.12, 13, 14, 15. I delivered the poor that
cried, the fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him
that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to sing
for joy. I put on Righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgment was a Robe and
a Diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame. I was a father
to the poor: and the cause which I knew not, I searched out, and I brake the
jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. Thus it is at
once, the Honor and Duty of those who are in Power to relieve the poor and
needy, and to rid them out of the hands of the Oppressors. The not hearing of
the poor, the not relieving and helping them, the not supplying their wants,
the not redressing their injuries by those who have power to do all these for
them, is their renewing and perpetuating their misery upon them: and therefore,
that Magistrates, Ministers, and every one according to their several places
and abilities, in love to Christ Jesus, and in tenderness of bowels to the
M^^^^ers of Christ, and their own flesh, may perform this duty of caring for
the poor, I shall conclude all with an Use of Exhortation.

To do good and to communicate forget ^^t, for with such Sacrifice God is well
pleased. Forget not, that is, remember to do good and to communicate; yea, so
remember it, as thou would have Christ remember thee to do thee good, and
communicate unto thee the Treasures of his free Grace, and riches of his
mercies in the day of Trial, trouble, and distress, in the hour of death, and
in the day of Judgment: For (says he) these are Sacrifices, which do not only
please, but well please God and Christ. The Fathers called that which we give
to the poor Pecunia trajectitia, that is, money returned by Bill of Exchange.
As they that travel into other Countries do not take their money with them, for
fear of robbing, or other miscarriage, but they pay it here, and have a Bill of
Exchange to receive it beyond the Seas, in the Country to which they intend
their journey: So, whatsoever we give to the poor, we give to men, but Christ
repayes it. We give it away in earth, but we meet it in Heaven: we cast it a
way in this world, but find it in the world to come. To this purpose Solomon
speaks, Prove. 11.24, 25. There is that scatters, and yet increases; and
there is that withholds more then is meet, but it tends to poverty. The
liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall also be watered
himself. The Apostle compares Charity to seed sown: now no seed no crop; and
the more seed the better crop; for says he, 2 Cor. 2.6. He that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he that sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully. And take we all the Apostles advice concerning charity, as it
follows in the next verse, Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so
let him give, not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver.
Now he that administers seed to the Sower, and sows the seed of all Grace in
your hearts, make you to abound in this Grace also, 2 Cor. 8. 7. And my prayer
shall be for you, 1 These. 3. 12. The Lord make you to increase and abound in
love one toward another, and toward all men.

FINIS.

