MORE LIGHT Shining in Buckingham-shire: BEING A Declaration of the state and
condition that all Men are in by Right.

Likewise the Slavery all the world are in by their own Kind, and this Nation
in particular; and by whom.

Likewise the Remedies, as Take away the Cause, and the effect will cease.

BEING A REPRESENTATION Unto all the People of ENGLAND, AND To the Soldiery
under the Lord General FAIRFAX.

The second part.

Whatsoever does manifest, is Light.

Ephesians. 5. London, Printed in the Year. 1649.

More Light shining in Buckingham-shire.
The Apostle says, Whatsoever things were written, were for our learning.
IT is recorded in Scripture, that man being created male and female after Gods
own Image or likeness, viz. his Son Jesus, who is said to be the Image of the
invisible God, and the first born of every Creature, and by whom all things
were made, and to whom all things were to subject, for he being Lord over all
the inferior Creatures; God endowed with that excellent Rule of right Reason,
which is the pure influence of the Almighty, whereby he should walk in
subjection to his Creator and Father, and in Equity toward his own kind, viz.
to do to another, as the other should do to him, and none to lord or force any
arbitrary power one over another, or to assume any privilege above his
brethren; for all men by Gods donation are all alike free by birth, and to have
alike privilege by virtue of his grant: Genesis 1. 26. to the end. and Genesis 9. 1.
to 18. So that as all inferior creatures are given unto man, viz. mankind; and
that for all necessaries as he should need: So it is as plain, that every man
has a right and propriety in the creatures, one as well as the other; so that
for any to enclose them wholly from his kind, to his own use, to the
impoverishment of his fellow creatures, whereby they are made his slaves, is
altogether unlawful, and it is the cause of all oppressions, whereby many
thousands are deprived of their rights which God has invested withal, whereby
they are forced to beg or starve for want; for all grounds being enclosed, and
all other things monopolized into a few Mercinarys hands, whereby thousands that
would, and desire to live in a lawful Calling lawfully, are of all people most
oppressed, because not suffered to keep any thing about them, because of the
incroachers before named, who will either hunt it or pownd it, etc neither can
they enjoy the benefit of their own labor, although God commands they should,
because of those forenamed oppressors, who have not only enclosed, monopolized,
incroached, inhanced all the creatures into their hands, but do likewise extort
away the labors of their poor brethren, and take out the bread out of their
mouths, and from their poor wives and children, by their unreasonable,
unlawful, unjust and wicked Rates, Taxes, Powls, Towls, Customs, so that the
flower of those industrious men's labors are boulted out from them, and only the
Bean left them to feed on; and if any seem for all this to maintain his family
through his extreme industry, then the other Cormorants force offices on him,
etc. thereby to more inslave him and that with most wretched oaths, etc. Oh it
would be too tedious to relate all the slavery they are put to, and sworn
perform as that at their Court-leets, there to appear to do homage, and
acknowledge themselves slave to their Tyrants, called Lords of Manors; and if
they hold any Lands, what extreme Rents are they forced to pay for it, to their
extorting Landlords? besides above the 3d part of their labor taken from them
by the impropriators, besides paying quitrents, as it is called, whereby in
some, as the Lords of the Manors are petty Tyrants and Kings; so they hold all
from a supreme Lord, who was none of Gods setting up, viz. a King, whom they
upholding as the only dread Sovereign Lord, and allowing him a great and
intolerable Revenue, as Lands, Customs, Poles, Toles, Tithe of all sorts, and
quitrents, etc. with Fines, Harriets, and Charters, Patents, Monopolies, etc.
by which means they can be Farmers under him, and petty tyrants over the
people: and to secure themselves from being made deliver up their usurped
powers and interest; they have their Commissions, Grants, Pattents holding in
his name, and they protecting him from being questioned and his power thrown
down; he does defend, uphold, maintain and allow them to rend, tear, devour,
rob, spoil, extort and tyrannize over the poor people, etc. and to this end
does invest them with strange names and titles, such as the Scripture owns not,
or never did allow of, as Dukes, Princes, Earls, Marquesses, Vicounts, Lords,
Barons, Sirs, Esquires, Gentlemen, etc. and privileges accordingly, as to
hunt, hawk, etc all which vain titles are forbidden by our Savior as
heathenish: for it arose from man's own sensuallity, darkness, and wickedness,
and murder, for Nimrod was the first King, and he was was such a bloody wretch,
that he was called a Hunter, Genesis 10. 8 9, 10. that is, a Hunter of his own
kind in the presence of the Jehovah even against Gods Ordinance, so wicked was
he; and v. 10. The beginning of his Kingdom was Babel, viz. Confusion, out of
Gods way, by which confusion he raised up a pack of Tyranny; after many Kings
more, and they divided each against others; and striving who should be the
greatest Incloser and Tyrant, fell together by the ears, and caused the people
to murder one another; so that it was Kings that first brought in Wars. Read
the 14. Chap. of Genesis, where observe the first murderings and thefts: and
the rise of Dukes was from wicked Esan. Read the 36. of Genesis, these the
Kings call their Cozens: In shore, the whole Scriptures declare Kings to be no
better then Tyrants and Usurpers: And although God granted the Israelites a
King, yet it was in his anger, says the Sc^ipture, Hosea 13. 11. and he took
him away in his wrath. And although some good men were Kings, yet it was not in
regard to their Office, but Persons, for in that they were Kings they were
Tyrants, and did extremely extort from the people; for see how Solomon extorted
from the people. 1 Kings 4. first see his Princes. from verse 1. to the 7. then
see his Officers to get provision monthly, from verse 7. to the 20. then see
his provision for his Court, 22, 23. verses, as in one day 30 measures of fine
floor, 60 measures of meal, 10 fat Oxen, 20 pasture Oxen, 100 Sheep, besides
Hearts, Roes, Bucks, fallow Deer, and fatted fowl. See 27. verse, how his
Officers provided, etc. and 26. verse, do but note the horses that he kept, as
forty thousand stalls of horses for Charets, and twelve thousand horsemen; then
see in the 28. v. the people bring, as the Officers appointed, in v. 27. Barley
and Straw for the horses, and Dromedaries, etc which was such an oppression,
that the people, when they came to crown Rehoboam, would condition to have it
removed, 1 King. 12. 1. to 7. and he refused to take off those burdens, to v.
16. then in v. 16. the people refused to choose him King. And then did they not
choose Jeroboan King read the chap. and did not David command Mephibosheth, that
he and Ziba should divide the Land, 2 Samuel 19. 29. viz. Mephibosheths Land; now
Ziba was but the others servant, read a Sam. 16. from Verse. 1. to Verse. 4.
there Ziba slandereth his Master Mephibosheth, and David gives away
Mephibosheths whole estate unto Ziba, Verse. 4. And when Mephibosheth comes to
clear himself from his servants slander, David restores to himself his own
again: So that the slanderer must have the honest man's goods. What Justice is
this?

Their Offices were tyrannical, only God did many times for his names sake let
them have now and then a good man in the place, out of special favor, and no
otherwise; for the kingly Power, even to Israel, at first, was confirmed upon,
as a plague, and no otherwise, as a reward of their own wickedness; and thunder
and rain was sent in their Wheatharvest, to convince them That their wickedness
was great in desiring a King: read 1 Samuel 12. 17, 18. And in Verse. 19. the
people desires Samuel to pray for them, and confesleth, that of all their sins
they had added this sin, in asking a King. And in Verse. 20. Samuel told them
they had done all this wickedness, etc. And Verse. 25. tells the people, That if
they would still do wickedly, both they and their King should perish.

Now their wickedness was in two Respects:

1. In desiring to have a King to be like other Nations, 1 Samuel 5. 8. viz. the
Gentiles and Heathens that followed their own sensuality: Now those Israelites
not to be like other people.

2. In advancing a man, one of their own kind, in the place of a God, and so
to idol^ze their own flesh above God: For do but observe what the Almighty
says unto Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 7. They have not, says the Lord, rejected thee,
but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them: And see Verse. 8.
and forward, What a tyrannical Government Kings are. From Verse. 11. to the end
of the Chapter.

And he said, This will be the manner of the King that shall reign over you; he
will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his charets, and to be
his horsemen, and some shall run before his charets.

And he will take your Daughters to be Confectionaries, Cooks, and Bukers.

And he will take your fields, and vint yards, and your olive yards, and give
to his officers, and to his servants.

And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest
young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

He will take the truth of your sheep, and you shall be his servants.

And you shall cry out in that day, because of your King which ye have chosen,
and the Lord will not hear you in that day.

Which Scriptures do declare, That Kings are the heads of all Tyrants; and that
wicked men, shrouding themselves under him, have not only protection by him to
Tyranny, but likewise you see he will give them large gifts, but out of other
men's estates: For, says the Scripture, he will take your vince yards and
oliveyards, the best of them, and give them, to his servants. This is the
Reason why those men will be the Kings slaves, because the people may be slaves
to them, and they to tyrannize And in Verse. 15. and 17. there comes in your
Tithes of Labor and Stock; Kings were the Authors of it.

2. They do not only incroach away men's estates, but likewise make slaves of
men: See Verse. 12. He will make Them plow his grounds, and reap his harvest,
and make he instruments of War; so that Kings are the cause of Wars: For of
necessity they must keep up Armies, else the people will never be such slaves
as to obey them. Then they make Captains of thousands and Captains of hundreds;
Here is the rise of Nobility and Gentry: And men, for to get his favor, will be
willing to enslave their own kind, as to be Captains; O the height of all
slavery What? slaves to Kings, that so the people may be their slaves? So it
is, as Kings, are the worst of men, yet others will execute their wills; If
Ahab and Jezebel will take Naboths Vineyard do but send a Letter to the chief
of the City, and they will stone him. Let but Charles send out I Commission for
Array, and how many will execute it? yea, if he will raise an Army to murder
and plunder us, he need but set up his Standard and thousands will rise for
him; Priests will preach in his behalf, and that he is the Lords anointed,
though it is with the Popes grease, and he Antichrists hackney, and has his
power from the Beast, Revel. 13. That has his authority from the Dragon, who
is the Devil and Satan whose first predecessor was the Norman Bastard William,
who came to be King by cruel murder, as shall be proved hereafter: so that as
the creature, man, is enslaved to his kind, and all Monopolizings,
Encroachings, Inhancings, Licenses, Patents, Grants, Prerogatives, Privileges,
unjust and unnatural, arbitrary and wicked, compacted, unreasonable and all
unjust interests, are unlawful, and the Scriptures do every where protest
against it, calling it Oppressions; and pronounces Judgments against it,
calling the Abettors, Promoters, and Actors of the same, though men, call them
Kings, Lords, Generals, Parliaments, Councels, Consuls, Judges, or by what name
else they are known, dignified, or distinguished, as the Priests call it, to be
but Lions, Bears, Wolves, Leopards, Foxes, Bulls, Beasts, Dogs, Whelps, from
their Natures: For being led by their sensuality, avarice, and lusts, and
making all others their slaves, to serve them with cap and knee, etc. to labor,
drudg, trudg, work, moyl for their, etc. as if they were born only to be their
slaves, and they to use them as their Beasts, Horse, etc. yea, and beholding to
them for it too; that so they may be their Dog-keepers, or to wait on their
horses, Lackeys to run before them, and be Postillions, Pillions, etc. Yea, and
to make them hold their Lands, Houses, Cottages, etc. at what terms, holdings,
slaveries they please, forcing fines and harriates at every change, etc. And
the better to keep them in slavery, have utterly denied them to have any power
or voice to choose their Lawmakers, or Law-execusioners: And lest they should
have some Justice done by some in Authority, they have devised such a multitude
of Courts and Terms, so that those great Cormorants can remove the suite out of
one Court into another; and Law being bought and sold by the wicked encroaching
Normen, shameless, cheating, hickney Lawyers, being worse then the devil, who
scorns to take a penny Fees to torment any, but will do it freely. By all which
means those poor men are kept in slavery, both in person and estates; and not
only so, but are rated and taxed by the aforesaid Taskmasters, whereby they
bear out those rich, idle Vermin. But yet this is not all; but if those great
Nimrods fall out, and being moved one against the other, who shall most inslave
the people, and suck them most, and being compacted into parties, and their
lusts moving them to Wars, then the poor harmless men must be invited to fight
the others battles, and to this end, Pharaoh-like, they have their Juglers, who
can play the Hocus Pocus, and invent a thing they call Religion, like Jeroboams
Calves, who was the first invented State Worship: then a Convocation or Synod
of Divisers, who being more cunninger then their Masters, they quickly get
above them, and can outreach them by their wills and subtilness, they quickly
juggle them together with Oaths, Covenants, etc. then they do as the lowbel-men
amongst Larks, carry a false light and gloss of Scripture, and with their
preaching and noises, thumping and bumping the Pulpit cushions, cudgel them
into a conceit to raise up a way of miantenance for the Church Devines, as
Tithes, etc. this being done, and their god bellies filled, then like so many
Beagles they open their mouths, and with full cry, having the scent of such a
great benefit, etc. lay on like Thatchers. Oh rise, help your King, help your
Parliament: Oh your Lives, Liberties and R^ligions lies at stake: Thus were
the poor men made murder each other, and those that were unwilling to go were
pressed and forced by both sides, a most wicked practice; and when they come
home again, as very slaves as at the first, and no care taken for widows,
fatherless, sick, lame, etc. as is fit, but many, I fear, perish for want, and
others that take for need hanged, or if they are in debt, made lie in prison
and rot: for all which wickedness, although they have made Laws, Ordinances,
etc. for the same ends, and so they hold all their incloseness by a Law, yet
mark what the Scripture says of it, Woe be to them that decree wicked decrees.
And for their incloseness, Woe be to them that join house to house, that the
poor has no place, etc. And for their oppression, It is not of the Lord, that
the people should labor in the fire. Mark what became of Pharaoh, and the
Egyptians, for their oppressing the Israelites: And was not the old world
drowned for using violence? for what all those miseries befell the Israelites
and Judah? for in all the Scriptures was not oppression one of the chief
grounds.

From whence we observe, That all those oppressors before named do live
altogether out of Gods way, and in Rebellion to his Laws: first, because they
live without a Calling, and so are idle, being Vagabonds, and wasters of the
creatures, by drunkenness, pride, gluttony, and so but Vermin in a
Commonwealth, and by their own Law ought to be put into a house of Correction,
and to be made work.

1. They are Rebels against Gods Command, for faith he, In the sweat of thy
face thou shall eat bread: By Thou is meant all mankind, none exempted.

2. Those that will not work, let them not eat, says the Scripture.

3. Christ bids pray, Give us our daily bread.

Now none is our bread but what we work for, for, as said before, In the sweat
of thy face thou shall eat bread; therefore those that work not, have no right
to eat: and as they are Rebels, so are they Thieves, because when a man has
got bread, viz. necessaries by his labor, it is his bread; now the other that
sweats not at all, yet makes this man to pay him tribute out of his labor, by
Rates, Taxes, Rents, etc. it is theft, and so against the Commandment, Thou
shall not steal.

4. He is a Traitor against the Jehovahs anointed, viz. Jesus Christ, who alone
is Lord and King over man, and all men are equals.

1. Now for one man to be Lord or King over another, and force on his Commands
of his own authority, he takes on him the place of Jesus, and so is a Rebel and
Traitor to the Crown and Dignity of Christ.

2. For man to reject the Laws of God, which binds him, to do to another as
another should do to him, and force on his own Arbitrary Laws, such a one is a
Rebel in the highest degree, and his power is of the Beast, and so of the
Devil, and he and his followers are said to go into perdition, and shall be
tormented for ever and ever.

3. For man to enclose all Lands and Creatures from his kind, is utterly
unnatural, wicked, and treacherous, for if man shall eat bread by his sweat,
then he must needs have ground to sow corn; therefore to enclose all grounds
from him, is to strave him, for if no corn, no bread, and if no ground, no
corn; then this is theft in the highest degrees. Mark this you great
Gormudgings, you hang a man for stealing for his wants, when you your selves
have stole from your fellow brethren all Lands, Creatures, etc. Now mark what
says the Scripture, Pull out the beam out of thine own eye, then shall thou
see to pull out the mote out of thy brothers eye: So first go hang your selves
for your great thefts of incloseness and oppressness, and then afterward that
you can go hang your poor brethren for petty thefts, as for a sheep, corn, etc.

So that from those grounds we conclude, first, What God entitleth man with,
that is to say, with alike privileges.

2. All men are to enjoy alike Freedoms, and none more then the other, so that
they are equal, and none have to do to command another, no more then another
him, but in a soynt union and agreement; that any be set up, it is but a
trulled humane power, and they but servants to the whole, and may be removed at
pleasure.

3. Man is to subject himself to one Sovereign Lord Jesus, and is to go by the
Rule of Equity, and no otherwise.

4. From all which grounds all men have right to the Creatures, etc. one as
well as the other.

This being so, we now conclude that people for the general living out of Gods
way, and most they enjoy is contrary to his Commands, so all that power, by
which they hold it, is an unlawful power: and secondly, without a Reformation
they they must never look to have Gods Justice, in plagueing of, by Wars,
Pestilences, Dearths, etc. to cease from them.

Now for the power, 1. Let us examine from whence it is. 2. How it arose. 3.
What it is. 4. Who are the chief upholders of it. 5. Who are under it. 6. How
it may be removed.

First, From whence it is; Let us consider the Scriptures at the rising of it,
and that was by oppressions and murders, and this arose out of the wickedness
of man's heart, viz. out of his lust, which is from that beastly corruption and
body of sin in him, which, says the Scripture, is not subject to the Law of
God, neither can be. This was that which stirred up Cain to kill Abel, Lamech
to be avenged seventy seven times: This made men war, as James says: This made
Nimrod to become a Hunter of his kind; and as it puffed up men to be Kings, so
again those Kings to be Tyrants, and kill, etc. Genesis 14. for says the
Scripture, It arose from the earth, that is, earthly affection which is from
the lusts of the flesh, the lust of thieves, and the pride of life, as John
says: and as it compacted it self into a visible Monarchy, and so into
Kingdoms, the devil does acknowledge them to be his, and offered them to Jesus,
if he would have worshipped him.

Secondly, Jesus does utterly disown them, calling them the worlds Kingdoms,
and said His Kingdom was not of this World. Now that the Devil owns those
powers to be his, and Jesus does disown them, and distinguishes his Kingdom
from them, then whose must they be? and from whence have Kings, Dakes, Lords,
Gentlemen, etc. Tyrants, as they are called their power and Tithes? that not
from Jesus Christ, for Christ does utterly forbid all his Subjects to be called
Lords, etc. as a heathenish thing, and of the world, and heathens were the
Devils worshippers, and the devil is called the prince and god of this world,
for in heaven he has nothing to do there; then if the devil be prince of the
world, then all these powers are from him, viz. those powers aforesaid, and so
the Tithes of Superiority, as King, Lord, etc. are from the devils now that
their buildings are of the devil, no marvel then that they strive to uphold his
interest.

Thirdly, For the rising of it, Daniel does describe it under the notion of
four several beasts, each distinct from other in quality, but because the least
which John describes is the last, which is to remain until the Kingdom of
Christ throws it down. Read the 13 of the Revelations, there this Beast is
described with seven heads and ten horns, his rise is out of the Sea, viz.
waters, and waters are the people, and out of the foming beastliness of this
Sea came out this Monster, his natures are like the Lion, Bear, Leopard, what
more crueler beasts then any one of these, but all their cruel qualities are in
him, his heads are two males, a Monster, and seven in Scripture is perfection,
viz. perfect wickedness, and ten horns to support him, viz. Kings; so that
kinlgy power is of this Beast, and this Beast is of the Dragon, for he gives
him his power and authority.

Fourthly, For the chief upholders of this power, the Scripture declares to be
Kings, for Kings are the horns of it, that upholds its power, etc. and by whom
it persecutes. Now by Kings in Scriptures are meant any supreme powers that are
by force, etc. therefore Herod was called a King, and yet a Tetrarch. And in
Joshna, there mention is made of thirty two Kings in the Land of Canaan, and
yet but Governors of Cities, Castles, etc. therefore Nebuchadnezzar is said to
be a King of Kings. And here in England, those called earls. Dukes, Marquesses,
Vicounts, etc. what were they but petty Kings? and had they not a tyrannical
House of Peers, that had a negative voice with the King? and did he not call
them his Couzens? and by whom we were cozened of our Liberties: and blessed be
God, their power is down. And as these are Kings, so besides there are
Vice-Kings, viz. those that are Deputies, as Mayors in Cities and Towns
corporate, that are Kings of Patents, which Patents are mere Monopolies, and
serve to inhance Trading and Commodities in a few men's hands, to beggar the
whole; these take Towls and Customs of their Brethren; so that if a man pitch a
sack of corn, one of these men comes like a Beggar with a dish, and then
carries it to the King of beggars, that is the Mayor: Those Vice-Kings have
twelve Pears too, whereby they domineer over the whole Town, city, etc. Then
there are the Hadg-kings, viz. those called Lords of the Manors, those fellows
can keep a Court Leet, and enslave all within their Territories; These are
Kings of all those Cuckcows in their Liverties, whereby fools are made to pay
Lead, Silver, quit-rents, etc. These all claim proprieties as aforesaid.

But now all this power came by murder at the first, by William the Norman
Conqueror, as it is declared in the first part that was set out before. So that
although the Emperial King is removed, and his Power, what are we the near, so
long as those other petty kings remain? and all that Power, Courts, etc are in
force still, though in another name, as Lord-keepers, etc. Cannot the Lawyer
cosen and cheat as much in that name as in the Kings? Is this all the
Reformation the Parliament will do? and will the Army be such fools, as to let
those beastly Courts, Terms, etc. remain, with all those wicked Laws in force?
which are the very nerves of the beast, the upholding of all the diabolical
interests, as I said before; for it is by murder that all those
interest-partics hold that privilege as they do: and it is those wicked Norman
Laws that do authorize them: Sure the Soldiers will not suffer this to
continue, but put down the Terms; and set aside buying and selling Law. Sure if
the Parliament do not do it, as it is plain they will not, if not forced, then
why may not the Soldiers as well pull the Judges out of Westminster Hall, and
take all their rusty Records, Laws, etc. and make a fire on them? that so we
may have honest, godly Laws, according the Scriptures and Reason. Would it not
be a notable booty for the Soldiers, when so many cheating Lawyers are together
at the Term, to drive them out, or else strip their long-tail'd Gowns over
their ears? O Soldiers I^ you could never do a better peer of service, then
to put down the Lawyers, and all their Courts, with all Patents, Grants, etc.
whatsoever is of the Norman and beastly power: For as Kings are the chief
upholders, so the Lawyers are their hackneys, that with their quirks and
deceits do dececeive the poor people, and keep them in bondage to those Kings.
Are they not their Stewards in all their Courtleets, and else where? Therefore
suffer not one Term more, and we in the Country likewise assist with what power
we can. So let us acquit our selves like men, and be no more slaves to none;
this were excellent indeed. And those proud hypocritical Officers that are
amongst you, that are against our Freedom, and would do the work of the Lord by
halves, put them out, and choose honester in their rooms; and the only way is
to take down their great pay^ let them serve as you do, or with a moderate
allowance. So likewise stand for the taking down all Tithes: and forasmuch as
the Priests serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, being
Antichristian: O then suffer them not to have any forced Maintenance, but as
people will freely give them; and let none be persecuted for his Conscience;
then you will do us good indeed, and we shall say, God is amongst you of a
truth. Now as we have discovered the Beastly power, and who upholds it, which
are Kings, Lords, Terms, and Lawyers, O then stand to us that we may never have
any more Kings at all, neither no other arbitrary Tyrants, or tyrannical
Offices that thereunto belongs: for all the whole world is under this power
of wickedness. Now mark what says the Scripture, That all who worship the
beast shall be tormented. And it is plain, so long as the people subject to it,
they worship the devil: Therefore no marvel if there are heavy Judgments in the
Nations, so long as they continue thus in rebellion against God.

Lastly, How it may be removed, is, to give all liberty for godly men to
declare against it. 1. Therefore take away all binding Laws, penalties, etc.
that men may freely preach against it, even in all public meetings, that so
the Priests may no more delude the people. 2. Utterly abolish these wicked
Laws, Terms, etc. with all Patents, Corporations, Grants, Monopolies, etc. For
why may not all Controversies be ended by Arbitration of our own Neighborhood,
by the rule of Equity at home, then to be thus abused by the Lawyers? And why
may not every man as freely speak, preach that God has made out to him, as the
Priests? And if the Priests will not be quiet, but still stir up strife, let
them be set aside, as needless and unprofitable, who keep the people in
blindness, as they have done, in preferring a wicked man in the place of a God,
as they did Charles Stuart.

Lastly, Above all, look to the poor; let not all the Bishops Lands, Crown
Lands be swallowed up, nor Commons, Parks, Woods, Forests, etc. for your great
ones gaps for to enclose them: but let all be for the poor, until more comes:
and all, whosoever, that have oppressed the poor, let them make restitution
fourfold. And think on prisoners that perish in prison by merciless Creditors
and Jaylors, that they may not be mewd up, and starved, until they are poisoned
there. And likewise a way to prevent cozening and and cheating one another; and
that all Trials be in every Hundred by twelve men of the same neighbor-hood,
and all buying and selling Law put down, as aforesaid: And let a free Trade be
in the Nation; All Monopolies, Patents, etc. utterly taken away. And for the
rule to go by that which is declared the Rule of Equity, to do to all men as
they should do to others, etc. and all other false tyrannical rules taken away,
and all Laws to be out of the Scriptures, seeing there is but one Lawgiver,
who is able both to save and destroy. And for Law Executioners, to be only
such, who are right godly, honest, wise, moderate, judicious, reasonable, and
faithful men, and those chosen by free Election of the People; and so all that
bulk of Officers that are by Pattents, as all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs,
Bailies, Mayors etc. and all other Offices that are not elected by the people,
but were forced on us with out our Election, and against our consents, by a
Patent: Anfor as much as the throwing down the Kingly power, all those fell with
it; and we looked never to have them more revived, seeing that all power is
arbitrary that is not out of the pepples voluntary Election, the people being
declared the supreme Authority under God; and whom they choose, to be the lawful
Magistrate: yet nevertheless, as if the Parliament intended still to keep the
old arbitrary and tyrannical Norman Laws, Terms and Courts, still to enslaveus;
and Lawyers, Patentee Officers to torment, have made an Act that all Patents,
Grants, Courts, etc. shall continue as they formerly did, only Writs in the
Judges and Keepers names, although in our Petitions we utterly denied the same:
and they have appointed Commissioners to be Justices without any election from
us. Likewise the Grandees in the Army have preferred a thing called An
Agreement of the People, which is too low and too shallow to free us at all:
for it does not throw down all those Arbitrary Courts, Powers and Patents, as
aforesaid: And what stock or way is provided for the poor, fatherless, widows,
and impoverished people? And what advancement of encouragement for the laboring
and industrious, as to take off burdens, is there? By all which, and by
Arbitrary Powers erected a new, we see, that they mind their own interest,
gain, and rotten honor more then our absolute Freedom: This being so, we are
enforced to appeal to all our dear brethren in England, and Soldiers in the
Army, to stand every one in his place, to oppose all Tyranny whatsoever, and by
whomsoever, intended against us.

Reader, You may expect in the third Part to have an Anatomizing of all Powers
that now act, etc.

And in the fourth the Grounds and Rules that all men are to go by.

Farewell.
FINIS

