FORNICATION CONDEMNED, IN A DOUBLE SENTENCE,

Commending Marriage in All. Condemning Whoredom in All.
OR, A brief Consideration of Heb. 13. 4.

By THO. MOORE, jun.

And did not be make one? and yet had be the residue of the spirit. And
wherefore one? That he might seek a godly seed. Therefore take heed to your
spirit, and let none deal treacherously with the wife of his youth. Mal. 2. 15.
Flee fornication. Every sin that a man does is without the body: but he that
commits fornication sins against his own body. What, know ye not that
your body is the temple of the holy Ghost? And if any man defile the temple of
God, him will God destroy. 1 Cor. 6. 18, 19. and 3. 17. LONDON: Printed by Ja.
Cotterel, for the Author; and are to be sold by Nath. Crouch, at the Cross-Keys
in Bishops-gate-street, near Leaden Hall. MDCLXVII.

The Preface.
Considering how often and vehemently the Apostles admonish believers (in all
their Epistles and precepts to the Churches, and especially to those among the
Gentiles) of fornication and all uncleanness, and filthiness of the flesh;
usually mentioning it as the first branch of the evils reproved, and to be
abstained from; as Gal. 5. 19. Ephesians. 5. 3. Col. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 9. And sometime
mentioning it as the general head of the pollutions to be abstained from, in
order to their sanctification, as 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. I have been inquisitive what
might be the reason, and meaning of it, and have in such enquiry found and
perceived some things happily worth observation.

1. That there is generally in most men, a greater natural promptness, and
inclination (...) the flesh, to such kind of filthiness, and uncleannes^ of
the flesh, then to many, or most other ways of iniquity: this is signified, or
intimately employed in this; that when the holy Ghost distinguishes the lusts
of the flesh under these two heads, the desire of the flesh, and of the mind,
Ephesians. 2. 3. or into more branches, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life, as 1 John 2. 16. or as in the formentioned
Scriptures; the desires or lust of the flesh is put first. Note, that all
fleshly and sinful lusts, as under both those heads, in Ephesians. 2. 3. are there,
and elsewhere called, the lusts of the flesh, as by the flesh is meant, the
carnal mind or body of sin, which is enmity to God, and is not subject to his
Law, nor can be, so that they that are in it cannot please God, Romans 8. 1-12.
This is called flesh of man, because conceived by him, in his listening to
Satan, and because from thence it is become a natural disease, over-spreading
the whole natural man, in his body, and in his mind, as he is naturally
descended from Adam. For as so, the Apostle says, He was carnal, sold under
sin. It consists of ignorance and enmity to God, and jealousies of him,
together with vain and high thoughts of our selves, and desires of equality
with God. And was at first conceived, by listening to, and parlying with that
temptation of Satan, -- Has God said? etc. Is there not some secret will in
God, contrary to that revealed, some design to keep you back from arriving at
that happiness and contentment, which you ^ay attain in improving your natural
faculties, and freedom? Now this body of sin with its members diffuseth it
self, and is stirring and working in the whole man, leading captive in all his
natural desires, affections, and actings; and thus it is still in them warring,
who through grace are not in it, but in the Spirit: And the desires of the
natural body, which are after ease, pleasure, and contentment to it self; these
as polluted, and instigated by the carnal mind, which provokes to seek the
same in such things, or in such a way and manner, as is forbidden of God; are
more properly called, the desires or lusts of the flesh, (as by flesh is meant,
the natural body, or outward man.) And the desires of the natural mind, and
soul of man, which are after those things, which according to its reason,
understanding, and judgment are best for the man; these as corrupted, and
moved by the carnal mind (under which also it is sold) are more properly
called, the desires of the mind (and by the Apostle John, the lust of the eye,
and the pride of life.) And these are after the riches, honor and wisdom of
the world, or the establishing a righteousness of ones own, such things, and in
suchwise as to his corrupted reason, promise to make him rich, and excellent in
himself, to give him a self-sufficiency.

Now the first sort of these fleshly lusts, the grosser and more sensual, the
appetites of the flesh, or natural body, as corrupted and sold under sin, are
put first, where they are distinguished, to signify as is said, a more
powerful inclination, and promptness in men generally unto them; yea, even in
believers, where the mind is in part renewed, yet this law of sin has its
dwelling, and operation still in the members, working in them all manner of
concupiscence, and leading captive to bring forth fruit to death; in which also
it will prevail, if not abstained from in the light and strength of the grace
of God bringing salvation. And by reason of the prevalency, and dominion of
this sensual carnality in the natural powers; the admonitions against this
grosser filthiness are first placed, and more abundantly, and vehemently urged.
And however through pride, men will not acknowledge it, but every one almost,
if they can but hide it, so as it appear not openly or palpably, are ready to
say, they abhor, and are free from inclination and desire to such filthiness,
as Whoredom, Adultery, or uncleanness of that nature; yet it is not so, but
generally there is in most men naturally, a great propensity to the following
those sensual desires after that which is forbidden; the flesh as corrupted by
sin dwelling in it, is always provoking to it; therefore there is need of more
instructions, and vehement admonitions, and warnings against it.

2. The Gentiles that knew not God, but walked in the ways of their own heart,
did generally allow themselves in such kind of uncleanness and filthiness of
the flesh, possessing their bodies in the lust of concupiscence, 1 Thessalon.
4. 5. 1 Cor. 5. 1-10. And were the more hardened therein, after any rejection of
the light of the knowledge of God brought to them, Romans 1. 24, etc. Yea, also
among the Jews; that had been, and still was allowed that was now declared to
be fornication and uncleanness, as is showed in the following discourse.

And this gave a twofold reason for the Apostles so placing, and urging their
admonitions of this nature.

1. The believers wrote to, had bad their education, and conversation among
such, and were sometimes such, fulfilling with allowance the desires of the
flesh, and of the mind, even as others, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. 1 Cor. 6. 9-11. Tit. 3.
3 And therefore (though now in part, and but newly redeemed from them, and
renewed in spirit, yet) had the more of the relics, of such natural
filthiness; and the more powerfully yet warring in their members; for it is the
more hard to learn to eschew any evil, by how much the more a man has been
accustomed to it, Jer. 13. 23. yea a man is more rooted in such a vain
conversation, as has been received by tradition from fathers, 1 Pet. 1. 18.
And the sins of the youth cleave as it were to the bone, Job 20. 11. And as
nothing can truly redeem the soul, and turn it from such sins and idols unto
God, but the precious blood of Christ; so there is need of so much the more
urging and applying that with its instructions, and reproofs, unto, and against
such evils, as are as it were bred up and nourished in the flesh, and from the
youth.

And so we have all of us most need to be watchful in the Spirit against the
sins of our youth; and in the light, and strength of Gods grace in Christ to
keep us from our own iniquities.

2. They had the more temptations and provocations to such uncleanness, by
still being, and dwelling among such, as with whom it was generally used and
allowed. There being little of outward shame, or fear among men to restrain
from it; such as were not restrained by the grace of God, would be the more
tempting and provoking, and think strange if others did not run with them to
the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4. 2, 3, etc. And surely inticements, and
provocations of that nature are as snares and bands, which a man may escape
only by being in the fear of the Lord all the day, Eccles. 7. 26. with Prove.
23. 17. and 1. 10, etc. Therefore we are instructed not to be amongst
wine-bibbers, etc. nor to have fellowship with the unfruitful works, or workers
of darkness, but to come out from among them, and be separate, so as we may not
touch the unclean thing. Be not deceived, evil communication corrupts good
manners; Therefore a wake -- stand up from the dead, forsake the foolish and
live, and go in the way of understanding, Prove. 23. 20, etc. and 9. 6. 2 Cor.
6. 14, 15, etc. Ephesians. 5. 6-11, 14. 1 Cor. 15. 33, 34. For there is in us while
here, and especially while retaining any youth or strength of nature, matter
for such temptations to work upon, yea, sin on such temptations works the more
powerfully all manner of concupiscence from the commandment forbidding it;
especially after that has appeared, and come to a man by the light of the
Gospel.

3. These sensual appetites or desires of the flesh, do more directly and
grossly defile the man, if not abstained from, and so are more directly and
immediately cross, and opposite to sanctification: other lusts of the flesh,
may, and will if followed, as much, and dangerously defile a man, and barden
him against the sanctification of the Spirit; it may be some of the desires of
the mind after those spiritual wickednesses, in which spiritual fornication is
eminently found more dangerously; and the rather because a man following them,
is pure in his own eyes, and yet not washed from his filthiness; but these, I
say, more directly, immediately and grossly do defile the man in himself, and
before God and men, and so defile Gods temple; as is more largely showed in the
latter end of the ensuing treatise: Yea,

4. Those things that render other sins and ways of iniquity most vile,
polluting, and abominable, are found eminently in this, and it is composed of
nothing else. As to say, 1. An earnest and greedy following that sinful lust,
and desire after that which is forbidden. This is that in covetousness rendering
it most vile, and hateful in the sight of God, and men (though it contain many
other branches and ways of inquity in it) a not being contented with such
things as they have, or as are given and allowed them of God by Christ; and
they may have and use, and in some sort seek with his allowance; nor to seek,
and desire after that, but still more desiring and lusting after the forbidden
fruit, that which is another, and not theirs; or which they cannot have or
seek with his allowance, and in his way, as in Ahabs earnest longing for
Naboth's Vineyard, and in any man's coveting that which is his Neighbors, and
seeking to increase to himself that which is not his, in which he is said to
covet an evil covetousness, and to consult shame to his house, Hab. 2. 6, 8,
10. hence covetousness is ranked with uncleanness of the flesh, and placed next
it, yea, as a branch of like uncleanness. See Ephesians. 5. 3-5. Col. 3. 5, etc. Now
this longing and unsatisfied desire after the forbidden fruit, which is a
principal thing in covetousness, that renders it vile and hateful, and so we
might say in other sins and ways of iniquity, this is found most eminently in
this lust of uncleanness, and indeed it is nothing else, or has no other desire
or lust in it, but such a desire cherished and followed.

2. Rebellion against God, in the pride and height of the spirit; a despising,
sleighting, and rejecting him, and his gracious government, and provision. This
is that in treason, or rebellion against earthly Governors, Principalities,
and powers that God by his providence sets over us (though there may be many
other evils in it, yet) this is that in which the wickness and hatefulness of
it is chiefly evidenced and aggravated; He that resists the power, resists
the ordinance of God, and shall therefore receive to himself damnation, or
judgment from God, Romans 13. 2. Hence the despising government, and speaking
evil of dignities is ranked together with the walking after the flesh in the
lust of uncleannese, as that in which there is a like despising of Gods
government; and therefore falls under a like judgment, 2 Pet. 2. 10. with 1 Samuel 8. 7. and 10. 26, 27.

This also we might have showed in covetousness, and other ways of iniquity, as
that which chiefly renders them vile, hateful, and abominable to God: Now this
is eminenty found in them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness;
a proud and stubborn despising, and rejecting his gracious Law, Government, and
Provision, as might be particularly showed, both in the married and unmarried,
and may appear in what is said in the following discourse of the honourableness
of Marriage in all; to which I refer the Reader. Yea, I might have added, that
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, in which a man not content with that
compliance and combination made with Satan by our nature in the first natural
root of it, does voluntarily against light, and warning, and so stubbornly make
a new and personal compliance, and confederacy with Satan for himself, and so
sells himself to work wickedness, 1 Samuel 15. 23. with 1 King. 21. 25 Hence also
it is, that this uncleanness and filthiness of the flesh, with idolatry (which
is filthiness of the spirit) is ranked together with witchcraft, etc. See Gal.
5. 19, 20.

3. A brutish sensualness, exalting, and preferring the sensual desires, and
appetites out of their place, following, and serving them, in opposition to all
right reason and judgment, and against all instrustions given, rules and order
set them in any wise by the only Lord.

This is that chiefly (though there be also many other evils in it) that
renders surfeiting and drunkenness so vile, filthy, and odious in any man or
woman; not only, nor so much the affections, but the grosser, and more sensual
appetites are served, and preferred before the judgment; and so get the
victory, that the man is swallowed up, and besotted by them; now this also is
eminently found in the walking after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness,
which is therefore put first, and mentioned together with surfeiting and
drunkenness, as that in which a man is sensual and brutish, and is further
besotted in following them. See Hos. 4. 11, 12. with Prove. 23. 27. to the end.

There being in it therefore a complication of the filthiest dregs of iniquity
found in all other fleshly lusts, it deserves to be set in the forefront, and
so is, and shall be in Gods judging it.

I might also have added, that there is spiritual fornication in it; the heart
departing from the Lord, and from his testimonies, and way, to seek counsel and
satisfaction elsewhere, and yield themselves, and their members servants to
other lords besides him: but I shall not here enlarge any further to it. These
things considered, and finding also by too sad experience, that there is need
of urging and pressing instructions, and admonitions of this nature, even among
believers; I have some time since wrote something upon 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. which I
was often pressed in my spirit, to make more public, but either neglected, or
was hindered, until I was less sensible of the need of it, or began to hope,
that as touching that, those that would so read or hear, as to give any earnest
heed to what I had to say from the testimony of the Lord, had no need that I
should write unto, or for them. But now being again made sensible of need, and
reproved for my neglect, or deferring of what I was so much pressed in spirit
to; I have here given, according to my weak and little measure of
understanding, the sense of that double sentence of the Apostle, Heb. 13. 4.
with some instructions arising from the consideration of it; and could have
been glad to have added the following admonition and exhortation with
encouragement: Let Your conversation be without covetousness, and be content
with such things as ye have; for God has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee, etc. But for want of time to write, and means to put it out, I
must yet forbear; though I think it as needful to be added, as this was to go
first, and that too in order to the abstaining from fornication, and filthiness
of the flesh; for not only is covetousness, as it is, or has in it, a lust
after the forbidden fruit, (or that which God has not given or allowed us, and
so which we have not in and by Christ Jesus the Lord) the direct root of this;
But many times covetousness more properly, or as more strictly taken for the
love of money, and will to be rich in ones self (which also springs from the
natural ignorance of, and enmity to God, and vain thoughts of our selves, and
idolatrous esteem of other things) is that which leads many into this
temptation and snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, and makes them
slaves to the filthy and base lusts of men, (their own or others) yea, it is
the root of all evil, more directly or remotely: And oh that I were more sit
for it, and then if God preserve me, and give opportunity, I shall desire to
have one blow at the root.

In the mean time, and always, that the Lord may deliver us all from it, and
incline our hearts to his testimonies, and not unto it, for counsel and
strength to guide our feet in the way of peace and holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord; is the desire of, The most unmeet to reprove, or
admonish others, of all that have tasted that the Lord is gracious,

January 12, 1666. Tho. Moore, Junior.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 23. put out great. P. 17. l. 4. read not so to be taken. P. 30.
l. 11. put out afterward. P. 36. l. 1. r. man. P. 42. l. 15. for so r. to. P.
44. l. 1. to earth add is dangerous folly. P. 45. l. 1. r. marriages. P. 71. l.
8. put out that.

FORNICATION condemned, In a Double Sentence; Commending MARRIAGE in All.
Condemning WHOREDOM in All.

HEB. 13. 4. Marriage is honorable in All, and the Bed undefiled: But
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.
IN the first branch of this Sentence consider

1. What is Marriage, etc. 2. What is meant by its being Honorable in all. 3.
What makes it so, and how it becomes so to us. Lastly, of what Use this is to
us.
1. The Marriage here directly spoken of, is that which is natural, of and in
the flesh; and yet such as may, and in believers ought to be in the Lord also.
It is the uniting or joining together in the flesh, of one man, and one woman,
that were before both of them free, and unmarried. The joining them together as
one flesh, one body: and that by mutual Consent, and solemn Covenant, in the
presence of God, and publicly testified.

And God is after a peculiar sort a witness of that Covenant, having allowed
and appointed it for good and holy ends, (as shall after be showed.)

Therefore also they are said to be joined together by him, when with mutual
consent any one man, and one woman, that were before both free (as aforesaid)
do so take and give themselves, and are so taken and given one to another. And
whom God has so joined together, no man may put asunder; nor ought they either
of them to break that union or covenant, by dealing treacherously or
fraudalently one with another. Mal. 2. 14, 15. Matthew. 19 4, 5.

This Marriage was at the first made by God more immediately, or by the
ministration of Angels, in his bringing the woman to the man, after he had made
her of the man, and giving her to him in a solemn manner, to be his wife, an
help meet for him in the flesh, and in the Lord. And by the man's taking her as
the gift of God, into such union of the flesh, to be one body, one flesh with
him, and that in the presence of God and of his holy Angels, (who are still
witnesses of that Covenant between a man and the wife of his youth:) And upon
that gift of God, and his so taking her, she became his wife. And so still,
Marriage has been with Gods allowance, and is to be made by a solemn agreement
between such persons as may be joined together in that Covenant. And betrothing
one to another, and Contract made in the presence of God and men, and after
such manner, and custom of the places where they live, testified and confirmed,
as in which it is confirmed before men, (as Ruth 4.) that no man may disanul,
make void, or add thereto. Gal. 3. 15. Still remember, and carry this along,
that this Union, and Covenant of Marriage, is such, as is of one man, and one
woman, in one body, as one flesh; and admits of no more according to Gods
institution, and appointment of it from the first. For God made them at the
beginning male and female, one man, and one woman; and said, For this cause
shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave to his wife, (he
says not wives) and they twain (he says not They three, or They four, but
They two) shall be one flesh. This is Marriage. And so the bed undefiled is the
Marriagebed, modestly intimating the fellowship between married persons as man
and wife, which is allowed and approved of God. See Prove. 5. 18, 19, 20. 1 Cor.
7. 2, 3, 4, 5. which then is not defiled, when no other is accepted into it,
besides or with them; or so known, approached to, or looked on to that end, or
in pursuance of such a desire, by either of them. See Job 31. 1-9, 10, 11. with
Genesis 49. 4. Numb. 5. 20. Prove. 5. 17. See how the spiritual wickedness
answerable to such defiling the bed is expressed Isai. 57. 8.

2. The next consideration is, what is to be understood by its being honorable
in all.

It appears by that which is opposed to it in the other branch of the Text,
which is Gods judging, disallowing, condemning, punishing Whoremongers and
Adulterers: That by its being honorable, is meant, that it is allowed and
approved of God in his word and works, and by him made comely, and of good
report among men; as a laudable and comely means of Gods appointment and
approvement, and by him ordained to honorable ends; as

1. For man's having a meet help and companion. God having first formed the man
of the dust of the earth, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, in
which he became a living soul, and was made after Gods own image or likeness,
judged, that it was not good for man to be alone, or without one of the same
kind, (for among all the other creatures there was not found an help meet for
him) he therefore formed the woman of the man, and gave her to him as a meet
help and companion, Genesis 2. 7, 18, 20, etc. for the instrumental bringing forth
a godly seed, a seed of God, or after his image and likeness, and brought forth
according to his will, in a way of his allowance and approvement. See Mal. 2.
15. Did not he make one? yet had he the residue of the spirit. He could have
made more as well as one; but he made one, and but one: and wherefore one? that
he might seek a godly seed: Therefore he made a woman of the man, and for him;
that man might not generate with any of the other creatures, but might have one
of himself for a meet help, that he might beget in his own likeness, who was
made after the image of God; and therefore but one, that he might have a godly
seed, or a seed brought forth according to Gods mind, an holy seed, as opposed
to a seed of fornication. And so Marriage still is honorable in all, a
laudable means, and way approved, and appointed of God, for the seeking and
bringing forth such a seed, as of which neither man nor woman shall be ashamed
to have, or to have had. As well as also for society, and mutual solace, and
helpfulness in all things pertaining to them to do, and suffer, in their
bringing up children for the Lord, and seeking his glory in all things. And so

2. A comely and laudable means of Gods appointment for avoiding fornication,
which it is his will we should abstain and flee from. See 1 Cor. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5,
9.

3. It is also ordained to be to us a mystical sign and resemblance of another
Marriage, that is heavenly, spiritual, and glorious, as in a threefold
consideration.

1. That union between the humanity and the Deity, and so between God and man
in the person of the Son of God, in whom the Word was made flesh: This though a
nearer union then can be fully resembled by the natural Marriage, being a
personal union, an union of two natures in one person; yet is also resembled by
a Marriage, because as in Marriage, the debts, arrearages, and forfeitures of
the woman become the man's, and he becomes surety for them, for her good, and
for the Creditors satisfaction: so, and much more in this, Gods Son being made
of a woman was made under the Law for us that were under the Law; and all our
sins, debts, arrearages, and forfeitures to God met together on him; and he
became our surety for good. And also because as in Marriage, all the riches,
glory and dignity of the man becomes the woman's, and she is invested and
dignified with it: so and much more in this, all the riches, glory and dignity
of the Son of God, and that is the glory of the Fathers own self, which he had
with him before the world was, is become man's, and so as the humane nature is
enriched and glorified with it in the person of the Son of God made man; whence
the glory of the Word made flesh, is said to be the glory of the only begotten
Son of God, full of grace and truth; and as such, the eyewitnesses beheld it,
Joh. 1. 14. and believers do now spiritually and by faith behold it. For these,
and other such reasons, this union, in which the Word was made flesh, and the
Son of man was glorified with God, is resembled by a Marriage which a King made
for his son, and sent his servants to call good and bad to the wedding-feast,
Matthew. 22. 2-10. with Prove. 9. 1-6. This also may be signified (at least as the
root and foundation of that) in Jer. 3. 14. Turn, O backsliding children, says
the Lord, for I am married to you; as may appear in comparing it with that Jer.
31. 22. How long will thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? The Lord has
created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man.

II. That spiritual uniting, reconciliation or Marriage of men to Christ, and
so to God in Christ, which is graciously tendered by Christ in the Gospel unto
all men in due time, upon this ground, that the first is already made in Christ
for them, and therein all things ready. Isai. 55. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. with 2 Cor.
5. 14-19. with Matthew. 22. and Prove. 9. and which is made in the first fruits
between Christ and the Church, even while they are here on earth, and so in a
great sort between Christ and every believing soul. Which also was typified by
Gods espousing and marrying the whole house of Judah and Israel to himself, as
to their own one husband, and their becoming his after a peculiar sort above
all people. Jer. 2. 2. and 31. 32. Ezekiel. 16. 8, etc. Isai. 5.

This gracious and spiritual Marriage (as also that type and figure of it now
mentioned was) is more especially and frequently resembled by the natural and
earthly marriage: see an instance or two, Ephesians. 5. 23-32. The Apostle first
instructing wives to be subject to their own husbands, as the Church is to
Christ, gives this reason, that the husband is the head of the wife, even as
Christ is the head of the Church. And then instructing husbands to love their
wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it: yea, to love
and cherish her as his own flesh, even as the Lord the Church; and thereto
showing that a man's wife is one body, one flesh with himself. And that for this
cause a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife. He
adds, that this is a great mystery; but I speak, says he, concerning Christ
and the Church: that is, it is not so great a mystery in it self, but as it
resembles the union and marriage between Christ and the Church. Therefore
elsewhere he says, that as he that is joined to a woman is one body; for two,
says he, shall be one flesh: so he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit.
And therefore admonishes to flee fornication; as well because marriage is so
honorable in the thing resembled by it, as also because in being joined to the
Lord they are made one spirit with him, and so one body in the unity of the
Spirit; therefore not to defile his body, his temple, by taking the members of
Christ, and making them the members of an harlot. See 1 Cor. 6. 15-19. whence
also he warns of spiritual fornication: for, says he, I have espoused you to
one husband, that I may present you a chaste virgia to Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2.
Yea, that earthly marriages, according to Gods institution of them from the
beginning, are ordained for a sign and resemblance of this heavenly and
spiritual marriage; and therefore honorable in all, appears, by the holy
Ghosts making use of them, and the obligations of them, and loves pertaining to
them, occasionally, to set before us this heavenly and spiritual marriage, and
the things pertaining thereto. See Psalm. 45. tot. thence entitled, A song of
loves; and the whole book of Canticles. Yea, to set before us that
forementioned type of this, and therein also the thing it self; and the evil of
spiritual fornication, by the evil and shamefulness of a wife's dealing
treacherously with her husband. See the forecited Scriptures. Isai. 5. 1, etc.
Jer. 2 and 3 chapters; Ezekiel. 16. tot. with Hos. 1, 2 and 3 chapters. And
indeed, all spiritual fornication, and treacherous dealing of that kind, is,
and always was found on the woman's part, that is, on the Churches part, not on
Gods and Christ's part, who is the head and husband; in him is no iniquity; he
hates such treachery, and putting away, (as we shall after further show.) And
this was spoken to them, as well as many other things, by ensamples or types,
which are also written for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world are
come. 1 Cor. 106. 11. Heb. 8. and 9. and 10.

III. That glorious marriage, in which this between Christ and the Church, now
spiritually begun, shall be completely finished between him and them, in their
souls and bodies reunited; in which their vile body shall be fashioned into
the likeness of his glorious body, and they glorified together with him: And in
which Jerusalem shall be gloriously married, even their land shall be married,
and the seed and offspring that shall then be reserved, and brought forth out
of them, shall be married to him, and therein also to them the children of the
first resurrection, and that according to such a Covenant, and in such manner,
as they never before were married: At which Marriage, and on that mountain, the
Lord will make to all people a glorious feast. See Isai. 25. 6, etc. They are
pronounced blessed that shall be called unto this Marriage-supper of the Lamb,
to sit down with him then when the Bride the Lambs wife has made her self
ready; even as they are pronounced blessed, and holy, that have part in the
first resurrection, for on such the second death shall have no power, but they
shall be priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand
years. Rev. 19. 7, 8. 9. and 20. 6. with Matthew. 25. 10. Luke 22. 28, 29, 30.
This is that resembled by natural or earthly Marriages in the prophecy of it,
Isa. 62. 4, 5. Thou shall no more be termed Forsaken, nor thy land desolate,
but thou shall be called Hephzi-bah, and thy land Beulah: for the Lord
delights in thee, and thy land shall be married: for as a young man marries
a virgin, shall thy sons marry thee; and as the bridegroom rejoices over the
bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. See also Jer. 31. 31, 32, etc. Hos.
2. 19, 20.

Thus, and for these honorable ends and purposes, Marriage is honorable in
all, and the bed undefiled. In all, namely in all men, or persons of mankind,
male and female, whether believers or unbelievers, whether rich or poor, and of
what order, rank, degree or place soever they be in the Church, or out of it.
So that whosoever desire it, being such as are fit for it, and may be joined
together according to that Covenant in its primitive institution, they may
marry with Gods allowance. Though believers are admonished not to be unequally
yoked with unbelievers, and so to marry only in the Lord; yet the ignorant,
profane, and unbelievers are nowhere forbidden of God to marry; but that is
allowed them, and made clean, comely, and honorable, for their enjoyment and
use, as one of those demonstrations of his goodness toward them, by which he
is leading them to repentance.

Which leads us to the third Consideration, namely,

3. What it is that makes Marriage in such wise honorable in all, and the bed
undefiled; and by what means it becomes so to us. To which I say,

1. God has dignified it, and made it honorable for all mankind in the first
man Adam, by making him at the beginning male and female; and first the man,
one man; and then the woman of the man, one woman; and by giving them one to
another as meet helps and companions (as aforesaid) and so making them twain
(two of one) to be one flesh, one body, upon their acceptance and mutual
consent in his presence; and giving this instruction thereupon, (which being
spoken by Adam in his innocence, is mentioned by the Wisdom of God as Gods
saying) For this cause shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave to his wife. See Genesis 2. 18* 21-25. with Matthew. 19. 4, 5. and Mal. 2.
14, 15. Thus did God dignifie it, and make it honorable for all mankind in
the first Adam. But

2. That it now becomes honorable to us, sinful and polluted mankind, and
that such enjoyment and use of it, as aforesaid, is laudable and comely in all,
is only by means of the socrifice and mediation of the man Christ Jesus, the
second Adam, by whom it is sanctified, and made clean for our use, from that
shame, confusion and pollution that we had procured to our selves in it, and in
all conditions, relations, and enjoyments. For notwithstanding God had
dignified it, and made it honorable in the first man and woman, as in their
first constitution, and that was for all in that first public man male and
female; yet sin being once entered, and death by sin, it* could not have been
honorable in them, nor in any of their posterity, unless God had devised a
means for his banished, that they might not be utterly expelled both from his
presence and mercy, unless God had provided a remedy in a second Adam; for sin
is a shame, and reproach to any people, and does make a separation between God
and them, and hide good things from them. Pro. 14. 34. Jer. 5. 25.

Now the first Adam, both male and female, presently after their creation, and
excellent constitution, sinned against their Creator, and therein the whole
Nature sinned, and departed from God, and became polluted with all uncleanness,
and enmity to him, and so came short of that glory of God in, and unto which
they were created: And brought shame and dishonor upon themselves, and upon
their state, and relation of marriage, and on the fruit of the body, and of the
Womb; so that all mankind became cursed in all relations, conditions, and
enjoyments, and in all that they had, and did, as in, and from the first man
Adam. See Genesis 3. 16, 17. and Deuteronomy. 28. 15. etc. with Romans 3. 9-19-23. and Chapter
5. 12. But God has found out a Ransom, a Redeemer, and Healer, for all
mankind without respect of persons. 2 Samuel 14. 14. Romans 3. 21, 22, 23. etc.
and 5. 12-18.

God has crowned his son Jesus with glory, and honor above men and Angels,
that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man: And he that only
one, in a body prepared him to that purpose, dyed for all, as the second Adam,
a surety, and public person, in the room, and stead of all; he dyed their
death, and therein suffered all the shame, reproach, and wrath that was their
due for the sins, and trespasses of the world, that came in by the disobedience
of one, and occasioned the breach between God and man at the first: And therein
God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them: For he has made him that knew no sin, to be sin for us:
And this for our behoof and commodity, that men condemned and dead at Law,
might live to a comfortable enjoyment of his mercies in marriage, and the
fruits thereof, and in a comfortable use of the Creature; to the end that they
that thus live in their several ages, should not benceforth live to themselves,
but to him that dyed for them and rose again; that so through the grace of God,
bringing salvation to all men in due time -- they might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Heb. 2. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15, 19, 21. with 1 Timothy
2. 6. Tit. 2. 11, 12.

Wherefore also, he is by means of the same death the Mediator between God and
man, making intercession for the transgressors, for the daily taking away those
sins of the people, in which when light comes they choose darkness rather, that
judgment may not speedily be executed, but mercies yet continued to rebellious
ones. 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. Psalm. 68. 18, 19, 20. Isa. 53. 12. Luke 13. 6-9.

And by means of these two, the sacrifice and intercession of the Man Christ
Jesus, in whom the nature of man is married to God, and who is that one
Mediator between God and man, marriage is sanctified, and become honorable in
all; and so every creature of God sanctified (that is) made clean for our use,
that it may be received with thanksgiving of them that believe, and know the
truth: For it is sanctified (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 5.) by the word of
God and prayer; that is, by the word that was made flesh for us, and by his
intercession for us.

By his being made flesh, and so by the sacrifice of his own Body once for all,
made perfect through sufferings, he has made peace for the sins of the world
imputed to him; abolished death, taken the sting out of it, redeemed us to
himself from the curse of the law: And so far taken the evil of the curse and
shame out of marriage, and creature-injoyments, that we may have a laudable and
comfortable enjoyment of them, though still some fruits, and remembrances of
our sin is left upon them for gracious ends; and therefore in the hand of the
Mediator, who orders them for our good.

And by his prayer, or continued intercession for us, he still sanctifies those
enjoyments of the creature, and makes them clean for our use, against the
provocation of our daily iniquities of a new sort, which otherwise would render
them unclean, and polluted to us, full of shame, misery and curse; which now
are filled with gladness, refreshing and mercy to men, even in all: and this,
that they may be received with thanksgiving (as aforesaid) of them that believe
and know the truth.

Behold, in all this, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world;
for because He by the grace of God tasted death for every man, and gave himself
a ransom for all, and is our peace, the propitiation for the sins of the whole
world: Therefore Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled.

We come in the last place to consider some usefulness of this Instruction.

1. It aggravates the sin of Fornication; if God had prohibited Marriage to any
man, or to any sort or order of men, or rendered it dishonorable, or uncomely
for any to marry, fornication in such had been more excuseable.

But when at such a rate, as through the sacrifice and mediation of his Son,
and to such a gracious end, that men might be accommodated with the more
cheerfulness to live to him, and serve him, God has made marriage honorable
in all, and the bed undefiled; for any to walk in, and serve the lusts of
uncleanness, in whoredom and adultery, or seeking content and satisfying to the
natural concupiscences in any way forbidden of God, must needs be out of
measure sinful, because without necessity, there was a sanctified means to
avoid it, which either they had, or might have had, for seeking it of God
according to his Will, who knows our needs; and what is good for us he would
have given: yea, there is in it a despising his way, and gracious provision,
for our meet helpfulness; which iniquity is the greater, by how much the more
his provision is rich and graoious.

2. This instruction condemns as heretical and devilish, those doctrines that
religiously forbid to marry, as also that command to abstain from meats which
God has created to be received, and that with thanksgiving of them that
believe and know the truth, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 3-5.

Though in some cases of distress and perplexity of Christian Churches and
Nations, it may be good (that is to say, commodious) for a man, if he can
contain, then not to marry; yet if he, or she that is unmarried, do then marry,
they sin not, nor do any thing worthy of shame merely in marrying, though such,
at such a time, shall have the more trouble in the flesh; yet it is better to
marry then to burn, if they cannot contain, therefore let them marry, 1 Cor 7.
7, 8, 9, 26, 27, 28. For Marriage is honorable in all, of what degree, order,
or rank soever: But whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

3. This also admonishes not to abuse marriage which God has in such wise,
and by such means made honorable.

Now marriage is abused, either by treacherous breaking or violating the
covenant of it, or enticing others so to do: or by a dishonorable use of it,
or behavior in it. And here give me leave to stay a while, as to show the
abuse of marriage in both these branches; and to warn of it, it may be needful
to some.

1. Marriage is abused, and profaned, by a treacherous breaking, or enticing
others to break and violate the covenant of it, of which God is witness, who
will be a swift witness both against the adulterer, and against the false
sweater, see Mal. 2. 14, 15. and 3. 5. Therefore (says the Lord) see that none
deal treacherously with the wife of his youth; namely, that first taken, when
he was free, and at liberty to marry: either not having been married before, or
being by the death of a former wife free from the law of his wife (or so the
wife from the law of her husband.) For God is a witness between him, and the
wife of his youth; and will take all treacherous dealing, in neglecting, or
departing from the first; taking, or going in to another, or looking upon
another to lust after them during the lifetime of the first, as a breach of his
Covenant, which admits not of another to be added to the first taken, during
the lifetime of the first, no, though under pretense of taking, owning, and
caring for her as a wife; nor of departing from, or putting away the first. See
Levit. 18. 18. with the forementioned Scripture in Malachi.

So then the Marriage-covenant is violated and broken, either by adding
another, or by departing from, or putting away the first taken, during her
lifetime.

1. By adding another as a wife or concubine; a wife to her sister, or one wife
to another, during her lifetime.

True it is, that the taking and having more wives then one at at a time, and
sometimes diverse wives and concubines also, was customarily used in former
ages, even among Israel after the flesh: And many good men allowed themselves
in it, without examination of the custom whence it came, and whether it was
according, or contrary to Gods Law. And in those times, before that grace of
God that brings salvation to all men had so appeared, as now it has by Jesus
Christ, more fully discovering, and teaching to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts; God winked at such things, and did not so severely reprove them
as since he does, and will do. And might the rather suffer, and forbear the
strict taking notice of them, that at the time of the manifestation of Christ,
and through the Gospel, he might the more declare his righteousness in
forgiving sincs that are past, and for other holy ends.

Yet however in those times of ignorance, among the Gentiles, and under those
darker dispensations to Israel, while he spoke to them but in diverse parts, and
had not given so full and clear a revelation of the mystery of godliness, as is
now come forth by Christ to Jew and Gentile, he in a sort winked at such
things; yet (I say) it was not so from the beginning, as is already showed; nor
did God ever give any declarative allowance of it, but contrariwise did forbid
it, and declare it to be contrary to his mind, and to the order he had set in
creation, as may be seen in the Scriptures already cited.

And in the way of his judgments also, even enough might be seen to show, that
he did not approve it, (though he did not so severely judge it, as under this
last dispensation he will.)

That he did not approve it, nor was it according to his mind, may be seen in
these Observations.

1. The first that we read of, that had two wives together, was that Lamech
(not of the posterity of Seth, but) of Cain, the fifth generation from him, who
went out from the presence of the Lord, and was with his posterity separated,
and distinguished from Seths posterity, who, it appears, abode in Gods
presence, and retained his Oracles, and were called the sons of God, probably
as distinguished from Cains posterity, who were called the sons and daughters
of men. (Compare the 4, 5, and 6 chapters of Genesis.)

And see I. what befell that Lamech, (the first that broke Gods law and order
set in creation, in taking two wives;) he was led into, and overcome of such a
temptation, as brought him under the sentence (at least in his own spirit) of
an heavy judgment, exceeding Cains tenfold; which he was made sadly to bewail
in the ears of both his wives, who must reap the evil fruit of it with him: And
see how the mention of it is presently added to that of his taking two wives,
Genesis 4. 19, 23, 24. II. See also what wrath and judgment it brought upon the
old world, when the sons of God (those of Seths posterity, among whom the
Oracles of God and his Worship was retained) saw the daughters of men that they
were fair, and took them wives of all that they chose, and thereby joined with
them in their evil manners, and made their wickedness great, hardening their
hearts against the spiritual preaching of Jesus Christ in his Oracles, and by
such means as he afforded.

2. And though after we read of some good men that added another wife, or wives
and concubines, during the lifetime of the first; yet as they had no allowance
from God, in any of his oracles or instructions given them so to (...) so
likewise it may be observed,

1. That they of them that we read of first in it, were led into it by
consulting with the flesh, or drawn in unadvisedly by some temptation, and
through heedlesness of the Word and Oracles of God. (As for instance:) Abraham
lived with Sarah till they were both old; and though God had given him no
children, yet he would not add another wife or concubine to her, to see if
that way he might obtain children, but intended to make Eliezer of Damascus his
heir, until the Oracle came forth, tha^ one out of his own bowels should be his
heir: after which, upon Sarahs consulting with the flesh, because it ceased to
be with her after the manner of women, she thought there must be another added
for the bringing about Gods promise; and he listening to that hasty device,
went in to Hagar at the request of his wife: yet neither is Hagar called by the
holy Ghost his wife, (though by Sarah given to him to be his wife) but Sarahs
maid, the bondwoman; and both she, and Keturah, called his concubines, Genesis 25.
6. 1 Chronicles. 1. 32. which Keturah also by that seems to have been added in
Sarahs lifetime, I say, in that she is called his concubine. He having been
once led into a snare, and there being no such distinct revelation of the evil
of it as is since come forth, he might the more easily be led into another.

And Jacob intended no more then to take one wife, according to the instruction
of his father and mother, ( Genesis 27. 46. and 28. 1, 2. with chap. 29. 18.) but
was beguiled of her his heart was first set upon, by the treachery of Laban,
who without his knowledge or consent put the other first upon him: and then was
easily persuaded to follow his affection in accepting Rachel also, whom he
always loved more then Leab; and then through envy of the sisters,
occasionally provoked from his having them both to wife, he was further led
into snares, to accept of each of their handmaids for concubines. And after
these swervings from the true order and state of Marriage, (as set by God in
the beginning) found in some of the fathers, other good men after, even under
the Law, (in which ministration that evil was not so fully and particularly
discovered and reproved) following the examples and customs of their Fathers,
diverse of them took many wives together, or one in the lifetime of the other,
without examination, or considering how they therein swerved from the order
set, and from the instruction in the Oracles from the beginning. And what
snares they met with therein, may be seen in David, much more in Solomon, as
well as in others. This was very general, that one was loved more then the
other, as in the case of Jacobs two wives, Genesis 29. 30, 31. So, that it was a
mischief very incident to the having two, is signified, Deuteronomy. 21. 15. And that
occasioned envy and hatred between the women, as, 1 Samuel 1. 2, 6, 7. and in the
former instances.

II. It is also observable, that in those instructions delivered by these holy
men, in those times, which are recorded by the holy Ghost, they now here
justify that which yet was some of their practice in that particular.

Abraham charged his servant to take a wife (not wives) for his son, of his
kindred, that he might not marry with the daughters of the land; so Isaac and
Rebekkah charged Jacob. See Genesis 24. 3, 4, 5. etc. and 27. 46. with Chapter 28.
1, 2.

And Moses the man of God, though his ministration was dark, and veiled, in
comparison of that come forth since; yet left this precept for Kings, who were
to be examples, and leaders of the people; That they should not multiply wives,
Deuteronomy. 17. 17. besides that general precept, Levit. 18. 18. Thou shall not take
a wife to her sister (or as the Margin renders it) one wife to another, to
uncover her nakedness, besides the other, during her lifetime. See how
expressly he forbids it.

Yea, Solomon also, or rather the wisdom of God by him, (though it seems he had
not always so heeded that instruction, which he spoke by the Holy Ghost to us)
instructs to rejoice with the wife of the youth; he says not wives, but the
wife, and that of the youth, (the first taken, when a man was unmarried, or
free from a wife, as aforesaid) Let her be as the loving hind, let her breasts
satisfy thee at all times, and be thou always ravished with her love. And why
will thou my son be ravished with the bosom of a stranger? It seems by this,
that all other women, during the lifetime of the first, are strangers in that
respect, and so to be taken, or had. And how evil in the fight of God the
walking contrary to this counsel is, and how snaring and hurtful to a man, may
be seen in what follows. See Prove. 5. 18. to the end, with Eccles. 9. 9. and
Mal. 2. 14, 15. It appears by all said, that the having two wives together, or
adding one to the first during her lifetime, is, and was from the beginning a
breach of Gods Order and Covenant, and contrary to his mind, never approved by
him, though sometimes in a sort winked at, and not so severely charged and
judged by him, as now under the Gospel.

Against this some happily may object. --

Object. 1. That Gods giving directions in such a case as that, Deuteronomy. 21. 15.
If a man have two wives, the one beloved, the other hated; intimates his
allowance of having two.

Answ. To this I answer, That as much intimates his allowance of hating the
one, as of having two. And that he never intended to give allowance to any to
hate his wife, will surely be acknowledged by any that have read, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self; and no man ever hated his own flesh; and a
man's wife is one flesh with him. Therefore shall a man leave his father and
his mother, and shall cleave to his wife.

Nor will any say, that God allowed a man to commit adultery with a maid, not
betrothed, because he gave direction in such a case, that if he had done so, he
should marry her, Exodus 22. 16.

Object. 2. Gods allowance (or the goodness and lawfulness) of such a practice,
then appears, by Gods bringing good fruit out of such matches; as for instance,
Rachell and Leab did build the house of Israel, Ruth 4. 11.

Answ. God often brings good out of evil; yet does not thereby justify the
evil, nor stood in any need of it for the bringing forth his good: nor gives us
any allowance thereby to do evil, that good may come: but when evil is found
with us, and where sin hatk abounded, he takes occasion to magnify the riches
of his grace, and the perfection and victoriousness of his righteousness, for
forgiving, and reigning over sin, even unto life eternal. But then to make such
use of it, as to say, let us continue in sin, that grace may abound, Let us do
evil that good may come, is a most wicked abuse of, and turning his grace into
wantonness, contrary to all the end* and instruction of it, which God forbids.
Romans 5. 20, 21. and 6. 1, 2. with Chap. 3. 5-8. Yea, it is an evil and sensual
way, to judge of God and his things according to outward appearance, to judge
him to be like us, and approve our ways, because he holds his peace, or also
still fills us with good things, Psalm. 50. 21. Eccles. 8. 11. Isa. 57. 10, 11,
etc. We are instructed to search, try and examine our ways, not by outward
appearances, or successes, but by the Word of the Lord, and now by that as come
forth by Christ in the preaching of the cross, which is that light that makes
manifest all things reproved. Ephesians. 5. 13. 1 Cor. 11. 28, 29. Jam. 1. 25.
Psalm. 1. 1, 2. Jer. 17. 7 9.

Object. 3. God gave David Saul's wives into his bosom, 2 Samuel 12. 8.

Answ. 1. He gave him also, as the same Scripture tells us, his masters house,
and the whole house of Israel and of Judah, to be ruled, fed, and nourished by
him as their Shepherd, as well as also therein to be to him a rich portion for
his present satisfaction and contentment, and to magnify him; and so did give
his masters wives into his bosom, to be at his dispose, and to be cherished by
him, as his masters wives; and yet not give them to him to be to him as wives;
nor read we any where of his taking, or having any of them as such: yet they
being so given to him, to be cherished by him, and their husband being dead, it
had been less evil in him, to have taken any of them, then to slay Vriah with
the sword of the children of Ammon, that he might take his wife; yea, first to
take her, and then so to slay him, as he did. And so his having those in his
custody (as aforesaid) aggravated his evil in this, as did all the great
goodness that God had bestowed upon him. And yet also

2. If we had found that David had so taken them, and should understand this
Scripture to say, that God did give them into his bosom for wives, or to be so
taken and used by him, if he desired it (which it does not:) Yet that would not
prove Gods approving his so taking, or having any of them as a wife, during the
lifetime of another. For God is said oft-times to give permissively those
things which properly he allows not, much less approves, but suffers, and
permits, and is pleased to wink at the sinfulness of men's desires in them; as
in a like case, Moses for the hardness of their hearts under the ministration
of the Law, that had both veiledness, and yet sharpness in many things, holding
under a yoke of servitude, in which there was not such manifestation of the
riches of the grace of God, to melt and overcome to such whole submission to,
and delight in Gods government in every thing, as is since come forth by
Christ: I say, for the blindness, and hardness of their heart, under that
ministration (which was then more excusable) he suffered them to put away their
wives, when as from the beginning it was not so: And then, as ever, God (who is
one, and with whom is no variableness, or shadow turning) hated putting away.
See Matthew. 19. 7, 8. with Mal. 2. 14, 15, 16. and Mark 10. 5, 6.

But enough has been said to show, that the taking, or adding another wise
during the lifetime of the first, was always an abuse, and corruption of
Marriage, contrary to its first state and institution, and a breach of its
Covenant, of which God is witness. And to clear it against those objections
that may be raised, either from some former practices of some of the holy men
of old (I say, of some of them, for most of them were preserved from that abuse
of marriage, as Noah, Isaac, Moses, Job, and others that might be mentioned.)

Or from God's suffering, or winking at such practices in any sort under those
darker dispensations; though then he left not himself without witness against
them, even in the Oracles received, and retained by those men, and
instructions, and precepts delivered by them; who yet themselves through
temptation, counsel of the flesh, or evil examples not examined, were led into
such snares, as is already showed.

And yet more might be said, (as to mention a little in that one instance of
Job) Job was a man of whom God testifies, that he feared God, and eschewed
evil; and this is one of the great evils, which in the fear of God he had then
learned to eschew, having one wife (who yet sometime through her folly was an
affliction to him) He made a covenant with his eyes, (namely, that he would not
look, or think on another, to lust after her) why then, said he, should I think
on a maid: For what portion of God is there from above? and what inheritance of
the Almighty from on high? Is not destruction to the wicked, and a strange
punishment to the workers of iniquity, etc? If I have (says he) walked with
vanity, or my foot has hasted to deceit: If my heart has been deceived by a
woman, or I have laid wait at my neighbors door: Then let my wife grind to
another, and let others bow down upon her; for this is an heinous crime, an
iniquity to be punished by the judges. See Job 31. 1-12.

And now that God has spoken to us in these last days by his Son, he has
plainly declared his mind for the bringing us into rectitude in this as in
other things: see Matthew. 19. 4-6. with Mark 10. 6-8. and what is before noted
thereupon: like to which is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 2, 3. Let every man
have his own wife, and every woman have her own husband; and that to avoid the
so having, knowing, or looking upon (to lust after) any other by either of
them. All which is there signified to be fornication, as things are now
revealed.

Therefore also the same Apostle instructing Timothy and Titus what manner of
persons they must be, who might by them be ordained in every place as Bishops
and Deacons; mentions this as the first thing: If any be blameless, the husband
of one wife, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 12. Tit. 1. 6, 7. If any say, this being a direction
what manner of persons they must be, that may be chosen into office of
oversight of their brethren, is not binding to all: I answer,

1. It is an instruction how such ought to be qualified, that they may
profitably teach, and therewithal be examples to others, in such things, as the
grace of God bringing salvation to all men, now in this appearance of it,
teaches all. Therefore that which they must be, is no other then what all
others, to whom that grace has appeared, ought to be (according to their
capacity) and are by their teaching and example to be instructed to; as may be
seen in the other things mentioned, as vigilancie, good behavior, being given
to hospitality, apt to teach (as in any measure they have received the gift, 1
Pet. 4. 10.) not given to wine, no striker or brawler, not accused of riot. 2.
This, that he be the husband of one wife, is the first thing mentioned, by
which he is to be renderd blameless: yea, in the Epistle to Titus, it is added
as the reason why he must be the husband of one wife, etc. for such a one must
be blameless. It seems then, no man is blameless, (now under this last
dispensation) that is the husband of two wives together. I shall add no more
to this. But,

2. The Marriage-covenant is violated and broken, by departing from, or putting
away the first-taken wife, or husband, during their lifetime. Hence to that
admonition, Mal. 2. 15. Let none deal treacherously against the wife of his
youth; this is added as a motive, For the Lord the God of Israel says, that he
hates putting away. Putting away therefore is thereby signified to be included
in the treacherous dealing warned of. And our Savior says, that though Moses
for the hardness of their hearts suffered them to put away their wives, and
wrote them such a precept; yet from the beginning it was not so: and further
adds, that whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, commits
adultery against her: and if a woman shall put away her husband, and marry
another, she commits adultery, Mark 10. 3-11, 12. Yet in the relation of one
part of this saying by Matthew, we find an exception, Whosoever shall put away
his wife, except it be for fornication, etc. or for the cause of fornication.
See Matthew. 19. 8, 9. with chap. 5. 32. According to which, our Savior implies,
a liberty yet left in some cases (though he gives no such commandment in any
case) for a man to put away his wife for the cause of fornication* or that
there may be some such cause of fornication, for which he may put her away, and
yet not be chargeable with breaking covenant, or committing adultery against
her. And surely, that is such fornication, as is properly and originally her
act, ( viz.) such as in which she treacherously departs from her husband, as
Jer. 3. 20. and endows and takes to her self another in stead of her husband,
as Ezekiel. 16. 31, 32, 33, 34. (which is there distinguished from that which is
usual in harlots; in which they are enticed, allured, or hired by the adulterer
to commit adultery with them.) And if only for such fornication of the wife,
our Savior still leave a man at liberty to put her away; then the liberty
given in this exception, nothing crosses the general prohibition of putting
away without the exception: Because in such a case, he is not the first, in
leaving, or putting away, and so is not properly said to put her away; for she
first voluntarily and treacherously leaves him, and goes to, and takes another
in his stead; though after she hoth done so, he by some public act, divorce or
put her away, in such wise, that she may not return to him, nor he to her
again; or on her after turning, refuse to receive, or own her again as his
wife. This I give as my present apprehension of the nature of the fornication
meant in the exception: to which I am induced, both from that general
prohibition forementioned, as expressed by the holy Ghost in one Evangelist;
with which I see not* how else this should fully agree: and I know Wisdoms
words are all plain, and right, nothing perverse, cross, or clashing one
against another in them; and if in any thing any of them seem otherwise to us,
we may be sure, we do not yet understand them. For though, in some one place,
that is mentioned by the wisdom of God, which in another place speaking of the
same thing, is omitted by the same wisdom, yet so as nothing crosses, but each
confirms, opens, and helps to understand the other. And I am also induced to it
from the nature of Gods dealing with the house of Israel, and with his Church
and people now; which we shall find to be such as is fitly resembled hereby,
but much more exceeding in graciousness: for he hates putting away; and when
provoked to it by such treacherous departing from him, and taking another in
stead of him; yet, can righteously, and is graciously ready to receive them
again on their turning to him, as we may after show. Jer. 3. 1-20. Ezekiel. 16.
32. etc. I submit my apprehensions herein to correction of better judgments,
and propound it as my conception, That for a single act of fornication merely,
or it being not such, as in which she treacherously departs from her husband,
and goes to, and takes another in stead of him, a man is not to put away his
wife; yea, I suppose he is obliged by the grace of God that has now appeared
by Christ, upon her repentance, after turnings aside by temptation, if he may
safely, without sinning against his own body, to receive her again. And which
soever of them is first in departing from, or putting away the other, for what
cause soever, deals treacherously, breaks the covenant, and commits adultery
against the party so put away, as well as with any other with whom they join in
the lifetime of the first.

Suitable to which is that of the Apostle, who gives it as by commandment from
the Lord, that the wife depart not from the husband: but if* she depart, let
her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband. And let not the husband
put away his wife. And when he adds in his advice, that if an unbelieving
yokefellow will depart, a brother or sister is not in bondage in such a case:
yet there he says, that if the unbeliever be pleased to dwell with the
believer, let not the believer leave them. 1 Cor. 7. 10-13. See how God will
deal with them that break the covenant in such cases, Ezekiel. 16. 59. and 17.
13-19.

2. Marriage is abused and profaned by a dishonorable use of it, or behavior
in it: as to say, when either in marrying, or seeking and choice of a wife or
husband, or else in the living together of married persons, or their demeanor
one toward another, the reverence and fear of him by whom marriage is made
honorable, and the bed undeled, is not before our eyes; and so, our hearts are
not inclined to his testimonies, but to covetousness, or to that wisdom that is
from beneath, which is earthly, sensual, and devilish, for direction of our
steps therein; and the thing aimed at therein, is not his honor and praise,
and the promoting the things of his kingdom, and in order thereto, the direct
end and benefit of marriage according to his ordinance; but other things
preferred before it, as may appear in these things.

1. When in marrying, or in seeking and making choice of a wife, or an husband,
either 1. It is desired, and sought, as a cover, or cloak, under which they may
hide themselves in the service of unclean and filthy lusts. Or, 2. When the
getting and increase of the riches or honor of this world, is the thing sought
in it, and not a meet help and companion, according to Gods ordinance; both
which are a shameful and dishonorable abuse of marriage, though the later be
of high account with men that know not God: And Oh that it were not too much
approved or allowed among them that believe, and know the truth as it is in
Jesus, who have thereby been instructed in all things, even in marrying, as
well as in all other things in their conversation, to seek first the kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof; and therein to leave it to him to add all
other things, as he sees them good and needful for them. Or 3. When the will
and affections are preferred and followed in the choice of relations, against
and contrary to the understanding and judgment, which is, or ought to be
enlightened, and rectified by the light of Gods testimonies, and so to be the
guide of the whole man; it is therefore especially evil and shameful in
believers, whose understanding and judgment has been so enlightened, and
rectified, not to suffer it to have the precedencie and victory in such choice,
as in all other things: yea, they are counseled, and warned by the holy Ghost,
not to be unequally yoaked together with unbelievers; and to make that burden
the lighter, they are left to their liberty to marry to whom they will, with
that only limitation, only in the Lord: It is therefore exceeding sinful, and
a dishonor to marriage in them, to follow their own will and desires, beyond
the bounds of that limitation; for unbelievers, and such as are in darkness
cannot be meet helps, and companions to believers in the things of the Lord
(to whom they are joined) and so do not draw equally in the yoke, or the same
way with them; for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? or
what communion has light with darkness? etc. 2 Cor. 6. 14-17. with 1 Cor. 7.
29. see if that be not mentioned as the inlet to the over-spreading of so great
wickedness in the old world, and so of the wrath that followed; That the sons
of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them wives
of all that they chose, Genesis 6. 2. etc.

II. When in married persons dwelling together, or in their demeanor one
toward another, they cleave not one to another, or are not perfectly joined
together, as one body, one flesh.

1. Either not resting satisfied with one another, but envying, and coveting
the portion of another; or thinking, and fixing the eye, or mind upon another,
in the lifetime of the first, to lust after, desire, or propose her, or him to
themselves for a reserve to be had, or taken as a wife, or husband after the
death of the first; the so looking, or thinking upon another has in it, not
only adultery against the present relation, a treacherous departing of the
heart, and adultery committed in heart with the other so looked upon, but also
murder. For it cannot be without an inward desire of the death of the present
relation; and that may occasion at least a neglect of cherishing, and seeking
the comfort, and preservation of their life as their own: yea, the very
thoughts of another entertained and allowed, during the lifetime of the first,
will lead into such further snares and polluting evils, as of estrangement from
their own despised relation, and burning in lust to the other, and the other to
them; as will occasion jealousies as cruel as the grave; and (as discovered)
grief, and wounding, even to death, if not with it despising and cruel hatred,
to the making the life of the grieved, yea, happily of both bitter, and
uncomfortable, even to the shortning of their days. Yea, so brutish will it
make a man in the issue, after his hardening his heart against the reproofs of
instruction, that in his desire to follow and satisfy his lust, he will count
nothing too dear, yea, even be ready to sell his birthright in Christ by the
Gospel for it: It will prevail to the breaking those bounds, which in the first
entertaining of it he had proposed, or set to himself: For who can carry fire
in his bosom, and not be hurnt? Therefore flee this close piece of treacherous
dealing, with all the branches of it, for it will even eat out the precious
life.

I might have placed this in the first branch of the abuse of Marriage, for it
is a violation, and breach of its covenant; but however placed, if the
admonition be received, and the unruly warned, I have my end: Let therefore the
counsel of the wisdom of God be acceptable, and his instruction received: Let
thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice with the wife of thy youth. Let her be as
the loving hind, and pleasant roe, let her breasts satisfy thee at all times,
and be thou always ravished with her love. And why will thou, my son, be ravished
with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? For the ways of man
are before the eyes of Lord, and he pondereth all his goings. His own
iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords
of his sins: he shall dye without instruction, and in the greatness of his
folly he shall go astray, Prove. 5. 18-23.

And as in this shameful demeanor in married persons, marriage is abused, and
its covenant profaned: So likewise

2. In either of them defrauding the other of their loves, or of their own
bodies; for even the withholding, or hiding themselves from their own flesh,
is there called fraud (as appears by the foregoing Verses) except it be with
consent for a time, that they may give themselves to fasting, and prayer; and
come together again, that Satan tempt them not, etc. which exception also the
Apostle gives by permission, and not of commandment: Let therefore the husband
render unto the wife due benevolence, likewise also the wife unto the husband.
The wife has not power of her own body, but the husband; and likewise also the
husband has not power of his own body, but the wife. See 1 Cor. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5.
The want of this often lays open to the evils forementioned.

3. Or not looking upon, and minding each of them the state, affairs, and
concernments of the other, as to the outward man, as their own, or not uniting
them in one; but distinguishing and dividing interests, and so dwelling
together as two, and not as one body, it is well if as good neighbors; but not
as man and wife. Or,

4. Living in envy and hatred one of another, or in variance and strife one
with another: which many times follows upon the former, as the proper issue of
it; and truly that is so shameful an abuse of marriage, and so dishonorable a
thing, that it does in a sort disrobe a man, not only of the face and garment
of Christianity, but of humanity also; For no man ever hated his own flesh; and
a man's wife is his own flesh. Yea, to conclude this,

5. It Is a dishonorable demeanor in such married persons as believe and know
the truth, not to dwell together with their relations as persons of knowledge,
in the ^ight, and instructions of the truth known by them; and so the wife
being in subjection to her own husband, as it is fit in Lord, therein also
cheerfully submitting to, and bearing that fruit of sin remaining upon her in
this married condition for the Lord's sake, and that with thankfulness to him
that has turned our water into wine, our curses into blessings, into
sanctified instruments of good; that so if any obey not the Word, yet they also
may be won by the conversation of the wives, while they behold their chaste
conversation coupled with fear, etc. And the husband giving honor to the wife,
as unto the weaker vessel, so tendering and cheririshing: And (she being also a
believer in Christ with him) giving honor to her also, as an heir together
with him of the grace of life that is in Christ Jesus: An heir of the same
inheritance, and having the same title, and on the same account; for in Christ
Jesus is neither male nor female, but ye are all one in him, all the children
of God by faith in Christ Jesus: for as many as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ, and as such the Grace known leads to give honor to her, a
peculiar kind of honor in the Lord, together with that in the flesh
forementioned. As likewise it teaches husbands to love their wives, as Christ
loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that he might wash and sanctify it,
etc. and not to be bitter against them, 1 Pet. 3. 1-7. with Ephesians. 5. 22-25. with
Col. 3. 22, etc.

I shall not enlarge this discourse by further explication of these particular
instructions and commandments given by the Lord Jesus unto believers; only say
in general, that it is shameful, and dishonorable in them, not to be found so
demeaning themselves in the light of the Lord, in which they have known, and
may further know these things, and the blessing met with in doing them: And be
that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

I might also here fitly place the discovery of another abuse of marriage, and
dishonorable demeanor in it, which is found* in another extreme; namely that
of excess, and insobriety, or intemperance, and inordinate affection; for in
all these things there is excess; and then does a man or woman exceed, when
their affection to, and rejoicing in the present, and worldly, or natural
enjoyment of one another, and use of the comforts, refreshings, and
contentments of this life, are not kept under, and in subordination and
subserviency to their love to him, and glorifying his name, by whom they have
any comfortable enjoyment of those things, and to the promoting the things of
his Kingdom in them, and by them: Much more then, when in stead of letting the
moderation of our mind be known unto all men, we love father, mother, wife or
children, more then Christ; and that appears, when we prefer their love, and
the enjoyment of them before his love, and enjoyment of him, and fellowship
with him; and the pleasing them before the pleasing and glorifying him; and
when we suffer ourselves to be swallowed up of, and carried away after the
delights, pleasures and contentments of this life, as in the enjoyment of one
another, or in any creature-contentments: And surfeit, or fill ourselves with
them, that the heart is overcharged, and the body unfitted for seeking or
serving him, or receiving and drinking in from him in the things of his
Kingdom: Or, also so set our minds and affections upon them, that we cannot
freely part with them for his sake, or yield them up to be at his dispose.

This great instruction contained in the first branch of this Text, namely,
that Marriage is honorable in all, considering how, and by what means it
becomes so, and to what great end it is so made; Teaches us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world: looking for the blessed hope, etc. Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13.

And so in this particular, that we should every of us learn to possess his
vessel in sanctification and honor: and not in the lusts of concupiscence, as
others that know not God: but so as devoted and consecrated vessels to the use
and honor of him, by whom all things which by sin were polluted, and filled
with shame, are made clean and honorable to us, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3-5.

And so not only in this, but in all things, this instruction as well
admonishes to a sober and comely use of every creature, not to live to
ourselves, our* own lusts, or the lusts of men, in the enjoyment and use of
them, but to him that dyed for us and rose again; as remembering, and
considering that we could have had no mercy in meat, drink, clothes, or in any
thing pertaining to this life, but by the sacrifice of the Son of God, made
perfect through his personal sufferings, by which peace was made; nor any
continuance of it after iniquities, and abuses of grace committed by us, but by
his intercession, who is our peace: which clearly shows wonderful goodness, and
a gracious and glorious end of the Almighty toward us therein. All which
powerfully instructs us to aim at that, as our great end in all our use of
them, that God in all things may be glorified, and the things of his kingdom
promoted. 1 Cor. 10. 31, 32. 2 Cor. 5. 15. with 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2. But for this, I
refer the Reader to what is spoken afterward more largely of sobriety in
teaching in temptation.

4. In the last place, This whole consideration may be of further usefulness
unto us, to instruct and teach us, by and upon occasion of earthly Marriages,
and in our seeking, enjoyment, and use of them, and behavior in them, to be
exercised in minding and considering the heavenly, as in a resemblance and
similitude appointed of God to that purpose. That being in the first
consideration of it, the bottom, ground and reason of this being clean, and
honorable to us; and, in the second and third considerations of it, the end of
this, and all other creature-enjoyments, being made so to us, is first and
chiefly to be looked to, and minded by us, in the beginning, and whole proceed
of our conversation, for wisdom, counsel and strength to order it aright, and
to be aimed at as the end of our conversation in all things.

For some helpfulness therefore herein, I shall here put to mind some
Instructions concerning that heavenly and spiritual Marriage, especially as in
the second Consideration of it, which is that chiefly resembled by the earthly
Marriage, as they are set before us in this whole Consideration of the earthly
Marriage (which is honorable in all) as by way of resemblance or similitude.

The Instructions I shall mention may be ranked under three Heads. They are
such as are resembled

1. By the nature of the Marriage covenant. 2. By its being honorable in all.
3. By the comely and honorable behavior in it, or in the things pertaining to
it: as to say, 1. In seeking, or wooing a wife, and in the woman's listening to,
or accepting an husband. 2. In betrothing and marrying in righteousness. 3. In
the demeanor of the married persons toward each other.

1. Those I shall mention as resembled by the nature of the Marriage-covenant,
are,

1. That as in the earthly marriage, there is a mutual consent, and agreement,
and solemn covenant made by both parties, without which they are not joined
together according to Gods ordinance: so in the spiritual marriage, there is a
mutual consent and agreement between Christ and the Church, and so on the part
of every member in particular, without which they are not so joined to the Lord
as to be made of his Spouse, his Body, his true Sanctuary. So much is signified
in our types, the whole house of Israel, when he swear unto them, and entered
into covenant with them, and they became his, in the day that he brought them
out of the land of Egypt, their time was the time of love. And he remembered the
kindness of their youth, the love of their espousals, in which they went after
him in the wilderness, etc. They had avouched him that day to be their God, and
he had avouched them to be his people. See Ezekiel. 16. 8. with Jer. 2. 2. and
Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18. So likewise those that are of the true Sanctuary, of the
Spouse, and Church of Christ, the peculiarly beloved of the Lord, they are
those that have made a covenant with him by sacrifice, Psalm. 50. 5. even by the
sacrifice which he has first prepared for them, and given to them for a
witness of his love, and for a covenant to the people; and so they are said to
be reconciled to God by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 18. with Isai. 55. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Not only his Word has come unto them in power, etc. for so it does to them
that reject it, (and will none of him) in the plain and faithful ministration
of it: he therefore that despises, despises not man but God, who has given
of his spirit to accompany such faithful ministration of his Word: but they
also were willing, and obedient in the day of his power, as he was working in
them to will and to do; they received his Word, as the Word of God, (which
effectually works in them that so receive it, to the uniting an joining them
to the Lord) so that they turned from idols to God, to serve him, and to wait
for his Son from heaven. See 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4, 5, 6, 10. and 2. 13. True it is, he
is the first seeker, and wooer of men to be reconciled to God; and without his
gracious and spiritual calling, and drawing, no man can come to him: and
therefore he prevents every man in due time with that; yet though he do so, and
declare his readiness to accept, yea and desire that they should come in his
drawings, and be reconciled and married to him in his Son, except they come to
him as to a living stone, in the powerful drawing influences of him to them,
they are not as lively stones built up a spiritual house, etc. Ho every one
therefore that thirsts, come to the waters; come in the power of the call,
even to day while he is calling, and stretching out his hand, if ye will hear
his voice, harden not your hearts -- Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear,
and your soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting covenant with you,
etc. He will not force thee against thy will, nor own, accept, or choose thee
into peculiar favor and fellowship without thy will; it is thy heart he
desires, My son, give me thy heart: for with the heart man believes unto
righteousness: And because he knows thou have neither heart, nor power to will,
or choose him, nor light in thy understanding to perceive his preciousness, that
might draw thy soul after him; therefore in, and for that love of pity and
compassion he had to thee, and desire after thee, even when thou wast
altogether dead in sins and trespasses; in which love, he gave himself a
ransom for thee: he becomes himself also a testimony in due time to thee, and
makes the testimony of himself powerful to open thine eyes, and so to turn thee
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; that (in turning at
the light and power of his gracious drawings and reproofs) thou may receive
the forgiveness of sins, and inheritance, through the word of his grace, with
his Saints. Only then rebel not thou against the Lord: for consider how great
things he has done for thee; but cease from thy own works, to believe on him
that justifies the ungodly, as he is by his preventing grace working in thee
the whole good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of Faith with power, and
this shall be imputed to thee for righteousness, accepted as thy act, and
making a Covenant with him by his own Sacrifice, which he has prepared, and
given for a covenant on both parts, there is all his great and precious
promises confirmed, and made sure for thee in and by that sacrifice of himself,
and with him given to thee, and therein is thy faith and troth plighted to him,
in laying hold of his Covenant; and drawing near in the sweet allurements, and
encouragements thereof, he will graciously accept thee, and make thee partaker
of himself by his own Covenant, and by virtue of his own Sacrifice, by which he
has obliged, and encouraged thee to give thy self to him.

2. As in the earthly marriage, he that is joined to a woman is one body; for
two, says he, shall be one flesh:

So he that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit; he is therein baptized, and
made to drink into that one Spirit of Jesus the Lord, by which he was raised
from the dead, and which immeasurably dwells in him (for the fullness of the
Godhead dwells in him bodily) and which comes forth from him in the name of
the Father, and testifies of him, manifesting the glory of God in his face, who
is the image of God; and being made to drink into this Spirit, they are of the
same mind with Christ, and so reconciled in the spirit of their mind unto
God; for they have the mind of Christ, having received his Word, they have
known surely, and believed that he came forth from God, and is a true and
faithful witness of God, and have so received him, and are made partakers of
him spiritually; for through this knowledge of him that is true, they are
united and made one in, and with him that is true, even with his Son Jesus
Christ, and so with the Father in him, (1 Cor. 6. 16, 17. with chap. 2. 16. and
12. 13. 1 John 5. 20. with chap. 1. 3-7. John 17. 8.) As a little further to
explain, even as the man and wife in marriage are become one in the flesh, and
in things pertaining to the flesh, and outward man: So Christ and the soul in
this marriage is become one in the Spirit, and in things pertaining to the
spirit, and inward man, even in all things pertaining to life and godliness.

His sufferings, his resurrection and glory, his Father, Spirit, Angels,
children, servants, all become theirs by Faith; not only prepared, given and
treasured up in him, as in a surety and treasury for them; so they were before,
and are for others that are not joined to the Lord, for by the grace of God he
tasted death for every man, and gave himself a ransom for all, yea he dyed for
their sins, and rose for their justification according to the Scriptures, and
is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and by means thereof has
received gifts in the man, for men, yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord
God might dwell among them; God has prepared eternal life in Christ for all,
and with him, in giving him a testimony to men, gives eternal life in the
gracious discoveries, and tenders of it to them in due time; but only he that
has the Son has life, and he has it in having him, with whom God gives all
things pertaining to life and godliness; and they are received in receiving
him, even now spiritually, and by Faith as he is received. They are by the same
spirit of Faith, by which they are baptized into Christ, baptized into his
death, even into union and fellowship with him, in his personal sufferings and
resurrection, so that by Faith they dyed, and were buried with him, and are
risen with him, through the same faith of the operation of God, who bath raised
him from the dead, and are therein taught and strengthened to reckon themselves
dead indeed unto sin (to its charges and condemning power by the Law) in that
he dyed to sin once, and alive unto God, made capable of receiving mercy from
him, and of being admitted into fellowship with him through the Mediator, by
his resurrection from the dead, by which they are quickened to a lively hope,
and have consolation and rejoicing in his sufferings and glory as their own, it
being theirs by Faith: And so his Father, Spirit, promises, all theirs by Faith
in him, yea, his Angels, servants, creatures, even Paul, Apollo, Cephas, the
world, life and death, (says the Apostle) all is yours, and ye are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods, 1 John 5. 11, 12. Romans 6. 3-9, etc. Col. 2. 12. 1 Cor. 3.
21-23.

And on the other hand, their weaknesses, pollutions, wants, and imperfections
are become his, in some answerable sense as the wives are the husbands, not now
to bear in his own personal body, as once he did the imputation of our sins,
and the sense and feeling of all our sicknesses and infirmities, and so knows
how to succor us in ours that still remain upon us: But he being raised from
the dead, dies no more, nor has death any more dominion over him, nor is sin
any more imputed to him. But he makes intercession for transgressors, and has
compassion even on the ignorant, and them that are out of the way: and so he is
the Savior of all men, the upholder of all that, fall, that they might know
him, and believe in him: but especially, the Savior of them that believe; they
being joined to the Lord, their weaknesses, and wants are his to heal, cleanse,
and make up, for he gave himself for his Church, that he might wash and cleanse
it with the washing of water by the word, and sanctify it, to and for himself;
and so their works that are theirs as his Spouse are his, to perfect what
concerns them; their sufferings for him his by interpretation, and he engaged
on their side, as the Apostle, and high priest of their profession, their
special surety or advocate for good, to manage their matters for them in heaven
and earth; to work their works in them, and for them, to plead their cause, and
fight their battles; and they are taught and strengthened by faith to cast their
care on him, and wait through the spirit for the hope of his righteousness by
faith, in perfecting what concerns them, Psalm. 103. and 119. 121, 122. and 138.
8. and 145. 18, 19. Gal. 5. 5. Heb. 3. 1. and 10. 19-23.

3. As in the earthly marriage, or in the union of it, there is but one man,
and one woman, as before is showed; and the woman is originally of the nam, yet
so as both of God; and the man the head of the woman: So here

1. The Spouse and Church of Christ is but one, the only one of her mother,
Cant. 6. 9. Begotten and made by the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with or
through the word of truth, the Gospel of Christ, Jam. 1. 18. And so Jerusalem
that is above, whence that glorious Gospel is come forth unto us, is said to be
the mother of all the members here on earth, speaking of those under the plain
Revelation of the mystery, and now since God has spoken to us in these last
days by his Son; they all, as Isaac are the children of promise; and such only
are counted for the Seed, even they that are of faith in all ages, the children
of the Bondwoman have no part here. See Gal. 3. with chap. 4. 21-31. and Romans
4. and 9. 8.

They are such as are made out of Christ's personal body spiritually, and so of
his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5. 30. as was resembled by the woman's being
made at first of the man, in which she was bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh: Now the Apostle says not, that we are flesh of his flesh, etc. But with
allusion to that resemblance, we are of his flesh, and of his bones, or members
of his body, even of his personal body; that is to say, what we are spiritually
as the Spouse and Church of Christ, and members thereof in particular, we are
of, and by the virtues of his personal body, that was broken for us, and in
which being raised from the dead, he lives and continues ever; and through
the discoveries thereof, and therein of the pretiousness of his blood unto us;
and likewise, we are therein united to, and made members of that his body, as
the woman in marriage is of her husband, so that his things become ours, and
our weaknesses and wants his to supply, and what concerns us his to perfect, as
before is showed. They are all by one Spirit baptized into one body, etc. 1
Cor. 12. 13. And what forms of godliness soever any have, if they be not born
of that Spirit that testifies of Jesus, and commends God's love in him, they
are not of the beloved, not of the chosen Generation. There are threescore
Queens, and fourscore Concubines, many daughters of the Whore, or Synagogue of
Satan; yea, many Churches or Societies, that call themselves of the holy City,
and make mention of his name, but not in truth nor in righteousness, yet they
would be called by his name, but eat their own bread, and wear their own
apparel, whose names he will not mention, or confess before his Father, nor
offer their offerings. And there are Virgins, or persons not espoused to any
religious interest, Church or Society, without number; but his beloved is but
one, as aforesaid.

11. The head and husband of this body or Church is but one. And he is the head
of it, and of every member in particular, as the man is the head of the woman.

He by whose name she is to be called. Jer. 33. 16. chap. 14. 9. with Isai. 63.
19.

He at whose finding and appointment she is to be in all things, and whose
bread to eat, garments to wear, and whose laws, rules, and ordinances in all
things between them, and in all affairs of the house she is to observe.

He with whom she is to have fellowship for all fruitfulness, in whom to seek
wisdom, righteousness, strength, holiness, by an exercise of faith in him.

The Lord Jesus Christ, and he only, is the head and husband of this Church,
the Minister of the true sanctuary, the Great and only High priest over the
house of God; and to them there is no other Lord, Head and Husband, chief
Bishop and Shepherd of their souls, Father of spirits, Judge and lawgiver,
though in the world there be many that pretend to such place, and power in, and
over the Church; and many that so call and acknowledge them: But that it is
treacherous dealing, and spiritual fornication in any to challenge such place
and power in, and over his Church, even as for a man to have his fathers wife;
and like it, for any, especially of those espoused to one husband, to own, and
acknowledge any in his place in any of these things, may further be showed in
the following part of this discourse.

2. The instructions I shall mention as resembled, and signified (as concerning
the spiritual Marriage) in this affirmation of the natural and earthly, that it
is honorable in all, are such as are employed, and contained in the affirmation
as applied to the spiritual.

As 1. That it is lawful for any man in due time, and while it is to day* to
come to God by Jesus Christ; and so to be reconciled and married to the Lord,
even by the same means, by which the earthly marriage is become honorable in
all; there is an effectual door opened, and way made for all men, that they
might be married to Christ; the bars and hindrances that made it unlawful and
impossible are broken, and removed. Jesus Christ by the blood of his Cross,
has made peace, and atonement for our sins, that made the breach and
separation between God and us at first; and in his being raised, and exalted,
has obtained justification, and redemption in himself as our surety, and a
release of mankind by the Father, from under the sentence of banishment, the
curse of the law, unto himself as their Redeemer and Lord; and also power to
make reconciliation for the sins of the people, that are still imputed to them.
He that has made peace, is our peace, the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world, as we have before showed in discovery of the way, and means by
which marriage is become honorable to us sinners, where also is showed, that
the great end of that provision made was higher, even that men might in their
particular persons be reconciled to God; and the same is abundantly asserted in
the Scriptures of truth; hence the Apostle from this ground, That God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses to them,
beseeches men now to be reconciled to God; For (says he) he has made him that
knew no sin to be sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him, 2 Cor. 5. 19-21. He once suffered for sins, the just, for the unjust;
being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, that he might
bring us back to God. 1 Pet. 3. 18.

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men: For he has broken the gates of brass, and cut
the bars of iron asunder: Slain the great enmity between God and mankind by his
cross, that he might reconcile both Jew and Gentile unto God thereby, Psalm.
107. 15, 16. Ephesians. 2. 16. with Col. 1. 20, 21.

2. That such grace is extended through Christ to men in due time, as by which
they may be reconciled and come to him, and have this blessed Marriage made
with them: true, they cannot come of themselves, nor will, nor do any thing
that may contribute to this marriage, no man can come to Christ, unless the
Father draw them; therefore also he has sent his Son, not only to make the
way to it, and provision for it in himself; but also to draw men in due time,
in their several ages, and that with the cords of love, and with the bands of a
man, with the testimonies of himself, as the Son of man, and the spiritual
commendation of the love of God therein; he has anointed him with the holy
Ghost, and power to proclaim liberty to the Captives; and therein to give
opening of eyes to the blind, and power to them that have no strength, moving
to repentance: Him has God exalted a Prince, and a Savior, for to give
repentance and forgiveness of sins, even to rebellious ones, that the Lord
might dwell among them, Joh. 6. 44. with chap. 8. 12. and 12. 35, 36, 44, 46.
with Hos. 11. 4. and Isai. 61. 1, 2. with chap. 42. 1-7. and 49. 1-9. Act. 5.
31. with Psalm. 68. 18, 19, 20.

And he in giving himself a ransom for all, gave himself also to be a
testimony in due time, and having made peace, came and preached peace to Jew
and Gentile; yea, he was in all ages preaching by his Spirit to their spirits,
that were disobedient to his preaching, and for their disobedience are now in
prison; and for this cause, and in such manner was the Gospel preached to them
by such means as he pleased, that they might be judged, reproved, discovered as
men in the flesh, and that they might live according to God in the Spirit, 1 Timothy 2. 6. Ephesians. 2. 17. 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. and 4. 6. with 2 Cor. 5. 15. Nor left
he himself without witness to any, but was always crying without, even to the
sons of men, that are yet without, calling to them by his servants, and other
means to behold him, Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth;
and all the day long (while he is so calling) stretching out his hand, putting
forth the light and power of his Spirit; making that which may be known of God
manifest in them, and thereby moving them to repentance; and therefore the
despisers are said always to have resisted the holy Ghost, Act. 14. 17. and 17.
24-28. Prove. 1. 20-24, etc. with chap. 8. 1-6. and 9. 1-6. Isai. 65. 1, 2. and
45. 22. Romans 1. 18, 19-28. and 2. 4. and 10. 18-21. Act. 7. 51.

3. That God not only allows it, but wills, approves and desires it in
Christ, that men through him might be saved, that they might be redeemed, and
turned from darkness to light, and so from under the power of Satan to God, and
so that therein they might be married to Christ, he has sworn he has no
pleasure at all in the death of the wicked that dies: though they persisting
till the day be past, he shall laugh at their calamity, and mock when their
fear comes; yet now he does not so, while yet though dying, or in a perishing
condition, he is not wholly dead, or as a tree twice dead, and plucked up by the
roots, while yet sin is not wholly finished; he has no pleasure at all, that
they should go on to finish it, and bring destruction upon themselves; for he
would not that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, and
be saved, Ezekiel. 18. 24, 31. and 33. 10, 11. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Nor can there be a
greater argument to evidence the truth of this, then that unspeakable gift and
prepatation for them in Christ, and the provision in him for calling and
drawing them in due time, of which we have already spoken: we may well argue
with the wife of Manoah, Judge. 13. 23. If the Lord were pleased to stay us
(says she) he would not have received an offering at our hands, nor have sent
his Angel to show us such things as these; so, and much more may we say; If the
Lord had any pleasure at all to cut off men in their sins, or that they should
pine away in their iniquities, he would never have himself found out, and
prepared such a sacrifice, such a means for his banished, that they might not
be expelled, and that when otherwise they must needs have dyed in the proper
sense of death, they must have perished for ever from him, and were as water
spilt on the ground, dead in sins, and trespasses; neither did nor could seek
mercy, or reconciliation, yea, when they were enemies, as 2. Sam. 14. 14. Romans
5. 6-8. Nor would he have sent the Angel of his presence to show us such things
as these, to assure us in the light and power of his Spirit, that all things
are ready, and therewith powerfully to invite, and call us to the wedding; For
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to be a ransom
for all, and a testimony in due time, (as foreshewed) that whosoever through
this grace believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life: For
God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved, John 3. 16, 17. Yea, he has declared his
acceptance of it as men's kindness, that they will accept of him, and as that
which griev^s his Spirit, that they will none of him; Oh infinite grace and
condescension! See Jer. 2. 2. Psalm. 81. 8-13. Isai. 48. 17, 18. and 63. 10.
Luke 19. 41, 42. and 13. 34. with Matthew. 23. 37. who can conceive such a
blasphemous thought of the Father of lights, in whom is no darkness at all,
that he should cover hatred with such pretenses of love, seeing also he abhors
that in others? Prove. 26. 23-26. See Prove. 8. 6, 7, 8.

4. That it is an honorable thing for men to be married to Christ, this may be
sufficiently seen in what is said already in the instructions from the nature
of Marriage. For is it not infinite favor, and an unspeakable honor to a man
that is a sinner, vile, dust and ashes, and was an enemy, and by nature a child
of wrath, even as others, to be admitted and received into a covenant of Peace,
and reconciliation, yea, into friendship and familiarity with the Almighty, and
that by a sacrifice of his own finding out, and preparing, to be brought into
the Kings presence in garments of his own making and preparing for us, yea, to
be joined to the Lord, so as to be an heir together with him of the grace of
life, and to have all his riches and precious things become ours; and all our
wants his to supply; infirmities, and diseases his to heal, our works, his to
work in us, and for us, the injuries done to us, to be taken as done to him,
and he the Almighty to be engaged with us, and on our side (as aforesaid) and
also to be owned, and called by him, the sons and friends of God, and as if all
this were too little, to set before us the hope of a far more glorious
enjoyment of this marriage, and the fruits thereof in time to come, when he
shall be glorified in his Saints, and they be glorified together with him; we
may well say, Behold what manner of love is this? and whence is this to us? as
1 John 3. 1. 1 Chronicles. 17. 16, 17. Luk* 1. 43. And yet the honourableness of
this state further appears in what is signified, and resembled by the
honorable ends of Marriage first mentioned; as so say,

That it is the only and certain means ordained of God, for our bringing forth
fruit to God, that may be acceptable in his sight, and remain before him; even
the fruits of his Spirit, in the works of faith and love, that may be
remembered, and rewarded in the day of Christ, and spiritual seed or children,
that may appear on our account, as our crown, our glory, and joy in that day;
Without me, says our Savior, ye can do nothing; nothing of this nature out of
him, or but in union, and fellowship with him, as is there signified by another
resemblance, John 15. 5, 6. The soul being reconciled and joined to the Lord by
his word, received and kept in the heart, and abiding in him, and walking, and
working together with him in the unity of the Spirit in what they do, they
shall bring forth much fruit, and the Father shall be glorified by it, and it
shall remain, and they shall ask what they will in his name, and it shall be
given them; the want of this occasions the loss of much work, the hasty
withering of much fruit, that may seem glorious at first, and the hindrance of
many prayers, as in the resemblance, 1 Pet. 3. 1-7.

Likewise, this being joined to, and having fellowship with the Lord, resembled
by Marriage, and the bed undefiled, is the only and certain means ordained of
God, for avoiding spiritual fornication; yea, for keeping and cleansing our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. He that drinks of the water
that I shall give him, (says our Savior) shall never thirst; that is,
drinking still, and drinking abundantly of that, he shall have such fullness of
satisfaction at home, as shall preserve him from thirsting after any other; he
shall have no want, for it shall be in him a well of living water, springing up
to his refreshing, and satisfaction at all times, even to eternal life, Joh. 4.
14. Hear, O Israel, what I testify unto thee: And there shall be no strange
god in thee, neither shall thou worship any strange god; -- open thy mouth
wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81. They only that are redeemed from the
earth, and so have their conversation in Heaven, from whence they look for the
Savior, etc. These are they that are not defiled with women, for they are
virgins, chaste to the Lamb, who dwells with them, and leads them to living
fountains of water, that they hunger not, nor thirst after other refreshings,
nor are taken with the appearing beauty and contentments of other women, any
harlot-Churches, or Societies, nor with the golden cup in the hand of the
whore. See Revel. 14. 3, 4. with Isai. 49. 10. and Revel. 7. 15, 16, 17.

And this leads to another instruction, employed in all the former.

5. That it is a shameful and dishonorable thing, and of bitter and dangerous
consequence, to neglect and despise the gracious tenders of this blessed Match;
to refuse this marriage, not to be willing in the day of his power to be joined
to the Lord, seeing without it we are yet in our sins, and under the power of
darkness, and Satan, and can have no inheritance in the riches and Kingdom of
Christ and of God, nor can do any thing, or bring forth any fruit that may be
acceptable in his sight, or remain upon our account to any praise from him; but
remain under wrath, and lie open to the power of all evil, snares, and
temptations, and cannot escape the damnation of Hell; therefore to defer, and
still to linger, or look back, and not so to receive the love of the truth as
to save and redeem us from the earth, not only because that only the present
day is ours; but also especially, the last times into which we are fallen are
perilous; and still dwelling upon the earth, we lie open to such snares as in
which if once taken, we shall hardly recover, the wicked shall be holden with
the cords of his sins.

It is an heavy woe and judgment denounced upon all the dwellers on the earth
in these last days, they shall worship, or wonder after the Beast, the
Antichristian Beast, they shall be so taken with the appearing glory of his
Kingdom, or things thereof, as either to receive his mark in their hand or
forehead, or else to strive after, and glory in the attainment of some like
glory, in visibility, outward power, dignity, order, observations, or like
things; or else shall make him their dread, they shall not escape the pollution
of women, or of the man of sin; For fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon
the inhabitant of the earth, and he that escapes the one, shall fall into the
other; yea, the great day of the Lord hastes greatly, and that will be as a
snare upon all that dwell upon the face of the earth, by which they shall be
taken, and holden for ever under the wrath of God, which shall be poured out
without mixture; and they shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. And the smoke of
their torment ascends up for ever and ever: And they have no rest day nor
night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receives the mark of
his name, Revel. 13. 8. and 17. 8. with chap. 8. 13. and 14. 9, 10, 11. with
Isai. 24. 17. Luke 21. 35. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we cannot
but persuade men; be ye reconciled to God, receive not this grace in, and
through which it is tendered in vain.

3. That which remains of what we propounded to be considered in this point of
usefulness, is, such instructions as are resembled by the comely or honorable
behavior in marriage, or in the things pertaining to it: As to say,

1. In seeking, or wooing a wife, etc.

1. As in earthly marriage, the man is the first seeker and wooer; so it is
here, the Lord Jesus Christ, by his Spirit, and in the Name of the Father, is
the first Seeker and Wooer, he first seeks us, and prevents every man with his
goodness, calling, and graciously moving to repentance before any man regard
him, or incline the ear to come to him; for who has first given to him, or
enquired after him? he finds them all walking after the vanity of their mind,
laboring for that which is not bread, and spending their strength for that
which will not satisfy, and graciously cries after them, Ho, every one that
thirsts, come to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy wine and
milk without money, and without price, etc. Romans 11. 35. with Isai. 55. 1*7. I
am sought (says he) of them that have not asked for me; that is, that have not
first so much as asked for me, or inquired at all after me, till I first sought
them; yea, I am found of them that sought m^ not: I said, Behold me, behold me,
unto a nation that was not called by my name: All the day long I spread out my
hands unto a rebellious people, that walk in a way not good, etc. Isai. 65. 1,
2. He speaks once and twice, while yet man perceives it not, or will take no
notice of it, yet he waits that he may be gracious; For he was sent to seek,
and to save that which was lost, and therefore also he sends his servants, his
Ambassadors, to woo and beseech for him, praying their acceptance as a kindness
to their Lord, and himself in, and with them cries, yea, he stands at the
doors that are still kept shut against him, and knocks, declaring it is that
which he will accept as a kindness from them to him (as we have before noted,
and it is worthy to be considered) if they will open to him, incline the ear,
and come in his gracious calls and drawings, Luke 19. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20.
with Prove. 9. 3, 4, 5. and Matthew. 22. 1-10. Revel. 3. 20.

This is such infinite grace, and condescension, for him that is the Lord of
glory, and heir of all things, so honorably to treat such poor miserable and
vile wretches, that have nothing but sins to forgive, and diseases to heal, and
while they are yet enemies, so to prevent them, and follow them, and to endure
so many repulses, and still to wait that he may be gracious, as it is wonderful
to behold; and shows such meekness, and lowliness of heart, as renders him a
fit teacher and leader for such as we are, and may encourage any vile sinful
wretch to open to him, while yet he stands without, and knocks: surely this is
not after the manner of men; for though the man be the first seeker and wooer,
yet he proposes some help and advantage to himself in her he seeks, and there
is first something desirable to him in her he seeks; but here is nothing of
that nature. This is as if some earthly Prince, or Monarch should earnestly
seek and woo, and send his Ambassadors to Court, and beseech the most vile, and
deformed beggar on the dunghill for himself, and that he might set her among*
Princes; yea, infinitely more than so; the condescension is greater, and the
end higher then can be fully resembled by that (which yet is not to be found
among men;) for such was our condition, that it was necessary for him first to
humble himself to be made poor and base for us, even like unto us in all
things, except sin, and then to dye our death, and suffer our curse, the just
one for the unjust, that he might bring us to God; and when he had done all
this for us, who might have counted it infinite favor to have been accepted of
him upon our seeking it with tears; he still finds us, not only poor,
wretched, vile and naked; but sinners and enemies, in our filth and blood, and
then so to court and beseech us, as is said, and only in his compassion to us,
and for our good, not willing that any should perish, but desirous they should
partake of his riches and glory; Oh, who can show forth all his praise^ Oh, let
not such Grace be in vain! How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation?

In this also he has given us a perfect example and pattern, that we should
follow his steps, in humbling our selves to them of the lower sort, and
becoming all things to all men, if by any means we may win any for our Lord.

II. As in wooing, a man tenders himself, and therein what is his, as the great
argument to prevail with the woman to give her self to him, and so he gives
himself for his wife, that is, he gives himself to her, as the argument or
price for her, that in lieu thereof he may obtain her to, and for himself: so
it is here in an answerable sense; the Lord Jesus Christ gave himself for his
Church, Ephesians. 5. 25. that is, he did not only give himself a ransom to God
for her, that he has done for all, when enemies, that he might be a testimony
in due time; nor is that the giving himself here directly spoken of: but such a
giving himself as answers to the resemblance, namely, he gave himself
spiritually to her for her, even that by that price he might redeem her from
this present world, and prevail with her to give herself to him, to be his. And
in that sense is that to be understood, Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself, a peculiar
people zealous of good works: that also may be understood by his giving himself
for our sins, Gal. 1. 4. namely, of his giving himself as a price to us, to
redeem us from them, to prevail with us to cast them away for his sake, and for
the enjoyment of him, that so he might redeem us to himself from this present
evil world. And in such a sense his Church is said to be a people which he has
purchased with his own blood, Acts 20. 28. that is, bought, or redeemed of
themselves, and out of this present evil world, and so from their vain
conversation received by tradition of fathers, and that with the precious blood
of Christ, that is, with that price as spiritually discovered in the Gospel. 1
Pet. 1. 18.

The Arguments then used by the Lord in this his spiritual and gracious wooing,
are all contained in Himself; Himself is the price he presents to allure;
first, and chiefly, in that which he has done and suffered in his own person
as our surety, and is become for us with the Father, in which he shows, the
marriage between God and man, or reconciliation of man to God, complete in the
root and original of it; and a great and joyful feast, a rich provision of all
things pertaining to life and godliness prepared and made ready for men
thereby, that they in their particulars might be married to the Lord, and
abundantly fed and satisfied with the fruit of the marriage already complete in
him.

This was resembled by the marriage the King made for his son, Matthew. 22. (as
is foreshewed) and that is the great Argument the servants are sent to allure
the guests withal, namely, that the wedding (the occasion and root of all the
feast) is ready, and the dinner prepared, and all things ready, even the
killing killed, (the sacrifice of the body of Christ slain and offered:) the
wine mingled, (the man Christ Jesus anointed with the holy Ghost, and power,
the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily, that of his fullness we might
receive, etc.) See Matthew. 22. 4, 8. with Prove. 9. 1-6. And yet herewith also he
discovers, and presents himself to the soul in that which he is doing as the
Mediator between God and men, both to them-ward in the Name of the Father, as a
Witness to the people, a Testimony in due time, a Leader and Commander to the
people; and with God for them, appearing in his presence as their Surety, and
making intercession for the transgressors. And in this in both parts, as the
Savior of all men, that through him they might believe, and be married to the
Lord, and as the Savior especially of them that believe; the great Apostle and
High Priest of their profession. And likewise in that which he will do at his
appearing and kingdom, to the completing of the marriage, and glory that shall
be revealed in and upon them; as Isai. 45. 21, 22-24, 25. with chap. 55. tot.
and 42. Heb. 3. and 12. 1, 2, 3. He calls to behold him in all these things of
him, and therein graciously tenders, and gives himself to them, as a price put
into their hand, a gift prepared for them, which he promises further to give
unto them, and make them partakers of, according to the faith and hope of the
Gospel, on their enclining the ear, and coming to him, in his gracious calls
and drawings.

And surely then, as it is comely and honorable for a woman to give
entertainment, yea thankfully to accept, and embrace the real proffer of a good
husband, that is fit for her, and with whom she may laudably be joined: so, and
much more is it comely and honorable for every, or any poor sinful soul, to
accept of this infinite grace tendered by Christ, to give kind entertainment to
such a lover, so fit for us; to incline the ear to what he sets before us, and
come to him in the sweet allurements, and drawing efficacy of that grace in
Christ proclaimed: say not, I am unfit for this marriage, by reason of so many
sins that have dominion over me, and many foul diseases that must first be
healed: know, that he knew thee, before he called thee, and that thou can not
get victory over thy sins, nor healing of thy diseases without him; yea, he
therefore called thee, and in his call gives himself for thee, that on thy
coming to him, and yielding up thy self to him, and so becoming his, he might
then wash thee with the washing of water by the word, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. with
Ezekiel. 16. 3-9. Yea, he will then thoroughly wash away thy blood, forgiving all
thy sins, and healing all thy diseases, and make thee meet for the perfecting
the marriage, and perfect it in due time: take heed of complementing thy self
out of this marriage, nor let farms, nor oxen, no nor any earthly marriage, or
the love of father, mother, wife, or children be preferred before this, or be
an hindrance to thy coming to the wedding-feast, to which thou art called, that
thou may be joined to the Lord: if thou now, when called, love any thing
more then him, thou art not worthy of him, not meet for him; and it will be
shameful iniquity, for anything whatsoever, now to neglect, or defer, seeing
thy need of him is such, that thou can not be well, nor happy here or
hereafter without him. Seek the Lord therefore while he may be found, and call
upon him while he is near. And for further encouragement, see what follows.

2. As a man that behaves himself comely or honorably in things pertaining to
the earthly marriage, does not, when he has wooed, and persuaded the woman to
consent, and that her affections are drawn to him, and set upon him; he does
not then, nor will by any means cast her off, not for any infirmities then
perceived, or meanness, poverty, and wants then appearing to him; but proceeds
to betrothing, and marrying in righteousness; and then seeks to cover, and heal
her infirmities, and supply her wants, as his own, in the body: so, and much
more, the Lord Jesus Christ will not cast away any that come to him in his
gracious drawings and wooings: Whosoever comes, (says he) I will in no wise
cast out, Joh. 6. 37. yea, though some men in such cases may, he will not; for
his work is always, and in all things honorable, and glorious, his
righteousness remains for ever; nor will he upbraid them with former
unkindnesses, and repulses given him, no though uncleanness have been found
with them in the time of love, (as in that type, Hos. 3. 1.) nor with present
unprofitableness, and infirmities; but receive them to the glory of God, in
union and fellowship with himself: he will betroth them to him in
righteousness, and in faithfulness; and will engage all his interest in heaven
and earth for them, that they may be washed, and healed. See Hos. 2. 18, 19,
20. with Chap. 3. Romans 15. 1, 7. Jam. 1. 5. Faithful is he that calls you,
who also will do it, even perform his begun good work unto the day of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 24. with Phil. 1. 6. So that no unfaithfulness, or want on his part,
can hinder the proceeding, and carrying on of the work unto the finishing of it
in the perfect day. All which powerfully engages us to abide, and be for him,
though he make us wait many days, (as in that type, Hos. 3. 3.)

3. In the comely and honorable demeanor of married persons one to another,
to which marriage obliges; which is in the husbands love and faithfulness to
his wife; and the wives subjection, chastity, and faithfulness to her husband;
we are minded, as by way of resemblance, of the love and faithfulness of Jesus
Christ to his Church, which is infinite, and without any fayler, or
imperfection; and of the obligation upon the Church, to subjection and chastity
to him

1. His (...) and faithfulness to the Church, and to every member in
particular, and his peculiar care for them is such, as that for their sakes he
sanctifies himself, devotes or gives up himself, to mind their good, and their
things with peculiar design, as the first, and chief thing directly aimed at,
in all his works in, and government of the world, and that unto which all other
things must stoop^ that they also may be sanctified, made clean, holy, and
chaste to him through his truth, they are set as a seal upon his heart, and
engraven upon the palms of his hand, that he cannot open his hand to do any
thing in the world, but they are in his view, their safety, preservation, and
defense from evil, and making meet for the inheritance, is continually before
him, and in order to that, and so as may conduce to that end, he will give men
for them, and people for their lives, Joh. 17. 17, 19. Isai. 49. 15, 16. and
43. 1, 4. Cant. 8. 6.

This also in included in his giving himself for his Church, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.
Namely, his sanctifying or separating himself in and above all things to mind
their good with peculiar design (as is said) That he may wash and cleanse them
with the washing of water by the word; and this also for the good of others,
even that by them the world may know that the Father sent the Son the Savior
of the world, and that he has loved these with the same manner of love, with
which he loves his Son; for he has chosen, and ordained them, that they
should bring forth much fruit, and that their fruit should remain.

More particularly according to the resemblance,

1. Such his holiness and devotedness to them, that he will not add another
wife to her to vex her in her lifetime, and that is for ever, for because he
lives, they shall live also, the seed of his Servants shall continue for ever.
So then, he will never own nor accept any other woman or Church, nor any that
are not by that one Spirit baptized into that one body, and made to drink into
that one Spirit, into that nigh relation with him, to be heirs together with
them of this grace, nor put any such burden upon them to own, or acknowledge
any other, (...) have their birth to the hope of inheritance from (...)
^rinciples, as competitors or copartners with them (...) ^his inheritance of
the Saints; For what says the Scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son,
for the son of the bondwoman shall not inherit with the son of the freewoman,
Gal. 4. 30. And this that the promise may be sure, and upon certain, and
undoubted terms to all of this body, to all the children of promise, and that
they may have strong consolation, and be encouraged, and engaged to abide with
him in the faith and hope of the Gospel; For if they that are of the law be
heirs, faith is made void, and the promise of none effect, Romans 4. 14-16. Let
them know therefore for their encouragement, and let all know for their
admonition and warning in time; That the Lord has set apart, separated from
all others to, and for himself, the man that is godly, ( Psalm. 4. 3.) that is,
the true worshipper of God, that worships the Father in spirit and truth,
giving honor to the Son in hearing his word, and according to it believing on
him that sent him, and so seeking to have all their rejoicing in Christ Jesus,
according to the testimony God has given of him, relinquishing for it all
confidence and rejoicing in the flesh.

And truly he that honors not the Son, neither does he honor the Father that
sent him; and therefore the Father seeks and wooes such worshippers; and
therefore also the Son will graciously own and accept them, yea, distinguish
and set them apart from all other for himself; all his fresh springs shall be
there; for all his nuptial or conjugal delight is in the Saints, even in them
that excel in virtue, whose righteousness exceeds that of the Scribes and
Pharisees; they being such as have made a covenant with him by that perfect
Sacrifice of the body of Christ offered once for all, and so are made the
righteousness of God in him; as for such as turn aside to their crooked ways,
that hasten after another, or endow another (the Translators render it another
God, but the Context* shows it to be) another Mediator and High priest, (and so
it may include another righteousness and sacrifice) to come to God by ^r also
another chief Bishop and Shepherd of their soul^ and Father of their spirits,
another head and husband with him; though they also make mention of, and would
be called by his name, yet he will not offer their bloody offerings, nor take
up their names into his lips; he will not make their sacrifices acceptable, nor
confess their names before his Father; and therefore their sorrows shall be
multiplied, when the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity,
for they are not his wife, nor is he their husband in such their crooked paths.
See Psalm. 16. 3, 4. with Psalm. 125. 5. Hos. 2. 2. Though there be many Queens
and Concubines, that plead their title to him, and interest in him as an
husband, he will own none as in that relation to him, but his Dove, his
undefiled, which is but one, the only one of her mother, as before is showed.
And

2. Such his love, faithfulness, and truth to her, that he will never leave
her, nor forsake her, nor put her away from him: For the Lord will not forsake
his people for his great names sake, 1 Samuel 12. 22. Yea, the Lord the God of
Israel says, that he hates putting away, Mal. 2. 16. He has not cast away
his people whom be foreknew, Romans 11. 2. Namely, those that are of the election
of grace, that by the discovery of his grace in Christ to manward, are chosen
out of the world into that grace, and having access into it, are through it
preserved in Christ, and abide with him, for they are therein made of the
beloved and chosen generation, that were chosen in Christ from the beginning of
the world, though they were not so before; they are now beloved, that were not
beloved, it has pleased the Lord to make them his peculiar people, and
therefore for his great names sake, he will not forsake them, but will always
reserve them to himself: They are the rest that are not of this election of
grace, that abide not in this one body, and so not in the unity of the Spirit
with them that call on him in truth, but turn aside to their crooked paths,
that hasten after another in his place (as before) who in any of his judgments
are left to blindness, or put away and rejected by him, either in whole or in
part, the iniquities for which God will forsake, are such as in which the
sinner becomes not his wife, or of his wife; such as in which they depart from
him, and become another, endow another husband, or another in his place, for
he hates the putting away the wife, as before is showed; he will not therefore
forsake, or cast away any that have been espoused to him, from that relation
and nighness, for infirmities or diseases found, no, nor for one, or diverse
particular acts of spiritual fornication, though he may correct, and hide his
face from them, yet will not forsake or put them away, while as yet they have
not sold themselves to another; but still cherishes, and seeks their healing
and helpfulness as his own body. But if ye forsake him, he will forsake you; if
we deny him, he will deny us. Yet such the infinite excellency and preciousness
of the sacrifice of Christ, and the riches of his grace in Christ, that when he
is provoked by men's forsaking him to forsake them, and to put them away, and
leave to blindness and hardness, to which he is not easily provoked, yet then,
I say, he does not presently give a bill of divorce, nor utterly reject, while
by any means he is calling, and they are not become trees twice dead, plucked up
by the roots, but still remembers for them his covenant; and withal remembers
the kindness of their youth, the love of their espousals, and has like pity
toward them, as a man toward his straying children, or toward an adulterous
wife, whom yet he loves; and in his love and pity seeks after them, and uses
gracious means for their reclaiming, and they, or any of them, if they abide
not in unbelief, shall be grafted in again; for he can righteously forgive such
sins and treacherous dealing, as are resembled by those which men cannot
righteously forgive, yea, he can forgive those sins they cannot justly forgive,
and so also those greater ones in this case resembled by them, and can have
compassion where they can have none. See Jer. 3. 1-12-14-20. with chap. 2. and
Isa. 50. 1, 2, 3. with Romans 11. 1-7-11, 23. compared with 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. and 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. Psalm. 125.

Yea further, such his love and faithfulness, that he will not fail them of all
the good that he has promised them, or given them encouragement to expect in
him, and with him, nor forsake them, or leave them comfortless, or as Orphans
and Widows in any trial, service and sufferings; for so is that saying of God
alluded to in this Heb. 13. 5. Both expressed and applied in Deuteronomy. 31. 6, 8.
Josh. 1. 5. as a faithful head and husband, he will

Write his name, and his Fathers upon them in such wise now as they shall be
known, and called by it in heaven, and by them that have their conversation
there, and be fitted and strengthened to bear forth a right, and successful
profession of it to others; and be sealed, distinguished, and marked by it to
the day of Redemption; and it is, and shall be engaged for their protection,
and defense, and in due time fully, and gloriously written, and manifested upon
them.

Feed, and satisfy them with the fatness of his house, and make them to drink
abundantly of the Rivers of his pleasures; he will give them that which is
good, and their soul shall delight it self in fatness; for the bread that he
will give them is his flesh, which he gave for the life of the world, their
bread shall be plentious, and their waters sure.

Cloth and adorn them with the robe of his own righteousness, in which he will
make them acceptable before God, and fill them with the fruits of it to
manward, which shall appear to praise at the day of Christ, when he will
beautify the meek with salvation.

Guide them with his counsels, and lead them into all truth, and show them
things to come, and direct their way and work in truth; yea, he will dwell in
them, and walk in them, and have such spiritual fellowship with them as shall
make them fruitful, to the increase of the body, and to the edifying it self in
love, and will own their children as his, and be the God of them, and their
Seed, and they shall be his sons and daughters.

And as a faithful Apostle and High Priest of their profession, will manage
them in it, and be with them, wherever he lead them, to uphold and strengthen
them, deliver them from all evil, make all things work together for good to
them, plead their cause, fight their battles, perfect what concerns them, and
make their spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God, before whom he will also
confess their names; and in due time receive them to glory.

2. The subjection, faithfulness, and chastity of the Church to Christ, unto
which she is infinitely obliged by all this grace, holiness, and faithfulness
of her Lord, and husband, is such as is resembled by that of the wife to her
husband. And surely it is such as in which she be holy, as he is holy, chastely
devoted, and set apart to him, and for him, as he for her sake has sanctified
himself, that she might be sanctified through his truth, and so partaker of his
holiness, that she be only for him, and for no other thing or person in his
place, that forgetting her own kindred and Fathers house, she reverence and
worship him as her only Lord and husband, and be subject to him in all things.

1. Owning and acknowledging with thankfulness his name as put upon her, and
counting it her glory and honor to be known, and called by it, and bear the
reproach of it, and therefore confessing, and not being ashamed of it before
men, yea, commending it as the only worthy name, and not mentioning her own
name, or suffering her self to be known, or called by that, or by the name of
any other person, ordinance, work or thing.

2. Sitting down under his shadow, to rest satisfied with his fruit, to
rejoice in him, rest, and stay upon him, and that grace in him as a sufficient
sign and witness of Gods love, ground, and foundation of faith, and hope in
God, fountain of wisdom, righteousness, strength, and of all things pertaining
to life and goldliness for us; and so as a sufficient and good rest, and
refreshing for us, considering* and feeding upon his flesh, which he gave for
the life of the world, and drinking down his blood that was shed for the
remission of our sins, and for obtaining all fullness of Spirit, and of grace
and truth into him for us, that so of his fullness we may receive, and in such
believing view, and mindfulness of him, and as his words are found, discovering
him in these things of him, eating them, and keeping them in our hearts, so
staying upon him, and seeking rest and refreshing to our souls; relinquishing
for it all other signs, witnesses, or ways of seeking rest, and so all
confidence, and rejoicing in the flesh; and not following any desire of meat
for our lust. And so putting on, and wearing his garments, in seeking so to
know him, that through the knowledge of him we may be found in him, our hearts
and minds stayed there, and we clothed with his righteousness before God, to
give us boldness, and render us acceptable in his presence, relinquishing for
it that of our own; and filled with the fruits of it to manward, that may be to
his praise, and the adorning his Name and Doctrine, and putting off for it the
fruits and works of our own wisdom and desires, the deeds of the old man.

3. With purpose of heart cleaving and adhering to him, as the only Father of
our spirits, Lord and Master of our faith, fear, and worship toward God, chief
Bishop and Shepherd of our souls, our Judge, our Lawgiver, and our King, to
save us, who only is able to save, and to destroy; and having our eyes and
hearts to him in his Testimony for all wisdom, understanding, counsel and
strength; and for all commandments and directions for walking before him, and
in his house; and resting on his Name, and the authority of his Testimonies for
all; ( O Lord, other lords* have had dominion over us, but by thee only will
we make mention of thy Name) and so being subject to him in all things.

4. To acquaint ourselves with him, seeking and entertaining fellowship with
him, by an exercise of faith in his Testimony of what he has done, is doing,
and will do; that thence we may prove the effectual working of it in our own
spirits, reconciling, and conforming to him, according to the greatness of his
power, which works in them that believe; that therein also it may be fitted
to our lips, and we constrained, and directed by him to such an holding it
forth in word and conversation, as in which we may have his presence, and
fellowship of his Spirit, making us fruitful, even in the bringing forth
children by him, and for him.

5. To give him our loves, not only in the yielding up souls and bodies by his
mercies, as a living sacrifice to be employed by him, and at his dispose, whose
we are, and not our own, being double bought, or bought in a double or twofold
sense, yea, twice bought with one price, his precious blood, and so the
sacrifice of his own body, made perfect through it, with that in presenting,
and offering it to God the Father in heaven, he redeemed, and bought us of him
from under the curse of the Law, to be at his dispose; and so he has bought
even them that deny him, having given himself a ransom for all: And with the
same price, in his presenting it spiritually by the Gospel to our hearts, he
has redeemed or bought us off ourselves, and out of, or from this present
world, and our vain conversation therein, unto himself, that we should be a
peculiar people to him, etc. Therefore we are not our own, but by these mercies
infinitely obliged to yield up to his use and dispose, both souls and bodies,
which are his. And not only so, to give him our loves, but in the return of
all again to him that we have received from him; both in the praise and glory
of it: Not unto us, not unto us, but to thy Name, and to thy grace in Christ:
for of thy goodness and bounty, and of the sufficiency of that grace, have we
all our sufficiency; and also in the improvement of it, using it to him,
employing it for the promoting the things of his kingdom, and not for our own
ends, and pleasure; aiming at him as the great end of all our conversation,
that he may be known, and glorified in us, and by us, in that which he has
done, and is become for men in himself, and in that which he is doing, and will
do; and also in the returning, or bringing, and offering to him, all the fruit
we have brought forth by him, and for him; even the children, or seed after the
Spirit, for they are his: I have espoused you, says the Apostle, to one
husband, that I might present you as a chaste virgin to Christ; My joy
therefore (says John the Baptist) is fulfilled, when the Bridegroom has the
Bride; this is that elsewhere called, the offering up of the Gentiles, and so
seeking to build, nourish, and bring them up into him in all things, and for
him; and so also our children after the flesh.

And truly as a wife treacherously departs from her husband, so do such as
have been espoused to this one husband treacherously depart, and go a whoring
from him, when

1. They either are ashamed of his name, or count it not glory enough to be
known and called by it, but seek to magnify, or to be known, and distinguished
by their own name, or the name of some other person, or thing besides, or
together with his name, or do receive, and are marked with some other name,
either in the hand as actors in it, maintainers, and defenders of it, or in the
forehead, to confess and show it forth before men. Or,

2. When though in some sense they would be called by his name to take away
their reproach, yet they will ear their own bread, and wear their own apparel,
rest not satisfied in his being sent into the world, dying for our sins, and
rising for our justification, according to the Scriptures, as a sufficient
sign, witness and revelation of himself what he is for us, and to us, and so
of the Father; but seek after some other sign, as those, Matthew. 12. 38, 39. 1
Cor. 1. 22-24. An evil and adulterous geneneration (says our Savior*) seeks
after a sign, and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the
Prophet Jonas; for as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales
belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of
the earth: nor are contented to be found in, and clothed with his
righteousness only, but seek after some other righteousness, or work, to
commend them to God, and to rejoice in before him; and so go about to perfect
by the flesh, that rejoicing consolation, and confidence, that holiness, and
those works that were begun by the Spirit in the preaching of the Cross of
Christ, as the Galatians, see the whole Epistle to them; and of the Corinths
the Apostle had jealousy, left they should be corrupted from the simplicity of
Christ in like manner.

3. When they own and acknowledge any other Lord or Master of their faith,
Father of their spirits, chief Bishop and Shepherd of their souls; and desire
to come into bondage in their minds, and consciences to any other name, power,
or ordinance of man, and have their fear toward God taught, or determined by
the doctrines and precepts of men. See Isai. 29. 13. with Matthew. 15. 2-9. and
23. 8-10. with 2 Cor. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 3. And whoever of them following such a
lust, or desire of pre-eminence, as was sometime found in the Disciples, Matthew.
18. 1. with Mark 9. 34. Matthew. 20. 21, etc. and approved and followed by
Diotrephes, 3 John 9. do assume any such Lordship over Gods Heritage, as having
dominion over their faith, or power to bind and loose the conscience, or sit
as Lord and Judge there, by virtue of whatever work, place, or office in the
Church* they assume it to themselves, they therein commit such treachery and
spiritual fornication, as is resembled by a man's having his fathers wife, which
the Apostle mentions as such abominable fornication, as was not so much as
named among the Gentiles.

4. When they go in unto, and seek fellowship with other lovers, whether things
or persons, to make them fruitful, or that their fruit may be the more fair and
beautiful in appearance (or be the end, or pretense what it will) as to say,
when they acquaint themselves, and have fellowship with Philosophy, the wisdom
from beneath, or love of being wise in a man's self; and vain deceit, that
artificial science, knowledge, or way of knowing, demonstrating, and expressing
things, which in respect of these things is falsely so called: when, I say, they
seek to and have fellowship with these, for understanding, finding out, and
demonstrating the great things of God in Christ Jesus, which belong to their
own and others peace, as not satisfied with the simplicity of Christ in his
Testimony, or with that plain preaching of the cross which is foolishness with
men; or not there singly to stay and wait for the evidence, and demonstration
of his Spirit, for opening our understandings, and leading us into all truth,
and there to wait for the hope of his righteousness by faith, in the perfecting
what concerns us, and making us fruitful; but lusting after, and doting on some
other wisdom and strength with it, which in stead of rendering us more excellent
and fruitful indeed, and in truth, makes the preaching of the cross by us
without effect, and only tends to espouse to ourselves, or beget a faith,
resting on the wisdom and power of man. See 1 Cor. 1. 17, 18, etc. and 2. 1*5,
etc. with Col. 2. 8. and 1 Timothy 6. 20.

Or when they go out from him to other Societies, where he seeds not, nor makes
his flock to rest at noon, as seeking to gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of
thistles, or as wondering after something of the Kingdom and glory of the beast,
or of his whore there, and seeking to learn how to add something like it, unto
what is of the Spirit in and among those that call on his name in truth, that
they may have something also to glory of in appearance, and grow more comely,
glorious, and fruitful that way. But indeed it defiles, and makes barren, and
desolate of true glory and fruit. See Cant. 1. 7. Matthew. 7. 15, 16. Revel. 3.
2, 4. with chap. 14. 4.

5. When they give their loves to another, as in those things peculiarly
pertaining to their only Lord and Husband, as to say, when they yield up their
minds and members to the service of sin, in any of the unclean and filthy
lusts of the flesh, or in covetousness which is idolatry, they herein defile
his Temple which he has double bought with such a price, as aforesaid; and so
there is treachery and spiritual fornication against the Lord, even in this
uncleanness, and filthiness of the flesh. See Romans 6. tot. with chap. 7* 4, 5,
6. and 8. 9-12. 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. with chap. 6. 13-20.

Or when in their better works and endeavors, they either are empty Vines to
him, and bring forth fruit to themselves, as Hos. 10. 1. or else having done
some work, and suffered many things, and brought forth some fruit by him, and
through his strengthening and filling them, and gracious presence with them;
they ascribe and attribute the praise of it to themselves, to their greater
wisdom and skill, either in the word of righteousness, or in other arts and
sciences, or to their prudent management of things; their zeal, care, or
diligence, or the like, and so deck their Idols with his ornaments, as Ezekiel.
16. Or also seek to espouse and win the children brought forth, unto, and for
themselves, contrary to the mind and Spirit of Christ in his servants, as
before showed; and indeed, this is also near akin to that more high degree of
spiritual fornication before mentioned, which is resembled by a man's having his
Fathers wife.

And surely this is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning us, even our
sanctification, that we should abstain from fornication, both carnal and
spiritual; and as the mercies of the Lord, as set before us in the
consideration of the heavenly and spiritual Marriage, resembled by the earthy,
and of the great and precious promises therein confirmed and given us; yea, and
in the consideration of the earthy marriage also, do powerfully oblige,
instruct, and strengthen us to cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, to present and yield
up the whole man a living sacrifice holy and acceptable, which is but a
reasonable service, and not to be conformed to this world, but to be
transformed by the renewing of the mind, as Romans 12. 1, 2, etc. with 2 Cor. 7.
1. So likewise the holiness of the Lord, and his severity against all
uncleanness, and filthiness of flesh and spirit, and the dreadfulness of his
wrath reserved against despifers, or neglecters of his mercy and salvation,
that turn his grace into wantonness, and will not be made clean (as this is
clearly showed, and to be seen in the discovery of that grace in Christ to
manward, which is abused by such rebellious despisers and neglecters) is very
useful to be considered to the same purpose, and of powerful usefulness, (as so
seen in that glass aforesaid) to warn and admonish to flee fornication, and all
uncleanness: yea, the Apostles had abundant usefulness of such considerations
of the terror of the Lord upon their own spirits, for awakening and
admonishing to watchfulness, denying the flesh, and keeping under the body, as
they were also instructed by their Master, their Lord and ours: see Mark 9.
42-50. with 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 9. 27. And have also frequently in all
their ministration, both to believers and unbelievers presented this severity,
and terror of the Lord in, and with their preaching of the Gospel, and as an
instruction, and consequent thereof, to awaken, warn, and admonish all, to give
more earnest heed to the things set before them in the glorious Gospel. See
Acts 13. 38-40, 41. Romans 1. 18, etc. and 2. 1-10. 1 Cor. 6. 9-11. 2 Cor. 5. 11.
Gal. 5. 15-21. Ephesians. 5. 1-6. Col. 3. 5, 6. Heb. 2. 1-3. and 10. 26-31. and 12.
15-25-29. Behold therefore the goodness, and the severity of the Lord.

And see to that purpose what is set before us in the other branch of this
Sentence; in the consideration of which, I shall endeavor the more brevity,
having been much larger then I intended upon the former, and especially in the
last point of Usefulness.

Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: But Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge. In this later part of the Text, (viz.) But
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge; let it be considered,

1. What is Whoredom and Adultery. 2. Who are in Gods account, and by him
reputed Whoremongers and Adulterers. 3. How, in what sense, and after what
manner God will judge them.
1. Whoredom and Adultery is here opposed to Marriage, and the bed undefiled;
and by that opposition signified to be, All carnal knowledge of, or fellowship
with a woman, that is other, or besides Marriage, and the bed undefiled;
whatever of that nature is more, or besides, every man having his own one wife,
and every woman having her own one husband: so much also is signified by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 1, 2, 3. whatever (I say) is more then this, or besides this
in persons married; and so all such carnal knowledge of, and fellowship one
with another in persons unmarried, is Whoredom and Adultery: I might also
include those unlawful and dishonorable conjunctions, though under pretense of
Marriage, yea the being married with such relations in the flesh as are
mentioned Levit. 18. 6-18. with 1 Cor. 5. 1.

This might be more particularly showed by the Scriptures of truth; but this
may suffice in this place: yet this I add, that our Savior says, Whosoever
looks upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery already in his
heart: understand it of a woman that is not his own wife, and so where the
having and following such a desire is sinful, and forbidden: for the desire of
a man to his wife is not called lust, or not an evil or sinful lust. Yea the
Apostle also mentions chambering and wantonness, foolish talking and jesting,
as branches of this uncleanness, and filthiness of the flesh, Ephesians. 5. 4. Romans
13. 13. I might also add, that the holy Ghost thus detecting and judging
Adultery with a woman, and all uncleanness or filthiness of the flesh of that
nature, does more strongly imply the sinfulness, and abominable shamefulness of
a man's lying with mankind, as with woman-kinde; and of man or woman lying
with any beast, as Levit. 18. 22, 23. with Romans 1. 24, 26, 27.

2. They are in Gods account, and by him reputed Whoremongers and Adulterers,
that when light comes to them, loving and choosing darkness rather, do as
children of disobedience to the grace of God bringing salvation; either go on
to commit, and serve, and continue in the actual service of such unclean lusts;
or remain in, and under the guilt of them: that is to say,

1. Such as Against the light and power of the grace of God reproving, and
moving to repentance, do go on to commit such uncleanness, (as aforesaid) or to
serve and follow after such unclean and sinful lusts, and make provision for
them; as by looking upon a woman to lust after her, or by frequenting such
company, as is unclean, or lascivious, or by chambering and wantonness with
any, or foolish talking, or jesting, which are branches of uncleanness, and
filthiness of the flesh, (as is said) and tend to further provocation of
unclean lusts.

2. Such as having polluted themselves with such uncleanness, and filthiness of
the flesh, though they continue not in the actual service of it; yet have not
come to the fountain opened for their washing, to the precious blood of Christ
as declared in the Gospel; or as the grace in him through it, is discovered to
them; or have not submitted to the washing efficacy thereof; not so received
the love of the truth, as to save them, to baptize, or wash them into Christ
for righteousness and strength.

For these are still under the guilt of their former sins, and so still reputed
as such with God; though from some other cause or reason, they may have ceased
from their former course of acting, or walking in them; or through decay of
nature, and so of the fleshly strength and lust, their former sins may have
left them; yet the wrath of God abides on them, even for those sins of their
youth; because they have not believed on the Name of the only begotten Son of
God. And if still they abide in wilful ignorance, and unbelief of that truth
through the knowledge of which the Son makes free, they are not free indeed:
for the soul being without this knowledge of God in Christ, cannot be good, not
reconciled to God, and so not washed from its sins; and therefore so remaining
till the day of Gods grace and patience pass away from them, they shall die in
their sins. For if ye (ye to whom that has been testified in the evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit) believe not (says our Savior) that I am he: if
with the heart, ye embrace not, or close not with the Testimony of Jesus The
Christ, in those manifestations of it, brought to you, to save you from your
sins; ye shall die in your sins. Joh. 3. 18, 36. and 8. 24. with Prove. 19. 2.

This description of Whoremongers and Adulterers, that are so repuced of God,
according to his rule of judging men by Jesus Christ, and the grounds of it,
may be further demonstrated from the Testimony of Jesus; as to say:

1. That they are children of disobedience to the grace of God, that is by, and
through Christ, and such only; that do abide under the guilt, and imputation
of sin from God, so as to remain under his wrath for sin, this, or any other;
This is thus demonstrated. The guilt of the disobedience of the first man,
Adam, in which we have all sinned; and of our natural uncleanness, or
filthiness of the flesh, as merely, and necessarily from thence derived to us;
in which we are by nature altogether filthy, sinners, enemies to God; full of
all ungodliness, unrighteousness, fornication, etc. These being by imputation
laid upon Christ, or caused to meet together upon him; and he having been made
sin, and a curse for them; he has thereby made peace, and atonement with God
for them, and by himself purged them away from before the Father; so that he
has redeemed us (all mankind) of the Father from under the curse of the Law
to himself: The Father has released us into his hands, and judges no man,
otherwise then by Jesus Christ, unto whom as our surety he has remitted, and
released the old debt, and first judgment he had against us; and has
committed all judgment unto him; so that in this his judging by Jesus Christ,
he holds no man under wrath, or at a distance from his Majesty, merely because
they have a sinful Nature, full of enmity to God, and inclined to all that is
contrary to his Law, nor for such sinful actions, as merely break forth through
natural infirmity, or violence of temptations; nor shall there be any occasion
for that Proverb in the eternal judgment of all men by Jesus Christ: The
fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. And
though now men do bear some fruit of that first sin, and natural sinfulness, as
thence derived in mortalities, and death now reigning upon them, yet is that
death abolished; the sting taken out of it, and no man shall perish in it, but
be raised out of it, and brought before the Judgment Seat of Christ; For as by
man came death, so by man the resurrection of the dead: for as in Adam all dye,
so in Christ shall all be made alive from this death. And now while they live
here, though in mortal state, yet are they not by these fruits of sin remaining
upon them, nor for this filthiness of the flesh, held out from God, or under
his wrath. ( Col. 1. 20. Heb. 1. 3. Gal. 3. 13. Joh. 5. 22. Romans 5. 18. Ezekiel.
18. 1. with 2 Timothy 1. 10. 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.) But this is the condemnation,
that when light is come into the world, men love and choose darkness rather; and
for this, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men, who withhold, or smother the truth of God in
unrighteousness, and would not so receive it, as to save them from their
ungodliness, and unrighteousness: Because that which may be known of God was
manifested in them, and they liked not to retain God in their knowledge. John
3. 19. Romans 1. 18*29. Yet also,

II. That all that consent to sin, so as to yield up their members to commit or
serve it, or voluntarily follow after its sinful and unclean lusts, and make
provision for them to fulfill them: that they are guiley before God, and under
wrath, as sinning against that grace that brings salvation to all men; this we
learn from that branch of the testimony of Jesus, that declares him in the
virtue of his ransom for all, a faithful testimony of Gods goodness to men in
due time; and therewith warning* of the danger of hiding, retaining, and
following the sins of the youth, showing the necessity of being washed from
them, and leading to repentance; even so soon as there is any capacity in the
soul to know any thing, and strength to act voluntarily after their own choice,
so soon does he prevent every man with his goodness, that they are not left
under a necessity of committing, or serving sin; nor are their sins, and
iniquities so left upon them, that they may not by the grace of God deny, and
resist them; for though they be naturally dead in sins and trespasses, yet the
dead are made to hear the voice of the Son of God, that in hearing, or adhering
to what they are made to hear by his preventing grace, they might live: Though
the spirit of a man be as a candle out, that cannot light it self, nor be
lighted by a mere blowing upon it, yet the inspiration of the Almighty gives
it understanding; that true light that lights every man that comes into the
world, is (as we have said) a testimony in due time, a faithful witness;
therefore whoever sins, he is of the Devil, and has voluntarily refused to
see, know, or take notice of Gods goodness, which brings salvation to all men
in due season; and therewith teaches, that denying ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. 1 Timothy 2. 6. John 16. 8. Romans 2. 4. Ezekiel. 33. 10. Joh. 5. 25. Job* 32. 8. 1 John
3. 6, 8. Tit. 2. 11, 12.

And the heynousness, and sinfulness of this kind of sin, or sinning, is
evidenced, and aggravated by the grace of God, in, and through Christ, against
which it is committed. Yea,

III. That this sin, and so all sins of this nature are still retained in
heaven against men, and they reputed as guilty before God, whether they go on
in the course of acting or serving them still, or no; while yet they are not
washed in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; this
likewise is to be seen, and understood in the light of Gods testimony
concerning Jesus Christ, which declares it to be his peculiar work and office
in the name of the Father, and by the power of the eternal Spirit, by, and with
the virtues of what he has done, and is become in himself for us, to save, and
wash us from our sins; It is to him that all the Prophets bear witness, that
through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive the forgiveness of
sins: And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which
they could not be justified by the law of Moses, Act. 10. 43. and 1. 3. 39.
Neither is there any other name given under Heaven, whereby we may be saved,
but the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth. He has deputed no man, or Church as
his Vicar, or substitute to do this; but himfelf by, and through the knowledge
of himself is the justifier, and cleanser from all unrighteousness, Isai. 53.
11. 1 John 1. 7, 9. And so it is attributed to the Apostles, and to them that
believe through their word, and have that word of reconciliation to minister, I
say, it is attributed to them in their faithful ministration of that Word,
because of the promise of his spiritual presence with them therein, always to
the end of the world; that whose sins they remit, namely, in that ministration,
and by the power of their word, they are remitted in heaven, etc. For it is
Jesus Christ that makes them free, through the knowledge of that word of truth,
it is Christ spiritually ministering, and ministered by them; he sent his word,
and healed them, (Joh. 20. 21, 23. with Mark 16. 15, 16. and Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
Joh. 8. 32, 36. Psalm. 107. 20.) And truly, if he wash them not, men can have
no part with him nor are they washed from their filthiness, how clean or pure
soever in their own, or others eyes. Whence it is said of the Corinthians, Such
were some of you, namely, fornicators, covetous, etc. But ye are washed, ye are
sanctified, ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God: he says not in the name of the Church, or of some High Priest, or
Bishop on earth, no, not in the name of Paul, or Peter. (Was Paul crucified for
you (says he to them, 1 Cor. 1. 13.) or were ye baptized into the name of
Paul?) But in the name of the Lord Jesus, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 11. Implying, that
until they were washed in that name, they were not washed nor free indeed, nor
was their name changed with God; but they are still reputed as such with him,
whatever other washings and cleansings they have had, and in what other name
soever. But being washed in his name, in that washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost, which is poured forth abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Savior, they are no longer reputed by the Almighty, as
Whoremongers, and Adulterers; but are by him graciously owned, and called by a
new name, Sons of God, heirs with Christ, elect, beloved, of the chosen
generation.

Behold what manner of love is this, that even such may have their sins so
blotted out in heaven, as to be called The sons of God? who would not make
haste to this fountain, while it is yet held open for the washing us from our
sin and uncleanness? We knowing the terror of the Lord against them that will
not be made clean (whose sins are still retained in heaven against them) cannot
but persuade men; though they count us fools and madmen for our pains, for see
the sentence and decree of the holy One, Whoremongers and adulterers God will
judge: which leads us to the last consideration here propounded, namely,

3. How, in what sense, and after what manner God will judge them. The
opposition of Gods judging them in this saying, But whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge, I say, the opposition of it, unto what is before affirmed of
the honourableness of Marriage, shows it to be such a correction, punishment,
or judgment for it, as is fitly opposed to the honourableness of Marriage, and
the* bed undefiled; that is, he will put them to shame, and wound them with
reproach and dishonor. And though this may be, and is in the beginnings of it
in mercy, and for their healing, and therefore with much mixture of mercy; yet
still persisting such, he will more severely judge them, as those that break
Wedlock and shed blood are judged; a wound and dishonor shall he get, and his
reproach shall not be wiped away; and in the issue, they still going on in
their trespasses, or not being washed in the blood of Christ, he will judge
them to everlasting shame and confusion, as he will do all makers, and
worshippers of Idols, (who are spiritual adulterers, and fornicators) and all
that are incensed against him.

See this distinctly, in three branches, or steps of Gods proceeding in his
judging them; according to a threefold sense of Gods judging spoken of in the
Scripture.

Gods judging is sometimes taken for the judgments of his mouth, as Psalm. 105.
5. and of them oft-times more particularly for his passing sentence for, or
against a man, his approving, or disapproving, his justifying, or condemning;
in respect of which it is said, that that he judges (even now in this present
day) without respect of persons, according to every man's work: 1 Pet. 1. 17.
and 2. 23. with Joh. 8. 16, 26, 50. and 12. 48. and 5. 30. Yet because sentence
against an evil work is not speedily executed, the hearts of the sons of men
are fully set in them to do evil.

Likewise, more often, and frequently, his judgments are taken for the
judgments of his hand, his executing judgment according to the righteous
sentence of his mouth; and so sometimes for his judging in this life and world:
Genesis 15. 14. That nation whom they shall serve will I judge. 1 Samuel 3. 13. God
would judge the house of Eli for ever. Ezekiel. 7. 3, 27. He would judge them
according to their ways and deserts. Chap. 16. 38. I will judge thee as women
that break wedlock, and shed blood.

And sometimes for his eternal judgment in the world to come: After death the
judgment, Heb. 9. 27. God has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained; whereof he has
given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. Acts
17. 31. See also Romans 2. 6*16.

Now according to these three branches of Gods judging, we are to take this,
namely, in such a sense as including them all.

1. God will not now own, and approve them, but reprove, convict, and bear
sentence against them, by the spirit of his mouth, or doctrine, making that a
reprover, and condemner of them in their spirits, and consciences; and this in
mercy, and faithfulness to them, that taking shame to themselves, and turning
at his reproof, they may escape further, and worse judgment. And so is that to
be understood, 1 Pet. 4. 6. For this cause was the Gospel preached also to them
that are dead, (even by his Spirit to their spirits, as in the days of Noah,
Chap. 3. 19.) that they might be (namely, by that preaching) judged (that is,
discovered, reproved, condemned, and made to take shame) as men yet living in
the flesh, but that they might live according to God in the spirit. To which
agrees that, 2 Cor. 5. 15. That one died for all, that they which live in their
several ages, should not henceforth (namely, after this grace comes to them, in
his spiritual ministration, thus discovering, and judging them as dead men: see
verse. 14.) live to themselves, but to him that died for them, and rose again.
So our Savior says, The Spirit of truth, that he would send in the preaching
of the Gospel, should reprove (judge, condemn, convict) the world of sin,
because they believe not on him, etc. ( Joh. 16. 8, 9, 10.) that is, by taking
of the things of Christ and showing them, namely, what he has done, and is
become for sinners, and so glorifying him, he shall manifest, and evince to
them, that it is their own wilful sin, and great iniquity, that they believe
not on him; and that that is the reason, that all other sins (which thereby are
rendered odious, and out of measure sinful) prevail over them, and that they
remain still in them, and are not washed from them. In this sense of judging,
Ezekiel is called upon as Gods mouth, and messenger to judge the Elders of
Israel, and the bloody City: Will thou judge them, son of man, will thou judge
them? Cause them to know their abominations. See Ezekiel. 20. 4. and 22. 2. and
23. 36.

And for this I dare appeal to all Whoremongers and Adulterers, but more
especially, to those to whom the plain declaration of the Gospel has come,
(though God leaves not himself without witness to any) and most of all to those
of them that have gone on in their evil ways, following their unclean and
sinful lusts, till they have brought further wrath, shame, and judgment upon
themselves; whether before it has come to that, God has not oftentimes, by
the spiritual convictions, and reproofs of his instruction by his servants, or
otherwise also, judged them in their own minds, and consciences: has he not
graciously showed them their abominations, and how hateful to him, in
discovering an open fountain for their washing? has not his goodness oft-times
melted, and moved to repentance? has he not many ways cried to them, Oh do not
this abominable thing that I hute! though they would take no notice of it, nor
take shame; but went on hiding, and holding fast their deceit, till a deceived
heart turned them more aside, and they hardened their hearts to a treasuring up
more wrath against the day of wrath? Jer. 44. 3, 4. Romans 2. 4. And if any of
them should not acknowledge so much, yet let God be true, and every man a liar;
I know they belly the Lord in not acknowledging it; because I know, he is holy*
in all his ways, and righteous in all his works, according to that
manifestation of himself in his Son: I know he will have no fellowship with
iniquity, nor shall the sinner stand, as approved, or allowed in his sight; but
even while he defers his anger, and holds his peace, in respect of the
judgments of his hand, not rebuking in fury poured out; yet in this first, and
more gracious way of judging, he speaks once and twice before he strike, though
men will not perceive, or regard it. Job 33. 14, etc. Zech. 7. 9*12. Oh the
folly, and madness in the heart of sinners, that will not submit to his
judgment, nor take shame, while he is graciously judging, that they might turn
from their iniquities, and understand his truth! How do they lay themselves
open to wrath! for still this decree remains against them, Wheremongers and
Adulterers God will judge: whereas had they submitted to this his merciful
judging them by the Gospel, and the reproofs of* his instruction, and turned in
the light and power of his reproofs unto him, their former wickedness should
not have been remembered against them in heaven; their name should have been
changed, and a new name given them; and so this decree had lain no longer
against them, because they had not been such now in Gods account. But they
remaining still Whoremongers and Adulterers, however judged, reproved, and
condemned for it by the Lord, according to the Gospel, the decree still lies as
much against them as ever, for it lies for ever against Whoremongers and
Adulterers: Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. And so

They not receiving reproof, but still remaining such, especially after God
has spoken once and again by the Gospel,

2. God will severely judge them by the judgments of his hand, in this present
life and world, while yet in mercy he does not cut them off in their iniquity,
he will judge them as women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged. See
Ezekiel. 16. 35* 38-40, etc. See also Prove. 6. 32, etc. Whosoever commits adultery
with a woman, lacks understanding; he that does it, destroys his own soul:
A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away.
Yea, a whore will bring a man to a piece of bread, and the adulteress will hunt
for the precious life: verse. 24, 25, 26, etc. True it is, he oft-times defers
his anger, and does not speedily execute such judgments on such workers of
iniquity, or with less severity, where they have had less means of knowledge of
better things: but because he leaves not himself without witness to any, even
of his goodness, that is in, and through a Savior, moving to repentance,
therefore he will judge, and that without respect of persons, according to
every man's ways: for all the ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord, and
he pondereth all his goings. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself,
and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins. For to God belongs
vengeance, and recompense, and shall not he correct? who chastises the heathen
for such things. Prove. 5. 19, 20, 21. Psalm. 94. 1, 7-10. Romans 1. 18, etc.

Abuse not therefore his patience, forbearance, and longsuffering, as thence to
imagine he does not see, or regard: but know, that his goodness in his
patience, and bounty yet exercised, is to melt thy heart, and move thee to
repentance. But God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of
such a one as goes on still in his trespasses. Destruction is to the wicked,
even at their portion from God, and a strange punishment to the works of
iniquity, Job. 31. 3. Psalm. 68. 21. And infinitely better it is to be judged,
yea, to have our judgment in this world, then in the world to come.

Seeing therefore Gods judging us here, is by a Mediator, and that he may not
judge us in the world to come, but that we may escape the damnation of Hell:
Learn (at least when so judged by him) timely to humble our selves under his
mighty hand, and to judge our selves, that we fail not of his grace, that is
yet bringing salvation in the way of his judgments; nor be further judged by
him: Be not mockers, lest your bands be made strong; for if under all these
judgments in this life, and notwithstanding them, the Whoremonger and
Adulterer, and so the Murderer, and Covetous person, who is an Idolater,
remain still such until the day pass; that is to say, If either they continue
in the evil way and course of acting, serving, or following, and making
provision for it; for there is no such dispensation from heaven, that a man may
continue in the act of sin, or in the course and way of sinning, and yet be
free from the guilt of it: The liberty to which we are called by the Gospel, is
not liberty to the flesh. Or if they have left some particular way and course
of sinning, in which they have before walked, or it have left them; if yet they
remain under the guilt of it, not being washed in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God (as aforesaid). And so their iniquity not being
purged from them till they dye, which it cannot be, but by the blood of Christ;
and if they be not purged till death, they can never be purged after, for there
is no wisdom, knowledge, work, or device in the grave, or in the disappearing
state of death, to which we are going, Eccles. 9. 10. (no Purgatory there) nor
any returning again to perfect any thing left undone under the Sun. For though
all men shall return again from the grave, and from the disappearing state of
death; yet not to perfect any thing left undone under the Sun, but to appear
before the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ, to receive every one according to
the deeds done in the body in this life, whether they be good or bad, according
to the Gospel-rule of judging: if therefore they still remain such in Gods
account, they still remain under the decree: For Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will judge. And so dying in their sins,

3. They fall under the eternal judgment of the wrath of God, the full and
proper wages of their sin, and cannot escape the damnation of Hellfire, where
their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched.

For from the very time of death, there is a great gulf fixed between them, and
those that have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of
the Lord and Savior, and are not again entangled therein, but dye in the Lord;
yea, between them and those that are yet among the living, to whom there is
hope, so that he that would pass from the one to the other cannot. From
thenceforth they are sealed up, and reserved in prison to the judgment of the
great day; and their spirits have no rest day nor night, but are in continual
horror, in remembrance of what infinite mercy they have slighted, abused, and
sinned against, and in the sense and apprehension of the dreadful wrath of the
Lamb, that is now become their portion for ever, Luke 16. 19-26. Rev. 14. 11.
with Prove. 14. 32.

And in that imprisoned state of darkness and horror they shall remain till
they shall have their dead bodies raised up by the voice of the Son of man (the
Lord Jesus Christ that dyed for them) and reunited with their spirits. And
that resurrection of them shall be to everlasting shame and confusion, world
without end. For then they shall be brought before his Judgment Seat, and
there shall be particularly, and fully brought to light, and manifested, all
the grace they have sinned against, all the warnings and reproofs they have
despised, and every secret thing* and hidden work of darkness they have done:
It shall be made manifest before God, Angels and men, to evidence the equity
and righteousness of his Judgment, which themselves also shall then upon clear
conviction acknowledge just; for from their own mouths he shall judge them, and
so proceed to that righteous and dreadful sentence, which from thence in the
execution shall for ever seize on soul and body: Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire prepared for the devil and his angels, which is to them the second death;
and the smoke of their torment aseendeth up for ever and ever. And God, and his
holy Angels, and sanctified ones shall rejoice when they see the vengeance; for
there shall be no more mercy, bowels or pity in God, Angels, or men toward
them for ever, as in this day there was. God himself shall laugh at their
calamity, and mock when their fear comes; and they shall be tormented for ever
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; I say, for ever
in soul and body together, for there is no darkness or shadow of death left, in
which the workers of iniquity may then hide themselves; no pains or torments
shall ever be able to put an end to their sensible being, or make a dissolution
of soul and body again; but when an hundred, a thousand, ten thousand, yea, ten
thousand times ten thousand years have passed, yet is not the time at all
shortened; it is still for ever, and for ever. Nor is there any intermission,
their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched; and it is infinitely
sorer punishment, then any merciless torments that can be suffered in this
life; yea, the pains and miseries of this first death, and the Hell pertaining
thereto, will be cast into that lake to boot; all aggravating the terror of
it, yet there will be degrees of torment by the worm, and by the fire, and they
will be most dreadful, and in the highest degrees upon those that have sinned
against most mercy; who knows the greatness and power of his wrath? it will
be even according to his infinite greatness and power to execute it, and
according to the grace abused; for then there shall be no Mediator to plead for
any abatement, as now there is; nor any to deliver. Oh consider it in time, ye
that forget God, lest he come and tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver: surely then it will appear no small mercy to have been now delivered
from the wrath to come, secured from the second death, whatever men have
suffered, or denied themselves of in the way to it. Oh that men were wise, and
would timely take warning to flee from it; and therefore to flee from those
ways of iniquity, and paths of the destroyer that end in it: For such, as
aforesaid, cannot enter into life, nor inherit the Kingdom, or escape the
damnation of Hell. And in their turning, let them turn to the Lord, seek
healing in his name and blood; for except he wash us, we can have no part with
him.

The Use of all.
That therefore they may flee fornication, and be washed indeed from such
filthiness, and uncleanness of the flesh; let them give more earnest heed to
the things they have heard concerning Christ in the three branches of the
testimony of God concerning him, namely of what he has done, and is become for
us in himself; and of what he is doing, as the Mediator between God and men,
and of what he will do; and so unto the instructions thereof, with the reproofs
of those instructions.

The instructions thereof, as particularly applied in this case, are,

1. The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, for his use and service,
and to be disposed by him, for he has bought it with a great price; even by
giving himself in his own body a ransom or price of redemption to God for it;
and to this purpose he dyed, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord of all.
Therefore we are not our own, we are bought with a price, that we should
glorify God in our souls and bodies, which are his by redemption, as well as
by Creation. The body is not redeemed at such a rate from the curse of the Law,
that it should henceforth serve sin.

2. The Lord is for the body, he is the Savior of it, and even now caring for
it: all the health, strength, and mercy enjoyed in this body, is by virtue of
his blood, and through the power of his mediation, who makes intercession for
transgressors, for further sparing, and that he may still be a testimony in due
time, and that we may live to him, and glorify him in our souls, and bodies,
which are his.

3. And he that raised up Jesus the Lord from the dead, shall also raise us up
by his own power, even in this very body, to receive in it, according to the
things done in it, whether good, or bad: and he shall raise, and judge us by
him, according to the Gospel, as before is showed. Shall we then take the
members of Christ, those that are his by purchase, redeemed, and bought by him,
cared for, and preserved by him, and that must be eternally disposed, and
judged by him, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid.

See all these three branches of instruction together, and so applied, 1 Cor.
6. 13, 14, 15-20.

Yea, there is also included, and contained in the same, further instructions,
and arguments against this filthiness of the flesh, and all uncleanness, as
springing from the testimony of Jesus unto such as have believed, and known the
truth as it is in him; as to say:

1. They have been redeemed by the same price, in another, and further sense,
(which is before mentioned) namely, bought off themselves, and so redeemed, and
chosen out of the world, and from their vain conversation, by his spiritual
discovery of it to them, and therein the pretiousness of his blood: he has
thereby out-bidden the world, and prevailed with these to adhere to him, and
yield up themselves, soul, and body to him, to be his, and at his dispose; and
he has owned, and taken them as his purchased possession, and so made their
bodies, temples of the holy Ghost, which is in them, renewing the mind, that
the whole man might be transformed by it. And

2. After a peculiar sort he cares for their bodies, preserving, and carrying
them through great tribulations, and so delivering them from those things, and
persons that do threaten destruction to their bodies, (their outward man) more
then to any others; and this that they might glorify him, and finish their
course with joy: to which purpose, as their Advocate, he is managing their
cause, and matters in heaven, and taking away their sins, yea the iniquity of
their holy things there, and thence affording his gracious, and spiritual
presence with them, and protections over them in their service of him, and
suffering for him here on earth.

3. He has called them by the Gospel to the obtaining of eternal glory, and
given them part in the first resurrection by faith in Christ, and in the hope
of it in, and by him; in which resurrection, they shall be presented together
with the Lord Jesus, and with the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles; and have
their bodies that now are vile, fashioned into the likeness of his glorious
body. See all this also in the forementioned Scripture, with Chap. 3. 16, 17.
Romans 8. 9-12. 1 These. 4. 13-18. and 5. 5-10. and 2 These. 2. 13-17. Phil. 3. 20,
21.

Their bodies therefore are more especially, and in a peculiar sense the
members of Christ; and shall they then take them, and make them the members of
an harlot? God forbid; let not such filthiness be once named among them, as
becomes Saints: surely it is not only unsuitable to their faith, and hope,
and to their profession of it; but directly contrary to all the instructions of
it; and tends to make it void to themselves, and to cut them off from it, (
Romans 8. 13.) yea, to provoke his cutting them off from the Vine, shutting them
out, and driving them away into utter darkness. For the wicked is driven away
in his wickedness, but the righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14. 32. If
any man defile the temple of God, him will God destroy: for the temple of God
is holy, (peculiarly devoted, and set apart for him to dwell in, and walk in)
which temple (says he, speaking to such as forementioned) ye are. Now then,
such as last mentioned, in committing fornication, or al^owing themselves in
the service of such filthy, and unclean lusts of the flesh, bring themselves
thereby under that dreadful sentence of destruction from the Almighty; be will
destroy them, and not build them up, as to their place, and service in his
temple: yea, if timely they receive not correction, and obey the voice of it,
he will blot out their names, and take away their part out of the book of life,
because they defile his temple:

Which they do,

Both in defiling themselves, who are purchased and devoted stones in that
house or building, members of that body: And in defiling others, even others
that are also of his house; yea, the whole Church, or Society of which they
are; and this is done in fornication not abstained from by such, more directly,
and abundantly then in many other sins or ways of iniquity: As to show it a
little.

1. They defile themselves, and that both in themselves their bodies and souls
which are Gods; and before God and men.

1. Herein they pollute, and defile themselves in their own persons, so that
the whole man is actually defiled and made unclean by this lust, followed, and
not abstained from.

1. They defile the flesh, or body, Jude 8. In joining it unto, and making it
one flesh with that which is forbidden, and unclean to them: For he that is
joined to an harlot is one body; and so not only defiles her, but himself with
her. This therefore the Apostle urges as a particular motive against
fornication, and to admonish to flee from it: Every sin that a man does, is
without the body: but he that commits fornication sins against his own body;
that is to say, every sin though conceived within, in the mind; yet when a man
does, or commits and acts it, it is then without the body (for it is done and
acted by the members, and so comes forth to manifestation, or at least into an
act that is outward, and so without the body.) And so also is fornication; but
in this fornication is singular, it not only wars against the soul, as all
other fleshly lusts; but in committing it, a man more directly and grossly then
in other sins, sins against his own body, wrongs, injures, and dishonours it
(and so he does his wives also, if he has one, who is his own flesh or body)
yea, he pollutes and defiles his members, in making them the members of an
harlot, (any that is not his own wife according to the Marriage-covenant) and
becoming one flesh with her: Besides that therein he hazards and lays his body
open to such noisome diseases, as is the proper fruit, and meet recompense of
such unrighteousness; and so therein sins against his own body, as much as if
it did always certainly follow.

II. They also therein more directly and abundantly then in many other sins, do
wrong, defile, and destroy the soul; and that both in order to the committing
it, and that they may go on to serve it; and then also by committing, or
serving it, and as the consequence of it.

In order to the committing it, and that men may go on to serve this lust of
uncleanness; it is so manifestly contrary to Gods mind (especially where the
light of the Gospel has discovered it) and so dishonorable and fil^hy in the
eyes of men generally, and no color of any good pretense to excuse it, and so
brutish, and sensual a thing in it self* and contrary to the reason,
understanding, and judgment of a man, as in any measure that is preserved by
Christ; that a man or woman* (especially such as have in any measure known the
truth as it is in Jesus) cannot go on to commit or serve it, without such
^ilful suffering the mind to be clouded and darkened, and h^rdning the heart
against the light, and instructions of the grace of God, as may make them fit
to receive any thing, that so Satan may carry them captive at his pleasure;
yea, the reason and understanding of a man must be captivated, and denied, and
all ^nslav^d to the lust, that it may get domini^n.

Which also being followed and served, further wrongs, defiles, and destroys
the soul, yea, it takes away the heart* as says the Prophet Hosea of that and
drunkenness together, Hos. 4. 11. Whoredom and wine, and new wine take away the
heart; they confound and rob a man of his understanding, and take away his
heart, and affections from God, and the things of his Kingdom, that when a
price is put in his haud, he has no heart, Prove. 17. 16. Nor can he see when
good comes; nor has understanding, or strength to see, or avoid any evil; but
is made sottish, and easily led into any Idolatry, Murder, or wickedness,
after their own deceived heart: for so also it follows in that of Hosea, My
people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declares unto them; for
the spirit of whoredom has caused them to err, etc. Nor have they eyes or an
heart to foresee, consider, or prevent any mischief or danger coming upon them;
but are hurried into it, ^s an ox to the slaughter, or as a fool to the
correction of the stocks, Prove. 7. 22, 23. and are as he that lies down to
sleep on the top of a Mast, insensible of wounds, evils, and dangers attending
them. See this, and much more mentioned as the fruit of those two besotting
sins, Whoredom and Drunkennes^. Prove. 23. 26. to the and. So ^e that does them
defiles and destroys his own soul, Prove. 6. 32.

2. Hereby they render themselves filthy, and unclean in the sight of God,
vessels unmeet for any peculiar use and service of the Master, such as in which
he can take no pleasure, for they herein break his appointment and order,
reject and despise his government, and provision, profane, and defile his
members to the service of unclean and filthy lusts; and therefore God accepts
them not, but will destroy them as to their place and service in his temple (a^
aforesaid) and blast their blessings, and good things to them, and have no
fellowship with them, for he requires cleanness and holiness in them that come
near* to him, and will be sanctified by them; yea, this kind of uncleanness,
and so all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, as it comes under this head of
fornication, carnal, or spiritual, is especially branded with this note, that
God hates it, Rev. 2. 6, 15-20, 22. with Levit. 20. 10-23, 24. Mal. 2. 16. and
Deuteronomy. 12. 31. and 16. 21, 22.

3. Such unclean lusts not abstained from, do also bring a blemish, stain, or
blot upon them among men; and that also to the blemishing the worthy name of
God, (if that be called upon them.) Some other evils are more justifiable in
the sight of men, which yet are abominable in Gods sight: but this is not only
abominable in Gods sight, but of evil, base, and shameful report among men; and
especially to be found in such as are called by, or call upon the Name of the
Lord: A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped
away. See Prove. 6. 33.

Yea, so are they defiled in the sight of God and men hereby, as renders their
words and works unclean, unacceptable to God, unprofitable to men; so that
whatever right profession be held forth by them, as the Lord delights not in
it, so also it is stained, and its fruit hindered among men, by its coming out
of their mouths, until they be washed, delivered, and quitted from those
pollutions, and the guilt of them before God, and in such wise, as it may in
some measure appear to men, that they are so: whence David prays to be
delivered from bloudguiltiness, that his tongue might sing aloud of Gods
righteousness; and so that God would open his lips, and then he says his mouth
should show forth his praise: signifying thereby, that his lips were shut by
Gods just correction, and by the sense of shame, and guilt of his murder and
adultery remaining upon him; and that his opening them himself, until God had
washed and purged him, and delivered him from the guilt of them, would not tend
to the praise of God. Psalm. 51. 12, 13, 14, 15.

2. They defile others; not only each of them the other with whom they join in
it; nor is this all further, that if there be an husband or a wife against whom
the adulteress or adulterer deals treacherously in committing fornication,
defilement occasionally happens to them, yea it may be to body and soul, more
or less; besides the fraud and wrong therein done to them: but also they defile
others more generally, and the more abundantly, by how much the more they were
in union and fellowship with them that call on the Name of the Lord in truth;
encouraging some by their evil example to follow it, against the reproofs of
Gods instruction in that, or other lusts, and so also unfitting them to
admonish, or reprove others for so doing; and offending others that are weak;
yea, occa^^oning them to stumble at the truth, and at the way of it, as if
Christ were the minister of sin, or the liberty to which we are called by the
Gospel were liberty to the flesh; and provoking others to wrath of pride,
strifes, debates, and many other evils: whence the Apostle admonishing to look
diligently, lest any root of bitterness be suffered to spring up, (and not
curbed, or plucked up at first rising) and thereby many be defiled; he adds
this warning against fornication and profaness, as eminent defilements, and
defilers: lest there be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for one
morsel of meat sold his birthright, Heb. 12. 15, 16. Yea, such the stain and
blemish brought upon the whole societies of believers, among whom such are,
that while they are with and among them, they are outwardly defiled, and
besmeared with reproach amongst men of the world, that are ready presently to
judge them, as allowing such evils and uncleanness among themselves, and
thereby rendered unmeet to bear the vessels of the Lord, and minister about
holy things among them, and the more unsuccessful therein. And therefore they
are admonished to put away from among themselves such wicked persons, as being
called brethren, yet are fornicators, idolaters, railers, drunkards, covetous,
extortioners, with such to have no company, or intimate fellowship, that they
may be ashamed, etc. See 1 Cor. 5. And that the truth of God, and the way of it
may not be evil spoken of, as a nursery of such, nor suffer damage by them in
any thing; but that they may cut off occasion from them that seek it. For there
are many wicked and malicious adversaries, that watch for their halting, and
seek occasions and advantages, that they may speak reproachfully of, and
blaspheme that worthy name by which they are called, and great occasion is
given them by such fleshly lusts served among such; which also more highly
provokes the Almighty, and renders such works of darkness, and iniquity so vile
in his sight, that he will not let them go without some correction left upon
them, for a remembrance of their ways, and to warn, and humble them, even such
as yet in turning to him are forgiven, and healed. For so he says to David
after his humbling himself, and confessing his fins, although thereupon he
says by the Prophet, The Lord has put away thy sin; yet he adds, Howbeit,
because by this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord
to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die: that is,
besides the forementioned corrections, which likewise should come, and remain
upon him, as that the sword should not depart from his house, etc. Because
(says he) thou have despised me, and taken the wife of Vriah, etc. See 2 Samuel
12. 9-14.

Seeing then this lust of uncleanness, and other such fleshly lusts, not being
abstained from, by those that have known, and believed the truth, are so out of
measure sinful, and defiling to themselves, and others; suffer this word of
exhortation by the Apostle Peter, Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers
and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts that war against the soul; having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as
evil doers, they may by your good works (in putting off these deeds, and fruits
of the flesh, and in putting on the new man with his deeds) which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation, 1* Pet. 2. 11, 12. Yea, the
rather accept it, and give earnest heed to the things we have heard in Gods
speaking to us by his Son, to strengthen us against such defiling evils,
because especially now, that the darkness is past, and the true light has
shined, making manifest all things that are reproved, such defiling of the
temple of God, procures such sorer punishment, and destruction to the defilers,
from the Almighty: for,

Whhremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

And look what sentence is here denonnced, and lies for ever against
Whoremongers and Adulterers, unto whom the holy Ghost had here particular
occasion to apply it, in this opposition of his sentence, unto his asserting
the honourableness of Marriage, and the bed undefiled; we may by the same word
of the Lord apply unto all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men.

For now especially since the righteousness of God is revealed in the Gospel of
Christ (which is the power of God to save) that men might be justified by
faith, and that the just by faith may live, and walk by faith, and so in the
spirit, and not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, (compare Romans 1. 16, 17. with
chap. 3. 21-27. and Gal. 3. 23, 24. and 5. 16.) The wrath of God is also
thereby more clearly revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold (hold back, detain, or smother the truth of
God, that comes to save them from it all) in unrighteousness; for the judgment
of God is according to truth, yea, according to the Gospel of truth, that
royal-law of liberty, that proclaims redemption from the curse, and liberty
from the bondage of the Law, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in them that believe; I say, according to this Gospel of Salvation by
him that was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him, the judgment of God is according to truth against all them that commit
such things, as in which his holy law is transgressed; and without respect of
persons, he judges according to every man's work; for he that said, Do not
commit adultery, said also, Do not kill; now if thou commit no adultery, yet if
thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the Law (and so we may say, if
thou steal, or if thou bear false witness, or if thou do any thing contrary to
sound Doctrine) and shall be judged for it by the law of liberty, and according
to its rule of judgment (which has been already showed.) So speak therefore,
and so do in all things, as those that shall be judged by that law of liberty.
See Romans 1. 18, 19-28. with chap. 2. 2-10-16, etc. and Jam. 2. 8-12, 13.

See also there how the Apostle James applies a like sentence with as great
severity against the having the faith of Christ with respect of persons, and
despising the poor, which he condemns as murder: For he shall have judgment
without mercy, that has showed no mercy. And so the Apostle Paul, (as the holy
Ghost elsewhere) passes a like judgment, as by commandment from the Lord,
against idolaters, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers, extortioners, and
all liars, yea, against all the unrighteous in general, as well as against them
that walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, such, as such, and while
such, have no part, or inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God, nor
shall inherit; but because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the
children of disobedience, that will not so receive the love of the truth, as to
save them from these things. See 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 5.
3-6. Col. 3. 5, 6-9. with Revel. 21. 8. and 22. 15.

Yet let us also take in the Apostle Peter's, [But chiefly] 2 Pet. 2. 10. where
after he has said, verse. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptation, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished,
he adds, But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness,
and despise government, etc. which may be of some use to us in this place.

For that -- But chiefly -- must refer either to the punishment in the day of
judgment, to which they are reserved that are unjust still, and filthy still,
after the love of the truth extended to save them; or else to Gods knowing how
to reserve them, or exercising his infinite wisdom and knowledge in reserving
them to the day of wrath, and retaining their fins against them, that they may
be brought to light, and judged then: And it may be without error referred to
both: For

1. As there is a more or less severity of wrath, in the days of Gods wrath and
judgment here, when God is calling fins to remembrance, and with rebukes
correcting men for their iniquity; so also there shall be degrees of
punishment, in that day of Gods, eternal judgment by Jesus Christ; whence our
Savior says, That it shall be more tolerable for some then for others in that
day, Mat. 10. 15. and 11. 22, 24. And the greatest severity of wrath is
reserved for those that have most defiled, profaned and destroyed his temple;
and this walking after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despising
government; especially when found in such as have a form of godliness, and so
turn the grace of God into lasciviousness; and deny the only Lord that bought
them, and so in whose sins, both spiritual and carnal fornication, meet
together, falls chiefly under that condemnation, as may appear by what is said
already; and such were those defilers of the flesh spoken of by Peter and Jude,
for whom they therefore conclude, the mist of darkness, or as Jude expresses
it, the blackness of darkness (which must needs signify the thickest, or most
dreadful and horrible darkness) is reserved for ever, 2 Pet. 2. 17, 18. Jude 13.

2. There are some fins (though works of darkness) that are more open and
manifest to men in the acting, or committing them, going before to judgment:
But there are others more secret and hidden from men, that they cannot manifest
them, discern, or find them our; and such ordinarily is the way of a man with
a maid, and so of the adulterer, and adulteress, and therefore reckoned by the
wise man among those things that were too wonderful for him, Pray. 30. 18, 19,
20. Now though he perfectly knows all our works, and there is nothing, not a
word in our tongue before it be spoken, nor a thought in our hear, but he
knows it altogether; yea, all things are alike naked, and manifest before him
with whom we have to do; yet the knowing, and finding out the hidden things of
darkness* (which men cannot see, or not find out and make manifest) and
bringing them to light, and to judgment is especially attributed to him, as
more peculiarly, and immediately his* own work: The secret things belong unto
the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. He reveals the deep and secret things, and
knows what is in the darkness, Dan. ^. 22. Yea, he shall bring every work
into judgment, with every secret thing, Eccles. 12. 14. He will both bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
heart, 1. Cor. 4. 5. And this also to signify, that he is chiefly engaged, and
ingageth himself in the discovery, and judging of those things that are hidden
from man's judgment, and so the hidden works of darkness; and so much seems to
be employed in the phrasing of this sentence of the holy Ghost, especially
considering the former part unto which it is opposed, Marriage is honorable in
all, or among all: -- But Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge; as much
as to say, their works though in themselves shameful and dishonorable, for it
is a shame to speak of those things that are done of them in secret; yet are so
much in the dark, and they so hidden from man's judgment in the committing and
acting of them, that they say, Who sees us? and who knows us? and might many
times escape without either taking shame, or receiving shame, or punishment as
the just reward, or recompense of their works, if God were not the more engaged
by himself, and in his holiness, truth, and justice to find them out, and
manifest, and judge them; but though they also comfort themselves, and harden
their hearts in their evils ways, with a thought that God will not see, or
regard such things: Yea, when ^e defers his anger, and so as to the judgments
of his ^d seems to hold his peace, a long time, then they boast themselves in
their iniquity, as if they were sure of his approving, or standing Neuter;
saying in their hearts, God has forgotten, he hides his face, he will never
see it: Or more blasphemously, How does God know, and can he judge therew the
dark cloud? (as Psalm. 94. 7. and 10. 11. with Job 22. 13. 14,) yet, yea the
rather, and more severely God will judge, bring to light, and manifest their
hidden works of darkness, even where otherwise man could not: For he knows how
(though man knows not) to keep, and reserve the most secret, and hidden works
of darkness, as in a plain and clear record to the day of wrath and judgment,
and then to bring them to light, and manifest them, that they may be punished,
For all the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he ponders all his
goings; he searches the heart, and tries the reins, that he may give to every
one according to his ways: he has said it, and shall he not do it?
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

Yea therefore, so much the more as a man seeks to hide and cover his sin; so
much the more he engages the Almighty against him, to find it out, and
manifest it, and bring him to shame. Therefore the Prophet Isaiah denounces Woe
against them that seek deep to hide their Counsel from the Lord, and their
works are in the dark, and they say, Who sees us? and who knows us? Isai.
29. 15. And the Prophet David confirms the truth of it by his own experience,
Psalm. 32. where after he has said; Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, whose sin is covered, -- to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity; and
signified that this blessing comes upon the man, in whose spirit is no guile;
whose inward thought and bent is not fixed, and secretly set to hide and cover,
that he may hold fast, or not take shame, when God is graciously making
manifest and judgeing; he then ^s: That when he kept silence, (that is, as
appears by what goes before, and follows; while he guilefully sought to hide
and cover his sins) his bones waxed old, through his roaring all the day long:
For day and night Gods hand was heavy upon him, so that his moisture was turned
into the drought of summer. Then being brought to it with labor, he
acknowledged his sin, and did not hide his iniquity, -- and the Lord forgave
the iniquity of his sin, -- and became his hiding place. And thence he
instructs others, not to be as the horse, or mule; -- and warns them, that
many sorrows shall be to the wicked. -- He that hides his sin shall not
prosper: but he that confesses and for saketh, finds mercy, Prove. 28. 13. If
we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. Let a man therefore examine
himself, his ways, and works in the light of the Lord, even in the glass of the
Gospel, looking into, and confidering the Lords body that was broken for his
sins; and as that discovers the vileness and sinfulness of any of his ways and
works, let him not straight way go away from it, shunning the light, because
his deeds are reproved by it; but still continue looking into that perfect Law
of Liberty, and timely acknowledge his transgressions, and the iniquity of his
sin, as discovered, and reproved thereby, and seek help and healing in the Name
of the Lord, not yielding his mind or members to unrighteousness, but yiedling
them up to God, and avoiding the occasions by which he has been led into
snares, that so he may prove what is that good, perfect, and acceptable Will of
God in Christ Jesus concerning him: for this is the Will of God, even your
sanctification, and that ye should abstain from fornication; if we live in the
Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit, minding the things of the Spirit which he
testifies of Christ; and yielding up our selves, as that is working in us to
will, and to do; and we shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, though it be
lusting and warring in the members; For sin shall not have dominion over you,
for ye are not under the law, but under grace; but if we live after the flesh,
we shall dye. Oh take heed of engaging the ^hty against us; for whoever hardened
themselves ag^ him, and prospered? be not deceived, God will not be mocked;
what a man sows, that shall he reap; he that sows to his flesh, making
provision for it, that he may fulfill its lusts, shall of it reap corruption.
And Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

I might have added by way of further Usefulness of the whole consideration of
this later branch of the sentence,

That if God will so certainly and so severely, according to his rule in the
Gospel, judge Whoremongers and Adulterers, What will he do to spiritual
fornicators! how certainly and severely will he judge that uncleanness and
filthiness of the spirit, that directly and properly answers to such filthiness
of the flesh, as is already detected (...) such a^in which the Church, or any
particular society, or member, any soul that has been in any measure espoused
to that one husband, the only chief Bishop and Shepherd of souls,
treacherously departs from him, as a wife treacherously depar^^ from her
husband, and hastes to, or endows another in stead of him, giving that to
them, (whether things, or persons) which is only due to him, and seeking those
things in them, which he is abundantly and in truth only for us, and to us; or
in such respects, assuming his place, (as before is in some measure showed.) I
say, how certainly and severely will he judge this spiritual fornication in
those that wickedly, against his gracious warnings, commit, and persist in it!
May I not say much more, or with greater severity of wrath, then the carnal
only? at least, in many of the branches of it, such as answer to, and are
resembled by the highest, and worst degrees of carnal fornication: for thereby
the temple of God is still more dangerously and desperately defiled and
destroyed; and therefore swift destruction brought upon themselves by the
destroyers thereof, as might be showed in 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12-16, 17, 18. with 2
Pet. 2. 1, 2, etc. 2 Cor. 1^. ^. 3. ^. Tim. 2. 16, 17, 18. with Chap. 3. 1-8.
and in many (...) Scriptures.

And I might here add also, but chiefly to such of them, as under pretense of
godliness, and great boasts of liberty, and high and spiritual seize, do
walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanuess, and despise government --
speaking evil of dignities, etc. as more at large in that 2 Pet. 2. and the
Epistle of Jude, with 2 Timothy 3. 1-8. and 1 Timothy 4* 1, 2, 3. and 2* These. 2.
3-12.

But having already exceeded my intended bounds; and my first intention in
this, being to admonish of carnal fornication and all uncleanness of the flesh;
I shall here add no more, but the mention of my desire, that what is said, may
be so considered, as all may be warned in the authority, light, and strength of
the

Name of the Lord, to flee fornication: yea to abstain from fleshly lusts,
which war against the soul, and tend to bring the blood of others upon our
heads also; and that such further fruit may be reaped, as may tend to the
praise and glory of God by Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory and dominion
for ever, and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

