A LETTER TO General Monck, In Answer to His of the 23th of January, DIRECTED
To Mr. ROLL, To be communicated to the Gentlemen of the County of DEVON.

By one of the EXCLUDED MEMBERS of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed for R. Lowndes, at the White Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1659.

A Letter to General Monck, in Answer to his of the 23 of January, directed to
Mr. Roll, to be communicated to the Gentlemen of the County of Devon.
By one of the Excluded Members of Parliament.

SIR,
UPon reading your Letter of the 23 of January, directed to Mr. Roll, to be
communicated to the Gentlemen of Devon, I thought, that to answer some
mistakes, as it is due to the subject, seasonable to the occasion, and proper
for me, (therein concerned;) so it cannot be ungrateful to you, if you be that
lover of truth and candor, I always esteemed you, and not a person obstructed
with Interest, or engaged in Faction. With wise and good men, the shrill sound
of Trumpets does not silence the whispers of Reason and Conscience; nor the
power of acting without control, encourage them to oppress: And I persuade my
self, that virtue and prudence will equally restrain you from treading in the
footsteps of the Ambitious, or any other by-path, (though yet untrodden.) Give
me leave, therefore, (with the freedom of an Englishman, and your friend) to
show you, That, in waving the original merit of the Cause, as impertinent,
(whereas, indeed, it is only considerable) You argue too much at large, and
without a principle: For, being once propounded, and admitted, (as it needs
must be) That the Force upon the Parliament in 1648. was the great Breach, at
which our Confusions have entered like a Torrent; It will then follow, Not that
Actions, in themselves, unjustifiable and ruinous, ought however to be
justified, though with ruin: But that the continuance of the same force must
needs enlarge the Breach, level all our Fences, and let in an Ocean of
Miseries; It will not seem reasonable, nor according to good Art, to skin the
Wound, and make a palliative Cure, but rather to search the bottom, how tender
soever the flesh may there be: It will then appear, That accumulation of
Violences is not the way of Peace. And that Error can never become Truth by
perseverance, It will be demonstrable, That for the minor part of the
Parliament to exclude the major, in constituting of the Government, is to
settle a Commonwealth upon the Basis of a Faction: A Foundation too narrow for
the Fabric; which having no principle of stability within it self, must be
always supported with external Props. For, Sir, I dare appeal to your Reason,
whether such a State can subsist one hour longer, than the force continues, by
which it was first constituted. Finally, it will then be evident, That the
danger of endless Distractions, is more terribly threatened by the oppression
of those, who are, without comparison, the major part, and disinheriting the
Nation of its Laws and Birthright, than the disobliging of such as are, in
respect of the people, very few, being so confessed by the Argument it self. For
what makes them, with so much obstinacy, decline freedom of Parliament, but
the conscience of their own weakness, as to a legal civil Interest?

But admitting (for Arguments sake) That the many corrupt Interests (now on
foot) ought to overruled that of Justice and Common Freedom: And that those
Interests outweigh their Opposites in the balance, (whereas every man knows,
they have ^nely rendered themselves considerable, for the present, by getting
the start in Armor; And so, if ever disarmed, must vanish of themselves.) Yet
by your favor, Sir, I marvel, you can, from thence, so positively conclude,
That Monarchy cannot possibly be restored in these Nations: The Reasons you
allege are two; 1. Because its Support is taken away. 2. Because it is
exclusive of the forementioned Interests, which are likewise twofold, Spiritual
and Civil.


For the first of these Reasons, I think no man, of sense, will deny, That the
Excise, and Monthly Taxes (which were established since these times, and wh ch
probably can never cease, till Freedom of Parliament be restored) does far
exceed the Charge of a Court: And I doubt not but Charles Stuart would readily
accept a Monthly Tax of Sixty thousand pounds, in lieu of his former Revenue,
and abate us our Excise: So as that Objection is sufficiently answered, without
Jealousy given to the Purchasors of his Lands.

For the Spiritual Interest, viz. Liberty of Conscience; When I compare the
great Moderation of the Church of England, in its Principle, with the present
temper of the Age, which renders all thought of Spiritual Coertion absurd and
ridiculous, and the Uniformity you mention, (in the judgment of all knowing
men) impossible to be established by Humane Endeavors. I do not see, why we
should not expect as great Indulgence, under Monarchy, and Regulated
Episcopacy, as in a Commonwealth; And much greater than we can promise our
selves either from Presbytery, or Church-Anarchy, which (by confounding our
Doctrine, destroying our Discipline, and weakening our Charity) will soon make
way for popular Fewds and Animosities, the most licentious and turbulent of all
Persecutions.

For the Civil Interest you mention, viz. the security of Public Sales,
(which, like a great Philistim, seems to bid defiance to our Peace* As, on the
one side, our settlement cannot, probably, now be bought at a cheaper rate,
than the satisfaction of the Purchasors; so, on the other side, methinks, the
most interessed of them might, in prudence, rather submit to some abatement, to
procure a legal and unquestionable Title, than with extreme hazard to
themselves, and ruin to their Country, maintain an Estate, which they can sell
to few, but Mortgage to none. Were there a mutual condescension herein, I
suppose, there are many visible Expedients to reconcile all pretenses, and
preserve the Commonwealth, now exposed, as it were, to a daily Crisis: I verily
believe, the most considerable Freeholders in England would think it the
discreetest Bargain that ever they made, if, by sacrificing the fourth Part of
their Inheritances, they might enjoy the remainder in peace, freedom and
safety: A much less proportion, certainly, would do the Business. And, Sir, if
you would now further such an Agreement, I dare freely say, it would be the
greatest Victory you ever obtained. We see, that oft-times, in private suits,
where there is an Animosity between the Parties, much more is spent, than the
value of the thing Contended for: But this is far more observable in Civil
Dissentions, where the Vast Burden of War is attended with infinite hazard,
and commonly ends in public Calamities. The War of Germany, having lasted
thirty Years, with utter desolation to some Provinces, and exceeding great
ruin to all, The several Princes, at length, bethought themselves of a
Temperament, Wherein, the disinherited, (as it were) compounding, and the
Conquerours receding, Peace was seasonably restored, and both sides greater
gainers by their present loss, than they could have been by future Victory;
And, though, at first, the difficulties seemed insuperable, Yet long suffering,
and common Exigence had so disposed the minds of all men concerned, that, (by
admitting Necessity, in lieu of Justice,) their Endeavors proved very
successeful: How great a Blessing would it be to this Nation, if wisdom,
moderation, piety to our Country, and charity to our selves, and each other,
might produce the same Effects with us, which misery and woeful experience
extorted from them! Which, Sir, I do not only Offer; but earnestly press upon
your Consideration, For that, as I believe you a person of much integrity, and
Temper, so, I suppose in this juncture of time, it may be in your Power to make
your self an Arbitrator, or at least, to promote an Agreement, for which, the
Ages to come will bless your Memory. I doubt not, but, in your Progress, by the
public Addresses you have received from many Counties, the Clamours of some,
and mutterings of all, You understand the Violent inclinations of the People,
Now crying with Rachel, Give us freedom of Parliament, or we dye; It boots not
therefore to allege, That the Army will not endure it; For either that Yoke is
indended to be perpetual; or not; If not, when ever it shall either cease, or
be cast off, In comes freedom, like a torrent, and in a moment overwhelms all,
that has been Established by Junto's, Whereof this very Parliament has given
a fair precedent; But, if our Yoke be intended perpetual, What tyranny like
that of armed faction? What sound so harsh to English ears? And who, in
after-ages, will believe, that those very men, who so branded the King, for an
irregular impeachment of five Members, and aspersed him with the bare rumor of
an intention to bring in a few German Horse, should, themselves, continue and
own the forcible exclusion of much the major part of the Parliament, and entail
upon their Country an Army of Janissaries and Timariots; which, I am confident,
if they will subsist, must, at least, every third year, conquer it anew.

By that wisdom, and courage, you have often expressed; By your love to Justice,
and bowels to your Countrymen; By the instability of humane affairs; The
uncertainty of your Life, but certainty of your Account, I conjure you, not to
lay the Cornerstone of such a Babell, Whereof, it were no presumption to
presage, that it can never be perfected, God having already so confounded their
Languages; To whose holy guidance, and preventing grace, I heartily recommend
you, and remain,

Jan. 28. 1659. Sir, Your most faithful and affectionate Friend and Servant,
R. M.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
GIve me leave to offer this Postscript to your further consideration; It is
manifest, That betwixt the Years 1643, and 1653. The great Monster W r
devoured, 1. The Benevolences of all the well affected, 2. The spoils of all
the Disaffected, 3. The Annual Rents of a Considerable Part of the Lands in
England, sequestered, 4. The fifth and twentieth Part of all men's Estates, 5.
That prodigious Contribution of fifty subsides, at once, besides many more, at
other times, 6. The infinite Sums raised by the Compositions of many
thousands of Delinquents, 7. A constant Excise upon almost all Commodities, 8.
The monthly Tax, sometimes 120000 l. seldom under 90000 l. 9. The Sales of
Kings, Churches and forfeited Lands, And Lastly, in effect, the whole Kingdom
of Ireland; And yet, (if we may believe the innumerable Complaints of
Reformades, Widows, and Lenders,) the public faith, very lamely asserted; As
evident it is, that the late Protector, continuing the same butthens and,
otherwise, practicing all the subtilties of a Tyrant, in wracking the People;
Yet, in four, or five years time, contracted a Ruinous and incredible debt; The
same forces are still continued, And, probably, must increase, in measure, as
our dissatisfa^^ions multiply; There are, now, no considerable Estates, left,
to sequester, Delinquents to compound, or public Lands to sell; The
Commonwealth vastly endebted, The treasury exhausted, Trade declining,
Customs sinking, All future Contributions must, of necessity, be forced out of
the very bowels of a poor, enslaved, exasperated, and starving people; The
perpetuating whereofs by our servitude, Whether it be fit, or just, or safe,
or, indeed, possible, I leave you to judge.

FINIS.

