THE Cry of Oppression, Occasioned by the Priests of Englands Pulpit-guard,
which is a Popish Law that was made by Queen Mary, to guard her Friars and
Jesuits. With a true discovery of the unjust proceedings of those called
Magistrates of Bathe; Wherein is a Lamentation over them, and a Warning unto
them to repent, lest they perish for ever.

Isa. 10.1, 2. Woe unto you that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write
grievousness, which they have prescribed, to turn aside the needy from
judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people.

Isa. 33.1. And when ye shall cease to spoil, ye shall be spoiled, and when ye
shall cease to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with you.

Psalm 12.5. For now will I arise, says the Lord, for the oppressing of the
Poor, and for the sighing of the needy, I will set him in safety from him that
puffs at him.

By one which is hatefully called a QUAKER, hated and persecuted without a
cause, a Prisoner for the Word of God, and testimony of Jesus, he by whom the
world was made, which said, They shall hale you out of their Synagogues, and
before Magistrates, and shall cast you into prison; and if they kill you (mark)
they shall think they do God good service.

Known to the world by the Name, Thomas Morford.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1659.

THE CRY Of OPPRESSION: Occasioned by the Priests of Englands Pulpit-guard,
which is a Popish Law that was made by Queen MARY, to guard her Friars and
Jesuits. With a true discovery of the unjust proceedings of those called
Magistrates of Bathe; Wherein is a Lamentation over them, and a Warning unto
them to Repent, lest they perish for ever.
Upon the 27 day of the Third Month (called MAY) in the Year (according to the
Worlds Account) 1655. I was moved of the living God to go into the Idol-Temple
in the City of Bathe, and there was one Priest Sanger (Priest of Martins
Parish, near the place called Charing Cross in London,) standing up praying in
the high place, and as I stood by a chief seat, in that Temple (or Synagogue)
in which were two or three Priests, there came unto me he whom they call their
Sexton, and said, it was Prayer-time, and would have had me take off my hat,
but I spoke not a word unto him, yet heard I a voice saying unto me, The
prayers of the wicked are abomination to the Lord. And the witness of God arose
up in me very swift against the false Prophet, (and against all the rest of the
false Prophets and Sorcerers that were there at that time from many places of
the Land) that was speaking lies in the Name of the Lord, saying, Hearken unto
the W^rd of the Lord, albeit the Lord spoke not unto him, neither did the Lord
send him: therefore did he not profit the people; and so dreadful and terrible
was the power of the Living God on me, and in me, that I did exceedingly quake
and tremble; his Word was in my bosom as a fire, I was weary with forbearing,
I reeled like a drunken man, and was ready to sink down to the ground, so heavy
was the burden and indignation of the Lord in me against the Sorcerers and
false Prophets. But after a little while the Lord by his secret power did stop
the mouth of the false Prophet, which was speaking lies in his Name, etc.
before I had spoken the Word of the Lord: but then immediately was I forced to
roar out the burden, judgments, and indignation of the Lord against the
Sorcerers and false Prophets, and the terrible day of the Lord, a day of
bowling, howling that was (and is) coming upon them; then presently they were
in an uproar, and he (called their Sexton) with others fell upon me, haling and
beating of me, that Christ's words might be fulfilled, which said, They shall
beat you in their Synagogues, and hale you out of them, and hale you before
Magistrates, and cast you into prison, etc. And another (as it was said) cried
out Stab him, hear the fruits of your Ministry.

Then came the Constables (that then were) of the Town, Robert Chapman, and
Walter Gibbs, and haled me away presently to prison: and as I was haling
thither, the bruits that held me by my arms did strive to break or wrest them,
but I was preserved by the strength and power of my God, out of their rage and
madness; Praises to the Lord for ever.

On the next day I was brought before John Biggs Mayor, that then was, and
Matthew Cliff that then was called a Justice; they asked me, wherefore I came
to disturb their Minister? I answered, the Lord sent me (and truly so he did)
to bear witness against him, for he was a deceiver, and a false Prophet, and
has deceived you; but they were not willing to dispute the cause with me, but
sa^d, except you give security to be of good behavior, you must go to prison
again; I demanded by what Law they judged me? they answered, they had a Law: so
I required to hear it, then they commanded their Clerk to read their Law to me,
which was done; and that Law they read to me, and judged me by was a Law made
by Queen Mary (which killed and Martyred the servants of God called Protestants
in her days) to guard her Friars and Jesuits.

But had not those that sat as my Judges been wilfully blind and ignorant as
well as malicious, but had had the least measure of the wisdom and spirit of
God (which ought to be the only Guide and Counselor of all faithful and just
Judges, and Magistrates, which judge for the Lord in Righteousness, and not for
gifts and rewards,) truly they would have found a clause in that Law, whereby
they might justly and truly have judged me guiltless of transgressing of that
Popish Law it self, for in that Law are these words, (that is to say) If any
one shall wilfully, maliciously, and contemptuously etc. let or disturb any
Preacher or Preachers, in his or their Sermon, etc. that then they should
suffer according to that Law.

But the Lord that searches all hearts, and knows the secrets and intents of
all hearts, is my witness that I went not into that Temple or Synagogue at that
time, by the wilful, malicious, contemptible will of man, but only in obedience
to the movings and Spirit of the living God, which movings are contrary to the
will of man (he that has an an ear to hear, can hear and understand) yet so
contrary to the true sense of the Law, I was had to prison again.

Now let the light of Christ in all judge what ground the Priests stand upon,
and have for their Ministry, that are not able to stand or defend themselves
without a Popish Law to guard them; neither they nor any else can deny it, for
it was read to me, and by it have I been wrongfully kept in prison, and by
those that were the Ministers of it, above nineteen months; but I denied to be
judged by that Law, for I told them it was a Popish law, made by that wicked
Queen Mary, which killed the servants of the Lord; but they answered, they
could not help it, for it was not repealed.

Now if it be not repealed, let all the wise in God judge by what follows, by
a Law of Queen Elizabeth (touching Common Prayer, etc.) Act 10. Chap. 2. last
Clause, its said, That all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, etc. wherein or whereby
any other services, Administrations, Sacraments, or Common Prayers are
licensed, or set forth to be used, shall be from henceforth utterly void, and
of none effect.

But if you say it is not repealed by the Statute aforesaid, yet prove I it
void, from that first Principle of the Laws of England, in the Book (Doct. and
Student.) Chap. 2. to this effect: That the Law of God is the only true ground
of all Laws; and that all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, Customs, or Prescriptions
whatsoever, that are contrary to the righteous Law of God, are all null, void,
and of none effect, etc.

And also in OLIVER the Protectors Articles of Government, Article 35. are
these words, viz. That the Christian Religion contained in the Scripture be
held forth, and recommended a^ the public profession of the Nation, etc.

Article 37. That such as profess Faith in God, by Jesus Christ, though
differing in judgment from the Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline publicly
held forth, shall not be restrained from, but shall be protected in the
profession of the Faith, and exercise of their Religion: so that they abuse not
this Liberty to the civil injury of others, and to the actual disturbance of
the public peace on their part, etc.

Article 38. That all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Clauses in any Law,
Statute, or Ordinance to the contrary of the aforesaid Liberty, shall be
esteemed as null and void.

Now this is according to the Law of God, and to the Christian Religion, and is
contained in the holy Scriptures of truth, to go into a Synagogue, or
Steeple-house, and there to ask a question, or to dispute, or to bear witness
against the false worships; it being the manner of Christ, and his holy
Prophets and Apostles so to do, 1 Kings 1.2. Luke 2.46. And it was and is the
order in the holy Church of Christ, as the Scriptures testify, to wit, That if
any thing be revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his peace, for
ye may all prophecy one by one, 1 Cor: 14.29, 30. and therefore it being
according to the Law of God, and to Christian Religion, and the Faith in Christ
Jesus, professed and exercised by the Lord Jesus, and his Ministers, and being
no civil injury to any, nor disturbance to the public peace on my part, to go
and bear witness against a false worship, and hireling Priest, I ought to be
protected therein, as in the exercise of the true Christian Religion.

And therefore (undoubtedly) your said Popish Law is repealed, void, and of
none effect, as I have proved before.

And therefore ye Rulers of Bathe have unjustly (like unreasonable men) kept me
a prisoner above these nineteen months, and have not convicted me of the
transgression of the righteous Law of God, (which ought to be your Rule, Deuteronomy.
14.17, 18, 19) or any Law of the Nation.

As I was informed, some of you (called Magistrates) said, if ye should let me
go without giving you Bonds of Security for good behavior, (as ye call it)
that I would sue you at your Law for wrong imprisonment; Vengeance is mine,
says the Lord, who is come and coming to give to you, according as your Works
shall be; and to him do I commit my cause, who will in his righteous judgments
ease him of his adversaries, and avenge him of his enemies. The light of Christ
in your consciences will be your Judge and condemnation, which condemnation
will be forer torment unto you than the loss of all your outward riches, or
glory, or any other judgment that man can inflict upon your carnal bodies; so
your fear and jealousy I do deny; and your evil I do not resist, but in
patience do suffer your wrong, till he for whose testimony I suffer, work away
for my deliverance, out of the hands of unreasonable men. And in a few days
after my first committing to prison, John Biggs that then was (called) Mayor,
sent William Baker his Sergeant, with this Message (as he said) if I would say
I was sorry, and to that effect, for what I had done, he would set me at
liberty; to which I answered, that I was so far from being sorry for the
testimony that I had borne against the Priests, that I would seal it with my
blood, if it were required; and to this my answer, the Keeper of the prison
that then was, (which since has left the prison) was witness: yet
notwithstanding William Baker went and told his Master the Mayor, that I said
that if I were out of prison I would go and do the like again, which was false,
and the Keeper of the prison did witness so to William Bakers face; for which
William Baker gave him very uncivil language, and for that cause a little while
after John Biggs would not suffer my Friends that came to visit me, to come at
me, while he was in his power, but commanded the Keeper to keep me in the inner
prison, yet William Baker gave me to my face very fair words, and did witness
that what I then said to him was truth; the Lord lay not this sin to thy charge
William Baker, for thou did falsely accuse me at that time, the light of
Christ in thy Conscience is my witness, but it was that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, which says, That in the last days men shall be traitors, heady,
high-minded, proud, covetous, boasters, blasphemers, fierce, despisers of those
that are good, and (mark) false accusers, etc. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2.

And on the fifth day of the Ninth month, 1655. (that being the day of their
Sessions) the Rulers of Bathe sent for me to their Sessions before them; and
when I came into their Court. John Boyce that then was (called) Mayor, asked
me, if I knew before whom I stood (for he with others of them were clothed in
Scarlet, and Velvet, but the end will be woe) I answered I did, so he commanded
to take off my hat, and it was done, and one of them gave it me in my hand, and
I put it on my head again: Edward Parker one of their Bailiffs or Sheriffs that
then was standing by me, (being filled with rage and madness, as well as Wine
or strong Drink) haled my hat off my head again, and struck me in the face; I
asked them (if they) sat to judge me according to Law, and contrary to Law, did
suffer me to be struck in their Court, and said, God will judge and smite you;
but there was such a rude noise amongst them, that they could scarce hear or
understand what each other said, for their carriage was more like Dogs barking,
and Swine renting, than like men that sat to judge the cause of the Oppressed,
and Afflicted, such was the carriage of some of those Which sat as Judges, and
Justices; neither would they (scarce) suffer him; they called their Mayor that
then was to speak, which I suppose would have done Justice, had he not feared
the ill will of his Brethren; and so I reproved them for their rudeness, and
said, if they stood before a Magistrate of God, who judged righteously for the
Lord, they would dread and tremble at his presence, for the eyes of a faithful
King, Judge, or Magistrate (who hates Gifts and Rewards, which judges without
partiality, and wresteth not the cause of the poor, nor respects the person
of the Rich) scatters the Wicked, Prove. 20.8, 26. but at last the Mayor had
leave to speak, and said unto me, except I did give security to be of good
behavior, that I must go to prison again, so commanded to take me away, and
charged the Keeper to keep me up in the inner prison, and not to suffer any to
come at me but my Wife, whose outward dwelling was three miles from the Town;
yet he did not deny any Friend (that came to visit me) if they asked him to
come at me; and John Parker called an Alderman, cried out, throw him into the
Dungeon, and put bolts of iron upon him; so they haled me to prison again, and
did not at all convince me of any Law I had transgressed; and committed my
Friend T. H. that was with me to prison also, that gave them no just offense in
word or action, but only stood there peaceably to see if I might have justice;
but after they were a little cool (for many of them were much inflamed with
Wine and strong Drink, which did not become men of their places, Prove: 31.4,
5.) they released my Friend out of prison again.

And upon the 23 day of the Fourth month, 1656. came some Friends of Bristol
into Bathe, and one of them went to John Boyce the Mayor that then was, and
spoke something unto him concerning his keeping me in prison, and at that time
there was with the Mayor the Constable of Bathe that then was, Henry Parker,
and they had had some discourse concerning my releasing out of prison; so the
Constable did engage (as did after appear) for my good behavior, and that I
should not commit the like offense; so the Mayor bad him go and fetch me forth
of prison: so he came up to the prison, and that Friend with him, and asked me
whether I was willing to go forth of prison, and said, the Mayor had sent him
to release me, but he did not tell me plainly that he had engaged for me as
aforesaid, but was very urgent (and so was that Friend also that came with him,
that I think did not know their deceit) to have me go with him; but I gave them
little answer, but waited to know the mind of the Lord, (for the Lord had
afore-shewed unto me, that so they should come and fetch me forth, and bad me
not hearken unto them, and also sent his Messenger upon the 27. day of the
Third month, 1656. which was but little before the Constable came to me, and he
said unto me, take heed how thou do come forth, lest thou art ensnared, but
come forth freely, or else thou will rue it the longest day thou live; so
having a command from the infallible Spirit of the living God not to hearken
unto them, and forewarned by his Messenger without, I was in great dread and
fear, and was not hasty to answer them a word; upon which the Constable was
exceedingly urgent upon me for an answer, pretending much feigned love, and
using many words unto me, and said, The Lord in times past did give his
servants a tongue to speak, and immediately did reveal in them what to say, and
asked me again, whether I was not willing to go forth of prison? to which I
answered, that this is that the Lord has immediately revealed in me, I am
willing in his time to go forth of prison, but ye have kept me here near
fourteen months a prisoner to satisfy your lusts and envy, and have not so
much as convicted me of the transgression of any just Law of this Nation;
neither have ye had me to your Sessions these two or three Sessions, which ye
ought to have done, and there to have executed judgment upon me if I had
deserved it, and been convicted of the transgression of any just Law; but your
carriage the last time I was there was such unto me, I think it has caused
shame as well as hardness of heart to possess some of you, or else there to
have cleared me, which is according to the Law of the Nation, which is not
denied to Felons and murderers, which if ye do refuse to do, let them that
sent me to prison come and fetch me forth. To this effect, if not the very
words was my answer to the Constable: at which he was much discontented, and
said, I was a false Prophet, and Deceiver, or worse to that purpose, and said,
I might lie in prison till Doomsday (as he called it) before they that sent me
to prison would fetch me forth, and so he departed; then it was presently
reported that I might come forth of prison, but that I loved to lie in prison,
or to that effect; whereupon there being some Friends in Town at that time,
they sent the said Friend that came to me, with the Constable, to the Mayor
again, (by reason he said as well as others, I might come forth of prison, but
I would not) to fetch a discharge for the Keeper of the prison, it being
according to the Law of the Nation so to do; so that Friend being urgent upon
the Mayor for a Discharge, he did write (instead of a Discharge) a charge to
the Keeper for to keep my body in prison, and called for an Officer to carry it
to the Keeper, but looking again upon that Friend that went for a discharge, he
said, I think thou art pretty honest, give it to the Keeper. This following is
a Copy of it; let the wise in God judge.

George Mittins,
YOu are desired to keep the body of Mr. MORFORD Prisoner, till he give
security for his good abeisance. No more at present,

Yours, J. B.

So when those Friends saw that charge to keep me in prison, instead of a
discharge, they went down to the said Constable, and told him of it; to which
he said, that they had no intent to let me forth, but to try whether I would go
forthor not, which will be proved if it be required, and to two of those
Friends whose Names are here subscribed, he said that he had engaged to the
Mayor, that Thomas Morford should not commit the like offense, if he would set
him at liberty; then the Constable being demanded whether I might come forth of
prison without any pretended security from any man by word or deed; he
answered, I might not. To this testimony the said Friends have subscribed their
Names, Charles Jones, John Wathen.

And on the next day came some Friends from Bristol, and thereabouts to Bathe
for to visit me in the prison; but before they came unto me, some of them went
to the Mayor, and spoke something to him concerning my long, fore, and unjust
imprisonment; so he told them that he would have set me at liberty the
yesterday, but I did refuse to go forth, and said unto them, tell his Friends
of Bristol of it; then those Friends (when they came to prison to me) told me
what the Mayor had said unto them; then I showed them the true cause why I did
not go forth, and the Mayors Charge instead of a Discharge. Then some of them
went down to him again, and showed him his deceit: then he was exceeding angry
with them, and called for an Officer to send them to prison, but after his
passion was a little over, he told them the Sessions was very near, and then he
would send for me to the Sessions; then those Friends urged him again to
perform his promise: he bad them not fear, for it should be so.

Upon the 14. day of the Fifth Month, 1656. (it being the day of their Quarter.
Sessions) those Friends came again to Bathe, and some of them went down to the
Mayors house that morning, before he went to the Sessions, to mind him of his
promise that he had made them: but he was very angry with them, and bad them go
out of his house, and come to the Hall a thousand of them, and he would answer
them, so they (though not a thousand of them) did go to the Hall, where as soon
as they appeared before them called Justices, which should have done justice,
some of them which ware long Robes, with some others, fell upon my Friends,
haling and pulling of them like wild Bruits, and thrusting them down stairs,
ready to spoil their bodies; and so though John Boyce that then was called
Mayor bad them come to the Hall he suffered them to be so abused; then they
waited below till they were going to dinner, and then they charged the Mayor
with his promise again: then he told them in the afternoon he would send for me
to the Sessions; in the afternoon they went again, and required him to perform
his promise, and to do justice; but he that was called the Recorder, James Ash,
passed away, and did not do me justice: neither did the Mayor (notwithstanding
all his promises) send for me to the Sessions; but a little before they left
the Hall that evening, the Rulers sent up Carew Davis their Sergeant unto me in
the prison, to know if I had any security; to which I answered, if they would
let me go down to their Hall, and there convince me as a Transgressor of any
just Law, I was willing to receive any Punishment that might be inflicted upon
me according to that Law; and there was a Friend, a rich man in the outward,
offered security if they proved me a Transgressor, or of any evil behavior;
so the Sergeant went down, and some of my Friends with him to them again, and
gave them my answer, and my Friends that offered security, and their answer
was, except my Friends did engage to be my security, before I did come out of
prison, I should not come forth. We are witnesses to the truth hereof, whose
Names are here subscribed.

John John's, John Wear, Anne Hill, Eliz. Atwood, Richard Jones, Thomas Terret,
Katherine Evans, John Wickham, Anth. Sturbs, Joan Screen.
Upon the 25 day of the Sixth month, 1656. came the Keeper of the prison unto
me, and said, I might go forth of prison if I would, I demanded of him who did
give such order? then he seemed to be very angry with me for questioning of
him, and would give me none other account; I told him if they did put beggars
in prison but a night or two, they did commonly send for them before their
Magistrates, and there clear them, and have they kept me here almost sixteen
months unjustly, and now think to thrust me out privately, with thy saying, I
may go out of prison if I will, so he passed away from me, and I waited to know
from the Lord what I should do. So after a little while I was moved of the Lord
to write a Letter to the Mayor, which was in substance according to what is
before declared, and therefore shall omit it here; and to know of him the
certainty of the Keepers saying, that I might go forth of prison if I would,
and I sent it down by my Wife, so the Mayor bad my Wife bring a man of the Town
to him, and she should know more of the matter, so at that very instant there
came a Friend of Bristol to prison to me, and I desired him to go down to the
Mayor, and to know what his intent was toward me: so he did, where, as soon as
he appeared, the Mayor came and took him by the hand, and asked him what
Countryman he was, which being answered, he took him aside, and said, we are
about to set Thomas Morford at liberty, and this is all we will require of you,
that is to say, that you will promise that when he is forth he shall be civil,
and of good behavior, and (said the Mayor) we will put him forth, and he shall
never know you promised any such thing: which my Friend denying, (knowing that
I was innocent, and had not been of any evil behavior, neither had deserved
any part of that unjust imprisonment, the Mayor began to be angry, and said
that every soul ought to be subject to the Higher Powers; To which my Friend
answered by way of Question; Art thou that higher power to which the Soul of
Man ought to be subject? To which the Mayors answer was, if he thou would him, he
would bind him to the good Behavior, and bad him be gone about his business;
and that Friend to testify the truth concerning the Keepers saying, I might go
forth of prison if I would, has subscribed his Name, which is John Weal

Upon the 11. day of the Ninth Month 1656. (that being the day of their
Quarter Sessions) Matthew Cliffe at this time called Mayor, Ordered at the
Sessions (but thither he did not send for me, but judged me before he tried me,
and there slaundered me with false accusations behind my back, and said I was a
Railer, and a Disturber, as it was said, and charged the Keeper to keep me in
the inner prison, and not to suffer any to come at me, but my Wife; in which
inner prison being a close dark room, they have kept me the greatest part of
these nineteen months, into which sometimes in rainy weather runs down streams
of water, then which the Law of the Nation affords better for Felons and
Murderers. And there was a Felon (with another) put over the room where I was,
and the Felon brake through the sealing over-head into the room where I was:
and because I gave notice to the Keeper, and did not give my consent for him to
break the rest of the prison, when he was put up again, he threw down his piss
or Urine several times over the place where my bed was, that it might run down
upon it.

Upon the 17 day of the said Ninth Month came Anne Blacklin, and several other
Friends with her to visit me, and desired the Keeper that they might come into
prison to me; but his answer was that the Mayor had commanded not to suffer any
to come in except my Wife; so Anne Blacklin and those other Friends went to
Matthew Cliffe the (called) Mayor, and desired him that they might be permitted
to come into the prison to me, but he told her she should not come in to me,
nor see my face, for he said, I had abused their Minister, and was a Railer:
then she bad him send for me before his face, and convince me of evil, or
being a Rayler, but that he refused to do, and said he would send for me the
next Sessions, and then if I did not what he did require of me, he would send
me to Bridewel, and so he rudely and unbecoming a Magistrate, to so evil
entreat a stranger, and give such an evil example, thrust her and her Friends
out of his house, and would not suffer them to come into prison to me, though
she told him she came a purpose from Bristol to visit me; and in a few days
after came James Travers, and John Wickham to Bathe, and desired the Keeper to
let them into the prison to me, but the Keeper or his Wife told John Wickham
that the Mayor had charged them not to let in any, but my Wife, for if they
did, he would take away the keys from them; and James Stirredge, and James
Travers went to Matthew Cliffe Mayor, to know of him what Law he had to keep me
so close prisoner; he told them he had a Law, but showed them none, and would
not suffer them to come into prison, neither would he give leave to any that
ever asked him (to come in to visit me) to come in.

And whereas thou Matthew Cliffe, and ye John Boyce, and John Biggs who were
Mayors before him, with others of your company, do accuse me for Railing,
Railing I do deny, and do not use (or bring) railing accusations against any
man, and so that slander I do return back again on your own heads, who are the
false Accusers, and in the nature of Railers. Did I rail at thee John Boyce,
and thee Matthew Cliff, and the rest of your company on the 5. day of the Ninth
month 1655. when ye passed in pride and pomp, with your pipes sounding before
you through the gate to Thomas Scrines house to feast, where ye feasted and
enflamed your selves with Wine and strong Drink, without the fear of the Lord?
I say unto you, Did I rail, to tell you, as it was it was in the days of Noah,
so shall it be, and is in this the day of the coming of the Son of Man: They
eat (says Christ) they drank, etc. and bid you repent (with a lamentation over
you) and mind the light of Christ in you, which showed you sin and evil, and
reproved you for it, for that was your Teacher, for your Teachers without you
have deceived you, and I said (and now affirm again) that the Lord will stain
your pride and glory; and this I was moved of the living God to speak unto you,
for which ye caused me to be shut into the inner prison, before ye came back,
and used me so uncivil and brutish that night, at your Sessions as I said
before.

And did I rail at thee Matthew Cliffe, the 9. day of the Ninth Month 1655.
because I asked thee as thou passedst through the gate, when thou would fear
the living God, and do Justice? Or did I rail at thee the 16. day of that
month, I being moved of the Lord to go out into the outward prison (the inner
prison door being but a very little while before left open) which I believe was
the mind of the Lord so to have it, and immediately thou passedst by with thy
Mace before thee, to the Idol Temple; and the Word of the Lord came unto me
saying, say unto Matthew Cliffe, Thus says the Lord God of hosts, Except thou
repent, and meet me the living God by Repentance, I will cut thy life off from
the earth, and thou shall go down to thy Grave in sorrow; and when thou art on
thy bed of Torment, remember how thou sleightedst the day of thy Visitation;
and this was the Word of the Lord unto thee, The light of Christ in thy
Conscience, and in all your Consciences, shall eternally witness me to be true;
and this was the substance of whatever I spoke to any of you as aforesaid,
which for the clearing of Truth, and my Innocence, and taking off of your
reproach, I was pressed in my spirit to send forth this as a testimony against
you, for it is no more than what is contained in the holy Scripture of truth;
and let the wise in God judge. And I say unto you, (as Eliah said to Ahab) who
are in Authority, from the greatest Prince, to the least of you all, that ye
are they that disturb and trouble the Nations, in that ye do not keep the peace
which ye ought to do, but suffer the Lords servants (whom he has sent unto
you) to preach his everlasting Gospel freely, and to fore warn you of his great
and mighty day that is come, and coming upon you all, and of his great wrath,
and fierce indignation that he will assuredly pour forth upon you except you
speedily repent, to be beaten with sticks, and stones, dirted, whipped,
stocked, and to be cast into prison, and there to perish by long and sore
unjust imprisonment; and ye are those that have itching ears, heaping up to
your selves Teachers, to wit, your hireling Priests, which prophecy falsely,
and divine for money, and speak peace to the wicked, which put into their
mouths, and against them that do not, they prepare war. And so ye are those
that do hold up the horrible filthy thing in the Land, and cannot endure sound
Doctrine, but are making havoc of the servants of the most high God; and ye do
plainly manifest your selves to be such Princes as the Prophet Ezekiel called
Ravening Wolves, which made it their prey to shed blood, etc. Ezekiel. 22.27. And
to tell you plainly from the Spirit of the living God, what ye are, is no
railing: but the day will come, ye will confess it to be more honesty and
faithfulness in them that so do from the Spirit of the Lord, than it is in them
that preach peace to the Wicked.

So my grievous and unjust oppressions I have received from these unreasonable
men, I leave to the Lord, and all that fear his Name to judge thereof.

Oh! all ye Inhabitants of the Earth, the dreadful and mighty day of the Lord
is come, and coming upon you all unawares, as a Thief in the night, and though
ye are saying, peace, and safety, sudden and eternal destruction as a whirlwind
will come upon you, except ye repent; and in particular upon you, O ye
Inhabitants of Bathe, who are a shelter for all wickedness, pride, and
wantonness, fullness of Bread, and all uncleanness abound amongst you; ye are
seen as Sodom and Gomorrah, the Lord will stain your pride and glory, and the
righteous judgments of the Lord will be heavy upon you: your blessings which
ye have turned into lasciviousness, lusts, and uncleanness, are corrupted and
accursed, and the day hasteneth that all that fear the living God, will not
seek unto them, but our waters shall be a wallowing place for Swine, and the
wild Beasts of the field, and the Sword of the Lord will be upon the arm, and
the right eye of your Idol Shepherds, and false prophets, Zack. 11.17. Their
right eye will utterly be darkened, and their arm clean dried up, and some of
you shall wander up and down with your earthen vessels to seek water, and this
is the plague the Lord will smite you with, who are persecutors of his
anointed ones; Amos 8.12.
Your flesh shall consume away while ye stand upon your feet, your eyes shall
consume in their holes, and your tongues consume away in your mouths, Zack.
14.12.
nothing of this shall fail, the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it; at
a time appointed it will speak, and not lie; and if in the day of the Lord they
shall be cast into everlasting fire, that did not visit the least of Christ's
little-ones in prison; What shall ye do that cast them in, and will not suffer
them that do come to visit them to come at them. Witness to this against thee
Matthew Cliffe, Anne Blacklin, etc. whose testimonies will stand against thee
for ever; and also against thee John Bigg, shall witness Nicholus Jordan, John
Dowel, Nathaniel Milner, and Sara Bennet of Bristol (in the year 1655.) with
several others; for at that time the said N. Jordan coming up the street of
Bathe a little after his Wife, and my other Friends, there came two young men (
Samuel Whitehead, and George Sprat) with a cord, and interwinding N. Jordan in
the cord, struck up his heels, and he fell upon the hard stones, ready to break
his bones, he being (at that time) but a weak man in body; and when he appealed
to thee John Bigg, no redress he had: so thou did plainly manifest thy self
to bear the Sword in vain, who let the evill-doer go free.

Upon the 26. day of the Fourth month (called June) last past, there being the
servants of the Lord met together (in the hired house and ground of Thomas
Dyer) and as they were peaceably and quietly waiting and hearing the Word of
the Lord from his servants, Tho. Salthouse, Miles Halhead, the bruit people
gathered about the place where they were, hallowing and yawling, like wild
Beasts, throwing stones and dirt, as though they would have murdered the
peaceable people of the Lord, and sorely hurt Tho. Salthouse in the head with a
stone, while he was speaking the Word of the Lord freely, in love to their
Souls; and when those Friends passed away from the Meeting, the brutish people
followed them in the street, throwing stones and dirt at them as though they
had been wild mad, whooping, and yawling, and beating of a Drum; and this is
the fruits of your Government, and yet ye say to us, Let every Soul be subject
to the higher power; and a little before ye Rulers of Bathe cast me into
prison, I was passing peaceably with two of my Friends. T. H. and R. S. down
your streets, none of us giving any offense in word or action; at that time a
multitude of your brutish people fell upon us, and were like to murder us, we
being all at that time exceeding weak in our bodies; and thou Robert Allen (who
art above forty years of Age) thou should have had more wit and reason, than
to have given such an evil example to the younger, as thou did in beating
me; the Lord forgive Thee, and not lay it to thy charge.

And I have been very sick in your prison, so that my very flesh consumed away,
and my bones were corrupted, and ye visited me not; and when I have been
hungry, those whom the Lord had sent to bring me meat, ye have severaltimes
been ready to murder them, which was my Wife, John Evans her Brother, and his
Wife and Daughter, and Tho. Hawkins, one of them was once sore wounded; and the
Bruits being asked why they did so? they answered, that John Bigg the Mayor
that then was, bad them beat my Friends out of Town, because they were Quakers.

These unjust actions will light heavy on you which are called Justices, and
Magistrates, who ought to be a terror to such evill-doers, and keepers of the
peace, and protectors of the Innocent, for else ye bear the Sword in vain, and
the Sword of the Lord will be turned against you, who is the Higher Power, and
unto him your Souls ought to be subject.

And ye that are Rulers of Families, ought to be examples in Righteousness,
Moderation, and Meekness of Life to your Servants, and Children, and to
admonish and nurture them up in the fear of the Lord, and to correct them for
abusing and mocking such as do neither you nor them any harm; But (O ye
Inhabitants of Bathe) what evil examples do ye give one to another, both
Magistrates, Priests, and People, in Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness, buying one
another at Law, and living in all manner of uncleanness, your Children running
up and down streets whooping, and yawling, like wild Bruits, mocking and
abusing strangers, which does testify what breeding and manners their Parents
have brought them up in, which neither fear God, nor regard man, and yet some
of them are (called) Centlemens Children; but they are but Gentiles Children
which know not God, for surely were there either Parents, Magistrates, or
Ministers that did truly fear the living God, their Children would bring forth
some better Fruits: but it is like Priests, like People. Oh that ye Persecutors
of the Lords people knew the thing that belongs to your peace before it be held
from your eyes, and your houses left desolate, and that thing is Christ Jesus
the light of the world, in which did ye believe in truth, and follow, it would
lead you into the good manners, and out of the evil communication, and lead
you to live a righteous holy life, without which none shall see the Lord, and
to do unto all men, as ye would that they should do unto you, and that is good
Religion.

Oh that ye knew the day of your Visitation, and that there were hearts in you
truly to fear the Lord, and that ye rightly considered of your latter-end,
before that day of wrath come upon you, wherein your Souls will have no
pleasure, which is reserved for the Wicked, Perditions, and ungodly ones; then
ye shall confess him which now ye call a natural light, to be supernatural,
when he will fit in your Conscience as a Refiners fire, and as an Oven that
burns, when your breath as a fire is consuming you, being kindled by the
Spirit of burnings, and of judgment from the Lord God; but did ye love and
follow the light which Christ has enlightened you withal, it would lead you
out of that great indignation which will assuredly come upon you, except ye do
repent. But if ye do rebelliously reject the day of your visitation, and
salvation proffered unto you; remember when ye are in the pit ye were
forewarned of it; and this is love to your Souls, and I do beseech the Lord to
forgive this great evil ye have done against me, who am the least of his
servants. Lord lay it not to their charge, for they know not what they have
done.

To the light of Christ in all your Consciences I speak, which shall eternally
witness me to be true, and answer your Condemnation to be just, if ye rebel
against the light. T. M.

THE DECEIT AND ENMITY OF THE PRIESTS, Manifested.

And the Doctrine of PERFECTION (by them denied as Popish) witnessed by the
Scriptures to be the Doctrine of Christ, his Prophets, and Ministers. And the
POPE with his Priests, and Friars, and the Priests of England proved to differ
nothing in ground and nature one from the other.

WHEREIN, Is also an Exhortation to all People to Examine themselves whether
they have the true Faith, and Hope, and Belief, with their Effects and
Operations as they are in Jesus.

LIKEWISE, XX. QUERIES Propounded to George Long, High Priest of Bathe, and
Priest Sangers of London, by them to be answered in Print, or Writing.

Hos. 6 8. As troops of robbers watch for a man, so the company of Priests
murder in the way by consent.

And Christ said, False Prophets, and false Christ's shall arise, ye shall know
them by their fruits: they shall cry, Lo here, and lo there, believe them not,
nor go not forth, for the kingdom of God is within you. And, Christ is in you
except you be reprobates.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

THE Deceit and Enmity OF THE PRIESTS MANIFESTED.
YE Priests, oppression, and injustice are the fruits of your Ministry: the
controversy of the Lord is great against you, and of you will the Lord require
all the Souls that perish under your Ministry, for ye have only sought your own
gain, and ease, and have not sought that which has been lost, neither have ye
brought again that which has been driven away, nor bound up that which has
been broken, nor healed that which has been sick; but with force and cruelty
do ye rule, speaking peace to them that put into your mouths, and they that do
not, against them ye prepare War, to wit, go to law, and take away their Good
by force; ye are those that are establishing the Vision, ( Dan. 11.14.) robbing
the people, and exalting your selves; but at the time appointed ye shall fall,
and never rise again: the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, but first ye will
do wickedly, and by reason of them that forsake the holy Covenant, Woe unto
them; by you and your deceit, and flattery will the holy people deeply suffer,
and by the rest of your Sects; and the abomination that makes desolation will
yet be exalted. Woe unto you.

I am the light of the world, says Christ, that lights every man that comes
into the world, and that Christ said, They shall hale you out of their
Synagogues, and ye, shall be brought before Magistrates, and Rulers for my
names sake, and they shall scourge you, and cast you into prison, and ye shall
have tribulation ten days, that ye may be tried; he that endures to the and
stall be saved, and shall have a Crown of glory. And if they kill you (mark)
they shrit think they do God good service. This is fulfilling by you Priests,
in particular by you George Long, and Priest Sangers of London, for by your
Ministry (causing) have I been haled out of the Synagogue, and cast into
prison, and haled before Magistrates. And,

Moreover, thou George, Long, ^ouldest have the blood of me, and my innocent
Friends, to quen^h thy blood thirsty mind, for thou said (near the 23 day of
the 5 month last, in John Biggs house (where ye Priests and Magistrates were
feasting and feeding without the fear of the Lord) thou would have three or
four Quakers hanged for an example; William Russel asked thee wherefore, but
thou could give no just account, now let all that fear the Lord judge whether
thou art not a murderer, and blood-thirsty hater of the upright, Prove. 29. And
as troops of robbers wait in the way for a man, so the company of Priests
murder by consent, and no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. 1 Ioh.
3.15. and when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you,
says the Lord God; and though ye make many prayers, I will not hear you, for
your hand are full of blood, Isa. 1.15. The Lord is against you, and will not
appear among you, except it be in his fierce wrath and indignation. The light
of Christ in you shall witness this to be truth, of which thou George Long
scornfully asked if it were the light of a candle we spoke of to be within us;
to which thus says the Lord God, That in the day thou shall run to hide thy
self in thy secret chamber of imaginary and vain hope, in which thou have
consulted with the lying spirits of Divination, and Witchcraft, and I, that am
the dreadful God, there meet thee (except thou Repent) with my spirit of wrath
and indignation, even in burning flames of fire; then shall the scorner be
consumed, and then thou shall confess that I am not a natural light, says the
Lord God.

And when thou George Long wentest to the house of T. C. to demand hire of him
which never set thee a work, nor made any condition with thee, neither will he
buy thy Babylonish stuff, but did (to thy face) deny thee to be a Minister of
Christ, neither do thou abide in his Doctrine, but are a Swearer, and forcer
of others so to do (contrary to the command of Christ, and his Ministers, who
say, Swear not at all, by any Oath, Mat. 5.34. James 5.12.) Witness to this the
men of Witcombes Parish, whom thou compelledst to swear: and at that time when
thou wast at T.C. his house, and his Wife charged thee for thy lie, and false
report against the innocent, thou badst her and the rest (if it were a lie)
take it, and make sport with it.

Now all people that love your Souls, take notice of George Long who is a
reporter of lies, and bids others take them, and make sport with them: so he
does plainly manifest himself to be one of those false Prophets that Christ
said should come in the last days, of whom says Christ, Ye shall know them by
their fruits, Mat. 7.20. And these are the fruits of the false Prophets, to
wit, sporting themselves with their own deceivings; (mark ye that are makers of
Feasts with your Priests) while they feast with you, having eyes full of
Adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, (take notice) beguiling unstable
souls; an heart they have, exercised with covetous practices, (mark) cursed
children, which have forsaken the right way of the Lord, and are gone astray,
following the way of Balaam, who loved gifts and rewards (as ye Priests do) the
wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. from verse 1. to 15, from the 10 Verse of
Jude, to the 19. And in those two Chapters ye may read a true discovery of the
Priest, and false Prophets.

And thou George Long said (at the time aforesaid) to T.C. that the Quakers
preach the Doctrine of the Pope, to wit, Perfection. Now whether the Doctrine
of Perfection be a Doctrine of the Pope, or false, let the light of Christ in
all judge; for the blessed God, his servants, and Prophets and Christ Jesus and
his Ministers preached the Doctrine of Perfection, the Lord said to Abraham,
Walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1. And Moses (his servant)
preached perfection, and said, Thou shall be perfect with the Lord thy God, and
not follow them that use Divination, etc. Deuteronomy. 18.11, 12, 13. David preached
Perfection, 1 Chro. 28.9. and said, Know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve
him with a perfect heart. Hezekiah did witness he had walked before the Lord in
truth, and with a perfect heart, and had done that which was good in his sight,
2 Kings 20.3. And Solomon preached Perfection, and said, 1 Kings 18.61. Let
your heart be perfect with the Lord our God, to walk in his Statutes, and keep
his Commandments; and Prove. 11.5. The righteousness of the perfect shall
direct his way, (mark George Long) but the wicked shall fall by his own
wickedness. And Isaiah, (that holy Prophet) preached Perfection, saying, Thou will keep them in perfect peace, whose minds are staid on thee, Isai. 26 3, 4.
And the Lord Jesus (the everlasting Covenant of God) preached Perfection,
saying, Be ye perfect, even as your Heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5.48. And
Paul (his Minister) preached Perfection, not with enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in the demonstration, power, and Spirit of the Lord: howbeit, he
preached wisdom amongst them (mark) that were perfect; and therein did Paul
strive and labor according to the mighty workings of the Lord in him, (mark)
to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus; and therefore having these
promises, says Paul (see what the promises were, 2 Cor. 6.3 last verses) Let
us cleanse our selves, (take notice ye that say, that man cannot be free from
sin on earth) from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of the Lord; and he said, they were, not come to the Mount that might
be touched, but ye are come unto Mnunt Syon, and unto the City of the living
God, Heavenly Ierusal^m, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the
general assembly, and Church of the firstborn which are written in Heaven, and
to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. And
Epaphras a servant of Christ, labored fervently in prayers, that they might
stand perfect and complete; Read these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5, 6. 2 Cor.
7.1. Col. 1.28. Heb. 12.18. to 23. Col. 4.12. Heb. 6.1. John 17.23. 1 John
4.12, 17, 18.

Now let all that fear the Lord judge, whether the Doctrine of Perfection be a
Doctrine of the Pope, yea or nay; or whether G. Long which denies the Doctrine
of Perfection does not deny the Doctrine of Christ, and so is an Antichrist, 2
John 9. and tells the people they cannot be freed from sin while they are on
earth, and yet says, if they have Faith to believe that Christ dyed for their
sins, they shall be saved, and so applies the Promises to that nature, which
the judgments of the Lord are to, preaching peace to the wicked, to whom God
has said, There is no peace; and (to confirm this Doctrine of imperfection)
tells people, that Paul was a sinner, and David was a sinner, and that Job was
not a perfect man; witness to this against thee George Long Francis Stokes of
London, to whom thou said (when I sent by him to thee a few Queries, which
thou never yet answeredst, which I shall send (some of them) once more (with
some others) unto thee, and Priest Sangers; at that time thou said, Job was
not a perfect man, and so thou blasphemously chargedst God to be a liar, which
said, Satan, have thou considered my servant Job? that there is none like him
in the earth, a perfect man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil? Job
1.8. Therefore thou George Long have spoken wickedly against God, Thou think
that he is altogether such a one as thy self, but he is a pure and holy God,
and has reproved thee, through me the least of his servants, and set thy sins
in order before thee, (as Psalm 50.21.) for although Job said in the anguish
and bitterness of his soul and spirit that (mark) if I should just fie my self,
my own mouth would condemn me; if I say I am perfect, it would prove me
perverse; yet the Lord said, Job was a perfect man, and the Word of the Lord is
true; Job said, he was as one desperate, and did confess his words to be as
wind, chapter 6.26 for he was not suffered to fetch his breath by reason of the
anguish and bitterness of his Soul, and he desired the Lord to take his hand
and dread off him. And in all this Job sinned not with his lips, Job 2.10. And
Job said, My face is foul with weeping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of
death, (mark) not for any injustice in mine hands, for all my prayers are pure;
and he said, My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let go, my heart shall
not reproach me so long as I live: here Job did confess his perfect holy life,
Job 16.16. and 27.6. And the Lord said again, chap. 2. Satan, have thou
considered my servant Job? that there is none like him in all the earth, etc.
and still he holds fast his integrity, although thou have moved me against
him to destr^^ him (mark) without a cause. Job was a perfect man, and none
spoke of me the things that were right, like my servant Job, says the Lord God
Almighty, Job 42.7. And therefore thou George Long art a forger of lies, who
said, Job was not a perfect man: Thou art a Physician of no value, and the
wrath of God is kindled against thee, (and all you wicked ones) who are
searching for the sin and failings of the holy Fathers of old, thereby thinking
to keep people in sin for term of life, and also to hold up the horrible
filthy thing in the Land, and the abomination that makes desolation, etc.

And although David was a sinner, yet when he saw his sin, he repented, and
sat on the ground, and made Sackcloth his garments, and prayed the Lord to
blot out his sin, and his iniquities, and to create in him a clean heart, and
renew a right spirit within him, which David did witness the Lord had done for
him, and had delivered him out of all his trouble, and said, I will praise the
Lord for ever, (mark) because he has done it, etc. Ps. 51.9, 10, 52.9.54.7.

And although Paul did cry out, O wretched man that I am, etc. yet he did after
witness, and say, the law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus had made him
free from the law of sin and death, and over death he did triumph, and thanked
God that he had given him the victory over his sin, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 7.25. and 8.1, 2, 37. and chapter 6.16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 15.55. to the
end.

[This may serve to satisfy the simple, and for a witness against thee Rob.
Hill, who falsely reportedst that I said, Paul was not a Saint, or born of God,
when he said, O wretched man, etc. Thou askedst me, whether he was not a
sinner? I answered, that he that was born of God, did not commit sin, etc. But
thou by thy consequences concludest, and falsely reportedst as aforesaid: Let
the wise in God judge, to whom I refer my self; I had been silent herein
(knowing it is honorable to cease from strife) had I not been told of it by
several people since I came into prison, for it is near two years ago that the
words were spoken]

Now let all the wise in heart judge whether or no Job, David, and Paul did not
witness a cleansing from their sins and iniquities, and witness a perfect holy
life, or perfection, contrary to that Doctrine of George Long, and others, who
quote them for examples to people, that they may live in sin for term of life,
which is just the Doctrine of the Pope, (who in his ground differs little
from the Priests of England, though in some particular circumstances they may:
for the Pope, and his Jesuits, and Friars, tell the people they cannot be free
from sin, or perfect, whiles they are on earth, but tell them there is a
Purgatory, where they must be cleansed after death, for which many of them do
give their whole estates to the Pope, his Friars, etc. to pray for their Souls
after death, that they may be freed of out Purgatory (which they say is a place
of torment) and go to Heaven. And hence it is through their subtilty and craft
they have gotten so many Abbeys, etc. and other yearly Revenues as they have,
part of which is now become their Successors, (to wit, the Priests of England;)
and hence was the ground, (to wit, from the Pope) of Glebes, and Tithes, for
which the Priests of England contend so earnestly, and sue men at Law, etc. And
the Pope, his Jesuits, and Friars, etc. say, the Wafer or bread is (Corpus Dei)
the Body of God, and the Wine his Blood, after they have consecrated it (as
they call it,) and some of the Priests of England say the same; and the Pope
and his Priests, etc. wash, or sprinkle little Children, and call that Baptism;
and they use a form of words at their Graves, burying of their dead; and they
stand praying in the Synagogues and Pulpits, and preach from a Chapter and
Verse, and have Parsonage-houses, Gleabs, and Tithes, and some of them preach
for hire, moneys, etc. All which the Priests of England, for the greatest part
of them do the like; and against such dumb greedy Dogs who could never have
enough, but preach for their gain from their Quarters; the Lord sent Isaiah to
cry, Isa. 56.10, 11. and against such the Lord sent Jerimiah to cry, which did
commit the horrible thing in the Land, the Prophets prophesying falsely, and
the Priests bearing rule by their means, and the people did love to have it so,
as ye people of England do; but what will ye do in the end thereof? ye shall
lie down in sorrow, Isa 5.30, 31. Isa. 50.11. and against such the Lord sent
Ezekiel, to cry, who did make a prey of the prople, and destroyed Souls for
dishonest gain, Ezekiel. 34.3, 4. and 27.4. And against such the Lord sent Micah
to cry, which did preach for hire, and divine for money, as your Priests and
Divines do, Micah 3.10, 11. And Christ said, ye shall know them by they fruits;
and against such Christ Jesus cried, who stood praying in the Synagogues, and
were called of men Master, and had the chief Seats in the Assemblies, and the
uppermost rooms at Feasts, Mat. 23.6, 7.

Now all people who have been learning the way of truth from your priests, some
20, 30, 40 years, some more, some less, and have given them great Gifts and
Rewards, and yet ye are as ignorant of the true way to eternal life, as ye were
the first time you went to hear them: and look with a single eye on your
Priests, and see what difference there is between their Doctrine, and that of
the Popes.

Therefore be ye warned of them all people, before the terrible day of the Lord
come upon you, and consume you as stubble, for in that day the wicked shall be
as stubble, which is come, and coming, and with the Rod of his mouth will he
smite the earth, and with the breath of his lips will he slay the wicked;
therefore while ye have time, prize it, and repent, for though there be a
righteous holy life to be attained through Christ Jesus, Isa. 4.4.
whose blood cleanses from all sin; yet those whom he does redeem by his
Spirit of burnings, and of judgment from sin, Romans ^.6.
he does redeem them henceforth not to live in sin, but unto him which dyed and
rose again (he that has an ear to hear, 2 Cor. 5.15.
can hear) to serve him (mark) in newness of life; and if ever any of you come
to witness a perfect holy life, either Priest, or People in any measure; ye
must come to witness a real, not feigned, forsaking of your evil ways, and a
daily dying and crucifying of that life that now lives in you, with all its
lusts and affections; Gal. 5.24.25, 16. Rom 6.4.
And the life that ye have sl^ne (whiles ye have nourished your hearts as in
the day of slaughter) to be raised by the power and glory of the Lord God, even
as Jesus was raised from the dead, etc. And therefore your saying, ye hope ye
shall be saved from your sins, and ye believe Christ dyed for your sins, and by
faith in Christ, ye shall be saved, etc. It is not your speaking those words,
and living in sin, will serve your turns, for Christ is come and coming, to
give to every one, according as their works shall be: And therefore that
belief, that does not lead you out of sin and evil, and to live a truly
righteous holy life, it is the belief of Devils, for, the Devils believe and
tremble, Iam. 2.19. Therefore says Christ, who is the light of the world, Ioh.
8.12. Ioh. 12.46.
that lights every one that comes into the world; that whosoever believes,
(mark and understand aright) and follows, shall not abide in darkness, but
shall have the light of life; God is light and in him is no darkness: If ye say
ye believe in the light, and walk in darkness, sin and evil, ye are liars and
the truth is not in you, 1 John. 1.5, 6. 1 Ioh. 3.3.
And that hope that is not purifying your hearts, even as he is pure, is the
hope of the hypocrite, and the hope of the hypocrite shall perish: And that
faith which does not give you victory over sin, and the world, Ia. 2.10.26
(which is in your hearts, out of which proceeds evil thoughts, adulteries
murders, thefts, covetousness, pride, deceit, and all manner of wicked
uncleanness) that faith is a dead faith, for whatsoever is born of God,
overcomes the world, and that is your victory over the world, even your faith,
1 John 5.4.

Now in the light of Christ in you all, Judge whether ye have this true hope,
faith and belief, with their effects and operations, as they are in Jesus; ye
or nay? For though Moses did tell the children of Israel, of a land of rest,
which was truth, yet after the Lord by his power, delivered them from the
oppressions of Pharaoh, and his Taskmasters, and brought them through the Sea,
and delivered them from their enemies that pursued them, and from many other
enemies in their travels, and lead them through Wildernesses, and through a
great and terrible Wilderness, wherein were Scorpions, and fiery Serpents, and
drought and no water; Deuteronomy 8.15. Yet I say, many for their rebellion,
disobedience and hardness of heart, and unbelief, entered not into that land of
rest, but dyed in the Wilderness, but the faithful and obedient, did enter into
the land of promise; I have transferred this unto you as a figure, if ye can
receive it, do. Now all these things happened unto them for examples, And they
are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

These following are the Queries I send to you, Georg Long, and Priest Sangers
of London; which I do require you to answer; by plain Scripture, which if ye
do, the false Prophets and Antichrists, and Deceivers, will be discovered, and
the truth cleared from salshood.

Querie 1. Whether ever any of Christ's Ministers were persecutors, or casters
into prison, for speaking in their Church; it being their order and manner that
if any thing was revealed to him that stood by, the first should hold his
peace, 1 Cor. 14.30.

Querie 2. Whether ever any Minister of Christ, did abide in one place, seven
or eight years, or their life time, in a parsonage house, or preach for 40. 50.
60. or 100. or more, or less, by the year; yea or nay, Mat. 28.19.

Querie 3. Whether Christ's Ministry be not now the same as ever, both for
matter, manner, and Maintenance? If ye say nay, prove when it was changed, Mat.
10.8.

Querie 4. Whether it were not the chief Priests, with Pilate and the rest that
killed Jesus, hanged him on a tree, and wrote letters of Greek and Hebrew, over
his head, which ye call your Original tongues? And whether they did not profess
themselves to be Abraham's seed, and Moses disciples, and as seemingly zealous
as ye priests of England do, who are crucifying of him a fresh, persecuting and
killing his witnesses, under pretense of blaspheming, as your fathers did the
just one aforsaid? answer this Querie in plainness, Mat. 26.56.57. Luke 23.38.

Querie 5. Whether Christ be not the light of the world, and lights every one
that comes into the world? And whether that light that lights every one that
comes into the world, be not safficient to lead unto eternal Salvation, all
that believe and follow it? John 8.12. Isa 46.7. Heb 5.8, 9.

Querie 6. What is the first principle of true Christian Religion?

Querie 7. What and where is that key of knowledge, which being taken away, the
kingdom of God is shut from men? And how did the blind Guids take away the key
of knowledge? Luke 11.52.

Querie 8. What is that that checketh for sin and evil in the conscience, if it
be not the light of Christ, seeing that man by nature is the child of wrath,
and at enmity against God, in him dwells no good thing; But that is good in man,
though not of man, that shows the evil in man, and that is light that shows the
darkness, therefore not natural; nor of nature, Ephesians 5.13. chapter 2. 3. Rom 7.18.
and chapter 8.7.

Querie 9. What is the one Baptism, and how may one know he is baptized into
that one baptism? Ephesians 4.5.

Querie 10. Whether ever Christ Jesus or his Ministers, did wash or sprinkle
little children, calling it Baptism? Or whether ever they did use that Popish
form, speaking the words of Job or any other Scripture at the grave? Or whether
Christ or his ministers did sing David's prayers, and prophesies, in meetre, yea
or nay?

Querie 11. What and where is that everlasting covenant, the Lord said he would
make with his people? And what is the seal of the Covenant? And what is that
anointing, of which John said to the Church, ye have received of him, and
abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, Ier 32.40. 1 John 2.27.

Querie 12. Seeing the Scriptures say, ye shall be all taught of God; Whether
any may expect it in these days? And whether the teachings of God in spirit,
by his eternal spirit, and by his law written in the inward parts, be not
sufficient to lead unto everlasting life or salvation, to all that believe and
follow it, without your teachings from your sensual wisdom, which is from
beneath, ye, or nay?

Querie 13. Whether they are not false Prophets Deceivers and of the Devil, who
through covetousness make merchandise of the people; And are crying, so here is
Christ, (...) there he is, and by feigned words, and fine speches, deceive the
hearts of the simple, 2 Pet. 21.2.3. Rom, 16.18.

Querie 14. What is the cross of Christ, and what is it a Cross to? And whether
ye are not enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is your belly, whose glory
is your shame, and who mind earthly things? Phil 3.18.19.

Querie 15. What is it in man that ye minister unto? And from what do ye
minster?

Querie 16. Whether the Scriptures, the declaration of the Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles, be that living word of God, that lives and abides for ever? 1
Pet 1.23.

Querie 17. What and where is that way of holiness, which the unclean shall not
pass over, but it shall be for those, the wafering men, who (though fools)
shall not err therein, no ravenous Beasts, Lions whelps or fierce Lion has
trod it, or passed by it, no fool knows it, nor the vulturous eye has not
seen it? Isa 35.8, 9. Job 28.6, 7.

Querie 18. What is the first resurrection; And whether ye can witness ye are
partakers of the first resurrection, Rev. 20.6.

Querie 19. What and where is the tree of life? and what is the flaming sword,
that turns every way, to keep the tree of life, Gen 2.9. and 3.24.

Querie 20. Whether ye have an infallible Spirit to Judge and try all Spirits?
And where is that Spirit of truth, which Christ said he would send, that should
guide into all truth, and show things to come, Ioh. 16.13.

I have here proposed Scriptures, Chapters, and verses, to these Queries.
Because I sent some of them to a Priest, by him to be answered; and his answer
was, that they were not Fundamental; And therefore for the sake of the simple
hearted (But not to fatisfie the lust of any) that they may see the deceit and
ignorance of their Priest, (who are ignorant of the Scriptures) And also that
ye may search the Scriptures, I have here proposed them to you in public.

The Lord, that searches all hearts, knows that I have no envy against the
persons of you, George Long, and Priest Sangers, or the Rulers of Bath, or any
other by whom I have suffered, neither would I hurt the least members of your
bodies, if I might; And I desire the Lord not to lay it to your charge, in his
dreadful day, wherein ye must give an account (to him, with whom ye must have to
do, will ye nill ye) for every idle word and all the actions done in the body;
And I was as great a lover and follower of your Priests, as some of ye are now;
But now the Lord having showed me their deceit and abomination, that makes
desolation, Mat. 24.15 Isa 62.1. 1 Ioh. 2.27.
spoken of by Daniel the Prophet; At it my soul is vexed, and for Sions sake I
cannot hold my peace till its righteousness shine forth in its brightness, and
its salvation as a Lamp that burns. He that has an ear to hear, can hear and
understand.

And therefore I do charge and require you Priests, George Long, and Priest
Sangers, in the presence of the dreadful Lord God, to answer these Queries by
plain Scripture, without giving meanings or consequences, or imaginations,
hatched up in your carnal dark minds, for the Scripture is of no private
interpretation, neither came they by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke
them forth, as they were moved of the holy Ghost, and cursed is he that adds
to them, or diminishes from them.

Which if ye refuse to do, you will plainly manifest your selves to be no
Ministers of Christ (for they are no more then what every Minister of Christ
ought to know, and to have the work of them wrought in himself, and to give an
account thereof, and of the hope that is in him, with meekness and fear, being
required) but Antichrists, and deceivers, and keepers of the people in
ignorace and blindness, and ye will bring their blood upon your own heads; And
except ye speedily repent, the day will come upon you, wherein you will wish ye
had never been born, then you will remember me, whom the Lord sent you to
forewarn of those Judgments, and indignations that will come upon you, except
ye repent, for which message I have been imprisoned near twenty months; where
I wait in patience, on the Lord, to be delivered, in his time; Let the light of
Christ, in all that fear the Lord, Judge, whether these be the fruits of the
Ministers of Christ, or not.

Rev. 19.19. And the Beast was taken, and with him, the false Prophet, that
wrought miracles before him, etc. These both were cast alive into a lake,
burning with fire and brimstone; Because when I called, ye refused: I have
streched out my hand, and no man regarded: But ye have set at naught, all my
Counsel and would none of my reproof. I also will laugh at your calamity, I
will mock when your fear comes, and in your heat I will make your feasts, and
ye shall drink, and be drunken, and rejoice, and sleep a parpetual sleep, and
not awake; Says the Lord God of Hoasts.

T. M.

A TESTIMONY Against the Worlds feigned Love, and Salutations, and flattering
Titles.
As also against their false Accusations, against them scornfully called
Quakers, touching Magistracy, Ministry, Scriptures, Heaven, and Hell.
And likewise against the Prayers, and Songs of their Idol Temples, wherein is
a true Discovery of their eternal Destruction, except they repent.
The world has a love, and loves its own; And have several salutations and
flattering titles, giving to each (as they think) according to his or their
place, or estate, or riches: some saying, How do you, or I am glad to see you
well; others good morrow, with a put off of the hat, etc. And others with
bowings and cringing, saying, your humble Servant Sir, or, your servants
servant, etc. And all is but feigned love, and words proceeding from a
deceitful heart, for, when poverty, tribulations, or any other afflictions
come, your love, and feigned respect have an end. Yet for fashion-sake (which
will pass away and have an end also) if ye meet each other, ye will still use
your deceitful salutations, (to wit) How do you, or I am glad to see you well,
etc. When sometimes if ye could avoid it, ye would not see each other, and also
have secret envy in your hearts one toward another, and would do any evil one
to another, in body or goods, if it were not for some slavish fears, that do
possess you of the law; and ye do backbite, and revile each other, behind one
another backs, and yet, (if ye do meet each other, if envy and malice be not
so great in you, that it stops your mouths) ye will say, How do you? I am glad to
see you well, etc. when ye are not well in body or soul, (for envy destroys
and consumes body and soul) And where there is envy strife and division, there
is every evil work, and that is not well, 1 Cor. 3.3.
Iam. 3.16. And ye that say, I am glad to see you well, etc. know sometimes
that the person or persons to whom ye speak, are not well, but want both food
and raiment, and ye some of you have it in great abundance, albeit ye give them
not those things that are needful, and what good do your words do them? Read
Iam. 2.14.15.16. and 1 John 3.17. But as for your souls food, healer, or
covering, ye are little sensible of it (any of you whose hearts dwell in the
earth) what it is, or where it is. But did ye love and follow the light of
Christ in you, that checks you for sin and deceit, and that shows you the
hypocrisy of your hearts (as is before showed unto you) it would give you power
against it, and lead you into the kingdom of God, through the Cross, where
that precious ointment, covering, and living bread for your souls is.

And ye that say, your humble servant Sir; or, your servants servant, bowing
and cringing, using many vain words. Are ye not liars and hypoctites ye, or
nay? And is not the woe from God to the hypocrite? And is not the liar for the
lake? when ye say, your humble servant Sir, etc. Are not your hearts haughty,
and puffed up in pride, and living in it? And are ye not wanton, scornets,
mockers, and persecutors of the innocent? Are these the fruits of true
humility? Nay, nay, see, Gal. 5.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. and there ye shall read the
declaration of the fruits of true humility, and in the light of Christ Judge
your selves, and ye shall not be judged, for ye that use that deceitful
salutation, saying, I am you servants servant, ye are of Hams Generation, Genesis
9.25. And that that is in high esteem amongst men, is abomination to the Lord.

Therefore repent while ye have time, for the day is come and coming, that an
account shall be given for every idle word; And by your words (says Christ
shall ye be justified, and by your words shall ye be condemned, Math. 12.36,
27. Therefore all who to the light and life of Christ, in any measure are come,
and by it are guided, cannot use your vain words, nor bow to your deceit, not
use your fashions (which to them are past away) and for that cause ye persecute
them to death, and no murderer has eternal life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15.

But where do yeread, in all the Scriptures, that any did require any such
thing, as putting off the hat, and fining of men, and casting of them into
prison, if not done? Did ever Moses, who was as a King, a Priest and a Prophet
to Israel, or David and Solomon, who were Kings, ever compel men to such a
thing? Solomon said, my son give me the heart, not the hat: Is not the hat an
ornament of the body? may ye not as well compel the servants of the Lord, to
pull off their shoes, as their hats? And why do ye compel the male servants of
the most high God, to stand bare headed before you more then the Females?

Oh! the loftiness and haughtiness of man! I will (says the Lord God of Hosts)
stain the pride and glory of all flesh, an woe to the crown of pride: Do ye not
show your selves to be those whited Sapulchers, which appear very beautiful
outwardly (or with a seeming humility) but are within full of hypocrysie and
all uncleanness. And although some of you, say Abraham, Lot, etc. bowed, yet
they did not bow to the wicked, but it was to the Angels, or Messengers of the
most high God, and although Jacob bowed seven times, (Blessed is he that
reads and understands) Jacob was then in returning to his fathers house;
and thus says the Lord to you, O ye Edomites (or the house of Esau) because
Esau your father, and ye his children, pursued his brother with the sword, and
did cast off all pity; and his anger did tear (as yours does) perpetnally, and
he kept (as ye do) his wrath for ever. Therefore thus says the Lord, the house
of Jacob shall now be a fire; and the house of Joseph shall be a flame, and the
house of Esau shall now be for stubble, and no one of your fathers house shall
remain, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And to whom then shall the seed
of Jacob bow but unto me, says the Lord God of hosts, whose alone right it is?

But may I ask you a question, what spirit is this that is so much contending
for honor before men, bowings, putting off the hatt, etc. Is it not that
spirit that was in Saul, when the spirit of God was departed from him? Or is it
not that that was in Haman, that vexed him because Mordecai could not bow to
him? Or whether it be not that which was in the Chaldeans, and Nebuchadnezzar,
who had prepared an hot fiery furnace, to cast the Innocents in, because they
could not bow to there image? Or is it not that spirit that would have had the
Lord Jesus to have bowed, or fallen down and worshipped him; yea, or nay? which
Christ reproved and said, Get thee hence Satan, It is written, thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, etc. Mat. 4.10, 11.

But Paul says, concerning the holy fathers of old, Abraham, Isaac, etc.
Brethren, I would not have you to be ignorant, that all our Fathers were under
the cloud, and passed through the sea, etc. But now, the star of Jacob is
risen, the Cloud is scattering, the Lord again, as in the ancient of days, is
smiting the tongue of the Egyptian Sea, in the seven streams; this is enough to
the wise.

And all that (but) to Mount Sion are come, a Law from God, they have received,
which says, Thou shall not bow, etc. And the Scripture does testify, that
Peter a Minister of Christ, and his holy Angel, did deny, and forbid bowing
unto them, for when Cornelius would have fallen down or bowed to Peter, he
denied it, and said, stand up, for I my self also am a man, Acts 10.25, 26. And
when the Angel came unto John, John. 19: 10. 22.9. Exodus 20 45. Deuteronomy. 5.8, 9.
Phil. 2.9.
he fell down, and would have worshipped the Angel, But he forbad it, saying,
see thou do it not, I am thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren the Prophets,
which keep the sayings of the book, worship God, which is a spirit. And unto me
says the Lord God, shall every knee bow, both in Heaven, and in earth.

So that it is evident, that there is not one Scripture, that does require any
such thing, as putting off the hat, or bowing; But the Scriptures do testify
against it, and forbid it, as I have proved before, except it be that of
Solomon which says, The evil shall bow before the good, and the wicked at the
gate of the righteous,

And although Moses said, Thou shall stand up before the hoary head; yet he did
not say, they should put off the hat, or bow, etc.

And as for you who are contending for flattering titles of honor, which ye
say, Paul gave to Festus, Agrippa, etc. Luke to Theophilus, John to the Lady,
etc. This cover is too narrow for your deceit, in the light of Christ are ye
seen, judged and denied; for, when Paul said, noble Festus, etc. and O King
Agrippa, etc. Paul spoke as he found by them, for they were more noble than the
Tumultuous Jews, who took him (to wit Paul) with Sylas, and cast them into the
inner Prison, Acts 26.22, 23, 24, 25.
and made their feet fast in the stocks; And the Magistates rent their clothes,
and beat them uncondemned, etc. Acts 22.25. But when Paul came before Festus
and Agrippa, they were more noble, than those aforesaid, and gave him leave
peaceably to give an account of his faith, and the hope that was in him;
neither were they offended at Paul, when he Thee'd and Thou Would them. And they
judged him without partiality, and said, we find nothing worthy of death, or of
bonds, in this man, etc. And so they were truly noble in their judgments to
Paul, and to this Paul's words do much accord, for when he came to the Bereans,
he said, they were more noble than the tumultuous Jews of Thessalonica, in
that they received the word with alreadyness of mind, and searched the
Scriptures daily, whether these things Paul testified of, were so, etc. Acts
17.10, 11. And hence was the true ground of Paul's saying, Noble Festus, O King,
etc. which was for their noble and true judge meant of Paul's innosency, as is
aforesaid.

And when Luke said, most excellent Theophilus, etc. It was for his love to the
truth of Jesus, which Theophilus was instructed in. And Paul said, he accounted
all things but dung in comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ,
etc. And Solomon says, The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor, but
the way of the wicked seduceth them. But such a one was not Theophilus, who was
instructed in the way of God; and therefore Luke a servant of the Lord Jesus
thought, good to give him a more perfect understanding of all things from the
very first, in order concerning the Lord Jesus, etc. Luke 1, 1, 2, 3, 4. And
hence was it, that Luke did account Theophilus excellent, or more excellent
than Herod, Pilate, and the wicked high Priests, who seduced them to kill the
just One.

And when John wrote to the Elect Lady, it was not one who lived in idleness,
pride, wantonness, lusts, excess of ryoting, whose apparel was laced with
silver or gold, or used plaiting of the hair, or looked for flattering titles,
or respect to her person. But it was one who was covered with the ornament of a
meek and quiet spirit, who had her children walking in the truth, whom I love
says John (mark) in the truth, and not only I, but also all they that have
known the truth, which truth, leads out of all the evils, aforesaid, read 1
Pet. 3.1.2, 3, 4. Pet. 4 3. Iam. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. for though John did not speak
those words, yet Peter and James did for the most part, and the spirit of
Christ was but one in them, and ye who are called Ladies, Maddam, etc. in the
light of Christ judge your selves whether ye have the fruits of the Elect Lady,
or whether ye are any of those virtuous women, spoken of, Pro. 31. who are
doing good, not evil, all the days of their lives, seeking the wool and flax,
working willingly with their hands, (not in vain toys, but) with the spindle
and distaffe; or whether ye are not with some of your husbands, who are
plotting and wresting the judgment of the poor and needy, living in all manner
of sin and evil, persecuting the innocent, yea, or nay, these are not the
fruits of of true Humility, or Nobility, nay, nay; to the light of Christ in
all your consciences I speak.

And whereas some of you say, we hold there is no Heaven nor Hell, but that in
the conscence; ye are false accusers, for if in this life only were our hope
of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19.
we were of all men most miserable, for they who to the life of Christ, by
faith in him, in any measure, are come, can say (with Paul, that all our
present sufferings, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us, which has been hid from ages and generations, but now is made
manifest in his Saints, Christ the hope of glory. And in love to this glorious
life, (we have in measure received as the earnest, for obedience to the faith)
of the eternal inheritance, as we abide in it) our dearest relations of all
visible created objects whatsoever, and our lives also, are not dear unto us in
comparison of it. And we know that when this our earthly tabernacle shall be
dessolved, we have a building with God, not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5, 1, ^
(mark) eternal in the Heavens, for in this we groan earnestly, etc. and they
who to this life are come (as I said before) in any measure, can witness, the
great torment and tribulation, they have passed thorough, Acts 14.22. which is
the portion for everlasting, of the wicked, Psa. 17.14. Psa 13.5.67.8. Job
21.6. to. 15.
who have their portion of ease, joy, pleasure, only in this life, and have
more than heart can wish; whose eyes stand out with fatness, their houses are
safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them; their bull gendereth, and
fails not, their Cow calveth, etc. your children dance and have the Tymbrel
and Harp, and rejoice in the Organ, therefore they and you their parents, say
unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; Mat.
25.^ to the end,
and what is the Almighty, that we should serve him, etc. And ye spend your
days in wealth, persecuting the innocent; but in a moment go down to the
grave. And to such Christ is now saying, Depart from me, ye cursed (take
notice) into everlasting fire, woe is me for you, ye wicked ones, Repent while
ye have time, this is the day of your visitation, and salvation proffered unto
you, who are wanton, and in pleasure on the earth, nourishing your hearts as in
the day of slaughter, ye have condemned and killed the just, and he does not
resist you.

And as for you who have gone up and down to get men to subscribe to your
grievous Prescription, which ye have prescribed against the innocent saying
they (who are called Quakers) deny the Sriptures, and are Jesuits; witness to
this ye of Marshfield, and thereabouts, and others, saying, they deny
Magistrates and Ministers, Government, etc. thereby thinking to cover your
wickedness, that ye have purposed against the guiltless.

I who am a Servant of the living God, and a fellow feeler and partaker of
their sufferings, am moved of the Lord, to send forth this as a witness against
you, who have done, and are doing so wickedly, for so we who are scornfully
called Quakers, hated and persecuted without a cause, do own Magistrates and
good Government, whether the King as supreme, or any other Governors, who are
of the Lord, sent for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well, for so is the will of God, etc. for no Magistrate ought to be a
terror to good and godly men or any other good thing; But if he be, he bears
the sword in vain, and the sword so the Lord, will be turned against him, and
cut him off, as were Ahab, Jehoash. and others, as the Scripture testifies,
that did oppress his people: nay, look to our days, remember Wentworth of
Ireland, and the late King, with other of that generation. Take notice, ye that
are in authority are ye better than they? Nay, ye are not, if ye walk in their
steps, and ye will have their end, except ye repent. And as for you who are in
Authority, and act contrary to the pure law of God, which ought to be your
rule, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19. and are acted by your wills and lusts, and unrighteous
Laws, wereby we suffer deeply; yet to you also are we subject, in that we
suffer under your great oppression, without resisting of you, which we rather
choose to do, than to disobey the royal Law statutes and judgments of the
most high and holy God.

And Ministers of Christ we own, who abide in the doctrine of Christ, 2 John 9.
But Jesuits, and all that wicked Popish Generation, we do them deny, for they
are as great enemies to the truth, as it is in Jesus, as the Priests of England
are, who abide not in his Doctrine, and will use and are using, the Servants of
the Lord, whom he has sent, and is sending unto them, them to forewarn of the
plagues and righteous Judgments of God, that are coming upon them, as bad as
your priests of England have done; who have given, and are giving them a wicked
example, and your reward will be a like.

And the Scriptures we do own and are ours, and are for the perfecting of us,
being given by inspiration of God, and to us they are profitable for Doctrine
and reproof, for correction, and instruction, in righteousness, that thereby we
may be thoroughly furnished to every good work of the Lord.

And therefore all ye who are plotting and persecuting of the Lords chosen
ones, (whom he has redeemed, and is redeeming, with his precious blood, and by
judgment, Ephesians. 17. Isa. 52. Isa. 1.27. out of the worlds customs, fashions,
words, etc.) fining of them, and casting them into prison, for not bowing or
putting off the hatt, etc. to satisfy your wills and lusts, and some of you
are afflicting, and whipping, and putting of them into stocks, other stoning
and dirting of them, in streets and high ways, they not giving you the least
offense in word or action; ye are those that rob the Lord of his honor, and
haters of Sion, and the Lord will plead with you all, poor and rich, by fire
and sword, and will cut your cords of wickedness asunder, and ye will be as
grass that grows on the house top, that withers before it be grown up,
wherewith the mower fills not his hand, nor he that binds sheaves, his
bosom, neither will they which pass by, say, we bless you in the name of the
Lord, or the blessing of the Lord be upon you, neither receive you into their
house, or bid you God speed, for he that so does, will be partaker of your
evil deeds, Psalm. 129.4 to the end, 2 John 10.11 And then will the prayers and
prophesies of David, which ye have made the Songs of your Temples, (unto which
ye have added and diminished both words and verses; Witness Psalm. 2. Psalm. 4.
Psalm. 14. and 15. with many others, therefore denied by the Children of light)
will come upon you who are Confederates, persecuting the innocent, for ye sing,
your hearts are foul and vain, and death in have will fall on you, and send you
quick to hell, except ye repent. Will it not be just with the Lord to answer
your prayers, who are doing so wickedly, Read and understand what ye sing,
Psalm, 5.6, 9. Psalm. 55.16. Are ye not liars and Hypocrites when ye sing All the
night I wash my bed with tears, etc. My joints in sunder break, My heart does
in my body melt, like wax against the heat, etc. My tongue cleaves to my jaws.
Are not your tongues at liberty, uttering forth deceit? And are not your hearts
as hard as the nether millstone? And do ye not spend the night in sleep and
ease? O ye simple ones, when will ye be wise? Do ye not know the liar is for
the Lake, ye sing and say; ye do not haunt with men, whose deeds are vain, to
come into the house ye do refuse with the deceitful train; ye much abhor the
wicked sort: it were well if ye did, But are ye not some of them that are
taking Counsel against the Lords anointed ones? If ye say nay, Then are ye not
some of them that resort into the Temples or Synagogues, (called Churches) Into
which come all manner of wicked lewd persons, The light of Christ in all your
consciences, shall eternally witness this to be truth, and answer your
condemnation to be just, except ye speedily repent, and come out from amongst
them, and touch not the unclean thing; understand what you sing and read, Psalm.
26. for the Lord is discovering the secrets of al hearts, ye read, or sing, My
wounds stink and and are festred so, as loathsome is to see, etc. That ye go
wailing all the day in doleful heavyness, etc. And ye say or sing, ye roar for
grief of heart, and are not puffed in mind, and have no scornful eye, etc. How
dare ye to be so presumptious, to breath forth such abominable untruths before
the Lord, when ye are at ease, clothed in rich arayment, perfumed with sweet
smells, and are haughty, scorners, puffed up with pride of mind, living in
wantonness ease, and pleasure, singing vain songs and times, having eyes full
of adultery, etc.

By this ye may as in a Looking-glass, see and read your figure, and also what
blindness and ignorance your Priests have lead you into, that ye are not truly
sensible, when ye sing, whether it be for a blessing or a curse, and therefore
I was moved, out of tender love to your souls, that ye might come to consider
aright, of your condition to forewarn you of those plagues, that ye ignorantly
pray for to come upon you, which will assuredly come upon you speedily, except
ye repent. The light of Christ in all your consciences shall eternally witness
me to be true, and answer your condemnation to be just, if ye slight the day
of your visitation, and salvation proffered unto you.

T. M.

THE END.
POSTSCRIPT.
THis Book should have been Printed long ago, but through neglect of some, and
mistake of others, it has been prevented a great while; yet now it comes not
out of good season, but may do its service, to awaken the Witness of God, in
the Persecutors of the Righteous Seed, that they may see what they have done
and repent now, before the last plague be, poured out; for the Viols of Gods
fury is full, to be poured out upon the head of the Ungodly, so the service of
this book, is now in season, to answer the witness of God in all men, to which
it is Commended.


