COENA quasi KOIN: The New-INCLOSVRES broken down, AND THE LORDS SUPPER Laid
forth in common for all Church Members, having a Dogmatical Faith, and not
being Scandalous: In a Diatribe, and Defense thereof: AGAINST The Apology of
some Ministers, and Godly People, (as their own Mouth praises them) asserting
the lawfulness of their administering the LORDS SUPPER in a select Company:
Lately set forth by their Prolocutor, Mr. HUMPHREY SAUNDERS.

Written by WILLIAM MORICE of Werrington, in DEVON, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for Richard Thrale, and are to be sold at the
Cross-Keyes at Paul's gate, entering into Cheap Side, M. DC. LVII.

Augustine. in Psalm. 48. Concio. 1. Tom. 8. Page 93. EXigitur a manducante quod
manducat, non prohibeatur a dispensatore, sed moveatur timere exactorem.

Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. 11. Hom. 27. Tom. 4. Page 110. Quoniam Dominica
coena, hoc est, Domini, debet esse communis, quaeenim Domini sunt, non sunt
hujus servi aut alterius, sed omnibus communia, quod enim Dominicum est, idem
and commune; nam si Domini tui est, quemadmodum est, non debes tanquam propria
tibi assumere, sed tanquam res Domini, communiter omnibus proponere, siquidem
hoc est Dominicum, nunc autem non sinis esse Dominicum cum non sinis esse
commune, sed tibi comedis.

Bullinger. adversus Anabaptist. l. 6. c. 9. p. 229. and 232. Probationem
Ministri aut Ecclesiae judicio non relinquimus, ut tum demum aliquis ad coenam
Domini accedat, cum Ministri vel Ecclesia satis dignum fidelem and sanctum
judicaverit -- Probet homo seipsum -- non debet ab alio probari.

Musculus in 1 Cor. 11.28. Page 438, 439. Apparet necessarium and utile esse
eorum studium, qui neminem ad coenam Domini admittant, quem ipsi antea non
probaverunt, si modus and discretio adhibeatur, nec velut universali lege
indiscriminatim omnes, etiam qui inculpate se gerunt in Ecclesia, ad hujusmodi
examen constringantur: verum juxta timendum est, ne institutum hoc, quam nunc
magni aestimatur, tam olim in priscam servitutem Ecclesiam Christi reducat, and
noxium reddatur. Sane Apostolica institutio nihil hujus requirit, sed hortatur
unumquemque ut seipsum probet -- sed quid si Minister Ecclesiae hac Apostoli
sententia nolit esse contentus, nec admittat nisiquos ipse explorat, item quid
si fidelis ad panis tantum, and non poculi Dominici communicationem admittatur,
sicut in Papatu fieri videmus? Respondeo, ubi nec Domini ea institutio, nec
Apostolica Doctrina servatur, ibi non est ut communicet fidelis, sinat
Magistratus illos regnare in Ecclesia, donec visum fuerit Domino modum imponere
illorum Dominio.

Chamier Panstrat. Tom. 4. l. 7. c. 19. S. 17. Page 196. Non sunt digne
praeparati; Scelus hominis! cur indignos Sacramento dicis quos indignos negas
pace Ecclesiae? Itane tibi videatur qui censeantur in corpore Christi, ut
indignos pronuncies qui vescantur Christo? at Chrysostomus negabat, dignos esse
qui vel precibus interessent; quodnam quaeso ingenium tuum est? Chrysostomi
certe Catholicum, vide ne tuum non Christianum.

Casaubon. exercit. ad annal. Baron. exercit. 16. S. 31. Page 366. Coena Domini
privatae epulae non sunt, natura sua, sed publica fidelium omnium invitatio.

The Sum of the Dissertation.
DIATRIBE. SECT. I. OF Antiquity and Innovation, the Character of their
Discipline: the state of the question. p. 29. DEFENSE. SECT. I. What Authority
the Diatribe ascribed to the Fathers and ancient Church. Why the Apologists
derogate from them? p. 32. SECT. II. Of Antiquity, Custom; sad consequences of
Independency, the novelty thereof; the Fathers not without errors, yet not to
be slighted. What may be called the Primitive Church? Protestants always
honored their Fathers, and never declined their Testimony. p. 33. SECT. III.
How the Apologists have suited their Discipline, to comply with several-Parties
and Interests? the odious Blots of their Pen. p. 42. SECT. IV. Whether the
Diatribe were guilty of Petitio Principii? 44. SECT. V. Whether their
Discipline advance Godliness? The Sacraments are Seals of the Conditional
Covenant; which Doctrine has no affinity with semi-Pelagianisme. Whether the
exhibiting the Sacrament make men Saints? Whether the giving thereof without
discrimination upon trial, blind men in their sins; or be the setting of the
Seal to Blanks? Whether the Sacraments are privileges of the Godly? 1 Cor. 10.
argumentative for a free Communion. 46. SECT. VI. Independent Books and
Arguments. Of Rhetorique; what Builders the Apologists are? 62. SECT. VII. The
Apologists causlesly irritated by an Allegory. 67. SECT. VIII. In whom the
School vesteth the Power of Church Censures. Whether the Apologists may de
jure, or do de facto, censure alone? How they have restored the Sacrament? 68.
SECT. IX. The state of the Question: the model of their Church: Whether their
way smack of Donatus his schism? Ecclesiastical Communion consists principally
in Communion of Sacraments. Of Examination precedent to the partaking of the
Eucharist. Whether, and how necessary? What knowledge may be competent? What
profession of Faith the ancient Church required before admission to Sacraments?
Of Excommunication, Suspension, Presbytery; the Apologists no friends
thereunto. 71. DIATRIBE. SECT. II. The Lord Jesus examined not his Disciples
antecedently to his Supper. He admitted Judas to the participation, as the
Fathers consentiently assert, and the Scripture evinceth, Luke 22.21. and Joh.
13.2.26, 27, 30. discussed. 96. DEFENSE. SECT. X. How we know Christ examined
not the Apostles? The force of Arguments from the Authority negative of
Scripture? Of the washing of the Apostles feet. Whether any did partake the
last Supper, save the 12. Apostles? The Apologists conceit of the 70.
Disciples. Of Confession of Faith, how and when necessary? Examination is a
virtual and interpretative diffamation. Whether it be a small thing they
require? Whether Examination, if it be necessary, ought to be made but once?
111. SECT. XI. Judas did communicate at the Lords Supper. What is thereby
inferred? The Attestation of the Fathers in that matter: the consent of later
Divines. The weight of the testimonies on either side: the Apologists confess
there was no visible cause to exclude him. Whether Christ in admitting him,
acted only as a man? His not condemning the adulterous woman. 122. DIATRIBE.
SECT. III. The sufficiency of Scripture, whereupon Negative Arguments are
grounded: the Argument deduced from 1 Cor. 11.28. it is difficult and unsafe to
judge of other men's estate. Of temerarious judgment. Of judging men to be
wicked or irregenerate. With what difficulty, and what a Pedigree of
consequences their proofs are derived from Scripture? General Rules for
satisfaction of doubting Consciences, persuade the contrary to their way. Of
Christ's admitting only Disciples: Heb. 13.17. Mat. 18.16. Rev. 2.2. 1 Pet.
3.15. 1 Cor. 5.11. explained and vindicated. 134. DEFENSE. SECT. 12. 1 Cor,
11.28. Reinforced and vindicated; Negative Arguments, whether this be such?
Whether all revealed in Scripture be necessary? Christ's not examining his
Disciples. The sense of ancient and modern Interpreters upon that of 1 Cor.
11.28. the testimony of Paraeus vindicated. Examination but an after-reckoning
to Auricular Confession; and built upon the same Foundations: the Consequences
thereof alike to be feared. 149. DIATRIBE. SECT. IV. No pre-examination in the
ancient Church, save of Catechumeni. Sending the Eucharist to persons absent
and strangers. The institution and abolishment of Confession. Liberty to
approach the Lords Table upon self-examination. Whom the ancient Church
excluded from the Eucharist. The Judgment of the Fathers, Casuists, and
Schoolmen, concerning those that are to be admitted, and to be debarred. To
partake was anciently commanded as a common Duty. The omission reprehended, the
common right asserted. 181. DEFENSE. SECT. XIII. The honor and interest of the
Ministry. Confession of sins as necessary as Examination. Whether their
principles have any affinity with the Roman, or may be subservient and
manuductive to Popery. The ancient Discipline most like to advance Reformation.
What were the Catechumeni, Energumeni, Penitents? The several degrees of the
latter. The Church Way of the Apologists has no conformity with the ancient
Church. How the Heathens proscribed profane persons from their Holies? Whether
the Ancients went too far in Censures? A testimony of Albaspinus, falsified
by them, cleared. Another of Chrysostomes vindicated. 185. SECT. XIV. Sending
the Eucharist to strangers and persons absent, whether a corruption? Whether
the Fathers were prodigal of Christ's blood? Of admitting to the Eucharist
presently after Baptism. Of the Literae formatae, and communicatoriae. 182.
post 185. SECT. XV. Of daily communicating; of receiving at Easter; all the
People anciently communicated. No man to be repelled upon the private knowledge
of the Minister or other. Whether all did partake the Lords Supper that heard
the Word? What sins may exclude from the Sacrament? Whether the ancient
Church knew or practiced any such Censure as Suspension? The Negative proved,
the Arguments for the Affirmative profligated. Penitents were first
excommunicated. What Communion anciently did signify? What Abstinency denoted?
What was the Lay-Communion? What was meant by removing from the Altar? What
Suspension anciently signified, and in what sense that notion was used? What
the School determines of giving the Eucharist to manifest and occult sinners?
Suarez imposterously alleged by them. What Suspicion may warrant an Exclusion?
Whether their way of Separation be conformable to the Ancient? Of their care to
keep men off from the Sacrament. The Application of a passage in Chrysostom
redeemed from their Exceptions. Whether there be reason to examine
dispositively to hearing the Word, as well as to receiving the Sacrament, and
danger to the Unworthy in the one, as well as in the other? The casting of Pearl
before Swine, and giving holy things unto Dogs, what it intends? The difference
between the Word and Sacraments. All not anciently admitted to all the Word.
The Sacrament multifariously proved to be a converting Ordinance, and this to
be the common judgment of Protestants. What effects may be hoped only by
seeing the Administration, without partaking? The Sophisme discussed, He that
partakes worthily, is converted already; he that eats unworthily, eats
damnation. Whether men are prohibited those Duties which they cannot well and
duly discharge? The moral works of natural men. 186. DIATRIBE. SECT. V. By a
free Communion, there is no damnum emergens by pollution of the Ordinances,
Minister, or Communicants: the visible Church is aggregated of good and evil.
It is Schism to renounce Communion of Sacraments, with evil men not duly
censured, the administration not to be intermitted, because all are not
sufficiently prepared: or those that are unworthy may partake. The similitudes
defeated of giving a cup of poisoned wine only with admonition. Of giving a
Legacy to Scholars of such a capacity and parts, which the Trustees cannot
otherwise distribute. Of being guilty of the sins we hinder not. The weak to be
encouraged and promoved by admission. As much danger by mixed Communion in the
Word and Prayers as in the Sacrament. The Reasons pretended to debar from the
one as argumentative to exclude from the other, Matthew. 7 6. examined. Whether
the receiving the Sacrament be a Duty enjoined to all, and a good work in all?
Whether it be a converting Ordinance? What the Sacraments seal, and how?
Whether they confer grace. The same evil effects ensue by male administration
of discipline; as by a free communion, and the same reasons which forbid
separation in the one, do also in the other case. 235. DEFENSE. SECT. XVI. The
removing the scandalous by the power of the Keys no ingredient of our question,
nor any part of the Discipline which they practice. What scandals may deprive
of the Sacrament? Whether formal Professors, if they could be known, were to be
admitted? How holy things may be polluted? As the Sacrament, so in like manner
other holy things may be defiled. By a free admission the Sacrament is not
polluted by or to the Minister, nor others that communicate worthily; and it is
no more dangerous for the unworthy to come, than to keep off. Whether mixed
Communion be a burden of sin, or pain? In what cases it is lawful to have
Communion of Sacraments with evil men. The godly were always commix'd with the
wicked in Communion of Sacraments, proved through the History of the Scripture.
Sacrifices were of like nature with Sacraments, and for offering or eating
thereof, no signs or trials of real Holiness were required. Whether there be an
equal necessity of profession of Faith at the receiving of the Eucharist, and
of Baptism. The Church of Corinth was corrupt, yet in reforming thereof the
Apostle prescribed no such trial. When and how far admonition and reproof may
be sufficient? Of Ambrose his proceeding against Theodosius. What are the
effects of the society of evil men with good. The errors of Audius, Novatus,
and Donatus. Whether the Apologists symbolize with them? Church Fellowship
consists chiefly in Communion of Sacraments, they make the Church of the Called
to be no larger than that of the Elect. The state of the Church according to
the Parables of the Floor, Field, and Net, Matthew. 13. Our Thesis asserted in
the express words of the Ancients. The Pastor of Corinth not reproved for
permitting mixed Communions, 1 Cor. 4.21. considered. The Parable of the
Marriage Feast. Of sealing men. Their too free Pulpits, no free Tables: of
Preaching without Ordination. A recapitulation of much of the Discourse. 255.
DIATRIBE. SECT. VI. Whether this Discipline suit with Romans 14.1. and 10. or
check not with Charity, relish not of the Pharisee? Whether it sort with the
qualifications of the High Priest, Heb. 5.2. Or the example of Hezekias?
Whether it smell not of Diotrephes? Of examining persons set beyond suspicion.
Whether their way were cast in a like Mould with Popery? Of their Elders: their
way is independent. A complaint of our Schisms and Heresies. Persuasions to
mildness and moderation. 307. DEFENSE. SECT. XVII. They misrepresent their
Church Way. Whether the Queries of the Diatribe, were doubts of Friends or
Enemies? What are properly scruples? 318. SECT. XVIII. Romans 14.1. and 10.
discussed. Whether they judge or despise their Brethren. Psalm. 15.4.
vindicated. No other Qualifications required in order to communicating in a
Churchmember, having a dogmatical Faith, but to be without scandal: whether
they reject only the wicked? whether their way render them not guilty of
temerarious judgment: of judging the heart, of bearing infirmities; of moral
men. 320 SECT. XIX. 1 Cor. 13.7. considered: whether they suspect not much
evil, believe or hope little good of their people, of examining the knowing to
be exemplar to the ignorant, or to nanifest their humility, whether it be their
duty to submit to such a passive examination? whether to call them to it be not
directly to detract from them, or interpretatively to diffame them? small
matters are often great in the consequence. 2 Cor. 11.2. examined? the
properties of charity in hoping and believing, all the ignorance charged, is
not to know it to be duty to submtt to their commands, whether conversion may
be sudden? whether the Church have loss or gain by these ways of pretended
Reformation? 332 SECT. XX. Whether the Apologists are charitably suspected, or
can be justly charged with Pharisaism? whether their actings proceed out of
tenderness of conscience? A parallel between the Apologists and Pharisees in
some things. 369, (169) SECT. XXI. What was Diotrephes? what his ambition?
whether the Apologists exceed not the bounds of Ministerial power, by bringing
all under trial, excluding and not for scandal, and that so many, and by
common continual practice? whether this check not with 1 Peter 5.3. whether
those they reject are scandalous? themselves separated and left the Church
behind them. Of Ecclesiastical power, what it is, and how far extensive? The
duty of Stewards. It is Christ's honor to have an universal Church. Their
actings, 1. Not commanded or warranted by Gods Word. 2. They act solely. Of
their Elders, of ruling Elders in general, not by divine right, yet a prudent
constitution requisite to be continued in some way, the interest of the whole
Church in censures, the Elders Representatives of the Church, whether the
ancient Church knew any such? 3. They act arbitrarily, of the former Bishops,
the Flowers of the Apologists Canina facundia, which they cast on the Opposites
of their way, the aspersions wiped off, and some of them reflected, of small
things, and whether their Injunctions are such? what may be the consequences
thereof, viz. their own power and greatness in the intention, which yet in
effect may be thereby lessened, whether their promiscuous examination be to
prevent respect of persons, of examining persons known to be knowing, of the
Shekel of the Sanctuary, of their aviling of their people, and thereby giving
advantage to the Papists to upbraid us, of the former Bishops, the lack of
light in some places through want of some to hold it forth, whether the
Diatribe aspersed Presbytery to be modelled like Popery? the Apologists no
friends to Presbytery; their way has some analogy with Popery, and accidental
tendency thereunto. 378, (178) SECT. XXII. Of Independents, their godliness,
their Schism, the confessed imperfection of the way of the Apologists, their
desire of an union with the Independents, an admonition to the Presbyterians,
the confounding of Churches and Parishes by the Apologists, their gathering of
Churches, whether they are guilty of disorder against Law? whether Magic were
laid to their charge? whether they are culpable of Schism and Sedition, or
injury to other Ministers? of the hatching others Eggs, like the Partridge.
414, (214) SECT. XXIII. Why they have not the Sacrament in their own Churches?
why only at Pyworthy? whether it be no great matter to be called or drawn
thither? Of their return to their own Churches. How they stigmatize the People,
and judge their hearts? Of serving the times: they confess the Word and
Sacraments to be the same thing: what thereupon follows? 426. (226) SECT.
XXIV. Whether they are Butchers or Surgeons? Whether guilty of Schism? Of
negative and positive Schism. What are just causes of separation? Whether
our Savior separated from the Jewish Church, for instance, in eating the
Passover? They condemn what they practice, by confounding Churches, and by
separation. They grant Professors to be visible Saints, which destroys their
Platform. Their Reasons why all sorts are to be admitted to the Word and
Prayer. Whether there are not better Reasons to warrant a like admission to
the Sacrament? Whether the same conclude it not? Whether the Churches of
England are all true Churches? Sacraments Notes of the Church, and therefore
communicable to all Church Members; they grant Discipline enters not the
definition of a Church, yet they separate for want thereof. Whether they may
not as well deny Baptism to the Children, as the Eucharist to the Parents? 434.
(234.) SECT. XXV. Their great abuse and distortion of Scripture; with what a
train of Consequences their Arguments are far-fetched; they are borrowed from
the Donatists, Papists, Brownists, Independents; none of them conclude the
question, as themselves have stated it: the Argument raised from 1 Cor. 14.40.
examined. Whether it be a glorious and comfortable practice that none approach
the Lords Table, save holy persons? Whether their way be warranted by the Laws?
The moderating of Censures. Whether their way have like ground with the ancient
Discipline, in receiving in Penitents? Whether there be order and decency in
mixed Communions? The lesser good to be omitted, to acquire the greater; the
confusion and disorder of their ways. (250.) 450. SECT. XXVI. Jeremy 15.19.
Discussed and vindicated. (264.) 464. SECT. XXVII. 2 These. 3.2. and 6. Opened
and redeemed from their misapplications. Whether anciently the Commerce with
any not excommunicate were avoided? What society Excommunication cuts off
from? How Suspension might be used, and is abused? (267.) 467. SECT. XXVIII. 1
Cor. 5.11. Ventilated, and the Chaff of their Interpretation dispersed. Whether
we may have communion in sacred things with such as we may not have society
with in civil? (274.) 474. SECT. XXIX. Matthew. 7.6. The sense thereof enucleated
and showed not to be subservient to their purpose, but odiously abused.
Whether Ministers may act in Censures alone, and upon their own knowledge
(281.) 481. SECT. XXX. 1 Cor. 11.27. and sequent. Discussed, of eating and
drinking unworthily. Whether there be a necessity of examining all, because
some cannot examine themselves? Whether any irregenerate man can examine
himself? Whether this tends not to introduce Auricular Confession? Jude 3.
opened. (288.) 488. SECT. XXXI. 1 Timothy 5.22. Interpreted and answered. Of
Principals and Accessories, 1 Timothy 3.10. considered: Not like Reasons to
examine those that are to communicate, and those that are to be ordained.
(293.) 493. SECT. XXXII. 1 Pet. 3.15. Heb. 13.17. Discussed: What obedience is
due to Ministers, and what power they have? 497. (297.) SECT. XXXIII. Levit.
13.5. 2 Chronicles. 23.19. Joel 3.17. Nahum 1.15. Zach. 19.21. Brought off from the
Rack whereon they have set them. The difference between Legal and Moral
Uncleanness; what the former typed. 501. (301.) SECT. XXXIV, XXXV, XXXVI,
XXXVII. Their repeated fallacies. The complacency of their close, which is
destructive to their main Discourse. 509. etc. (309).
The Preface.
BEing engaged in the public Service of my Country, I have been always most
forward to employ the power entrusted with me, for recovery of Tithes to the
Ministry, whose honor and maintenance I have ever sensed to be very much of
the interest of Religion; for as Heraclitus once said, Were it not for the Sun,
it would be night for all the Stars: so, were there not such greater lights,
whose Office and Ministry is to enlighten the world, the frye of twinkling
Stars could not prevent or supersede a general Darkness, especially being
Stellae prosilientes, Falling stars, which have no Celestial origin, nor are
fixed in the proper sphere, but carried upward by their innate levity, and
kindled by an irregular zeal.

Among such as were occasionally convented for Non-payment, there were some
that pleaded in their excuse, that they would willingly pay their Tithes, if
their Pastors would administer the Lord's Supper, which some of them did
altogether intermit; others did only exhibit it to a Church which they had new
gathered; and therefore they prayed they might not be compelled to pay their
Tithes to those which had interpretatively renounced and disclaimed to be their
Pastors, by having appropriated another flock: This being no irrational answer,
nor easy to be gainsaid (for as Crassus said to Lucius Philippus, If thou will not own me for a Senator, neither will I acknowledge thee to be a Consul;
and as the Canons say, there is Matrimonium inter Episcopum and Ecclesiam; so
in Divorces, when for espousing a new Love, the former Wife was repudiated,
there was still, Tibique res tuas habeto) I knew no expedient apter to evade
it, then by a gentle suppling and inflecting them to pay their Tithes, upon
promise that I would engage the forces I had, to persuade their several
Ministers to revive and reduce the Sacrament in their proper Churches, and to
admit them thereunto, if there were no just and manifest obstacle.

In compliance with this promise, and because the cure (as with the Leper under
the Law) begins with the Ear, I privately entered into an amicable altercation
upon this Subject with some of these Ministers; For even the Lights of the
Sanctuary may need Snuffers, though such ought to be of pure gold; and however
the School tells us, that an Angel of an inferior Order does not illuminate
another of a superior; yet in the Elementary world, Naturalists say that the
Jackal is conducter to the Lion, and the little Musculus goes before the Whale
as a guide, and to direct him from shelves and flats; yet nevertheless I was
not herein without the modest sense of Tertullian, Non tantus sum ut ego vos
alloquar; verumtamen gladiatores perfectissimos, non tantum magistri and
praepositi, sed etiam idiotae and supervacui quique adhortantur de longinquo.

As they have taught us to distinguish of Conversion wrought at the Sacrament,
but not by it; so some one or other perhaps occasionally, if not causally, was
at such colloquies and transactions, if not by them, induced to return to his
Duty, and redintegrate the Communion in his Church: Others I found according to
that character of St. Hierom, Facilius vinci posse quam persuaderi; but having
sundry times by some interveniencies and avocations, been frustrated of the
opportunity of a full carrying through, of the conference which I had entered
upon with one among the rest, who seemed to me to have solicited with, and
engaged others by his influence and inspirations, and who had new gathered a
Church, (if not in that notion, yet much of that nature) I thereupon concluded
to give him my sense, and the reasons thereof in writing; which accordingly I
lapt up in one sheet, and transmitted to him by a private, and no vulgar hand:
And because I had no thought it should be seen abroad, I was not careful to
give it any handsomer dress, but only put it in an homely attire; and having
as little ambition as skill to paint to eternity with Zeuxis, I took no long
time to draw this picture of my mind, which was only two days in forming; so
that I might plead with Hierom, Qui non ignoscit ingenio, ignoscat tempori;
indeed I rather touched then handled things, and like Ladas I passed very
lightly over the sands, intending to leave no impression or footsteps of any
traverses betwixt us; but nevertheless, as contrariant to my complacencies, as
cross to my expectation, what I intended to speak in the ear, was preached on
the house tops; for no sooner was this private Rescript received, but the
Church (as according to the idiom of the Donatists they speak) was congregated,
and at their tribunal was my bashful sheet brought forth (which I rather wished
had been sentenced to perpetual imprisonment) to be publicly arraigned.

To justify or excuse the publishing hereof, it has been pleaded, that it was
not wedded to him under any caution not to communicate or impart it; and that
2. it was expedient to publish it to the Church, because they were concerned in
it, and they heard but their own Cause pleaded.

But for answer to the first; I should have thought, that though I had been
silent, yet Morality would have dictated, that without my consent first had,
nothing of mine should have been made common to any, besides those to whom I
allowed it, and the publishing needed my express assent to warrant it, not my
direct prohibition to restrain it. To the 2. Though the Church were concerned
in the subject and matter controverted, yet that can no more evince an
expedience to communicate to them the traverses betwixt us, then because every
one of the Nation is interessed in the conduct of State Affairs, that therefore
it is necessary or fit that the people should be acquainted with the counsels
and agitations thereof: I had no altercation with them; my address was not to
the Orbs, but the Intelligence that set them on their motions, and with
Diogenes I struck at the Master, for what I thought more culpable in him then
in the Scholars. I never was of Lucilius his mind, who professed he wrote
only to the unlearned Tarentines, I should rather invert the speech, and say,
Perseum curo legere, Laelium Decimum nolo; let him that I strike at be such an
one as may totum telum recipere; and let the learneder smite me, whose reproof
shall be an excellent oil (so it be cold oil, for oil set a fire is most raging
and mischievous) that shall not break, but heal the wounds I may chance to have
in my head. I am somewhat of Aristippus his mind, the bite of a Weazel would
trouble me more then the tooth of a Lion. Si cadendum est, Aeneae magni dextra
cadam, and sim jugulatus Achille: But the course they took could only have
been rib'd and inlaid with some reason to support and strengthen it, if I had
scattered my papers among his Church, and sought to toll away his Proselites,
and if they had been hereby shaken, or made volatile, and could not have been
otherwise fixed, but by persuading them how in that argument he had foiled me
(which general notion, and that taken up by an implicit faith, was, I doubt,
all the impression which the generality of them could get by the reading of our
dissertations; for though those matriculated into his Church, may perchance be
all sufficiently principled in repentance toward God, and faith in Christ
Jesus, which my charity prompts me to hope (whatever others report) yet I doubt
(however they may blandish them) that their understandings are too narrow and
disproportionable to make judgment of controversies, especially agitated
scholastically.) Sic mihi magnopere faber est invisus, in altum
Qui struit, adnitens superare jugum Oromedontis.
But hereupon it was bruited abroad that I should forthwith receive an answer;
and though methinks so many hands should have made more light work in respect
of time, and not so light in regard of weight, yet I can instance the person,
one of their Church (and I know they will resent with indignation any suspicion
that one of that extraction and refinement should retain any Dregs or impurity
of an untruth) which did say, and the person to whom, and the circumstances of
time and place when and where he said it, that four Ministers had laid their
heads together to frame a speedy answer to my Epistle; in which relation
therefore that which they call an Apology of some Ministers and godly persons,
may be so named as well in respect of the efficient as the subject.

But whether sat been, I shall not say, but I am sure not sat cito; and though
they would have it to be as the Jews Messiah, born long since, but showing it
self long after; yet I know their Answer (like Lapis Lazuli among Physicians)
had many several Washings before they could agree to give it, and about a year
after the Answer was said to be inchoated, the Church met to peruse and set
their Seal to it, which after several concoctions and filtrations was then
thought fit to be sent in progress to several Towns among their Symmists,
whither like a Snowbal to gather somewhat by rolling, and to raise a posse
comitatus against this rebel to their Discipline, I will not assert upon
conjectures or reports, but shall be facil to believe that if this Temple of
their Diana had been so many years in building by all Asia, it must rather have
been one of the wonders of the world.

For the censures which they insinuate to have attended or prevented the coming
forth thereof, as I am not justly obliged to be responsible for what I was not
guilty of, who (as Memnon General to Darius said his Soldier was) am pressed to
fight, not to rail, so I cannot discreetly undertake to excuse what I am
ignorant of; but if they mistook not the tinckling of their own ears for
outward sounds, perhaps some of their own Cougregation that think themselves
losers of a just liberty of communion, might seek their recompense by a freedom
in communicating their grieved minds, and in civitate non libera (as they made
it) would yet have linguas liberas; and then I shall only remind them a story
of Philip of Macedon; when one told him that Nicanor who was in Court, and
neglected by him, spoke reproachfully of him, he sent him a large Donative, and
supplied his indigence; and thereupon Nicanor began to talk very honorably of
the King; which made Philip to say, Videtis in nobis esse situm, ut been vel
male audiamus: but whatsoever those censures were, or by whomsoever aspersed,
as winds blustering about the earth are caused by vapors breaking out of the
cranies thereof, so were these rumors occasioned by themselves that were pleni
rimarum; and it fared then with them as it uses to do with such as buy winds
of Witches, who by opening the knots of the ropes given them, raise so great
gales, as make them wish them stilled again, which they have let loose, and
cannot hush: Had they done (as Augustine speaks of Zachary, Tacuit generatus
vocem) men might have held their peace, and the Apologists had peace; or as it
was said of Bonaventure; Had they been first the dumb Ox, the world needed not
to have wondered till they had lowed: That ever I writ any thing to be answered,
or that they undertook the answer, had never slown so far, nor sounded so loud
but in the winds which their own birth first raised; and that which was my
desire, might have been our common felicity, to have discharged all our volleys
with white powder, not only for the candor, but because (they say) it makes no
report; and to have resembled heavenly rather then earthly bodies, the one
moving without sound, the other with bustling; and so never to have come forth
upon the stage, but to have acted our parts behind the curtain, had not they
drawn it aside, to show what prizes they could play, and to make open sale of
the Bears skin as soon as they began to hunt; for what ever censorious omens
others had of them, themselves had endeavored to make the Country ring with
their celeusma's, and the Paeans of their triumph for this victory; and though
the dust followed their chariot, wherewith they seek to blind men's eyes, yet
the creaking of their wheels (and they are only dry things wanting fatness
which use to move with noise) were heard long before they were seen to come.

Yet all this while I was no more answered then one man may be by whispering in
another ear, nor did no more feel the stroke of their rod, then Nico did the
blows wherewith his image was beaten by those that made no haste to encounter
himself. I might justly have expected it, not only upon the score of Civility,
but Christian charity, that I should first have been privately admonished of my
faults, before the Church had been told thereof; for even a truth unseasonably
published, is a virtual slander; and though I will not profess with Aristotle,
Let them not only reproach, but beat me too, whiles I am absent, yet I shall
say with Plancus, when he was told that Asinius Pollio had written invectives
against him, not to be published until after his death, that there are none but
Ghosts and Goblins that fight with the dead; and in respect of obloquy, there
is the same reason of the dead, and those that are not present; but perhaps it
was their conceit, that the expectation of the blow, which they boasted to be
impendent, would anticipate the suffering thereof, knowing that pauculum
differt patiaris adversa, an expectes, nisi quod tantum est dolendi modus, non
timendi; dolens enim quantum scias accidisse, timeas quantum possit accidere;
and because that cito periisse est loco beneficii, therefore they would be
persuaded by Caligula, Sic feri, ut sentiat se mori.

Almost two years after I had inscribed and consigned to them my single sheet
(by which time perchance I might have forgotten that any such thing had passed
my hands, had I not been awakened to the remembrance thereof by their assiduous
alarms) I received in manuscript their answer; but in the interim, perceiving
this my small spark by their stirring was like to be no longer covered under
ashes, but to be laid open to public light, therefore least it might expire
and vanish through its own exility, and so weighty a question sustain some
prejudice by so short an answer (which Nebridius St. Augustines friend hated)
and so suddenly formed (which I need not profess, seeing, as Apelles, when his
boy showed him a painted table, and told him that it was done in haste,
answered, he might have spared to tell him so, for the work sufficiently showed
it) therefore as the Tuberous use to take their younglings into their bellys
again for their better fostering and defense, so I reassumed into the womb of
second cogitations this rude Minerva, this conception and abortive issue of my
brain, and new molded my Diatribe, yet retaining the same Scheme of the former
black lines, though dilating and filling them with fresher colors, yet kept it
close and secret, having still a desire with the old Romans, to sacrifice mutae
deae ad compescendas detrahentium linguas, until by the veiw of their Apology
transmitted to me, I had the provocation and the call to remande my Diatribe
(the same with little or no alteration which here precedes this defense) and
they had the virgin prospect thereof; for seeing how undecent it was in them,
to prostitute their answer to others eyes, before it was represented to mine, I
could not stumble at the same stone of offense, since as in good things the
example merits more praise then the imitation, so in evil the imitation
deserves more blame then the example; and together with that review were
conveyed some animadversarions on their Apology, as velites to begin the
Skirmish, till time could bring to the shocke the waightier armature.

To these animadversions their Prolocutor replied, and I rejoynd. But within
short time after a gentleman of quality and worth came to me (as he said) from
the Apologist, to tell me, he was very willing to cut off or wind up the
thread of controversy, which he heard I was preparing to draw out farther by
forming an answer to his Apology. But I might be superseded of such pains; for
he desired I would rest as silent as he had resolved to be, who would never
henceforth have to do with me in any altercation of this kind.

I (who had always applauded the wisdom of the Romans that set the image of
Angerona on the altar of Volupia, and have ever sensed most pleasure in
silence) received with much complacency this amicable offerture, and thereupon
laid aside and took a farewell of the thoughts of making answer, and that little
Schedule which I had scribled, I passed this sentence upon, tineas pascat
taciturnus inertes.

But it seems they thought that also, per injurias injuriis tutum est iter, and
they had learned that principle of Machiavell, that whom they stagger with one
wrong, they must utterly cast down with more; for although he that read over
the Oration which Lysias made for him, the oftener he perused, the worse he
relished it; yet it seems they better fancying their discourse, the longer they
contemplated it, and beholding themselves under I know not what multiplying
glasses, fell in love with their own image, and thought themselves so
considerable, and their way so exemplar, as to acquaint the world with so much
of both, or else being as they say excited thereunto by importunity of friends
(the common vouchee to warrant publications) whereof one has hung out his bush
at the door, to whom though perhaps some as wise men will say, as Apollonius
did to Tigellinus that asked him how he liked Nero's singing at the harp,
melius de Nerone sentio quam tu; cantare enim tu illum dignum putas, ego autem
tacere; yet I shall alone add, that the gentleman has in one respect salved
the honor of his judgment, by insinuating a doubt that his love to the person
may deceive him, though in another regard he has detracted from the credit
thereof; for amans quod cupiat scit, quod sapiat nescit; honestius est cum
judicaveris amare, quam cum amaveris judicare; yet however for my part, amet
tua carmina Maevi; but upon these or other impulsives, about two years after
this, and at the last Spring out comes in print their Answer to my first sheet
(which I had professed I would disclaim and not own) and that without taking
any notice of the reveiw thereof (which they had all those years in their
hands) and which alone (having slighted the former) I assumed to defend, as a
piece which I thought better fortified, even as if they had borrowed some of
the subtilty of the Serpent who assaults the heel when he cannot reach the
head; or, had been prompted by Balak to see but the utmost part of them, and
not to see them all, and hoped to have power to curse them from thence.

Though I had this Apology in manuscript long before it came abroad in print,
yet I could not be sure what alterations it might undergo by new sublimings, or
what increase of strength it might make acquist of by a posse regni, as well as
(they say) it did by a posse comitatus.

I confess I had not enough of that wisdom which I might have learned from
the motto of Venice to prepare for war in the time of peace; and the rather,
because I had little of that which Epictetus calls the sinews of Wisdom viz.
Distrust; but had I not been cajoled by the former message, perhaps my Jacob
might have come forth into the world holding their Esau by the heel, though I
think the birthright will not be worth them a mess of pottage, But I shall
soberly profess it, as a precise and measured truth, that my Antilogy has
taken up as many hours in the transcribing (so illegible it has proved by the
hasty and evil hand that drew the original) as it was in the composing.

What Hannibal told Scipio had been happier for Rome and Carthage, had been
also better for us, viz. to have kept our selves within our bounds and limits,
rather then to have come abroad in such a warfare, and to have confined and
enclosed our ignorance within our own precincts, and not to have laid it open
to general notice; the first happiness is to be furnished with knowledge, and
the second not to blab our ignorance; and Quintilian says, that Caesar and
Brutus fecerunt carmina non melius quam Cicero, at faelicius; quia illos
fecisse, pauciores sciunt; and if we had not perhaps been favored with the
like repute for writing which Galba acquired for governing, (capax imperii,
nisi imperasset) yet surely we had both been held wiser men if we had held our
peace; who though we may fiddle, yet neither of us can make a great city.

The Apologists shadow is not like to be the longer for this victory. I doubt
(contrary to what Socrates said) it will not be easy to commend the Athenians
among the Athenians themselves for very excellent Writers; and as it was said
of Poets, so must it be of Writers in printe; mediocribus esse poetis, Non d^i
non homines non concessere columnae; and as Geometricians demonstrate, that an
angle of sphaericall lines can never be equal to one made of right lines, but
will be still greater or lesser, so there is no mediocrity for Writers; he that
is not very good, is stark naught; and therefore whereas they have said they
were willing to have put their tract under a bushel, though it had been proper
enough to have put it into a dark lantern, to have guided themselves, and
conveyed the light thereof to me only; yet perchance in respect of others,
since nec defensoribus istis Tempus eget, when the heat of those Epidemicall
controversies has produced more Writers (to use Plautus his comparison) then
an hot summer brings forth buzzing flies; and as it was said of a city in
Greece, the Physicians were more then the sick, so Writers are almost equal
in number to Readers; therefore if they had set it under a bushel, since it
does not much olere lucernam, there had been no great loss of luster to
themselves, nor miss of light to the world; and whither a bushel had not been a
proper place for it, since modius est mensura aridorum, let the learned judge.

For my self, who Mecum habito and novi quam sit mihi curta supellex, as I
only designed my first undertakings as a sacrifice to truth, not ostentation,
so I passionately wished to have offered it in private, as the old heathen were
wont to make all their Sacrifices, tecto and velato capite (except those to
Saturn and Hercules) and I protest I look as strangely and with as much wonder
on my self in print as any of those in Ovid's Metamorphosis on their new
transformed shapes, or as those did that awaked in Aladeules his paradise; but
indeed we are lapsed into an age which without any great skill in Philosophy
has attained to that which was said to be the end thereof, to admire nothing,
not by discovery of the true causes, but by observing the multiplicity of
strange effects.

Whither I make vision by intramission or extramission, and look either at home
or abroad, I can see little or no encouragment to have publicly engaged in
this controversy being first beyond my ability, who because mancipium
negotiorum, am also mancipium paucaelectionis, especially in those chronicall
controversies, and which like Cadmus his fighters have risen out of our earth,
non hic sulcos ducimus, nec hoc pulvere desudamus; as Galba was said to be
magis extra vitia, quam cum v^rtutibus, so I can scarce pretend to be extra
ignorantiam, not at all cum scientia. I have not those choice opportunities of
resort to living libraryes (as Eunapius called very learned men) nor to dead
counselors (as Alphonsus named books) and as one said of the Duke of Savoy,
that he had money enough to make a feast, not to make a war; so I have books
enough to feed the mind with matter of contemplation, not to engage in
controversies, if I had secessum scribentis and otia, and the station I hold,
and condition I live in, were free of those continual distractive avocations,
which necessarily rout the meditations, when set sometimes in array, (as in me
will be obvious to any, by that uneveness of my style (whereof my self am
conscious) which like the moon has not only spots, but according to Galilee,
unequal parts, hills and valleys, and which flies in an indented line, higher or
lower according as my wings were dry or dipped in the current of those
encumbrances) yet nature has not indulged me with understanding so acute as to
pierce farther then the bark of things, nor with a flame accommodate to sublime
and distill much of the substance or spirits thereof; and therefore though
sometimes proni studii certius indicium est, supra vires niti, quam viribus ex
facili uti; alter enim quod potest praestat, alter etiam plus quam potest; yet
because I could only ad pauca respicere, I was not willing de facili
pronunciare, and had rather not to have committed a fault then to ask pardon
for it, and to have held my peace with Cato, until I could have spoken things
better then silence; but they have made a coward fight, and therefore beshrew
the Spartans who (as Antalcidas upbraided Agesilaus) will make the Theban,
crasso jurares aere natum, a fighter whither he will or no.

2. Contrary to my affection and judgment, who am one of those plants that
most love and best thrive in the shadow, nec caret umbra Deo, and like Coral am
more verdant under water, but am red with blushing when I come up above it; who
as I cannot undergo the judicious trial of the learned, so I am not willing to
hazard the passionate censures of the Ignorant, and as I am Asinus ad Lyram, so
those Controversies make me no Music, who had rather sit down by the still
waters (most subservient to the complacencies of Contemplation) then to be
plunging in those of strife; and had rather shed my tears on the fire of
contention, then be stirring in the coals.

I do often recognize that of Bodin, Veritas in controversiis fidei potius
precibus apud Deum, quam argumentis quaerenda and investiganda est; and I have
observed that beside the original maladies of Error, and the symptomatical
diseases of Pride, Animosity, Faction and obstinacy, when iram atque animos a
crimine sumunt, not only those in whom there is any thing of the serpent, are
not to be charmed when (as Augustine tells us) one ear is laid to the earth,
their interest, and the other covered with the tail, viz. that wherein is their
sting or power, but that even according to the doctrine of Astrologers, those
impressions which are six in men at their first appearing into the world from
the influences of those superior lights that are then culminant and ascendent
in the houses, become complexional and turn into that nature which expellas
furca licet usque recurret; so that upon those accounts very few are healed by
going into the troubled waters, though moved by the best Angels of the Church,
but too many are like Aristophanes auditors, nunquam persuaseris etiamsi
persuaseris; and like the little Indian fish, of which Columbus relates, that
what he once seiseth upon, he holds fast while life holds.

Durus ut ilex tonsa bipennibus,
Per damna, per caedes ab ipso
Ducit opes animumque ferro.
3. With the sense of many disadvantages and praejudices; Olor sine Favonio
silet; but whosoever shall sing to my tune, shall not keep time; and therefore
as Tacitus said of the age of Domitian, Inertia pro sapientia erat, so since
the hope to turn the stream is overballanced by the fear to be overturned by
it, this may seem a time for the prudent to keep silence: when Numa's tenth
Muse Tacita shall find more quiet then all the other nine with all their
singing. Beside, this is an age when scribendi cacoethes and censura ultra
crepidam, are both in their state and vigor, as Physicians speak: Baronius and
Genebrand call the tenth Century an unhappy age, because it had no Writers; our
age contrariwise has the infaelicity to have too many, who blot their own
names more then their papers, and only seem to do penance in a white sheet,
for their ignorance, vanity and presumption. Rhetoric has almost put an
Ostracisme upon Logic, yet it were to be wished that very many books were but
at such an ascendent as Rhetoric, and were speciously painted though not
strongly built, which, the truth is, have not so much fucus as the Venetian
Curtezans deceive with, which are said to be fat with clouts, white with chalk,
red with painting, and high with shoes. But he that with Marsias has found
any pipe of popular eloquence, which Minerva has laid aside, such a one dares
to contend even with Apollo himself, and if he be able to tell a sensible tale
in a handsome style, thinks himself accomplished to make a good defense of any
thing, and a sufficient reply to any man, as if it were a full answer not to
hold his peace, Facile est cuiquam videris respondere qui tacere noluerit, Aug.
whereas really they are only like birds of Paradise, that have feathers to
fly into light ayry discourses, but no feet to stand upon any good or solid
grounds; and their discourses are but as the Nightingale, vox, praeterea nihil,
and only verborum flumen, mentis gutta, and then only come to contain good
matter when they fall inter thuris piperisve cucullos, and then indeed they are
spiced with some sweetness. And when books are written by such as are Aquilae
in nubibus, non graculi in sepibus, yet it is the fate of learned men, what
Carneades said was the misery of Athens, that what wise men debated, fools did
judge of; so he that quits and takes leave of his private muses and recesses,
to come in public, shall be sure to be like the Owl, which though Minerva's
bird, yet when he comes abroad out of his shade, draws all the small birds to
flock about and peck at him; and whise men presume to understand above what is
meet for them to understand (for Creed mihi nimium Martia turba sapit) every
Cobbler dares correct the quaintest table that was ever drawn by the pensill of
Apelles; and St. Basil might now meet with more cooks, who presume to dress
and season spiritual food, when it becomes them only to look to the
pottage-pot. Lastly it cannot but facilitate a desire of conditions of peace,
when I am not able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against me with
twenty thousand. Men are linked and sodered in a concatenation, and as it were
a league offensive and defensive in Controversy; and as viols set to the same
tune, when the string in one is touched, the like is moved in the other; so in
this case, touch one and move all: and as they pretend that several needles
set severally to turn upon their tables, and touched with the same loadstone,
when one is set to any letter or point, the other by sympathy turns to the
like; so others of like principles drawn by the same attractive, will think
themselves interessed in the united defense of them, and set themselves upon
the same point, and common letters; and so I shall be like not only to
encounter men of more learning, Impar congressus Achilli, and shall be
endangered to complain with Caesar, Extorqueri sibi causam L. Cottae
patrocinio, but also to combat with more men of learning, Non Hercules, and
tamen contra plures, whose single stock cannot hold out against a common purse.

4. With no affection to my subject, and therefore it is like to be worse
ventilated; for the Italians (in their proverb censuring the different
elegances of pictures, as being done either con diligenza, con studio, con
amore) intend that piece was most exactly drawn which the painter formed with a
love to the work. It Is true what the Orator said, Crescit cum amplitudine rerum
vis ingenii, neque quisquam claram and illustrem orationem efficere possit,
nisi qui causam parem invenit; and what was spoken of poverty of fortune, is
applicable to that of the subject, Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus
obstat Res angusta domi; but I disaffect not my subject upon that account, as
if it were among such as Verbis ea vincere magnum Quam sit, and exiguis his
addere rebus honorem, yet if I were susceptible of works of this nature, I had
rather be employed about the stuff of the spouses garments then about the
borders and fringes; and rather operate upon the pillars then the rayles of the
tabernacle; and were I nare sagaci, I should think it a nobler chase to hunt
the wild bore of the forest, then any gentler beast that may do hurt in the
vineyard. I envy that glory to Hortensius that never engaged in a civil war;
And it is the matter as much of my sorrow as my wonder, Quis furor hic o Phoebe
doce, quo tela manusque
Romanae miscent acies, bellumque sine host est?
Cumque superba foret Babylon spolianda trophaeis,
Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos?
And allthough truth be a dearer friend then Plato, and however Faveo Curioni,
Caesari honestissime cupio, pro Pompeio emori possum, sed tamen ipsa republica
nihil charius; yet I confess I do not without some displacency check with that
resolution of Tully, subeam cum iis qui videntur esse boni, quam ut videar a
bonis dissentire; though good Josias may go forth to fight without harkening to
the Words from the mouth of God, yet it is commonly presumed that good men
carry the Arc into the field with them, and like some Ethnic Cities which in
a siege tie up their walls to the images of their supposed Gods, Secumque Deos
in praelia ducunt. And that which inclined me to have trust up my sails and
kept my anchors unwaighed, was least by the wind of some men's breath, Neque
enim ignari sumus ante malorum, I should be carried on the hard and sharp rocks
of censure, or the quick sands of volatile and temerarious judgment, as one
that goes out to fight against holiness and reformation, under whose badge and
cognizance their Church Way is lanched forth for its pasport; And therefore as
Caesar said his wife should be, I was desirous to stand free, not only of
crime, but suspicion, to obstruct any way that looks to those ends. For this
very stamp makes a piece regardable even before the metal be tried, and the
very face of holiness and reformation (though borrowed and laid on by painting)
is at first blush, like that of Parthenopaeus (one of the engagers with
Adrastus in the Theban war) so beautiful, that it is a charm to restrain any
from offering to hurt it.

I have the thousand witnesses to attestate for me how I should tremble to
break one of the least commandments, and teach men so, and to kill all those
whom I impede the cure of; and as I sinned in my forefathers before I was
borne, so by leaving them any scandal to sin in posterity after I am dead; Nay
if I should ravel but one thread in the seamless coat, or asperse one spot in
the clothing of pure gold, I should sadly think what Luberius once said,
Nimirum hac die una plus vixi, quam mihi vivendum fuit; and therefore having
this Murus aheneus, I shall fetch some encouragement from that of Ambrose, Qui
been sibi conscius falsis non debet moveri, nec aestimare plus ponderis esse in
alieno convitio quam in suo testimonio; and I shall find no less comfort in
that of Seneca, Nemo pluris aestimat virtutem, quam qui boni viri famam
perdidit ne conscientiam perderet.

But I wish it were news that some that expressly execrate the heresy of
Florinus, did not, though unwittingly yet virtually and interpretatively dash
upon it, and blending Manes his two principles together, derive the Origin of
evil streams from the pure fountain of all good; As they say, friar Bacon
could cause his own writing to seem inscribed in the Moon, and de Loier tells
us, that the image of St. Francis at Lions set on a Tower, by reflection of the
clouds seemed to be in the heavens; so some men are deceived with a conceit to
read that as a writing from heaven, which was formed on earth; and that to be
the image of divine truth, which is but the reflection of some men's fancyes.

Birds of every feather will be making nests to lay their young at Gods altar,
and malefactors for protection take hold of the horns thereof; but as God would
have them taken thence, so none will permit that every opinion or practice
should pass unquestioned that takes Sanctuary under the notion of holiness and
reformation.

And if to be an opposite to this way, be to be among the Antipodes to holiness
and reformation, I shall yet die with Phocion and the ancient Church and old
Fathers, and the forain Protestant Churches (which it seems now we may not name
Reformed) and modern great Divines, will be set in the same Climate, whereof I
shall hold forth so true and plain a map formed out of their own lines, and
drawn up by their own charts, that all save squint-eyes shall directly see the
World of those that consent with me.

I shall not build according to the German model to afford a prospect of the
furniture of the house at the door, yet adjourning farther considerations and
fuller discoveries to the inner rooms, I shall here in the frontespice only
glimpse forth, that though as the Historian speaks of Crescens, Nero's
freedman, In malis temporibus partem reipub. se fecerat, so some men have set
up their own models as the only measure of righteousness, and their form of
Discipline like Polycletus his statue, as the canon to all others, and have
farther made this Scrutiny at the Sacrament, the poles whereon all holiness and
reformation must hang and move, and the materia prima^ or basis of all other
elements; and as if it were the Palladium which only could preserve the City,
so as all their discourses of the beauty of holiness and reformation conclude
in the necessity of this discrimination, as all Cato's counsels in the Senate
ended with this close, This I think, and that C. thage is to be destroyed; yet
I shall offer it to men of temper and judgment to be considered, whither as
that which the silk worm designs for an house becomes his tomb, so this so
common and so general a suspension of men from the Sacrament (whereby they are
dealt with as the Balearides used their children, who afforded them no bread
until by their tried and approved dexterity in shooting they could hitte it
down from an high place, though they were ready to be starved in the interim;
whereas yet they are as good markmen which are fed that they may have
strength to shoot) has not most of all obstructed the designed reformation,
and the settlement of that Discipline, which might have advanced it, had the
principles thereof been closely stuck too; but being perverted and blended
with other heterogeneals has set us at a greater loss, and left us at a fault.

First by irritating and imbittering men's spirits, instead of sweetning and so
endearing them, as that the virtue of the agent might have been more effectual
upon the patient well disposed.

Secondly by injecting suspicions in some, and raising misprisions in others,
of the tendency and issue of those undertakings; who cannot be persuaded as Leo
the Philosopher told Philip marching with an army to subdue Byzantium, and
saying that he went to make love to the City, that he that meant to become an
affectionate wooer, would come with clashings of armor, and not rather with
sweeter Music; it is far from endulcing or obliging men to find, that
whereas no iron tool was used about the altar, nor iron was employed in
Solomon's temple for matter or instrument, the very nails being of brass, as
the doors were of olive, the Emblem of Peace; and the very heathen (as Tully
tell us) forbiding all brass and iron in their temples, Vt duelli instrumenta,
non fani, yet nevertheless they have now so much hard iron in their Church
frames as it were to cut us up or cut us off, making such dissections and
excisions, not of the Sacrifices, but the Sacrificers, and making Divination by
inspection into the intrailes, and researching what they are within; so that
though the Persian Magi by observing their king at his Coronation to lay his
hands first upon bread and knife, did augurate that his reign would prove
plentiful, but cruel; yet men observing that at their first inauguration they
catch such fast hold of the power of the Sacrament, and cut off the generality
of their people from partaking thereof, do rather shrewdly Divine that their
government will be scarce of Sacramental Bread, yet rigid in the
administration; but wise and moderate men know it is with most people as with
swarms of Bees in their rise, which must not be angered, least they take their
wings and leave their stings with us, but be charmed with pleasing sounds, and
have their hives dressed with sweet herbs that they may stick; and when they
are once settled, you may order and dispose of them better, and as you think
expedient; and more easily then discern the drones and cut them off, and the
Bees will work with you and afford you honey.

Let them open their eyes and wipe them and look about, since they have set
themselves to heal the distempered body in this way and method of cure,
whither the dyscracies be not multiplied and heightened rather then remedied and
lessened; Et dum sanare vitia voluerunt, auxerunt, as Lactantius in another
case; we conjecture by the ingredients of the Medicine, what effects it would
work; but when we see how the Physic has wrought, we can more certainly
determine of the nature thereof. And since their applications, how many humors
which in mixtion and mutual contemperation were neither discerned, nor were
molestous, yet being secerned and gathering head, and putrefying and turning to
a dangerous nature, have set the whole body out of frame, disturbed and
inflamed it, and have broken out into ulcers? spewing out their heterodox
venom; and whatever disease might be at first pretended of configuration,
number, or site, they have now at last occasioned a solution of continuity, the
most mischeivous and destructive malady of all others, that sure their
reformation in this kind is but as Luther said of the Cardinals, they were like
Foxes sweeping the house with their tails, raising more dust then they cleansed.

It is evidently true what Mirandula asserted (though he were at first taxed of
heresy for it) That no man has so much power over his own understanding, as to
make himself believe what he will, (the understanding depending upon the will,
Quoad exercitium sed non quoad specificationem.) And therefore though some
would willingly believe the contrary; yet they are convinced to opine, that
however this way carry a facing of reformation, yet it has an underlining of a
design, and is but a confoederacy to bring a most perverse interpretation upon
that of the Gospel, He that will be great among you, let him be your minister;
and by translating Diocesan Bishops into Parochial, only to cut up the old
Moons to make new Stars; And what such men think, they sense an obligation
and impulse plainly to speak, not only because wounds that bleed inwardly are
most perilous, and Miserum est ab iis laedi de quibus non possis queri; but
because the Basilisk being first seen, it may be forstalled of killing, and
they may be more cautious what they act, that find themselves to be no longer
in the dark.

That Commune odium Dei atque hominum, Panstrat. tom. 4. lib. 3. cap. 1. sect.
3. Advers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 229.230.
as Chamier denominates the old Anabaptists, first crumbled the Church into
sand, and then blew the dust into our eyes. Post doctrinam de coena scrupulose
quaerunt Anabaptistae, says Bullinger, quorum causa coena dominica instituta,
etc. the Anabaptists scrupulously inquire after the Doctrine of the Supper, for
whose sake the Lords Supper was instituted, and to whom to be given; and they
talk much of separation, to wit, that sinners are to be driven from the Supper
of the Lord; and by this means, whereas the Lords Supper is amiable and full
of joy, they make it horrible and sad, and so straighten the admission
thereunto, that even Godly men abhor to approach it, and rather fly from it
then come near thereunto; and how therefore should faithful Ministers so easily
(as the Anabaptists would have it) exclude from the Lords Supper, men that are
sinners, yet desiring the grace of God, and which give witness thereof, by
their coming to the Supper? thus he. It was verily one patch of the sheeps
clothing wherein these Wolves walked, and the perfumed bait wherewith they
covered their deadly hook, to decry mixed Communions, whereby the pure were
polluted, and the prostituting of holy Ordinances, and falsely applying sacred
seals. Those seeds were indeed first sown by Novatus Lucifer and Audius, but
prospered little, and took no deep root, until fomented and cultivated by
Donatus; and then they sprung up, and grew to a tree of great hight and
spreading branches, which (like some trees in India) was venomous to all that
came under its shade and droppings. St. Augustine assisted by some other Church
Heroes, by many strong blows of his sharp and acute wit feld down this tree;
the stump of the roots thereof, were nevertheless left in the earth, and Quod
aruit in se, refloruit in ipsis Anabaptistis, who new manured and watered it,
and brought it to repullulate, and rise up to some hight. And then sure it must
needs be good that Nero persecutes; and therefore, Timeo Danaos and dona
ferentes. The Brownists and Independents were lesser spriggs growing from this
root, and were but as several filtrations and refinements of that Schism which
the Anabaptists had too grossly distilled and extracted from Donatus; for this
flame that has made such combustions in the Church, has like fire risen in
the form of a Pyramid, more full and gross below, and the higher and farther
it goes, it is purer, less, and nearer to a point; yet though those later
inherit not all Donatus Conclusions, yet they hold in Fee (in fide) his
principles by descent, and all heirs are not ex ass, for some were only per
uncias and yet inheritors: And sure he that reads Augustine against the
Donatists, and attending the substance, reflects not on all circumstances, will
think it a dispute against our modern Separatists, and that Parmenian, Petilian
and Cresconius were some that had gathered new Churches.

But Etiam tu Brute fili? Even of those that went out to fight against them,
many like those sent forth to make discovery of Jehu, have in somewhat turned
behind them, as if Independency had the same common or analogous fate with
Ireland; whosoever came to plant, sooner by conversation imbibed and became
assimilate to the Dispositions and Custom of the Irish, then was capable to
reclaim and rectify them; and as Hierom said, Gentilem agunt vitam sub nomine
Christiani; so many are Presbyterians in name, and Independents in their
notions; and wearing the Livery of the one, go about the work of the other,
Virtutem qui verba putant; and it may be said of such as Chemnicius spoke of
the Monks, concerning Pelagianisme, they defye the Heretic and foster the
Heresy; some I suppose out of a medious compliance, hoping by going on part of
the way to draw them another, so to meet and close in the middle, as if it
were absolutely true which the Paracelsians assert against the Galenists, that
similia similibus curantur; and they could take such, as they catch Dotterels,
by imitation of postures; some I believe in the heat of zeal (without a clear
light) so to set their foot in a clearer path, and keep it unpolluted by evil
company in their way, and like the Garrison of Sfetigrade, when a Dog was dead
in the well, they would not drink the same water, though the Town were lost by
it to the Turks; Others I doubt take this way, because they trace many
footsteps there, moving according to the influence of example more then reason,
and naturalizing for innocence the imitation of another fault; and supposing
an Error, when it is made public, to be adopted by truth; others I fear lift
up their foot this way, that they may better set it on their peoples necks; for
however the Prophets reject those talents and change of garments, yet perchance
there will be some that run after them.

This has been the Spring that has made the waters naught and the land
barren, and which needed such salt to be cast into it, Sal mordacis veritatis,
(as Hierom speaks) I am conscious that this is a tender point, and perhaps as
intangible as Erasmus said some others were, which Luther meddled withal; but
as Mauritius said of Phocas, if he be a coward, he is a Murderer; so, should I
withhold the truth for fear, I kill those whom I might have profited. Amyclas
silentium perdidit. This is a Sacrifice to truth; and honey was not to be used
in any Sacrifice; yet like the Dove, Si mordeo osculando mordeo; for I have
endeavored with the Spartans, before the battle to Sacrifice to Love; and with
Hercules, to hang my sword in a bough of myrtle, which was Consecrated to Love,
but Non amo nisi offendero; I love their persons, all whose opinions and
practices I am not in love with; nor could I truly love them, did I not love
them in and for the truth; he that is summum bonum, is also primum verum; and
as God the chiefest good, is the formal object and reason of all love, so those
material objects must also be loved in relation to him, and as those to whom we
would communicate that Sovereign good and prime Truth, whereof they are
participable; and therefore, Nemo me potest uti amico and adulatore.

It was the Motto of that genius of France, Richelieu, Maneat moralis
benevolentia inter discordes sententia; and it was a greater Man's, (Augustine)
Rarissima dissensione condiri plurimas consensiones; I cannot call a spade
otherwise then a spade, yet have been sollicitous that we Macedonians might not
appear rude, nor seem to be among those bestias calami, Psalm. 78.30.
as Hierom Allegorically expounds that which we read the Company of Spear-men,
but is in Hebrew, Beasts of the Reeds; Si quod dixi ferventius, non illud
contumacia sed fiducia dicenda est. And if my style seem to be keen and
peircing, I shall say that they have sharpened it by hard grating, and even air
comprest by such grating turns to fire; the Schoolmaster when Carneades
demanded, Vt sibi vocis modus daretur, answered, Do tibi modi loco eum quocum
disputas; and therefore as Agesilaus surprised by the Athenian Ambassadors at
play with his children, asked them, if they had children or not? for if they
had, he feared not their Censure; if they had not, he desired them to suspend
it, till they had some; so I shall hope from those that have been so coursely
and undecently dealt with as I have been, to be freed from blame; and I desire
those that have not felt such dealing to supersede their correction, till they
have been sensible of the like; and am further confident, that to those that
like some animals have not their gall in their ear, I shall neither seem like
the Dolphins to have my teeth in my tongue, nor as the Polypus to bring up any
excrements at my mouth; for indeed though Tobit's eyes were opened with gall,
yet I like the way of Jonathans cure as more sweet, to open them with honey; but
yet we know, this makes some eyes to smart notwithstanding.

If my way of writing seem an attempt to go out of the common rode, and yet to
miss the way, and too long for the ordinary Gests, or Stages. For the first it
is true, I should perchance have rather concurred with the Poet, Coenae fercula
nostrae, Mallem convivis quam placuisse coquis; and yet I recognize too that
Polycletus statue formed according to his own judgment, was more approved then
that which was carved according to vulgar Opinions.

It was the advice of Augustine that in places infected with Heresy all men
should write that had any faculty, that all sorts of people among many books
might light upon some; and perchance it might be as convenient to have the
books written, in all kind of ways, that all sorts might meet with these which
suited them; and some there be, that when there is corn in the sack would be
glad to find silver also in the mouth; and though they chiefly wish the sword
should cut, yet are better pleased to see the hilt also well hatched, and the
edge to be set on by the grownd-stones of the Philistines; and I confess though
I have endeavored to head my arrows as well as I could, yet I know, they would
have flown the farther and peirced the deeper too if they could have been well
feathered; and though I have sought to serve up solid meat, yet I think it
would have better taken the pallat, and been received into the stomach, if it
had had pleasant sauce; and though my poverty forbid the banes, yet I like the
motion made by Euripides, to wed the Graces to the Muses; and if I could
therefore, I would with Demosthenes have written not only Picta sed sculpta;
and though Nobis non licet esse tam disertis, yet notwithstanding, In magnis
voluisse sat est; and the ingenuous acknowledgment of what I ought to have
done, may excite others that are able to do it (and so Fungar vice cotis,
acutum Reddere quae valeat ferrum, exors ipsa secandi,) that so books may be
redeemed from beggary, and the distillations of the pen become more sublimed,
which for the most part, carry too much of the dreggs, and thereby the blatant
herd may be discouraged and shamed to make such use of those which in their
hands are Goose-quills with a witness.

For the length of the Treatise, though the thread thereof be not spun out in
any aequality to theirs, who replied in twelve sheets to one of mine, and this
Discourse is returned in far less then a twelvefold proportion, yet it is
very true that I have been reminded by some judicious Friends, that so limber a
Discourse as theirs is, did merit no large or full grown Answer; but as when
certain Grecians entertained by Lucullus with a costly supper, said, they were
sorry he should be at such cost for them; he answered, Not so much for you
sakes as for mine own; so the pains I have taken, was not because their
Apology was worth so ample an Answer, but because the Controversy was worthy
of a full and diligent handling.

I confess also, I could never relish that Greek Proverb, that A great book
was a great evil, unless it were a great evil book. If my Observations have not
deceived me, the lesser books hold forth the greater vanity and emptiness, of
which alone Omne majus continet in se minus, and that of Salvian is too
frequently verified, Intelligimus id quod parum est nihil esse, if books were
thought fit to be greater in continuous quantity, they would be less in
discrete (and perhaps less indiscreete) while it would discourage many to
attempt to make such frivolous use of their feathers, who like the flying fish
cannot hold out any long flight, because their wings are soon dry.

I supposed I should find more cause to repent to have spoken too little of
what was needful, then to have held my peace in what was necessary; had I left
any hair untoucht, perchance they would have thought it had had a shadow; and
therefore as it was said in the Destruction of Maximinus and his Son, Ex
p^ssimo genere ne catulum relinquendum, so I was unwilling to leave any sprig
of this root, least it might sproute again, or to suffer one thread unbroken,
lest the frame might seem to hang by that, and be kept from falling.

If there shall be nothing superfluous which ought to have been pruned, if
there be any thing of complacency that may be in via pro vehiculo, and may so
abridge and render a long way the less sensible, if the subject be of great
weight and importance, as Non est longa oration de rebus maximis, according to
Euripides, so as Pliny said of Tullyes Orations, the longest are best; and
there will be less fear of fastidiousnes by writing too much, then of
prevarication by passing over things fit to be mentioned; or of negligence and
perfunctoriness, by not writing enough; Hac tu credideris longam ratione
Colossum.

My subject may put in to be of this kind of matter, but I (who am impar
subjecto, and infinitely far from what Heynsius says of Livy, a Writer
equal to the Majesty of that People of whose History he wrote,) cannot be so
fond or so far my own flatterer (Neque enim mihi cornea fibra est) as to
pretend that my handling thereof is in that kind of manner; but then they be my
other defects and imperfections, and not the length which are the alloy of the
work to embase the worth, and avile the price thereof.

And defects and imperfections doubtless it carries forth to many with it. Quid
tu? nullane habes vitia? imo alia, haud fortasse minora; for not only, Opere
in longo fas est obrepere somnum, but also, Non eadem expectes a summo
minimoque poeta; but whatsoever they shall be found to be, I shall humbly beg
they may be forgiven on the same condition whereupon Sylla gave a reward to an
evil Poet, that I write no more. And yet notwithstanding if the Apologists,
their Associates and Auxiliars (they having secured me under their hands, that
their purpose is to commend it to others more able, that I may have a
satisfactory Answer) shall think fit by any sober and rational reply, Vt Musis
sociae Charites sint, to assault this work, since I have now taken Sacramentum
militiae, or rather, militiam pro Sacramento; I shall endeavor to defend it as
long and make it good, as well as I can; and according to the oath taken at
Athens, Pugnabo pro sacris and solus and simul cum aliis; and I shall not be
sorry if my Master when he comes, shall find me so doing, who can be content
(pro hoc) stantem mori; yet nevertheless if they shall convince me of any
Errors, (who am infinitely far from Tully's Confidence, se nullum verbum quod
revocare vellet, emisisse) as I have so much of a man as to be very likely to
err, so I hope I have not so little of a Christian, as to be an Heretic, by
pertinacy; Et non est obstinatus qui paratus est corrigi, as Augustine; I shall
never be Insanus adversus antidotum, who am so much a Slave to reason, as to
say still, Draw me, I will run after thee; and since Nimis dedignatur
mortalitatem qui errasse erubescit, I shall subscribe to the reason of better
judgments (as Cornicis and columbae auspicia irrita fiunt, adveniente Aquila)
and being argued of any lapse, as the feathers of those fowls which were
sacrificed under the Law, were cast into the place of ashes; and among the old
Heathens, a tongue was sacrficed to Mercury, Ad expiandas perperam dictorum
labes, so I shall sentence my pen to ashes, (the Emblem of Repentance) and
devote my tongue to speak with more prudence hereafter; but if any reply be
taken from the cart (where they railed by Privilege) not the School, or be
seasoned Nigro sale Momi, non sale candenti Mercurii, as Hierom speaks, as I
know that Magnum contumeliae remedium negligentia, so I shall like that
Albanian Dog sent to great Alexander, when ignobler animals were set to bayt
him, vindicate my self only with contempt, and choose the more honorable and
most proportionable ways of revenge, Non esse visum dignum ex quo peteretur,
and by taking no notice, Eripere ei qui fecit contumeliae voluptatem; or if
secondly they shall cast their rejoinder into the same mould wherein they
formed their answer, and shall stuff and color it only with an ignorantia
Elenchi, by disputing for a power to remove notorious and scandalous sinners
from the Communion of the Sacraments, and so like the Lapwing set up their cry
at so great a distance from their nest, defending that which is not impugned,
and deserting the defense of that which is the matter of their practice, and
occasion of our contest; or shall only Intueri lunam laborantem, and take no
notice of her clearer light, and like flies seek for and stick only upon a
sore place, and falling upon the sick or some single parts of the army,
without charging through the main body, which is rather a freebooting then a
fight, and a pyracy not a just war, nor can ever assume a Victory; for since as
Philip of France said of his Son Lewis in England, As long as Dover Castle
stands out, he had not a foot in England; so as long as one Argument remains
unanswered, the cause is not carried; in all these cases also I shall only
make use of that which Tully calls the Eloquence of Atticus, Silence,
Respondere sciant me sibi dum taceo; or lastly, if any shall charg upon me with
another piece of Carolostadius, Nec res nec verba, or a stair higher, with a
parcel of Erasmus (according to Luthers Diverbe) Verba sine re: As Augustine
told Antony, that challenged him to the combat, if he were weary of living,
there were ways enough to death besides his Sword; so such infirm, saples and
enervous Treatises, will soon dye of themselves, and need not to have violent
hands laid upon them, Been tacuit, qui defensione non eget.

But since Divine Providence has permitted them to hale and thrust me forth to
appear in public, so perfectly repugnant to what my judgment dictated to be
expedient, and my affections sensed complacent, and the Lord knows also
contrary to those frequent Prayers which I put up to him to hinder and prevent
it, if he saw it good: it shall be neither pride nor presumption to hope that
it is possible that God, who is Ita artifex magnus in magnis ut non sit minor
in minimis, has some service to do for me, and some discoveries to make by me
(as weak eyes fixed attentively on the Stars discern more then better sights
observe with a transient aspect) and if by his blessing, I shall be capable to
fasten but one pin in the shaken frame of the Church, or my bucket to bring
up but one drop of truth from that well where it has been lately cast down and
covered, and my spark which their stirring has raked up, shall cast forth one
glimpse to make known the way of Peace; or if as Xenophons expedition though
with little effect excited great Alexander to a braver and more succesful
invasion of Persia; so this spark may kindle some greater and higher flame in
others, or my writings might be dusted with some filings of that precious Stone
called Glossopetra, which Pliny speaks of, which is like the tongue of a man,
not bred in the Earth, but fallen from Heaven in an Eclipse of the Moon, which
is said to still the wind; and so I could Motos componere fluctus, I should
think for this, if for nothing else, I had lived to some purpose, and should
dye with more comfort.

Augustine tells us, that double-forheaded Janus was the innocentest of all the
Gods, Tanto frontosior quant^ innocentior; and verily the Conscience I have of
the candor and cleareness of my own heart (weighing it with those grains
allowed to humane frailty) in all the Conduct of this Matter, who can say with
Augustine, Ego omnia quod bona fide dixerim, sine ullo studio contentionis,
sine aliqua dubitatione veritatis, sine aliquo praejudicio diligentioris
tractatus exposui) renders me somewhat the more confident, that those weak
Elucubrations shall find the more favorable receprion with men, and gracious
success from God, to whose blessing I humbly recommend them, and if his
presence go not with them, let him not carry them hence.

THe Author, though absent, yet was not wanting in his care to have the Press
better corrected; yet nevertheless, through incuriousnesse many Errata's have
escaped, to his no little perturbation: Besides, that lines are broken, where
they should be continued, (as Ex. gr. page 218. line 11.) and continued, when
they should have been broken, (as ibid. p. 12.) And that the mispointings
sometime vitiate the sense, (as E.G. p. 88. in the two last lines) and often
perplex it, especially by omitting or misplacing the Half-moons, which should
make the Parenthesis: Also, the Margin is taken into the Text, which begets an
incoherence; p. 74. l. 28, 29. And by leaving out (not) where it ought to be;
and putting it in, where it should not be, the sense is sometimes rendered
contrary. And p. 194. after And l. 6. to hands, l. 7. is somewhat inserted,
without the Authors privity, and which was not in his Copy. For the grosser
faults (especially in those sheets which he could see) here are directions to
amend them, which (though it be not easy to do, because the pages are
preposterously numbered also, the Revder is desired to correct, before he enter
upon the work, who else will be at greater loss of time to find out the sense:
smaller faults, and misplacing quotations higher or lower, are left to his own
discretion to rectify.

PAge 6. line 14. read breath. ib. 32. dele no. p. 7. l. 11. r. dole as. p. 12.
l. 24. r. sixth, p. 13. marg. r. videri. p. 17. l. 6. d. as. p. 18. l. 6. r. a
knife. p. 20. l. 30. r. where whosoever. p. 23. l. 32. r. vour. p 24 l. 25 r
longum. p. 26. l. 10. r. assure. 16.18. r. Augustus. p. 50. l. 30. r. Mayo. Ib.
47. their effect. p. 53. l. 7. r. that, p. 59. l. 35. r. nos sacit, p. 61. l.
16. r. consequent, ib. 22. d. and, p. 62. l. 7. r. scrutiny, ib. marg. r.
corrept, p. 67. l. 38. d. not, p. 71. l. 25 r. malleable, p. 73. l. 42. r.
suspected, p. 74. l. 69. r. Church; therefore, p. 76. l. 22. r. whether I
should. p. 79. l. 11. r. but not, p. 81. l. 5. r. vendicated, p. 82. l. 13. r.
assier, ib. marg. l. 28. Socrates History, p. 83. ult. r. or faith, p. 84 l.
28. r. nor is, ib. 38. r. I could, p. 85. l. 45. r. in the, p. 86. l. 20. r.
recte; p. 87. l. 36. r, bittle, p. 88. l. 27. r. they bear, p. 89. l. 6. r.
etsi, p. 91. m. r. page 467. p. 93. l. 22. r. Presbytery, p. 95. l 10. r.
Vibius, ib. 24. d. et, p. 99. l. 6. r. any, ib. m. l. 7. r. in 3. ib. l. 10. r.
3 part, p. 110. l. 10. (...) 8, p. 112. m. r. tract. 49. in Johan. p. 113. l.
11. r. Titleman, ib. m. r. Morton, ib. 40. r. what, p. 114. l. 22. r. wherein,
ib. m. r. concionatorium, ib. m. l. 24. d. verbi, p. 115. l. 30. r. inference,
ib. m. l. 3. vera esse, p. 118. l 5. r. material, p. 119. l. 27. r. ignominia,
p. 120. l. 38. r. little gemmyes, ib. 40. r, pleased, p. 124. l. 3. r. Pius,
ib. 27. r. theirs, p. 126. l. 33. r. his own age, p. 128. against l. 11. add 4.
d. 9. q. 4. p. 701. and q. 5. p. 703. p. 129. m. r. 39. ib. 16. d. not, ib. 43.
d. to, p. 131. l. 31. r. aperte, p. 132. l. 14. r. principle p, 135. l. 30. d.
self, p. 137. l. 11. r. no power, p. 139. l. 25. r. syllogizari, p. 147. l. 36.
Meier, p. 149. l. 30. r. wherein, p. 169. l. 11. d. where. p. 182. l. 9. r.
delinquents, ib. 11. r. left, ib. 28. r. receive, p. 183. l. 5. r. confession,
p. 184. l. 30. r. resultively, p. 186. l. 2. r. Clytus, p. 187. r. examination,
or that to be a part of repentance, p. 188. l. 27. r. puts, p. 169. (as
miscounted) l. 11. d. where, p. 170. l. 9. r. iute, p. 171. l. 19. d. of p.
173. m. r. Aquin. 3. q. 80. p. 177. l. 13. r. Liturgy, p. 178. l. 5. r. either
in the causes, ib. 26. r. or in the, p. 179. l. 14. r. extra oleas, p. 183. l.
21. r. consecration, p. 184. l. 23. r. was afterward usual, p. 186. l. 16. r.
their way, p. 189 l. 18. r. it is, p. 190. l. 31. Corviaus, p. 192. m. against
l. 12. add Epis^. 108. tom. 2. p. 98 ib. against l. 18. l. 2. obs. 4. p. 241.
p. 194. l. 6. r. communion and the dispersers, etc. p. 200. l. 39. d. if, p.
209. l. 45. r. inquire, p. 211. l. 12. r. but Casaubon, p. 215. l. 12. r. of
Heathens, ib. 13. d. who, p. 217. l. 14. r. such only, p. 219. l. 24. r. quia
per. p. 221. m. l 13. r. minas commode, p. 225. l. 7. r. vivified, ib. 26. r.
unum, ib. 34. r. sanitas, p. 226. l. 4. r. of the Saints, ib. m. against l. 11.
add tom. 4. l. 2. c. 2. S. 3. p. 27. p. 228. l. 21. r. Cramner, ib. 48.
percipi, p. 229. m. r. in Ep. ib. 25. r. president, p. 230. l. 48. r. enmity,
p. 232. l. 1. generate, ib. 26. ii. p. 233. m. r. 1, 2. p. 236. l. 5. reasons,
ib. do, ib. 13. r. perpended, ib. 25. r. no more than the word is, p. 237. m.
l. 5. r. tom. 10. ib. 13. r. tom. 7. ib. 23. rapsi, p 238. l 14. r. tamen, ib.
m. r add concord. eccle. epist. 166. ib. 45. r Audius. p 241. l 36. r society,
p 243. l 6. r I am, p 257. l 10. r submit, p 265. l 32. r if it do, p 271. l
3. (...) ib. 23. fulmen, p 272. l 26. r amittit. ib. 30. separetur, p 273. l
13. r Parmenianum, p 274. l 22. r vassal, p 277. l 8. r their greater share of
the, ib. 20. (...), ib. 43. (...), p 281. l 7. r. Rabirius, p 282. l 12. r
fluminis, ib. 36. r to receive, p 283. l 10. r to evince there is, p 286. l 10.
r Corinthum, p 290. l 22. jungentur, p 291. l 30. r may be, p 296. l 15. r
ecclesiam, ib. l 20. m. r cap. 5. In the first page not figured, m. l 4. r p
122. ib. 22. r secundum Mat. In the following page, l 4. r lenitas, ib. 12. and
so, ib. m. l 2. r 41. p 297. l 30. r of truth, ib. m. r scandalo and
offendiculo, p 301 l 3 r three witnesses, ib. 12 as if it were, p 304 l 29 will
be, ib. l ult. r Preachers, p 309 l 43 r Laberius, p 310 l 30 r old Romans, p
311 l 30 r Synonymus, p 312 l 2 nuncupatively, p 313 l 29 Laudat, p 317 l 2 r
Church, ib. 24. appositely, p 319 l 5 r lapilli ib. m. de Just. p 321 l 18 r
oporteri, p 324 l 4 r warrant, p 327 l 4 r heart, ib. 31 quisque p 328 m. l
ult. tom. 8 232, p 333 l 15 r aliquod, p 334 l 6 r. cuicta, p. 335. l. 15. r.
that which, p. 338. l. 16. r. an expectation of any, p 342 l 24 r whom they, p
70 l 3 r no seal, ib. 25 r checkered, p 173 l 5 r those callings, ib. 27. d.
and, p 172 l 13 r profecerit; p 174 l 33 r Talicotian cures, p 175 l 1 r
abominable, ib. 13. r the Pharisee, ib. 40 r opprobries, p 176 l 23 r
animorum, p 177 l 42 r who bave, p 178 l 27 r him in p 179 l 39 r have they, p
180 l 39 r not a rigid, ib. 41 r gerere, p 184 against l 14 m. add Eccles. l 1
c 5. p. 1942. ib. 38 r cinie, p 185 l 29 d. the, p 186 l 6 r rumorum, p 187 l 9
r a draught of a, ib. 13 r accipientes perverse, p 190 l 20 r Blondel, and so
page 300 l 27. p 192 l 29 r to their eyes, p 195 l 33 r alleviated, ib. m. l 15
r conqueruntur, p 196 l 40 r parallel, p 197 l 40 r as we, p 198 l 44 r done,
ib. m. r Bezam and Witgenstein, p 201 l 7 r to be set, p 209 l 21 r leave, ib.
48. r be, p 213 l 26 r not have been, ib. 32 r as well they may, ib. 46. r
Barcochab, page 215. l 40 r perscribi, ib. 42 r was good, p 217 l 29 r
incurious, ib. 38 r not knew it to be, p 220 l 37 r rational, p 221 m. r Came:
opera, fol. 424 p 228 l 43 r Est Ulubris, p 233 l 5 r themselves, p 236 l 25 r
superstition, p 239 l ult. r do not, p 241 l 6 d. but, p 244 l 35 r it cease p
248 l 11 r apposite, p 254 l 14 d. them, p 258 l 30 r may do, p 259 l 18 r
tales, ib. 35 r within, p 261 l 30 r majus; here add in the marg. Azor. Inst.
Moral. tom. 1. l. 1. c. 27. p. 50. p 262 l 11 r fugeret, p 263 l 5 r as if it
were, ib. 34 r if evil, p 265 l 1 r table, p 271 m. r post. Collat. p 272 l 15
r not casting, ^b. 1 r then not in, p 273 l 7 r proscribe, p 277 l 18 r as
Charondas, p 278 l 3 r till, ib. 48 r confine, p 281 l 7 r yet, p 283 l 13 r
converting, p 284 l 1 r invisible, ib. 25 r at, p 285 l 44 r they have, p 286 l
5 r decry, p 288 l 1 r caninum, p 289 against l 2 add contra Fulgent. Donat.
inter opera Augustini, p 286 l 21 r menaceth, p 292 l 22 r detested, p 293
against line 25 add contra lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 4. and cont. Epist. Parmen. l.
2. c. 22. p 294 l 27. d. dalous, p 312 l 26 r panem, ib. 43 r pascit, p 314 l 1
r carreir.

THE DIATRIBE.
SECT. I.
Of Antiquity and Innovation. The Character of their Discipline; the state of
the question.

ALthough I am none of the superstitious adorers of Antiquity (for Antiquitas
secli est juventus mundi) neither will be any of the froward retainers of
Custom, which may be as turbulent a thing as Innovation (Christ having said
that he was Truth not Custom) yet I have learned from Scripture to make a
stand upon the ancient ways, and then to look about and discover what is the
straight and the right way; and surely Novelty, though it be not by and by
rejected, yet it is always suspected; for what is most ancient, is most
honorable, says Aristotle; and most true, adds Tertullian: and what is settled
by custom, though it be not the best, yet at least may seem fit; where as
Mutatio consuetudinis etiam quae adjuvat utilitate, August. Epist. 118. c. 5.
perturbat novitate: and therefore Tremember, that not only the Spartans set a
mulct on the Musician that added one string more than ordinary to his Harp; but
the Lycians suffered none to propose a new Law, but with an halter about his
neck, that if the reason thereof were not approved, he might forthwith be
hanged for offering novelties: And therefore I cannot but conclude with
Augustine, Non est a consuetudine recedendum nisi rationi adversetur; and with
Ulpian, De Musica, l. 2. c. 8.
In rebus novis constituendis evidens esse debet utilitas, ut recedatur ab eo
jure quod diu aequum visum est.

If this new way (and I think I may without hazard of a quarrel take the
liberty to style it so) of gathering Churches, and making a kind of Monopoly of
the Sacrament, had ground and warrant from Gods Word, the Practice of the
Primitive Church, the demonstration of Reason, or did manifestly conduce and
tend to the advance of godliness and pure Religion, I should not check with it
for the novelty (relatively to our age) Jesus Christ is antiquity enough; and I
should say with Galba, Hoc age and feri, siquidem ita est e re populi Romani
(seu potius Dei) But when many good and moderate, and rational men are much
unsatisfied, that it carries any of these Stamps or Characters, and it is
doubted (not altogether irrationally) that it tends to quench the smoking
flax, not to inflame it; to break the bruised reeds, more than to strengthen
them; to blast the Seeds of devotion, which a gentler influence would cherish
and foment; and to make the most of men profane and careless of the Ordinances,
who by partaking thereof, might feel the power, and be charmed with the
sweetness and comforts of them, and possibly to make one part of the people
seem as Pharisees, and the other as Heathens and Publicanes, and (in effect) to
turn Aarons Rod into a Serpent, and make men fly from it; and for my own part,
unless I am blind through ignorance and infirmity (whose own heart witnesses
to me that I am not wilfully or maliciously so) I can see nothing really to
support this new frame, but Rhetorical Amplifications, not Rational Arguments;
Popular, not Logical Discourses; and Similitudes and Allegories, rather than
Reasons: Ad populum phaleras: which is handsomely to paint an house that has no
solid foundations: I cannot therefore upon these reflections, but excuse those
that at the sound of such Music cannot fall down and worship the Image that
Nebuchadnezzar has set up.

1. The liberty and profitable use of private conference, in order to
preparatory Instruction, is not controverted: it is an apt and elegant
comparison of Quintilian, that men are as bottles, which are sooner and better
filled, by taking them in hand one by one, and pouring water into them, than by
setting them together, and sprinkling water upon them.

2. That where (as the Casuists speak) there is violenta suspicio quae
moraliter facit rem certam, (for if it be only probabilis suspicio, they will
tell you, that melior est conditio possidentis bonam famam, but) in case of
violent suspicion, (and perchance also if it might be but morally probable)
that any persons are through ignorance unable and incompetent to discern the
Lords Body, that such may and are meet to be examined, or that such of whom is
like suspicion, that they have lapsed into any crimes that are scandalous, may
be publicly questioned and sifted; and where Ecclesiastical Discipline is
settled, that Witnesses may be examined concerning them, is not denied. In such
cases, the same may be spoken of neglect of Probation, as is said of the
omission of private admonition and reproof; a man may be called to an account
for an idle silence, as well as for an idle word: for as evil talk leads men to
evil, so an evil silence leaves them in it: Faciens and Consentiens eadem lege
tenentur.

3. That notorious sinners (and the Casuists, who have St. Augustine to prompte
them) say, Quando adest evidentia juris, quia juridice convictus, etc. vel
evidentia facti, etc. as Filiucius and Suarez express it.
that they can be notorious only upon this account, Cum crimen est manifestum
aut per sententiam in judicio (Civili aut Ecclesiastico) aut per publicam in eo
confessionem, aut per evidentiam talem ut nulla tergiversatione potest caelari:
And they farther tell us, that every crime that can be proved, is not therefore
manifest, but is rather manifestabile, than manifestum: but that such notorious
sinners being contumacious may, and in a well-constituted Church must be
excommunicated in a juridical and ordinate way with the greater, (yea, and if
that would content them) or lesser Excommunication, and respectively to the
merit of the cause, and disposition of the persons, is granted: Yet not so much
for prevention of any pollution that any may contract by communion with them
(for nec causa causae, nec persona personae praejudicat, as says St.
Augustine, concerning Peter and Judas their communicating together, and
quisquis ab hac Ecclesia Catholica fuerit separatus, Contra Donat. post.
Collat. tom. 7. p. 122.
quantumlibet laudabiliter se vivere existimet, hoc solo scelere quod a Christi
unitate disjunctus est, non habebit vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eum:
quisquis autem in hac Ecclesia been vixerit, nihil ei praejudicant aliena
peccata, quia unusquisque in ea proprium onus portabit, says the same Father)
But, first, to humble, and by shame to reclaim the offender: And, secondly, to
keep the example from having any spreading contagious influence by impunity: As
also, thirdly, Epist. 152.
to remove the Scandal, which the Discipline of the Church may contract by
remission and indulgence, lest the City of God, (as the Fathers call the
Church) should be as Philip styled one in Greece, that fostered all scelerous
persons, the City of the wicked. And fourthly, that also as Valerius Maximus in
another case, Quantum ruboris civitati turpiter se gerendo incusserunt, tantum
laudis graviter puniti adferant. Wherefore I oppose not a probation negative,
so as to see that there be no manifest exception against men for unworthiness.
I deny the necessity of a positive trial, to make a scrutiny and search into
them for some real worthiness. I conceive him visibly worthy that is an
intelligent, and no apparently ulcerous member of the visible Church. I do not
judge, that they are to admit none that are not otherwise visibly worthy, but
ought not to exclude any that are not visibly unworthy. I think it not
necessary, that all that are admitted should have demonstrative signs of
holiness; but suppose it enough, that they are not signally wicked. I conceive
it not ground sufficient to exclude them, that their lives are suspicious,
unless their crimes be notorious; persons scandalous, and openly flagitious,
we may separate from us: from others that fall not under that notion, we may
not separate our selves. And a power to act in such cases, the Ministry need
not complain wholly to want, even in Churches unpresbyterated, much less upon
pretense of such want, suspend the Celebration and administering of the
Sacrament altogether; for they may assume as large and free power to exclude
some such, even where no consistorial, juridical, formal proceeding can be had,
as they now take to put by, and interpretatively to excommunicate all, which
they do, while they (at least many of them) administer it to none, but intermit
the use thereof altogether, or exhibit it to very few or none (in comparison)
but to such only as they have gathered into a new Church; and therefore as one
being asked where he found his interpretation concerning Constantines donation
(as another his gloss upon the Salike Law) answered, If any looked on the
backside of that Donation (and so of that Law) there it was to be found: so
might it be more aptly said, that from whence they derived the power and
liberty to excommunicate all by nonadministration, or so many by non-admission,
they might fetch a right to exclude persons scandalous (yea and apparently
ignorant.) But our Rhodus and Saltus, our present question is, whether it be
not only profitable, but necessary, antecedently to the Communion, to make
examination, notional or real, of the knowledge, or the lives not only of
such, who upon morally probable grounds, may well be suspected to be
incompetent for ignorance or crime, but of all indifferently, so as for want of
will in any to submit to this probation, they may justly be debarred the
Sacrament; and for want of power or means in the Minister, to exercise this
Discipline, he may lawfully intermit the administration, or administer it only
to such as will submit themselves thereunto, gathered and convened (and not by
their proper Pastor) out of distant places, and several Congregations.

DEFENSE.
SECT. I.
What authority the Diatribe ascribed to the Fathers, and ancient Church? Why
the Apologists derogate from them?

THe Paper (so I shall call it, after that name which the Apologists always
give it at the Circumcision thereof) in the first Section, seemed to rise to
the hoary head of Antiquity, and cast a suspicious eye upon Novelty,
recognizing that, habet ut in aetatibus authoritatem Senectus, sic and in
exemplis antiquitas; and accounting with the Oracle that to be the best
complexion, which was concolor mortuis: yet this was delivered only in thesi,
and general, not in hypothesi, or particular application to my subject, and by
way of preface, not of argumentation, as they suggest, calling this the
firstborn argument, which yet had no double portion of substance, nor was the
beginning of strength, or excellency of dignity: Fit enim naturae quodam
instinctu, and judicio recto sane si illo recte utamur, ut in religionis
negotio nova omnia sint suspecta and fere exosa. Casaub. exercit. 16. S. 43. p.
390.
There was notwithstanding, not the least intimation made, as if any thing that
bears the stamp of Antiquity were therefore to be received, but only not
hastily to be laid aside; nor that any thing was to be rejected, because new
coined, but not to be so easily entertained: neither that whatsoever was
ancient, was infallibly true, but the more credible: nor that which was new,
was undoubtedly false, but more suspicious.

The Apologists cannot say, and whosoever shall make inspection into the Paper,
will not see, that I attribute too much to Antiquity, and if they would have
ascribed any thing, they needed to have said nothing.

But it seems they have the same quarrel to Antiquity, which the Affricans have
of the Sun, Urit fulgore suo; and as Herod, being originally a stranger, and
Alien, sought to suppress the Genealogies of the Jewish Nation, and especially
of the Royal Lineage: so the Apologists seek to disparage and detract from the
exemplary practice of the ancient Church, and judgment of the Fathers,
whereunto in opinion and way they are strangers.

De Carthagine potius nulla quam pauca. I am not susceptible to assert the
honor and reverend esteem of the illustrious Fathers (as Iuther calls them)
neither shall I need to undertake it; for though mutus fit oportet, qui non
laudabat Herculem, yet it was no unapt check of Antalcidas, Quis unquam sanus
eum vituperavit? But since the Apologists, instead of answering the
testimonies, have thought to discredit the Witnesses, and have somewhat
enlarged themselves both in this and the 13. Section, to lessen their
authority: It may seem proditorious, to desert their Defense, and to show less
zeal to support them, than they have done to deprave their credit; especially
seeing, as Isocrates was said to have made many Orations, in sending forth many
Orators: and he that saves a Physician, preserves many lives and many remedies:
So I shall in vindicating this Topic, fortify the Arguments drawn from it;
and if it seem out of my way, yet it is but in fresh suit of the Apologists,
whom I am bound to follow.

SECT. II.
Of Antiquity, Custom, sad consequences of Independency, the novelty thereof,
the Fathers not without errors, yet not to be slighted. What may be called
the Primitive Church? Protestants always honored the Fathers, and never
declined their Testimony.

THey embrace that saying, That which is first is true, because true antiquity
is a friend to truth, and every good way is old: but they restrain, and limit
this to such age and antiquity, as things may claim only for being revealed in
Scripture: But this is not the only antiquity which we are now debating of;
this is Antiquity proved Ex priori; but it is Ecclesiastical antiquity (as I
may call it) the consent and custom of the ancient Church, antiquity proved Ex
posteriori, which we are now considering of; what authority it carries, what
reverence and esteem it merits, and what force and influence it has.

We concur to adore Divine Scripture antiquity as the best: Veritas in omnibus
imaginem anteceda; postremo similitudo succedit. I ertul. Aug. contra Crescon.
l. 2. c. 29. Idem de peccat. merit. and remis. 1.1. c. 22. In m^de natura and
(...), ^. 61. (...).
Mihi pro his omnibus, imo supra hos omnes Apostolus Paulus; to assent to it,
as the truest, as that which nec falli potest nec fallere; and to captivate our
understanding thereunto, Sine ulla recusatione, and cum credendi necessitate:
But because this is the best and truest, and most infallible antiquity,
therefore to infer, that no other antiquity needs to be considered of, or is
worthy of reverence, or can lend any strength of argument, is as if I should
conclude, that because an Apodictick Syllogism (whose principles are
propositions, verae, primae, immediatae, priores, notiores, causae
conclusionis,) is only Scientifical, that therefore all Dialectick Syllogisms
concluding ex probabilibus, are useless and despicable; or that St. Paul argued
both weakly and superfluously, that the woman ought to have power on her head
because of the Angels, when it had been enough, and more efficacious to have
said, because of God: or because Christ is the only Mediator between God and
Man, by his merit and efficacy; and upon whose intercession alone we can rely
with faith: therefore it is vain and fruitless to seek or regard the help and
assistance of the prayers of the godly.

To the ancient Church I think most authority to be ascribed, and greatest
reverence to be attributed, since streams run purest near the Fountain; and if
that which is first be truest, what is next to the first, is next to truth: and
therefore, Sa^nctorum Patrum constitutiones qui proximiores fuerant Christo
^^^^scames, said Nazianzen; and those Orders be most pure, that come most near
to the example of the Primitive Church, said the holy Martyr Sanders: Fox Act.
and ^^on. p. ^494.
yet the at restation of that Church, I grant, is but an humane testimony, nor
perfectly ^^vine, but in part, as it faithfully testifies what the Apostles
did and said: Divine, in regard of the matter and thing testified: Human, in
regard of the quality of the Witnesses, and manner of testification, and
therefore formally as such, being but an humane testimony, can beget but an
acquisite faith; for no conclusion can be of higher nature than the premises,
as no water can be made to rise higher than the Spring: Picus Mirandula, Canus,
and I grant that, Fidei acquisitae (quae fulcitur homine proponente, non Deo
revelante) subesse potest falsum: and therefore, Nunquam hominem quemvis per
fidem acquisitam ita existimamus esse veracem, quin formidemus cum vel falli
posse vel fallere. Yet notwithstanding, fides acquisita^se habet ad fidem
gratuitam, sicut praeambula dispositio ad formam, and disponit animam ad
receptionem luminis, Alexander Hales; all as cited by Dr. F. White 's answer to
Fish. p. 14. 22.
quo assentitur primae veritati propter se, and dicitur ipsam introducere sicut
seta filum: and though divine revelation in Scripture be therefore the sole
principle, immediate motive, and formal reason and object of believing, and
last resolution of Faith; yet the authority and external testimony of the
Church, may produce the same, as an adjuvant instrumental administering moral
cause, and subordinate help. Prae omnibus si aperta fuerit Scriptura, eam ipsam
amplector, says St. Augustine: and therefore he that will not believe Moses
and the Prophets, it will be in vain to raise any of the dead to persuade him;
when the Scripture shines out in full brightness, omnes Perstringit stellas
exortus ut aethereus Sol: But when that Sun shines not so clearly, as to
convince and satisfy contenders who have bad eyes: the Fathers, as Stars that
receive their light from that Sun, may reflect some illumination upon us, as
the Stars are to be seen by day, in dark pits, and obscure places: and though I
consent to Augustine, Epist. 19. ad Hieron.
that let the Learning and Holiness of other Writers be never so eminent, I
will not think it true, because they have thought so; but because they are able
to persuade me either by other Canonical Writers, or probable Reason: yet I
add, that I am more confirmed in my persuasion, that I rightly hit the sense of
Canonical Writers, and apprehend the Dictates of true Reason, when I conceive
the same, which I find that they thought; though they are not principles of
infallible verity to command belief, yet they are grounds of credibility to
sacilitate assent; Non domini, sed duces, to use Seneca's words. And I shall
more easily embrace that which has their witness, and be more apt to doubt of
that which wants their testimony; Sola argumenta ex Scripturis esse necessaria,
Cathol. Orthedox. Tract. 1. q. 10. p. 121.
e Patribus autem probabilia, says learned Rivet: Their consent I esteem not
ut fidei mensuram, sed ut testem temporis and argumentum historicum, which
makes certain the matter of fact, that such was the doctrine and practice of
the first and purer times, being registered to us by those that cannot be
imagined not to know, being so near; nor be suspected to combine falsely to
impose upon us, being so pious.

They are not moved to hear men count and call good ways new, and the
Adversaries of true Doctrine have always loaded it with this Title (which
confirms them to see the ways of their government have the same lot) and
therefore this principle of Antiquity yields but a popular and fallacious
Argument. But few I suppose will be moved with this argumentation, as not
fallacious enough to impose upon popular judgments. For,

First, implicitly and interpretatively, those good ways are their ways,
wherein is involved Petitio Principii.

Secondly, if so small a matter confirm their judgment, it is suspicious, that
as small a weight of reason might first settle it; Talia sunt alimenta, qualia
sunt Elementa.

Thirdly, If that be a popular and fallacious argument which is derived from a
principle made use of commonly by Heretics, or others, thereby to give a
specious luster to their own Opinions, and cast an odium on their opposites,
then Scripture it self may be sentenced to be a principle, yielding only
popular and fallacious arguments; for who knows not, that most Heretics have
sought to fortify their Opinions with pretense of Scripture, and have
upbraided their adversaries with want thereof?

Fourthly, when any pretend antiquity to give countenance to novel and
unwarrantable Opinions or Institutions, by turning the wrong end of the
Prospective, to make things at hand seem to be far off: the fallacy is not in
the principle, but the men that abuse and falsely apply it; nor lies it in the
proposition, but the assumption.

Fifthly, seeing as Hierom tells us, Mendacium semper imitatur veritatem, the
argument is the more specious, and like to carry more force, because subtle
falsifiers have assumed it; for they being wiser in their Generations, would
not lay on those colors that had no beauty or luster; nor would they set that
stamp on their counterfeit Coin, did they not know it would make it pass more
current.

Hierom (say they) is condemned, for desiring leave of Augustine to err with
seven Fathers, but they dare not, nor are willing to give this liberty; but yet
they take as much, when in the question, whether Judas communicated of the
Lords Supper, they mention twelve late Writers, and not all of them, aut magni
aut boni nominis, asserting the negative; and ask, who would not err with such
as those are? But we say, though we would not err with the Fathers, yet we
less distrust our selves to err with them, or when they are on our side; and
probably suppose our selves farthest from erring, when nearest to them.

As the Scripture bids us to remember Lots wife, so they say to the Pretenders
of Antiquity, Remember the Gibeonites: Had this Memento been limited to false
Pretenders of Antiquity, it might have been plausible: but if themselves had
not forgotten to take some of the salt of that Pillar, whereinto she was
turned, to have seasoned their discretions, they never would have made this
instance indefinitly, and without limitation: For,

First, it follows not, because they counterfeited old things, we may not
allege that which is truly ancient; or because some stones are counterfeit,
therefore none must be precious Jewels.

Secondly, it may be retorted on themselves, the Gibeonites would not have
simulated that, which had it been true, would not have been effectual to the
ends for which they fained it; and had their bread, and bottles, and shoes,
been as old as they dissembled, Joshuah might, and would have accepted, and
been at peace and in league with them. And will it not then be consequent, to
suit the Apodosis to the Protasis, in this Allegory or Similitude, that
Antiquity is a likely Plea, and lends a good Topic; and such things as wear
her Livery, and bear her Character, are more receptible than those that want
them?

But if the antiquity the Paper calls for, do signify but Custom, as they
guess by some passages, viz. what is settled by Custom, they will be bold to
say of such antiquity, It is vetustas erroris: I shall say with Augustine, Quis
dubitat veritati manifestatae debere consuetudinem cedere? But I add, Veritatem
non ostendis, de consuetudine confiteris: De Baptism. cont. Donat. l. 3. p. 82.
Tom. 7. Ibidem, l. 7. p. 99. Ibid. l. 4. p. 85. ad Januar. Ep. 119. de Civitate
Dei, l. 15. c. 16.
but abstracting custom from the consideration of the matter, either as it is
good (for goodness will warrant it self without custom, yet honum and
consuetum duo sunt bona: and as St. Augustine gravely, Cum consuetudini veritas
suffragatur, nihil oportet firmius retineri) or as it is evil; for then custom
cannot authorize it: for the Philosopher said, Omnia mala habenda pro
peregrinis: and S. Augustine, Aut propter fidem, aut propter mores vel emendari
oportel quod perperam fiebat, vel institui quod non fiebat: But only as custom,
even as such, Ad humanum sensum vel alliciendum, vel offendendum, mos valet
plurimum; and upon that and other reflections, insinuated in the Paper, I
might, without offense, conclude with Ulpian; In rebus novis constituendis
evidens esse debet utilitas; and with St. Augustine, Non est a consuetudine
recedendum nisi rationi adversetur.

But beside, the customs which I chiefly reverence, and engage to defend, are
the customs of the ancient Church; Ad Casulan. Ep. 86.
and if the Apologists will be bold to say of such antiquity, it is vetustas
erroris, I shall modestly re-mind them, that they are more bold then wise: And
if they shall slight the judgment of St. Augustine, in his rebus, de quibus
nihil certi statuit Scriptura Divina, mos Populi Dei, vel instituta majorum pro
lego tuenda sunt, nor shall prize the sense of the great Council of Chalcedon,
(...), Let the ancient custom prevail; yet I hope they will grant there was
some weight in that Argument of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.16.
We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God.

The gray hairs of Opinions and Practices are then beauty, and a Crown when
found in the way of truth and righteousness: They are then indeed a Crown more
glorious and worthy of double honor; but yet aetas per se venerabilis, says
Calvin: and therefore some suppose, that in the Greek an old man is called
(...), which signifies honor; Willet in Lev. 19.32. Arist. l. 19. Ethic. 2.
Jansenius in locum. C. a Lapide in locum.
and it is the dictate of the same spirit (which Aristotle has also delivered
almost verbatim) Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face
of the old man, formally as an old man.

And some Expositors, because the relative is not in the Hebrew, thus interpret
that of Prove. 16.31. The hoary head is a Crown of glory, it is found in the way
of righteousness, as if old men were commonly righteous: as the Chaldee in the
late famous Bible renders that of Leviticus, Rise before him that is learned in
the Law, implying old men to be so: so as therefore we might turn the allusion
against them.

The light of Doctrine has long filled our Horizon; the light of Discipline
was not so forward or successful, being a long while held by some men in
unrighteousness: Nimirum liberanda veritas illos expectabat, as Tertullian once
said of Marcion: but -- utinam talis status esset in illo,
Ut non tristitiae causa dolenda foret:


Fair words cannot persuade us that we are not hurt, while we feel the smart of
our wounds: neither have we been bred up in Anaxagoras his School, to believe
the snow to be of other color than our eyes discern it. What Quintilian and
Seneca said of the Commonwealth, we may apply to the Church; the one, Quaedam
sunt crimina laesae Reipub. ad quorum pronuntiationem soli oculi sufficient:
The other, An laesa sit Respub. non solet argumentis probari; manifesta statim
sunt damna Reipub. The Tree is known by his fruit; and we have tasted such
bitterness in the fruits of this Discipline, and the Principles thereof, that
as Joab stubbornly said to David, Thou have shamed the face of all thy
Servants: So even those that could not be satisfied with the topping, but
wished the cutting down of the former Tree, as being grown too high, to
overtop and drop upon the Paradise of God, are truly ashamed to see this Plant
spring up in the place thereof; which not only like the Boranetz or Tartar
Lamb, though it seem to creep low toward the ground, and bear wool like the
Sheeps clothing, yet destroys all verdancy, and suffers nothing to grow or
prosper near it: but he also that shall contemplate in what a light flame the
whole Wood is, will be apt to conclude, that the Bramble is become the King of
Trees, from whom only this fire could come forth: So that some may well cry
out, as the Constantinopolitans at Arsacius his succeeding of Chrysostom, Deus
bone, quis cui? and are afraid to have contracted a suitable guilt to what the
Roman Senate incurred toward Drusus; of whom Paterculus tells us, Qui tanto
meliore ingenio quam fortuna usus est, ut malefacta collegarum, quam ejus
optime cogitata, Senatus probaret magis: But I remember Herodotus tells us,
that Phrinicus was amerced 1000. Drachmes, for representing in a Tragedy the
loss of Miletus, and thereby renewing the sorrow thereof: and therefore I shall
not farther have unguem in Ulcere, having elsewhere rubbed the sore; and also,
because not only ille dolet vere, but also tute, qui sine test dolet: only
in answer to the Apologists expressions I shall say, That their Light of
Discipline has proved an ignis fatuus, to lead us into Precipices and abysses;
or a Comet to portend and effect mischief, and the fumes and exhalations
thereof have eclipsed that Light of Doctrine, which they confess formerly
filled our Hemisphere; it has been only forward to undo us, and successful as
Pompey was great, miseria nostra: and as Curio was eloquent, malo publico, and
was brought forth with more unrighteousness, then ever it was withheld.

O utinam arguerem sic ut non vincere possem!
Me miserum; quare tam bona causa mea est?
Yet is it aes alienum, to acknowledge, that I neither can justly charge upon
the Apologists, nor will I leave them under the least suspicion of having any
personal share of, or proper guilt in the Heresies and Profaness, speculative
and practical Antiscripturisme, whose abominations in this Land make all good
eyes to water, and godly hearts to bleed: But I look on Independency (the
Principles of which Discipline have imposed on the Apologists) as the summum
genus, the common Principle, and as it were the Trojaa horse of all those
evils: for as the jangling Sects of Philosophers pretended to be all
Socratical; so the differing Sects assume the Livery of Independency, which is
the Basis, as Physicians speak, of the Composition, and the Bond and Common tie
of the Bundle: So as I impute not the mischief to Independents distributively,
but collectively; nor think them to flow formally and inseparably from
Independency in the Abstract, so as to spread through all the denominations, but
to have spawned from Independents in the Concrete, and that Discipline has
given the occasion of the rise and growth thereof, which how strict soever it
pretend to be, in admitting to Church Membership, or Communion of Sacraments,
yet is too loose in the liberty afforded to Opinions; in a conceit somewhat
like Tamberlains, That Religion is like a Posie, which is most sweet, when made
up of variety of flowers. In an epidemical Contagion, some may be yet antidoted
by temperament and habitude of body, yet the Pestilence is mortally infections;
and although there are many good Subjects of the notion of Papists, yet Popery
has many treasonable and seditious Principles: So though under the notion of
Independents there are many Orthodox men, yet Independency is causally very
heterodox; as he that lets down the Fence, or lays open the Gap, is guilty of
all the mischief which the wild Beasts do in the field.

They ask, whether we say the Sun rose not till twelve, because it shined not
till then; or that America was a second or new Creation, because sound out of
late? and thereupon persuade us, that their Government is elder than the former
Custom of our Predecessors, and not younger than the Scriptures; and that it
is unreasonable and unsafe to look only on the Customs and Practices of the
next Ages before us, which they are sure worshipped God impurely.

Though Clouds may mask the face of the Sun at one place, or for one instant,
yet it shines forth in some other; and not only by discourse of reason, but by
evidence of sense, after the Sun is come into our Horizon, we know he is risen,
for we then always see the light thereof (though not in full brightness thereof
perhaps) for without that light we could not well see. Though America was but
lately discovered to us, it was not unknown to all others; the Inhabitants were
not ignorant thereof; and we know all this while under what Meridians and
Parallels it was situate, and we are satisfied that it had a real, though no
notional existence in respect of us: but we are still to seek where this new
world of their Discipline was in being, until it was found out of late: And
suitably to the products of divine inspiration, or results of rational
discourse; a thing of this kind could have no being, till it was found out (and
therefore not fitly compared with America;) If they can assign when, and where
anciently their new light of discipline shined before we saw it, (unless
perhaps some flashes thereof were among those who supposed they had more light
of truth, The Donatists alleged in defense of their Separation that of Cantic.
1.7.
because more of the Sunbeams, and thought that only among themselves the
Beloved made his Flock to rest at Noon) I shall yield there was such a Sun,
though latter ages saw it not; else I shall suspect it to be only Parelius, a
counterfeit Sun, subsisting only in the vapors and exhalations of modern
heads.

Ancient Customs may be antiquated, and again redintegrated: some truths, in
some ages, smothered by the predominating Error and Faction, and be afterward
revived; for Nullum tempus occurrit Regi Coelorum: But it is one thing to be
new, Jewel apol. p. 5. c. 1. Divis. 1.
another to be renewed; Quod verum est, serum non est, says Saint Ambrose. As
there can be no change in God himself, so ought there to be no change in his
Religion, says that Gemma Theologiae: If therefore their Discipline were but
lately found out, it will be found to be without warrant. If they will commence
per saltum, Neb. 7.63, 64.
and say it is as ancient as Scripture, but cannot trace the descent and
pedigree thereof, through any one age of the ancient Church, they are only
like those Priests the Children of Habajah, who sought their Register among
those that were reckoned by Genealogy, but it was not found; therefore were
they, as polluted, put from the Priesthood. Although we shall gladly dormire
inter medios cleros, that is, says S, Augustine, in utriusque Testamenti
authoritate conquiescere, In Psalm. 67.
ut quando aliquid ex i's profertur and probatur, omnis contentio pacifica
quiet finiatur: Yet besides, that, they are likely to have as little
foundation in Scripture, as they implicitly confess to have support from the
practice of the ancient Church: In the interim also they contract many
prejudices, not easily to be wrastled with; for who will hastily believe, that
in this age, which to other works of the flesh, has added swarms of Heresies (
and mali mores excoecant intellectum, says Ockham) the Light of Discipline
should break out, when so many gross Clouds eclipse the greater Luminary of
Doctrine; that this secret of the Lord should not have been with those that
feared him in so many ages (whom he promised to teach, and to be with, and to
lead into all necessary truth, Non verisimile est ut tot and tantae in unam
sidem erraverint, says Tertullian: Et quod apud multos unum invenitur, non est
erratum sed traditum) nor reflected on us by those great Stars of the Primitive
Sphere, between whom, and some others, is no more comparison, than between the
pillars of the Temple and their shadows (as Nazianzen magnifieth Basil) and
when the like late discovery cannot be asserted of any other truth? And lastly,
that this Discipline should be so necessary, when the Church of God for many
ages flourished in godliness, knowledge, and peace, and yet was never
acquainted with it.

They are not the next ages before us that we look upon, as they odiously
insinuate, but the most ancient; and yet I wish that the present times may not
ingratiate and endear the former age notwithstanding its corruptions, and have
the fate which some think Augustus aimed at in adopting Tiberius, that the
memory of his Government might be more sweetened by the succession of a worse.

In the 13. Section (for we will still endeavor to collect and unite together,
what they have scattered of one concernment) they seek to enervate the
testimony of the ancient Church, by telling us out of the Lord Verulam, That
they which too much reverence old times, are a scorn to new; That the Fathers
agreed in mistakes, and were divided in truths; That the Opinion of the
Chiliasts (taken for an error) is by Justin Martyr referred to the Apostles:
Irenaeus affirms, that Jesus Christ lived fifty years on earth: Lubbertus is
cited to say it is the manner of the Fathers, when they would commend a thing,
not knowing its original, to refer it to the Apostles and primitive Times. In
the three first Centuries, the Learned are perplexed with spurious works of the
Fathers, which makes uncertain the state of the Primitive Church, which some
extend not beyond the Apostles days, or third Century, and it is stretched too
far to the age of Chrysostom.

We know, and acknowledge, that the Fathers (like the Moon) never borrowed so
much light from the Sun of the Scriptures, as to be clear of all spots.
Stapleton himself grants, there is none of the Fathers, in which something
erroneous may not be observed; they are like the Birds hatched at Cair by the
warmth of an Oven, which have every one some blemish; and I wish their errors
were of no other alloy, than such as the Apologists have detected: Piscator,
Alsted Mead, Hackwel, Gallus, etc.
whereof, that of the Chiliasts, themselves dare not stigmatize for an error:
(and therefore unaptly allege it) but only say it has been taken for one,
perchance they are more indulgent thereunto; because it is a Darling fostered,
and much fawned upon by many of their Brethren, and indeed has diverse more
learned assertors than them, who consent in the thing, though with some
difference in the manner: and for the conceit of Irenaeus, it is a
Chronological, no Dogmatical error; and Chronologers are one of those three
things that never agree: Id calumnia carere debebit, says Sulpitius Severus:
But because the Fathers might, or did err, therefore to give no credit to
their Witnesses, would be (in effect) destructive to all kind of humane
testimony.

From hence only can be concluded, that they are not infallible, and therefore
our understanding not to be captivated into any obedience to their Dictates (in
that sense we call no man Father save the Ancient of days) and that iis (in
enucleandis fidei controversiis) non necessarium est consentire tanqua^ ab omni
exceptione veris, Chamier. tom. l. 1. c. 6. p. 4. Aquin. 1. q. 1. art. 8. ad 2.
aut etiam in se -- possunt proferri (ut) quibus ex certa Suppositione certis
etiam circumstantiis hic discernendi (rectum ab obliquo) usu convenire queat;
says Chamier, and authoritatibus Canonicae Scripturae utitur proprie ex
necessitate argumentando, authoritate autem aliorum Doctorum Ecclesiae quasi
arguendo ex propriis sed probabiliter etc. as Aquiaas: But the errors of a
single Father, or their mutual differences cannot lay any obstructions in our
way, who lay no such great weight on their singular Opinions, yet set much by
their general consent, in what the most, and most famous in every age have
delivered, as received of them that went before them, and as practiced or
believed by them: What Lubbertus is alleged to say, will not make either scale
theirs or ours, to move much with the weight thereof; the notion Apostles is
not always taken properly, Dr. Ham. Resol. 6. quae. q. 5. p. 351.

And see Parker of the Cross, part 2. p. 126. de Baptis. Contr. Don. l. 4. c.
24. and alii and Epist. 118. c. 1.


or strictly to be understood; one great learned man has manifested it, that
in the Primitive Times Bishops were usually called Apostles: and another has
told us, that the ancient Church extended the Apostolical Times beyond the age
of the Apostles, even to the Nicene Council: The ignorance whereof perplexed
Baronius to reconcile it: How Scithianus and Terebinthus are said to live
Temporibus Apostolorum, who lived in Aurelians time, 300. years after Christ:
and howsoever, yet I know it was the rule of Saint Augustine, often inculcated,
and approved by our principal Divines in matters of fact and practice, That
which the universal Church holds, and which was not appointed by Councils,
but always observed, is most rightly believed to have been delivered by
Apostolical Authority. If some Bastard Writings are put upon the Fathers, which
like Eaglets being brought forth to the sun, are not very hard to be discerned,
by their inability to endure the light of critical examination: there are
others which the Learned are agreed upon to bear the characters of their true
Offspring, which set the ancient Church within our light and prospect; and it
is no argument, that because some coin is counterfeit, therefore none must be
current; let them reject it, if we offer to pay them with false money: But I
doubt their practice will need some counterfeit Writings to support it; for the
genuine Works of the Ancients will lend it no authority.

They should much have favored our ignorance, to have pointed at those (had
their authority been worth our notice) who confine the Primitive Church within
the age of the Apostles, or extend it not beyond the second centeury, that we
might have tried what weight their reasons or authority carry in the
counter-scales against the generality of the polemical Divines; who, though
primitive be a relation, and spoken always with respect to another, so that
what is primitive in reference to one, is not so toward another; yet they
dilate the ancient Church, Doctoribus Ecclesiasticis 6. priorum saeculorum
veterum patrum adscriberemus titulum. Rivet tract. de patr. Author. Tom. 2. p.
648. According to one of the Epocha's, the time for the measured purity of the
Inner Court, and that is the visible Church remaining in its primitive purity,
is 454. years. Mede's Remains on Rev. p. 20.
whereunto more reverence and esteem is rendered, unto the first five hundred
years; and within which Latitude of five hundred, did Bishop Jewel impale the
testimonies which he challenged his adversaries to produce, in confirmation of
several pieces of Popery: and sure the age of Chrysostom, which was the latter
end of the fourth, and beginning of the fifth Century, was like the eighth
Sphere; which though not next to the first mover (according to the old obsolete
hypothesis) yet had more bright stars than all the Orbs beside.

What they insert out of the English Plato, that to reverence old times, is to
be a scorn to the new, is meant of the arts and civil customs thereof, which
are lickt into better shape by time, and daily improved, and refined into more
perfections: Pervarios casus artem experientia trudit,
Exemplo monstrante viam, --
but Theology and the Doctrine of Faith being inspired, not acquisite, was
substantially perfect at the first tradition thereof; and those which were
nearest to those Secretaries of the Holy Ghost, had the advantage and
opportunity to receive a clear explication and right understanding thereof; and
though too much reverence to those ancient Times, may peccantly verge from
mediocrity, (wherein the matter of virtue consists) yet he that shall scorn any
for reverencing those old Times which we dispute of, may put for to be Doctor
of the chair of Scorners, and has been new dipped in their principles, who have
learnt to say, in effect, with that Pope, Hoc verum erit, si ipse volo, and non
aliter.

And whatever the Apologists may insinuate or glance at, the Protestant Divines
did never absolutely disclaim, or renounce the trial by the Fathers; neither do
they suffer any such Thrasonical vaunts as that of Campian, Field of the
Church, l. 4. c. 5. p. 349. and appendix. Part. 1. Sect. 2. p. 750.
to go unchecked and unshamed, Patres admiserit? captus est; excluserit? nullus
est; in altero fugam adornant, in altero suffocantur: Luther, and the rest at
the beginning, seem to decline such trial, (says a learned Divine,) because
the corruptions of their writings were so many, as could not easily be
discovered (conformable to the advice of Vincentius Lyrinensis, who says, If
Heresies be inveterate, and so have times and means to corrupt the Monuments of
Antiquity, we must flee to the Scriptures only) but now having found out by
the help of so many learned men, both of our adversaries, and amongst our
selves, that have traveled in that kind, which are their undoubted Works, and
which doubtful, or undoubtedly forged, we willingly admit the trial by the
Fathers, and we now only decry and condemn the Papists for their servile
enthralling themselves to the judgment of the Fathers as to a Law, as Canus
speaks, and ad ultimum iota, as the gloss on the Canon Law delivers, and for
fettering themselves with an oath, never to expound Scripture contrary to their
consent, and for advancing them, to the disparagement and obsoleting of the
Scriptures; as among other examples did the Sorbonist, Reynolds de Idololat.
Romans Eccles. l. 1. c. 8. p. 515. p. 301. Whitaker tom. 1. p. 13. Marta de
Jurisdict. citat. Dr. J. White's Defense way true Church, c. 20. p. 105.
whom Stephanus asking where he read such a thing in the New Testament? he
answered, Se illud apud Hieronymum aut in Decretis legisse; quid vero Novum
Testamentum esset ignorare: but never deserted a trial by the Fathers, as by
the Jury, though not as by the Law (which is the Scripture) nor as by a Judge
(which is the Holy Ghost) Ad hanc canitiem tanquam in Areopagum provocamus,
says Whitaker to Campian: and I could cite many others to the same purpose;
they are the Papists themselves, that with notable hypocrisy depress and avile
their authority, when it interferes with their Interests, speaking out plainly
what the Apologists more covertly insinuate, That the common opinion of the
Doctors, is not to be regarded, when another contrary opinion favors the Keys,
or the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or a pious case.

Those that washed off the water of their former Baptism by new immersions,
were the first that sought to bring under water also the authority and
reverence of the ancient Church; and it is very observable, that from the same
Fountain have sprung the foul and bitter waters of Schism and Heresy that
have defiled and envenomed the modern age, as if it were therein legible, that
had due honor been given unto the Fathers, our days of peace and truth had
been prolonged in the Land.

What the Psalmist says of Children, I think of the Fathers, Happy are they
that have their Quiver full of them, they shall not be ashamed, but they shall
speak with the Enemies in the Gate.

The Philosophers that writ of the contempt of glory, yet bewrayed their
^^nbitious itch after it, by affixing their names to the books: So even those
that seem to decry and slight the witness of the Fathers, yet think themselves
more gay Birds, when decked with their Plumes; and that they make higher
flights, if they can impe their Wings with any of their Feathers: The
Apologists themselves in their 35. and 37. Section, and elsewhere, seek to
borrow some colors from them, to paint the face of their Discipline more
seemingly fair. And it is still true what Erasmus was wont to say, When Hierom
is for our purpose, his authority weighs much; when against us, it is worth
nothing: Yet as Agesilaus sent Tissaphernes his thanks, that by fraction of the
sworn League, he had set the gods on his side; so I thankfully accept this
implicit and interpretative yielding me the Fathers on my part, while to my
sense no other corollary can be deducted from all their discourse hereof, but
this, Let them say what they list, we neither value them, nor will believe them.

SECT. III.
How the Apologists have suited their Discipline, to comply with several
Parties and Interests; the odious blots of their Pen.

PRimus felicitatis gradus est non delinquere; Secundus delicta cognoscere,
says Cyprian: They now condemn not all that differ from them, and must
acknowledge that some godly men, eminent in parts and places, close not with
them: and this I shall gladly take and put among their retractations, for
heretofore it has been their course (resulting as much out of subtilty, as
censoriousnesse) to brand such as are adverse from them, as enemies to
godliness, and so to sentence them (I think) is to condemn them; yea they
condemn them, while they renounce Communion of Sacraments with them, there
being no way to communicate with them, but to tread that path which they have
lined and beaten out; and if they grant them to be godly persons, how can they
without Schism desert communion with them? But indeed if their model of
discipline be the only path to Reformation, and be that point alone wherein
peace and holiness meet and close together, I think they could not but condemn
all that walk not with them therein, though in truth, rather this renders it
evident, that it is no such right way, because so many godly and eminent men
are found in another Road.

But as some censure them for going too far, so do others for not going far
enough in their separation.

And it is like enough that this befalls them, which is the common fate of men
that compound and medly themselves to comply with several Interests, and bear
up with diverse parties, who modelling themselves like the Tragoedian Buskin
indifferently for every foot, while they would ingratiate with all, are
endeared to none.

Aristenus long since resolved Media via nulla est, and the Praetor of the
Samnites in Livy wisely observed Media via neque amicos parit, nec inimicos
tollit, and men of that model are like the flying Fish, which being partly
Bird, partly Fish, is still prosecuted in the water by the Fishes, and in the
air by the Birds: The Apologists indeed, like good Astrologers, will be sure to
have chief respect to the Stars that are culminant, and when they draw the
Scheme, and set the Figure of their Discipline, they observe who are Lords of
the House, and accordingly make their judgment: so that (as famous du Moulin
said of the Papists) He that would know their Opinions, must consult with the
Almanac. Some of them that were the first to turn Tables, in the time of the
Prelates, have been since so busy in tumbling them, that now at length they
have in effect turned them altogether out of the Church.

When the Jews were in the Sunshine of prosperity, then the Samaritans would
claim to be their brethren: but if once they were under a Cloud or Tempest, the
other would not own the Kindred: And it is no new thing for men to be (in
truth) like the Stone which Suidas fableth to have been in Aarons Brestplate,
Cujus Color sive ad prospera sive adversa mutaretur; for some while the
Apologists held forth their Church in the notion of Presbyterian; but I could
give account of the occasion (and cast it up with their own Counters, which if
all the Box be not of the right stamp and metal, yet I am sure those I shall
take are without suspicion) when their Church was to be entered by them in the
Catalogue of a gathered Congregation.

A learned Divine of ours said, in answer to an Heterodox Prelate, that there
were some tantum in uxoratu non Papistae; and I may as truly say that some are
tantum in decim is non Independentes; and friends to that way, Usque ad aras
tantum, those Altars whereof they live: but manum de hac tabula, which as the
Italian Proverb speaks, I have not drawn Con amore with my affection to the
draught.

But to speak freely, (being indeed too free of such obloquy) the most carnal
and prosane in the Country are foremost in opposition to them, the scum of
whose choler they often see and hear, who measuring them by a fleshly line,
find their work defective, (I had snpposed rather excessive) not being able to
bear the strictness of the word, (I thought they would have said their
discipline.)

It is a misfortune, as sad, as singular, that the godly and wicked being of
such different principles, should meet in one conclusion against their way. If
the choler of some profane persons asperse on them, or their model (as
perchance there may be some that are like Ithacius in Sulpitius Severus, who
had no other virtue in him but his hatred toward the Priscilianists) yet scum
being such light froth, cannot stick or defile, being soon to be wiped off.
Male de me loquuntur, says Seneca, sed mali -- Malis displicere laudariest,
but yet notwithstanning, Moverer si de me Marcus Cato, si Laelius sapiens, si
duo Scipiones ista loquerentur.

But whatever they be, Non multum supra eos eminent quibus se irascendo
exaequant; and since also, qui alterum incusat probri se ipsum intueri oportet,
who would think that the Apologists, who take so tender a resentment of some
passages in the Paper (which yet I hope to approve, do disrelish more by the
distemper of the Organ, than the quality of the object; for quibus os putet,
omnia quae afferuntur putida sunt, oris, non alimenti vitio) would drop from
their Pens so odious a blot upon their Opposers, among which (none perchance
having said more in opposition to them, though nec me qui caeteros vicit
impetus) doubtless they set me with Uriah in the sore-front of the hottest
battle, that I may be smitten, and my good name dye.

Compare them, and determine if the Allegory and allusion taken from
Nebuchadnezzars Image, and the Romans pretended Magic, and an application of a
passage in Chrysostom, which lie so indigested in the rising stomachs of the
Apologists, or what else in the Paper may be capable of distaste, be not
charientisms, and civil complements, in respect of this calumny, which sure is
but the scum of a Breast boiling with an impotent choler; hic nigrae succus
loliginis, haec est Aerugo mera, Ep. 47.
is it possible; Tantae-ne animis caelestibus irae? I am more sensible of the
dishonor they have hereby done themselves (for, qui alteri maledicit sibi
convitium facit) and as Cyprian, Neque qui audit, sed qui facit convitium,
miser est) and my known deportment, especially measured by Seneca's Rule, Qui
se innocentem dicit, appellat iestem non conscientiam, might have prevented,
and will refute their calumny; and who, while I make not any external
judgment, either my Theater, or Tribunal, cannot by such clamours feel the
Music interrupted, which the Bird makes in my breast; scutum conscientiae
sufficit adversus gladium Linguae: But I shall neither much complain (for omne
natura invalidum querulum est) nor recriminate (since as Cicero to Dolabella,
tua moderatio eorum infamet infamiam) nor be passionate, because as Gregory,
Qui mala non fert, ipse sibi per impatientiam testis est quod non est bonus)
but I shall quietly take up these arma justitiae a sinistra quorum convitiator
faber est, as Augustine, and make use of this Dung spread upon me, to meliorate
and manure me into more fruitfulness; and it shall be my solace, that qui
volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae, as Suaviloquus Augustine.

SECT. IV.
Whether the Diatribe were guilty of Petitio Principii.

WHether their way be grounded on the practice of the Primitive Church, is the
great thing in question, and subject matter of this Congresse, and therefore
not to be begged in the entrance. Quantum mutatus ab illo; how can this consist
with their judgment delivered in the 2d. and 13th. Sections; nay, repeated in
the lines immediately following in this Section, where their expressions amount
to this, that they nothing weigh, or make no account of the practice of the
ancient Church, much less do they reckon it a great thing, no: would they
willingly have it brought into question upon this subject; so far are they from
making it (antomastically) the subject matter of this Congresse, well knowing,
that to re-search into the judgments and practice of the Ancients, is with
Roderick of Spain, To break open a Temple, where they shall only find Images
of men armed against them.

Magentinus, an Interpreter of Aristotle, tells us, That a begging of the
question, is, when that which is proposed to be proved is used as a medium to
prove it self, or when we use a medium, which seems to differ from the
question, but is all one with it.

Now let any man cast eye on the Paper, and see what in that place I propose to
prove, and what medium I use for proving it; and then judge whether I offend in
begging the question; or whether I may not question, that the Apologists need
to beg more speculative knowledge concerning that Sophisme, though already they
know as much practically, as any men that ever I met with.

I first insinuated, that Antiquity claimed reverence, and Novelty carried
suspicion: Next, that if the new way of the Apologists had ground or warrant
from Gods Word, the practice of the Primitive Church, the demonstration of
Reason, or did manifestly conduce to the advance of Godliness, I should not
check with it for its Novelty (in relation to our age) but when many good, and
moderate, and rational men were unsatisfied, that it had any such ground. or
warrant, or tendency; and it seemed to me only supported by popular discourses
and similitudes, I could not but excuse those that conformed not to it. All
this was by way of Introduction, rather than of Argument, or only Propositio
Narrationis, and a precapitulation of what was to be dilated, and in particular
to be demonstrated afterward: So as you may see the Apologists here make a
great Cry with little Wool; yet out of this Lana Caprina they have spun six or
seven of their Sections, making every Comma the subject of one of them; and in
every one of the rest I was as guilty of Petitio Principii, as in this point;
saving that they have omitted to speak here to the Warrant which their way
should have from Scripture, and demonstration of Reason; so as I may say with
Augustine to Cresconius, Si propterea respondisti quia tacere noluisti, non
quidem ad omnia, sed tamen respondisti; si autem ad hoc respondisti ut ea quae
a me dicta sunt, enarrares, video quidem te ad multa respondisse, sed nihil
video refellisse.

SECT. V.
Whether their Discipline advance godliness? The Sacraments are Seals of the
Conditional Covenant, which Doctrine has no affinity with semi-Pelagianisme:
Whether the exhibiting the Sacrament make men Saints? Whether the giving
thereof without discrimination on trial, blind men in their sins? or be the
setting of the Sealt, Blanks? Whether the Sacraments are privileges of the
godly? 1 Cor. 10. argumentative for a free Communion.

BUt they are struck with wonder at that (which is neither novum, rarum, aut
magnum) viz. That any are unsatisfied that their way conduces to godliness,
as if this were a principle evident in it self, and apprehensible by
intelligence, or by intuitive knowledge; or else themselves like Cato, that did
good because he could do no other; but for truth of this they are confident to
lay at stake their hearts, which else deceive them much, and their
understandings, which otherwise fail them quite; and we shall be much too
blame, if we will not be convinced by these new Topics: But whatever befall
their hearts, surely their memories have deceived, or attentions have failed
them, while to start a trivial quarrel, they talk as out of the paper of a
Rational, whereas only it speaks of a manifest conducing to godliness, and so
themselves relate the words, when they deliver the Text in gross, though they
here change it, when they lay it forth by retail.

Let me first say, that it is not sufficient to warrant their way, though it
did perchance conduce to advance of godliness in some acts or ends; for things
are not denominated good only from their ends or consequents; Bonum ex integra
causa, licet malum ex singulis defectibus: as in Logic, Ex falsis verumque
aliquando sequetur: so out of evil may good accidentally result. Corruption of
Judgment, and false Opinions, may influence toward the generation of some real
good. I doubt not but the fire of Purgatory has help to sublime and purify
some souls in this life, which it never did in the next; and, as Birds at Cair,
are hatched in Ovens by heat of fire, so that Purgatory fire has produced many
good works, though perhaps (as they say of these Birds) all of them may have
had some blemish; though no man can male uti virtute, yet he may been uti
vitio: As there are pious frauds, so there are pious injuries; there may be ex
rapina holocaustum, yet sacrifice is no plea or protection for robbery; nor may
I deprive men of their right, with design to make them more diligent and
sedulous to recover it, or others to preserve theirs.

But their way shames and restrains sin, therefore conduces to godliness:
and it were somewhat indeed, if it only shamed and restrained sin; but it
shames (by rejecting from the Sacrament) many that are not culpable of
scandalous sins, and restrains the use of those means, which properly and
directly (being Gods Ordinance) have a tendency to the preventing and beating
down of sin. Secondly, it advances godliness:

First, by engaging such as walk in it to more watchfulness, being by this
profession exposed to more observation for their ways.

1. If other men's eyes and observing of them excite to some watchfulness, and
so consequently improves godliness (as they say the Tortoyses eggs are hatched
by her eyes) it is the profession of godliness that occasions men to be
observed; not formally, as it is professed in their way.

2. This is therefore either to impale and confine all profession of godliness
to be in their way, and no other, or they conclude sophistically; for this
which is but an accidental effect, is not proper to the profession of godliness
in their way, but common to such profession in any way whatsoever; yea, it is
common to an hypocritical profession: for whosoever makes any show to be of the
City of God, is set on an Hill, and cannot be hid. The smallest motes are
discerned in the Sun, and he that pretends to more light, shall never be in the
shade: and invidious observation, like the Sunbeams, reflects most upon that
ground which seems to rise above the Level: Yet I trust this cannot excuse
hypocrisy, or blanch it with a tendency to godliness only, because a bare
profession to be good, makes men more curiously observe others, whether they
are such or not.

Secondly, in regard of the mutual watchings they submit unto: They that can
watch over each other when they dwell some of them at near 30. miles distance,
have either as admirable eyes, as he that could from the Promontory of
Lilibaeum in Sicily discern the number and bulk of the Galleys that came forth
the Port of Carthage; or else have that rare Catoptrick which Friar Bacon is
said to boast of, whereby he could read things in the Moon, that were reflected
from the Earth.

Thirdly, through the benefit of many private Exhortations and Duties, whose
Light and Heat may both kindle and cherish gracious affections. The more faulty
are the Apologists, not to make them public and more communicable, since Light
and Good are diffusive, and they kill as many as they might have benefited: Is
it lawful to do good, or to do evil? says our Savior, showing good not done,
is doing evil.

But first, why can they not be as watchful over themselves or others, if they
had a communion of Sacraments with others, as now when they separate from them?
Why should not their private Exhortations and Duties, if made public, and
others brought to partake thereof, have as great influence, in order to the
advance of godliness, intensive toward themselves, and greater extensive in
relation to others.

Has their Watch no other spring to set the Wheels a going, but hope to be
rewarded with the Sacrament, in such a singular way, whiles others are
excluded? as if they would not -- Virtutem amplectier ipsam
Praemia si to ll as: --
Sure then their Watch is only to observe the time.

Secondly, if upon admission of a multitude, the Sphere would be too great for
their virtue to extend unto, and the Horizon too large for their watchful eye
to make inspection through; yet nevertheless they need not by some general
observation of the rest, remit or neglect their special watch over so many, as
now they look after: and methinks it should be no less difficult to be
watchful over many collected in one Parish, than over so few dispersed, at such
distance, in so many Parishes.

Thirdly, if those be evil whom they desert, they are like to fall worse by
such desertion; but I cannot see it likely, that themselves should grow less
godly by their communion; in the natural body, when any parts are sick, all the
hope of help from within, is in those parts that are sound (as Plutarch tells
us upon another concernment) some men are like ambergrice, which though it have
an ungrateful odor simply and by it self, yet begins to smell most fragrantly
in compositions; and those consonants which among themselves, nor spell, nor
signify any thing, yet joined with vowels, do form a perfect found; Aliquod
bonum propter vicinum bonum; There is a winning by conversation, (as one stick
kindles another) the example and emulation of good men, the desires to approve
themselves to such (as Antigonus called Zeno his Theater; and Aeschines never
did better, than when he spoke in the presence of Philip) and the awe they have
of such (as Cato kept the whole Theater in order; and of like influence was it
in the Poet to be Coram Bruto) conduces much to meliorate actions and persons.

Fourthly, why should they more distrust themselves to be like the Grape in
this quality, Uvaque livorem contracta ducit ab uva, than the rest to resemble
it in this property, Botrus circa botrum citius maturescit? True goodness is
like Elixir, that by commixion with baser metals, improves them, not imbaseth
it self; like Light, has more splendour amid darkness; and like fire, heats
more by an Antiperistasis: and is their goodness only of affinity with the
Sentida, which withers, if any touch with it?

Fifthly, if by this separation themselves like the spirits and extractions of
Chemists, become more pure and virtuous; yet what becomes of caput mortuum,
those dregs of the people, as they call them? they not only lose the influence
of their godly Examples, private Exhortations, and Duties, but the fruit and
help of the public Ordinance, from which they are retrenched: Cannot these men
go to Heaven, unless alone, as Cyprian said to Pupian? Is the good less,
because communicable? (which is as much as to say, good is less good, because
it is good; for the nature of good, is to be communicable) Or is their eye
evil, because Gods and his Churches is-good? As he that saw the Votive Tables
in Neptunes Temple of those that escaped shipwreck after their Vows, asked,
Where were the Monuments of those that were drowned after they had vowed? So
what becomes of them that be excluded, while these are so improved by their
appropriate exercises? Is it fit that some men should feast, while the most
starve? Is it not better that many should receive Sportulam, than a few rectam?
Does their way advance godliness, in those whom they reject? which are diverse
hundreds, to one they admit: If it advance the continuous quantity of
godliness, sure it does not the discretive. How many in so many years, have
they gained to godliness; that is, to their way (for as Tychonius said of his
Donatists, Quod volumus sanctum est) how much have they enlarged their
Pomaerium's? I think there need no Libri Elephantini to record and catalogue
their Proselytes: they say, the goodness of Phsifick is best demonstrated a
posteriori, by the effects in working; and sure they cannot boast much of what
in this they may have wrought or effected, when their Prolocutor has above 5.
or 600. in his Parish, and has not (I take it) above 5. or 6. of them sublimed
into his Church by all his Separations.

Lastly, are there none godly but they? Or they more godly for this way, and
would not have been godly, or not so godly but for this way? Are they of this
way more godly, then many that are not of it? If they evince this, Herbam
porrigo; if not, Urbem defendam dum vita atque arma supersint, I cannot with
truth say of all, nor will speak with reproach of any, as Augustine does of the
Donatists, Damnant for as quod intus operantur; Yet I say, that if they deny
there are as godly men that cross their way, as any that walk along in it,
whereas they say, they boast not of their holiness, I shall tell them, that
they not only boast, but falsely boast thereof; the light of some of them does
shine, but we cannot discern it make any extraordinary blaze, and their Lights
need snuffers too, as well as others: they are many of them perhaps godly men,
denominating them from the better part, and according to their general course,
not every particular action, and by their main end, not every of their ways,
they have their alloy and rotten grains, and must be weighed with their grains,
as well as other men. And though I am none of those who like Leaches suck out
the corrupt blood; or like Quails, feed upon poison; neither do delight to
stir stinking Carrions, which should rather be buried; yet there are public
Records which cannot be hidden, of grievous and execrable crimes, whereof some
of their Communion (who were not only ex domo novitiorum sed professerum) have
been convicted, and which they have confessed; but though they do not expressly
boast of their holiness, yet they are conceited thereof, and implicitly and
interpretatively boast of it, while they separate from others, as not holy
enough for their Communion, and suppose they should be polluted to communicate
with them. All righteousness is by comparison; and though Guicciardine said of
the Popes, that he was a good Pope, whose wickedness exceeded not other men's;
yet they that profess to be holyer then others, and reject others from their
Communion only because not holy enough, if they be not much better then other,
they are much worse; and as those little Globes that have a Diurnal motion
about the Sun, we say are spots in the Sun, which yet are Stars, and would
other-where be so denominated, were they not so near his out-shining light: so
that holiness which would be passable in others, will not be tolerable in them
that pretend to so much; and it must be a greater Star that shall appear of any
magnitude in any higher Sphaere.

God has given sundry of their Meetings so much experience of growth, as to
knowledge and affection this way, as plentifully confutes this Paradox:
confutes it in order to themselves perhaps, if they had stood in doubt thereof;
not to others who cannot take notice of, nor have seen such experience. But
this is but Testimonium domesticum, the belief hereof is resolved into their
own testimony; and it is strange, that in a Democratical Church Government they
would imitate the Prerogative of Monarchs, and write test meipso: Moses his
face shined to others, and he knew it not; but it seems their shines, and
themselves only know it. But what improvement of graces soever has been
occasioned by their Meetings, as St. Augustine says of the Miracles wrought by
Heretics, they were done to confirm that truth which they held common with the
Church, not their Heretical Opinions; so that increment of goodness was caused
by the word and prayers at these Meetings, not formally, or the rather as they
were Meetings in a way of Separation.

The old impure way of Pell-mell tends to many evils, it strengthens the hands
of the wicked: And for this we must take their word, unless it can be proved by
Jeremy 23.14. (Where though I find the Prophets of Jerusalem reproved for
strengthening the hands of evildoers; yet I do not read any thing to persuade
me, that they did this by admitting them to the Sacraments and Sacrifices:) Or
can be confirmed by Luke the 13.26. where is mentioned, that they that shall
stand without shall say unto the Master of the house, We have eaten and drunk
in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets: But I did never till now
imagine, nor I think did any other dream, that this was eating and drinking at
the Sacrament: or if it were so to be understood, then to admit them to the
Word preached also, may as well strengthen the hands of the wicked, as to give
them admission to the Sacrament; for they plead as well his teaching in the
street, as their eating and drinking in his presence: And I rather think it
worthy very serious consideration, whether their way of excluding men
pell-mell, and in the lump, does not seem more to strengthen the hands of the
notoriously wicked, while they see no other censure, or detestableness in this
kind fall on themselves, then befall such as are innocent of Crimes notorious.
And as contemptu famae and contemnuntur virtutes, so when men are precipitously
made to be of contemptible fame, they are put into some hazard to contemn
virtue: Peccandi occasionem suspicando fecerunt, says Seneca: and as some wise
men think, in the case of jealousy, to hold any in suspicion is the way to put
the matter out of suspicion: Plerumque bonos tractat^o pravos esse facit; so
some may with more facility be tempted to fall to worse, when if they should so
lapse, scarce can worse befall them; and being put to shame without great
crimes, they will be less ashamed to become criminous, Liberius peccant cum
pudor omnis abest,

And (since as Mago Almoner to Henry the seventh told the King, by occasion of
the History of Joseph and his Mistress, It is one thing what a man should do,
another what he will do) some men, though their Crimes have not been so great
as to merit repulsion from the Sacrament; yet their grace perhaps may be so
little, as that being repelled, they may be too conformable to the resolution
of Otho in Tacitus, Cum nocentem innocentemque idem exitus manet, acrioris viri
esse merito perire.

Secondly, while wicked men enjoy the privileges of the godly, it will be
difficult to convince them of their impenitency and want of conversion: It
seems then, that (as Pliny tells us) as the presence of an Adamant frustrates
or suspends the attractive virtue of the Lodestone, so the Word by
participation of the Sacraments is defeated of its power to teach, to convince,
or to judge, and cease to be quick, and powerful, and piercing, etc. (all
which effects we should have rather conceived might have been furthered and
improved by the Sacraments.)

Let the Minister make them Saints in the Chancel (he may now do it in the
Church as well since their Tables are no longer turned Altar-wise.) they will
give him leave to make them Devils in the Pulpit till he be weary. This might
be some color for this effect of obduracy from their principles, who suppose
all ought to be real Saints that communicate; but there can be none from ours,
who assert, That Jesus sat down with the 12. and one of them was a Devil; but
yet while they profess to admit none but Saints, and persons regenerate, the
admission may make some rest secure upon that privilege, without more
re-search or inspection into themselves, and so to deceive themselves, Advers.
Anabap. l. 6. c. 9. p. 231.
because they have deceived others, Metuendum est, says Bullinger, ne caena
domini plerumque detur summis hypocritis et subtrahatur long dignioribus,
etenim qui se demiserint and humilitatem simulaverint, etiamsi animo long
turpissimo sint, et Evangelium spernant, nihilominus pro optimis et
sanctissimis habebuntur, qui sunt dignissimi caena dom^ni; qui vero apertiores
sint, et bilariores erant, et obnoxii communibus peccatis, a semulatione autem
alieni sunt, Cord tamen firmiter divinae misericordiae fidunt, etc. quia
nondum illis pro peccatis suis satisfecerunt, neque illis probantur ac nondum
satis digni videntur, excludentur a caena domini. This he speaks of the
Anabaptists, but it is as applicable to others.

The door of the visible Church is incomparably wider then the door of Heaven,
(says learned Baxter) and Christ is so tender, so bountiful, Saints
everlasting Rest, Part. 4. Sect. 3. p. 104, 105.
and so forward to convey his Grace, and the Gospel so free an invitation to
all, that surely Christ will keep no man off: if they will come quite over in
spirit unto Christ, they shall be welcome; if they will come but to a visible
profession, he will not deny them admittance there, because they intend to go
no farther, but will let them come as near as they will; and that they came no
farther shall be their own fault; and it is not his readiness to admit such,
nor the opening of the door of the visible Church, that makes men hypocrites,
but their own wickedness: Christ will not keep men out for fear of making them
hypocrites; but when the Net is drawn unto the shore, the Fishes shall be
separated, etc. And in the precedent page he says, Their being baptized
persons, if at age, or members of the Universal Church, into which it is that
they are baptized, is a sufficient evidence of their interest to the Supper,
till they do by heresy or scandal blot this (evidence) -- and this after much
doubting dispute and study of Scripture (he says) he speaks as confidently, as
almost any truth of equal moment.

The way of pell-mell blinds men in their wretchedness: very like! blindes them
with light, and poisons them with the antidote, just as the means is
destructive to the end. Light may indeed some-while a little blind some weak
eyes, yet it is the proper means of seeing, and to keep them in the dark, will
perpetuate their blindness, not make them see better.

Does it not argue blindness of understanding to think by any argument to
evince, that it shall either blind men in their wretchedness, or impede their
conversion, by sealing to them an assurance, that if they believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ they shall be saved by his death, which is the sum of the Covenant
of Grace, whereof the Sacraments are Seals?

To raise our Structure the higher, and make it stand more firmly, we should
perchance dig the Foundation deeper; and because this erroneous principle is
the Fountain of those bitter Waters of strife, our Marah and Meribath, it might
seem expedient to cast a little Salt into the Spring of those Waters to heal
them. A Covenant is a mutual compact or bargain between God and Man, consisting
of mercies on Gods part granted over to man, and of conditions on man's part
required by God: it results from Gods antecedent and voluntary love that he
entered into paction with man, and performs his absolute promise of giving
Faith and perseverance to his Elect: to which promise no condition is
imaginable to be annexed, which is not comprehended in the promise it self, but
to Gods Covenant of conferring other mercies, which flows from his consequent
love (which is a natural property in God, whose proper nature inclines to
reward good and evil) is a restipulation and condition of duty annexed. Of this
conditional Covenant only (the former being indeed rather a promise then a
Covenant, being only Gods act, without any mutual act of man) the Sacraments
are divine external seals (and I suppose it is no such just cause, as may
legitimate a war, whether it be more proper to say, they are conditional seals
of the Covenant) to testify and confirm unto us, that we shall surely acquire
what God has promised, if we seal back as it were our counterpart unto God,
and performing the condition render unto him what he requires, as a conditional
promise is made absolute by performance of the condition, which otherwise
obliges not.

That the Sacraments are not Seals of the absolute Covenant, nor set to without
respect to the condition, carries the stamp or seal of the Corporation of
Protestants, and those which have set their hands to any Writing against
Bellarmine, in that controversy of the efficacy of the Sacraments, have
attested this truth. And some others of the Luminaries of our own Sphaere have
reflected much light upon the point. I therefore (whose harvest cannot attain
to their Gleanings) shall not light my Candle in the Sun, nor in the worse
sense bring an Owl to Athens, Tu sequere a long et vestigia semper adora. It
may seem as much delirous to discourse of Military Glory after Hannibal, as it
was for Phormio to do it before him; and a Smith may seem already to have run
mad in undertaking (as he of old did to have effected) the amendment of an
instrument of Archimedes. Only I shall say, that whatever some rather odiously
then ignorantly insinuate, this is yet neither the language of Ashdod, nor
carries any stamp, or holds any affinity with Semi-Pelagianisme (or if you will
call it so; Arminianisme, which is Synonymous (for Arminius and Socinus have
had the fortunes to have these bastard and illegitimate Doctrines put upon
them, which had other elder Fathers) as Sextus 5. his Obelisk, and Farnezi his
Bull, and other Monuments, though formed and erected by the old Roman
Emperors, are now denominated from those that of late times have redeemed them
from rubbish, and restored their beauty) but the Doctrine we hold forth, has
no Analogy therewith: For beside that we assert Faith to be absolutely and
infallibly infused by God, per modum creationis, and nothing to concur to
conversion, ex part voluntatis causative sed tantum subjective; and, ut
credamus, to be wrought passively, in nobis sine nobis, although actively ipsum
credere be produced, nobiscum simul tempore consentientibus et co-operantibus,
whereas the Arminians symbolizing with the Jesuits, affirm Faith to be purely
an elicit act of Free Will, through a moral persuasion only, upon an object
congruously proposed, alliciens consensum non efficiens; and Grace (whose name
they have antiquated, as well as destroyed the Nature, substituting the word
help or motion in stead thereof) to be a general and indifferent influxe,
terminable by man's good or evil free will. Besides this, we are now disputing
of Gods Covenant and Promise in time, not of his Decree before all time. If
thou believe, thou shall be saved, is not of the nature of a practical decree,
but of a promise, and is only doctrinal and enunciative: neither do we (as
they do) make Gods Decree conditional, but only the execution thereof, and not
the will of God to save but the salvation of man, Gods eternal purpose in
saving being absolute in respect of any cause or condition impulsive in the
object, not in regard of the means in the execution, and order to the end. Gods
promises for their form correspond not with his purposes, his promises being
according to the manner of his executions, but his purposes have a different
method: What he purposes, he performs for the matter, but not as he purposed
for the manner: he saves in the same manner that he decreed to save; but in
executing or saving does not follow the same order which he did in decreeing:
this which is last in execution, is first in intention; Dr. Kend. Vndicat. part
2. c. 7.
and that which is performed on a condition, was absolutely intended: the
intention was to perform it upon condition, but upon no condition was it so
intended. We do not therefore say God intended upon condition of Faith to give
Salvation; but that he intended to give Salvation, upon condition of Faith;
intending to give Faith absolutely, and Salvation conditionally.

But the Sacraments therefore being only Seals of the Conditional Covenant,
then men are not made Saints by being made partakers of them. Indeed the use of
them may help to make men Saints by their influence and efficacy, but they do
not imply, or presuppose all those to be absolute Saints that partake them; but
only Saints conditional, if they seal back their counterpart to God, and
fulfill that Condition whereupon he makes his grants and conveyances: or only
relative and notional, not real Saints, Saints by calling, not by
qualification; as the Apostle writing to the entire Churches, among which
(especially among the Corinthians) many walked inordinately, calls them
Saints, that is, such as are made partakers of Gods Covenant, and Members of
his Church; not Saints actu, sed vocatione, professione, debito, (as A Lapide)
called to be Saints, taking the word (called) (...), and exegetically, ut sint
Sancti, as Paraeus and Aretius; and so called charitative, quia cha it as omnes
habet pro vere conversis, qui fidem et poenitentiam profitentur: such Saints,
as according to the idiom of Scripture, are Synonymous with Professors of the
Christian Faith: for it is not likely to be conceived by any, and will be more
difficult to be proved by the Apologists (who elsewhere say Professors are
visible Saints) that all those Saints whose bowels Philemon refreshed, and
whose feet the Widows had washed, and who had share of the Collections and
Contributions, and Ministrings, had all given evidence of their real Sanctity:
or that Paul when he shut up the Saints in prison, did tarry and forbear to do
it, till he was convinced they were really such; but it was sufficient they
were professors of Christianity, and that was enough to denominate them Saints.
He that is a member of the Church, is within the Covenant, and is in
Scripture Phrase a Saint, though not living altogether conformably to his
profession, (those privileges which are given to the visible Church, in
respect of internal essence, (according to Tychonius his Rule de permixta
Ecclesia) being attributed to the visible, in regard of external existence, as
to be Saints, holy children of God, Saints everlasting rest, part 4. Sec. 3. p.
105.
Gal. 3.26. Christ's body, 1 Cor. 2.13. branches of Christ, Joh. 15.2.) and
there are many Saints, or sanctified men (says Mr. Baxter) that yet shall
never come to heaven, who are only Saints by their separation from Paganism
into Fellowship with the visible Church; but not Saints by separation from the
ungodly into the Fellowship of the mystical body of Christ: He is therefore (as
I said) a relative, though no real Saint; and the entering into, and the
acceptance of the terms of the Covenant, is common to very Reprobates; and in
that notion a grave and learned Divine says, Mr. Balls ans. to Can, part 2. p.
52. Tom 4. l. 1. c. 12.
that Cain was in profession a Saint before he had discommon'd himself. And we
grant, that such an external, or (as Suarez calls it) a Legal Sanctification
the Sacraments always indeed do effect; so says the famous Chamier,
Sanctificationem illam quae pertinet ad externam vocationem in Ecclesiam,
quomodo Paulus dicebat ramos, id est, omnes sui temporis Judaeos esse sanctos,
quod eorum truncus, id est Abraham Sanctus fuisset, Romans 11. et filios fidelium
sanctos, 1 Cor. 7. Hanc sanctitatem concedimus semper conferri per Sacramenta,
nimirum quia utrinque in confesso est, esse testes professionis Christianae,
unde sequitur quicunque Sacramentorum sit particeps, hunc pertinere ad eum
populum qui profiteatur Religionem veram; and if they will have none to be made
such Saints by profession, but those that are Saints in verity, I shall desire
them to perpend, that their Argument is more forcible to forbid the admission
of such as are not manifest Saints, and approvedly holy to be Churchmembers,
then to be partakers of the Sacraments: for indeed the former are expressly, and
in terms called Saints and holy, and therefore with more color might they
argue, that there ought to be probation made whether they were such before they
were admitted into Church Fellowship, and what they shall answer to evade the
force of the Argument against admitting none but upon trial to be
Church Members, may perhaps be caught up and returned to frustrate the Argument
for non admission without trial to the Sacrament, and vox tua facta mea.

2. Not to question why the Sacraments, (or indeed this of the Lords Supper,
and not Baptism also) are made the privileges of the godly, and not other
Ordinances also: Or how external and sensible Ordinances can be privileges of
an invisible and indiscernable Society: Irregenerate men admitted to the
Sacraments enjoy no proper privileges of the godly; but as is their Faith,
such are their privileges: A common Dogmatical or Historical Faith externally
professed, gives them title to the common external seals of the Covenant.

External Ordinances are not only privileges of the godly in facto esse, sed
etiam in fieri: and either the Apologists must say they are never deceived in
these which they admit, or else sometimes notwithstanding their caution,
themselves are not privileged from communicating the Sacraments to the
unregenerate; and in so doing, they set the seal to a blank, and cooperate to
their damnation, and the act contracts more of guilt in them then it can do in
us, in whom it is for the impulsive cause, only an error of charity; and for
the matter thereof, if it should be evil, yet is not so formally to us, because
we are not thereof convinced in our Consciences; whereas they impose upon
themselves a necessity of acting that, which they can have no infallible
assurance they shall not fail in doing of, and yet are persuaded the failer
thereof occasions that which cannot be lawfully done. As it is no obvious thing
or facile work for any man to obtain an evidence of his own regeneration, so it
is infinitely more perplexed and intricate to acquire such assurance concerning
another: and therefore upon this principle, that the Sacrament appertains to
none but the truly regenerate, as the doubting soul can never approach, and so
the sick be cast into an incapacity of a Physician that most needs him, and the
weak in Faith be frustrate of that which was instituted for confirming thereof,
and the humble soul will be most afraid to come, and the presumptuous be most
forward, since baser Metals soonest run, and are most volatile, the richer are
more fixed, and the full ear hangs the head, when the empty pricks up: and as he
that knows most, discerns best that he knows little; so where there is much
grace, there often the want thereof is most complained of; whereas when the
strong man armed keeps the house, the things possessed are in peace: so also no
Minister can admit any man with comfort, because not in Faith, and therefore
with sin, nor without a snare, because not in allibly, but doubtingly. For
whereas it may be answered, that it is enough to act with the judgment of
Charity, and to go as far as that can lead and direct, I shall reply, That
Charity is very incompetent to hold the Beam, when things are to be waighed out
in the Scales of Justice, and with a suum cuique tribuere. Charity presumes
all are good that are not manifestly evil, interprets all doubtful things
concerning persons in the better part, and judges aliorum bona certa meliora,
certa mala minora, bona dubia certa, dubia mala nulla; which though it exalt
the excellency of the virtue absolutely, yet it shows it is not respectively
fit to be a just Judge, which must be impartial; and by what signs soever he
may seek to make judgment, the possibility of being deceived will render him
still pendulous and doubtful, whether those signs be certain, or his
disquisition and deliberation sufficient: and besides, if any shall say, that
they admit none that are manifestly wicked, but such only as being closely and
secretly such cannot be discerned to be hypocrites, I shall answer them, as
Augustine did Cresconius, Contra Cresc. l. 2. c. 23, 24, 26. Tom. 7. p. 47.49.
Cur conaberis occultum excipere peccatorem, quem Scriptura non excipit, non
ait oleum manifesti peccatoris, sed absolute oleum peccatoris, -- Nec qui
Baptizatur a mortuo manifesto, sed absolute a mortuo -- ita nec occultus
excipitur, quo evertitur omne quod loquer's: so in like manner they are
unregenerate, absolutely such, to whom the privileges of the godly are to be
denied, and not occult unregenerate men only.

3. Why is the one Sacrament more the privilege of the godly, As cited by
Bid, on 1 Cor. 10. and often by Chamier, v. g. Tom. 4. S. 11. c. 5. Sect. 27.
or more makes those Saints to whom it is exhibited then the other? Are they
not both alike equally Seals of the Covenant of Grace, and is not the Eucharist
the renewing of that Covenant which was formerly made by us, or others for us
in Baptism? Et institutio paria, et significatio similia, et finis facit
aequalia. It is no ways to be doubted, says Augustine, that every one of the
faithful does partake of the body and blood of Christ, when by Baptism he is
made a member of Christ.

They administer the Sacrament of Baptism to Infants, of whose sanctity they
can have no prognostics, and of whose Parents holiness they have no
Diagnostick signs: to tell me that other qualifications are more requisite to
the one Sacrament then the other is nihil ad rhombum, that is not now our
subject matter, but whether if the Sacrament of the Eucharist be imparted to
any that give not satisfactory testimony of grace, the privileges of the godly
be prostituted; and if so, why then it should not hold alike in the other
Sacrament of Baptism also: truly, as all the Rivers run into the Sea from
whence chiefly they are derived, so let the Learned perpend, Whether these
conclusions that seem to tend and lead thereunto, Advers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9,
p. 229.
did not first flow from the principles of Anabaptisme, that great Abyss of
modern Heresies; though perchance as Rivers they may seem at first to run a
quite contrary course from the Sea, and to move so silently, that none can
discern their motion thitherward, Post doctrinam de caena domini scrupulose
quaerunt Anabaptistae (says Bullinger) quorum causa instituta sit, et quibus
danda est, ac multa de separatione dicunt, atque hac ratione cae^am domini
amabilem et gaudio plenam, horribilem and tristem faciunt, ac aditum ad eam
adeo coarctant, ut pii quoque homines ab ea abhorreant, et eam potius fugiant
quam accedant. And as a straight Line drawn out in length is weak, and cannot
be strengthened but by being re-doubled, and bowed back again, whereby it draws
near to the nature of a circular Line, which is more strong by the support
which each part yields to another: so let it also be considered by the Senate
of the Learned, (for these points need rather Oedipus then Davus) whether the
Apologists can be true and firm to their principle of admitting none to the one
Sacrament, as being the proper privilege of the godly, without satisfactory
tokens of godliness, unless they also suspend Infants from the other, until
they grow into a capacity of giving such marks and demonstrations; and also,
whether they can exclude the Parents from the one Sacrament, without rejecting
their Children from the other, since the Parents Faith is the ground of claim
to the Child; and if a Dogmatical Faith, and External Profession cannot entitle
the Parent to the Eucharist, whether can it give the Child a right to Baptism,
since quod facit tale debet esse magis tale: But for my part, were I convinced
of the truth of these principles of the Apologists, I should have strong
tentations to turn Anabaptist, and doubt I could not else be true to them, or
maintain them.

This may also pertinently serve to blank or founder their Hackney Argument,
that the seal is to set a blank and false testimony that is given by a
promiscuous admission; for when the Sacrament, the seal of Faith, is
administered to those that are not true Believers, the seal is set to testify
and confirm that truth of sacred Writ, If thou believe, thou shall be saved,
(which is the compendium and abstract of the Covenant.) This promise is made to
unbelievers, though it be the object of Faith; but the thing promised, which is
the appropriate object of Hope, is not to be acquired by any that performs not
the condition: Besides, not only by the rule of contraries, nor alone by an
equal accommodation of that rule in interpreting the Laws, Praeceptum faciens
includit praeceptum non faciens, Mark 16.16.
(and therefore consequently the promise made to doing, implies the threat
against not doing) but even in terms it is expressed, that as he that believes
shall be saved, so he that believes not shall be damned; and therefore the
Sacraments being seals of the Covenant, as they confirm and ascertain the mercy
to the faithful partakers, so do they the judgment to the unfaithful receiver:
and therefore never is the seal set to a blank, to whomsoever applied, for
somewhat of holy writ is still sealed, either salvation or damnation, according
to the performance of the condition or not; as the same Deed or Writing sealed
and delivered may (according to Covenants) contain a grant and confirmation of
a right and estate, upon condition of some services; and upon default thereof,
that right and estate to be forfeited, and a mulct or penalty to be then
incurred; and he to whom the Original is sealed, may seal back his counterpart,
and oblige himself to observe the condition, before he have performed it, and
though perchance afterward he break it, and so analogically he may receive Gods
seal, the Sacrament, and set his own by taking it, that yet believes not; and
as in the Word preached, which is the savor of life unto life, and of death
unto death, and a sweet savor howsoever in both, he that believes takes his
part of the promise; he that does not, receives his portion, which is the
threat; so that to either it may be said, toll quod tuum est and vade, and the
terror of the threatening may conduce and dispose to the acceptance of the
promise, as fear introduces love, as the needle does the thread (in the
expression of St. Augustine) even so it fares in the visible Word, the
Sacrament.

Farther, when the Sacrament which is Gods external Seal of this promise is
applied to an unbeliever, it has all that is essential to Gods actual sealing
of the truth thereof, the promise being made and published, the Sacrament by
institution signifying it, by similitude representing it, by sanctification
assuring it, and God thereby engaging himself to verify it; in respect of
external sealing nothing more is done to a true believer, (for of internal
sealing and making the external to be successful or efficacious, is not the
question, neither may we confound the external sealing with the inward, which
is made by the spirit only) nothing is done more in relation to sealing to him
that performs the condition, than to him that fulfilleth it not. As when a
Writing is sealed and delivered to the use of two to become a Deed when a
condition is complied with, or else to be as an escrol, he indeed that observes
the Condition only has the estate thereby conveyed, but the sealing is alike
to both. And this Conditional proposition is an absolute truth, even when made
unto a Reprobate: though it be false that he believes, and that he shall be
saved, yet it is true, that if he believe he shall be saved; for if the
connection be true, though both parts severally considered, or though one or
other of the parts resolved into a Categorical proposition be false, yet the
proposition is true; Dr. Kend. ubi supra.
the verity whereof depends on the connection between the Predicate in the
Antecedent, and the Predicate in the Consequent, which put together so as the
Predicate of the Antecedent become the Subject, and the Predicate of the
Consequent be made the Predicate in a Categorical proposition, it will result
only into this indubitable truth, He that believes shall be saved.

Indeed if this Sacrament should be exhibited to an Infidel, not added to the
Church, who had entered into no Covenant with God, nor assented by any
Historical Faith to the written Word, or should have the Sacraments exhibited
without the Word, then they might argue that the seal were set to a blank, but
being exhibited to those who are in Covenant with God, (as all are that be of
the visible Church, how else can their children be baptized?) and have received
by a Dogmatical Faith the written Word of promise, whereof the Sacraments are
seals, there can be no blank but in the argument, if they shall in this case
urge it; they will not say that it is an untruth or false testimony when it is
delivered in the Word, though unto reprobates to whom that promise is offered,
and the offer chiefly bottomed on the sufficiency of Christ's death, to save all
that shall believe, it being true that Christ by his death merited salvation
for all upon condition of believing, if thereby we imply only the connection
between Faith and Salvation, so that all believers shall be saved, (though it
be not truth if we thereby intend that he merited salvation for all persons)
his death indeed being sufficient for all, in regard of the price and merit
thereof, though we cannot properly say he dyed sufficiently in respect of
Christ's purpose in laying down his life, and of the efficacy of his death, I
say the offer of this promise to reprobates is grounded chiefly on the
sufficiency of Christ's death to save believers, and partly on our insufficiency
to know who shall believe.

And if this proposition be no false testimony when it is held forth in the
Word, wherefore should it cease to be true when it is given in the Sacrament,
why should the same thing be true when proposed thetically, generally and to
the ear, and false when applied hypothetically, particularly and to the eye; as
if the essence of truth consisted in the manner and way of representation, and
not rather in the adaequation of things to the understanding? If they shall
object that the Sacraments are mutual engaging seals, and as Gods seals on his
part, so ought the receivers to set their seals to the counterpart, and when
God obliges himself to be their God conditionally, they absolutely promise to
be his people; and therefore when wicked men partake of the Sacrament, in them
at least it is a false testimony, while they profess to be what they are not;
and because all that are within the Covenant of Grace de jure should be Saints,
they ought to exclude all such of whom they are not satisfied and convinced
that they are such de facto. I answer, 1. That I grant there ought to be the
answer or restipulation of a good conscience in all for to be saved, but not in
all that partake of the seals of grace and salvation. Yet whosoever receives
them does or ought to set his seal to what is thereby sealed to him, which is
only, that he that believes in the Lord Jesus Christ shall be saved. 2. Let
them assign a cause why the same reason holds not in Baptism, and why upon
that account they adjourn not the baptising of Infants, till they can render
that satisfaction, seeing Baptism is a seal of the Covenant as well as the
Eucharist, and the seal is set to a blank when the baptized has no faith,
as well as when the Communicant believes not. 3. Not to mention that there is a
kind of mutual Covenant between God and Man, in hearing of the Word, God
obliging himself by his promises there revealed, and in us there is a virtual
engagement and profession of our religious reception of Gods will, and
subjection of our Consciences thereunto with belief of his truth, hope of the
good there promised, and love of God, which therein reveals himself, all which
though wicked men seem to profess, yet nothing thereof they perform. But to
insist on prayer, there is the like mutual Covenant, God obliges himself by
his promise (though indeed as Durand aptly, Ames. Cas. Consc. l. 4. c. 16. p.
187.
promissio divina in Scripturis sanctis non sonat in aliquam obligationem, sed
insinuat meram dispositionem liberalitatis Divinae, and thereby (as Thomas,)
Deus non nobis fit simpliciter debtor, sed sibi ipsi) in some sense, to hear
our prayers, if made in Faith, and in our prayers there is always an implicit,
and for the most part an explicit and express promise and engagement to God, to
endeavor to attain what we pray for, to glorify God with all which we obtain
by prayer, to observe his will that is pleased to accept the representation of
ours, and to turn that verbal praise which we give him into real, by glorifying
him by our religious lives, and complying with our vows, and verifying our
professions of service, without all which prayer becomes nothing but a mockery
of God. But do not wicked men in all this flatter him with their mouth, Psalm.
78.36.
and lie unto him with their tongues? and if then men must be suspended from
the Sacrament until they approve their holiness to the satisfaction of the
Church, lest otherwise they make an hypocritical engagement and false promise,
it seems to me to follow that upon the same account they ought not to be
admitted to prayers. Neither are or ought men to be Saints only in order to
the Sacrament, and not to other Ordinances; and if they must be rejected from
the Sacraments till they give convincing signs of their sanctity, because all
that are admitted to join in this highest act of Church Communion (as they
style it) ought de jure to be Saints, it seems to me that till they render such
signs they ought to be excluded altogether from all Church Communion, and to be
accounted as Heathens and Publicans, and no members at all of the visible
Church; for the Church and Saints by calling signify the same thing, and all
ought to be Saints that are of the Church.

Lastly, I may not deny that (through an accidental abuse which may not
prejudice things good in themselves) wicked men may be facil to flatter and
indulge themselves with a good conceit of their condition, though sinful, or an
hope of their impunity in their evils, because of their participation of the
Sacraments. It seems by what St. Paul delivers, 1 Cor. 10.
the Corinthians are an exemplary instance hereof, being guilty of the like
presumption and security. But what way of cure does the Apostle use to prevent
or remedy the malady? Truly not Empyrick-like straightway to take the knife in
hand and fall to cutting often, (for he does not tell them that therefore all
ought to be suspended beside manifest Saints) but he proceeds dogmatically, and
to expel and correct the error of the Corinthians (which also lets out the
vital blood and spirits of this Paradox of the Apologists) he better does
instruct and principle them, showing that the Sacraments which were common to
good and evil men, could give no privilege to sin, nor protection from
punishment. For quemadmodum tu comedis corpus Christi, sic illi Manna; and
quomodo tu bibis sanguinem, Homil. 18. in 2 Cor. In locum. Calvin Instit. l. 2.
c. 10. Sect. 5. p. 148. Aquinas, Justinian. Estius, Lapide, etc. English late
Annot. Chamier. to. 4. l. 3. c. 2. p. 55.
stc illi aquam ex petra, says Chrysostom. The Fathers did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink; the same, non in symbolis,
seu signis, sed significatione seu re significata, as Piscator; iisdem quoque
symbolis illustrem inter eos gratiam suam reddiderit; the same cum nobis, with
us, not only the same among themselves inter se, as the Papists would have it,
for that would take off the energy of the Apostles argument, whose scope being
ut ostendat quod sicut illis non profuit quod tantum donum sunt assecuti, ita
nec his quod consequuti sunt baptismum and spiritualia perceperint mysteria,
nisi sint ostensuri vitam dignam gratia, in the words of Chrysostom, wherein
not only all Protestants concur but even many Pontificians themselves,
therefore ut apta esset comparatio, oportuit oftendere nihil esse
inaequalitatis inter nos and ipsos in iis bonis quibus false gloriari vetabat.
Ergo pares in Sacramentis non facit, nec ullam praerogativam nobis relinquit,
says Calvin, and therefore in illa comparatione rem eandem significatam esse
fundamentum comparandi -- nulla consequentia si compararentur inaequalia aut
dissimilia -- nam si res impar, Ibid. c. 1.
in promptu exceptionem esse futuram, Periisse Israelitas non participes
beneficiorum quorum nobis Sacramenta sunt, adds Chamier: and the drift of the
Apostle here is to compare those Sacramental Types in the old Law with the two
Sacraments in the new, and that in two respects:

First, for the same nature or substance of mysteries in both; and secondly,
Mede Diatr. p. 556. Chamier Tom. 4. l. 3. c. 1.
for the same condition of the receivers, if either they abuse them, or walk
unworthy of them, says a late judicious Writer. They were therefore the same
spiritual meat and drink, in re (as Chamier) non in modo rei, (their Sacraments
praefigurative, ours rememorative, and ours having ex ampliore revelationis
modo gratiam uberiorem, as Calvin, non in specie visibili, sed virtute
spirituali -- in signis diversis eadem fides, as Augustine, and out of him
Anselm, there being discrepantia in signis, In Joh. Tract. 26. and 45. Tom. 9.
convenientia in re significata, as Paraeus, theirs being antitypes of ours,
signs of the same things, and ut apud Graecos Grammaticos (...) sunt elementa
quorum idem sonus, tempus deversum, as Chamier, and so this was the same meat
and spiritual drink too, because spirituale aliquod significans, Ut supra.
as Augustine and Piscator; figura spiritualis, as Sa, quia in symbolum and
significationem spiritualium, as Salmeron, and quatenus habuerint rationem
Sacramenti, adds Piscator. So then however these were Sacramenta
extraordinaria, transitoria and temporaria, yet being the same with ours (or
else Christ is not ours, for that Rock was Christ) the same with ours in use,
end and effect, and operating, Tom. 4. c. 9. p. 36.
says Ames, eodem genere non gradu efficaciae, and agreeing with ours omnibus
iis capitibus, quae sunt de natura Sacramenti, as Chamter; and therefore the
Fathers receiving the Sacramental Communication of the body and blood of Christ
indeed, Confut. Rhem. Test. in 1 Cor. 10.3. Willet contr. 11. q. 2. p. 544.
(as not only Fulk and Willet, but the whole Protestant Host of the living God
do contend) yet many of them God was not well pleased with, some whereof were
Idolaters, Fornicators, Murmurers, did lust, did tempt Christ, yet the same
spiritual meat and drink was received by all Sacramentally, though effectually
only by believers, the spiritual thing by the good alone, the Elements, which
were spiritual in their signification, by evil men also. And thereupon likewise
I hope it will seem evident to unprejudiced and unbiassed men, that the
Sacraments are not only communicable to such as have given positive signs and
demonstrations of Holiness.

There are such answers given to the Argument drawn from this Scripture, as
smack of some willingness to correct the Text, rather than their Models, and to
set their spurs in the Apostles side, rather than to loose the reins in their
hands.

Some tell us; Chamier ubi supra, Sect. 32. p. 17.
First, that those were extraordinary Sacraments; but what then? Extraordinaria
habent quicquid est de natura ordinariorum, excepta sola ordinis circumstantia,
quae eadem temporis ost, says Chamier. Secondly, But these had no special
promise annexed: But if so, then they had nothing beyond the Corporal use; and
the Apostle was mistaken when he calls them spiritual meat and drink, and says
the Rock was Christ, in signification; though yet being extraordinary
Sacraments; Ames thinks that idcirco non requirebatur ut promissionem haberent
spiritualem ab ordinariis distinctam, sed satis fuit ut illarum promissionum
beneficia singulari modo repraesentarent. Bell. ener. Tom. 3. c. 4. p. 42.
Thirdly, that those might be common to all persons that were also common to
beasts, which passed through the red Sea, drank of the waters of the rocks, and
eat of the Manna.

But to omit that, Paraeus calls this Vere bestialem and caninam arrosionem
veritatis, an argument smacking more of the Beast than rational Creature: even
the matter and Elements of our Sacraments are common to bruit Animals; for a
Beast may drink of, or be washed with water, and eat of bread, even a Mouse may
devour that which is consecrated; the possibility whereof has made the Papists
(out of whose Forge these Weapons issued, and upon whose Anvil they were
fashioned) not more cautelous in their preventing it, than curious in their
disputing thereof.

Divine Institution, does not alter the nature of things, nor moral and
relative mutations infer real; the mystical use must be distinguished from the
physical; and from this use superadded to their nature they became spiritual,
and Sacraments; none but those that were capable of that use (which not beasts
but only rational Creatures could be, (did partake a Sacrament; and it had
been an hard saying, if the Apostle had told us, that Beasts did eat and drink
spiritual meat and drink (as he calls this.)

Fourthly, That upon the score of this Argument, both Infants, and all
flagitious persons, such as were these Idolaters, Fornicators, etc. may be also
admitted to the Lords Supper: But for answer (beside that one knot is not
untwisted by tying on another) we do here only argue that Sacraments formally
as such, are not proper privileges of real Saints, or absolutely incommunicable
to any, but such as have given satisfaction of their Holiness (which is their
hypothesis, against which we are here disputing) and so much I think is fully
and clearly evinced by this instance; but yet though they are not absolutely
incommunicable, We do not assert, nor is it here upon consequence, that all
Sacraments may now practically be communicated to all persons, because there
are arguments drawn from other considerations, besides the nature of Sacraments
in general, which limit and restrain their use. As for Infants, (to whom yet
the Apologists will not affirm the Sacraments to be absolutely incommunicable,
for themselves admit them to Baptism) as they were in that time to
Circumcision; and there being no more that we can find required to
qualification for those extraordinary Sacraments than was requisite to
Circumcision, which was only to be within the Covenant, immediately in their
own, or mediatly in their Parents right, Infants were in a capacity to receive
these, as well as the ordinary Sacraments. Beside, an argument drawn from the
Infants eating Manna, may pass in the next rank to that which Bellarmine
collected from the drinking of Beasts, which might make a natural, but could no
moral use thereof, and take it as common food, but not as spiritual, or as
signs and pledges of better things. A principal end of the institution of the
Lords Supper, was the commemoration of his death, for which Infants are
incompetent; and here is an express command for a man to examine himself, which
Infants are not susceptible of; and upon this account they are not admitted to
the Eucharist, though they are to Baptism, being capable of the use and end
thereof, viz. to initiate them into the visible Church, and constitute them
members thereof, and engage them to the faith and obedience of Christ, and work
upon them some other relative effects, in all which a passive reception is
sufficient, whereas in the Eucharist an active is requisite; Adult intelligent
persons though criminous, have a potentiality to make such use, and do such
acts, whether actually they do or not, though perchance they are incapable of
an holy and effectual use or actions; yet notwithstanding I do not think (as
Paraeus does not) that the Israelites did explicitly understand the mystical
use of the Cloud, Rock, and Manna, yet most of them implicitly did so, Com. in
1 Cor. 10.1.
and apprehended them as signs and symbols of Gods being in covenant with them,
and all that were intelligent might have done so, and therefore all did in
common partake of these extraordinary Sacraments. And however there may be
pious considerations and prudential motives whereupon such flagitious persons
ought to be removed from Communion of Sacraments; Yet where either for
preservation of unity, or through the multitude of offenders, or
non-settlement, or non-administration of such discipline, or through any other
obstacle (all which considerations might perchance be found in the condition of
Israel in the desert) that cannot be done; for all those to whom it is not
done, there may safely be a mixed communion, and free admission to the
Sacraments being Covenanters and Church Members, without any such scrutining or
proof of their real holiness, which I suppose may be concluded out of these
premises. It irritates much when it is said that their way symbolizeth with the
Donatists, but among other things seposited for future discussion, Aug. de
convert. Donat. c. 23. p. Ep. 50.
this is one point of their Correspondency, that the Donatists would have all
their Church to be Saints, and suam ecclesiam ex qua esse profitentur, sine
macula esse and ruga, and as they cast at our door that with us wicked men
enjoy the privileges of the godly, so Cresconius tells St. Augustine vos inter
fidelem and perfidum nihil discernitis, Brevicul. Collat. 3. Tom. 7. p. 118:
but if they be all Saints with whom they hold Communion of Sacraments in their
Church, theirs is less like to be the Church of God, for there are tares in
that field, chafe in that floor, bad fishes in that net, nec latere, sed
cerni, not undiscovered but apparent, Contra Donatist. post collat. c. 8. Tom.
7. p. 123.
as Augustine, out of Cyprian, and so manifestly evil that the Wheat is rather
hidden, says he, when the Chaff is manifest. But adjourning a more plenary
discourse of this matter, I shall here only remind them of an aviso of
Bullinger in an Epistle to Beza, Ne dum purgatissimam ecclesiam, ne quid hic
aliud suspicer, volunt instituere, brevi nullam habeant.

SECT. VI.
Independent Books and Arguments. Of Rhetorique, what Builders the Apologists
are?

THE Apologists are rare men, for they say they pretend not to much art, and
Qui velit ingenio cedere rarus erit. It seems they can be content to quit the
key of knowledge, so they may hold fast that of power; but I doubt they would
not patiently hear another to say what they speak of themselves; else why can
they neither digest nor relish the speech, that some other shekels may weigh
more than those of the Sanctuary; and if they pretend not much to art, why
undertake they that, which none should presume to do, but such as can justly
make that pretendment? and therefore as St. Hierome tells us, mendax humilitas,
incauta humilitas; so I shall remember them of what a grave Divine answered to
one that spoke somewhat in his own disparagement, Greenham.
Oh, said he, why do you praise your self so much!

But as their own Espencaeus says of the Bishops of the Council of Trent, they
were learned in their Assistants, so the Apologists tell us that what ever be
their way of arguing, some other of the same judgment with them in the main
have published arguments logical enough, and as yet unanswered. I cannot
conceive those of the same Judgment with them in the main to be any other than
Independents: But if they relate unto, or intimate those learned pens that have
been drawn forth and impressed, in asserting Presbytery, and vindicating the
power of excommunication (as I doubt they do, because in their subsequent
discourse when their own quivers are empty, they make use of some of those
arrows which were never aimed at, n^^ are proper for the mark) I must tell them
they have no more interest in, or advantage by those arguments than the page
which Huartus speaks of, could have in all the Kingdoms and Nations of the
earth, by the false imagination in his frantic distemper, that they were all
his Vassals and Contributaries, and himself the only Master thereof. Of
Treatises maintaining Independency I am assured there are many more written
than I have read, who am not much conversant in the late English Pamphlets, who
love not to be opening packes of small Wares, and choose to set up some great
lights in a room, rather than go to search every corner with a candle in my
hand. But truly of those Independent Writers that I have met with, if I shall
offer my judgment, I must say of their Arguments as du Moulin did of Boniface
his Extravagants, They will do well with a sword in hand; I presume the
Apologists engage more of time to books of this subject, and I doubt not but
they have cropped the best flowers to make up this garland wherewith they seek to
crown their way of discipline, which in their order we shall consider.

But the arguments which the paper means, when it calls them popular discourses
and similitudes, were neither more lamely nor disadvantageously represented (as
they suggest) than really they were, for the Apologists have not cured their
halting, they still go the same pace in their Apology, though to supply the
weight, here is addition to the number, but non gemit Antigenidus si Tellias
novas habet tibias, and they could not well be unknown, or easily be mistaken,
being so often inculcated, and made the ordinary subject of their Sermons, and
resound of their Pulpits, this being the Sparta, they have chosen to adorn, and
therefore no matter if not given under their hands till now, though perchance
it had been more politic not to have now given them, the eye being not so
easily charmed as the ear, and we might have imagined them better, if we had
less perfectly known what they had been, and they might have been like the
Images of Brutus and Cassius in the Funerals of Junius, Julius.
eo ipso praefulgebant quod non visebantur, as many other things; the less
known, the more have been reverenced; like Callipolis, only fair afar off, and
resembling the Chariots Vegetius speaks of, At first a terror, but upon more
acquaintance a scorn. We yield them the knowledge of distinguishing between
illustrations and arguments, but we know more of their illustrations, than
their Arguments, and their Declarations of the purity of Ordinances, and of the
Saints, the profaning or polluting of either by mixed Communions, the giving
false testimony and prostituting the privileges of the godly, the mischief of
evil society, and the partaking of other men's sins (which are good propositions
till they be yoked with unsuitable assumptions, and terms argumentative in
thesi, but misapplied in hypothesi) out of which mediums the Arguments were
formed which the paper meant and called popular, because only like to take
with that kind of people which have Cor in auribus, non aures in Cord, as
Augustine speaks, taking things ut sonant, non ut sapiunt: such are neither
good arguments, nor s^t illustrations: but out of their resolutions nothing can
be distilled but fallacia consequentis, and which are therefore but like
Egyptian Temples, specious in the Frontispiece, and a Calf or an Ape in the
Penetral, Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne. But some reasonings in the
Paper are of that constitution, (I suppose they mean illustrations, which word
immediately preceded) and there are indeed many illustrations of the reasons, or
the things proved by reason; but whereas they have told me that my discourse is
only Rhetorique, and that I should have used more of the fist than the palm,
and a major and a minor would have done better than my ingenious sentences, and
witty illustrations, besides that which the Poet has prompted me with, --
Leporem tu quoque pone mihi. Let them string up such sentences and
illustrations, and I shall like their discourse the better, if such a thread
run thorough it, such sentences, though sometime picked from Heathens, being in
some degree argumentative, seeing to reason from what the wisest of natural men
have taught, carries no great unsuitableness to St. Paul's reason from what
Nature teaches, 1 Cor. 11.14. I must further take leave to answer, that (absit
invidia verbo) it is so facil and familiar to me, that of quicquid conabor
dicere I could make syllogismes; how easy had it been to have thus argued?
That which was not done by our Savior Christ at the first institution, is not
necessary to be done in order to the administration of the Lords Supper, but
the special examination of every Communicants knowledge or life was not done by
our Savior Christ at the first institution; ergo. Or thus, That which was by
the Lord Jesus imparted to Judas, is not to be denied to any that is not
scandalous or notoriously wicked; but the Sacrament was by the Lord Jesus
administered to Judas, ergo; Or thus, What was permitted by St. Paul is still
allowable; but to come to the Sacrament upon the private examination of a man's
self, was permitted by St. Paul, ergo. And thus I could as easily have done
thorough the whole discourse; but out of the Schools, I thought it a more flat
and tyring way of arguing; and I took my precedent chiefly from the greatest
Masters of Controversies, in whose larger Volumes I meet not with many explicit
syllogismes, and remembered that Tacitus commends Seneca, that he had
Scribendi genus temporis illius auribus accommodatum; and that Mercury speaking
to Battus, sell into Battology, -- Me mihi perfide prodis?
Me mihi prodis? ait. --
And therefore chose rather to be in fashion, than to wear richer cloths, and
to be wet with the common shower of folly, as it is in the Fable, than to be
wise with singularity.

But who has not read in Aristotle of a rhetorical, cryptical, and implicit
Syllogism, which Logicians say is usual, Ornatus aut brevitatis causa; and
which by a tacit supply of one proposition is made up perfect: Children when
they first learn to read, spell every syllable, but grown more skilful, they
make up and pronounce every word at its first aspect: so I think the like of
discourses, where any versed in arguing can readily analyze the speech, and by
a mental supply of what is only employed, find the force or fallacy of the
argument. Though I have censured others for popular Rhetorique, the Imposture
of our times, yet not as rhetorique, but as Enervous, where affections are
only wrought upon, reason not at all; and which being resolved, appears but
like a Calf made out of golden earrings. Whether mine be of the one, or the
other kind, neither my self nor the Apologists are competent Judges, who
perchance may both look on it through a Perspective, though I at one end, they
at the other of the Glass; and at the one end all things appear greater, at the
other less than they be. But however it be, though they (as Cresconius did St.
Augustines) do slight and upbraid my rhetorique (such as it is) having
perchance the like quarrel thereunto which he had to Demosthenes his Candle,
because it stood in his light, and they have some affinity with Cleon, who
using to hold the worst side in the causes he pleaded, was therefore always
inveighing against Eloquence; yet perchance some may find more implicit
Syllogisms in my Rhetorique, than Logic in their explicit ones. As he among
the Romans was held the best Citizen, that being a Plebeian favored the
Optimates, and being a Patrician countenanced the people; so I think him a more
accomplished Writer, that taking the part of a Logician to work on reason,
takes in aid of Rhetorique; and playing the Rhetorician to move the affections,
makes Logic auxiliar. Things of the same signification may have different
impression, according as they are dressed, and set forth; and perchance the
same thing nakedly and bluntly delivered, had not made so easy and great an
impression on the famous Marquess of Vico, as it did when set forth under an
elegant similitude by Peter Martyr. I would be made all things to all men:
Modus orationis auditor, Orpheus in Sylvis, inter Delphinas Arion.

It was Epiphanius his commendation, that the Learned liked him for the matter,
and the unlearned for the style; and (as Pliny says, they sometime deal with
the Elephant) it is convenient to deck the Manger with flowers, that the
Provender may go down the better. But the Apologists will prove themselves
Builders, and not Painters; and sure they may be both with commendation, for
Christ was painted crucified among the Galatians, which Interpreters understand
of the lively and evident setting forth of his sufferings. Let them therefore
lay solid Foundations, and build up firm Walls, we shall not only allow, but take
complacency in the painting thereof: But let them not bring us back again to
Babel, that when we call for stones, they bring us only Mortar to daub with.
They are, they say, Builders, not Painters; perchance he that can judge of
Colors, will take this but for painting: they may be Builders at some times,
and in some things and respects, and yet perchance be Painters only in some
others (as particularly in this subject:) for it is not necessary, that he that
builds should never paint. It is a debt to Truth, to acknowledge that they are
capable to build up in our holy Faith, and do edify: themselves disparage
their skill and pains in building, more than I dare to do; and confess their
power of destruction an hundred to one greater than that of Edification,
pulling down a goodly Church, that with some stones selected out of the ruins,
they may build an angust Chapel after their model. And can they pass for good
Builders, when after twenty years labor in a Town that has formerly had two
or three expert Architects to prepare the work, (and one of them shining.
Tanquam inter ignes Luna minores; By whose excellent preaching, they were like
Capernaum, lift up to Heaven) succeeding each other (and as Machiavel says of
Princes, so may I of Ministers, The continued succession of two good Ministers
cannot but effect great matters:) that yet their Prolocutor among 5. or 600.
stones cannot hitherto hew or square above five or six of them for the Altar,
or make them lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.5.
built up a spiritual house (as the Apostle speaks.) It is likely, that in some
resemblance with that living stone, they may be some of them disallowed indeed
of men, but chosen of God, and precious; but while they will not own them for
such, they detract much from their own faculty in building. I suppose we do not
see any painful and holy labors in Gods field recompensed with so poor an
Harvest, and God is not wont to give so small an increase, where any wise
planting and diligent watering has preceded. Had the Apologists been as
frequent, and earnest, and importunate, in preparing men for the Communion, as
they have been in asserting their power of suspending them, and been careful
rather to prevent, than to punish indispositions, I believe they had superseded
those multa supplicia, which cannot but be to them tam turpia quam medico multa
funera, as Cassiodor speaks; but suam quisque homo rem meminit; and the
Proverb which Ammonius, in the life of Abbo, tells us, was used of things too
eagerly and impertinently insisted upon, venit ad decimas, may now be turned
into venit ad suspensionem; their Pulpits have been too much set to the tune of
their models and plat-forms of Discipline, which might with more honor and
more fruit of their Ministry, have only resounded repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: but while they have been more careful lest
they mar their own Inheritance, than to raise up the name of the dead (viz.)
Jesus Christ our elder brother upon his Inheritance, no marvel though they
spit in their own faces, and put upon themselves the reproach of bad builders.
He is not like to build the house better, that has not entered at the door. The
influence of the Agent is upon the Patient well prepared, and those
preparations and previous dispositions are best wrought by familiar and gentle
applications, humble condescentions, meekness, of spirit, and by being given to
Hospitality, which are the most proper tools and most effectual Instruments to
build with: durum and durum non faciunt murum; and he that shall choose to make
use of the contrary, may think to build such a Chamber for himself, as Tobias
had by the preparation of Eliashib, in the Courts of the house of God; but he
may not hope to build Gods house, especially when his Rod takes up almost all
the Ark, and leaves so little room for the pot of Manna. The Halcyon or
Kings-Fisher does only build his nest in a calm; and the Fishers of the King
of Heaven are only like to edify the Church by calm comportments, and gentle
applications, not by raising such fiery and boisterous storms. Amphions Music
brought together, and laid the stones for building the Walls of Thebes; but
they are so long, and so much knocking and beating of the stones, that they
break them to pieces, and are like the Italian Musicians that were admitted to
sound their Airs before Sultan Achmet, which were so long a tuning of their
Instruments, that he thought this their best Music, and sent them away with
contempt and indignation, and frustrated of their reward.

SECT. VII.
The Apologists causlesly irritated by an Allegory.

-- Quis te tam lene fluentem
Moturum tot as violenti gurgitis iras
Nile putet?
WHO would have imagined, that the drawing of an Allegory from Nebuchadnezars
Image, would have been an occasion to bring me into the fiery Furnace, (as St.
Augustine calls an Adversaries angry mouth) and that quicquid tetigero ulcus
erit. Bitterly, (they say) but -- Flagrantior aequo
Non debet dolor esse viri, nec vulnere major.


I conclude, that I cannot but excuse such, as at the sound of such Music
cannot fall down and worship the Image which Nebuchadnezar has set up; I make
their holy and Christian way, the means (antonomastice) of spiritual life
(though I trust all are not spiritually dead that partake not of these means,)
Nebuchadnezars Image and Idolatry, and their Exhortations, moving souls to
their society (as tending to Reformation, and some rise of order) so as it
seems they only are of the Reformed Religion, whereas they only reform the
Church militant in the Military notion; (as Troops and Companies are said to be
reformed when they are lessened) This is Pagan Music; Magnum crimen Caie
Caesar, and ante haec tempora inauditum! But are the Apologists in earnest, and
will they as much blemish their Charity, to think I intended this, as their
discretion, to suppose that this can be inferred from my expressions? If I seem
to conclude bitterly, it is because the stomach vitiated the tongue with
choler, therefore every thing tastes bitter: Does it more imbitter them to hear
the same thing dressed in a Rhetorical figurative expression, than in a rustical
and blunt Language; Acuto quam retuso telo vulnerari commodius sit, says the
great Physician Celsus. A comparison reflects more light, and impresseth more
complacency, than a simple contemplation. If I had said I could not but excuse
these that could not dance after their pipe, would not that have irritated them
with the harsh sound thereof? And what do I in that other delivery of my self,
but signify the same thing in other words? Scaliger tells us of a Maid that
sounded at the sight of a Rose (as Cantharides are killed with smells of sweet
flowers) and it seems the Apologists are offended with a poor Flower of
Rhetorique, a Rose that has no prickles. Allegories are but implicit and
contracted similitudes, which as they must not be wrested beyond their scope,
and (as Heralds say of Bearings) the resemblance must be taken from the best of
their properties, not the worst; so he that shall apply all that to the subject
of the apodosis, which agrees to the subject of the protasis, will forfeit as
much of discretion as of charity. In that Allegory, (viz.) where the dead
carcass is, there will the Eagles resort; the carcass refers unto, and shadows
out our blessed Savior, but dare any to be so foolishly blasphemous, as to
apply unto our Savior other properties of a carcass than that one of conveying
his Saints to him as Eagles to a carcass. Do not the Apologists in the close of
this Section, tell us in the phrase of Scripture, of Adders stopping their ears
to them, and of their piping to them that have not danced, and shall we have so
little wit or ingenuity, to say they grant themselves to be Charmers or
Fiddlers? With as much color of justice do they complain elsewhere, that I lay
Magic to their charge, in saying their gathering others from their proper
Pastors into their Church, resembles that Magic which some Romans were
slandered with, of charming and bringing other men's fruits into their Fields.
As Socrates said of Heraclitus his Works, What I understand, is good; what I
understand not, I believe is good: So when they elsewhere complain of
despiteful Calumnies cast upon them, who will not contrariwise be apt to say,
what I know has no cause of complaint; and therefore I believe what I know not
is as causless. But as it tends nothing to the honor of their patience,
imbecilla se laedi putant si tanguntur; so as little to the repute of their
innocence, to be so tender, Hieron. in Is. 2. Tom. 4. p. 20. Aug. Tom. 7. p. 69.
as to catch fire from every spark; for not only wise Tacitus has said,
agnita sunt si irascaris; but more reverend Hierom, Qui m^hi irasci voluerit,
prius ipse de se quod talis sit confitebitur; and perchance when they suspect I
accuse them of Idolatry, they re-mind that of Hierom, Omne dogma contrarium
veritati adorat opera manuum suarum, and constituit idolum in terra sua.

SECT. VIII.
In whom the School vesteth the power of Church Censures. Whether the
Apologists may, de jure, or do de facto, censure alone? How they have restored
the Sacrament?

THE Paper, (quantum distabat ab illa?) that otherwhere is too parsimonious, is
here (quanto majora dedisti) become very prodigal, in granting them more power
than they desire, (and then surely the grant is exceeding large) for it
impowers the Minister alone to excommunicate, which the Learned make an act of
jurisdiction belonging to the whole Church, (the act and exercise of that
power, none but their late sprung party of Independents do invest the whole
Church with, though the Church-Representative in general Councils perchance do
assume it) Or to the Officers of the Church, (which is not so accurately
expressed, for the Minister is a Church Officer too) but herein he speaks the
opinion of the School, which seems to put Church Censures into the Ministers
hands alone. But however, the Schoolmen may perchance seem to allow a Minister
to deny the Sacrament, ad hic and nunc, to him that is notoriously guilty of
mortal sins; and so is jure and demeritorie already excommunicate; Aquin.
suppl. q. 22. art. 1. Biel. in 40. d. 18. q. 2. conclu. 3. Valencia in 3. disp.
7. q. 17. punct. 3. sic etiam Durand. and Estius in 4. d. 18. ille q. 4. iste
Sect. 14. item Vasquez de excom. dub. 17.
yet so broad and unlimited an expression, that the School seems to put
Church Censures into the Ministers hands alone, argues the Apologists to have
tasted the Schoolmen, tanquam canis ad Nilum, or heard them, tanquam echo per
reflexionem, at second hand; for it is their general and constant doctrine,
that not all Priests, nor only Priests; but, as Aquinas speaks such qui habent
praelationem sive jurisdictionem coercivam; that is, judicii exterioris
contentiosi, in the words of Biel, or legitimam jurisdictionem, ordinariam, vel
delegatam in foro externo Ecclesiastico, in the phrase of Valentia, have the
power of Excommunication, though parochial Ministers may inflict it sometimes
by special commission, or in certain particular cases, by custom; as in Theft
and Rapine. But -- Capream de rupe videbant,
Casuram sperant, decipit illa canes.
The Apologists do but dream all this while; when they awake they will find
they have not that which they thought to have held: neither was that granted
which they assume. The Paper argued, ad hominem only, not ad rem, and supposed
they might comparatively take as much power alone to exclude some notorious
sinners, as they did assume to excommunicate so many that were not notoriously
sinful: and yet as Luther said in the matter of Absolution, Hieron. ubi supra.
in casu necessitatis quilibet potest esse Sacerdos; so under the duress of
necessity, ( quae quicquid cogit, defendit, says Seneca, so that the Oracle
resolved, omnia necessaria concedit Deus) where discipline by any obstruction
is not regularly settled; or those that should concur to the exercise thereof,
do generally and totally desert or neglect the duty, if the Minister by the
power of those keys which he holds in his single hand (so it be not Citra
consensum Ecclesiae ac praecipuorum ejus membrorum, In 1 Cor. c. 5. p. 466.
maxim autem Christiani Magistratus; as Paraeus limits it particularly,
although that consent be only implicit and interpretative) shall shut out from
the Sacrament, until he verify his repentance, any one that has lapsed into
such an execrable sin and scandal as deserves excommunication (for only for
such sins St. Epist. 118.
Augustine affirms may a man separate from the Communion) and is notorious by
sentence of any Judicatory whatsoever, Confession of the party, or Evidence of
the fact, See more of this Sect. 29.
that Minister that shall do this shall live without any quarrel from me for so
doing. But yet what necessity in some cases may sometime warrant, is not always
and in all cases regular or absolutely to be practiced. Honesta lex est
temporis necessitas, necessity is a temporary, no perpetual Law; and the great
Lawyer Paulus resolves, quae propter necessitatem recepta sunt, non debent in
argumentum trahi. And as the Paper did not concede them what they suggest, so
had it granted as much, yet it is no more than they desire, unless their
desires have narrower boundaries than their practice; for in the 29. Sect. they
say in terms, the Ministers of the Gospel may act by virtue of their Commission
from Christ, upon their own knowledge or conscience, as to censuring; but as a
Conqueror, having vanquished his enemy, will not be content with that which
before would have given complacency: so by that time they were grown confident
of their Victory, and thought their shadow grown longer, and like the bounds of
Sparta; so their power is lengthned with the sword; and perchance as the shine
of success may quicken them, their claims may still spring to a greater
height. And if they do not claim, yet they already usurp the power to suspend
alone, without the efficacious concourse of any others. Those whom for form
sake they call their Elders, may perchance sometime heretofore have
co-operated, not as Physical, but Moral causes, ad quorum praesentiam, non
efficientiam sequitur effectus, to whom therefore I cannot allow the nature of
Consonants, which though mute of themselves, have their sound when joined with
Vowels; but those having no vital principles, they are rather like Architas his
Dove, and Regiomontanus his Eagle and Fly, which move by these Wheels which
they make and set, and whereof they order the spring; and yet also it is very
obvious and transparent to all about them, that these Wheels have been rarely
or never set a going about the Work; for one or two of the Ministers only made
trial and judgment, and admitted or laid aside as they list, which I think they
will not deny; or if they should, I could verify by particular instances.

But whatsoever be the neglect of others, the Apologists have now redeemed
their faulty omission of the Eucharist, the frequent Celebration whereof they
sense to be their duty; and so secundo post integritatem gradu consistunt, and
are almost innocent, because (as they say) humbled: The lesser evil has
somewhat of good, and it is well that they see, and farther from evil, that
they have in any degree reformed their fault, God may in his good time reflect
one beam of light more upon them, and make them see that they have yet no
otherwise rectified their sin of Omission, than as he does, that idly sat
still, and then starts up to run a wrong way. But as qui tarde vult, diu
noluit; so qui paucis dat, multis negat; as I doubt not but they would hitherto
have wholly intermitted the administration, unless they could have gathered a
selected company, among whom to have administered it in the way of separation:
so now still they omit and lay aside the Celebration, in respect of so many as
they admit not, which are by far the greater number: so as take the
denomination from the greater part, and we may say they administer to none (in
comparison) and in their proper Churches and Charges they celebrate not; for as
the Papists poisoned their God in the Sacrament, that they might poison the
Emperor, so they have suspended the Sacrament it self in their Congregations,
that they might suspend the people: and their zeal to the administration, may
well be gathered and concluded out of this, that their Prolocutor by his
Allotrio-Episcopal influence and acting, has procured and brought into some
Churches, under the notion of Pastors, some which long time after were not
Ministers lawfully ordained, and so in no capacity to consecrate and
administer. And whereas they tell us, that all that are desirous and worthy,
with little pains, might partake thereof; As for many of those that are
rejected, their desire will be sufficiently witnessed, and their worthiness is
not to be tried by unsealed weights, and uneven balances; and for the pains
which they must take, which I imagine they intend of their travel to a remoter
place, Ad Paulin. Ep. 13. Tom. 1.
although frustra fit per plura, and one place is as near heaven as another, as
St. Hierom said, Et de Hierosolymis and de Britannia aequaliter patet aula
coelestis: so they that call them ten or twelve miles, may with as much reason
command them twenty or thirty farther: Yet it is not so much the place, as the
way that is questioned, and the reason and authority that enforces it. But of
the place, we shall suspend farther consideration, having destined a special
Section to that Topography, and desire only it may be here perpended, whether
the thrusting out of such a multitude from the Sacrament, do not check with
that caution, which Augustine so often inculcates, of not eradicating the
Wheat, while they rashly would separate the Tares.

SECT. IX.
The state of the question; the model of their Church: Whether their way smack
of Donatus his Schism? Ecclesiastical Communion consists principally in
Communion of Sacraments. Of Examination precedent to the partaking of the
Eucharist. Whether, and how necessary? What knowledge may be competent? What
profession of Faith the ancient Church required before admission to Sacraments?
Of Excommunication, Suspension, Presbytery; the Apologists no friends thereunto.

IT is no unprofitable way, says an eminent Divine, Dr. Jo. Whites Defense
way, p. 143.
when one cannot defend his question to pick a quarrel to the state thereof;
Which trick, says he, Dr. Stapleton in his time made good use of. The
Apologists, it seems, have learned this trick, and here question the Paper for
mistaking the question; but it being their practice directly which was
questioned, the state of the question will be best determined, by calling under
our prospect their way and their practice. At Holisworthy diverse assembling at
the Public Lecture, the Prolocutor of the Apologists, who was married to that
Church, and now by a new kind of Polygamy sought to contract a new and fairer
Spouse, of such as were most mallable to his impressions, and facil to be
licked into that shape whereunto he would form them, drew some few (for he
retained his interest in his old Church, when he gathered a new; and being more
provident than Aesops Dog, kept the substance, when he caught after the
shadow; and held the Bird in hand, when he sought more in the Wood) into a more
private Conventicle, where after the Lecture, they had a kind of prophesying,
and one or other was by turn selected to be Moderator of their Exercises, where
Jacob not rolling away the stone from the Well for the sheep, but the sheep for
Jacob to drink, while the Ministers sat by in silence (and silere eos turpe
est and Xenocratem loqui.) Others, who though like those Animals whose eyes
serve them well enough in the dark (for their private obscurer condition) yet
have no perspicacy for a greater light; so their parts either infused by
nature, or acquisite by study, being too angust to reach that height, or
comprehend those Dimensions: Yet -- Currus petit ille paternos.

They presuming (as I think) to understand above what was meet for them to
understand, Epist. ad Paul. in Tom. 3. p. 8.
which the Apostle forbids; and when -- quod Medicorum
Promittunt Medici, tractant fabrilia Fabri.
Sola Scripturarum ars est quam sibi omnes vindicant -- hanc universi
praesumunt, lacerant, docent antequam discant, which St. Hierom derides, and
not contenting themselves with the judgment of discretion, Hieron. ubi supra.
but usurping that of direction, and cancelling the natural Law of Relatives,
were all Pastors without Flocks, and the Sheep all turned Shepherds, they
undertook ( -- Quae non viribus istis,
Munera convenient. --)


To expound and apply difficult Texts of Scripture, and resolve doubtful Cases
and Questions in Theology; and with the Child (as it is in the Story of St.
Augustine,) to lade out the Ocean with their Cockle-shell; and as they
arrogated to be Gods mouth in public teaching of the rest, so to be the mouth
of the rest to God, in public praying for a blessing upon others. Nay, some of
their Women impatient of that Gagge which the Apostle had set in their mouths,
as if not fitted for this age, wherein he did not fore see that Sex should
become such able Speakers, had their frequent interpositions, even to the
modelling of their Meetings and Exercises, Discunt, proh pudor! a feminis, quod
viros doceant; so as their Congregation had somewhat of Analogy with the State
of Athens, where Themistocles ruled the City, and some other governed him. And
now, when in conformity to the Independent Archetypon, (where when seven or
more persons by frequent society are satisfied of the holiness of each other,
they agree to constitute a Church of themselves, so when) they had drawn forth
stones enough, hewn and formed them to their fashion, that there might be no
noise of Hammers at Pyworthy, thither the Prolocut or carried them without ever
appointing of a Communion at home, where such as were fit might come to be
admitted, or examining who in his Parish else were fit, or endeavoring to fit
them in any other way, save by preaching, That to come under their discipline,
was the only door to let in to the Sacrament, he there erects of these Stones
his altar contra altar, whereof all they which did at first partake, and were
received into Communion of the Sacrament, had their tesseras hospitales, Ad
annal. Baron. Exer. 16. Sect. 43. p. 393.
or mensales, or somewhat analogically to what Cafaubon speaks of the Heathens
in their sacred mysteries, Habuerunt and Symbola quae pro tessera erant
thyasotis corundem sacrorum per quae se invicem agnoscerent, bringing their
Leaden Tokens with them, as Badges to distinguish them, or Passports to warrant
their admission. Others afterward, led by their proper affections, or drawn by
their importunity, entered into society and communion with them, after they had
rendered some satisfaction of their worthiness, most (of any one Parish) out of
the Parish of Pyworthy, from whence their Elders were selected, many out of
diverse, some adjacent, some distant Parishes, very few out of the Prolocutors
own Parish, who yet upon some emergencies would have owned the Church, and
appropriated the gathering thereof to himself, so as however he elsewhere
speaks of finding a Church settled at Pyworthy, to color his ad journing
thither from his proper charge; yet it was of his settlement only upon this
occasion: and though that Parish Church had then a Minister, yet he that has
since ordinarily officiated there was long only a candidate of the Ministry.

This abridgment of their Church History, will set this whole Discourse in more
light, and put us right in the true state of the question agitated between me
and the Apologists, which had its rise and result from their proceedings:
Nonnulla pars est inventionis nosse quod quaeras, says Augustine. They say,
the Author is unacquainted with their way, (and it had been happy if none had
ever been acquainted therewith:) It is probable, they have their Cabala's, for
at their Assemblies they have sought to set Harpocrates at the door, that some
of the mysteries of their way might be as secret, as the Holyes of Ceres: but
the thingnow in question, -- Opinor
Omnibus and Lippis notum and Tonsoribus esse.


But we err in saying they examine all, which they deny that they do; such as
are more knowing, and are willing, do only make profession of their Faith and
knowledge, some publicly, some more privately; which is in effect to say, that
they do not examine them in one point, but in all: there is no more difference
between examination upon interrogatories, and a large continued profession,
than between a Pedlars laying open his whole Pack, and his showing forth some
few parcels, that some may enquire for; or than when a person is suspected to
have filched some commodity, between his ripping up, and showing out all the
laps and receptacles of his garments, and the Officers making a particular
re-search into them. By compelling men to make profession, they make (in
effect) an examination of more particulars, and put them under a more difficult
trial; as to give a brief answer to a question, is more easy, than to make a
long continued Oration. And if this profession be not an examination, let them
examine themselves: how can they reconcile these two assertions, That they do
not examine all, and that in the reformation of a corrupt Church (which they
say is the work they are about) it is necessary to examine all, without
convicting themselves to omit to do that which they say is necessary.

And if profession therefore be a kind of examination, how can that also cohere
with truth, or with it self, that they examine none but those which may well be
suspected of incompetent knowledge; and yet they bring under this profession
such as are knowing. And if none he examined, but such as may be well suspected
of incompetent knowledge (which we not suspect, but know in some particulars to
be otherwise, unless they are of the humor of Dionysius of Sicily, who
admitted all to have recourse to him, save those he expected treacherous; but
yet suspected all for such, that he might admit none,) then such as are not of
competent knowledge being incapable of admission to the Sacrament; and they
admitting not the rest of their Parishes, because they should be, and will not
be examined: how can it consist with what they tell us elsewhere, That it is
enviously surmised, that they think all those incapable, whom they admit not:
And if they will examine all, and yet do examine none but such as may well be
suspected to be of incompetent knowledge, it is as little to the honor of
their Ministry, as to the credit of their peoples proficiency, since Diogenes
thought the Master was to be stricken, when the Scholar played the Truant.

The omitting of the use of Sacrament (they say) concerns them not: but sure it
does, because they omit it in their own Parishes and charges, where it is their
special and proper call to administer it, and they omit to distribute it to all
that come not under their examination.

That about convening from diverse Parishes, will but confound the discourse if
mixed with it, (and indeed it is like to confound all the specious discourses
they make in defense of their way, as I shall endeavor to manifest anon) most
of those admitted were taken in, not without their proper Pastor. I will not
divide the house upon that trial; but whether these that were admitted with
their Pastor, were culpable of Schism, we shall hereafter examine: in the
mean time, St. Cyprian imputes Schism to those that were admitted without
their Pastor, Ecclesia est plebs sacerdoti adunita, Cyprian. Epist. 68. p.
209. that is, (as Junius explains him) Respectu unionis externae and
materialis, non internae and formalis cum Christo -- ex illa formali seu
essentiali sunt Catholici, ex externa, secundaria and adventitia noscuntur and
censentur in corpore, Junius in Controvers. 4. Bell. 1104, 1105. Citat. Vasquez
in 3. Disp. 219. c. 2. p. 499. Tom. 3.
grex Pastori suo adhaerens, unde scire debes Episcopum in ecclesia esse, and
ecclesiam in Episcopo, and si qui cum Episcopo non sint, in ecclesia non esse:
and farther, Frustra sibi blandiuntur ii qui pacem cum sacerdotibus Dei non
habentes, obrepunt and latenter apud quosdam communicare se credunt; cum
ecclesia, quae Catholica una est, scissa non est, neque divisa, sed sit utique
connexa, cohaerentium sibi invicem sacerdotum glutino copulata; and if it were
not Schism, it is a fault forbidden by the first Council of Carthage, Ut
nullus Clericus vel Laicus in aliena parochia sine literis sui Episcopi
communicaret; and a fault which the Council of Milevi censured with deprivation
of the Communion.

2. Such as were admitted of other Congregations are persons justly (which term
is unjustly assumed or begged) offended with the grossness of their
administrations at home; where no separation at all is made, nor cherishing of
desires that way. It gave the pretended rise to Donatus his Schism, that
Caecilian (supposed a traditor) was retained in Communion with the Church.

First, this is to condemn themselves for chafe, by separating themselves from
those whom they suppose to be chasse; Vos nihil inter perfidum and fidelem
discernitis. Cresconius Augustino: Separarunt cause a quod in Communione
Sacramentorum mali maculant bonos, ideoque se corporali disjunct one a malorum
contagione recessisse, ne omnes pariter per^r^^. Aug. de unitat, baptism. c. 14.
for says St. Augustine, De area vix excutieris, si triticum es, -- eo ipso
quod discedis and volas, paleam te esse indicas. And secondly, to confess that
all Augustins learned and ardent propositions, and strong armature against the
Donatists, could not beat down and dash in pieces that Schism, but that it
would in part rise and spring up again in these men. For if to refuse to have
Communion of Sacraments with evil men, and to separate because discipline is
not exercised in casting out of evil men, be not a main part of the Schism of
the Donarists, I am too dull to understand the sense of St. Augustine; and if I
mistake him and their Heresy, I err with Plato, and many learned men share
with me in the same misprision. If they shall say, That they separate not from
all Churches, but only from those Congregations that are so corrupt, and
therefore they are neither Donatists nor Schismatics:

I answer:

1. Might not the Donatists have put in the same Plea, Altingius probl. Tom. 2.
part. 2. problem. 17. p. 329. Junius in contro. 4. Bellar. p. 1165. Ames. de
cas. Consc. l. 5. c. 12. p. 288.
who when they divided themselves from the Catholics had a Communion with the
many Churches of their fraternity? Adhuc ista verba communiter dici possunt,
potest enim and alius dicere, as Augustine; this is the common defense of all
Schismatics, that when they leave one Church, they go into another; but as
Altingius will give them one venny, Quibuscum coenam sumere detrectamus, eorum
fraternitati tacit renunciamus: So secondly, let them take a blow from the
famous Junius to beat down this interposition, Schismatici comperiuntur multi,
qui non a spiritu aut capite aut a corpore discindi volunt, sed ab hac, illave
ecclesia (i.e.) membro particulari corporis ex infirmitate particulari;
especially if, as Ames adds, the separation be propter causam omnium
ecclesiarum communem (as we suppose it is, being causa morum corruptorum,
scandali, aut singularium offensionum, Trial grounds, Separat. c. 10. p. 197.
Sacramentorum Communione sociamur. Contra Donatist. post. Collat. c. 28. Tom.
7. p. 127. Sacramentorum participandorum communione cohaerere. Ibid. c. 21. p.
126. In una congregatione paria Sacramenta tractantes. Contra Parmen. l. 3. c.
2. p. 13. Malus frater, propter communia Sacramenta. Collat. cum Donatist.
prima die. Si in communione Sacramentorum mali maculant bonos, si propter ipsam
tantam Communionem Sacramentorum mali perdunt bonos. Contra Crescon. l. 2. c.
35 36. p. 5. Tom. 7. Commixtos bonis malos intra retia suorum Sacramentorum.
Brevicul. collat, cum Donatist. 3. die p. 118. Bonos malis in communione
Sacramentorum misceri. Fulgentius l. de fide ad Petrum.
wherein all Churches may be alike concerned.) If they shall think to evade by
telling us, that they hold communion in other Ordinances, not only Mr. Ball
gives sentence against them; That to use one Ordinance, and not another, is to
make a Schism in the Church; but St. Augustine has fore-stalled their Plea,
who as he makes external unity and communion to consist mainly in the
participation of Sacraments, so he constitutes much of the Schism of the
Donatists in their refusing to have communion in Sacraments with the
Catholics. And though I deny not that they renounced and protested against all
other communion with the Orthodox, as well as in the Sacraments (to which
height and wideness of separation the Independents have not risen or removed)
yet do they symbolize with them in the kind, though not degrees of their
Schism; for there may be several stories of building one higher than another,
yet all upon the same foundation: And these Duties notwithstanding wherein they
communicate with others, they account no acts of Church Fellowship, or
Ecclesiastical Communion, but such as they can dispense unto Pagans also. And
themselves also seem to constitute the root of Church Fellowship in the
Communion of Sacraments, owning none to be of their Churches, but such as
communicate with them of the Supper of the Lord. As therefore they applaud the
fighting Cock, which having lost one eye for the battle, turns away his blind
side lest he be stricken, where he can least ward the blow: so I cannot blame
the Apologists to seek to sequester from the question their gathering into
their Church such as separate from and renounce communion of Sacraments with
their own Congregations, which is the grand heteroclyte and chief anomalon of
their way; which (as Calvin says of the point of Justification controverted
between us and the Papists) would they retract, it would almost quit the cost
to grant them all the rest. But the lawfulness of this they undertake to assert
hereafter. But Aut deem verbis, aut add viribus, for the words require more
than a City: In the interim, they abstract the state of the question, and
deliver it in this form, Whether in the reforming of a long corrupted Church it
be necessary that all the members thereof do submit to some examination or
trial of their knowledge before they be admitted unto the Lords Table? This
question they fear not to maintain in the affirmative.

Et cum magna malae superest audacia causae,
Creditur a multis fiducia. --
They suppose corruption in their Churches, (and he has no fire of divine love
in his heart, that has not Water limbeck'd out of his eyes to see it) Men well
satisfied with the present frame and temper, not looking on them under any such
disorder, they can expect little of reason or truth from -- Vox tua facta mea
est; If we could as easily accord in other things as this, Et duo concordes
animo moriemur in uno; Only I cannot tell, neither should I concur with them
in a desire nor much to dispute with such; for the more they are sick, they the
more need the Physician, and though Cain be not his brothers keeper, yet Jacob
holds him by the heel, detinet gressus suos (as Bernard allegorically
interprets it) and though they seem never so incurable, yet he that lay 38.
years diseased, might perchance have bin sooner cured, had he not wanted one to
put him into the healing pool: however, si non liberabo animam suam, liberavi
meam; for Qui non corrigit resecanda, committit, and facientis culpam in se
habet, qui quod potest corrigere, negligit emendare, says Gregory. But yet
notwithstanding all this, it would be the great question, whether they found,
or made more of this corruption, and whether the Cure may not be as mischievous
as the Malady, as it fared with Cn. Pompeius, of whom the Historian tells us,
Gravior remediis, quam delicta erant; and whether since they undertook the
Cure, the Diseases have not grown more desperate and incurable, and ut antea
flagitiis, ita nunc legibus laboratur; or perchance among wise and moderate men
this would be beyond question, Hae manus Trojam erigent, --
Parvas habet spes Troja, si tales habet,
When men of their way and principles declaim against the corruptions of the
Church, Clodius accusat moechos, -- And when they cry up Reformation, Clodius
de pudicitia.

And it will be farther no less questionable, why this way of examining and
proscribing from the Sacrament, should be unto reformation (as quicksilver to
other metals) that without which they could have no constitution, and that this
Cure could be wrought by no medicine, whereof this is not the Basis, so as all
the Psalms of reformation end in this Gloria; whereas I rather think (si non
falsis ^ludor imaginibus) that scarce any thing has more obstructed the work
of reformation, than this enclosing of the Sacrament, and censorious driving of
so many from it; as nothing more prejudiced the Roman Church, nor more helped
forward the work of our Reformation, than their withholding of the cup from
the Laity, which has made them lately somewhat wiser by their harms; so as now
in this Nation (what is done elsewhere I know not) the Laics are permitted the
Wine, though not the Cup; out of which it is powered into a Glass wherein they
drink it; for reason of State forbids they should have it in the same manner
the Priests receive it, that being reserved only for Kings to be so far made
equal with Priests; and if they should perfectly reform this sacrilegious
abuse, they should confess a former error, and consequently forfeit their
Palladium, the infallibility of their Church; and since res, aetas, usus semper
aliquid apportat novi, aliquid moneat, ut illa quae te scire credas nescias,
and quae tibi putaris prima, in experiundo repudies, it is possible that at
length piscator ictus sapiat, and those Fishers of men too may change those
Nets which drive away most Fish, for those that may enclose more, and not by
alienating hearts, forfeit their hands, which might help to carry on the work
they pretend to. As Saracenus Moses to Lucius of Alexandria in Ruffinus,
Nunquam verior potest esse fides quae auribus capitur, quane quae oculis
pervide^ur; so let them give us some sensible effects and demonstrations a
posteriori, of the aptness and energy of their way for reformation; they cannot
dispute us out of our senses, and we see where they set up after eight or nine
years, among several hundreds, they gain scarce so many units; and their
reformation is like the filings and washings of Gold by false Clippers, only
to impair and embase it, like Dioclesians deserting the Empire to attend a
Garden; or like Woolseys destroying forty religious houses (as they were then
accounted) out of the ruins thereof to build two Colleges. Nay, they do not
edify after that proportion, nor to that similitude. As whom they admit, have
liberty given to believe what they list (liberty in things of the mind, being
the great bait or philter of Independency) so those whom they reject, are like
enough to take liberty to do what they list, little or no care being taken of
them; and they being cast off without any great crimes, may be careless what
they do, since they can speed no worse, though their crimes become greater. I
know nothing can so much excuse the former frame and temper as the succeeding;
as Augustus adopted Tiberius to reflect more glory upon his own reign by
comparison with his Successors, comparatione deterrima sibi gloriam
quaesivisse, says Tacitus; nor any thing that can more endear the present
frame and temper of the Church, but the like fear which the old woman had that
prayed for Dionysius of Sicily.

It is no new thing to transfer upon others our proper faults: Me suo nomine
exulem vocat; as Nero set Rome on fire and charged it on the Christians, and
yet all the time of the burning too he sang some of Homers doleful verses: but
ori digitum, for the forefinger that used to stop the mouth, had the attribute
of salutaris from antiquity.

But to revert to the question, as stated by the Apologists. If there were no
other Gulf between us, but the necessity of Examination of our knowledge, in
order to our admission to the Sacraments, we might sooner come together: but
yet, first, why this should be only necessary in the reformation of a long
corrupted Church, and not be of a stable permanent necessity (seeing knowledge
is always needful in every Communicant, and they will be satisfied that every
one is knowing, and that satisfaction cannot be had without examination, as
they pretend) they have not favored our ignorance so far as to tell us; and
I doubt we shall need not only some Delian diver, but Elias himself to come to
resolve us.

2. In reformation of a long corrupted Church there may be an obviousness of
reason to examine those that are corrupt, or suspected to be so, but all are
not so (we hope,) and why all should then pass under examination, our dullness
needs to be prompted to apprehend the reason.

3. It had had more of rational congruity to examine in reforming an ignorant
Church, rather than a corrupt, for there may be knowledge enough, where there
are corruptions too many.

4. We are left in a mist also, and need to have it cleared up to us, how they
understand the Church to be corrupt; whether with the Brownists (the
comparative degree of this separation) they suppose the reformed Churches to be
corrupt in the first constitution, and in Essentials, which though directly
they affirm not, yet implicitly and by consequence they seem to say it; why
else do they gather new Churches, and separate from the former Congregations?
Among Heathens they might find a proper sphere for such activity, not here;
if there be Churches already gathered to their hand; and they cannot, in my
sense, stand firm and unshaken upon this degree or stair, unless they ascend to
the superlative degree of separation, and require a farther probation in order
to the re-acception of the other Sacrament; and so as the Papists upbraid us to
have had no Church before Luther, they will gratify them farther, confessing
that till now gathered by them, we had none since.

5. If they suppose corruptions only in Accidentals, in doctrines not
fundamental (but that charge they have seemed to wave;) or in discipline and
manners, this indeed is the way to keep the power in perpetual exercise, and
qui velit potestatem, perpetuam velit, for whatsoever the Donatists may talk of
a Church in this world without spot or wrinkle, yet as Beda tells us (who
according to his wont took the hint thereof from Augustine) while the Apostle
says, Retract. l. 2. c. 18.
That he (viz. Christ) might present to himself a Church not having spot or
wrinkle, he first said glorious, sufficiently signifying when she should be
without spot or wrinkle, to wit, when she should be glorious; here she may be
fair, but among women (only by comparison) and yet is black still, habet
aliquid Aethiopici decoris, as Origin. Since then Corruptions will still be,
and Reformation thereof ought always to be, they need not have limited the
necessity of examination in these terms, in reformation of a long corrupt
Church, but have determined it always necessary.

6. And of necessity we must cast dirt in the faces of the Churches of God,
that have preceded us, as well in dignity as time, if in reformation of a long
corrupt Church this examination be necessary. The godly Judges and Kings of
Israel and Judah, with the assistance of the Prophets and Priests, oftentimes
had a zeal like fire to consume the grown corruptions, and purge and purify
the Church; yet there is no light that there was any such fiery trial of those
that were to come to the Sacrifices or Sacrament. St. Paul begot the
Corinthians to Christ, and that body by many distempers soon grew corrupt, and
in purifying thereof, the Apostle prescribes no such looking to the state of
those that were to be admitted to the Sacrament, he only commands every man to
examine himself, none to examine another; not to take our Prospect at too great
a distance: The Morning Star of the Reformation arose to dispel and clear the
contagious Mist of Popish Errors, Superstitions, and Usurpations; yet we cannot
discern the least foot-step of any such way of examination, but whosoever
professed a desire of Communion with them, was accepted and received into
fellowship with them in the Sacraments, unless by any notorious crime he
forfeited it.

7. And if the question thus stated be the mark the Apologists shoot at, let us
with a touch only, and in general here, try how their arrows will fit or reach
it. They have mustered up in the 25. and following Sections, sundry Arguments
grounded on Texts of Scripture, to verify their judgment, and defend their
practice: Does any of them conclude the question thus stated? I beseech you try
in which of their Syllogismes is this Thesis, the conclusion; It is necessary
in the reformation of a long corrupt Church, that all members thereof submit to
some examination of their knowledge. Nay, which of them mentions any
examination, (only one Text speaks of giving an answer, but not to the
purpose) or which specifies the Sacrament, as that in order whereunto the duty
enjoined is to be performed? one excepted, where is a command for men to
examine themselves, none to submit themselves to be examined by another. The
withdrawing from, noting, not eating with, not giving holy things, or casting
pearls, shutting up, keeping out, etc. is to be understood (in their own
sense) of men of wicked lives, nothing here intended of men defective in
knowledge, and neither can examination be concluded out of the Texts, but by
making petitio principii the medium, viz. that what is there enjoined as duty,
cannot be complied with, but by such examination. But then for the limiting and
restraining of all to the time of Reformation of a long corrupt Church, the
Chemists that can extract oil out of steel and flint, volitant velut umbrae,
compared with these men, whose omnipotence of Logic can create something out
of nothing. Who ever till now suspected, that only in the reformation of a
corrupt Church things ought to be done in order and decency? The precious to be
separated from the vile, that we should be delivered from unreasonable and evil
men, and withdraw our selves from every brother that walks disorderly; That
we must not cast pearls before Swine, and give holy things to Dogs, nor be
partakers of other men's sins; that we ought to obey them that rule over us,
etc. As if at other times, when a long corrupt Church is not to be reformed, we
need not, nor are obliged to do any of these things. Diogenes seeing a roving
Archer, ran to stand at the mark as the safest place; so surely all the
Apologists shafts are shot so extremely wide, that I may willingly choose to
keep my self at this mark, which they set up for the state of their question,
and yet never fear to be hurt with any of their arrows.

Concerning examination the paper did never absolutely oppose it as precedanous
to this Ordinance (as they suggest.) I might say to the Apologists as St.
Augustine did to Cresconius, Lege prius diligenter contra quod scribis, aut
intellige quae dicuntur, aut noli quod intelligis vertere in aliud; for the
very first inspection into the paper will clear it of that charge: it is
denied to be necessary that all be examined, but it is affirmed of some ( viz.
such of whom there is a violent suspicion that they are ignorant) that it is
meet they should be examined, and these propositions carry neither Diagonall,
nor interpretative contradiction.

Though they have not yet prompted us with the least Jota of Scripture that
might enforce this examination preparatory and dispositive to the Sacrament,
nor helped us to the smallest color of reason to evince it to be more
requisite, in order to the Sacrament, than other Ordinances, yet we shall here
tell them:

First, that we do not so much question the convenience of examining, as the
necessity thereof: Durum est quod necesse est, said Quintilian. As love is the
sweetning of labor, and ubi amor est, non est labor, sed sapor; so necessity
is the imbittering of all undertakings, like the Salamander which if laid to
the root of a tree, it never flourishes or prospers. Quod cogitur, altera mors
est. As the Colossus at Tarentum might be moved with a finger, but not at all
stirred, if one set his whole force to it; so many may be facil to go that are
impatient to be driven, and less cheerfully choose to do that which they
cannot choose. It is a memorable Story which Cardan tells us of him in Millaine,
who having in sixty years been never without the Walls, yet when the Duke
hearing thereof sent him peremptory command never to go out of the Gates
during life, he that before had no inclination to do so, yet soon dyed with
grief to be denied the liberty of doing it: Because therefore we would not be
brought under a yoke or into bondage of any thing, we strive to stand fast in
that liberty wherein, we think, God and the gifts which he has given us, have
set us free.

2. We do not altogether dispute whether they may call men to examination, as
whether it be so necessary, ratione medii, so as that if they will not come
under it, they have power for that cause only, to keep them from the
Sacrament. Lo. Verulam.
We shall say of this matter, as a learned Man does of Alchimy, which intends
to improve baser Metalls into Gold, and then with one drop of that Elixir to
transmute a whole Sea of Quicksilver into Gold; That the foundation is more
facible than the superstructure, the antecedent more rational than the
consequent, the proposition more plausible than the inference: So in the first
part they may pretend color, but in the second are blanke. A Landlord may
require his Tenant to bring forth his Lease and show his title, but if he
think himself not obliged to produce it, it follows not that he may be thrust
from his Tenement. When Bellarmine arguing for Auricular confession and
agitating the History of Nectarius, Bellarm. de poenitent. lib. 3. cap. 14.
page 304, 305. tom. 6. Denison de auricul. confess. cap. 14. p. 92.
objects that Adversarii non admittunt homines ad Eucharistiam nisi exploratos,
and for proof thereof, besides Melancthon, cites Calvin, Interim quin sistunt
se oves pastori, quoties sacram coenam participare volunt, adeo non reclamo, ut
maxim velim hoc ubique observari: Dr. Denison answers, Illam consuetudinem
probant -- illud tamen ut ab ecclesia susceptum, non a Deo praeceptum, exigunt.
And howsoever this be vendicated as the Doctrine and practice of the Reformed
Churches, especially those that are of Presbyterian model, yet in the necessity
(and so also in the Universality) thereof, it is but a Servant lately taken in
for a need, that wears the badge or cognizance of the family, but it is not of
the lineage or right offspring. We know that Gentlemen of this Nation that
travel into France or Holland, upon the offer of themselves are ordinarily
admitted to partake the Sacrament, without examination, and even in the Church
at Charenton, the most celebrious of the Nation.

3. We do not so much oppose this pretended power of examination, as the
consequence of it. As Qui veterem fert injuriam, invitat novam; so if we give
place to one imposition, we make way for more, and as in Gods Law, he that
offends in one point, is guilty of all; so in men's commandments, he that gives
up his liberty in subjection to one thing, forfeits it in all, for even in this
concernment, Eadem est ratio partium and totius, and if obedience be due to one
command, it is also to more, that shall come stamped with the same authority.

4. Neither do we at all contest against an expediency of examination
relatively to some persons, such as lie under a violent or morally probable
suspicion of ignorance, Quando intercedit sufficiens ratio ad generandum
dubium, as the School defines it, who being convicted to be ignorant, we deny
not but it is fit their approach be somewhile retarded, until they are better
instructed; but such whose understanding in the Gospel is well known, Reply to
Dr. Whitgift. p. 164.
or which do examine themselves, Mr. Cartwright says, their meaning is not
they should be examined: and when there shall appear an expediency of
Examination, none but will say, it may be done as well in private, and that it
shall sort better as well with charity, as prudence, to do it so.

But though palpably ignorant persons may be excluded, yet it is a fallacy of
the consequent to conclude that therefore all must be examined. There are some
that are elevated above all suspicion of ignorance, and there are other ways
of discovery of ignorance besides particular examination upon interrogatories.
Themselves tell us, that they examine none that are taken to be Disciples, and
therefore they may know them to be such without examination, by their
education, discourse, actions, and employments. Were a Pastor so familiarly
conversant with his Flock, as he ought to be, and is some think employed not
only by Paul's preaching from house to house, but also by those alike-used
Scripture idioms, the Church in or among you, and you in the Church; or did not
deem the feeding of the Lambs by catechizing, to be beneath his magistery and
greatness, he would need no other marks or signs to know his Sheep by, than
such as he might take from common conversation.

Even themselves say that Christ needed not to examine his Disciples before
they did partake of his Supper, because they were known to him;

But to dispute, No ignorant person ought to be admitted, therefore all ought
to be examined whether they are ignorant, is (as I have elsewhere instanced) as
if I should argue no Idiot ought to manage his own estate, therefore all ought
to be examined, whether they are Idiots, before they be admitted to the
mannagement of their Fortunes, and is somewhat analogous to Bellarmine's
reasoning, that because Ambrose censured Theodosius, therefore he was a lawful
Judge of him in an external Court, to examine matters in order to his sentence,
who notwithstanding proceeded only ex evidentia facti.

And however, we cannot think it fit to examine silly Maidservants, what is
the Essence of God, that is a depth too great to put an Elephant in, much more
a Lamb; The Philosopher could say, De Deo hoc tantum dic, Esse; and Gregory
better, Ne vocabula quidem Dei naturae congruentia reperire homines possunt,
and therefore de Deo cum dicitur, dici non potest.

And we should also think it very useful to affie the Standard of the
Sanctuary, and to determine what measure of knowledge may be a competency for
the Sacrament. It is evident that the Catechumeni presently upon their baptism
were anciently admitted to the Eucharist, Durantus for this cites the authority
of many Fathers de ritib. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 19. p. 161. Albas. de veter.
Eccles. rit. l. 2. obs. 22. p. 315. Mr. Ball answ. to Can. 2 part. p. 58.
Sylvius 22. ae. qu. 2. art. 10. conclus. 3. p. 28. Usher sermon: on Ephesians. 4.13.
and answer to the Jesuit p. 311. and 312. Bellarm. de Verbo Dei l. 4. cap. 11.
Hieron. ad Pammach. tom. 2. p. 238. hist. l. 7. c. 30.
and yet Albaspinus tells us, that during their catechumenacy they were taught
nothing de arcanis Sacramentorum; and the profession at first required of all
that were received to Baptism (as a learned Divine affirms) was that they
believed the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; Regulam fidei per baptismum
accipimus, says Irenaeus; qui baptizandi erant olim solitos reddere seu
recitare Symbolum, is affirmed by Sylvius, out of many ancient Authors. In the
Eastern Church, they recited the Nicene; in the Western (who, says Bishop
Usher, applied themselves to the capacity of the meaner sort more than the
Eastern) the Apostolical, and both he and Erasmus show, that the Apostles
Creed (which the Fathers called regulam fidei) was not so large at first as
afterward, when it was enlarged by accession of sundry Articles occasioned by
the emergency of several Heresies and other occasions. Bellarmine is very
confident (and we take up this arrow to shoot it back against himself) that the
Apostles never used to preach openly to the people other things than the
Apostles Creed, the ten Commandments and the Sacraments, Hierom tells us in
his time, there was but forty days allowed for catechizing the Heathen, Ut
per quadraginta dies public tradamus sanctam and adorandam Trinitatem, says
he, (which insinuates what was the Doctrine taught them;) and the same thing
Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus and omnis testatur antiquitas (adds Victorius in his
Schol^a;) and Socrates relates the whole Nation of the Burgundians were
catechized seven days, and the eighth were baptized; and if we may judge of
their proficiency by the time of instruction, it could be no great stock of
knowledge, that aliens from the Church and Faith could acquire in that interim,
in all probability not so much as the Children of the Church may do after so
many years teaching, as the other had days.

The Apostles themselves at the first institution had a very small cantle of
knowledge, who had only an implicit Faith, even of the death and resurrection
of Christ, as appears, John 20.9. and Luke 9.44, 45. and 24.7, 8. neither do
we find they had any other preparatory instruction concerning the Nature and
ends of the Sacrament, save what was collected from the words of Institution,
which we propound not as a sufficient extent of our knowledge, or that we
should content our selves with such a measure, but as a restraint upon their
rigor, and that they should accept a less stint than what they exact.

But notwithstanding if some are weak in knowledge, it is no unlikely way to
improve it by frequent partaking of the Sacrament, where the great mystery of
the redemption of the World by the death of Christ, is so sensibly showed
forth; so as to suspend men because of their mean knowledge is, as if they
should deny them the means, because they have not fully attained the end: and
if profession of Faith may serve in lieu of examination (as the Apologists
insinuate) the very coming to the Sacrament and partaking thereof is a kind
of real profession of Faith. And Aquinas tells us, Addit. ad 3. q. 5. ar. 2.
Durand. 4. d. 17. q. 14. Loc. com. part. 4. p. 194.
Sacramenta sunt quaedam protestationes fidei, or signa protestativa fidei, as
Durand, an owning of Christ externally; and engaging to believe in him; they
profess their Faith as touching the body of Christ nailed upon the Cross, and
his blood shed for their salvation (says Peter Martyr) confession being to be
made with outward actions, not only with the mouth: And if any orall and
explicit confession was thought fit to be made, it was only the joining in
the public repeating of the Apostolic Creed, which in the Eastern Churches
usually preceded the Sacrament: and therefore in the third Council of Toledo
it was decreed, Cano. ^.
Ante communicationem corporis Christi and sanguinis, juxta Orientalium partium
morem, unanimiter clara voce sacratissimum fidei recenseant Symbolum, ut primum
populi, quam credulitatem teneant, fateantur. Besides, the adding Amen to the
words of Consecration, wherewith (says Ambrose) the Elements were delivered,
quibus singulis vescentes confessionem fidei suae addebant, respondentes, Amen:
Chemnitius says, was a profession of the Faith, Exam. Trid. Council. part. 2.
p. 107. Idem p. 111, 112.
and the same learned Man adds, that therefore in Festis solennioribus tota
multitudo ad majores Basilicas conveniebat, and ibi solennis quaedam Communio
celebrabatur, Ut quisque publica professione ostenderet se esse membrum
ecclesiae, and this, he says, was enacted to be done by the Agathense
Council; where observe that he speaks of tota multitudo, not five of five
hundred, and so many at these times convened, that one Church could not
contain them, and Leo prescribes that therefore sacrificii oblatio reiteretur:
and sure every man's proper reason will dictate to him, how impossible it was
that in such a confluence there could be a trial of every man's knowledge and
holiness, which could neither be perfectly known to them that in such manner
administered. De re Sacrament. l. 2. p. 52.
Hospinian speaking of the solemn communions upon the greater festivals, tells
us, Nec malo consilio haec solennis communio instituta fuit, sed ut hac publica
professione declararent se esse membra verae ecclesiae, and admonerentur sicut
unus est panis, ita multos se unum corpus esse, atque hoc modo consensus in
doctrina and fide retinerentur.

So when Erastus objected, that sinners were called to the Sacrifices; Beza
answers, Such sinners as testified their repentance by their sacrificing: and
if to sacrifice were a profession of repentance, then to come to the Communion,
by the same proportion of reason, is a profession of Faith, and the Priest
might have as rationally examined the truth of the Sacrificers repentance
(which he did not, but charitably judged of the sincerity of his heart by the
offerings of his hands) as the Minister may now make research into the
knowledge of Faith of the receiver. Rivet. Gerhard.
for though the owner had brought the Lamb to the Courts of the Temple to be
killed by the Priests, which the Learned deny; yet it was eaten at home by the
whole Family, to whom the Master taught the end and use thereof, but called
none to account what understanding they had of that, or any other mysteries.
Let them, if they think it expedient, and will afford the pains to do it,
examine men also of their aptness to profit by the word, and of their
proficiency thereby; but as if men decline and will not come under such
examination, we cannot allow them to shut them out from hearing the Word; so
neither can we permit them to exclude all from the Sacrament, that conform not
to be examined in antecedency thereunto.

Yet if the Apologists would only bring us all under the necessity of an
unlimited examination of our knowledge, to have peace with them, we might be
content interpretatively to put out our right eye, and subject our selves to a
suspicion of our ignorance. But Ad populum phaleras, --
Ego te intus and in cute novi. --
A satisfaction concerning men's knowledge and verbal examination in order
thereunto, is not only nor principally contended for by them, nor alone or
chiefly questioned by us. They insist on it to be satisfied of their Holiness,
and without real proof thereof they admit none to fellowship in the Sacraments,
which they tell us are the privileges only of the Godly: This is that Helena
that chiefly sets us all at War, and has kindled those flames: they suppose
that to be a Churchmember with a dogmatical faith, gives not a right of being
admitted to the Sacrament, or is the Directory for them to admit him: Neither
is a negative holiness sufficient to be free of scandal, but he must give
positive signs of sound grace; nor that it is enough they have nothing against
him, he must show some evidence for himself of real holiness: it avails not
that they know nothing to the contrary, they must have farther satisfaction;
they grant not that every intelligent member of the visible Church has a
right, till he have forfeited it; but allow no title till he have pleaded and
approved it by some evidence that he is a member of the invisible Church: They
repel not men for notorious Crimes, nor in any formal judicial way of Censure,
but because they are not satisfied concerning them, or they have not merited
their good opinion. Nay, I would particularly instance in some that after
admission have been laid aside, not for want of grace, but for lack of some
degrees thereof, as for not being humbled enough; and for defect of such
satisfaction, or almost upon suspicion of the unsanctified estate of some, in
whom they may perchance observe some inordinateness, they suspend themselves
(rather than those which are the far greater number) from the Communion, gather
a new Church of those they suppose more pure and holy, and erect a separate
Altar, whereby they directly fall within the definition given of a Schismatique
by the great Council of Chalcedon, Qui seipsum a Communione suspendit,
collectam facit and altar constituit. Had the Apologists conformed their
Churches to the Presbyterian model, set up and settled that form of discipline;
had they retained the Celebration of the Sacrament, and constantly at their
appointed times administered it in their proper Churches, and admitted all those
that they could not particularly charge with, and plainly convict of some
scandalous crime (and notorious, according to the received definition) what
Silenus said was the greatest happiness of this world, had been the felicity of
this controversy between us, Never to have been born, or soon to have dyed:
yet they suggest,

1. That in yielding that scandalous and notorious sinners may be suspended, I
prevaricate, by granting the main of the question, and yet opposing them
stiffly. 2. They impute it to me, that my concessions look one way, and my
arguments another, implying, as if I did covertly dispute against the power of
Excommunication. 3. They obliquely charge upon me, by some insinuations, as if
I were inimicous, and had some animosities against the Presbyterian Government.

But to the first, Praevaricator est quasi varicator qui diversam causam
adjuvat prodita causa sua: quod nomen Labeo a varia certatione tractum ait; nam
qui praevaricatur ex utraque part constitit, quinimo ex altera. Cujac.
observat. Or it is a metaphor taken from vari, those that have their knees out
of joint that they touch above, and the feet are far asunder; so they that
strive together and are friends privily, are called Prevaricators. Dr. Andrews.
(not to question how properly they apply the word prevaricate) though the main
had been granted, yet some lesser and collateral things might merit my
opposition, as well as they have found their defense: but yet having the main
in grant, I should have thought, that to defend these pettier things, were a
play not worth their lamp. But that which they call the main was never the
least part of the thing controverted, being yielded without all controversy.
It is indeed the main Fortress and Castle whereunto they ratreat upon every
charge, though they will find the Gates thereof shut against any refuge for
them: verily all the fatness of their discourse ha^h no other relish, but that
there is a power, and that it is a duty to exclude such as are nefarious and
scandalous from the Communion. Were the Apology deplumed of those feathers
which are but borrowed, in respect of what is proper to our question, it would
show as naked as Aesops Crow; but their Arrows thus feathered, as little hurt
me, as hit the mark they have set up; for if I had blended the beams of the Sun
with my ink, I could not have made it more clear or lucid that I am not among
the Antipod^s to that Thesis; rather the abstract of our difference, and the
punctual state of the controversy between us, is compendiously this: They
think none ought to be admitted to the Communion, but such as give satisfactory
signs of knowledge and holiness; I suppose they should exclude none but those
that are signally ignorant and flagitious. They require a positive probation as
necessary, and that demonstrative proof ought to be rendered of their godliness,
I judge a negative trial sufficient, so as to have nothing against them, and
that they be not obnoxious for any notorious wickedness. They will admit none,
whose sanctity may be doubted; I allow only such to be rejected, whose crimes
are notorious: They argue, that because none but such as are fit and worthy
ought to be admitted, it is therefore necessary to make trial generally of the
fitness of all, and not finding a competent number of fit persons in their
proper charges, that they may separate into a new Church, gathered and made up
only of such as they judge to be fit; I suppose the fallacy of the consequent
in both, is the first limiting and restraining their probation within anguster
bounds (those that are not notorious or not violently suspected, needing no
trial; and those that are notorious, being for the most part past it, and tried
to their hand;) and in the latter I concede no liberty at all, and though de
jure and speculatively only fit persons are to be admitted, yet de facto and
practically all intelligent Church Members that have made no public forfeiture
of Church-privileges and interesses, nor of good existimation, that bonum
depositum in aliorum mentibus, are regularly to be deemed and accepted as fit,
and accordingly to be admitted. These are the proper issues between us, and
what is heterogeneal to these is ignoratio elenchi; and where they should
defend these hypotheses, and vindicate this course of theirs, only to contend
for the power and duty of Excommunication, is it not Andabatorum more, to fight
blindfold? or seeing it to be best for their advantage, to run at tilt, not
against a fighting enemy, but a wooden image of their own erecting, fitting the
mark to their arrows, not suiting their shafts to their scope; and in effect is
nothing else, than as if a Tyrant, to justify his rapines and persecutions,
should plead the just power of Kings to punish ostenders upon lawful process.
For let them punctually answer, are all these jure aut juridice, excommunicate
or suspended, whom they admit not? Are they de facto, grossly ignorant, or
notoriously wicked and scandalous? They cannot say it, and they deny that they
think it, let them then recount these two assertions, That they admit all, save
grossly ignorant, and notoriously criminous; and yet these whom they exclude,
are not such. St. Augustine never more urgently pressed Petilian and his
Hyperaspist Cresconius, to answer that question, Si Conscientia certe dantis
attenditur quae abluat accipientis, etc. than I shall importune the Apologists
to satisfy this Dilemma: Those many whom you reject from the Communion, are
either judicially sentenced for notorious sins, (and then I will confess that
they are justly separate from you;) or else not so censured, and then you must
confess you unjustly separate from them. To say they are not willing, is to say
contrary to what they profess, who complain of being defrauded of what they
have such a will to partake, Varus ait, Scaurus negat, utri creditis? To
suggest it is their fault that they partake not, is to make them culpable for
not taking that which they cannot have; for when had they a Synaxis in their
Churches? To tell them they must come at Pyworthy, (where he that tells them
so, is Pastor of no Church there; those that are so told, are not the flock of
any Pastor there) they might as justly call them to Exceter; and would they
come there, they must notwithstanding come under this probation, and wait upon
their good pleasure and gracious opinion, which is the thing questioned, and
sets the business in the same posture as before, after all these palliations.
So that in the conclusion, when they tell us elsewhere, he that puts them to
prove that persons knowing and not scandalous may be excluded, shall hear of
their refusal; we must say to them, we do indeed hear of their refusal, but it
is only to prove this, not to do it, whiles they exclude these whom they dare
not say; and if they did, we should knowingly gainsay, that they are ignorant
or scandalous.

To the second, that my Concessions look one way, my Arguments another, (as if
like the Parthians I turn my face from that mark I shoot at; or like Faustus,
that pretended to write against Pelagius, yet half justified him) it had been a
just debt, if not to me, that I might see my error; yet to themselves, that we
might see their truth and ingenuity, to have instanced in any one argument of
mine, that pleads against the power and duty of Excommunication. No, when the
Civil Magistrate is become both the Son and Father of the Church, I do not
think that the opening of his Praetorium should shut up the Ecclesiastical
forum exterius, nor the exercising of his sword, lay the keys aside to rust:
Let them not be tried to open other Locks than they were made for, that Moses
may have no cause to say the Sons of Levi take too much upon them; we shall no
more repine at Aarons keys or rod, than at Moses sword. I am sensible these are
different Administrations, and have several reasons and ways and ends. There
are some Crimes which need Censure, and sometime the Civil Laws take no hold
thereof, nor can the Civil Courts take cognizance of them; and the Magistrate
punishes, though the Offender repent; and is satisfied when the pain is
suffered, or mulct is paid, whether he be penitent or not. The Church has a
contrary method in her punishments, and which are not properly punishments, but
castigations; the holy and prudential ends thereof I have elsewhere displayed:
I do not therefore hold it fit to excommunicate Excommunication, though I judge
the undue conduct and culpable exercise thereof to be suspended. Let it not be
1. too frequently inflicted, it being Medicine, not Food; and Physicians tell
us, that Medicines lose their efficacy by ordinary use; and though Cacochymie
give indication, yet continual Purgings brings the habitude of the body to a
cachexy; and in the Timpany, to let out all the water without stops and
intermissions, destroys the Patient. 2. Nor too precipitate, Nulla unquam de
hac morte hominis cunctatio longa est, And Avenzoar (they say) trembled three
days before ever he administered a Purge: 3. Nor ordinarily, until after
frequent admonitions, and afflatur omne priusquam percutitur; let all other
good means be used, Cuncta prius tentanda, -- Let it be as Physicians say of
Antimony, that it must be like a cowardly Captain to come up to the charge last
of all, and after all others; let it be only upon obstinate impenitence, and
when it is immedicabile vnlnus, then quaecunque medicamenta non sanant, ea
sanat ferrum; as says Hypocrates. 4. Let it not be for any thing, but scelus,
or affine sceleri, that which is interpretativa negatio fidei, gross abominable
iniquities, whereby the Church may be defamed, and the enemies have cause to
blaspheme; and such as may be stumbling, blocks to other men's Consciences; such
sins as appear omnibus execrabilia, as Augustine, and are excessus
peccatorum, as Estius speaks: let it be not inflicted for smaller faults, which
else would be (as Parisiensis tells us) as if to kill a Fly on the forehead,
we should knock a man in the head with a beetle; and let not such purity be
required from men in order to their safeguard and immunity from this Censure,
as Anabaptists exact; who, as Marlorat tells us, Marlorat. in 1 Cor. 51. Ball
trial of the grounds of Separat. c. 10. p. 187.
Ante Communionem protestantur se tantam habere Charitatem, quantam Christus in
cruce pendens. 5. Let it be for such Crimes as are notorious by public notice;
not if one or other, (though perhaps the Minister be one of them) do know
thereof; but let them be such as are scandalous in their course, commonly
defamed by evidence of fact, or confession or proof of witnesses; and if not by
innumeris documentis testibusque; as Augustine pleads, yet by more than one;
for uni testi, ne Catoni quidem, credendum est: even when the great cry of
Sodom came up, yet God went down to see, whether they had done altogether
according to the cry; Si regnas, jube, si judicas, cognosce. 6. Let it be done
humili charitate and benigna severitate -- sine typho elationis in hominem, and
cum luctu deprecationis ad Deum; Aug. cont. Parmen. l. 3. c. 2. Tom. 7. p. 13.
and as it is said of Augustus, Prius suas lachrymas quam alienum sanguinem
effudit; for otherwise, -- hujus enim summi rarique voluptas
Nulla boni, quoties animo corrupta superbo
Plus aloes, quam mellis habet, --
Let it be thus regulated without humane wrong in hypothesi, and let it in
these pass as of divine right.

The greater Excommunication I mean; for as concerning Suspension, which they
call the lesser Excommunication, I am deceived if it may not be called the
least in the Kingdom of Heaven: the Tree from which that Wood was gathered,
was of a later rise and spring in the Paradise of God, not of the first
planting, and has no divine ground to fix its root in; if there be any
Characters in Scripture asserting expressly, or by plain and easy consequence
the divine right thereof, See this amply discussed,
or any footsteps thereof in the tract and course of all the ancient Church, so
as that any were suspended from the Sacrament, that were not separate from the
body of the Church by Excommunication, those characters and footsteps are too
small to be discerned by my dim eyes, Horizon too narrow to reach them,
unless their hand, like that in a margin pointing to the places, shall lead me
nearer to them. Tertullian I am sure defines Excommunication of what kind
soever it be, a Communicatione Orationis and conventus, and omnis sancti
commercii relegatio. I am not ignorant there is frequent mention in the
Casuists and Schoolmen, of excommunicatio minor, but these bear no weight,
where these men hold the beam; yet notwithstanding it may have place, and be of
wholesome use, when men strongly accused, or violently suspected of offenses in
their nature scandalous, are under trial, and as it were pendente lite; in
which respect it may pass, as gradus excommunicationis, as Ames calls it; and
if they will give that name to a deferring to administer to those that are
manifestly ignorant, while they are under catechizing, I shall not contest
against it, and besides I should be no eager Opposite thereunto; because as
Alcibiades acquired more esteem, because Socrates loved him; so I should be
more indulgent to this act of discipline, by reason it has the favor of some
godly learned men, and seems also to march under the Colors of Prudence, and
pretends to wear the cognizance of Piety and clement moderation, and only
under the notion of clemency; and upon account thereof, we may give a passport
to that, which is the main weapon wherewith the Casuists and Schoolmen fight
for the lesser Excommunication; and from whose Armory, the Divines of this
judgment have borrowed it, That he that can do the greater, can do the less;
which having many other limitations, must especially be limited to matters of
the same kind; for otherwise (for instance sake) a Justice of peace that can
send a man to the Goal for Felony; which is the greater, cannot commit him to
the Prison for Debt, nor likewise in matters of the same kind. However it may
go upon the account of clemency, it cannot pass upon the score of justice; for
a Judge that may for a crime take a Malefactors life, may not nevertheless
deprive him of his eye for that offense; yet so as suspension be exercised in
such a regular way as excommunication ought to be, and for such notorious
scandals as merit excommunication, (for then the person suspended seems
excommunicate, jure, licet non juridice, in fieri and si non in facto esse, in
actu signato, si non actu exercito, demeritorie, etsi non effective, and so our
ground may still lie unshaken, that every member of the visible Church, not
incapable through natural disability, has a right to the Sacrament, while
these in such manner suspended, though not fully and formally cut off from the
body of the Church, are yet having a virtual excision, no complete members
thereof; and being much loosned, have loosed much of the privileges founded in,
and resulting from Church Membership,) I say with these qualifications, though
this Jephtha be the Son of a strange woman, yet since he may fight for Israel
against the Ammonites, I shall not vote to cast him out; and though like an
Heteroclyte, it be among those quae genus variant (having not that kind of
evidence and authority which excommunication has,) yet if it do not flexum
also (and deflect to any inordinateness, among those which novato ritu
deficiunt superantque) for my part I shall not proscribe it: Even menial
servants merit some respect only for wearing the Cognizance of noble Families;
only as they distinguish the Roman gods into those Majorum Gentium, and
Semi-dei, seu Indigites and Semones; so let there be a distinction among acts
of discipline, of those that are originally of a divine impression, and
necessary, and such as are of later prudential Edition, and expedient only in
some cases.

And to proceed farther, 3. Disp. 7. q. 17. punct. 1. p. 1387.
I am not altogether of the judgment of the School and the Casuists that
determine, Abstinendum a sententia excommunicationis, quando constaret non modo
non profuturam peccatori, sed etiam nocituram, quia scilicet magis indurabitur;
yet I approve it with the limitations of Valentia, Tunc solum verum esse,
quando circumstantiae non essent tales, ut propter exemplum and bonum Commune
redundaturum ex tali Excommunicatione videretur merito posse negligi privatum
detrimentum illius. And I do fully consent with Augustine, Si contagio peccandi
multitudinem invaserit, Contra Par. men. l. 3. c. 2. Tom. 7. p. 13.
divinae disciplinae severa misericordia necessaria est, -- tunc autem hoc sine
labe pacis and unitatis and sine laesione frumentorum, fieri potest, cum
congregationis Ecclesiae multitudo, ab eo crimine quo anathematizatur, aliena
est -- and eum posse tali modo salubriter corrigi, qui inter dissimiles peccat,
idest, inter eos quos peccatorum similium pestilentia non corrumpit, -- neque
enim potest esse salubris a multis correptio, nisi cum ille corripitur qui non
habeat sociam multitudinem; cum vero idem morbus plurimos occupaverit, nihil
aliud bonis restat, quam dolor and gemitus. Plures numere tuti inter multos
societate culpae tutior. Tacitus.
And such a course is not only suitable to civil prudence, (an example whereof
we may find in Sparta, (a City of the strictest and severest discipline of all
Greece) and as the best men, so the best City of Greece, might pass for the
best of the Heathen world, (where though he that fled out of the battle carried
afterward the perpetual Characters of Infamy, yet when such a multitude were
put to flight at the great battle of Leuctra, Agesilaus thought fit to lay
asleep, and suspend the Law for that time. But 2. conformable also to Divine
wisdom, Annot. in Mat. 13.41.
not only in respect of what Grotius tells us, Quod ad poenas generales
attinet, quales sunt diluvia, incendia, aliaeque id genus pestes, cum non
possunt ita infligi, ut solos improbos contingant, proborum etiam paucorum
causa, Deus iis abstinet, aut certe eas temperat: but in regard of what St.
Augustine proves, from the pattern of the Apostle, who though he
excommunicated one incestuous person at Corinth, Ubi supra.
yet, cum jam multos comperisset and immunda luxuria and fornicationibus
inquinatos, ad eosdem Corinthios in secunda Epistola scribens, non itidem
praecipit, ut cum talibus nec cibum sumerent, multi enim erant, nec de his
poterat dicere, Si quis frater, etc. sed ait ne iterum cum venero ad vos,
humiliet me Deus and lugeam multos, etc. per luctum suum potius eos divino
flagello coorcendos innuens, quam per illam correptionem, ut caeteri ab eorum
conjunctione contineant.

And 3. the contrary course is altogether opposite to the ends of
Excommunication, either general, as edification; whereas this is vastare
civitatem, non sanare (as Salust of Catiline;) and clades, non medicina, as
Germanicus in another case; or special, as making them ashamed, whereas the
multitude of offenders takes away all shame, as among Negroes it is beauty to
be black, and they paint Angels of that color. The civil judgments and
Ecclesiastic censures, though otherwise different, yet are both built upon
these common grounds, that punishments are inflicted, not because a fault has
been committed, but lest it should be; that the fear of that offense may come
to all whereof the penalty has fallen upon one; and as it fares in the Church,
so it falls out alike in a Christian Commonwealth, if the Laws be not duly
executed in the punishment of Malefactors, good men are scandalized, and evil
are encouraged by impunity; and not only the Justice of the Nation, but the
honor of Religion also is left obnoxious to obloquy: yet however no man
contradicts the moderating of civil punishments by clemency, or approves the
excess of Justice, which is cruelty, such as the Poet reproved in Sylla, Ille
quod exiguum restabat sanguinis urbi
Hausit, dumque nimis jam putrida membra rescidit;
Excessit medicina modum, nimiumque secuta est
Qua morbi duxere manus. --
He must be more than a Cherubin that deignes not to look to the mercy-seat;
Nec quisquam est cui tam valde innocentia sua placeat, Seneca de Clem. lib. 1.
ut non stare in conspectu clementiam paratam humanis erroribus gaudeat. It may
fall out also in many cases, what Livy tells us to have happened in that of Q.
Maximus, Nec minus firma est disciplina militaris Q. Fabii periculo, quam Titi
Manlii miserabili supplicio; and it is as consentient to prudence, as the
practice of States, where there is a multitude of Delinquents, to choose out the
fattest for Sacrifices to justice, and with Tarquin; to lop off the heads
only; and where by a partial or negligent execution of Laws and administration
of Justice, offenders suffer condign punishment, it cannot yet warrant or
excuse a denying of subjection, or a raising of sedition, or an erecting and
constituting new Commonwealths in the Commonwealth, as if men could not live
with a good and undefiled Conscience where were any bluntnes in the Sword, or
inequality in the Scales of Justice; and why those considerations may not have
some place, and the reasons thereof be in some measure applicable to
Ecclesiastical censures, I confess I cannot apprehend, but am yet to be
instructed.

When the Church had no Civil Magistrate, and very many sins there were,
which the Laws took no cognizance of, nor prescribed punishments for, the
Ecclesiastic Censures recompensed that defect: Now when Municipall Laws under
Christian Magistrates are multiplied and extended to the correction of most
offenses, the execution thereof might in some degree supply the neglect of
Ecclesiastical censures, and comply with the greatest part of the ends thereof,
as to humble, and by shame to reclaim offenders, to inhibit the contagious
spreading of the example, and to remove the scandal which Religion might
contract, by permitting offenses to pass unpunished: for as for pollution of
others (without society in sin) false testimony and sealing of blanks and the
like, I think the prevention thereof to be no proper end of censures, 1 Cor. 5.
nor find any such thing intimated by the Apostle, where he argues and
reasons for the putting away of that wicked person from among the
Corinthians, nor suppose them to be any more effectual means to that end, than
anciently in Eclipses the resounding of those era auxiliaria mentioned in the
Poets, were to ease the ignorantly fained -- solis lunaeque labores; Or the
torches that were then held up were to reflect light on these great Luminaries.

I say the Laws of the Commonwealth might in some degree supply the neglect of
Church censures (which are to be exercised in palam facinorosos, maxim si
circa hos magistratus officium non faciat, says Paraeus,) so far, In 1 Cor.
5. p. 14. 67.
as to restrain and withhold men from separation, or (which is the modern
Periphrasis and new notion, to blanch and palliate separation) from gathering
new Churches. And this is that which to me seems cardo negotii, and that which
I must insist on, that though Excommunication be obstructed or laid asleep, or
culpably exercised, and so there be a mixture of good and evil in one
Communion, yet there must be no separation into the new gathered Churches. The
contrary opinion and practice was the very spirit and extract of the heresy of
the Donatists. Calvin tells us, Instit. l. 4. c. 12. sect. 12.
that because the Bishops only reproved some evils which they thought not
profitable for the Church to punish with Excommunication, therefore they made
invectives against the Bishops, and raised a schism against the Churches of
Christ. Morton grand impost. cap. 15. sect. 25. Martyr. loc. com. part. 4. c.
5. p. 61. Parae. in 1 Cor. 5. p. 467. Augustine. contra Parmen. l. 3. c. 1. and
2. p. 12. and 13. tom. 7.
And Dr. Morton shows us that they separated from the other constituted
Churches in Africa, especially because of the mixture of Godly and wicked
professors in one Communion; and Peter Martyr and Paraeus both tell us out of
Augustine, that the Donatists objected to the Catholics that they had no
Church because they wanted Excommunication: but St. Augustine answers them,
Dicant ergo si possunt, meliorem se atque purgatiorem habere nunc ecclesiam,
quam erat ipsa unitas, beatissimi Cypriani temporibus, who yet held communion
of Sacraments with men notoriously culpable in una congregatione, paria
Sacramenta tractantes, and though, says he, siat hoc (scil. excommunicatio)
ubi periculum schismatis nullum est -- salva dilectionis synceritate, and
custodita pacis unitate -- adhibita prudentia and obedientia in eo quod
praecipit Dominus, ne frumenta laedantur; yet as he instances in the case of
Cyprian, Quia non poterant ab iis corporaliter separari, ne simul eradicent and
triticum, sufficiebat iis talibus cord sejungi, vita moribusque distingui,
propter compensationem custodiendae pacis and unitatis, propter salutem
infirmorum, and veluti lactentium frumentorum, ne membra corporis Christi per
sacrilega schismata laniarent; and to this truth his whole books are but one
continued testimony: and for this we have better, even infallible and
authenticke witness, for when the incestuous Corinthian was not censured yet,
neither did any, how much soever they might pretend to purity, 1 Cor. 5.
separate themselves into a gathered Church, nor had any check from the Apostle
for not doing so, or command to do it, no not if in case, as he had judged
already, that wicked person should not have been put away from among
themselves. And when the Angel of the Church of Thiatyra suffered that woman
Jezabel to teach and to seduce, Revel. 2.20. and 24.
to commit fornication, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, those which had not
that Doctrine, nor known the depth of Satan, were only commanded to hold fast
what they had, and had no other burden put upon them, because they had not
separated Jezabel from the Church, either of command to separate, or of
calamities and threatenings for not separating, and for being defiled with such
communion.

To conclude this discourse, (the thread whereof I have spun into some length
that it might reach thorough the whole extent and limits of Excommunication,
and which is very pertinent to clear as well the state of our Controversy from
mistake, as I my self from misprision,) I shall now wind it all up in this
clew; That I approve very well of Excommunication the greater, and condemn not
the lesser, but I like not their way of inflicting it, because not like to that
course, which I think only to be approved, and as Rectum est sui index and
obliqui, that which I conceive right, will manifest theirs to be crooked, being
too common, and laid on too many, too precipitate and without particular
admonition, and inflicted for no gross and notorious crimes, impenitently and
obstinately persisted in, but only because men are not, in their opinion, holy
enough, or cannot satisfy them of their holiness: and indeed whereas they
insinuate others to be opposite to Excommunication, themselves plainly destroy
the nature thereof, not only because In omni foro ad judicium rectum, In 4. d.
18. q. 2. art. 1.
requiritur and cognitio causae, and sententiatio, as Biel speaks, whereas yet
they suspend the greater part of the people without either of these, but
because the definition (which includes the nature) of Excommunication, is to be
censura ecclesiastica privans ab aliqua communione fidelium, etc. whereas they
Excommunicate (with the lesser Excommunication I mean) and exclude from their
Communion a multitude upon whom no Ecclesiastical censure ever passed.

Now lastly, for Presbytery, I long since read and took much impression from a
passage in Bodin, De method. hist. c. 6. p. 245.
Laudabile, si quid usquam gentium, quodque rempub. efficit, si non opibus and
imperii magnitudine, certe virtutibus ac pietate florentem, illa scilicet
Pontificum censura, qua nihil magis divinum cogitari potuit, -- ad Christi
norman dirigitur, latenter primum and am'ce, deinde paulo acerbius, tum nisi
pareas, etc. igitur nulla meretricia, nullae ebrietates, etc. And I still
approve of Presbytery according to the judgment of Calvin, as a prudent
Government, regulated generally by the word of God, and conducible to Truth and
Godliness; yet not after the opinion of Beza, as particularly enjoined by Gods
Word, and necessary to be alone entertained; where Truth and Godliness shall
be, Ut ab ea non magis liceat recedere, quam ab ipsius Religionis placitis. I
am not against Presbytery, yet I am not so much for it, as to be against all
other forms of government beside it. I deny not that to be a good government,
yet affirm not that there is none else that is good. I never voted for
exorbitant Episcopacy, nor should I have ever suffraged against a regulated; I
would have gladly lived under rectified Episcopacy, and I am content to be
under a moderate Presbytery, (for there are rigidi and molles Presbyteri,
as well as rigidi and molles Lutheran^) and between regulate Episcopacy and
moderate Presbytery is no such gulf fixed, that there can be no passing from
the one to the other, and if they be not like some of the Heathen Gods which
were the same deities, but had one name apud superos, another apud inferos, yet
sure they are not like Angles made of right, and Angles made of Spherical
lines, which can never be made equal; and we will not dispute which is the
right line, or which more Spherical, (more known in the Sphere of the world)
seeing we endeavor to atone them. All things are apt to be soyled by diuturnal
use, and men's corruptions will have an influence into their actions. Streams
pure in the Fountain, contract some filth by a long course, but accidental
evils may not prejudice what is essentially good: Faults of the concrete are to
be sequestered from the abstract, and the miscariages of persons not to be put
upon the score of the Office they manage. And Presbyters are men too, and man
has a connotation of frailty, and never comes up fully to the Standard of the
Sanctuary, though I think they hold out weight as much, and need as few grains
of allowance to make them passable for sanctity, as any generation of men that
I know, so that I wish we had more of Presbyters, and am sorry to find so few
right Presbyters, and that many pass under that notion, which are but
conterfeits and prevaricators.

Even my zeal for the honor of Presbytery transports me into a dislike of those
which lapse from their principles, as if they distrusted and were out of love
with them, and reflect dishonor upon that name by their recidivations. Nor can
I take complacency to find that Cassius, Quicquid velit, nimis velit, and I
think it very wise and seasonable Counsel which Galba gave to Piso, Nero a
pessimo quoque desiderabitur, mihi and tibi providendum est, ne etiam a bonis
desideretur; I should be sorry to hear it said, that Diogenes tramples on the
pride of Plato with greater pride, and look upon it with indignation, when
those that pretend to be inimicous to Episcopacy, are suspected not to be so,
because as Charles of Burgundy excused himself not to wish evil to the King of
France, because in stead of one he wished there were twenty: So they do not
extinguish the Dominion, but change and multiply the Subjects thereof, Magis
alii homines quam alii mores, as Tacitus, and they do only as he said of
Mucianus, Vim principis complecti, nomen remittere; and like what Cossitanus
complained of in that Historian, Ut imperium evertant, libertatem praetendunt,
si perverterent, ipsam aggredientur; or like as Caesar and Pompey contested not
to vindicate liberty, but who should seize on the Sovereignty, Caesar would
admit no Superior, Pompey no Equal; and Paterculus tells us of the latter,
occultior non melior. It grieves me also that in stead of Independents
returning to Presbyters, they are too facil and too forward to turn toward
them, in a scandalizing compliance, and to be imposed upon, and seduced with
their principles, as if (by such a transplantation, as Paracelsus talks of in
natural generations) there were several forms in them, but that still
resulteth to give being and denomination which meets with most plenteous and
suitable nourishment, Ipsi serviunt temporibus, ut ipsis serviant tempora, like
the Hyaena, they are males one year, and females another; and like the Mervail
of Peru, which every year bears different flowers. This has been the
Gangrene of Presbytery, which spreads and mortifies, and the Worm which has
smote the Gourd, under which our heads hoped to find a shadow to deliver us
from our grief; so that now the East Wind and the Sun beat upon us even to
fainting.

But I shall ingenuously confess, that as my weak understanding cannot discern
that the Word of God particularly determines, or absolutely prescribes any one
entire form of Church Government, but only holds forth general rules for the
constitution and exercise thereof, as may suit with order and decency, and
conduce to edification in godliness, and advance of truth and peace; so my
tractable will is ready to embrace and submit to any that shall not check with
these rules, nor retrench those ends, (as to me Independency seems apparently
to do; but which else shall be to those ends most subservien, I suppose may be
aptly demonstrated ex posteriori, and not obscurely determined by Time the
Mother of Truth, and Experience the Mistress of Wisdom) rather than in an
unhappy contest about setting on such or such a garment on the Church, to tear
her flesh, and scatter her limbs, and in a difference about making the hedge,
to burn up or devast the field. And as Discipline seems but as the Garment of
the Church: so Joseph may be his Fathers darling, and yet have a party-colored
coat; Epist. 86. Tom. 2. p. 76.
In ista vest varietas sit, scissura non sit, says St. Augustine, and
elsewhere in the like case, Omnis pulchritudo filiae regis intrinsecus, illae
autem observationes quae variae celebrantur in ejus vest intelliguntur, unde
ibi dicitur in fimbriis aureis circumamicta varietate, sed ea quoque vestis ita
diversis celebrationibus varietur, ut non adversis contentionibus dissipetur.
To think to hang the whole frame of a Government upon two or three words only
in Scripture, (as Curio did the people of Rome upon one hook in his
Amphitheater) and which may as rationally be understood of, and as properly
applied to another subject, matter and persons, as those which they expound it
of, and which would hardly ever be so interpreted, but by a judgment seasoned
with their infusions, and predisposed by their glosses, or facilitated by
proper affection to believe what they would have to be: Truly I cannot but
wonder with Cato, that one Soothsayer does not laugh when he meets another. A
wise and learned man tells us, Sir W. Raleigh.
that Ignorance has set Philosophy, Physic, and Divinity in a Pillory, and
written over the first, Contra negantem principia; over the second, Virtus
specifica; over the third, Ecclesia Romana: to which we may add the fourth
(though set there more by Interest and Faction, than Ignorance) even
Discipline, and superscribe Jure Divino.

I am not of that Elevation, nor my judgment at that Ascendent, that either
should be worth the notice, Et melius fuerat non scribere, namque tacere
-- Tuum semper erit, --
and therefore the Greek Ep^gran called Silence, Pharmacum tranquillitatis
fortissimum. And perchance the not carrying of a stone in my mouth, like the
Cranes flying over the Cilician Mountains, to prevent their cacklings, may draw
many about my ears; for to deliver my self in such an opinion, is to set
Athanasius against the whole World, and the whole World against Athanasius; but
because Momus would have every one to have a window in his breast, and the
importunity of the Apologists has coacted me to manifest, that I hold no
opinion which I dare not own; and as that Roman professed of his house, I
could be content my bosom were patent to every man; I have therefore
adventured to deliver my judgment, as one that am peaceable and faithful in
Israel. And though Ursius Crispus found more of safety when Ille igitur nunquam
direxit brachia contra
Torrentem; --
Yet he should have had more honor and conscience, had he been -- Civis qui
libera posset
Verba animi proferre, and vitam impendere vero:
But yet I do not know why I should not claim my share of that rara temporum
felicitas, as Tacitus calls it; and wherein our age exceeds that of Nerva, Ubi
and sentire quae velis, and quae sentias, loqui licet.

But Quis coelum terris non misceat and mare coelo,
In tabulas Syllae cum dicant discipuli tres?
Who can patiently hear the Apologists traduce others as averse from
Presbytery, when that disaffection lies in their own Wallet, More vulgi suum
quisque Contra Ruffin. l. 3.
flagitium aliis objectantes, as Tacitus in the case of Vedeius Aquila; yet
forgetting that caution of Hierom, Caveas in alterum dicere, quod in te statim
detorqueri potest; and what is their opinion of, or affection to Presbytery,
make judgment (as they did of Hercules) by this foot-step: they tell us that
Mr. Jeanes has his advantage upon his adversaries (among whom it seems they
rank themselves) by this, P. 170.
that he holds them strictly to Presbyterian principles (from which it appears
they would go loose) whereas they think it safer to transgress a disputable
principle of Presbytery (so as it appears they are not convinced of the
certainty of those principles, which by being still disputable, are only
problems, and not principles) than to offend against the light of the word:
Whence it follows, that a man cannot keep close with Presbyterian principles
without clashing with the Word; and then also these principles are not
disputable, but undoubtedly and indisputably false and vicious, if they cannot
adhere to them without receding from the holy Scripture. When they can wipe off
and expiate these blots which their Pens have dropped upon Presbytery, and point
out any as black and odious shed from mine, let them mark others with a black
coal or their black Ink, for adversaries to that way; in the interim, Nonne
igitur jure and merito vitia ultima fictos
Contemnunt Scauros and castigata remordent.
Besides, how little their model and course symbolizeth with the Presbyterian
way, he may read that runs it over. Rarely do the Presbyterians use Censures,
and on very few do they inflict them. Who ever in any of those foreign Churches
of that Discipline has found the far greatest part of their people under
suspension, or any suspended, but upon regular process, for the scandal of some
notorious evil, obstinately continued in after admonition? Because they turn
aside from this way, we walk not with them, who should easily be at agreement,
did their way agree with the Presbyterian.

DIATRIBE.
SECT. II
The Lord Jesus examined not his Disciples antecedently to his Supper. He
admitted Judas to the participation, as the Fathers consentiently assert, and
the Scripture evinceth. Luke 22.21. and Joh. 13.2, 26, 27, 30. discussed.

IT is St. Basils conclusion extracted from the Exordium of Moses, and St. John
(In the Beginning) (...), to begin at the beginning: In quavis institutione,
quod primum, est and praecipuum: Et primum in uno quoque genere est regula and
mensura reliquorum: Consentaniously St. Paul makes Christ's first institution
the pattern of all subsequent administrations, as being perfect and exact in
all Essentials. He received of the Lord what he delivered, and he disclaims all
additionals; but now our Lord Christ when he first instituted this Sacrament,
made no previous examination of his Disciples, before he administered it to
them: he showed them the nature, use and ends thereof, and he washed their
feet, an Emblem of the preparative cleansing by Faith and Repentance, and
purifying of the affections: Usus allegoria ex communi hominum usu desumpta,
qui in balneis aut quovis lavacro corporaliter sunt jam recens lo^i, caetera
quidem mundi sunt, attamen quidem necesse habent abluere pedes, quos contactu
terrae quotidie inquinant, etiam cum primum balneo egrediuntur, aut etiam cum
adhuc in illo nudis ambulant pedibus: Jansenius harm. c. 130. p. 140. In locum.
Idem Grotius.
to which Protasis of Jansenius St. Augustine adds the Antapodosis: Homo
quidem in sancto baptismo totus abluitur, verum tamen cum in rebus humanis
postea vivitur, utique terra calcatur, ipsi igitur humani affectus sine quibus
in hac mortalitate non vivitur, quasipedes sunt, ubi ex humanis rebus
afficimur: but to enable the discharge of this duty of purifying, a general
instruction and exhortation on the Ministers part is proportionable, without a
particular examination; as is here verified, and sufficiently warranted by the
practice of our Savior.

If any shall answer, that the Apostles were enriched with an extraordinary
talent of knowledge and sanctity, which frustrated and prevented the necessity
of probation. I shall reply;

First, that it is evident by sundry passages of Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.17. as is
evident by Joh. 20.9. and knew nothing of his death, Luke 9.44, 45.
that they were then somewhat ignorant, yea even of the resurrection of Christ,
(without which all Faith is vain) which does not so much disparage them, as
magnify the powerful inspirations of that holy Spirit, which so soon after,
and so abundantly endued them with knowledge, as well as power, from on high,
that Leo might have said, Quam plene, as well as, quam cito discitur, quod
docetur, ubi Deus magister est.

But secondly, if the Apostles needed not to be examined, because the
sufficiency of their knowledge and holiness could not be doubted, then by a
proportionable accommodation of reason, neither ought such now to be, whose
competency of knowledge cannot well be suspected, nor lives reproved for
notorious crimes, which is the issue we plead for.

Thirdly, they were clean, but not all; and if Christ admitted Judas to the
Communion of his last Supper with the rest of the Apostles (who though he might
look with a face of Religion toward the other Disciples, yet Christ, whose eye
pierced into his heart, beholding him under the true notion of an hypocrite,
and without hope of repentance; and yet admitting him together with the rest,
without any satisfactory signs of holiness, which Judas could not give, and
Christ needed not to make re-search of, but only as being at that time no
sinner notorious:) I should gladly learn, by what authority and precedent any
that profess the Faith, and are innocent of notorious and scandalous sins,
which may check with their profession, can be rejected? and by what means the
unworthiness of some receivers, can be so spreading or diffusive, as to reflect
guilt on him that administers, or pollution on the Ordinance, or prejudice on
others that partake in the Communion, since the unworthiness of Judas could
have no such influence. And because the weight of this precedent will sway very
much to the turning of the Scales in this controversy, and the Fathers in
their contests with the Donatists made so much use thereof upon the like
occasion, I shall prompt my self with an hope, that it may quit the cost of
time (which is the price of discourses as well as business) to enlarge in a
copious discussion of this question, Whether Judas did partake of the last
Supper of our Lord? wherein our Antagonists are eager, and very much engaged to
maintain the Negative.

But that our Savior admitted Judas to such participation, is the consonancy
of the Fathers, -- Veteres, ingentia nomina, Patres. None of them that are
majorum gentium that I know, have contradicted it besides Hilary. I am
conscious, that a learned man has mustered up some ancient names which he
would impress to fight for the contrary. But either his Witnesses are not such
as he pretends, or their testimonies not so as he suggests: For first, Ammonius
Alexandrinus, though he first repeat the story of Judas his receiving the Sop,
and going forth immediately thereupon; and afterward rehearse the Institution
and Distribution of the Sacrament; yet it follows not that therefore Judas did
not communicate; for the Author that cites this testimony does much insist upon
this, as a principle, That things are not always acted in the same order,
wherein they are recited; and besides I hope to verify it, that Judas his
receiving of the Sop, and immediate going forth, has no such influence upon
this question, as to evince that which they suggest, which are for the
Negative; Dionysius (ancient, though counterfeit) does not assert that which is
pretended; for when he says, In which Supper (that is, the Lords, as the
Alleager tells us a little before) the Author of those Symbols does justly
deprive or cast out Judas, who had not holily with agreement of mind supped
together with him on holy things: We cannot upon his Ipse dixit, assent that
(In which Supper) must signify, before Supper, and that by holy things can
only be meant the Paschal Supper; and that Christ's separating Judas from the
society of the Apostles, can be only a separation corporal, not spiritual; or
could be made at no time else but immediately before the Institution of the
Sacrament. But not only Aquinas and Valentia, Part. 3. q. 81. ar. 2. part. 3.
d. 6. q. 9. p. 2. page 989. De Scriptura 9. 6. c. 12. p. 385.
but the most learned Whitaker allege Dionysius his authority for our opinion.
As for Maximus, (who was yet a Century short of the six hundred years, within
which the Learned impale the Fathers of more signal authority) and Pachymeres,
who was a Youngling of the thirteenth Century, and whom indeed Doctor Whitaker
casts on that side, yet neither of them do seem so clearly to testify that for
which they are produced; They both expressly say, that Judas received the
mystical bread and cup, which could not be meant of the Passover; for whatever
they may say of the Bread, yet the Cup there was not mystical, being not
essential to the Paschal Supper, but occasional; for they used it as a common
drink with their meat; neither by the mysteries which they say Christ gave to
his Disciples alone, after Judas was gone forth from Supper, is it necessary to
understand the Sacramental Elements, for thereby they might understand the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, as they are called Matthew. 13.11. and
mysteries of the Faith, as they are named 1 Timothy 3.5. more clearly set forth in
our Saviors Divine Sermons, subsequent to his last Supper. And though upon
another account the former Author say, That after the Sacrament, both Matthew
and Mark do immediately add, And when they had sung an Hymn, they went out
into the Mount of Olives: Yet though the Evangelists immediately add their
outgoing, it follows not, they immediately did go out, those being two different
things, and though nothing intervene between the recital of the one and the
other, there might notwithstanding between the existence of them; and if the
giving of the Sop to Judas were the same night with the Institution of the
Lords Supper (as they would have it) then it appears that Christ his Divine
Discourses with the Apostles, recorded John 14. were had before his going
thence, which is afterward expressed in the last verse of the Chapter; and if
not, yet it is most likely by John 181. that his other Heavenly Sermons, Chap.
15.16. and 17. were before his going forth after Supper ended, either in the
house, or the Mount of Olives, or in the Garden, it matters not in which; for
since it was after Judas went forth, it is all one to our purpose. As for the
Recognitions of Clemens, the famous Whitaker reprobates and stigmatizeth them
as suppositions upon this very score (among others) because they affirm Judas
did not receive the Sacrament; and as for Rupertus Tuitiensis the Abbot, and
Innocent 3d. the Pope, they came into the World too late (between the twelve
and thirteenth Century) to carry away venerable authority (though Rupertus also
is fetched off from this party by Vasquez) neither could any more of that alloy
counter-ballance the Scale against the common consent of the School, M. 3. q.
81. art. 2. disp. 217.6.1. 2. part. q. 81. ar. 2.
who all follow the conduct of the great Bellweather Aquinas, and are
unanimously for the affirmative: and as I know not any one of them that strayes
or divides himself from the Herd, so do the Canonists also strike in
generally, and take the same way with them. That the Churches of England and
Ireland were of this belief, while they approved and incorporated the words of
St. Augustine to this purpose, the one in the 29th. the other in the 96th.
Article, is silently confessed. That the Confessions of Bohemia and Belgia
assert the same, Harm. Confess. S. 14. p. 432. Edit. Lon. 158.
is denied with too great affront to truth, violently overborn to support the
contrary opinion. When that of Belgia says, Judas and Simon Magus did receive
the Sacrament, this Author answers, that it was meant of Baptism, whereas but
look into the place cited, the whole context will appear to be of the Lords
Supper, which is the only subject of that 35. Article of the Confession of
Belgia, and the head and title of the Section in the Harmony, and no other
Sacrament is there mentioned; and use and custom, which have the Empire of
words, and give the Law to forms of speaking, has made it more common and
trite when we speak of the Sacrament without specification or restraint, to
understand thereby the Lords Supper. And as for the Confession of Bohemia,
Harm. p. 388. s. 12.
whereas it says Judas, received the Sacrament of the Lord Christ himself; He
answers, It was that of Baptism, whereas there is no evidence that Christ
baptized any. Augustine indeed thinks that he did baptize the Apostles only;
but others dissent, and think they had only John's Baptism, and the Text
seems plain against it, Job. 4.2. Jesus baptized none. I am not ignorant that
the negative in this question, Whether Judas communicated? has some great
modern names appendent to it; but if the Beam should be swayed by Authority,
they are not enough by far to turn the Scale; but he that has brought forth
the greatest Muster-roll of them that I have met with, has a strange way to
answer and enervate the Authorities marshalled against him for the affirmative,
by saying, That the Authors hold some other opinions that check with their
judgment in some other things that allege those authorities; and if we should
fight with him at the same weapon (which indeed would movere tribu, and abolish
that Topic ab authoritate) we should soon defeat him of most of his Authors,
that are for the Negative: for (to omit that Musculus cited for that Opinion,
differs in judgment from him in a greater matter, viz. That Excommunication is
of no permanent necessity, but instituted and practiced only while the Church
wanted a civil Magistrate;) even in this subject concerning Judas, the most of
his Authors acknowledge, that he received the Paschal Supper, though it be
denied by him, who I think is in that denial singular, except perchance (which
Maldona^ supposes, and Gerhard denies) that Hilary went before him, who
perchance foresaw that if Judas received the Passover with Christ (which
before the Institution of the Lords Supper was in stead thereof, and
correspondent thereunto, and significative of the same thing) it was as
subservient to our purpose, as if he had partaken of the Lords Supper.

But because we are all of Augustine's mind; Ego solis canonicis Scripturis
d^beo fine ulla recusatione consensum; and other Authors are to be alleged,
non cum credendi necessitate, sed judicandi liberate: we shall therefore say
in the words of Ambrose, Recita de Evangelio: and of Augustine, Procedat in
medio codex Dei. As in the agitation of the Controversy concerning
Transubstantiation our Divines argue from the form and words of the
Institution ( He took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave to his
Disciples, and said, Take, eat, etc.) that he blessed what he took, and brake,
what he blessed, gave what he brake, and bid take of what he gave, and eat what
they took, and this was bread, and at every period it was still bread: so I may
with some resemblance frame such an Argument in this present question, He (that
is, Jesus) sat down with the Twelve, Matthew. 26.20. He gave to his disciples,
verse 26. he bid, Drink ye all of this: verse 27. and as they did eat, Jesus
blessed and gave to them, Mark 14.22. and they all drank of it. Now the
Disciples which he gave it to, were the Twelve he sat down with, those all that
he bid drink were the same he gave to, and those all that drank were the same
which he bid drink thereof, and those were still the Twelve, the full number of
twelve: I recognize that it is somewhat smartly observed, that, 1 Cor. 15.5.
Christ is said to have been seen of the Twelve, yet they were then but eleven
at that apparition, Judas being gone to his own place; so in like manner the
mention of twelve, does not here necessarily take in Judas at the Sacrament,
nor conclude the formal and precise number: For answer, I think this shall not
be aptly and pertinently here interposed, because it is confessed that Jesus
sat down with the full number of twelve, though some suppose that Judas did
rise before the Institution of the last Supper.

Secondly, Beza supposes (from whom Piscator dissenteth not) that in that
place to the Corinths (...) was intruded in stead of (...), that apparition
being here spoken of, which is rehearsed John 20.19. when Thomas was also
absent, for verse the 7. of that Chapter, reciting another and latter
appearance, the Apostle says, He was seen of all (as if that former number was
not all) the Apostles, viz. the Eleven, as is recorded, John 20.26. This
conjecture borrows strength from the vulgar translation which here reads, of
the Eleven, whereby it is manifest, that the Translator read in the Greek
(...); so as when the word (...) seemed (though without cause) a fault in
writing, some substituted in stead thereof (...), and some (...) Hierom and
Ambrose their Text have the Eleven; Augustine and Beda have both readings. For
my part I profess to be very tender in admitting any such miswritings and
Sphalmata's in sacred Scripture, except pure necessity compel it (as in
Kainan, Luke 3.36.) Chrysostom therefore has another answer, That this
appearing was after Matthias was chosen and inserted into the College of the
Apostles, and though we elsewhere read of no such appearing, so neither do we
of that mentioned verse 7. But let it be, that the Twelve here is a name of
order, not of number, as Cajetan according to his wont, abstractively, and that
Major numerus consuetus ordinarius Synecdochice positus pro minori non
ordinario, as Estius answers it; Et quia eodem numero institutum erat eorum
Collegium, says Grotius: and as the late Annotatours observe Genesis 42.13. that
it is said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, and yet in the same verse it is
added, One is not: yet because it is so taken here, to argue that it must be so
accepted in other places, is, Elenchus ex particularibus. At the time of the
apparition there were but Eleven, at the Institution of the Sacrament they were
known to be full Twelve, the circumstances and universal particle (all) show
the number to be complete, at least it was so, at the sitting down, by general
concession.

In this question, Whether Judas did partake of the Lords Supper or not? Caput
argumentationis for the affirmative, is Luke 22.21. and for the negative is
John 13. verse. 2, 26, 27, 30. That we may first fortify our own holds, before
we fall out into the works of the enemy, let us consider that of Luke, where
immediately after distribution of the Cup, it follows, But behold the hand of
him that betrayeth me, is with me on the Table, whereupon it follows that
Judas was present when the Sacrament was distributed, and consequently did
Communicate.

Hereunto it is answered, That Luke relates this by an hystorology and
recapitulation, these words being mentioned by St. Matthew and Mark to be
spoken by our Savior before the Institution of his Supper, and it is more like
that they observed the true order rather than St. Luke, one Evangelist being
more credibly to be reduced to the order of two, than two to the method of one;
especially considering that Luke relates not the matter of the Lords Supper,
according to the order wherein things are spoken or acted, because he relates
the taking of the Cup; verse 17.18. (which some will have to be the
Eucharistical Cup) and giving thanks, before the taking of the bread: Besides
(say they) Matthew and Mark record that discourse of the Traitor to be uttered
as they did eat, which could not be if Luke observe the right order, for after
Supper he took the Cup, and after the distribution of the Cup, Luke adds that
reflection upon the Traitor.

Whereunto I shall reply, That it has more verisimilitude, that Luke observes
the proper order of things, rather than the other Evangelists, not only
because he professes according to his perfect understanding of things, to
write in order, Chap. 1. verse 3. but because he recites both the Institution
of the Eucharist, and manifestation of the Traitor in one continued series of
Speech; This cup is the new Testament, etc. but behold the hand of him, etc.
Whereas Matthew and Mark make the one and the other, as it were several
paragraphs or sections, Now when even was come he sat done with the Twelve, and
as they did eat, he said, etc. Matthew. 26.20, 21. and then verse 26. And as
they were eating, Jesus took bread. And I think it is more likely that
paragraphs may be transposed, where things of one concernment are digested and
set forth together, than things in one historical series, where is a
continuation, rather than transition of Speech, or else we must look for the
proper order of the acts and gests of Tiberius in Suetonius, rather than in
Tacitus. The discretive particle (but) shows also, that Luke speaks of
somewhat unsuitable unto what went before, as that though Christ shed his blood
in love to man's salvation, yet one of them, then at his Table, sought to spill
it in a treacherous malice.

Concerning the Cup mentioned Luke 22.18. it has no relish to be the
Eucharistical Cup, which being spoken of afterward, verse 20. Luke that
professes to write in order, was not guilty of such confusion and vain
repetition. In locum.
Beda and Theophylact, together with Piscator and Cajetan (to omit Bellarmine
who therein runs byas) affirm it to be the Cup of the Passover, neither
does our Savior call it his blood of the new Testament, or, the new Testament
in his blood, but simply the Cup. A Paschal Cup indeed, I know none formally of
that denomination, the Cup then used was as common drink with their meat,
Buxtorf. Synagog. Jud. c. 13. p. 338.
however the modern Jews, as Buxtorfius tells us, by prescribed rule, then
drink four Cups in memorial of four deliverances mentioned Exodus 6.6, 7. but
as when our Lord says, I will not any more eat thereof, verse 16. he relates
to the Passover mentioned verse 15. so the Cup, which Luke first speaks of,
was in all probability the last Cup in the dimissory Supper, Weems Christian
Synagog. p. 196. Idem Buxtorf. in Thal. Lexico.
where after the Master of the Family had drunk the last Cup he said, This
night I will drink no more; and there was a Paschal Canon that they might drink
no more after they had drunk that last Cup; and our Savior seems to allude to
this, verse 18. I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, etc. which though
spoken before, was no more inconsistent with his drinking presently afterward
of the Sacramental Cup (if he did drink thereof, which though diverse of the
Fathers supposed, upon misprision that the Cup here spoken of by Luke, was the
Sacramental Cup, and the School does thereunto generally assent, yet diverse
learned Men (as particularly Luther) deny it, In 3. part. q. 81. art. 1.
because we read only that our Lord gave to his Disciples, not that he eat or
drank himself;) yet his speech no more obstructs that drinking, than his
saying, It is finished, was incoherent with his dying soon afterward: In the
one he said he would do no more, what from a little afterward he would not
do; in the other he said that was done, which wa^ instantly to be done.
Deodate thereof interprets it thus; This is the last mea^ I shall make with
you, and notwithstanding this expression he did eat also after the resurrection
by a certain dispensation, which was not egestatis, but potestatis: and not to
nourish his body, but to feed our Faith in his resurrection; and of this
comestion after he was risen, Chrysostom and Beda understand this to be meant,
until I drink it new, etc.

To that which Matthew and Mark say, That the discovery of the Traitor was as
they did eat, and Luke speaks of the taking of the Cup after Supper, and then
followed the detection of the Traitor: I answer, That as St. Matthew says
(...), as they did eat, when Christ discoursed of the Traitor, verse 21. so he
uses the same words at the Institution of the last Supper, verse. 26. as they
were eating, Jesus took bread; therefore it seems that, as they were eating,
which Matthew uses, is not at great difference with, after Supper, as Luke
expresses it, otherwise there could be no Harmony between the Evangelists;
reconcile therefore the 26 verse of Matthew, with that of Luke, and the 21.
verse will soon come into the same agreement. The truth is, at the Passover
there were several Suppers, or more properly according to our English idiom,
several courses: As now among the modern Jews, first the unleavened cakes are
set on the Table, then the pulti^ula or Pap which represents the straw and
mortar in Egypt, next the acetaria or Sallet of bitter herbs, and then lastly
the Lamb; and discourses or prayers are interposed between the one and other,
as Buxtorfius relates, Synag. Judai. cap. 13.
and therefore the disclosing of the Traitor might be after one Supper, and yet
as they were eating of another. Nevertheless I do not think that at the first
Institution of the last Supper, or mention of the Traitor, properly and in
strictness of Speech, any thing was eaten, but manducantibus illis, is well
interpreted by Deodate, while they were at the Table, and by Maldonat, Statim
ut coena peracta est, antequam surgerent, antequam mensae and ciborum rel quiae
removerentur. And whereas it is argued, that it appears by Matthew. 26.23. he
that dippeth, etc. as also by giving the Sop, John. 13. that they were eating
at the time when the Traitor was discoursed of; it may be readily answered, In
locum.
that the dipping, non notat praesentem actum, sed consuetudinem, as Paraeus:
Notatur non una certa and singularis actio, sed agendi consuetudo, as Piscator;
It denoted no present action, for that had signally discovered the Traitor
without more inquiry, of whom yet the Disciples remained ignorant, and Judas
himself did afterward ask, Is it I? but those words did only obumbrate one
of those that usually did eat together with him; and Jansenius observes that
the Greek in St. Matthew is in the pretertense, has dipped, (...)
though Mark has it in the present, and he adds that our Lord intended not
to show what Judas did at present, but to what familiarity he had admitted him,
that was about to perpetrate such a crime; Sylvius in 3. q. 81. art. 2. p. 331.
not as a sign to discover the Traitor, but to exaggerate his treason, as
Sylvius; and it does not prove that Judas at that time had his hand in the
dish, more than that David's familiar friend did eat of his bread, at that
instant, when he said, he lift up his heel against him, Psalm. 41.9. Of the Sop
we shall speak more amply anon.

But to prevent more altercation about the order of things in the several
Evangelists, we find that Judas sat down among the Twelve Apostles, who were
not twelve without him; our Lord gave to his Disciples and they did eat, he bad
all drink and all did drink; where is there any mention of Judas his going
forth before all was ended? De non apparentibus and non existentibus eadem est
ratio in lege (etiam divina.) We pursue our Quare impedit, and ask, what should
cause a writ of Ne admittas to be sued forth against Judas, who (as Maldonat
observes) had he risen from Table before all had been ended, he had bewrayed
that treason, which he labored to conceal.

Here therefore are interposed two Arguments, whereof the first seems to be
raised de jure, that he ought not, the other de facto, that certainly he did
not communicate; the first pleads, That all those that then did partake of the
Sacrament, for them Christ's body was broken and blood shed, and they all were
to drink new Wine with him in his Fathers kingdom, But neither of these can be
verified of Judas. Ergo.

Hereunto what if I should answer as Calvin does to that of Matthew. 11.21. (a
response which I confess I have heretofore as much acquiesced in, as in any
other solution rendered, either by our Divines or the Dominicans) That the
Speech of Christ is applied to the common conceit of men's minds, and he speaks
after the manner of men, that is, as men might morally think or judge, and not
out of his heavenly Sanctuary. Themselves say that in case Judas were admitted,
Christ dealt as a man therein; And indeed a man might morally have thought and
judged, that one of the chosen Apostles, conversing so long with Christ, taught
by him, and publicly teaching him, and now eating the Passover, and his last
Supper with him, had his share in the prementioned privileges; and then these
words can be no more exclusive to Judas at the first Institution, than now they
be to any reprobate when by a charientisme and according to the judgment of
charity, like words are used in the subsequent Administrations. But I neither
will, nor need, to fix upon, or to adhere unto the Answer. The rule of
Tychonius the Donatist, De doctrina Christiana, l. 3. tom. 3. p. 13.
which is the Second of his Seven Rules, and which he calls de Domini Corpore
bipartito, but St. Augustine better names, de permixta ecolesia; will
sufficiently satisfy this Argument, viz. Quando Scriptura, cum ad alios jam
loquatur, tanquam ad eos ipses ad ques loquebatur videtur loqui, vel de ipsis
cum de aliis jam loquatur, tanquam unum sit utrorumque corpus propter
temporalem cemmixtionem and communionem Sacramentorum: What agrees to one part
is often affirmed of the whole, especially when it is the greater part, and
beside that the Apostles here represented the whole Church, and that Christ in
some respect, interpretatively at least, tasted death for every man, propter
susceptam communem naturam and causam, and to make the salvation of all men
possible, though that were not the only nor adequate effect of his death,
Loquitur collegio Apostolorum, atque adeo non fuit necessarium ut singuli
postea illum potum biberent, sed satis est quod multi. Sylvius in 3. q. 81.
art. 2. p. 331.
and as Athanasius thinks no man had risen, if Christ had not dyed, and
therefore he dyed for all, that all might have resurrection. Neither of these
Sentences were spoken to the Apostles distributively, but collectively; not to
Judas in particular, or in the singular number, but take ye, eat ye, in the
plural (...), Ad plures eorum, non ad omnes referendum est, says the Ordinary
gloss, the words were verified toward the major part which was enough to
warrant the truth of what was said, broken, shed for you, and drink with you,
as Maldonat observes. Judas was one of them to whom our Lord said, Matthew.
19.28. You that have followed me in the regeneration, etc. shall sit upon
twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel; yet that promise shall not
be verified in Judas, though fulfilled toward the rest, and Matthias shall
possess the Seat of him, who is gone to his own place.

Now for that which is the Achillean Argument, and by the seeming force whereof
many modern Theologues have been carried to the other part, viz. the giving of
the Sop to Judas, which they think must needs be given before the last Supper,
where was nothing to dip it in, and upon receiving whereof, Judas went out
immediately; I hope to give so full and clear an answer thereunto, as may
satisfy any unprejudiced and unbiassed understanding, and so by finding an
error in their writ of Ne admittas, and recovering upon our Quare impedit, we
may bring our Quare-incumbravit, and at this Institution give Judas that
Induction, which the Ancients suitably to all circumstances in the Text have
afforded him.

First, Dr. Hammond Annot. in John 13.26. p. 340. conceives that the dipping
is misapplied to the Sop, and may signify no more than Christ's putting, or
dipping his hand into the dish, verse. 17. to whom having dipped I shall give,
etc. but if, as he supposes, (...), does properly signify the lower side or
crust of the bread, which was wont to be given about to each of the guests in
the postcoenium, which was among the Jews as the Grace-cup; it is necessarily
consequent that Judas was present at the Institution of the Sacrament, and not
only at the first part of the Supper.
it has ever seemed strange to me, that learned Men have concluded, that the
Sop must needs have been given to Judas, either at the Paschall Supper, where
the Charoseth (the sauce wherein they dip the bitter herbs of the color of
clay, the Emblem of their servitude in Egypt) is thought to be that wherein the
Sop was dipped, or rather say some, since it is not like that Christ kept the
Passover with any conformity to their superstition and traditional rites, the
Sop was given at the common Supper, for here only could be some liquid thing
wherein to intinct it, whereof there was none at the Lords Supper.

I know that the Learned agree not about the number or order of the Suppers,
but for my part I strike in with them, that suppose there was among the Jews
but one Supper upon the matter, viz. the Paschal Supper, though that might be
divided or diversified by several formalities, as I said before, and they were
several courses rather then Suppers.

Buxtorfius tells us, Synagog. Judaic. cap. 12. p. 325.
that the later Jews that day in the evening whereof they eat the Passover,
dine betime in the forenoon and slightly, and eat no more until they keep the
Passover, that they may eat that with the better appetite; and it is the less
likely that then they will at that supper cloy themselves with other meat: and
howsoever they might eat other common meat with the Paschal Lamb, as there was
occasion, yet it appears incredible that ten persons (for there might be no
more sometimes, and never were above twenty) should eat a whole Lamb either
before or after another set distinct Supper. The dimissory supper was as
secundae mensae: Weemse p. 133. Christian. Synagog.
and here some think the bitter herbs were brought in, and in the time that
this was eating, our Lord instituted his Supper, which being before they rose,
and before the utensils and remainder of the meat were taken off, as
Interpreters conclude to reconcile Matthews (as they were eating) with Lukes
and Paul's (after Supper) what I beseech you should hinder, but that the Sop
might be dipped in some of the liquid relics of the former Supper, yet standing
on the Table, even after Christ's Institution of the Sacraments? or how will
they disprove or make it seem improbable, Gerard. harm. c. 171. p. 453. Estius
annot. Johan. 13.26.
that it was Wine (not consecrated) wherein our Lord dipped the Sop? (for which
there wants not the authority of men very learned.) There is no necessity then
to conclude, that the Sop should be given before the Sacramental Institution;
but neither,

Secondly had it been so given, is there any cogency of reason to hold, that
Judas his going forth immediately after his receiving thereof, should be so
instantly as to retrench all intervenience of time, wherein the Lords Supper
could be afterward instituted. That the word (...) immediately does not always
signify a moment of time, but a very short interval, (as Maldonat expresses
it) may appear Mark 1.12. for (...) and (...) are of the same signification
and indifferently used, both being rendered, protinus, statim, continuo: but
(...) translated immediately Mark 1.12. cannot be construed but with some
latitude of time; for after the voice from Heaven saying, Thou art my beloved
Son, etc. it is added, and immediately the Spirit drives him into the
wilderness, which could not be in a moment, considering the circumstances of
his baptism, and coming up out of the water, and revesting himself. Annot. in
locum.
Nay the learned Grotius interprets immediately in this place non multo post;
nam dies unus, says he, aut alter intercessit, John. 1.29. neque inusitatum,
ut (...) ita usurpetur, ut John. 13.22. The same latitude of construction the
word must have as it is used by Greek Authors (...) Statim a pu^ritia; (...),
jam inde a vetustate in Xenophon, (...), statim cum juvenes sunt; and (...),
statim ineunte aetate in Thucydides: none of these can be limited to a moment,
but must be interpreted with some latitude, and therefore the Syriac according
to Tremelius translation renders (...) in this place of St. John, eadem hora,
the same hour, and thus forms the Text, Ipse Judas accepit panem eadem hora
and egressus est for as: Judas received the Sop the same hour and went forth.

Thirdly, as there is no necessity to conclude, that the Sop, if given that
night was given before the last Supper, neither is there any cogency of reason
to infer, that if it had been given before that Institution, that therefore
Judas went forth so immediately, as to leave no proportionable interim between
the one and the other, for the Consecration and distribution of the Sacrament.

So lastly, there is no certainty that the Sop was given to Judas that night
when the Passover and our Lords Supper were eaten. And I shall crave leave to
offer some Animadversions which may make it seem not improbable, that it was
dealt him at a former Supper in Bethany, and that the Supper mentioned, John
13. was neither the Passover, nor Supper of the Lord.

That thirteenth Chapter of John begins with these words, Now before the feast
of the Passover; and then in the second verse says, Supper being ended; so as
the Supper there rehearsed seems to be before the Passover. The marginal
annotation on John 13.1. referres us for the consonancy of the Evangelists to
Matthew 26.2. where it is said, after two days is the feast of the Passover;
so as by comparing the Texts, the Supper mentioned in St. John was two days
before the Passover, and though it be said John 12. that Jesus came to Bethany
six days before the Passover, yet the Supper recorded, verse. 2. of that
Chapter, and in the 13. Chapter, might be some days after his coming, and but
two days before the Passover, and some learned men suppose that he had that
week several recourses to and from Bethany.

It seems a very Tortious and improper answer to interprett before the feast
of the Passover) to be the night of the Feast, but before the eating of the
Paschal Supper: There is neither reason, nor example, nor authority for it, and
it sounds contrary to common sense, and the two days mentioned Matthew. 26.2.
are destructive to the interpretation. Besides when our Lord said to Judas,
(what thou do, do quickly,) some of them thought that Jesus had said unto
him, buy those things that we have need of against the Feast, and therefore
this could not be spoken in the night of the Feast of the Passover, it being
then too tardy to make preparation for that which was elapsed, or at least
instant.

If any one shall interpose, That there was also the Passover of Bullocks and
Sheep which the Jews called H^ag^ga, which was celebrated on the fifteenth day
of Nisan, and the second day of unleavened bread according to Numbers 28.16,
17. In the fourteenth day of the first month is the Passover of the Lord, and
in the fifteenth day of this month is the Feast. I shall answer, that beside
that it seems by 2 Chronicles. 35. that these Bullocks and Sheep were killed on
the fourteenth day, though the people feasted on the remainder of the offerings
upon the fifteenth: let it farther be considered, that had this been spoken on
the fourteenth day of the month at night, when the Paschal Lamb was eaten, how
unlikely it was, that the Apostles could imagine that any provision could have
been made for the next immediate day, so late, and so unseasonable, for it was
night when Judas went forth.

I shall not lay much weight upon this observation, yet it is not despicable,
that after that Supper where the Sop was given, John 13. there is mentioned one
exit or going thence of our Savior John 14.31. and after that, several of his
Sermons are recited before his last going forth over the brook Cedron, where
was the Garden whither he went from his last Supper John 18.1. which insinuates
that the Supper mentioned, John 13. was not his last: And since St. John seems
somewhat abruptly and without any coherence with, or relation to any thing
antecedent in that 13. Chapter, to say (and Supper being ended) it seems to me
not irrational, nor unparalell to other parts of Scripture, to conjecture that
he now reverts to recite what farther happened at that Supper mentioned in the
former Chapter. The Hebrews have a Proverb, in Scripture Non esse prius and
posterius, and such intercalations and historical Epentheses are not only
frequent in Genesis and other Books of Scripture, but obvious also in the
Evangelists, as may be observed in the series and order of Jansenius his
Harmony, and it is the first of Tychonius his rules (which St. Augustine calls
keys for unlocking the hidden things of Scripture) and which he names
Recapitulation; Dicuntur quaedam quasi sequantur ordine temporis, vel rerum
continuatione narrentur, cum ad priora quae praetermissa fuerunt latenter
narratio revocetur.

Farther Satan was first entered into Judas before he had recourse to the High
Priests about betraying of his Master, Luke 22.34. but he had first received
the Sop before Satan entered into him, John 13.27. (he might have thoughts and
tentations of Treason before, but he put it not into act or execution till
Satan had gotten the possession of his heart,) therefore he had swallowed the
Sop before his resort to the Priests. But now from the Supper at Bethany, he
went forthwith to the Priests to drive the bargain with them Matthew. 26.14. and
so consequently then (or before) he must needs receive the Sop.

Neither does this Argument depend only upon St. Matthew's relation of Judas
his entering into Conspiracy with the Priests immediately after his recital of
the Supper at Bethany (though St. Mark also observe the same Method) and Luke
relates his conference with the Priests as before the Passover, and the
Fathers think that he grudging at the wast of the ointment bestowed upon our
Lord at that Supper, took thereby the occasion of his treason; and seeking to
repair his loss, finds a way to sell the ointment which was already spent,
by selling his Master who was anointed with it, Damnum quod effusione unguenti
se fecisse credebat, vult magistri pretio compensare, says St. Hierom, but St.
Matthew also, Chap. 26.16. (saying, and from that time he sought opportunity to
betray him) does evidently show, there was some interval of time between his
Contract with the Jews, and the execution of his Treason, and therefore
consequently some days before the Passover he had agreed with them for the
acting thereof, conformably whereunto the Ancient Church conceived, that Judas
entered into conspiracy with the Priests on the fourth day of the week, and that
his passion followed on the sixth, and in memory of the one, they fasted
Wednesday, and in remembrance of the other, upon Friday in every week.

Besides, Judas going out at night when he had received the Sop, the time was
too angust to make his redress to the Priests, drive his bargain, muster the
Soldiers, and return to seize his Master, all in that one night, if before
hand things had not been treated, resolved, disposed and ready prepared, in
order to the execution. So as Satan being entered into him before he designed
the treason or went about it, and that entry being made together with the
reception of the Sop, he could not receive it in the night of the Passover.

If any shall tell me that the contrary is the common opinion both of Ancient
and Modern Authors, I shall franckly acknowledge it, but so is it also, that
Judas received the Supper of our Lord, and if they will assume a liberty to
dissent in the one, they must yield us the freedom to vary in the other.

Whereas it is objected, that if our Lord had made known the Traitor so
signally at the Supper at Bethany, two or three days before the night of the
Passover, how could the Disciples be so dull or forgetful to be still
ignorant of him, and to question again who it should be? It is easy thereunto
to answer, That if at the Paschal Supper, when they think the Traitor was
marked out by the Sop, the Disciples yet noted it not, nor understood it to be
Judas, either through perturbation of Spirit, as Augustine, or the softness of
our Lords voice, as Jansenius and Grotius, or the charitable and innocent
goodness of their natures, which could neither suspect nor believe any such
thing of another, more then of themselves, or because that manner of speaking
(thou say it) licet sit affirmantis non est plane affirmantis rem, Tu
dixisti, Etsi aliquando affirmantis, interdum tamen est vel interrumpentis, vel
suspendentis sermonem, quasi diceretur, tu videris, hoc apse dicis, non ego --
potuit etiam hoc dici sic a Juda and a Domino responderi, ut omnes non
adverterent -- illud cui panem porrexero, and post communionem and soli Johanni
dictum fuit. Sylvius in 3. q. 82. art. 2. p. 331. Vasquez in 3. q. 81. art. 2.
disput. 217. c. 3. p. 485.
sed, ut ibi annotavit Euthymius, aenigmati simile fuit, eo quod Judas
confessus non fuerat, aut quia illis verbis aliud intelligi potuit, nempe ipsum
Judam revera illud dixisse, as Vasquez, Sylvius and Barradius to like effect.
For the same reasons they might take as little notice of, and as little
apprehend the discovery, made at the former Supper at Bethany; and what ever
shall be alleged to excuse them, or manifest the reason of their inadvertency
at one time, may also serve for the other. But that none of them understood
Judas to be the Traitor, even to the last, no not St. John himself (as some
learned Men conceive) is evident, John 13.18. no man at the Table knew for what
intent the Lord said, what thou do, do quickly. Had they been persuaded
that Judas was the Traitor, could they have thought that Christ would have
trusted him with buying any thing for the Feast, or giving ought to the poor,
as they conceived he meant by these words, quod facis, etc. and had St. John at
last understood it; doubtless he would have revealed it to the rest, that with
one consent they might have risen up against the Traitor, as Jansenius observes.

Our Savior spoke of the Traitor at Bethany to show he foreknew the plotting
and designing, and in the Paschall night also, to manifest he foresaw the
acting and execution of the Treason. And as for that objection, That had Jesus
told them two days before that one of them should betray him, they had at that
time began to be sorrowful; and to ask, Is it I? It may be thereunto answered,
That men are not always equally affected at the relation of the same things,
they may have diverse dispositions, suitable to different occurring
circumstances.

Secondly, they might then also be sorrowful, and make such interrogations,
though S. John record it not, else how will the Objecter answer the Argument,
should it be retorted upon him, as that, the discovery of the Traitor mentioned
in John, was not the same with that recorded by the other Evangelists; because
at the one the Disciples were said to be sorrowful, and asked, Is it I? At the
other, not?

If any shall farther object (as my own thoughts by a prolepsis prompt me, that
some perhaps may do) that the lotion of the Apostles feet is commonly
understood to be (among other causes) mystically in order to their preparation
to the Sacrament, and an Emblem of the pureness thereunto requisite; and that
though it were usual not only among the Jews, but other ethnic Nations, to
wash before meals, yet to do it after Supper, was proper only to the Jews, and
that only at their Paschal Supper; whereas some learned men say, there was a
double washing, suitable to a double Supper; and the second lotion was before
the Dimissory Supper; all which are Arguments, that this giving of the Sop at
the same time, with the washing after Supper, was at the Passover.

I shall answer, That some of the Fathers have indeed made such allegorical
applications of this lotion, but there is nothing in the Text to warrant it;
where other Reasons thereof are employed, v. 14. and other rendered by the
Fathers; as, Ut somnium illud de regno politico messiae eis excuteret, and in
seipso perfectae humilitatis exemplum ostenderet: Farther, Semel lotos
baptismate, eodem lavacro non indigere, sed hoc lavacrum quotidianis excessibus
est institutum, and jugis retractatio usque ad novissima veniens, and omnia
debet opera and cogitatus singulos prescrutari, and affectus per vitia
discurrentes, vagam instabilem animam per inania evebentes corrigere and
lavare, neque quidquam in vita pretermittere indiscussum, quod gemitibus and
suspiriis non fuerit expiatum: Besides, Discipulorum pedes in praedicationem
Evangelii praeparare, ut verum esset, Quam speciosi pedes Evangelizantium! etc.
Yet more, Ut esset symbolum spiritualis illius aquae quae misso spiritu sancto
in Apostolos erat effundenda, ut copiosius perfunderentur, cum mundi utique sam
essent. Lastly, and principally to show them, Vobis necessarium est lavare
pedes (i. e.) quodcunque Ministerium mutua praestare, nam per lotionem, quod
infimum est obsequium, etiam reliqua multoque mag is honestiora debemus exequi;
as Thephylact, and from him Calvin, Salmero, Maldonat; and Grotius renders this
reason, Tam vili Ministerio se subjecit, ut amorem suum evidentissime
ostenderet. Quod diximus vile Ministerium, apparet, 1 Samuel 25.41. But however,
Allegoriae illatae, non innatae, non sunt very sensus Scripturae, sed
applicationes and dilatationes very sensus, nec sensus Scripturae, sed
artisicium interpretis. And as Origin well, are like Gold out of the Temple
which is not sanctified; yet granting that it was done partly to set forth that
preparation requisite to the partaking of the holy mysteries and previous
thereunto; yet I deny that it could not be so, though done two or three days
before hand. The Jews had their preparative before the Passover, and the Lamb
was tied, as some think, to the Bed-posts four days before, that they might
better remind the reason of the Institution, and dispose themselves to the
Celebration; and our Savior might also on like grounds some days before,
prepare his Disciples for the receiving of that Supper, which he instituted in
stead of the Passover.

Concerning the washing after Supper, the learned man which denied that Judas
did partake of the Passover, pressed with this Argument, tells us, that for
(...) -- some Greek Copies have (...), and Nonnius, (...) (but indeed Maldonat
supposes that Nonnius used that word only because (...) would not stand in
his verse) and so the sense were as Augustine (and so I know do others)
expounds it, Supper being prepared and ready to be set upon the Table. Of this
elsewhere the same Author gives some instances; and if this were so, the
Argument were evaded, and the doubt assoiled; for if the Washing were not after
Supper, then it was not peculiar to the Passover.

But indeed this plaster is too narrow to cover all the wound, the Author took
no notice of verse 14. where it is said, he rose from Supper (...), so as this
washing could not precede it; I therefore answer, That this lotion being to an
extraordinary end, was not made in the usual manner and method, and to show it
was not to mundifie and fit them in order to that present Supper, according to
the National Custom; but to another end, and for a mystery, our Lord inverted
the usual order, and makes that subsequent, which was commonly antecedent to
Supper. what ever the reason were ( and melius est dubitare de occultis, quam
litigare de incertis; and here also not altogether unfitly may be applied that
of Gregory, Qui in factis Dei rationem non videt, infirmitatem suam
considerans, cur non videat, rationem videt;) it is but a weak Hinge to hang
such a consequence upon, viz. The Jews washed not after supper, but at the
Passover; therefore it was at the Passover that Christ after supper washed his
Disciples feet: As if I should argue thus, Because the Jews only at the Feast
of Tabernacles cut down and brought in boughs, Tremel. Annot. in Johan. 7. S. 2.
and cried Hosannah; (so as the boughs and days of the whole Feast were called
Hosannah, from the usual acclamations of the people when they carried the
boughs up and down;) therefore our Saviors triumphal entry into Jerusalem,
when they cut down boughs, and cried Hosannah, was at the Feast of the
Tabernacles, which in truth was made but a few days before the Pasover, which
was always kept in Nisan, whereas the Feast of Tabernacles was celebrated in
Tisri six months after.

If any shall now after this tedious discourse interpose with Cassius, Cui
bone? and tell me that howsoever it may be yielded that Judas did partake of
the Lords Supper, yet this cannot conclude an admission of persons scandalous
and openly flagitious, since Judas his sins were then secret and uncensured.
I shall say, that it is not of my concernment to answer the objection, which
may perhaps be pertinently obtruded to the Erastians, but is excentrick to my
motion, and heterogeneal to the case I plead for, who undertake not to be an
Advocate for persons notoriously wicked and scandalous, not asserting that
those which are notorious for sins may not be rejected, but that without
tried and approved notes of sanctity they may be admitted; nor that men whose
flagitiousness is publicly known may be repelled, but none upon any private
notice of their faults, may be excluded. And thus much will be inevitably
concluded from the example of Judas his admission, which was -- Hos quaesitum
munus in usus.

DEFENSE.
SECT. X.
How we know Christ examined not the Apostles; The force of Arguments from the
Authority Negative of Scripture. Of the washing of the Apostles feet. Whether
any did partake of the last Supper, save the twelve Apostles? The Apologists
conceit of the seventy Disciples. Of Confession of Faith; how and when
necessary? Examination is a virtual and interpretative defamation. Whether it
be a small thing they require? Whether Examination, if it be necessary, ought
to be made but once?

THE initiation of this Section of theirs is like an initial Letter, which is
fairly flourished, but signifies nothing ( viz. to the point in hand) Our heat
of pursuit after the main question, will make us separate those Heterogeneals,
and taking no notice of their shoots at Rovers, we shall only gather up the
Arrows, which they have aimed at the mark. They first ask us, How know you that
Christ did not examine his Disciples, since the Evangelists tell us, that all
that Christ did was not written? How know you that? 1. Ad hominem. -- Dicitque
tibi tua pagina; -- They tell us that St. Paul prescribed no other but
self-examination to the Corinthians, because he eyed Christ's performances with
his Disciples, whom he needed not to examine, being known to him; as therefore
he that being roughly asked by one of King Ptolomies Courtiers, Who let him
into the Palace? answered nothing, but ran to the wall, and with a Coal drew
his Portraiture in black lines: so we need make no other answer, but draw forth
their own lines, to show how we might have known this, themselves (very
credible men in their own judgment) told us so, An ignorabas apud Lucullum
coenare Lucullum? The Argument of the Paper was built on this ground, that the
action of Christ in the first Institution of the Sacrament, was the Archetypon,
and exemplar cause of all subsequent Administrations: so that herein matter of
fact being matter of Law and Rule; as well what Christ did, as what he did not,
being in some sort Dogmatical (for we are thereby taught that it was not
necessary to be done) and then in Laws, not to appear and not to be, being
equivolent ( Lex says Gabriel, Biel in 3. did. 37. q. vinc. art. 1.
Est signum notificati, nam quia nulla Lex obligat, si notificata non fuerit:
therefore upon this Foundation, this was our Architecture, viz. What was not
recorded to be done at the first Institution, it is not necessary to do in the
following Dispensations, this being a conclusion resulting from the former
principles: so as then to ask, how we know that Christ did not examine his
Disciples, is virtually and in effect to demand, how we know that all which
Christ ordained as necessary, to be done, is recorded in Scripture, and so to
put us to prove the perfection of Divine Writ; but they say, the Evangelists
tell us that all that Christ did was not written; true, but it follows not, all
was not written, therefore all things necessary to be done, or believed are not
written. The Evangelists are very punctual and exact in setting down things
circumstantial, and cannot therefore be piously imagined to have omitted
matters more substantial, and what was necessary to have been done, was of
necessity to be written for our example and learning, without yielding a
deficiency destructive to the perfection of Scripture; wherefore grounding the
assertions upon the next verse of the same Evangelist, Tract. 4.9. Such John.
Augustine tells us, although Christ spoke and wrought some things which are
not written, yet those things which seemed unto him sufficient to the salvation
of Believers were selected to be written; and Cyril assures us, that so much as
holy Writers judged sufficient for good manners and godly faith are written,
Cyril Alexan l. 12. John c. ultimo, cited by F. White, answ. Fish.
to the end that we shining in right faith, good works, and virtue, may attain
the Heavenly Kingdom. If therefore pre-examination had been so necessary to
those ends as they suggest, doubtless Christ did practice it, and that practice
would have been registered, since his example was to be part of our rule, as
themselves confess, and therefore to be made known and laid before us; so as
they need not scornfully put us to prove that Christ did not examine his
Disciples, since it may be well concluded, he did not, because they cannot
find it registered that he did; had it been necessary to be done, it had been
recorded; and not being recorded, he thought it not necessary. But that he
might notwithstanding examine them, is as rationally suggested out of John 20
31. Many other things Jesus did which are not written: As rationally indeed as
the pack of Popish Traditions, is thereby confirmed; for proof whereof this is
one of their common places. But whereas they tell us, that they cannot find
that Christ examined not his Disciples, unless on the backside of Constantines
Denation, which the Paper mentioned; Rather as the challenge of the power to
compel all men to submit to their examination, proceeds from the like
ambitious spirit, as did that forged Donation, so the concession thereof is
either some interlining, or endorsement of the same charter.

They next teach us, that argumentum a Scriptura negative, non valet, which
being delivered generally and unlimitedly or applied to the special point in
hand, where the fact is constitutive of the rule and dogmatical, impresseth
some wonder in what School they learned such Logic, or such Divinity, which is
not taught by any Protestant. The Papists who shame not to profess that many
Doctrines of Faith are neither openly nor obscurely, expressly nor involvedly,
contained in Scripture, In Thom. 22. q. 1. art. 10.
(as Bannes in terms) and that therefore to tie our faith to Scripture only,
is to play the fool, and mar all Religion, (as is affirmed by Coster) I
admire not, if they decry these Arguments ab authoritate Scripturae negative,
that so they may better advance their common topic of traditions; and
therefore it is not strange, that their Logicians Hunnaeus, Litelmau, Tom. 2.
contra. 3. de missa. l. 1. c. 24. p. 706.
and Fonseca deride them, but also their Achilles, Bellarmine magisterially
tells us, Illa argumenta negativa (non habetur express in Scriptura, ergo non
est fastum) jam ipsis pueris ridicula sunt. But such Arguments having for their
basis the perfection of Scripture, as the rule of all things to be done or
believed; or of Faith and manners (as Augustine speaks) and which could not be
the rule, if it were not commensurate to both, nor perfect, if it wanted any
thing. Surely for these that with Lyrinensis confess the Canon of Scripture to
be perfect, and in it self sufficient for all matters, yea more than
sufficient, to explode or censure these negative Arguments, is to betray the
Fortresses of the Faith, and make over the Armory of the Church to the Enemy,
Keckerman. Alsted.
which in the Commonwealth the Law makes Treason. But notwithstanding not
only our celebrious Logicians in their Topics, assert and verify them, our
famous Divines generally in their Disputes against the fifth Gospel of
traditions, do practically approve them, the ancient Fathers use, and
authorize them, as the Scripture denies what it notes not, says Tertullian;
We believe it not, because we read it not, says Hierom; we ought not so much
as to know these things, which the Book of the Law contains not, says Hilary;
but even the Scripture it self affirms and argues for such Negative
Arguments, yielding examples of them; Jer. 19.5. Joh. 8.40. 1 Cor. 11.16 Heb.
1.13.
as which I commanded not nor spoke it: this Abraham did not; we have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God; to which of the Angels said he, etc. And as
judgment often varieth with interest, and things acquire the price not so much
for what they are really in themselves, as for what they are relatively to our
ends and turns; so that which is no good money when they should take it, Norton
pretest. appeal. l. 2. c. 7. S. 9. etc. 25. S. 12.
is current coin when they should pay it. Not only Rellarmine himself, as also
other Pontificians like this Weapon well enough, when they think they can give
a blow with it, and do make use of such Negative Arguments, as a very learned
Divine at large declares; but even the Apologists themselves, though they here
expel this Iephta, as the son of a strange woman; yet when they have need of
his help in their distress, they court him again in this same Section; so as
that Iraeneous says of some others, Cum arguuntur a Scripturis, convertuntur
in accusationem Scripturarum, so only they are against those Arguments, when
such Arguments are against them.

Next, I do not know how to understand the Apologists, when they say, It is too
confidently affirmed, that Christ showed (his Disciples) the nature and end of
the Sacrament, which seems to me as the refuge of a person desperate of help;
and then etiam ad novaculam, as if they would catch hold of that which would
certainly wound, and uncertainly relieve them; for if they suppose absolutely
and generally that our Savior declared not these at the Institution, how can
that consist with the wise and holy and perfect discharge of his prophetical
office? for if he taught it not then, where did he unfold, or where else did he
deliver that Doctrine? How could the Apostles have that competency of knowledge
which might render them capable to discern and partake of the Lords body? and
how was that a Sacrament, Sacramentorum vero ea natura est, ut non modo non
cognosci, sed ne esse quidem omnino sine verbo queunt. These. Salmur. part. 3.
S. 15. page 34. si concionari est explicare seu viva voce, seu ex Scripto verbo
divino congruenter, quae fuerit Dei voluntas in institutione Sacramentorum,
concionatorum omnino verbum requiritur -- ut enim verbi Dei voluntas nullo
verbo declarata nequit efficere ut in signi materia quidquam praeter eam
materiam intueamur, quae ipsa per se materiam signi vel Sacramenti non habet.
Ibid. S. 35. page 11. Instit. l. 4. r. 14. S. 4. p. 472. In 5. ad Ephesians. Tom.
4. l. 1. c. 15. S. 9. p. 16. In Evang. Tom. 4. l. 3. c. 2. p. 75. Piscator in
Matthew. 26.26. p. 280, 282.
without accession to the Element of that word, which was to be not only
constitutive of the Sacrament, but also declaratory of the mysterious Rites,
and the thing represented, and also promissory of the graces thereby exhibited?
For sine doctrinae copula, attoniti undo aspectu sensus nostri redderentur,
says Calvin; and in another place, Sola mysterii explicatio, facit ut mortuum
elementum incipiat esse Sacramentum; for the elements and actions being no
natural, but instituted signs, there must necessarily have been a concurrent
Word to manifest the reason and end of the Institution, and the things which
they were instituted to signify; for, Signa indeterminata ex se, ad
significandum determ nantur per verba quibus instituuntur, as Chumier; and
correspondently Barradius tells us, Cum panem benedixit gratiasque patri egit,
animos discipulorum verbis praeparasse. And to supersede any larger
demonstration thereof, a most logical and very learned Divine has collected
the definition (including the nature, use, and end) of the Sacrament, out of
the very words of Institution, the Genus, and the Difference, taken from the
various Arguments; as not only the adjuncts, the matter; not only that of
Bread and Wine, but the matter of another kind, in breaking and pouring forth
of them, (where consists part of the use) the form, viz. the relation of the
Elements to the things signified and sealed by them, (in both which is very
much of the Nature) the Ends being four; the representation of Christ's death,
the testification of the fruit thereof, the vivifying and consolation of the
faithful, and an excitement to Thanksgiving: and so thus concludes his
explication thereof, Atque haec est doctrina simplex ac salutaris de coena
domini ex ipsis v rbis institutionis deprompta, ejusmodi certe ut fideles omnes
merito in ea acquiescere possint, omissis quaestionibus aliis non necessariis,
etc. And if we may acquiesce in the Doctrine of the Sacrament extracted from
the words of Institution, then the nature, end, and use of the Sacraments must
be held forth in, and may be collected from these words, else we could not rest
in the Doctrine contained therein.

But if the Apologists intend (and it is only charity which formally
respects their good; not justice which relates to our debt, that must incline
us so to understand them) that the nature, use, and end of the Sacrament was
not showed by the washing of the Disciples feet, it is like the Rainbow,
Thaumantis silia, and very wonderful how any that has common sense, could
impute that sense to me: but it seems if they could not find, they would make
somewhat which they could confute: but they have therein only done, as if
Antipheron should have charged fiercely upon his own phantasme. Was there any
color that having said, Christ showed his Disciples the nature, end, and use
of the Sacrament, that I did infer or conclude it out of his washing of their
seet? As there was no causal or illative particle expressed that might insinuate
that sense, so a conjunctive particle only was understood; and to his showing
them the nature, use, and end, out of the words of Institution, I joined also
his teaching them the duty of preparation in order to the right use, by the
lotion of their feet, with an implication likewise, that this being specially
recorded, it was as likely that the particular pre-examination of them would in
all probability have been as well recited, had it preceded, or been so
necessary: And yet neither did I relate that as my proper sense, or that I
supposed the washing to be directed, as a type or emblem to that signification.

But 1. I reminded, Potest aliquae interpretatio esse secundum quid hoc
estjuxta analogiam fidei and Scripturae, si ei non repugnet, quae tamen non sit
vera simpliciter hoc est, juxta genuinum sensum alicujus loci. Paraeus in Genesis
c. 1. v. 1. p. 30. Mede in 1 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. Diatrib. p. 598.
that some of the ancient Fathers did so allegorically interpret and apply it;
and if their Interpretations be true secundum quid, though not simpliciter, I
am not very willing to check with them.

2. Though the Fathers are of little reckoning, and stand in the lowest place
of account, where these men dispose of the Counters, yet farther I remembered it
to be the sense of diverse modern Theologues; and among the rest, of one higher
by the head than the ordinary rank, surmounting them, Quantum lenta solent
inter viburna cupressi.

The washing (says he) of the Disciples feet before Supper, what does it else
call for, but a cleansing of our hearts before we communicate? And though I
would not willingly err with Plato, and do reckon Truth a greater friend, yet
I would not willingly quarrel with Plato, when he crosses not my way.

3. I finding some thus to judge thereof, who are of somewhat like judgment
with the Apologists in this Controversy, I took it up as an interpretation ad
hominem, non ad rem; I allege it ex hypothesi, non thesi, for as long as a Dog
is not like to bite me, what need I hold him by the ear? and I thought
perchance they would have given a more favorable reception thereunto for their
friends sake, since it falls out often what Stapleton advises to, Olim
quandoque in Ecclesia receptum fuit pedes lavare ante sacram Comnionem,
Durantus de Eccl. ritibus, l. 2. c. 55. Sect. 10. p. 816. which sprung from
this mystical consideration.
That men look rather who speaks, than what is spoken, and imitate the
Athenians, who approved that speech in one man's mouth, which they liked not in
another. The truth is, I have elsewhere contradicted this reference, and
showed it not to be the mystical sense of Scripture, but the artifice of the
Interpreters, and the application or dilatation of the proper sense, and an
allegory illate, not innate; and therefore, -- Viderit utilitas, Let them of
whose interest it is to assert that allegorical sense, endeavor to vindicate
it, if they can; for my part I shall not feather Arrows to be shot against me,
and then be put to ward their strokes: here the Apologists and I shall easily
concur, and our lines meet in angles, however elsewhere they run parallels;
but though he washed their feet to teach them humility, which is the figurative
sense or application which they only or especially contend for, yet it follows
not, that no other was meant or intended. Augustine teaches us, that tanta est
ubertas divinarum Scripturarum, De Doctri. Christian. l. 3. c. 27. Confess. l.
12. c. 24.
ut saepe eadem verba pluribus modis intellecta, plures sensus sine falsitate
recip^ant, (which is to be understood of mystical or figurative senses.) That
their feet were now washed, might lesson them the preparatory, cleansing of
their affections; that Christ washed them, might learn them humility.

But if not Sacramental preparation, yet that somewhat else was intended then
an example of humble and charitable condescension, the Fathers long since
collected, partly out of v. 10. Ye are clean, but not all, chiefly out of v. 8.
If I wash thee not, thou have no part in me, whereby is understood, not that he
should not partake of the Sacrament, as Cajetan straightens it, but should have
no part of his felicity in his Kingdom, or (which typically and symbolically
to him was the same) in his familiar conversation and necessitude, from which
he should be ejected. Wherefore facta anagoge ab externa lotione ad internam,
ex tulit Sermonem, and speaking to all, in his speech to Peter, by the
external lotion, shadowed forth and signified the internal, either purifying
of the affections, and cleansing the stain of sin by grace of repentance, or
purging of the soul from the guilt of sin by his blood; (as Origin, Cyprian,
Ambrose, Augustine, Gregory, Bernard, Piscator, Cajetan, Jansenius, and their
own Margin takes notice, that the late Annotations so expound it) and the
spiritual washing, either to be wholly by regeneration, (Christ hereby reviving
the sign that is given of it in baptism, as Diopate) or daily, whereby
quotidian lapses are cleansed, this being as the fruit of Christ, his advent
into the world, and of his passion, says Bucer; so that this sentence contains
a general doctrine (says Calvin) that we are all stinking and defiled before
God, until Christ absterge our filthiness.

If some have supposed this washing to be after the Sacrament, the sum is
small for number (only Cyprian among the Ancients that I can recognize) and
their reasons of as small weight: that which imposed upon and mislead them was
verse, 2. Supper being ended, but I hope my Essays elsewhere have not left it
improbable that this Supper here mentioned, was not had in the Paschal night,
or if it should have been so, yet coena facta, no more concludes the close of
the Supper, then die facto, the end of the day; and some of the Learned render
the sense of the Greek by coena parata; but if that construction be not
plausible, others read inter coenandum, or by a Synecdoche integri, understand
the first part of the Supper ended, for at the Passover were several suppers
or rather courses, so as it might have been after one of them, or after all,
and yet before the Supper of the Lord. Besides it is expressly recorded, that
afterward he sat down again, verse. 12. and that he sat at Table, verse. 23.
because John leaned on his bosom; but whosoever be of that judgment, that
this lotion was after the Sacrament, I hope the Apologists will not consent
with them after they have been prompted (which they were not caute and
provident enough to foresee) that it will then follow that Judas was admitted
to the Communion, for verse. 13. we read, when Jesus had thus said, i.e. spoken
so much of this washing that preceded, he afterward discovered the Traitor, and
dealt him the Sop.

That (wash one another feet) signifies, examine your selves, is no man's
interpretation, but their proper fiction; but yet if Christ his lotion of their
feet had been figuratively instructive to the cleansing of their hearts, in
order to a Sacramental preparation, self-examination had been either a part
thereof, or means and help thereunto; and if they had been only lessoned to
examine themselves, and nothing else been signified, then it might perchance,
as they say, have stood better, if they had been bid to wash their own feet,
but the example of Humility and Charity could only be propounded by Christ's
doing it, and the spiritual washing of regeneration was now aptly represented,
while he made the external lotion, who merited and applied the internal, and
examination of the Minister may better discover men's preparation, but the
general Exhortations best prepare them; and if they shall tell me, That
Exhortations are or may be intermixed with Examination, yet formally it is the
Exhortation instructs, and Examination tryes the proficiency, and there is a
necessity of the instruction, none of the trial; and why a general Exhortation
may not without farther trial, fit men for the Sacrament, as well as for other
duties, and while it expounds and lays open and applies the Word of Institution
(as it ought to do) as well dispose us to recieaing, as the very reciting of
the words did prepare the Apostles (for we read of no other preparatory
instruction, which they had) I should be glad the Apologists would give a
rational account before the Greek Calends.

If Christ did not examine his Disciples, does it therefore follow, that they
may not examine some or all in their Assemblies. Ignorantia elenchi is commonly
that Ink which this Sepia sheds to facilitate an escape; let them bethink
themselves, is it our question (even as themselves would state it) whether the
Minister may examine, or whether of necessity he must? I grant he may examine
some, I deny it to be necessary that he must all; and so much I inferred,
because Stripture is silent that Christ examined his Disciples, and the
consequence is bottomed on this positive Doctrine, current among Theologues,
that whatsoever is Essential, or absolutely necessary to the Sacrament, may be
collected out of Christ's doings and sayings at the Institution.

Christ administering only to his Disciples, teaches us rather to exclude the
Ignorant. Let them do it, we shall not quarrel them; but will they say that all
are such whom they exclude? How constantly they hug their dear Ignorantia
elenchi! The strength and consequence of the Arguments drawn from Christ's
admitting none but Disciples, I have elsewhere examined, and showed that by the
concurrent testimony of Orthodox Divines, Tom. 4. l. 8. c. 3. Sect. 25. p. 292.
the Disciples then represented the whole visible Church, not (as they would
have it) only the invisible Church, and such as were real Saints.

The great Chamier distills a more pure and wholesome Doctrine from Christ's
administering to his Disciples, eo docuisse neminem admittendum qui non sit in
numero fidelium, atque inde abstinere jubemus omnes excommunicatos. But they
say (as if they would ribbe or buttress the former Argument, which has been
the sand whereon they have laid the Foundation of their discourses on this
subject) that he admitted not only Disciples, for then all Christians may come
in under that notion; but that he admitted only his choice Disciples, he had
the 70. and others, but those as more infirm were not admitted. What
proficiency the Apostles had then attained to, we have elsewhere discussed;
Infirmi erant, Advers. Anna. bapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 233.
meticulosi, infirmi etiam in Charitate, and aliis virtutibus and in hac ipsa
caena inter se contenderunt, quisnam maximus inter ipsos foret, says
Bullinger; but turdus sibi malum ejicit, Golias his sword shall cut off his
head; for may we not reminde them of what they have so soon forgotten, and in
their own words answer, How know you that? viz. that none of the 70. were
admitted? The Evangelists tell you, that all that Christ did was not written,
etc. they might be present for ought they can prove. Except (while they have
the abomination of diverse weights, one weight to take in, another to put out
by) a Negative Argument be of force, when it will make for them, and invalid,
when it will be against them, or be more conclusive in things merely
historical; which having no direct concernment with faith or manners, are not
so materious to be recorded (of which kind is this,) then in such things where
the fact should help to constitute the rule, and therefore ought to have been
registered, if they had been done. If Chemnitius think the 70. or any other
beside the 12. were not admitted, I have elsewhere showed, that men as learned
as he (though he was eminently such) do suppose that some of them might have
partaken, Tom. 5. l. 8. c. 3. Sect. 29. p. 202. And of this judgment also is
Dr. Fulk, Rhem. test. in Mat. 26.20.
though it be not expressed. Of this judgment among the ancient, is not only
Euthymius, but Chamier tells us, that the Liturgies of Peter, Clemens, James,
Mark, Basil, Chrysostom, expressly mention that the Disciples communicated, as
well as the Apostles, at the first institution of the Sacrament; and though it
be said, Jesus sat down with the 12. yet there is no exclusive particle, nor
is it added, (and none else.) But if Chemnicius suppose the 70. were not
admitted, let them consult him, whether Judas were not one of those that had
admission; and then casting up the reckoning by his Counters, tell me what they
shall gain by not casting in the 70. But I cannot divine what authority or
reason the Apologists had to affirm, that the 70. were excluded, because more
infirm (and so not capable it seems.) I had thought, that if none but the 12.
or 11. (as they would have it) did communicate, it was because they only were
Christ's constant Family, as it were, and the Passover was to be eaten by one
Family together, if they made up 10. persons; and Christ passing from the
Passover, and translating it to his Supper, admitted no more at the latter,
then he took to the former; and seeing that it was a Jewish Canon, that not
above 20. should eat together of one Paschal Lamb, our Savior could not
perhaps admit of many more than the 12, for that reason, if (as it is likely)
he conformed to that observation.

But it seems then by the Apologists, that those whom they admit, are as it
were in the notion and capacity of the choice Disciples, those whom they
reject, of the infirm 70. Yet to accommodate it more aptly to what they have
said, that Christ thereby teaches us to exclude the Ignorant and Wicked, they
should say not blanchingly, the infirm, but the ignorant or wicked 70, for
such they imply them to be by being excluded; and therefore those whom they
reject may comfort themselves with that Martyr, to be stocked in the same hole
with Philpot, and to be in the same condition with the 70 (whom Christ chose
notwithstanding) and to be no otherwise Dogs or Swine, then they were; but if
Christ called not those that were infirm,

They assure us, they examine none that are taken to be Disciples, that is
then, none that be Christians, (for Christian and Disciple in Scripture idiom,
are synonimous) or perchance none that be their Disciples, though many that be
Christ's: but how do they know them to be Disciples, before they have examined
them, if that be true which often they inculcate, That they cannot judge of
men's fitness without examination?

Real Disciples will not refuse to satisfy the Church, and encourage weak
brethren by a voluntary profession of their Faith. True, if the Church do
need, and shall have just cause to require such satisfaction, but as the Church
can receive no satisfaction, by a kind of auricular examination taken in
privare oftentimes by themselves, unless like the Pope, themselves are the
Church virtually, or the Church must be satisfied, because they are so; so why
should the Church need farther to be satisfied from such; of whose knowledge
they cannot doubt? this were to render the Church, like those remindless
persons, whom we sometimes see to go about to seek that which they carry in
their hands; and if they are already taken for Disciples, how can it be doubted
that they are not knowing?

2. Real Disciples will not refuse to make such profession of their Faith, when
those that are weak want encouragement in the Faith, but such an encouragement
is not to be given by a submission to examination. G. de Valentia 2.2. disp. 1.
q. 3. puur. 2. p. 328. 321.
Valentia and Sylvius determine it generally, Oportet instare casum aliquem
necessitatis confitendi fidem aut ex divino praecepto, aut humano obligante
regulariter, quando non subest justa and rationabilis causa omittendi illius
observationem. Aquinas limits it more specially, Ubi fides periclitatur,
quilibet tenetur fidem suam aliis propalare, vel ad instructionem aliorum
fidelium, sive confirmationem, Sylvius 22. q. 3. art. 2. p. 31, 32. Aquin. 22.
q. 3. art. 2. Filiuc. castract. 22. c. 3. S. 74.
vel ad reprimendam infidelium insultationem, and when by his silence, ex hoc
crederetur, vel quod non haberet fidem, vel quod fides non esset vera, vel alii
ejus taciturnitate everterentur a fide; or as Filiucius more abstractly, Quando
proximus per confessionem fidei quae ab aliquo fieret, facile traheretur ad
fidem, -- item quando aliquis versaretur in periculo negandi fidem, and alius
posset propria confessione id damnum impedire: And when they have defined in
general, that confession is necessary, when by omission thereof, subtrahitur
honor Deo debitus, vel utilitas proximo impendenda; yet they add, Quocirca
illud verbum Subtrahendi accipiendum est hoc loco, vel contrary vel privative
(i. e.) vel deum affici ignominiis, etc. vel quando aliquis a fide avertitur,
aut retardatur, etc. non negative, ut sit non exhibere honorem Deo vel non
impendere utilitatem proximo, etc. Baldwin. cas. l. 2. c. 1. c. 10. p. 81. and
79.
And to like effect does Baldwin resolve, who also tells us, Cum extra statum
Confessionis fides nostra alioquin satis nota, non opus est perpetuo iterata
confessione, quae jactantiae potius speciem, quam virtutis Christianae laudem
habet, but among all the Casuists of one side or other, which have punctually
determined of, and limited the occasions and circumstances wherein profession
of Faith ought to be made, it is a mavelous thing, that not one of them (that
I know) has stumbled upon this case, or reminded to define it necessary at
admission to the Sacrament; whereas rather the very coming with desire to
participate thereof, is without more ado a real profession of Faith, and
accommodates and complies with those ends, in order whereunto the Casuists
teach, that profession of Faith is needful, as before was showed.

And if weaker brethren are hereby encouraged to make like profession, or to
undergo what is equivalent thereunto and instead thereof ( viz. Examination,)
they only can thereby prove, the one ought to be done in order to the doing of
the like by the other, whereas we deny the necessity of either; and they should
first have evinced the later to be a duty, and then have enjoined this as a
means ordinate to facilitate it; the end failing, the means cease to be
necessary. But as the setting up of a Dictator at Rome, put inferior dignities
to silence; so the precedent of more knowing persons, I should think, might
rather discourage the weak, who cannot write Iliads after Homer, -- Ne tu
divinam Iliada tents, Nor write after that Copy, which the other have given in
more perfection then they can imitate. See S. 18.
However, they may paint the matter with colors fetched from pretended ends or
intentions, examination (and consequently such an imposed profession, which is
tantamount) has a connotation of suspicion; we do not inquire, where we do not
doubt; and therefore to reduce men under such trial does ex natura rei imply,
that they are suspected, or doubted to be ignorant; and this is to render them
infamous, ignorance when it is (as in this case) pravae dispositionis, being a
sin, and whatever they may speculatively opine, yet interpretatively and
practically they do thereby hold them as ignorant, and therefore rob them of
their good fame, that proprium bonum depositum a natura in aliorum mentibus,
Sylvins 22. q. 60. art. 3. conclus. 4. p. 316.
and that jus quod habent, ut bona de iis opinio concipiatur, quam diu
contraria manifest non probatur; and therefore to compel them to come under
this Inquisition, that by such encouragement those which are weaker may be
mollified and sweetened, is but burnt-offering out of robbery, to do real wrong
to prevent an imaginary, and to avoid scandalum acceptum to fall upon datum,
and is as if they should break one man's head, to give another a plaster; and
in a Taliacotian way of cure, to slash and cut off one man's flesh to salve
another deformity; or in a more obvious resemblance, having their purse cut in
a throng, to search every known honest man there, that the thief may take no
exception.

Yet elsewhere they are confident to tell us, That this is a small matter, so
as it seems to come to plead for it self in forma pauperis: but as Plato
answered, The Custom of small things may be a great matter. Solinus tells us,
Brevissima apud Amyclas vipera est, and propterea dum despectui est, facilius
nocet; and St. Augustine of the Cynifes in Africa, which are almost invisible,
quae tamen cum inserueriut corpori, acerbissimo fodiunt aculeo. Yet if the
smallness of the thing should facilitate any to undergo it, let it persuade
them not so eagerly to press and contend for a small matter; if it be a small
thing that is required, it is as small, that is denied; and therefore the
denial should not merit so great a penalty, as suspension from the Sacrament:
and with what Conscience can they drive off men from so necessary a Duty, and
rob them off so great a benefit, for a small matter? Esse nihil dicis, quicquid
petis, improbe Cinna,
Si nil Cinna petis, nil tibi Cinna nego;
But yet great motions are made by small Wires, Raynolds Confer. with Heart. p.
318.
and huge Weights hang upon Gemmeys; a little Spark may be so fuelled and
conducted, as to set the whole World on fire. Sorcerers, they say, beg and are
spleased with small things to be given to them, but thereby get a power to work
what mischief they please upon the givers. The Rent is oftentimes small, but
Homage and Fealty and Wardship be of great consequence. It was a small matter,
and seemingly pious and advantageous, for the Emperor to receive his Crown of
the Pope, with a benediction; bull in process of time that drew on and
countenanced the construction, that the Pope gave him the benefit, and bestowed
the Crown of the Empire upon him; and afterward it was thence inferred, that he
might deprive him thereof, and otherwise dispose it. And abstracted from these
formidable consequences; there are many other Reasons, why such as are real
Disciples may yet not forfeit such esteem, and yet refuse to take on this yoke.
Some perchance wave this profession and examination upon the same score that
Luther sometimes omitted Confession before the Communion, lest it should be
brought in as a thing necessary; and because, as the same man has taught us,
that Nihil pestilentius in Ecclesia doceri potest, Quoted by Mr. Baxter. Saints
Rest, Ex Hofner. part. 1. p. 138.
quam si ea quae necessaria non sunt, necessaria fiant, hac enim tyrannide
conscientiae illaqueantur, and libertas fidei extinguitur; and others perhaps
upon that account, whereupon men of public spirit oppose enclosures, lest the
Poor be injured, though themselves lose nothing by it.

Christ had communicated before with those Disciples in the Passover, which
was the same in substance with this Institution, therefore he needed not to
examine them, that were admitted before. Albaspin. de vet. eccl. rit. l. 2.
obs. 23. p. 327. Statuerat ecclesia ut easdem lectiones poenitentes memoria
custodirent, and iisdem doctoribus quibus catechumeni subjiciebantur, erudiendi
traderentur, -- de integro omnia fidei praecepta and prima rudimenta eos
ediscere and audire volebat; -- quod opinaretur eos qui se flagitiis mortiferis
obstrinxissent, divinae supremaeque justitiae cognitione aliquaque scientia von
tinctos. Instit. l. 3. c. 4. S. 13.
Either the same dispositions and qualifications requisite to the Lords Supper,
were required to eating the Passover, or not; if so, then they ought to have
been examined before they were admitted to that, and that would have been
recorded for our direction; if not so, then though admitted to the Passover,
they ought before admission to the Lords Supper to have been examined, and that
would have bin registered for our example. But if the Apologists will assume
liberty to infer, that having been admitted to the Passover, the same in
substance with this Institution, they might without farther examination have
admission to the Lords Supper, I hope they will give us leave to conclude, that
Judas having partaken of the Passover, it was all one as if he had
communicated of the Supper of the Lord.

The most zealous Assertors of examination press it not after once admission
in a due way; but unless all be agreed upon what is the due way, a man may be
often examined, upon pretense the former was no due way of admission: but if
they were all agreed upon the due way, as some that are admitted at one Church
will not be (I know) at another; yet my understanding has not light enough to
discern, if there be at one time, why there should not be at other times a
necessity of examination, since man (which carries a connotation of lapsing)
has a natural tendency to his first principle of nothing, and is apt to
decrease in goodness, and fall to worse; and (as Ockham tells us) mali mores
excaecant intellectum, and therefore intellectual graces may decay with moral:
And also by neglect of reading, and careless hearing, knowledge will be
impaired, since as the soul is called at first abrasa tabula; so when it is
written on, yet the letters (as in Table-books) will wear out in time, without
new impressions; and as the flying fish cannot hold his flight any longer than
his wings are wet, and therefore is still dipping them; so must notions be
often renewed, or they will at length be antiquated; and upon this account a
reiterated examination may seem at least expedient, and accordingly a book of
discipline in Scotland requires all Masters and Mistresses of what age or
condition soever, to come once a year before the Presbytery with their
Households to be examined personally, whether they be fit to receive the
Sacrament, in respect of their knowledge; And Calvin, who wishes ut sistant se
oves Pastori, determines it, quoties sacram coenam participare volunt.

SECT. XI.
Judas did communicate at the Lords Supper. What is thereby inferred. The
Attestation of the Fathers in that matter. The consent of later Divines. The
weight of the Testimonies on either side. The Apologists confess there was no
visible cause to exclude him. Whether Christ in admitting him acted only as a
man? His not condemning the adulterous Woman.

-- Baccare frontem
Cingite, --
IF they could be blasted by the prejudice and foreboding of the Apologists,
our endeavors to prove Judas to have participated the Lords Supper, would be
very unsuccessfull, for if we could lay and keep that ground, yet after all our
culture it would bear us no other but Sodom-fruit, which we might paint fair,
but it would prove but dust. Nothing they say, being thereby concluded against
their judgment or practice; but I fear this dust is in the Apologist's eyes,
and Non vereor ne quid portendant omina very. They add, though Christ saw
Judas to be an hypocrite and admitted him, it only follows thereupon, but
that hypocrites may be admitted, and who thinks the contrary? But they might
have had enough Logic to have discerned, or ingenuity to have confessed that
somewhat more is thereupon consequent, to wit, that (known) Hypocrites may be
admitted, and to this the Apologists think the contrary and profess it. They
speak of excluding profane and ignorant persons, and are told an hypocrite
was admitted, and this they say in truth is to paint an house that has no
foundation. Truly there is no color for it, that this were painting
howsoever, but it had been an improper material to build with, if, as they
speak of excluding only profane and ignorant, so they did exclude no other,
but though they have obdured their hearts to the exclusion of them that are not
such, will they also harden their forheads to say they exclude none but such,
and that all are such whom they admit not? If they dare not say that all
excluded are such, why do they say they are speaking of such, when they should
(as we do) speak of such as they exclude? If like the Lamlae they have eyes
prying abroad, and laid up in boxes at home, yet can they vainly think, that
others have not eyes in their head, to see that they exclude not only such as
are ignorant and profane, but those also which by submission to trial give not
satisfaction of their knowledge and sanctity? And do but observe when
elsewhere they distill the Argument of the Paper, how they more rightly give us
this for the Quintessence, Christ admitted Judas to the Communion, therefore
what need this prying? and not as here they would suggest, therefore ignorant
and profane may not be excluded; so as it seems not only by their discipline,
but by their arguings, they suppose all men ignorant, else they would not dare
to argue so imposterously.

Neither is the Argument altogether wide the mark whereunto it was aimed; for
if Christ exhibited it to Judas whom he knew to be ungodly, then the Sacrament
is not the Privilege only of the Godly, nor is the distribution thereof, to
such whose hearts or lives answer not their Profession, a partaking of their
sins, or a false testifying or false sealing, neither are convincing signs
of the sound work of grace upon the heart, that which gives the capacity or
right of receiving; all these seem to be concluded from this instance, and all
are against their judgment and practice.

Were they of my opinion, they should manage this argument about Judas, in
another sort? We might suspect the Apologists did smacke of some of the
Paracelsian notions, and were facil to believe that strong imaginations
elevated either by conciliation of an amicable intelligence (as they speak with
Avicen) or by Application of its Spirit to the Spirit of the World (as Ficinus
prompts them) can work Masteries upon another man's fancy, and make him
contrary to his proper notions to believe or imagine what they list: for how
else can they be so confident to impose (Erastianisme) on me, an opinion to
which I have so often and so plainly professed my self to be diametrally
opposite? how well they can manage an Argument, we shall have trial enough, but
let us confider the management they would have made of this.

Christ knew Judas to be a wicked man, yea a reprobate, yet admitted him,
therefore Ministers may not keep back such as they know to be wicked; thus the
Erastians. If this be the best managery they can make thereof, we find little
encouragement to trust an Argument in their hands, that will so soon decoct and
evirtuate the force thereof, and vitiate and betray it into a fallacy of the
consequent: for from Christ's admitting Judas known to him to be wicked, it
follows not that Ministers may not keep back such as they know wicked, but
only that they may admit them. There is a disparity between the freedom and
the necessity of admission, but if they understand by the Ministers knowing
them to be wicked, a private knowledge, then I shall profess it to be my
opinion, that a Minister may not keep them back; and Christ his admitting Judas
whom he knew to be wicked, will suppeditate an Argument for proof of this
opinion, which will not tremble in its arraignment at the bar of reason,
unless ignorance or passion usurp the Bench; and this opinion is also seconded
with the authority of diverse Casuists elsewhere cited, whereunto I add the
suffrage of a grave and learned Divine that tells us, Sinners are secret, not
of public notice, Mr. Balls Friendly trial of the grounds of separation. page
187.
though one or other (perhaps the Minister) may know them, in their course
scandalous -- they are not to be repelled, if they offer themselves, because
though one know them to have sinned, thus and thus, it is unknown to others,
and so the sin is private, and not generally known -- otherwise liberty
should be given to wicked Ministers to punish with this punishment whom they
please: but if they mean a public knowledge either by evidence of fact,
Confession or judicial sentence, men so known to be wicked, may be repelled
from the Communion by the Minister, and the contrary, which is the judgment of
the Erastians, as it falls not into my opinion, so it flows not from the
example of Judas, whose crimes were not then so notorious.

Aeneas Sylvius (when he was more Godly in truth, and before he was ius in
name) he used to say, It was a subtle artifice of the Popes, to set the
Lawyers to dispute, whether Constantines Donation were valid de jure, thereby
to introduce an Hypothesis, that such a Donation there was de facto. The
Apologists follow the contrary Method, and spend most of the Section, to
disprove that Judas communicated, and say less to the consequence and refult
of that example; We have elsewhere anticipated and forestalled all or most of
their Arguments, and applied Answers, and so having cut down and crop'd their
harvest, we shall have less trouble with the Gleanings.

After an heedful search (with others eyes) they cannot find the consonancy
spoken of among the Ancients, (for Judas his participation of the Lords
Supper.) But have all their researches found any Father of the first six
Centuries that sings a Note which breaks the symphony, ( Hilary excepted) whom
though Algerus thinks by a benign interpretation might be reconciled to this
opinion; yet Vasquez confesses the words admit it not, and Suarez says his
endeavors are frustrate. Advers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9. page 230.
But howsoever Bullinger expressly tells us, Sententiam suam nullis firmis
argumentis probat, propter quaeilli credendum. Unity is no number, one is next
to none, as in Music when many sing to one Tune, one antiphonous voice cannot
spoil the Harmony. What like point can they instance in, wherein so many lines
of the Ancients are concentred? and an opinion of a thing not in terms
revealed, but collected by discourse and abstractive knowledge, which passes
with a nemine contradicente, is a rare Phoenix, or rather a bird of Paradise
(if that place admitted that way or manner of knowledge.) But those Fathers
that vote with the paper, are balanced by multitudes of the best modern
lights. Perhaps there is Romana statera, where according to the distance from
the Center, one ounce may be weighed against a pound, and the Earth against a
Barley-corn, as Archimedes boasted. But it shall be as vain, as odious, to
enter upon those Staticks, and to make comparisons whether the Ancients were
Giants, the Neotericks but Dwarfes, and Dwarfes may see farther advanced on
Giants shoulders, according to the trite Allegory; or whether the modern lights
are great, like the Moon, because so near us, and have greater influence,
although they borrow their light from the Sun, that yet appears less. I shall
not therefore dispute of this, but not quarrelling that hypothesis; yet when
that constellation which gives light to Judas his Communicating, is beside the
ancient, made up of as many, yea more new Stars, than the other that has an
opposite aspect, I hope those modern lights alone (with Hilary only among
them) cannot balance so many of the Ancient and Neoterick both together.

The Fathers might receive this from one another without due looking into the
Text. The Fathers might? it has indeed no absolute impossibility, but they
might not also, and that has more verisimilitude, it being not like that so
many of them had so little of judgment and so much of Credulity, to precipitate
their Sentence without examination, or were so negligent in consulting
Scripture in this, wherein they were assiduously conversant, and whereunto they
so pathetically excited others to have recourse, but the Fathers are still much
in their debt, for the honor they do them. Bullinger says, in this case, Iis
ideo fidem habemus, quod ea quae scribunt, Evangelio nitantur, I shall yet
grant the Fathers might be confirmed in this truth by Tradition, which in
things historical is a very good Topic, and consequently contributes some
strength to this opinion, and those that were nearer the Fountain, had the
streams thereof more pure, and clear, than those at greater distance; as in
multiplicity of Echo's, by reiterated repercussion of the sound, the later is
more weak and dull than the former, and in plurality of Rain-bows, that which
is by immediate reflection of the Sun, is brighter and stronger than those
which rise from reflex of each other. Bannes jeasts at Pighius in the case of
Honorius, as if he could better tell whether that Pope were an Heretic or not,
than all those Councels and Fathers that lived near his time; we may note the
like vanity in this point, and as our Divines subtly observe, that whether
those Councels and Fathers erred or not, concerning that individual Pope, and
in judging Honorius an Heretic; yet from that judgment it follows, that they
thought the Pope might err; so if the Fathers were mistaken in determining
Judas to have participated, yet it is consequent that they supposed such as
Judas was, one without sound grace or satisfactory signs of conversion, and
yet not duly censured for scandalous crimes, might without any pollution to the
Ordinance or others, or prostituting the Privileges of the Godly, or false
Testimony, or partaking of sins, participate the Sacrament.

They are conceived to err in this point, by taking the Sop to be the
Sacrament, so does Augustine; Resp. In some places he does indeed seem to
suppose so, L. 5. de Baptism. parvulor. c. 8. and tr. 62. in Ioh. and tract.
26. Super illud, Patres vestri.
and so does Beda, to whom Augustine was, as Tertullian to Cyprian, Da
magistrum, but in other places Augustine asserts the contrary, and as I know
not of any other that so thought (except Origin perchance seem to do so) so I
deny that such misprision was the source of the other Truth, which was bottomed
upon pregnant Arguments collected from the Text, and wherein those that do
conceive them to err, do but as the Aethiopians, who sentence candor, for
deformity.

The Ancients not consonant to this opinion, are set down by Mr. Gallaspy in
his Aarons Rod. Resp. But sure his Rod is not Virgula divina, it has detected
no hid treasure, In 3. Aquin. in Evangel. tom. 3.
these testimonies were long since laid open and discovered by the Schoolmen,
(who profligate them) and by Barradius and others; neither is his, like Aarons
Rod, in this particular, but as the Magicians Rod, having brought forth things
not true and real but counterfeit, ( -- hic dormitabat Homerus.) We have
brought them elsewhere to the Test, Suarez 3. q. 73. art. 5. disp. 41. sect. 3.
Vasquez in (...) q. 81. art (...) disp. 217. c. Ibid. c. 1. page 481. and 482
Sylvius in 3. q. 81. (...) p. 331.
and we hope have sufficiently answered them, and more we could say, especially
to that of Dionysius, whom not only all his Commentators, says Suarez,
interpret to hold Judas to have communicated, but Vasquez and Sylvius copiously
vindicate and bring him off, to our side, as the former also turns the edge
of Rupertus his testimony against them, who is alleged by Mr. Gallaspy, though
omitted by the Apologists, Rupertus (says he) similiter, (scilicet) solum
refert utramque sententiam, nullam tamen earum, ut propriam pronunciat, qui
solum contendit ut is qui velit sententiam Hilarii defendere, simul etiam
asserere debeat nemini nisi de crimine convicto and confesso communionem
denegandam esse, (and were their judgment and practice such, we should not
quarrel them:) but indeed to add more in this point, the work would not be
worth our lamp, only whereas the Apologists citing four Testimonies only,
out of Mr. Gallaspy (for as I take it he mentions not Theophylact) viz. Hilary,
Clement, Dionysius and Innocent: they tell us they have examined some of them
by their own Books, but though we cannot reconcile this with what they say a
few lines before, That Theophylact is in their own hands, others they have
transcribed upon the forenamed Authors authority; yet we should be glad to be
assured such ancient Authors did find place among their Books, if the one half
of them were not counterfeit. But sure Dionysius his Testimony is none of those
they have examined, otherwise they would not cite it under the name of his
Commentator Pachymeres, and for Innocent we are informed by Sylvius, Ita
propendet in unam partem, ut alteram non rejiciat.

But Theophylact is in their hands; In 3. q. 81. art. 2. p. 331.
Habeo Themistoclem Atheniensem: he that shall survey diverse of their
quotations, will be facil to suspect they cannot say of many of their Authors,
as they do of Theophylact, and it was incautely said so of him alone, for as
Exceptio roborat legem, in rebus non exceptis, so mentioning him to be in their
hands and no others, it may perchance be construed they could not say the same
of others, otherwise they would have said it of the rest of their Classicke
Authors also.

But what says Th^ophylact, Some say Christ gave the Sacrament to his
Disciples, when Judas was gone forth, and doubtless they were Godly and eminent
Divines in or before Theophylact 's time, for he judges them worthy of credit,
and makes Christ's practice according to their interpretation, a rule to
believers, to do the like, and put evil men from the Sacrament.

Resp. 1. It seems rather those some that said so, were not viri nominis in the
Hebrew idiom, but -- sine nomine turba, Or ignota capita, after the Roman
Periphrasis, unless perhaps he meant it of Hilary, whom straying from the
common opinion of the Fathers he named not for honors sake (as those which
think that in the 16. of Luke to be an History, supposed our Savior named not
the rich man, because he spoke in his dispraise) and though Hilary be but one
person, and Theophylact speaks in the plural number, yet such Enallage's of
number are as current, as common. But if they were any of his own (who lived in
the tenth Century or thereabout, for there is some difference about the precise
time) it is less to their credit, that being the infelix seculum, as
Genebrard, infelix and indoctum, as Bellarmine, obscurum, as Baronius, exhaust
and destitute of learned and ingenious Men, and Writers, and whatsoever these
some were, as omnes urgentur ignoti longa nocte; so it seems their authority
weighed not much with Theophylact, nor so as to incline the beam of his
judgment to that opinion; for however here he determine not the question on
either side; but leaves it in the midst; yet elsewhere upon that of Matthew.
26.27. drink ye all of this, he seems to affirm that Judas was admitted,
though he have a singular opinion, that he only drank of the Cup and reserved
the Bread; and though here, as they say, he make an inference from the
Hypothesis, yet that is ordinary among such, as yet lay no great weight on the
Thesis; and whereas he infers that therefore we must put evil men from the
Sacrament, either he understands close and undiscovered evil men, (such as the
Apologists say, Judas was) and then he checks with them that say hypocrites may
be admitted, it being not in men's power to discern or exclude such, or else
known evil men, and then the exclusion of such cannot be inferred from the
expulsion of Judas, who was not such: so as by the vouching of Theophylact I
conceive they have gotten nothing, but to let us know he is in their hands;
Been habet, Presbyter creatus est Campianus ab Antonio Archiepiscopo Pragensi,
as once said Whitaker.

They next array and empanel a jury of twelve, the most eminent of our modern
learned Writers, hardly to be matched, which oppose, or leave doubtful, Judas
his receiving, and upon their verdict they give judgment in despite of all
Writs of Error, for who, say they, would not err with such? A strange line
dropped from their pens, that so much avile all humane authority, and si ego id
dixissem. But indeed, Pauperis est numerare pecus, -- And though they say, they
could double the number, besides learned Papists not a few, -- Credat Iudaeus
Apella,
Non ego. --
I am confident they would have then made them legible, had they been
Classical, for however some are nomina quibus assurgo, and such as -- nunquam
sine laud loquenda, Yet they have drawn very low for others of them, and
Pastor qui proprias congregat oves, quas relinquit, agnoscit alienas; for me,
-- inopem me copia fecit: And though I could have held forth some late
luminaries beaming light upon this Truth (among whom I think I might as
rationally and as solemnly have fixed, Mr. Prynne, as the Apologists have done
Mr. Gallaspy) more for number, not less for weight, which will be assented to
by any that finds Zwinglius, Calvin, Cranmer, Whitgift, Iuell, Hall, Whitaker,
Bucer, Bullinger, Martyr, Harm. c. 171. p. 454.
Paraeus, Aretius, and Chamier among them, besides Willet, Ball, Hammond, T.
Blake, and Ravanellus, etc. (and even Beza himself is alleged by Gerhard to be
of this mind;) yet I chose rather to produce constellations, as many, as they
have held forth single Stars, as beside these more than twelve Signs
thereof, in the modern Zodiac now discovered.

2. The whole Syntaxis of the Fathers (without any heteroclyte, Ubi supra.
save Hilary) whereof Vasquez particularly quotes Cyprian, Origin, Cyrill of
Jerusalem, Chrysostom, Hierom, Augustine, Theodoret, Leo, Beda, Euthymius,
Rabanus, Theophylact, a full Jury.

3. Besides Justinian (which makes it current by the stamp of Imperial
authority) in his Edict and Confession of Faith, with diverse more of later
birth, whereunto not only Valentia annumerates Sedulius and Remigius, but
another learned Man has added Ambrose, Mr. Prynne. Maldon. in Matthew. 26.20.
Nazianzen, Haymo, Victor Antiochenus, Occumensus, besides Bernard, and others;
and Maldonat tells us, Omnes quos legeri^ auctores.

4. All the School ( omnes qui de hac re meminerunt, says no pedary Schoolman)
and though a late Writer mention Durand, Vasquez ubi supra 4. d. 9. q. 4. p.
701. and 4. q. 5. p. 703.
Salmeron, and Barradius, to be of contrary judgment; yet as I wonder, why the
two later are ranked in this Class, being only Commentators, and not of the
School; so it is more wonderful, he should vouch Durand to warrant that
opinion, when it is manifest he was of our part, saying in one place, Sancti
dicunt, quod Judas proditor sumpsit in coena corpus Domini cum caeteris
Apostolis; and in another, Christus hoc Sacramentum dedit Judae, quem sciebat
esse in peccato mortali.

And 5. the Canonists generally, and (since the Apologists have prayed in aid
from the Church of Rome) I might have affirmed it to be the common opinion
thereof.

Not only (6.) their Expositors ( ex recentioribus expositoribus fere omnes,
as Vasquez witnesses, and I recognize none Enantiaphonous, save Barradius and
Salmeron) but also the chief Pillars and Pinnacles thereof (as Baronius and
Bellarmine among others) asserting it.

But 7. the Church has inserted it into their Missalls, Psalters, and
Horaries, as Turbae fratrum duodenae
Datum non ambigitur;
And therein running in consort with the Old Christian Poets, that sung, Bis
sex cum sociis epulatus nocte suprema; And among the Reformed Churches I cited
the Articles of the Churches of (8.) England, (9.) Ireland, the Confessions of
(10.) Belgia, and (11.) Bohemia, and might (12.) have instanced also in the
generality of Divines of the Augustan Confession (not one dissenting, Ubi supra.
says Gerhard, that he knows) in which Sphere shine many great lights, though
they have their spots, like the Moon, and so perchance has the Sun too (for so
some Astronomers tell us) though we cannot discern them by that light only
which beams from himself. So as we may reverse the verdict by an attaynt of
their Jury, and return more then 24. as a new Jury to do it; and as the
Apologists are bold to say, that the Fathers are conceived to err by the
mistaking the Sop to have been the Sacrament; so I may with less presumption
affirm, that modern Writers have been misled by a misprision, that the Sop was
exhibited to Judas before the Sacrament, and upon reception thereof he went out
so immediately, as to leave no interval of time for the administration, neither
of which is proved nor scarce probable.

I espied the Basilisk before he eyed me, and have elsewhere answered their
Arguments before they produced them; only there is one, which I had not wit
enough to foresee, and perhaps wit (if I had it) were not so likely to
apprehend it; as upon a deliberation in the conclave of sending a Nuncio to a
certain Kingdom, one being commended as a wise man, it was replied, That a
wise man was not fit for the employment, because he could not conceive or
imagine what such a people designed. It is an Argument, considerable, (and so
it is indeed for the vanity thereof) taken from the note of the last
Translaters of the Bible, and set to Luke 22.21. to show there begins another
matter, not a continued History orderly set down.

I perceive Sixtus Senensis (as learned as he was) was deceived, when telling
us of a Stygmatical or punctuary interpretation of Scripture, he adds, that it
is peculiar to the Hebrews, and our Divines need not to be longer puzzled what
Campian means by saying Omnes res and reculae made for his Religion, for it is
like he meant some such Notes as these. But if the Apologists are in earnest
(as we thought they had jested, when heretofore they used this Argument to some
Gentlewomen) we shall tell them, that these Notes are set to show a diverse
Subject matter of the relation, though orderly continued, but never used to
manifest an hysterology, or transposition of things; and if so obvious a thing
have not fallen under their observation, let them consult the recital of the
Decalogue, Exodus 20. where the same Note is not prefixed to the fifth
Commandment, which I think is yet set down in order; and in that one History
of David's duel with Golias, not delivered but according to the order of
things, they will find it very often affixed, and it will introduce an
intolerable confusion in sacred Writ, if this note shall always remarke
things transposed.

But would they please to have more of the Textuary, than of the Cabalist, the
particle (...), veruntamen, the first word of the Text, has far more force
to approve a continuation, and that the words were spoken after the
Consecration, than the note has to assert a transposition, or that they were
uttered before it; for if the words of Consecration had been set down by
anticipation, the adversative particle had been unfitly set there; for in the
judgment of the learned, Quoties aliqua per anticipationem prius narrantur
simpliciter tantum, per particulam continuativam aut copulativam, narrari
solent. St. Augustine tells us therefore that this of Luke does evidentissime
demonstrate Judas to have been present; and Suarez resolves, Veruntamen,
Suarez. 3. q. 73. art. 5. disp. 41. sect. 3. Sylvius in 3. q. 8. art. 1. p. 331.
apt indicat hoc esse dictum in ipsa communione Sacramenti, nam sensus est
perspicuus, Trado vobis corpus and sanguinem, quamvis non ignoro inter vos esse
qui me tradit, unde sancti advertunt, illa verba dicta esse a Christo, tum ad
commendandam charitatem suam, tum ut emolliret cor Judae, ut resipisceret and
non indigne communicaret. And Sylvius adds, ut discamus nihil ab eo
praetermissum quod ad emendationem pertineat.

That Judas departed before the administration, appears, because having
received the sop, he went out immediately, and what that signifies every
Englishman knows, that is, instantly, forthwith. That the Sop was exhibited to
Judas the same night of the Institution, and before the Sacrament instituted
(which is employed in this cryptical Syllogism) is no such principle, as to be
evident in it self, and to need no proof; and I am deceived if I have not
formerly manifested, that it was dealt him at another time; and if it were
given him in that night of the celebration of the Lords Supper, yet that it was
done after it was ended, is to the judgment of Augustine, Beda, Hugo, Thomas,
and others, as Vasquez quotes them, and of Cyrill and Chrysostom, as Suarez
alleges them. Ubi supra.
For the term immediately, Customary use Quem penes arbitrium est and fas and
norma loquendi, has rather evidenced it, that when we say, we will immediately
or instantly come or go or do a thing, we do not bind or conclude our
selves to a precise and punctual instant, but think we have complied with our
engagement if in a short time we perform it; and the use of the word in
Scripture does afford such latitude, and thereof may be vouched a multitude of
instances. When our Savior tells us, Mark. 4.29. (...)
that when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he puts in the Sickle, we
do not see nor can imagine that the husbandman watches to reap his Corn in the
first instant of its ripening: Luke 19.11. they thought the Kingdom of God
should immediately appear, I presume not in an instant, but after a short
space, John 6.2. Immediately the ship was at the land. not in an instant by
miracle, but by a speedy, yet successive motion; Acts 17.10. Immediately they
sent away Paul and Silas, but such a dispatch could not be prepared in a
moment; Mar. 1.28. Immediately his fame spread abroad thorough all the Region,
which could not be carried so far, but in some length of time; Mark. 4.5.
Immediately the seed sprung up, where immediately can only signify speedily,
for seed does not pullulate but after some little time; and that which our
translations render straightwayes, is in the Greek for the most part (...), the
same which they here translate immediately, and he that considers the things
mentioned to be done straightways, Mark. 2.2. and 3.6. and 15.1. will be facil
to belevee, that they could not be set about and entered upon, and expedited in
lesser time than our Savior might have administered the Sacrament after he had
dealt Judas the Sop. Nay we find that the Sacrament of Baptism is in the
preparation for it, and administration thereof said to be done straightwayes,
as Acts 16.33. it is said that the Jaylour and all his were baptized
straightway, the word in the Original is (...), which as it signifies in
praesentia and subito, so here the Vulgar and Castalion render continuo, so
does Beza in some Editions, in other illico, as does Piscator, and by the same
word Continuo, does the Vulgar, and sometimes Beza translate (...): here, John
13.30. in some Editions he reads statim, as Piscator does also; so does the
Vulgar elsewhere, as in that of Mark. 4.29. turn (...) into statim, which in
John it translates continuo, so as it seems the words are all Synonimous or
indifferent. But then it is not imaginable that all the Jaylors family could be
convened and prepared, and things accommodate for their baptism in an instant,
and therefore Tremellius out of the Syriac, as he renders (...) eadem hora, the
same hour in that of John 13.30. so does he also in that of Acts 16.33.
translate (...), eadem hora.

But if we should confine immediately to an instant, yet the Apologists cannot
make it clear when that instant commenced. For (not to insist, upon the sense
of Baronius and Maldonat, that he went out immediately before Christ his solemn
Sermon, and was no partaker thereof; Continuo (says the Cardinal) solum
significat Judam non exspectasse prolixam Christi concionem;) it is observable
what Vasquez prompts us with, that it is not said, he went forth immediately
after he had received the Sop, but, having received it, accepta offula, as Beza
and Piscator: or cum accepisset, as the Vulgar read the Greek particle of the
Aorist (...), and after the mention of giving the Sop, Satan is said to have
entered into him, and Christ said, what thou do, do quickly: now it is
likely that between the Sop and Christ his Speech was Judas confirmed in his
wicked purpose, by being possessed of the Devil, to perpetrate it, and after
Christ his Speech (from thence the instant commencing) then immediately he went
forth, not immediately after the Sop, but choosing that opportunity to go off,
to escape farther discovery, seeing his going out might be interpreted to be by
reason of being sent by his Master to do some service quickly; and so the
Paraphrase of the words will be, when Christ had said what thou do do
quickly, then immediately Judas having already received the Sop, wherewith the
Devil entered to spur him faster to his treason, went forth. And so the
mention of the receipt of the Sop at his going forth, shows not the moment of
the time, but the cause of his Exit, the Devil driving him, that entered with
it. But whereas, Dictatorlike, they tell us that those words, what thou do,
etc. were spoken before the Sacrament, we desire we may be excused to suspend
our Faith, until they prove what they say, or prove that all they say is
Oracle.

They think he spoke well that prompted them to say, that Judas was but^ had
Porter to let in men to the Sacrament: Verba nitent phaleris, sed nullas verba
medullas
Intus habent, --
Judas was not he that lets in, but he that entered, not he by whom, but after
whom others may seem fit to be admitted. To prove that others besides such as
have approved signs of holiness may have access, it had been unapt and
incongruous to have produced the example of an holy Man, but the instance of
such a Son of perdition is a very proper example; but what rigid and injurious
Porters are they, that shut such as are not notoriously wicked and scandalous
out of that gate, where Judas had entrance?

There was no visible cause for his exclusion: Then we trust it follows after
all this bustling to the contrary, that he was admitted (or else Christ
excluded him without visible cause, and then sure he could be no pattern to
us, as they say he was, for I hope we may exclude none causelessly;) but then
let them also exclude none but such as they have visible cause to repel, and
not require such a visible cause (as plain Evidence of their conversion)
before they admit. Advers. Anabapt. lib. 6. c. 9. p. 230.


The Apostles thought well of him, without any suspicion. Bullinger is
peremptory, Judae malefacta in mensa commemoravit, adeo apt, ut nihil clarius
dici potuerit: but if they knew not in individuo signato, who it was, they did
in individuo vago, and that one was not clean, and was a Traitor and Devil,
and yet they were not startled, nor scrupled to communicate all together, and
therefore sure had no impressions that to participate with such was a pollution
to themselves or the Ordinances, or any prostituting of the privileges of the
Saints, or setting of the seal to blancks, etc. Besides seeing some of these
sad effects depend upon the nature of the thing, viz. the very sumption of the
Sacrament by wicked men, more than our knowing them to be wicked and to
receive, these mischiefs would have resulted, though they were ignorant of the
rise thereof, Balls Trial grounds of s^paration. p. 198.
and the Ordinance seems to be polluted though they were not; but therefore it
seems from hence to be a necessary consequent, that the simple presence of
unworthy or wicked men defiles not, for then our Savior had spoken a
contradiction, when he said, Ye are clean, but not all, John 13.10. because if
one had been unclean, all had been defiled: No, neither our knowledge of their
unworthiness and wickedness, for then Judas had stained the Ordinance to Christ
himself; nay, the notorious knowledge thereof does not pollute, where there is
no power (through non-establishment or obstruction of discipline;) nor
opportunity (when at the time of communicating there cannot so suddenly be
admonition or judicial process had,) nor convenience (through danger of
Schism) to repel, nor leave from Christ to separate.

Judas was knowa to Christ as God, and he dealt Ministerially as man.

First, it is not absolutely and universally true, that Christ in this
Ordinance dealt as man, but rather as Mediator, God and Man; for none but God
could institute a Sacrament, whose blessing only can confer the grace which
is signified, and sanctify, and virtuate the Signs and Elements into an
aptness to those ends whereunto they were instituted, and none but Man could
have administered them; besides if he knew Judas his treason as God, yet
notwithstanding, he made it known to men.

And 2. it is not pertinent to dispute of the Principles of his knowledge, or
formally how he knew it; it is sufficient, that he had knowledge thereof, and
might have made it known to the Disciples and told them thereof, and in all
likelihood would have done it, had his partaking with them been so mischeevous;
and the Apologists confess, nay contend for it, that he made this discovery
before the Institution, and whether they understood at the time of celebration,
of whom he spoke particularly or not, is very disputable among learned Men: So
then, if none but Saints ought to have been admitted, how could our Savior
have given admission to one whom he had published to be a Devil? Judas non
possit illis annumerari, Advers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 230.
says Bullinger, quorum peccata levia and occulta sunt; praeterea Johannes
ante coenam eum manifestum furem fuisse scribit, Joh. 12. and he cites
Augustine, saying, Dominum, cum haec sciret, nihilominus ipsum in coena
tolerasse, ut nos doceret and exemplum nobis praeberet, malos tolerandos esse,
eosque etiam si coenae intersint, bonos tamen non polluere; and if herein
Christ dealt ministerially, then he was a pattern to Ministers, how to comport
themselves in like cases, which is not to repel those who by a notorious
knowledge appear not to be wicked, however privately they may be known to him
for such.

3. The sin of Ananias and Saphira was in secret and not known to Peter, but
by Divine revelation; yet the first in every kind being the measure of that
which follows, that we might take notice of the greatness of the sins of
lying, avarice, hypocrisy, and sacrilege, Ut incuteretur metus and firmaretur
disciplina, illo exord^o legis Evangelicae, say the Fathers, Peter made known
his sin, and that by a signal judgment; and upon the like account of reason,
if it were so necessary to repel all but real Saints from the Sacrament,
doubtless (as the Greeks call punishments (...), examples) our Savior by such
a Standard of example, as the punishing of Judas, by express casting him out,
would have measured out, and established that discipline in his Church.

4. I think they would say, or at least it were better said (wherein we shall
consent with them) that Christ rejected not Judas, because he knew his
wickedness only as it were per scientiam privatam, he did not know it, nor
could then give the Disciples knowledge thereof, per scientiam publicam and
notoriam, that is, neither by evidence of fact, Aquin. 3. q. 81. art. 2.
Similiter Suarez ubi supra.
confession, or judicial conviction, and quia nobis debuit esse exemplum
justitiae, non conveniebat ejus magisterio, ut Judam occultum peccatorem sine
accusatore and evidenti probatione ab aliorum communione separet, ne per hoc
daretur exemplum Praelatis ecclesiae similia faciendi, as the School long since
determined. If they would suite their practice to this method, and regulate it
by this principle, (as it is evident they do not, nor dare they say they do)
I had never set forth to charge them, and should soon sound a retreat; and as
they say, Christ was a pattern to us, who are to admit visible Disciples, not
being able to descend into their hearts: so correspondently would they work
according to this pattern, and give admission to all that profess to be
Christians (for Christians and Disciples are univocal) and which by notorious
crimes obstinatly continued in, do not blot their profession, and not make the
Sacrament, which Bullinger so much disresents, and whereunto (he says) it was
never instituted by Christ, Ut sit ventilabrum aut cribrum, Epist. Petr.
Datheno.
quo cribrentur aut dispergantur ab invicem homines, sed synaxin (i. e.)
coagmentationem, societatem, communionem, and con junctionem, would they do
this, I shall -- compescere limina Jani.

The not condemning of the adulterous woman by our Savior Jesus, John 8. is
not parallel, but has great disparity with his not repelling Judas, unless we
shall think it all one, not to do a thing when it is proper to his office,
and when it is not agreeable thereunto. In discharge of the woman, he dealt not
so much like a man, calling for her accusers, and when none came dismissing
her, but he acted like a man that did relinquere suum jus Magistratui, as
Brentius; In locum.
and noluit munus legitim judicii abrogare, as Musculus; Sicut reliquis suis
exemplis aut Evangelicae doctrinae praeceptis, nullum voluit facere
praejudicium eorum quae cuique ex officio pro salute reioub. convenient; ita
nec hoc suo facto, as Iansenius; and because Hoc non erat ejus officium, as
Piscator, and non venerat ut esset externus Judex scelerum, as Iansenius, or
suum munus cum ossicio Magistratus consundere, as Aretius; whereunto are
consonant Estius, Barradius and Deodate. And the power of inflicting capital
punishments being then taken from the Jews, as they confess it was not lawful
for them to put any man to death (though I know also some learned Men give
another reason of that Speech;) it is thought they brought the adulterous woman
in regard thereof, thinking thereby to have ensnared him; and to evade that
snare and frustrate their design, he condemned her not; It was not then for
want of Accusers, for they had formerly testified her offense to have been
notorious by evidence of fact, she was taken in ipso facto, or furto, as the
Greek is, by a Synecdoche speciei (...), but being gone off, Christ asked where
they were, and whether any had condemned her; only that in absolving her he
might defeat the designed surprise of the Pharisees, Ii te non condemnant,
neque ego te condemno; quod illi faciunt, ego facio, objicere in me non
possunt, leginos repugnare, in the words of Barradius: you may see then how
Diaphonous the example of the adulteress is to that of Judas.

But it seems the Apologists are like Blondus, of whom it is said that he cared
not quam vera, but quam multa s^riberet.

Yet Horatius will lend Dioxippas a Sword to cut off his head, as it is in the
profane Story, suitable to that of Golias and David in the sacred; for if
Christ could not judge the woman to punishment, because there were no Accusers,
and no man had condemned her, why do they then punish with loss of the
Sacrament, those that have had no accusers, nor have been condemned by judicial
process.

To their Epiphonema, or rather Io-poean in the close of the Section, attending
their triumphs over so poor and despicable an Argument as this, I shall only
say, Rode caper vites, tamen hic cum stabis ad aras,
In tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit;
And I shall conclude with that which Bullinger alleges out of Zuinglius,
Bullinger ad Petrum Dathenum advers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 230.
whereunto are perfectly consonant what himself delivers against the
Anabaptists; Apertum esse satis, quales ipse Dominus primae suae coenae (quae
haud dubie omnium fuit absolutissima) adhibuerit convivas, neque decere ut nos
Dei filio (qui solus corda filiorum hominum perspecta habet) acutiores nobis
sumamus oculos, aut nobis ipsis in coena sumamus judicium, quod ille nobis
neque praecepto neque exemplo dedit.

DIATRIBE.
SECT. III.
The sufficiency of Scripture whereupon Negative Arguments are grounded. The
Argument deduced from 1 Cor. 11.28. It is difficult and unsafe to judge of
other men's estate. Of temerarious judgment, of judging men to be wicked or
irregenerate. With what difficulty, and what a pedigree of consequences their
proofs are derived from Scripture. General Rules, for satisfaction of doubting
Consciences, persuade the contrary to their way. Of Christ's admitting only
Disciples, Heb. 13.17. Matthew. 18.16. Revel. 2.2. 1 Pet. 3.15. 1 Cor. 5.11.
explained and vindicated.

THE Canon prescribing and directing the due administration and receiving of
the Sacrament, is 1 Cor. 11. We cannot with Tertullian adore the fullness of
the Scripture, unless we yield it to be a perfect rule of faith and manners,
which it cannot be, if it be deficient in any thing necessary to be done or
believed, especially in such places, where it purposely handles things of that
concernment: The Law of the Lord is perfect (and perfectum est, cui nil deest,)
and it is able to make wise unto salvation, and thoroughly to furnish the man
of God. And therefore here, and only here an Argument, ab authoritate
negative, holds good: But in that Chapter to the Corinthians I find a
precept, Let a man examine himself, none; that he should necessarily pass the
examination of another; between the proper examination of himself, and eating
and drinking no other thing intervenes; Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat, (So) without more examination, having done so, he must not be let;
and therefore this very Commentary is made upon that Text by pathetical
Chrysostom; He does not bid one man to examine another, but every man himself,
making the judgment private and without witnesses. Paraeus strikes in Unisons
with that ancient Father, The Apostle says not, the Priest shall examine, or
prove them, but every man himself. So does Sarcerius, He commands not that one
should be approved to another, but each one to himself; as long before Clemens
Alexandrinus accounted every man's Conscience to be his best director in this
case. By what authority then can he be put back from the Sacrament, that has
examined himself? And to suspect that any have not examined themselves, who
shall profess to have done so, (without a violent suspicion, which is near to a
moral certainty of the contrary) how can it be competible with Charity, that
hops all things, believes all things, and thinks no evil?

This being a stubborn hard bone, much ado there is to overcome it, without
drawing blood from the jaws; One sets his teeth to it, and says, That the
precept of examining a man's self, excludes not the examination of his Pastor,
or the Elders, or the Congregation, both may be consistent, and both requisite.
But the offerture is supervacaneous, for the Argument concludes not; A man must
examine himself: therefore the Minister, etc. may not, or need not examine him;
but we only argue, that because where the Apostle professedly prescribes the
preparative dispositions and duties requisite to worthy receiving, he not only
gives no express precept that the Ministers, or Elders, or Congregation shall
examine, nor the people submit to examination, but rather the contrary, for
having examined himself he permits himself so to eat, therefore it is not of
the necessity of duty; for what the Scripture commands not, obliges not; he
permits a man to pass from self-examination, to receiving without any other
thing intervening; Let him examine himself, and so let him eat, without any
more ado in respect of examination, which if it had been requisite, the
Apostle would as well have said, Let him also pass the examination of his
Pastor, etc. as examine himself. And this Argument from the Authority negative
of Scripture (though (bet him eat) affirms also the liberty of access, without
any other than self-examination) is not only efficacious in general concerning
the necessity of things to be done or believed, but in this place, and upon
this very account, is specially approved by Interpreters, and urged as
conclusive to the excluding the necessity of any other examination.

Another tells us, that the Corinthians were a Church lately planted, a people
newly called out of the world, and converted to the Faith, and therefore it was
to be presumed they were sufficiently qualified both for knowledge and
sanctity, and needed no other but the proper examination of their own hearts.
But I shall reply;

First, if they were newly converted, and so late begotten of the seed of the
Word, they were then lefs grown in explicit knowledge, and less perfectly
instructed in the mysteries of the Faith, and therefore did more need to be put
under probation in the notion of the Catechumeni: but in truth the Church of
Corinth, had been diverse years planted, and the Apostles baptizing whole
Families (Yonglings as well as aged, as other Texts warrant us to assert
against the Anabaptists) in all probability, besides the first Converts, there
was now since the first constitution of that Church, a second rise and growth
sprung up to be adult and capable of the Sacrament.

Secondly, the Rule of the Apostle is written for our instruction, catholic
and extensive to all times, places, and persons, not limited or restrained to
the Corinthians, and to confine and appropriate general precepts to special
times, and particular persons, is artificium haereticum, to expilate and
exhaust the Armory of the Church, and imbezill the Weapons of the Faith, and
tends to defeat the standing Forces of Scripture.

Thirdly, ex concesso, this will then consequently exempt from examination
verbal or real, such as may well be presumed to be sufficiently qualified, and
so it is not of necessity, that the probation should be general.

Fourthly, the whole Epistle shows, how culpable those Corinthians were; and
how many were their errors in faith, and spots in manners; so that for ought I
know, our Congregations generally (abstracting them from these dismal Heresies
which have lately spawned from, and been fostered by men of like principles to
those we dispute against, and which for ought I see, obstruct no man's access to
the Sacrament, if his Seraphical Elevation can vouchsafe a condescension to
Ordinances) are not more guilty or obnoxious. Even in this very concernment of
their qualifications for the Communion, it appears by 1 Cor. 11.20, 30. that
many of them received unworthily, and discerned not the Lords body from common
meat, and had taken too much drink before they came to partake of the mystical
Cup; Yet neither does the Apostle command, nor encourage the intermission of
the Lords Supper, nor reprehend those that were better qualified and
conditioned, for communicating in a mixed Congregation, or among the Rout, (as
they phrase it, with somewhat too strange a spice of the old Pharisee) as if it
had been either a stain to their holiness, or a pollution to their persons, or
an obstacle to the fruit and efficacy of the Sacrament; neither does he charge
or caution the Elders thenceforth to admit no more without a pre-examination.

Another thus answers, That this self-examining is only meant of that judging
which prevents the judgment of God mentioned, ver. 31. which no man's examining
of another can do, but only his examining of himself. But if this were
granted, yet then it follows however, that no other but such self-examination
is required by the Apostle, for he prescribes no other but this, and that is as
much as we contend for. But when that learned man tells us in the same place,
that the Pastors and Elders of Corinth had admitted some to the Lords Table,
whom they judged fit and worthy Communicants, but God judged otherwise of them,
it was no impudence nor presumption in us to expect that he would have showed
us, where there is one syllable at least that mentions the admission only of
such as were by them thought fit, or of any probation made of their fitness,
that were not notorious and scandalous sinners; and if self-examination be
sufficient to prevent Gods judgment, it must be enough to prevent all sin,
every sin being waited on by judgment; and consequently to prevent a sinful
receiving, there needs none but a self-examination.

Another takes this bone in hand, and would crush and break it with this
interposition, That to the right examination of a man's self such dispositions
and graces are requisite, as no unconverted man is capable of; so as though
upon self-examination a man might be admitted, yet no man not having manifest
signs of being in the state of grace, can hereupon ground any title or claim to
the Sacrament, as being not susceptible of self-examination. Whereunto I shall
say (not to reflect that it carries a spice of Socinus, to hold that only
persons converted are capable of the Sacraments) that it is a supposition
suitable to their principles, that they assume a power to judge the secret
things of the heart, for it was wont to be an indubitable maxim, De occultis
non judicat Ecclesia, and of that nature is the right discharge of the duty of
self-examination. They can pretend but to make judgment only of external
actions, and such as may give scandal and offense, those they can take
cognizance of, and they lie within a judicial Sphere, but the other, viz. the
secret things of the heart, fall within none but a divine Horizon, and none can
be scandalous only for such things, because no others can take notice of them.

I shall still retreat to my first Fortress, I read, Let a man examine
himself, not that any should examine his examination: Nay positively I find,
that upon self-examination he may so eat, which liberty cannot consist with a
necessity of having self-examination examined by another. Men are commanded not
only to examine themselves, in order to receiving the Eucharist, but also
generally to try their ways, Lam. 3.4. and their works, Gal. 6.4. and if
unconverted men cannot do this, they may upon like account bring them under
examination for their whole life, and give a new name to the same thing of
auricular confession: And if unconverted men cannot examine themselves, how
shall they know themselves to be unfit and unworthy, that they may repent and
better dispose themselves, and in the interim abstain? Who gave them liberty or
means to search the heart, who are not proper Masters to whom men must stand or
fall?

But they tell us, that there is a twofold knowledge, Intuitive, which is by
an immediate looking on, and Arguitive (or according to the more usual
Scholastic term, Discursive) which is by comparing one thing with another, and
reasoning from one thing to another; in the first way God only knows the
hearts of men; in the second sense, we may know the condition of men's hearts,
by their outward actions, as a tree by his fruits. Whereunto I shall answer,
that it must still be reminded, what was premised in the state of the question,
that I disclaim and protest against the patrociny of persons notoriously wicked
and scandalous, no part of my Apology looks toward such, but to stigmatize with
this brand all those whom they exclude from the Communion, and to exclude them
upon that score, is a calumny to the persons, and a contumely to Sion, and will
be matter of triumph to Gath and Askelon. Parcite paucorum crimen diffundere in
omnes.

Subsequently to this Hypothesis I shall say, that when men of moral life,
unrebukable for those crimes, which Tertullian calls graviora and exitiosa; and
others, vastantia conscientiam, and whose knowledge of the Articles of the
Faith, and Principles of Religion, cannot rationally be doubted of; yet such
cannot by favor of their opinion, be translated into the Albe of persons
converted able to examine themselves, I doubt, if such a judgment smack not
more of a result from entuitive, than discursive knowledge.

Secondly, I think a man may use and exercise this discursive knowledge where
there is no need, by a superfluous indagation of things that appertain not to
him, and he is then al^enae conversationis curiosus explorator, and may also
not sufficiently ground or deduce his knowledge, and may put more in the
conclusion, than was in the premises, and may suppose his syllogismes to be
demonstrative, when they are but dialectick, and perhaps sophistick, and he is
then alienae conversation is temerarius judex, in the judgment of Bernard; and
therefore to apply to this purpose that of Augustine, Quid opus est ut
d^finiatur cum discrimine, quod potest n^s^ici sine cr^mine? What need we judge
the states of men with danger, which we may be ignorant of with safety?

Thirdly, though a man have been supposed formerly not to have been qualified
and empowered to examine himself, yet who can judge whether before his approach
to the Holy Table, in a sense of the necessity of the duty of self-examination,
applying himself in some degree to the discharge thereof, that spirit, which as
the wind blows where it lists, so sometimes comes suddenly, as a mighty
rushing wind, may not enable him to the present effectual performance thereof?
Whereof to say that notwithstanding probation ought to be made previously to
the Sacrament, is but to b^gge the question, and to condemn the Apostles, who
admitted thousands, and among them also Simon Magus to baptism, upon the
profession of his Faith, without farther trial, and in order to persons adult,
there is the same reason for the one Sacrament, and the other.

Fourthly, the conclusion that a man is not able to examine himself, does here
presuppose, and is inferred from another conclusion, that the person is a
wicked unconverted man; but there is so much uncertainty in the premises, and
so much danger in making the conclusion, that I think no charitable soul
humbled by the fear of the Lord, will be very forward so to conclude, this
being judicium figuli non luti, domini non conservi. Though I will grant that
for any great and scandalous sin, being notorious, a man may be suspended; yet
I cannot yield that every such scandal concludes a man irregenerate, nor can I
al^ow him under such a notion, to be either repelled, or yet examined, much
less to be accounted such; because he has not given them satisfaction of his
sincere holiness. God may have 7000. in Israel, and yet Elias himself not able
to discern one of them. If in some men we seem to observe few or no good works,
yet our heavenly Father may see them in secret. As some things seem, and are
not, so others are and do not seem. The Stars have the swiftest motion (or at
least the Earth has,) yet move without noise; it is distance and want of near
approach, that makes them seem less than they are, and some Stars (as in the
Galaxt^) shine unseen, and the Moon when that side toward the Earth is
darkened, yet that toward Heaven does shine bright. Some may perhaps imitate
Mucianus (or Vespasianus) in Tacitus, Omnium quae dixerat fecera^que art
quadam ostentator: Others take more of the Publican, than the Pharisee, and as
Artificis est celare artem; so they think it a good work to conceal their good
works, and therefore choose to shut their closet door upon their prayers, and to
cast back and muffle their left hand when their right dispenses alms,
reckoning other men's eyes to be latrones praemii, and their applauses furta
coeli, robbers of their reward; and though they honor him for his works sake
(in the full latitude of honor, as it is comprehensive of obedience,
reverence, maintenance) yet perchance are not persuaded, that it is an elicite
or imperate act of Religion, or the great Criterion thereof, to bring into
captivity their understandings and wills to the obedience of their Pastor, and
for to pass for religious men, to degrade themselves into unclean beasts, and
to swallow without chewing the cudde: Et nos hom^n^s sensum hab^mus, in the
phrase of Ambrose. If in some others we seem to take notice of some evil deeds,
yet can we discern no good thing in them? Flies that stick only on sores, may
soon make the ointment of a good name to stink. Why look we on the Moon only
when under an Eclipse, not in her brightness? It Is no rule for the Syllogismes
of Charity, Et sequitur partem Conclusio debiliorem. We may judge the acts of a
man not his state, and injustitiam facti, non personae: Comines would say he
was a good Prince, whose Virtues exceeded his Vices; In many things we sin
all, and therefore toleramus and toleramur, says St. Augustine. That other
Syllogistick Canon is here more applyable, Syllogizare non est ex particulari:
The denomination is to be taken from the major part, and a man must be judged,
not by a few actions, but all, or else an heavy sentence might pass upon David
and Peter. One or two acts cannot constitute an habit, or argue a malignity in
the agent, an habit being the principle of doing things willingly,
delightfully, constantly. There is a smoking flax^ that may be long before it
be kindled into a flame, and a mustard seed of faith, that may long lie dead as
it were, ere it spring and fructify. There is life in an Apopl^ctick, though
he lie as dead, he may ^n time recover, non infusione novae vitae quae aberat,
sed diffusione ejusdem quae inerat: Frigidity is the proper passion of water,
which is sometime accidentally hot, but notwithstanding in that instant, is
virtually and potentially cold, and soon by its intrinsic form will revert to
its proper quality. Grace may be where great sins seem to exclude it, as
contraries may co exist in the same subject, in remiss degrees. Grace may be
v^va, though not vivax, and in actu primo though not always in secundo; in
essence, yet not in present operation: and as St. Ambrose said to Theodosius of
David, Thou see his sin, not his repentance; so we see not whether men
lapse into an offense by inadvertency, surreption, sudden motion, nor how
violent and importunate was the tentation whereby they succumbed, nor how
imperfect was the consent, which might be much refracted by the reluctance of
the mind. Aristotle himself distinguishes between the sins of incontinent
and intemperate persons; the one offends with some reluctance, the other runs
into evil with a full carriere; Twisse vindic. part. 4. p. 192.
and the incontinent, he says, is (...), has a principle of natural goodness,
that makes him prone to repent, and capable of melioration. And even a
regenerate man is a mixed person, made up of the flesh, as well as the spirit;
he is as the twilight, where light and darkness are mixed and blended together;
and though the path of the just be as the shining light, which shines more and
more till perfect day, yet till the second rise and coming of the Sun of
righteousness, it suffers some alloy of darkness. The flesh and the spirit are
still at war one with the other, and though sometimes, and in some things,
the one or the other prevail, yet the one never works without the renitency
and reaction of the other; so that as the persons, so the actions are mixed,
and there is never an efficacious willing of the one, without a remiss
volition of the contrary object; the act is voluntary, but the things are done,
nolenter, volenter, and the act is more remiss through the mixture of what is
involuntary, Romans 7.15.
with what is voluntary in the precedent deliberation. And as the reluctance of
the flesh, and the influence and working of Concupiscence in all spiritual
motions and actions of just men, distills a sinfulness into the same, and
thereby stains, impairs, and extenuates them so far, as that though it prevail
not to pervert the substance of just actions, yet it enfeebleth and impedeth
them from attaining to that height and strain of perfection, whereby they
should be able to justify before God; so the retraction and reluctance of the
spirit in evil actions (where that spirit is, which none can know but he that
feels, for who else knows the spirit of a man?) though it make them not cease
to become sins, nor can give them form; yet it remitteth and mitigateth the
guilt, and gives them some qualification, so as such men so offending, though
they are not without spot unrebukable, yet these may be the spots of his
children, and they may be good men that commit some evils.

The quintessence to be limbeck'd and distilled from those resolutions is this,
That it is as difficult to discern, and doubtful to judge of the states of men,
as dangerous to err in such judgment; it is a judgment never easy, nor always
infallible, for the spirit of man which is in him, to judge of his estate, and
more difficult and dangerous for another, that knows not the things of a man.
In doubts that concern things, nothing but the weight of reason must turn the
scale; but in doubts concerning persons, the poyse of Charity must incline the
beam toward the better part, if not positively and speculatively to esteem them
to be good, yet negatively and practically not to conclude them evil, but ad
hic and nunc, to handle them, as if they were good. When we judge of things,
the good or evil thereof is not attended, nor are they prejudiced, whatsoever
we may chance to judge of them; but the good or evil of him that judges is
looked after, as he shall make true or false judgment, Truth being the proper
good of the Understanding, as Falsehood is the Evil thereof; Aquin. 22. q. 60.
ar. 4.
and therefore every one ought to endeavor to make true judgment of things:
But in judging of men, the good or evil of him that is judged is principally
respected, who is honored, if esteemed good; and vilified, if judged to be
evil; and therefore we ought to take heed, that we judge him good, rather than
evil, unless evident and morally certain reasons persuade the contrary. And as
for him that so judges, though perhaps falsely, that judgment is no evil to his
intellect, as neither does it pertain to the perfection thereof in it self, to
know the truth of all singular contingent things, but it rather belongs to,
and argues good affection. It is safer therefore to offend by excess of
charity, than through defect, and I had rather err ten times upon the score of
hope, than once upon the account of supercilious rash judgment. It is a good
rule of the School; In judicandis aliis, eorum bona certa, meliora; certa mala,
minora; bona dubia, certa; dubia mala, nulla judicemus. They had need be
pregnant, and vehement proofs, if not plain demonstrations, that shall warrant
one to judge another to be a wicked man, for if to doubt it (which is when the
mind is pendulous, and suspended in the midst, without inclining to either
part) or to suspect it (which is the concitation of the mind to an assent,) or
to opine it (which is an assent, but wavering and infirm, and with fear of the
contrary) upon light signs and arguments, be sinful; much more is it fully and
firmly to judge him to be such; and they may also be light Arguments to judge
him to be evil, which yet may be sufficient to doubt, or suspect, or opine him
to be so, because the former assent requires surer grounds, especially when
this judgment must be a sentence externally and juridically pronounced, as in
this case it is or ought to be, when a man is thereby debarred the Sacrament.
In doubtful things the safer part is to be chosen, but Tutius est reddere
rationem propter charitatem, quam crudelitatem, It is clearly more safe to
judge men good, than to sentence them to be evil; for to err in the former, is
no practical moral error, nor injurious to any, but only speculative, and in
things contingent an evil of no moment; but to offend in the latter, is a
practical error, through an inordination and inconformity of such judgment
with righteousness, which is a greater evil to him that judges, as being a
wrong done to another, and a robbing him of his proper goods, his good name
being a depositum laid up in the minds of other men (Honesta fama alterum
patrimonium; and fama pari passu cum vita ambulat) which he ought not to be
deprived of, but upon reasons very sufficient in the estimation of Prudence;
otherwise the forfeiture of reputation, being a punishment, he shall be
punished without cause, and without such reasons persuading the assent, though
the judgment perhaps may be materially true, yet it is formally false judgment;
true in it self, yet false in him that makes it. The Lawyers say, Jura sunt
promptiora ad absolvendum, quam ad condemnandum, and they add, Cum sunt parium
jura obscura, reo favendum est potius quam actori, and qui judicat, habet se,
ut actor, proximus de quo judicatur, ut reus.

I have been the more copious upon this subject, because what is said of
judging or opining men to be irregenerate, is applicable in some degree to a
supposing them ignorant. Ignorance, when it is of those things we are bound to
know (which differenceth it from nescience) and do neglect, becoming so a
pravous disposition, marches in the same rank, and with the same pace with
sin, and a suspicion thereof in like manner robbes men of their better
treasure, their fame deposited in the breasts of men, and those two coming under
suspicion, being the impulsives of examination, and obstructives to admission,
and the colors wherewith they paint the necessity of the one, and the shadows
whereby they set off the other at more distance.

Lastly, some would impose upon us, that though here in this 1 Cor. 11. the
Apostle prescribe no other but self-examination, yet that in other places,
there is found that which may enforce a being examined by others. But first
before we come to take a prospect of the particular places alleged, they all
fall under this prejudice, and are thereby frustrated, that Verum vero non
contrariatur, and therefore the highest principles of revealed truth cannot
check or clash with themselves; but if any other, save self-examination, were
prescribed as requisite antecedently to partaking the Lords Supper, it would
contradict this permission, that he that has examined himself might so eat,
(So) without other examination; and therefore, whereas they pretend that the
silence of the Scripture here in this place, is supplied by the voice of God
sounding it elsewhere; who can but doubt that such sound is like the music of
the Spheres, rather imaginary, than real? Some Texts are indeed pretended for
it, and Arguments drawn and formed out of them, but more in number, than in
weight, which if with any importunity they shall impose upon the world,
doubtless some will say of them, as some Interpreters think of the Jebusites, 2 Samuel 5.6. that they manned their walls with the bl^nd and the lame.

And seeing this antecedent probation is so earnestly obtruded, and vehemently
urged a^ necessary to the Sacrament, not only necessitate praecepti, but medii
also, (for without this, that is not to be administered) verily it seems
strange, that the Assertors thereof cannot produce one Text, wherein is one
syllable of the Sacrament, or one word of those that have the power and
authority to examine, and but one where is any mention of probation or trial,
and that too, being Heterogeneal to this subject. And since at best their
proofs are only Arguments of probability and of convenience, and propositions
propagated and deduced from the first principles of Scripture, by so many
descents and generations, that it is hard to try whether they do truly come
from that Stock, or not, and in some mean Parents by the way, there may be
fallacies which may vitiate and bastard them, I cannot apprehend how they can
beget a certainty in the Conscience, that without such previous probation, the
Sacrament ought not to be administied, at most they can only create a dubious
conscience whether it may or not, or an opining, that it should not. And then
(beside the special Arguments for the opposi^e part, ponderous enough if duly
weighed ^o turn the Beam and settle the Scale) and beside that which St.
Augustine tells us; Quod intell^gimus, debemus rationi; quod credimus, debemus
authoritati; sed quod opinamur, debemus error'; And Lactantius, Id opinatur
quisque quod nescit; and therefore Bernard seconds them, that Opinio, si
assertionem habeat, temeraria est; besides this, it seems to me, that the
principles laid down in general by the Casuists and Jurists to regulate
doubtful and opining Consciences, and lead them to act, do rather warrant and
persuade the Concession, than the denial of the Sacrament without such
probation.

As (to omit that poor topic of the common opinion) those Canons; 1. Favores
ampliandi, Odia restringenda.

2. Melior est conditio possidentis; which beside the possession of a good
same, until conviction of demerit to the contrary, is also applyable to those
that have been formerly admitted, which are the greater part of them that are
now excluded.

3. In dubiis tutior pars est eligenda, rationabiliter in dubiis favorabiliori
parti adhaerescendum est: semper in dubiis benigniora praeferenda sunt; in re
dubia benigniorem interpretat^onem sequi, non minus justum est, quam tutum:
semper in obscuris quod min^mum, quoties dubia interpretatio libertatis est,
secundum libertatem respondendum est.

And lastly, the greater offense lying on this side to neglect the Ordinance
and Worship of God, than upon that part, to communicate with persons improbous,
or unfit in that Worship, and those Ordinances.

But to take a special view of the forces which they muster, and to encounter
them; the Arguments drawn from these general Precepts of taking heed to the
flock, and watching over their souls, etc. are only Paralogismes arguing a
genere ad speciem affirmative.

The Argument formed from Hebrews 13.17. ( They watch for your souls, as they
that must give an account; therefore (say they) if they must give an account
for us, we ought to give an account to them;) this is fallacia consequentis,
for it follows not, that they cannot or ought not to perfect their account to
God of the discharge of their duty, if we become not particularly accountant to
them, and come under probation of what effects, the discharge of their duty
has wrought in us; and why is this account to be taken (if we were obliged to
render it) only antecedently to the Sacrament and alone concerning our fitness
for that one Ordinance, not all; or at one only time, not continually? Yea, why
not of all our actions, if we must account to them in all, for which they must
account for us, for that will not be for one act, but all? This alone flows
naturally from the Text, we ought to make account of them, but not that we must
give an account to them.

Concerning that allegation of Matthew. 18.16. If thy Brother trespass against
thee, etc. however it may be applyable in order to ^he proving of
Excommunication (whereo^ yet as learned men as lived in their age, some have
doubted, others have denied;) yet su^e it cannot be pertinent to his
examination, unless by some rare Alchymy of discourse they could turn a
trespass, or a wrong done to a brother, into an offer to communicate, or that
it be a trespass to desire the Communion, or that we can trespass against none
but the Minister and his Elders.

A late Author (not unlearned and sufficiently eloquent) has bottomed and laid
the soundation of his argumentation upon this subject in his principle, That
Christ at the first Institution (which ought to be the president to all future
Administrations) gave the Sacrament only to his Disciples, and therefore those
which are not Disciples, may not participate thereof, and the Disciples of
Christ must have such and such qualifications, which no unregenerate men can
have: Ergo.

But the frame must needs be weak that is raised upon such a foundation; for
Architects say, a crack in the Foundation, but as great as one digit, makes a
breach in the building of many foot: For first, Chamier Tom. 4. l. 8. c. 8. p.
202.
that the D^sciples (which learned men th^nk not evident, that they were no
more than the twelve Apostles, Gerhard loc. Com. Tom. 5. p. 18. Ames. Bell.
enervat. Tom. 3. c. 7. p. 159.
and it is not improbable (says Gerhard) that the Master of the house, and
some of his Family might also communicate) did then represent the whole body of
the visible Church (as the same Author elsewhere confesses) and is nervously
approved by Protestant Divines against the Papists, who would justify the
substraction of the Cup from the Laity upon this very score, because the
Apostles to whom it was first given, were only Priests, And that a Christian
and a Disciple, are Synonimous, may appear by Act. 11.26. The Disciples were
called Christians. So Matthew. 28.19. Go teach all Nations baptizing them, etc.
(...) the word used, is as much as to make Disciples, and not only signifying
to teach; for else it were a Tautology in the 20th. verse following, where it
is added, teaching them, etc. therefore to convert any to the Faith of Christ,
Spanheim. dub. Evang. Tom. 8. p. 93.
though but externally, is to make him a Disciple, he that is baptized is a
Disciple; and in this notion we grant, that none but Disciples may partake the
Holy Supper, that is, none but Christians. And as soon as any were discipled,
that is, converted, they were without any stop to be baptized; and if Disciples
are to be taken in that latitude and equivocal notion, in order to the one
Sacrament, it shall be strange to think they ought to be construed in any
stricter or more limited sense, in reference to the other.

Secondly, Judas was one of those Disciples, one of those Twelve that sat
down, yet had not those graces, though necessary to constitute and qualify a
Disciple.

Thirdly, it appears by the first of the Cor. 11. that very many admitted there
to the Communion, had not these Qualifications essential to real Disciples.

Fourthly, if Disciples qua tales, and formally such, are to communicate, then
since quatenus ipsum includes de omni; all Disciples are susceptible of the
Communion; but that Infants are Disciples, has been sufficiently proved, both
formerly, and also of late by excellent Divines against the Anabaptists; yet we
do not think fit to imitate the ancient Church, and give the Eucharist to
Infants.

The three favorite and palmary Texts, which as most commonly, so with most
color, are produced in proof of this Discipline, are that of Revel. 2.2. Thou
have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not; and that of 1 Pet.
3.15. Be ready always to give an answer to every one that asks you a reason
of the hope that is in you; and 1 Cor. 5.11. If any man that is called a
Brother be a Fornicator, etc. with such a one, no not to eat, etc. whereof the
second seems to prove the necessity of a verbal examination (at least
passively) the third of a real; and the first, like Janus, looks both ways,
and toward the proof of either.

Concerning the first, it can conclude nothing to this purpose, unless by some
new Art trochilike, they could draw it to be consequent, that every trial must
be by examination of the persons, and that every one approaching to the Lords
Table is likely to be a false Apostle, and that false Apostles were only or
chiefly to be tried antecedently to the Communion; or that because Heretics,
such as Ehion and Cerinthus (which are thought to be here meant) and the
Nicholaitans, which are expressly mentioned, ought to be tried by their lives
and doctrine applied to the Rule of Gods Word (which is the sense of
Interpreters upon this place) that therefore every other person offering to
communicate, though never pretending to be Teachers; Paraeus. Piscator.
Aretius. Menochius. Tirinus, etc.
much less holding forth new Doctrines needful to be tried, must be
pre-examined before their admittance; no man but will discern the fallacy of
the consequent. Touching that of Peter, first the Answer here commanded to be
given, is not properly a profession of the Faith, but a defense thereof, or a
Confession under the Cross, as Aretius expounds it, (...), a Defense of
Christian Religion, consisting in Speech and Arguments, says Piscator;
Gagnaeus. Menochius, in locum.
and therefore (says he) it is added with fear, viz. of God, lest for favor
of men, or fear of persecution, dissembling the truth, you offend God: so the
Syriack is rendered by Tremellius, ad defensionem; so Justinian understands it;
and Estius interprets it to be an Answer to the Objections of the Adversaries,
which Oecumenius admonishes to have been after a sort necessary in the
Apostles age, when the Gentiles derided the Christian Religion, and reproached
Christians for worshipping a crucified God, undergoing such persecutions, and
denying themselves the present complacencies and endeerments of life, out of a
vain and empty hope of future uncertain things, not falling under the
comprehension of Sense. The Apostle therefore commands the faithful to have
answers prepared and premeditated, whereby they might refel the Objections of
the Gentiles, and assert their hope of eternal glory to be most rational, and
satisfy any that was desirous to learn the Reasons of such Hope: this is the
sum and exstract of the Commentaries of Calvin, Paraeus, Estius, and
Justinian, upon the place. The vulgar Translation reads, In locum.
ad satisfactionem, and the gloss expounds it to be satisfaction by words and
deeds, justifying their Faith, both by defensive Arguments, Constancy, and a
godly life, which is in effect the Exposition of Aquinas also, which seems
likewise to be understood by Diodate in his Annotations, viz. he will have
believers still ready to show unto all men, that they sincerely serve the only
true God.

Secondly, if this giving an answer were properly meant of a profession of
Faith, when there is hope of him that asks, when the glory of God is to be
asserted, or the name of Christ to be confessed, as Bullinger extends it: yet
what is all this to an answer upon examination antecedent to the Sacrament? How
is the necessity thereof more at that time than another, evinced out of this
Text? If it be answered, That if we must be ready to give answer at all times,
much more before the Communion; truly I think he shall deserve thanks, as for a
largess, or for a charientisme, that shall grant the consequence; but let it
however be conceded, yet much more at the Sacrament, and only at the Sacrament
are things disparate, and the necessity hereof is at no other time obtruded;
but neither however comes this home to our issue, as not proving that unless
men will be thus ready to give an Answer, they may not be admitted to the
Eucharist, nor the Sacrament at all be administered. They must be strange Scrues
and Wires that shall draw this conclusion from the Text; the Flock may be
faulty in neglect of their duty, yet this cannot blanch with an excuse the
omission of office in the Pastor, and that may be requisite necessitate
praecepti, which is not so medii.

Thirdly, but let it be by Supererogation yielded, that by this answer is meant
an account of Faith and previously to the Synaxis, ye^ why must every man be
restrained to the Pastor and Elders; when Dydimus thought that the Governors of
the Church were those principally concerned to be ready to give the answer, not
to receive it? why might not the Papists have as much color to prove auricular
Confession from that of St. James, cap. 5. v. 16. Confess your sins one to
another, as these men have to prove that every man must give an account of his
Faith to his Pastor and Elders out of this of Peter, Be ready to give an answer
to every one? But as our Divines reply upon the Papists, that by that text in
James, the Priests are as well bound to confess themselves to the people, as
they unto the Priests; so why may not I as well retort, that by this Scripture
in Peter, the Pastors and Elders are as well bound to submit to the examination
of any of the people, as any of them unto theirs? I shall therefore conclude
that I doubt they will never be ready to give an answer to any that asks a
reason of the hope that they have, that this Text should make for their purpose.

Now lastly to that of 1 Cor. 5.11. (which is indeed the darling and
Champion-Text of the separation) I shall answer, that not to eat here, cannot
be understood of eating at the Lords Table, for there is nothing in the Context
to lead to that interpretation, no like Phrase elsewhere in Scripture to
warrant it, no sufficient authority to back, nor other reason to evince it,
save that it will serve the turn, and their hypothesis to keep company, and to
eat cannot signify to have Fellowship and to eat together at the Sacrament.
The Apostle could not possibly be so mistaken as to be supposed to forbid them
not to Company and eat with the Fornicators of this World at the Lords Table
where they never came, nor need they have gone out of the World, if they had
not gone thither with them: wherefore this is generally understood of eating
common meat, not Sacramental; yet they that go this way are divided into two
paths, some take it as a consequent of Excommunication, with men so censured
not to eat; others understand it Symbolically, as it denotes familiar
consortship and intimacy, which they are forbidden to have with such Offenders;
but neither of these ways will it lead to their ends, nor conclude any thing
subservient to their purpose: for the Argument will be either Ignorantia
elenchi; and is not pertinent to our question, if the Text be to be understood
of an inordinate brother judicially excommunicated; or else Fallacia
consequentis, (and it follows not from eating together at common Tables to the
not eating together at the Table of the Lord) if the words are meant of
ordinary eating with an inordinate brother not yet juridically sentenced. St.
Augustine, Oecumenius, Aquinas, and diverse others, with some very ancient
Copies, set the word (Called) before Fornicator, not Brother, and reads thus,
If any Brother be called a Fornicator; the Greek will bear both readings; but
the Learned say, that when nominatus idem valet quod appellatus, the Greek word
commonly used is (...) or (...); but the word here is (...), Signanter
nominatus, or diffamed with the name, a man of name as it were, that he is
designed generally of all by that name, and has made that common name as it
were proper to himself.

Famosi more Scripturae nominati dicuntur, says Estius. (1.) St. 1. Homil. 50
and contra Parmenian. 2. In locum. 3. In locum.
Augustine therefore understands it such a naming, as befalls a man condemned
for such offense in a juridical way; so does (2.) Aquinas; and though (3.)
Estius (whom one calls the most rational, acute, and solid Doctor of the Roman
Church) think not that the word nominatus, includes all that Augustine
requires, yet the Apostle (says he) doubtless would have that done in a
judicial order, which he elsewhere prescribes, 2 These. 3.14. as well as here;
but if the crime be so notorious, that by no gainsaying it can be denied, (and
in the entry into this Discourse, we added this to the constitution of a
notorious sinner) as was the offense of the incestuous person; it seems not
(says he) That the sentence of the Judge is to be expected, in order to the
avoiding of the Offender; In 4. Sent. p. 1. d. 18.5.7. page 266.
yet the same man, Valentia, Biel, and Vasquez, produce this very Text, to
assert and prove the power of Excommunication, whereby according to the old
Verse; Os, Orare, Vale, Communio, Mensa negatur. And of such a Church-censure,
Calvin and Aretius understand the place also, In 3. disp. 7. p. 17. punct. 1.
page 1385. In l. 4. d. 18. q. 2. art. 2. De excom. dub. 7. n. 2. p. 517. In
locum.
whereof if this be the genuine sense, it shall be very impertinently alleged
in this question, which then should imply a contradiction, if it were thus
proposed; Whether persons lawfully excommunicate, or excluded from the
Sacrament, are to be admitted thereunto? But if it be to be understood of
persons criminal, yet not juridically censured by the Church, and that with
such we must not eat at common Tables, and thence it be concluded, therefore
much less at the Table of the Lord.

I shall deny the consequence, because the prohibition of ordinary converse
(which is symbolically, rather than Synecdochically here set forth by eating
with them; Obliterari fidem commercio infideli. Tertul.
for the Table was a Symbol of friendship among the Ancients, as Bullinger, and
a note of intimacy, as Paraeus reminds us) is grounded upon the danger of a
tacit and insensible sucking in, and contracting a Contagion from such vicious
company; Ne consuetudine, velut contagione, paribus inficiamur moribus, say
Interpreters, it being one of the most admirable things in the world, in the
judgment of the Philosopher, Aristippus.
To remain good in the society of evii men; but there is no such fear of
infection by communion with them at the Lords Table, where they so seldom
meet, remain so little while, and have no examples of vices, nor occasions nor
tentations to them; so as where the reason of the prohibition extends not, the
Law does not; and therefore Marlorat out of Mayer affirms, That this
prohibition pertains not to the Holy Supper, whence we ought not to withdraw
our selves, In locum.
because some flagitious persons, not by common consent of the Church
excommunicated, do partake thereof, as the Anabaptists (says he, showing the
source and fountain of these principles) falsty teach; and in express terms
St. Augustine tells us, Accipiamus usque cum iis corpus Christi, cum quibus
panem edere prohibemur; that is, Epist. 84.
let us take the body of Christ with them, with whom we are forbidden to eat
bread: besides, not to eat at ordinary refections, is arbitrary, I may choose my
Consorts; but to eat at the Lords Supper is a duty, I may not refrain it,
though I like not my company, and though I have no society with peccant men in
that which is formally or occasionally evil, yet I may have in good. I may
worship God together with them, but not dishonor him, I may not so desert evil
men, as to neglect my own good, nor any act of goodness; and it is not so much
a local and bodily secerning our selves from evil men that God requires (as the
Donatists falsely taught) but a spiritual separation in mind and affections, and
from their sins, more than from their persons. When any is hindered to
separate evil men from the Congregation of the Church (says Augustine) if he
put away the evil from himself, he is not commixt with them in his heart, De
verbis Domini, etc. Sermo 18. Tom. 10. p. 18, and 19.
and so spiritually he is not only conjoined to good men, but separated from
evil: Duobus modis non te maculat malus; (says that Father) si ei non
consentias, and si redarguas, hoc est non communicare, non consentire:
communicatur quippe quando facto ejus consortium voluntatis vel approbationis
adjungitur: -- displicuit tibi quod quisque peccavit? Non tetigisti immundum;
-- redarguisti, corripuisti, monuisti, adhibuisti etiam, si res exigit,
congruam and quae unitatem non violat, disciplinam? existi inde -- manens loco
exiit inde -- clamando exibat inde -- ut cord recedamus, ne majus malum in
separatione bonorum committamus, quam in malorum conjunctione fugiamus, sicut
ipsi Donatistae fecerunt. Objurgando autem est liber in conspectu dei, cui
neque sua peccata Deus imputat, quia non fecit, neque alia, quae non
approbavit, neque negligentiam, quia non tacuit, neque superbiam, quia in
unitate permansit.

Lastly, if this precept, Not to eat with those that walk inordinately, shall
be a standing precept in the strictness of the letter, how can they justify
their frequent practice to the contrary? But such is the preposterousness of
some men, that notwithstanding this Text, they will do what the words
immediately forbid, viz. To eat with them at common Tables, and yet by
pretended virtue thereof, they will not do what the Text prohibits not, viz. To
eat with them at the Table of the Lord.

DEFENSE.
SECT. XII.
1 Cor. 11.28. Reinforced and vindicated. Negative Arguments. Whether this be
such? Whether all revealed in Scripture be necessary? Christ's not examining his
Disciples. The sense of ancient and modern Interpreters, upon that of 1 Cor.
11.28. The testimony of Paraeus vindicated. Examination but an after-reckoning
to auricular Confession, and built upon the same foundations, the consequences
thereof alike to be feared.

WHat a learned man says of 1 Cor. 7.14. Baxter.
I doubt I may add of this Text 1 Cor. 11.28. against which men do wilfully
cavil as if they were sorry, that God speaks it so plainly; and I doubt not
impartial and judicious men will discern, that notwithstanding all their bustle
and rattling, the Apologists are but like that Goth in Procipius, who though he
fought fiercely, yet had the mortal Arrows sticking in his Helmet, whereof he
soon after fell. They say they concede the fullness and sufficiency of the
Scripture, but they forthwith interpretatively and by consequence retract that
grant, while they deride an Argument from the authority thereof negatively,
which necessarily has its foundation upon, and result from the sufficiency
thereof in genere regulae, as I have formerly showed.

But this sufficiency (they added) is in the whole, but all of any one matter
is not contained in any one place, what is wanting in one, is supplied in
another. The Scripture in the full latitude of a rule is no otherwise
sufficient than collectively, tota Scriptura, non omnis, as we answer the like
cavil which the Papists have to 2 Timothy 3.16. where (...), omnis is tota; but
yet distributively every part is sufficient to that whereunto it was intended,
and contains a full direction in that which it undertakes to teach; and
therefore the Apostle here edoctrinating the Corinthians that examination was
necessary to precede the Sacrament, if any other probation than every man's of
himself had been requisite, he should have enjoined that, or else he
sufficiently taught them not their whole duty; and I suppose it will not be
easy to instance wherein the proper seat (as I may speak) of any doctrine,
Eccles. pol. l. 2. S. 6. p. 67.
where it is professedly and designedly taught, that any necessary point
thereof is in that place omitted, and supplied in another. Of the thesis, or
matter in general, hear judicious Hooker, because the things that proceed from
God are perfect without any manner of defect or maim, it cannot be but the
words of his mouth are absolute, and lack nothing which they should have, for
performance of that thing whereunto they tend, whereupon it follows, that the
end being known whereunto he direceth his speech, the Argument negatively is
evermore strong, and forcible concerning those things that are apparently
requisite to the same end. And for the hypothesis, Epist. ad Bezam.
or this special subject in hand, let them hearken to Gualter, I^ta certe quae
infinitis exemplis tam veteris quam novi Testamenti probari poterant, nos
movent, ut privatum illud examen, quo quisque seipsum probet, secundum Pauli
praeceptum, sufficere putemus iis qui ad Domini mensam volunt accedere, nam si
quod prae^erquam voluisset fieri Apostolus, magna erat illud praecipiendi
occasio, cum ex Professo de legitimo coenae usu dissereret, apud eos qui
innumeris erroribus atque vitiu polluti, ipsam quoque horribili usu
prophanarant, sed vidit proculdubio quam periculosum sit aliorum conscientias
rimari velle, quando nihil facilius est quam severius in alios animadvertendo,
sanctitatis majoris existimationem venari, and saepe tentationum lineis
metiuntur per importunos illos Censores, qui consolatione potius sublevari, and
confirmari debebant, ideo in hac ipsa causa graviter monebat videndum esse ne a
Sathana occupemur, cujus machmationes nemo Christianus ignorant.

It has been the ill hap of all the Arguments hitherto alleged, to dash upon
that rock, ab authoritate Scripturae negative. It has been their ill hap to be
guilty of a palpable and gross mistake, for the Argument collected from the
admission of Judas was not such, nay this very Argument in hand is not such;
for though we say we find a precept, Let a man examine himself, none that he
should pass the examination of another; yet we do not argue, that because the
Apostle has only commanded the one, therefore the other falls not under
precept; but we thus reason, the Apostle requires a man to examine himself, and
permits him having done so, to receive the Sacrament, which is the natural
analysis, and genuine paraphrase of the Text; and if any other examination were
to intervene, then having examined himself, Answer to chall. Josuit. p. 8.
Senensis biblioth. l. 6. p. 527. For denying the necessity of Confession before
receiving of the Sacrament, Cajetan his Commentary on 3. q. 80 art. 4. is left
out of the Roman Edition. Sylvius in 3. q. 80. art. 4 p. 311.
yet (So) nevertheless he could not be permitted to eat and drink: and
thereupon, not only the glory of this Nation, and our Age, Bishop Usher, does
from hence extract this Porisma, That in the Apostles days when a man had
examined himself, he was admitted to the Lords Table; but the great Cardinal
Cajetan (though cross to the interest of his Church, and his fellows are angry
for it, especially his constant evil genius, Catharinus) was sensible of the
force of this consectary, and concludes, Dicendo (Sic) etc. by saying (and so)
he signifies that to a worthy receiving of the Eucharist it is sufficient that
a man have examined himself, and uses this as a medium to conclude against
necessity of confession, and is therein applauded by one of his party, viz.
Petrus, Soto.

Secondly, had they been all such Negative Arguments, I think they had not
dashed upon a rock, but been built upon it, being founded upon the perfection
of Scripture, as I have formerly asserted.

Thirdly, in the controverting of this question I am for the negative, and
Ponenti non inf^cianti, incumbit onus probandi, per rerum naturam, factum
negantis probatio nulla sit, says the Law; I had complied with my part, if I
had showed their model of Discipline had no foundation in Scripture, to show
there was no necessity thereof that was enough; for the Scripture denies what
it notes not, says Hilary, and we believe it not, because we read it not,
adds Hierom.

Fourthly, would I use such wanton and licentious Arguments, as the Apologists
do, setting the Scripture upon a rack, and violently forcing it to speak what
is not in it, not giving, but making the sense of Scripture, and so ex
Evangelio Christi facere Evangelium hominis; as Hierom, and Scripturarum verbis
pro esca uti, as Athanasius, we could not want superfluity of Arguments from
Scripture authority affirmative; perhaps we might bring forth some of theirs,
as apt for our purpose, as applicable to theirs, if not more, and might make
such Idol- Mercuries of most of the Trees in the Paradise of God; but God
forbid we should so take his Word in vain, and abuse both Scripture and our
Readers, as it is sadly evident to me, the Apologists have done, which we shall
hereafter manifest; and whereof, if they shall not take shame, we shall be
ashamed in stead of Cato.

That nothing can be necessary about the practice of the Sacrament, which is
not there expressed, they see no reason to yield; but they should have spoken
more rationally, if they had showed reason why they should deny; but though
they fall short of that, yet they go too far another way, when they talk of
no other thing necessary, which they should limit to no other probation.

They are sure there is elsewhere, which is not there, (that is certain, but
they should have said of this concernment) and all is necessary that is
revealed, redundancy being a blemish to the word as well as deficiency;
although I am not willing to fall into Parerga's, and to contract Pyrrhus his
fault, to be diverted by every petty occasion from the main; and shall not
therefore insist on, rectifying this sorry expression, yet I must touch upon
it. All that is revealed in Scripture is not necessary to be known, or
explicitly believed; as that Paul left a cloak at Troas, yet all that is known
and sufficiently declared, and particularly offered to consideration, is
necessary to be believed: for the necessity of believing results not from the
matter great or small, but the formal reason or object (and objectum formale
quod, est Deus in essendo, sub quo, Deus revelans, say the Schools) and this is
the same toward all the material objects, so as the smallest matters revealed,
and sufficiently propounded are to be believed necessitate praecepti, although
not medii; and though not revealed, because necessary; yet are necessary,
because revealed, and particularly declared, consequently and accidentally
necessary, as secondary objects of Faith, though not of themselves pertinent to
the object of Faith; Aquin. 22. q. 2. art. 3.
for Nihil per se pertinet ad objectum fidei, nisi per quod homo beatitudinem
consequitur; but without this particular declaring and propounding, all that is
revealed is not necessary to be believed, but in preparation of mind, and by
Faith implicit, tanquam particulare in universali, by a general virtual
negative Faith not to gainsay it; and therefore sure it was not so clearly and
accurately delivered that all that is revealed is necessary.

Besides, though the Scripture be more than sufficient, as Lirinensis, not
prescribing more things than are necessary to be believed or practiced;
Antonius Perez.
but in frequent repeatings, and deliveries of those things, more than had been
simply necessary; yet I will not say as a Papist does (which is the more
strange) that the Scripture is superfluous and redundant (much less that the
knowledge of most things in the same are unnecessary) quia instractionis varii
sunt gradus, ut alia sit plena, alia uberior and amplior, and disertius quaedam
explicata, as Chamier observes. Tom. 1. l. 8. c. 2. S. 3. p. 104.


But if they mean only that some other trial is elsewhere prescribed, besides
self-examination, though not here mentioned, and therefore necessary, because
by Divine Revelation commanded; as they do not bring it forth, nor point us
where we may find it, so I know they cannot find it, (for Scripture being
most perfect truth, cannot contradict it self; and if some other probation were
enjoined him that had examined himself, he could not (so) eat, which would
check with St. Paul's direction; and therefore if they have found such a
command, I doubt they read it with Gregory and Bede's Spectacles, wherewith
they saw things that had no existence, or else met with it in the Gospel of the
Hebrews, the Acts of Paul and Tecla, the Epistle to the Laodiceans, or the Acts
of St. John, according to Cerinthus.

Here the Apostle mentions no trial by others for two Reasons; First, because
the Corinthians to whom he speaks were newly admitted to Church Fellowship by
profession of their Faith, and needed not to be called to this again; but in
our Church true discipline has been neglected, and many are unfit: I have
formerly superseded this answer, and showed the impertinency thereof, and shall
not actum agere: only since they know that we cannot swallow what they offer
without chewing it, they should have brought some proof that the Corinthians
did make such a profession of their Faith, as they require in order to
admission to the Sacrament; for we find cause to doubt, that there was no such
discipline practiced in the first times, since when three thousand were
baptized in one day, and added to the Church, we cannot imagine it facible,
that every one of them should make such an explicit verbal profession as they
require, and there could not sure be such an Evidence of the ability of all
those Corinthians, that they should be all taken to be such Disciples, as they
say are not to be examined, but the profession of their Faith is sufficient.

But since the Corinthians were so ignorant (not convinced of the Resurrection)
and so criminous, as the Epistle charge them to be, if yet upon
self-examination the Apostle permits them to communicate, that liberty cannot
rationally be denied to those, who doubtless are not so culpable as they were.
The Precept, Let a man examine himself, is universal and catholic; and why
then should the permission to communicate upon self-examination be peculiar
only to those Corinthians at that time, and so to separate what God by St.
Paul has joined together? To restrain and limit Divine Rules to particular
times or persons, without cogent circumstances, sets open a desperate way to
evade the force of Arguments deduced from Scripture, and to betray or make
breaches in the Fortress of Faith: and though the Apologists to escape out of a
presont strait (...), to serve a turn, take that way, yet when they have
soberly re-minded themselves, they will find this path leads to a precipice;
and that hence some may take the advantage and encouragement to tell them, that
Excommunication was only a temporary discipline, in joined while the Church
wanted a secular Magistrate.

If some in our Churches may be suspected to be unfit, it may perchance be fit
to bring them under trial by examination; but why paucorum crimen should be
attended with paena in omnes, and the unfitness of some should introduce a
necessity of examining all, I am not acute enough to discern the consequence.

2. The Apostle here eyes Christ's performances with his Disciples, whom he
needed not to examine, being known to him. We are fully reconciled to this
assertion, that the Apostle reflected upon the actions of Christ as his
pattern, and delivered only what he had received of the Lord; but then it
seems that neither in what he received, nor what he delivered, is any the least
hint of any other, save self-examination: Cranmer Defense true and Cathol.
doct. of Sacram. p. 5.
And then the Morning Star of our English Reformation having explicated what
the Evangelists and St. Paul in this 1 Cor. 11. have left written of the
Institution, concludes, That things spoken and done by Christ, and written by
the Holy Evangelists, and St. Paul, ought to suffice the Faith of Christian
people, as touching the doctrine of the Lords Supper, and Holy Communion or
Sacrament of his body and blood; as Cyprian had long before assured us, that in
sacrificio quod Christus obtulit, non nisi Christus sequendus est; so that we
are safe enough, if we believe and practice so much as either in the
Evangelists describing Christ's Institution of the Sacrament, or St. Paul
repeating and explaining it, and directing to the right administration, and due
receiving thereof, we find to have been done or prescribed; and we may hope
sooner to find pardon for not advancing beyond what we have their example or
precept for, than they can to obtain excuse for seeking to lead us farther.

If the Apostles needed not to be examined, because known to Christ, then
without examination men's fitness may be manifested, and such as are known need
no farther trial; but if the Apologists would condescend to be as gently and
familiarly conversant with their people, as Christ was with his Disciples,
perhaps they might have as much knowledge of them also, or infuse so much
knowledge into them, as to prevent and fore-stall examination. Yet according to
their model, the Apostles howsoever ought to have made a public profession of
their Faith, though they were not obnoxious to examination. And if they tell us
in earnest, that for example sake those whose knowledge is elevated above
suspicion, yet ought to submit to examination, I hope they will yield there had
been far more reason for our Savior, whose practice was to be our pattern, and
whose example was to pass into a Law, to have examined his Disciples, though he
actively, or they passively, needed it not; yet because we needed it, as a
standing influential example, since that being the first administration in that
kind, was to be the rule and measure of all to follow. And surely it is not
easily imaginable, that where professedly the Institution is recorded by the
Evangelists, and repeated by the Apostle, with directions for the fit reception
of the Sacrament, that there being the proper seat of such Doctrine, there
should be no one word of previous trial, and that it should elsewhere hang
upon a long chain of consequences; and by several distillations be extracted
from such places of Scripture, where is no mention at all of the Sacrament, or
any preparation thereunto. The celebrious name of Zanchy is mentioned, not to
reflect light, but to raise a cloud, for they neither produce his words, nor
direct us, where we may take view of them.

If none of these Reasons were of weight (as they cannot but sense enough to
distrust, for sure they will not turn those very scales at Sedan, which
Capellus tells us would break with the four hundredth part of a grain) yet why
may not examination of Pastors and Church Officers, stand with that of a man's
self, these being not contrary, but subordinate, and the Precept being not
exclusive, Let a man examine, etc? They are so accustomed to ignoratio elenchi,
that it is passed into their nature; we do not say those two are so contrary
as to be incompatible; nor argue, that because one is enjoined, the other is
excluded: but we reason thus, that the liberty of communicating only upon
self-examination granted by St. Paul (so let him eat) cannot consist with the
necessity of passing first the trial of another before admission.

Small hopes of his self-examination, that cannot bear the friendly trial of
his Minister, (it seems now without the Elders:) This is like, as to say, there
is little hope he will prove a good or penitent Emperor, that with Henry the
fourth, will not wait three days barefoot in the acerbity of Winter-weather, at
Pope Hildebrands gate, to be restored to the Communion of the Church.

This self-examination is meant only of secret sins, and sincerity of
graces, which men cannot see, and that their examination is for the
satisfaction and honor of the Church, and is of that which may be known and
judged. However, they may confine or limit the examination here commanded; yet
no other besides this falls under the command, and their limitation is grounded
only on their voluntary assertion, which limits not our judgment; and this
self-examination is not primarily of sin, but faith, whereof knowledge is an
integral part, Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, 2 Cor. 13.5. In
1 Cor. 11. Hom. 28. Tom. 4. p. 112.
(by which Text Chrysostom explains this) and if they will not inquire
concerning secret sins, we forbid them not to judge of notorious, and of the
sincerity of grace, if a self-examination be sufficient, why require they a
probation of the sound work of grace upon men's hearts, before they admit them?
As for the satisfaction and honor of the Church, we have elsewhere taken them
under disquisition; it tends perhaps to swell them with honor and greatness,
(non magnitudo, sed tumor est;) but for the Church, it cannot be for the honor
thereof, to have so many for ignorance or sin incapable of the Sacrament, or
to lie under such a suspicion, as to need farther trial, before they are
admitted.

They ask, Whether a godly communicant be bound to no other duty then is
particularly expressed in this Scripture, and they hope prayer and other duties
may be regarded and practiced, being warranted elsewhere, though not here
mentioned. How they still claspe their favorite, Paralogisme!

For first, though it is one thing to say, no other duty is necessary but
self-examination; another, that no other examination is necessary, beside that
of a man's self.

Yet secondly, although self-examination have several parts, and diverse
adjuncts, (which we shall not frigidly say, may, but must, be regarded and
practiced,) yet all need only to be done in private with a man's self, without
others privity, Homil. 28. in 1 Cor. 11. Tom. 4. p. 112.
within thine own conscience, none being present but God, who sees all things,
Enter thou into judgment, (says Chrysostom,) the Apostle non publicum faciens
judicium and sine test argumentum, as he elsewhere has it.

Among those Concomitants, prayer (which is Sal omnium officiornm) is one, and
this is cultus natural^s, non institutus, and spreads it self, and is
ingredient or united to all duties, as Mercury is joined to all Metals, being
to them, as Parmenio was to Alexander, without whom he could do nothing; and
like Themistocles in the honor of the battle of Salamine, in all account the
Second, whoever be the first; but if they think that in the recital of the
institution, and rules for the celebration, and receiving of the Sacrament in
the Evangelists and St. Paul, there is no command, or example for prayer to be
used, more than for examination by others, they might easily have adverted,
that Christ ( cujus exemplum pro imperio est; and who is that Elen or lapis
funiculi mensorum, as the Chaldee reads that of Genesis 49.24. because his
example is to be the measure of our actions) did begin with blessing, (...), as
Matthew and Mark, and benedicere est been precari; as the Hebrew, Beracha,
Benedictio, is derived from barac, precatus est, and benedictio panis and
calicis est invocatio divinae beneficientiae super illa (as Jansenius) and the
sanctifying thereof to that spiritual end and use whereunto they were designed,
and with giving of thanks, In 1 Cor. 10.16. p. 306.
(...), as Luke and Paul; which also Matthew and Mark mention at the taking of
the Cup, (as indeed both blessing and giving of thanks are signified by the
same Syriac word, Non quod eadem, sed quod conjuncta, tanquam ejusdem orationis
parts seu membra quidem ex quorum utrolibet, Synecdochice totum possit
intelligi, nec non alterum ex altero, as Estius: And giving of thanks is a
subjective, if not integral, part of prayer; In Matthew. 26 Homil. 83. Tom. 2. p.
174.
and from thence the whole action is denominated the Eucharist; and Christ
(says Chrysostom) gave thanks, to instruct us how we should celebrate this
mystery.

They yield, some Fathers and others gave the same gloss of those words, as the
Paper does, not in that sense, which seems to smack of the Rhemists, who tell
us, Rhem. Testam. p. 433.
that every one must assure himself, that if any thing (in the Scripture) sound
to him as contrary to their (which they style the Catholic) doctrine, he
fails of the right sense: but if I had prompted or dictated to those Authors,
they could not have written more clearly to my sense, or more expressly for my
purpose.

They do not think men only prohibited to busy themselves about others,
neglecting of their own condition, or forbidden to rest upon other men's
opinions of them; (having learned the knack it seems, which the Belgic
Expurgatory Index prescribes, when any of the Fathers is opposed in
disputation, to excuse and extenuate it, and seign some convenient sense) as if
this were all which they collect from the Text. St. Augustine upon another
occasion tells us, that Curiosum genus hominum ad cognoscendam vitam alienam,
is always desidiosum ad corigendam suam: yet however, a curious busying of
themselves about others, whether they neglect their own condition or no, is
culpable; and the reproof thereof may perchance hit with them, for curiosity is
one ingredient, though I fear ambition be the basis in this composition, and a
considence of themselves ill grounded on others flatteries, is no more peccant,
than a distrust and suspicion of others, resulting from their own malignant or
arrogant censoriousness, but the Authors cited do in terms tell us, that St.
Paul (whom we must recognize to give precepts concerning right and holy
communicating) commands only self-examination, injoyns no one to examine
another, no not the Priest or Minister, but prescribes the sciutiny to be
private and without witnesses, not public. And whereas they tell us, that
Chrysostom speaks only of private examination, which should be secret, but
that which is for information and satisfaction of the Church, should be with
witnesses: Sure they found this in the gloss of Orleance, which corrupts the
Text; for Chrysostom says, that no other but examination without witnesses is
prescribed; and then for them to infer that another examination must
nevertheless be with Witnesses, is such another interpretation of Chrysostom,
as the Pontificians give of Pope Telesephorus instituting Quinquagesima for the
Clergy, whom they make by the word Statuimus, to mean Abrogamus.

If Clemens counted every man's conscience his best Director, they hope he meant
it not of men void of true conscience, as all are, whom they willingly keep
off. Resp. Clemens doubtless speaking so generally and indefinitely, thought he
was obliged in humility to judge no man's conscience, and in chairty to judge
every man conscientious, who by notorious sins had not forfeited that
reputation; and to say they repel none but such as are void of true
conscience, let them examine their own consciences, how this stands with truth,
or consists with what elsewhere they say [That they do not judge all those to
be wicked whom they admit not] unless perhaps they can think to salve
themselves by saying, They unwillingly keep ost those that are such; but since
we see they admit them not, we cannot believe they do that unwillingly, which
we know no necessity incumbent on them to do, and find to be done toward so
many, so commonly, and so constantly. We could stick more flowers on the
garland of authority, wherewith the Paper sought to crown the sense which it
rendered of this place.

To omit the Ancients, Durant deritib. Eccles. l. 2. c. 55. S. 10. Chem. exam.
council. Trid. part. 2. p. 140. Hist. Sacram. l. 4. p. 366. Answer to Jesuits,
p. 99. Epist. ad Petrum Dathenum advers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 229, 232.
Epist. ad Bezam. Gualt. Epist. ad comitem Wityenstein.
among whom Athanasius comments on the words, I would propound no man for thy
Judge but thy self; and Theodoret, Be thou thine own Arbiter; and Theophylact,
I give thee no other Judge, I commend thy self to thee. Chemnicius affirms,
Ex interpretatione Pauli habemus illam dispensationem panis and poculi ex
praecepto Domini debere fieri, omni homini probanti se, item omnibus qui
invocant nomen Domini. Hospinian more punctually, Probet seipsum quisque, non
igitur sacerdotibus, aut aliis, hoc munus demandat, sed sibi quemque vult esse
probatorem. And as expressly B. Usher, who recounting the suppressing of
Confession, in Nectarius his time; and thereupon the giving liberty to every
one upon the private examination of his own conscience, to resort to the holy
Communion, he adds, which was agreeable both to the Rule of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 11.28. and to the judgment of the more ancient Fathers; and as fully
Bullinger, Ut quilibet juxta Canonem Apostolicum suae relictus conscientiae; ad
caenam accederet, dicente Apostolo, probet autem homo seipsum; and elsewhere
expressly says, non debet ab alio probari; and again, Probationem, Ministri aut
Ecclesiae judicio non relinquimus, ut tum demum aliquis ad coenam Domini
accedat, cum Minister vel Ecclesia ipsum satis dignum, fidelem and sanctum
judicaverit. And he cites Zuinglius, advising Oecolampadius, Ne nimis rigide
ageret, and mysticam coenam plerisque redderet ingratam, adeoque difficilem and
morosam. And Gualter is no less full in the consort, Nec ego videre possum cur
conscientiarum carnificina ex eo fieri debet, quod ut fidei confirmandae and
recreandis af flictorum conscientiis, a domino est institutum; and in another
place, Non absque causa quaeritur, an caena Domini, quae ut communionis and
societatis christianae Symbolum sit, utique fidei confirmandae serviat, a
Christo instituta est, in usum plane diversum, adeoque Christi instituto
contrariun converti debeat, ut interim dissociationis and exclusionis organum,
and conscientiarum carnificina fiat, deinde annon cum Pauli regula hoc pugnet,
qui ut quisque seipsum probet, non ut aliorum conscientias curiosius scrutemur,
jussit? Apparet (says Musculus) necessariam and utile esse eorum s^udium qui
neminem adcoenam Domini admittunt quem ipsi autea non probaverint, si modus and
discretio adhibeatur, nec velut universali lege indiscriminatim omnes etiam qui
inculpate se gerunt in Ecclesia ad hujusmodi examen constringantur, verum juxta
timendum est, In 1 Cor. 11.28. p. 438, 439.
ne institutum hoc, quam nunc magni aestimatur, tam olim in priscam servitutem
ecclesiam Christi reducat, et noxium reddatur, sane Apostolica institutio nihil
hujus requirit, sed hortatur unumquemque ut seipsum probet -- sed quid si
Minister Ecclesiae hac Apostoli sententia nolit esse contentus, nec admittat
nisi eos quos ipse explorat, item quid si fidelis ad panis tantum and non etiam
poculi dominici communicationem admittatur, sicut in papatu fieri videmus?
Respondeo, ubi nec domini ea institutio nec apostolica do^trina servatur, ibi
non est ut communicaret fidelis, sinat magistratus illos regnare in Ecclesia,
donec visum fuerit domino modum imponere illorum dominio. This voice is Bath
col, which comes with thunder, yet is that Fulmen, which Seneca calls
Monitorium.

But however they may despise or avert their ears from the voice of others, yet
Paraeus has such honor, that they are content to hearken to him, the words
cited out of him in the Paper they acknowledge to be his, non dicit Apostolus,
sacerdotes probent, etc. But they say Paraeus speaks this:

1. Of Popish Priests.

2. Of Auricular Confession.

3. In the following words he is theirs, Examina publica vel privata
communicantium minime improbamus, sed requirimus.

To the first, though the Libertines boast, that what is sin in others, is
not in them; and the Popish Canonists tell us, that though it may be a wanton
and impudicous act in another to kiss a woman, yet a Priest doing it, it is to
be presumed he does it only to bless her; yet we think it abominable to have
such diverse Weights, and diverse Measures; and therefore cannot denominate good
and evil with respect of persons, nor conceive that what is not just or
warrantable in Popish Priests, should yet be so in the Apologists; and if a man
after self-examination may so communicate without further probation by a Popish
Priest, we have not light enough (unless they reflect it) to see, why he may
not do so too without more trial by any other Minister.

To the second, If he that has examined himself may so receive, that (So) is
exclusive of any farther examination, as well as of confession; and though
Paraeus allege and apply the Argument, to refute the necessity of confession,
which he pertinently says, ad hanc probationem olim instituta fuit, and his
conclusion is specially against that; yet the medium is general and extensive,
and applyable to all of the like kind (universaliter applicandum, quod
particulariter dictum.) And by the analogy and proportion of reason, it may as
effectually be urged, and accommodated to frustrate the necessity of their
pre-examination, since all the particulars are involved in, and may be
collected out of the general; and out of one principle may several conclusions
be extracted and applied to diverse subjects. And whatsoever plausible reasons,
or specious pretenses, they can muster, to elude the force and energy of this
Argument; and notwithstanding the liberty granted by the Apostle, to maintain
their probation as necessary, the same or the like, do and may the Papists
muster, to support the necessity of confession.

To the third, Paraeus indeed owns the words they cite, and the Paper runs not
discord with them, which disallows not, but supposes pre-examination may be
requisite, as an act of prudence, ad hic and nunc, in order to particular
persons who may rationally be suspected to be of incompetent knowledge, but not
as an universal and unlimited Empire over all, with power to make re-search of
their lives, and the signs of saving grace in them, as well as disquisition of
their knowledge and intellectual gifts. Paraeus has no spice that relisheth of
this, and if his sense were not, as we have interpreted, we must dosiderare
Paraeum in Paraeo, and the weapon he has sharpened against the Papists, would
be turned upon himself; for if he think it required of the Minister, to make
probation of all, how can it hold coherence with that which he says, Estque
doctrina generalis de legitima and salutari usu Sacramenti, probatio sui
praecedat, postea veniatur ad sacrum hoc epulum -- non dicit Apostolus,
sacerdotes probent, explorent communicantes, sed quisque probet seipsum. And
though he approve of some kind of examination, yet he would have it such, from
which absit tyrannis and superstitio, and ducantur afflictae conscientiae ad
Christi corpus and sanguinem; And though we shall suspend to asperse tyranny or
superstition on their way, yet we are convinced, to say it is out of the way of
drawing men to the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and rather drives them
from it. And though examination may in some respects and circumstances be
requisite, yet Paraeus warrants not that it is so necessary, necessitate medii
aut praecepti, as if it be not practiced, or cannot conveniently be effected,
that either the Ordinance may be suspended from administration, or any from
partaking.

They think it hinted that their probation has risen out of the ashes of
auricular confession; and we cannot dissemble, that we conceive those ashes to
have improved their grounds, and that out of those ashes they have made glass
for this Prospective, for that they have built upon the same foundation, and
propt their Fabric with the same but tresses, we have evidenced out of
Valentia, (whereof they have, I suppose, more out of cautness, than contempt or
negligence, taken no notice) and in like manner, as Bellarmine, Lorinus, and
others, argue from Levit. 13.5. for proof of confession, so do they also
dispute for their examination, and I might add, that as they conclude because
persons ignorant are to be excluded, therefore they must examine all, or else
they cannot make judgment of their knowledge; so both Bellarmiue and Vasquez,
pleading for the necessity of confession, Bell. de paenit l. 3. c. 2. p. 231
Vasquez in 3. q. 90. art. 1. dub. 2. p. 184.
say, the Priest is to judge who ought to have absolution (without which none
can have admission to the Sacrament) but neque sacerdotes judicare possunt,
nisi peccata cogno cant, and incognita causa, non potest fieri judicium.

But though confession and examination are pitched upon the same ground, and
perchance have the same prospect, and after look the same way, (v.z.) toward
power and greatness, yet we never said they were in all things of the same
model and form of building; and therefore they might have superseded their
Parergon, and spared supervacaneously to show us the differences between their
probation and Popish Confession, though Amasis his famous Basin and Idol, were
formed of the same metal, it does not follow that they must have been of the
same figure. As the Arguments rallied for their probation, are to my sense (and
I hope to make it evident to others) as loose and wanton, as those the Papists
arrang for Confessions, and some of them are the same (as that of making
judgment of, and shutting up the Leper) and theirs of Jehoshapha's Porters,
weighs just as much as that of the Papists, concerning God's asking Cain where
his brother was; so auricular Confession has as specious prerences of
Reformation, and Godliness to usher and attend it, as they can palliate their
examination with, (which is oftentimes, if not always, auricular too, and acted
by themselves alone in private) as besides the disposing for the Sacrament,
that it must needs give a bridle to sin, and a stirrup to holiness and
perfection, when a man takes so frequent a survey of his actions and passions,
censuring them with grief, confessing with shame, curing by counsel, and
expiating with punishment, and redeeming with resolution to offend no more.

Confession was first only public recognition for public scandals, and then
enlarged and extended to private sins, but voluntarily undertaken, not imposed,
of Consilium Ecclesiasticum, it becaine at length Praeceptum Ecclesiae, then
enjoined for all sins quoad substantiam, at length quoad circumstantias, and
confession, as Luther calls it, degenerated into carnificinam cruentissimam
conscientiarum; and this was that prisca servitus whereunto Musculus feared
this examination was like to reduce us. The Keys at length got new Wards, and
instead of opening Consciences were used to unlock Cabinets and Kingdoms, and
they that carried them, hereby became Masters of the house, and kept all men
under their girdle by the keys that hung at it.

The Presbyterians profess they examine none but children; but some of ours of
that notion, spread and dilated their examination to all, though adult in
knowledge, as well as years.

The Independents enlarge and extend this trial to their lives and gracious
conversation, not only to exclude them for the scandal of notorious sins,
Bayley Disswas. c. 7.
but not to admit them without approved signs of Holiness, and to reject them
not only ob evidentiam juris aut facti, but upon suspicion.

And lastly, that which was at first only commended, as adjumental to
Godliness, is now become, as it were, the form thereof, giving the name and
essence thereunto; for let a man walk harmless and blameless without rebuke,
yet if he walk not with them in this way, he is but a morral man only, and
has not yet commenced religious, as if it might be said of this discipline, as
St. Augustine speaks of discretion, toll hanc and virtus vitium erit, and an
inconformity thereunto, were like the slaying of Callisthenes to Alexander, a
blasting of all graces, or an alloy to all endowments.

But nevertheless this new Light makes all to shine that walk in it, like the
bright light of the Sun, which gilds all his spots, and makes them invisible,
which some by their Prospectives discern in the body thereof. What farther rise
it may have, or progression make, we cannot certainly foretell, but may
solicitously fear, since men of these principles are like the Crocodile, which
never cease growing, while he lives; so do they still increase in new
singularities and humors, and pretended discoveries; yet I hope they will also
be as sagacious as the Crocodiles of Nilus, who never hatch any thing, but they
lay it without danger of being hurt by the rising flood: yet in the interim, an
ordinary judgment may easily discover, that a Fortress founded in the
Conscience, and raised on the advantage ground to command our reputation may
keep all the parts adjacent in subjection, and bring them under contribution.

And seeing Priam at this age was not unhappy, and confession it self in so
short time had neither so enlarged her phylacteries, or out-grown her girdles
(which was punished with death among the Gauls) as this probation has done,
therefore we fear the Year, when the Spring is so nipping; and it is more like
to be a sharp Thorn, that pricks so soon. And since we see that not only by an
extraordinary power, as in the time of Elias, but (as Fromundus tells us) by
natural course, a small Cloud may soon over-cast our Heaven, and of a small
Seed (as Mustard) a Tree may spring up, wherein the losty and high soaring
Birds may build their Nests. We may be excused, if we cannot make light of this
cloud, with a nubecula est, cito transibit, as Athanasius of Julian; and if
with the Ant, we bite the seeds, that they grow not. However they may seriously
and plausibly talk to us here of reformation, and satisfaction and honor of
the Church, and elsewhere of the smallness of the thing required; yet -- Timeo
Danaos and dona ferentes. Or (perhaps rather) petentes. We remember what the
shepherd in Aesop said, who beholding the smoothness and tranquillity of the
Seas after a former Tempest, which enforced him to cast all his Dates
overboard, which he had sold his Flock to buy, and adventure in the way of
Merchandise, Palmarum fructus concupiscit opinor, ac tranquilitatem propterea
praese fert, and we cannot be so simple, as they say the African Dabath is, who
is so charmed with Music sweetly sounding in his Ears, that he the whiles
suffers his feet to be fettered.

DIATRIBE. SECT. IV.
No pre-examination in the ancient Church, save of Catechumeni. Sending the
Eucharist to Persons absent, and Strangers. The institution and abolishment of
Confession. Liberty to approach the Lords Table, upon self-examination. Whom
the ancient Church excluded from the Eucharist. The judgment of the Fathers,
Casuists and Schoolmen, concerning those that are to be admitted, and to be
debarred. To partake, was anciently commanded as a common Duty. The omission
reprehended; the common right asserted.

HAving now heard the Nightingale her self to sing, perchance all will not be
of Agesilaus his humor, and refuse to hear any that imitate her voice, having
therefore examined the Authorities of Scripture, let us survay the judgment of
the Fathers, and practice of the Primitive Church, which cannot but elucidate
and confirm our sense and interpretation of Scripture; for as Plato said,
Majores nostri propiores fuere progeniei deorum; so the ancient Church stood
nearer the light, being nearer the Sun of truth, and his twelve signs, which
signified and showed forth his Gospel, and through which he moved round about
the world.

In these Primitive Times, I find that mutual reconciliations, and in the
African Churches, Vigils or watchings in Prayers, and in Chrysostom's time,
Fastings, and sometimes, and in some places the public renouncing of some
particular Heresies, were antecedent to the Synaxis; but I meet with no Records
of any command or example of previous probations as necessary, save for
Catechumen's.

The Eucharist was then often sent to persons absent, Justin. M. Eusebius. ex
Iraeneo, centur. Magdeb. cent. 2. p. 85.
it was given to strangers coming to Rome, as a pledge or Symbol of their
Communion and consent in the same Faith, where was no probability, or surely no
evidence, of precedent probation. When the Church that saw the benefit of
public Confessions for public Offenses, redounded as well to the subduing of
the stubborness of their hard hearts, and the improving of their deeper
humiliation, as to their raising up again by those sensible comforts, which
they received by the public prayers of the Church and use of the keys; some
men reflecting hereupon, and finding their own Consciences smarting for like
offenses, which being secretly carried, were not obnoxious to the censures of
the Church; to the end, they might obtain the like consolation and quiet of
mind, did voluntarily submit themselves to the Churches discipline herein, and
underwent the burden of public confession and penance. And to the end this
publication of secret offenses might be performed in the best way and
discreetest manner, some prudent Minister was first acquainted therewith, by
whose direction the Delinquent might understand what sins were fit to be
brought to the public notice of the Church, and in what manner the penance
was to be performed by them. At first it was left free to the penitent, to
choose his Ghostly Father; but at length, by general consent of the Bishops, it
was ordained, that in every Church one discreet Minister should be appointed to
receive Confessions, until at length in the time of Nectarius, Bishop of
Constantinople, (who dyed, A.D. 401.) upon occasion of the infamy drawn upon
the Clergy by the confession of a Gentlewoman, Socrates. hist. l. 5. c. 19. p.
349.
defiled by a Deacon in that City, it was thought fit it should be abolished,
and liberty should be given to every man upon the private examination of his
own conscience, to resort to the Holy Communion, which doubtless occasioned
Chrysostom (the Successor of Nectarius) to make those deliveries of himself
which have been formerly mentioned. The result of those premises is this, That
the ancient Church sometime thought it requisite, that confession of sins
should precede the Communion (which at length also was laid aside) but without
any other examination, verbal or real, of all Communicants. But seeing Faith
and Repentance are as necessary, as knowledge, to worthy receiving, and as
principal a part of that, whereof every one ought to make examination of
himself, or others are to make of him, I wish it might be advisedly perpended,
whether there be not as great reason, to have auricular confession in some
rectified and qualified manner, and to impose it as necessary, in order to the
communion, as to introduce their particular examination, as a duty so
necessary, especially since the Lutherans assert and practice it upon
Homogeneal or like principles, as preparatory and antecedent to the Sacrament
contra (...) nonnullorum Calvinianorum, Baldwin. cas. consci. l. 4. c. 10. c.
2. l. c. 12. c. 18.
as they speak, although they do it not, for the manner, with obligation to
the particular enumeration of all sins, nor for the matter, with any absolute
necessity of doing it; and therefore Luther used to say, that he sometime
communicated without confession, to show it was not necessary, and other times
confessed himself for the comfort of absolution: and the Church of Rome also
bottoms her rigid practice ( carnificinam animarum, as their own Cassander
calls it) upon the same grounds, that these men do their probation, because
(say they) It is the duty of the Priest to repel the unworthy, and admit the
worthy, which is best done upon the Penitents estate manifested in confession;
Valentia Tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 8. punct. 3. p. 931.
and Time, the Mother of Truth, may discover, whether these principles be not
some previous dispositions to the generation of such a practice of confession,
and that as necessary.

In the ancient Church were excluded from the Communion the Catechumeni,
energumeni, persons excommunicate, and Penitents, and such as lapsed into
Heresy, until they repented; and that any other, save under these notions and
capacities, were shut out and debarred, the Monuments thereof in Ecclesiastic
History have not fallen within my angust Horizon: Homil. 3. ad Ephesians. c. 1.
Tom. 4. p. 356. Hom. 50. Tom. 10. p. 115. de medicina poenitentiae super illum.
1 Cor. 5. si qui frater nominatur. Tom. 9. c. 3. p. 210. ad 4. senten.
distinct. 9. in 3. Aquin. q. 50. art. 6. Duran. Biel, Estius, Cajetan,
Valentia, Suarez, Vasquez, Nugnut Sylvius, etc. Biel in 4. distinct. 9. q. 2.
Lessius de justit. and jure. l. 2. c. 16. dub. 4. S. 55. p. 158. Baldwin. l. 4.
c. 9. cas. 1. Ursin. Catechis. part. 2. q. 81. p. 578.
He that partakes not is a Penitent (says Chrysostom.) We can (says
Augustine) repel no man from the Communion, although this prohibition be not
yet mortal, but medicinal; but one that by his own conscience, or the sentence
of the Ecclesiastical or civil Judicatory, shall be accused and convicted of
some crime. And in another place which Gratian cites under the name of Hilary,
but it is St. Augustines in his 118. Epistle, Si peccata tanta non sint, ut
excommunicandus quisquam homo judicetur, non se debet a quotidiana medicina
Dominici corporis separare. And the School (if it have any regard left it) does
generally hold; (as also do the Casuists, Baldwin, Navar, Lessius, Filiacius,
etc.) (and besides diverse reasons, they cite the authority of St. Augustine to
fortify their opinion) That the Communion is not to be denied to a secret
sinner, that is not notorious, if he openly desire it, lest he be thereby
diffamed, and lest the minister be, as says Biel, Proditor criminis, inferens
poenam ante criminis probationem, and poenam publicam, ob peccatum occultum;
and he is not a Casuist minorum gentium amongst his Partisans, who tells us,
that aliquis in peccato occulto, licet jus petendi Eucharistiam non habet, and
petendo peccat, tamen habet jus ne a parocho infametur; neither is it enough
that the Minister know the offense, Per scientiam privatam, nisi etiam per
publicam and notoriam, much less si rumor aliquam de iis su spicionem moverit,
nam si nondum sit aperte reus, nec satis convictus, aut confessus, admittendus
est, ne tam pretioso animi sui thesauro per nos defraudetur, says a reformed
Casuist; and though (as Lessius would have it) it were indeed sinful in these
to demand the Commun on, yet notwithstanding it may not be righteous for the
Minister to deny it them: for they are two questions in the judgment of a grave
Divine, Qui debeant accedere, Et qui debeant admitti, ad coenam; prior est
angustior, posterior latior and generalior, quia tantum pii debent accedere,
sed non tantum pii, verum etiam hypocritae, nondum patefacti, sunt ab Ecclesia
admittendi.

In those first times they generally communicated daily, which St. Augustine
says, he neither approves nor reprehends; afterward twice or thrice a week; at
length constantly on the Lords day, as appears by Justins Apology, and others
of the Ancients; but the fervor of devotion rebating, it was ordained, that
generally every one, pubertatem excessus (which was about the 15. or 16. year)
should communicate thrice a year: thus decreed Fabianus, Bishop of Rome, as
also did the Agathon Council. This Decree is found under the name of the
Apostles Canons, being the tenth in common account, and the ninth in Zonaras,
(which, though I am not ignorant, are not rightly fathered upon them, yet are
ancient and not contemptible:) As many of the faithful as come into the Church
and hear the Scripture, and continue not out the prayers, nor receive the Holy
Communion, let them be put from the Communion, as men that work the breach of
order: and it is noted in the Margin upon the same Canons, in old times all
that were present did communicate; and consonantly the Council of Antioch
decreed, That all that come into the Church of God, and hear the holy
Scriptures, and (...) (which Zonaras interprets, upon pretext of reverence and
humility; Chamier, the violation of religious order) refuse the receiving of
the Lords Sacrament, let them be put from the Church; and to like effect,
determines the Bracharen Council; Quid causae est, De verbis Domini secundum
Johan. Sermon. 2.
says St. Augustine, o Audientes, ut mensam videatis, and ad epulas non
accedatis? In vain (says Chrysostom) we stand at the Altar, when none will
participate, etc. If thou stand by, and do not communicate, thou art wicked,
thou art shameless, thou art impudent -- I would not only have you to
participate, but to be worthy partakers; thou will say, I am unworthy to
partake of the holy mysteries; then art thou unworthy to be partaker of the
prayers: not only by those things set before us, Homil. 3. ad Ephesians. c. 1.
Tom. 4. p. 356.
but by Hymns also does the Holy Ghost descend; you that are under penance
depart, etc. He that partaketh not is a Penitent; Why therefore (says he)
depart ye that cannot pray, etc?

Neither only was the participation of the Eucharist enjoined as a common
duty, and the omission thereof complained of; but the common right thereof
asserted by the Ancients, That which is the Lords, they make proper to
themselves, In 1 Cor. 11. Homil. 27. Tom. 4. p. 110. In 1. ad Cor. c. 11. Tom.
8. p. 494.
says Chrysostom, those things which are the Lords, are not this servants,
and not that servants, but common to all; he permits it not to be the Lords,
that permits it not to be common to all: It is not the Lords, says Hierom, but
man's, when every one invades it, as his proper Supper; for the Lords Supper
ought to be common to all, since he himself equally delivered the Sacrament to
all his Disciples that were present: To the same tune Oecumenius sings in
consort with him, Because, says Haymo, it is one bread, it must be common to
all, simul hoc sumimus, simul bibimus, quia simul vivimus, says St. Augustine
in Gratian.

It is true, that Chrysostom, who so eagerly and passionately urges all to
come, does as earnestly and pathetically charge Ministers, not to admit known
Ostenders to the Communion, In Matthew. 26. Homil. 83. Tom. 2. p. 176.
(and some vehement expressions of his to this purpose are our Antagonists
chief gleanings from Antiquity) But if one be ignorant that he is an evil
person, after he has used much diligence therein, he is not to be blamed,
says the same Father, for these things are spoken by me, of such as are known:
but this is not our question for persons known to be flagitious and wicked, we
have formerly proscribed and excepted out of our Apology.

In the close of all this, let it now be considered, whether there can be any
conformity between the ancient Church, and these men, that are resultatively
and interpretatively as busy and as earnest to exclude men from the Sacrament,
as the Ancients were to bring them to it, and if now men stand by, and would,
but shall not be suffered to communicate, where and upon whom then shall we lay
Chrysostomes Stygma, or where will it fall; and how may it be avoided of
wicked, shameless, impudent? If the Pastor shall say of his Flock (as it seems
some of his Auditors did of themselves) they are unworthy, Chrysostom will
give the Pastor the same answer which he did his own Flock, they are then
unworthy to be partakers of the Prayers; and the Council of Antioch adds,
Unworthy to hear the Holy Scriptures, if they are not under penance, they are
not in that Fathers judgment, worthy to be repelled.

DEFENSE.
SECT. XIII.
The Honor and Interest of the Ministry. Confession of sins as necessary as
Examination. Whether their Principles have any affinity with the Roman, or may
be subservient and manuductive to Popery. The ancient Discipline most like to
advance Reformation. What were the Catechumeni, Energumeni Penitents. The
several Degrees of the latter. The Church Way of the Apologists has no
conformity with the ancient Church. How the Heathens proscribed profane
Persons from their Holies. Whether the Ancients went too far in Censures? A
Testimony of Abbaspinus, falsified by them, cleared. Another of Chrysostomes
vindicated.

FOr the congregating of Homogeneals, we have formerly in another place taken
under examination the beginning of this Section, and in hypothesi have made
libration, what weight the judgment and practice of the ancient Church does
bear; here in thesi we shall perpend on which side that weight lies, theirs or
ours, and how the Beam inclines.

They are irritated that in relating the History of Nectarius his putting down
of Confession, we have mentioned the defilement of the Gentlewoman by the
Deacon, What else, say they, serves that Story of uncleanness for, but to cast
an odium on the Ministers? My reverent and affectionate respects to Ministry
are as well known, as I am: As Virgil, when Filistus calumniated him, said, He
would be silent, because Augustus and Mecaenas would answer for him; so I may
spare to vindicate my self in this, because so many Ministers of my
acquaintance will do it for me. And if I should appeal from Philip asleep, to
Philip awake, I presume the Apologists themselves will acquit me of any odium
toward Ministry; I wish some of them were not more culpable for inodiating
Ministers, and censorious vilifying their persons and pains, that themselves
may attract more esteem and dependencies, who (like the men of China) though
they may think the Presbyterians to have one eye (as the Chinois say of the
Europeans,) yet they conclude all the World beside to be blind. For my part, I
desire to receive a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, and not of a concurrent
in this or that way, Tros Tyriuesv, and love and honor the Minister, as Cyrus
did the King; they only do (as Hephestion did Alexander,) as he is a friend
to their ways; yet as much as I honor them, yet I cannot do to some of them,
as the Peguans did to their Pagodes, pull out their eyes, and give them up in
sacrifice; or as other Indians to their vast Giantlike Idols, who when they are
carried in triumphal Chariots, cast themselves under the Wheels, and are
content to be crushed and broken to pieces. And I shall farther be led by my
plainness to confess, rather than by any cautele or politic closeness ^o
dissemble, that I have this principle, that they should have much reverence,
large maintenance, but no great power; for as most Nations have been still set
on fire by the Coals of the Altar; so when the flame there rises too high, it
reflects the less light, but occasions no little combustion; and it is out of
love to them also, that I entertain this persuasion, since Amare, est velle
honum alicui, and it is for their good to be moderated and contracted in their
power, least as some herbs growing too rank, they become degenerous and
evirtuate; and not only like Cypress trees be fair and tall, but fruitless,
but also run more hazard to be shaken for their height, and to be maligned
for their over-dropping. And let me humbly, and without offense, beseech them,
without passion or prejudice, to consider and set upon their hearts, whether
according to that righteous sentence, He that exalts himself shall be abased,
by a just hand shaking a Rod, (which God forbid should be ever laid upon them,
and through them upon this poor Church, which cannot stand without them,)
whether the grasping of too much power, has not of late put them in danger of
holding none, and their straining to reach too high, hazarded the setting of
them out of joint. Whether their debarring so many of their right, may not have
occasioned so great intrusion into their peculiars, and their casting off so
many from the Sacrament, have not brought into question their casting out of
the Land, Judicia Dei multa occulta, nulla injusta.

And as for what they here charge upon me, he that knows my heart does know,
there was no such thought therein; I inserted that of the Gentlewoman as a
constitutive and commonly known part of the Story, requisite to manifest the
occasion and reason of the fact of Nectarius; but he that did not know the
Apologists, might be apt to suspect that they had the same cause of anger
against me, that Bessus had to the Sparrows, as if they accused him for what he
was secretly guilty of: And not only say out of Tacitus, Reperies qui ob
similitudinem morum aliena malefacta sibi objectari putant; but take up what
Salvian has said, Nec ego de nilo dico, nisi de eo tantum qui in se quod dico
esse agnoscit, si enim extra conscientiam suam sunt quaecunque dico, nequicquam
ad injuriam ejus spectant cuncta quaedico, si autem in se esse novit quae
loquor, non a mea sibi hoc lingua dici aestimet, sed a conscientia sua; but I
not only hope, but am assured of better things of them; and however they are
faulty so to suspect my meaning, I am not culpable to insinuate any such
suspicion; but perhaps they would in this also be like the Donatists, those
among them called Circumcellions, of whom St. Augustine tells us, Cogunt eos
quos in viis invenerint, laethalia iis vulnera infer; so they will enforce me
to would them whether I will or no, and though I have as little cause, as will,
to do it in this particular.

They acknowledge repentance to be as necessary a disposition and qualification
to receiving, acknowledge; and a part of examination to be that of repentance;
but when they should have answered our inference, That then it carries equal
reason to urge and practice a trial of men's repentance antecedently to the
Communion; and that this must introduce as great a necessity of bringing men
under confession, as under their examination, they keeping close to their
familiar ignorantia elenchi (which runs thorough all their discourse, as the
string of poison does thorough a Lamprey) instead of answering, whether it be
universally and absolutely necessary, do only tell us, that Confession in a
right and rectified manner (and we fore-stalled them in these qualifications)
has been, and is practiced in some difficult cases, and they dislike it not.

And truly so much we shall say and grant them of their examination, if they
would require no more, and let it be moderated and regulated as our Divines
prescribe for Confession, whereof Luther says it is Utilis, non necessaria,
Instit. l. 3. c. 9. S. 12.
debet esse libera, and nemo cogi; wherein Calvin is Symphonous, saying, Si ita
privatim angitur and as flictatur peccatorum sensu, ut se explicare nisi alieno
adjutorio nequeat, and adding, iis tantum modo commendetur, Exam. conc. Tri
dent. part. 2. c. 5.
qui ea se opus habere intelligunt, because (as Chemnicius rationally asserts)
non est mandatum, ut corda scrutentur; so let their examination be proposed as
profitable, not imposed as necessary; let it be somewhat of their prudence,
nothing of our bondage; let it be exercised toward such as may justly be
suspected of gross ignorance or exitious crimes (for such a just suspicion
only is principium inquirendi, as Vasquez speaks) and others left free, that
are elevated above such suspicion, and we shall be as perfectly reconciled to
their examination, as they or our Divines seem to be pacified toward confession.

But in the interim, the Argument remains unshaken; If repentance be as
necessary a qualification to receiving, and as essential a part of examination
as knowledge, then there is in order to communicating no less reason to
introduce the discipline of confession, than of examination; if the one be set
up, the other must also be imposed; if the one may be omitted, the other may be
laid aside; if the one be but profitable to some, the other is not necessary to
all: these two being like the subcelestial Gemini, which appear ominously and
unluckily, the one without the other.

They assert their Principles in their separation and examination not to be
Romish; and we suppose by former instances, we have demonstrated the contrary.
They profess to abhor the Church of Rome, her ways, and friends, and to be able
to maintain their cause without the Philistines forge, however the Apologists
may have a file for sharpning some of their Weapons; yet in several subjects
their main Armature was forged, and hammered out by the Pop^sh Philistines, for
there was no Smith in Israel wont to own it: Nevertheless, they are no farther
off from Popery, than we are from any suspicion that they are thereunto
affected, one either practice or opinion gives not rise to a denomination.

But secondly, we know, though Saul had put away those that had familiar
Spirits and Wizards out of the Land; yet being in a strait and exigence, he had
recourse to one of them for counsel; and I might say, did I not doubt it might
irritate, that two Foxes, though looking several ways, may be conjoined in a
Firebrand.

Thirdly, besides that which is opposed directly, may be farthered obliquely,
and by accident, and some men may suppose they are in the way to Dothan, when
they are going to Samaria, and suffer like delusion with those in Athenaeus,
who supposed themselves to be at Sea in a Tempest; and casting out the Utensils
of the house, thought they had eased the ship of her luggage, and were plying
hard their Oars to attain their Port, whereas all was but the effect of their
cups; and such Impostures may be occasioned by the golden Cup in the hand of
the woman full of abominations, though insensibly and unawares sip'd off, as to
make men dream they are doing one thing, when they are acting another. And as
the Rabbis (though vainly) expounding Exodus 32.24. say, that Aaron intended
not to make a Calf, but cast the golden Earings into the fire to consume them,
but by the operation of Satan, working by some Egyptian Magitians in the
Camp, the form of a Calf came forth; so it is neither impossible nor unusual
for some proling men, by over-witting and under-acting them, to make their
enemies unwittingly to drive on their designs, and unwillingly advance their
Interests: as it was said of Pompey the Great, Miscria nostra Magnus est; so
what sage man fears not, that our divisions do more occasion and facilitate an
union with that Kingdom, which is not so much divided within it self; and that
not only because the Trumpets must be of one piece that can call to the
Assemblies; but we see that water which is in an entire body, is not so subject
to the impressions of Air, yet being scattered into drops, is easily preyed
upon, and absorp'd by it; and when a besieged City is set on fire, the enemy,
who upon this account helps to blow and foment the flame, may more easily enter
and surprise it amidst our confusions.

And verily the unchurching of so many may make them more malleable to
temptations to step aside into the Roman Church, which is ready to spread her
skirt over them, in which respect he that put away his Church from this
ordinance (the Canon of the Nicene Council saying, Matrimonium inter Episcopum
and Ecclesiam esse contractum) saving for the cause of fornication, that is,
some noto rious sin, causes them to commit adultery; or lastly in so little
freedom to partake of the Ordinance, and so great liberty to take up any wild
and extravagant opinions, truth and godliness may finally fall under such an
eclipse, as the glimmering of that Popish gloworme may be a comfort in so great
darkness, and such an ignis fatuus followed as a guide, when there is no
better: and upon this score perchance, these cunning juglers, (like Boris of
Muscovy) clandestinely cause and help to set our houses on fire, that they may
get honor and power by rebuilding them: Wisemen will find these no idle fears
nor groundless jealousies, but as in that famous automaton, the sphere of
Cornelius Bezael, there was an igneous spirit enclosed in the center thereof,
which caused the motion; so time may discover, that though some others are the
maine spokes, yet the fiery spirit of the Jesuits lying hidden in the center,
have wrought in this sphere these rotations and circumvolutions, and it may too
late appear that unadvisedly all this while we have plowed with Popish heyfers,
and after all our turning up and harrowing of the Church, they may reap the
harvest of all those sowings.

The paper recording the discipline of the ancient Church, asserted, That from
the Communion (as customarily and indeed antonomastically we speak, though
properly the Communion and the Eucharist were far differing things) it
excluded only the Catechumeni, Energumeni, persons excommunicate, penitents,
etc. and thereupon inferred, That seeing they eject very many which fall not
under any of those notions, their practice is not conformable unto (but
disagrees from) that of the ancient Church.

Hereunto instead of giving an answer, they only say, that A smatterer in
antiquity (and whether they be of that lower form or no, the reader will by
and by have trial) may know the ancients rejected and suspended diverse sorts of
men, under sundry considerations, and were exceeding cautelous about admission
to this ordinance, no print whereof is to be seen in the common practice of our
assemblies, (and that is as true indeed of their assemblies as of any others)
where such orders and distinctions of men as are named may be fonud: And then
next they make us their catechumeni, in describing to us what they were, (but
whether themselves may not in some respect be penitents for such descriptions
the reader shall judge,) and the care of the ancients to keep off ignorant and
unfit, shames the ordinary administrations in our Parishes, where no such
things are thought upon, but All to the Sacrament is the plea and practice; and
then they take the boldness ( -- Nimium ne creed colori.) to say, thus far
antiquity is for us, rather than against us. There is no good soul but is
anhelant for the restitution and erecting of collapsed discipline, and when
other petitions may be frustrate, yet (as Philo comforted his countrymen, that
God would hear them, when they could not be heard at Rome, so) we must take
the better way to it, by petitions preferred to Heaven, Coelo restat iter,
coelo tentabimus ire.

But I must tell the Apologists, that I doubt they are parcel-guilty of the
obstructing of this work, and they will find somewhat thereof upon their
proper score, who have laid aside the right reins, and caught hold of the
false, and neglecting that discipline, which is rooted in Scripture, has
flourished in the purer times, and brought forth sweet fruits where ever it was
cultivated, have bestowed and engaged themselves in the grafting and dressing
of an exoticke plant, which they have no warrant to set; nor hope it should
bear much or good fruit, since it is too close and contracted, not spreading
its arms and branches abroad, and like the Clove tree engrossing all moisture
to it self, makes all other to wither about it. To graspe too much is the way
to hold less, and in this sense perchance, the half may be more than the
whole, and to draw the wires too high, is the way to crack the strings, not to
tune the instrument, Est modus in rebus, -- And as Cyneas told Pyrrhus, he
might have been more happy had he been content with Epirus, and not attempted
the conquest of Italy and Sicily; so had the hedge of ancient Discipline been
only repaired and kept up, and not raised higher, and set farther out beyond
the old line and landmarks, the seeds of peace and Godliness might have been
more happily sown and more prosperously flourished, in the field of the
Church, which now lies less manured and more full of tares and noisome weeds,
Moribus antiquis res stat, -- And a famous man says, Sir F. B.
That women are sometimes more fortunate in their cures, than learned Doctors,
because the one keep the old receipts punctually, which the others
magisterially take liberty to vary from, and to alter the simples; so the
Physic of ancient Discipline in all probability might have cured our
Distempers, cito, tuto and jucunde, whereas these new recipe's (like the
Paracelstan prescripts of Mercury sublimated and calcinate, and such violent
remedies) in stead of proving Medicines grow to be maladies, and to cure the
disease, kill the Patient, Ut antea vitiis, ita nunc remediis laboramus.

I shall not press or insist upon that of Bullinger, Potest in Ecclesia justa
constitui disciplina, Epist. ad Beza.
ut interim coena Domini libera maneat omnibus illis qui se juxta Pauli
doctrinam probarunt; but with hands and feet (asserting my self, and joining
with and drawing others, embracing and also propugning it,) I shall descend
into that opinion, that persons notoriously wicked and scandalous should be
cast out.

And whereas in the close of the Section they say, They wish they could see
this done in the Assemblies about them (which would beget better thoughts in
them of some men's spirits, than now they have) but thereof they know the
contrary. I shall tell them, that I wish they would consent that none but such,
as easily as I shall grant, that all such, ought to be ejected: If some would
have done it, and want power to do it, it is their affliction; if any have the
power, and do not exercise it, it is their fault; but yet to hold Communion
with those Assemblies, where it is not done, St. Augustine warrants them, it
shall be much to their praise, and nothing to their prejudice; and they have
almost as much to plead for themselves, as he had to justify the Catholic
Church against the Donatists: And for my part, I profess I had rather, All to
the Sacrament, than any to Schism and Separation. And for their thoughts of
others, they are no man's Tribunal: They that know their Witness is in Heaven,
with such it will be a small thing to be judged of them; neither are they such
Cato's, as that it should be punishment enough to be condemned by them; their
teeth are not like the Tigers Claws, wherewith whosoever is wounded, can never
be healed, nor does afterward prosper; nor, I hope, are the Images or
Conceptions, which they form of others in their Thoughts and Intellects,
subject to the like fate, which (they say) those Images are, which are made by
Witches, where the hurts and usage done to the Image, pass and are transferred
to the man whose Image it is.

I might dispense with my self from making any animadversions upon their
descriptions of Catechumeni, Energumeni, and Penitents; it is enough that my
Argument stands free, and that they confess the ancient Church separated none
but of such denominations, and cannot say that those whom they suspend are
only such, but then so confidently to conclude, that because the ancient
Church removed such sorts of men, therefore Antiquity is for them, they must
pre-suppose us bred up in the Rabbinical Schools, where the Disciples are
taught to believe that white is black, if the Rabbi tell them so.

Non obtusa adeo gestamus pectora Poeni: With as much color of reason do the
Papists conclude, because they find the word Tradition in Scripture and the
Fathers, and Merit, and Satisfaction, and the like in ancient Writers, that the
same names must needs be of the same things, and were understood and taught in
the same notion, which now they conceive and hold; could they produce any
Records, that all passed examination in point of knowledge, or any, save the
Catechumeni, strangers to the Church and Faith, and Children (who were a sort
of Catechumeni;) or any at all underwent a probation of their lives, or were
separated, because they were not convincingly holy, and not only because they
were notoriously wicked, that in any Church, only one of an hundred was
admitted, and a separation made from the rest, either negatively not to
communicate with them, or positively to constitute new Churches; they should
then hit the Bird in the eye, whereas now they do not so much as beat the
Bush; Tiberius.
but do only like that Roman Emperor, Cui proprium erat nuper reperta
scelera priscis verbis obtegere.

Suspension the ancient Church practiced and commended, not in that notion and
manner, nor of such persons as the Apologists do use it, but because they find
the word of suspeusion in the Monuments thereof; to conclude that their
discipline is found there, is somewhat like him, that reading Missa fuit Romae,
in the subscription of some of St. Paul's Epistles, inferred that that Mass
was then said at Rome; or because some kind of suspension is laudable, that
theirs must be as commendable, is not unlike to Caracalla, who supposed that
because one Alexander was a brave man, none of that name could be bad: but
seeing they are not Popes, who are to be believed absolutely, simply and
without condition, whose Will is in stead of Reason; and it is not for us to
judge whether they speak consentaneous to Reason; but it is Heretical to think
they may not determine, as they have determined, we shall desire them to show
us out of any Records that the ancient Church practiced or commended
suspension, as now it is understood and practiced, Et vitula tu dignus. --

It may yet reflect some light upon our subject, to make some observations upon
their expresses concerning the Catechumeni, Energumeni, and Penitents.

The first, they say, were such as the Church nurtured in the fundamentals of
Religion, being unbaptized (as they suppose) the children of Pagans. I shall
not instance any case, wherein a Catechumen unbaptized, might yet have been a
child of Christian Parents, as particularly if his Parents had died before the
times of baptism (which were usually but twice in the year) and then his next
of kin being a Pagan, had detained him from the bosom of the Church: nor
shall I insist upon it, that Children in years, though born of Christian
Parents and baptized, did also pass in the rank of Catechumeni, and went out at
the Ite, missa est: nor shall I rectify their judgment, by showing that some
Catechumeni were the Sons and Daughters of Jews; I shall only observe, that
had there been in those days any Anabaptists or Independents, the Catechumeni
might have been the Children of Christians, and yet unbaptized; for the one
would have baptized no Children at all, and the other, none but those whose
Parents had been gathered into their Churches.

Secondly, it is observable, that those Catechumens, as soon as they were
baptized, Tract. 11. in Johan. Chemnicius exam. part. 2. p. 101. Gerhard loc.
com. vol. 2. p. 1. Durant cited before. Casaubon. ad annal. Baron. exer. 16. S.
36. page 378. Notae in quos. canon. council. Gal. p. 167. Albaspinus de veter.
Eccles. ritibus, l. 1. obser. 19. p. 142, 143. Patrem vocas Deum and fratrem
mox vituperas, si vero non est frater tuus quomodo dicis pater noster?
Chrysostom.
were admitted also to the Eucharist, which not only appears by that of
Augustine, Transeant per mare rubrum, and baptizentur, and manducent Manna; but
by what Chemnicius cites out of Chrysostom, and Gerhard out of Justin, Ambrose
and Theodoret, and Durantus out of others; and by what Casaubon tells us, Vetus
Ecclesia semper adjecit baptismo participationem corporis Christi, (but where
he adds praesertim adultis, some learned men think it was tantum adultis, that
which was given to Infants being only the Wine (for so Hugo asserts) and that
scarce formally, as the Sacrament, but as they used to give them milk and
honey;) and how little time was allotted for instructing the Catechumens, and
what a small viaticum of knowledge was required to carry them to the
Sacraments, I have formerly showed; and surely it could not be imagined that
they who were strangers to the Christian Faith, and bred up in other Rudiments;
and who, when they came over into the pale of the Church, in the first times,
as it seems, were neither admitted to the reading of the Gospels, nor the
Sermons and Expositions thereof, (which, Albaspinus says, may be known by
these words in the Sermons of the Fathers, Norunt fideles) and which said not,
nor learned the Lords Prayer, till they were baptized, (for they were not
called Brethren, that were not admitted to the Eucharist,) and in that respect
joined not in saying Our Father (which perchance has brought us to stumble on
the reason, why the Lords Prayer is never recited in the Churches of the
Apologists, because there are so many present, who being not admitted to the
Eucharist, may not be called their Brethren, nor have God to their common
Father) I say that it cannot be imagined that in so short a time, with so
slender means, they could with as great a sum (of knowledge) obtain this
freedom of the Sacraments, as the generality of our Congregations have, who
(like Paul) are freeborn, and Ecclesiae cives nati.

The Energumeni (they say) were men supposed to be possessed by Satan, or men
excommunicate, because such are delivered unto Satan; and they derive
Energumeni ab energia, and out of Altenstaig tell us, Illi dicuntur Energumeni,
qui interius laborant per vexationem daemonis: But observe, first, for the
notatio nominis, how they institute a new Grammar, deriving Participles from
Nouns, and not from Verbs; I should have rather thought it more proper to have
fetched it from (...)

Secondly, for notatio rei, whatever Alstentaig tell them, who compiled his
Lexicon out of the Schoolmen, (who were not always over-excellent in Languages
or Antiquities) persons possessed were but one species., and included not the
whole latitude of Energumeni, Idiots and Lunatiques coming also underthat
generical notion. Whether to deliver one unto Satan, were directly to put him
under the corporal power, possession and inflictions of Satan, as a sad
consequent of Excommunication in those times, (as the Greek Fathers suppose,)
or only to excommunicate, which is a delivery up to Satan by consequent, a
declaring him to be subject to the Kingdom and Power of Satan, and no longer
to appertain to the Kingdom of Christ, and not a cutting him off from one
Ordinance (for that could not be said to be a tradition unto Satan, but a
depriving of all the means useful to eject Satan, Dr. Ham. Annotat. in 1 Cor.
5. E.
and the power of his Kingdom out of the heart (as the Catechist that
instructed men and fitted them for Baptism, was wont to be called the
Exorcist, that cast Satan out) as the Latin Fathers, and modern Expositors,
both Protestant and Popish, conceive,) I shall not dispute; this is beside my
subject, and there was never a triumph for any victory, out of a man's proper
Province; only I shall observe, that though excommunicate persons had been so
under the afflictive power and possession of Satan, yet all that were so were
not excommunicate, and yet those that were not compotent of mind, if they were
not born such, but fell into any distemper, after they had first received the
Eucharist, Aquin. 3. q. 8. art. 9. Vasquez in 3. Tom. 3. q. 80.9. disp. 212. c.
3. p. 442. Valentia 3. disp. 6. q. 8. p. 2. p. 926. Albas. not. in Canon. quos.
Conc. Gall. 7.1616. Communior tamen ejus usu recepta sententia est, dandam
illis esse communionem. Sylvius in 3. part. Aquin. q. 80. art. 9. p. 319.
Filiucius cas. tract. 4. c. 7. n. 190. p. 49. Casaubon. exercit. 16. S. 43.
Albasp. l. 2. obser. 4. Bellar. de poenit. l. 1. c. 22.
many of the Schoolmen (how justly I shall not dispute) incline to grant them
the Sacrament, at least for a Viaticum at their departure; and as for those
that were possessed, to whom indeed that name of Energumeni is more commonly
applied, the first Council of Orange allowed them in some cases the Eucharist,
if they were not perpetually vexed, Si lucidis gauderent intervallis, says
Albaspinus, so do many of the Schoolmen and Casuists by warrant of some later
Councels and Fathers, and though some sin occasioned the possession, yet (for
which there is the authority of Cassian, and an instance of Prosper) if they
were not delivered up to Satan for any great crimes, and so were in the
condition of persons excommunicate; and si de purgatione curent, si vita sit
purgatior, si non blasphement, si non enuncient, (that is, ut explicat
Balsamon) si tempore quo non vexarentur, docent alios, quae ipsi a daemone
didicerunt, they were not altogether excluded; generally they agree it ought
not to be denied them dying, so as we see, that the far greatest part of their
Parishes are thrust into a worse condition, than the Energumeni.

The Penitents were communionis Christianae velut candidati, as a learned man
calls them, and in a medious state or condition between the faithful and
Excommunicate; for with Penitents there was allowed a civil converse, and
toward them might be vouchsafed all Offices of Humanity; but with persons
excommunicate, as men polluted, it was piacular to have any company or
commerce, they were not safely to be looked upon, but weae universally shunned,
and not held worthy of the light.

The Apologists very pertinently observe, that men were put under penance, for
being scandalous in manners and opinions; and I wish their discipline had been
conformed to this pattern, and exercised only upon such and no others,
especially since they confess it is not necessary they should assign other
qualifications (of such I suppose they mean as are excluded) than Antiquity
did; but whereas they undertake to instruct us in the ancient course of
admitting Penitents, and say, They were first admitted to the limits of the
Church. 2. To lie down in the Church Porch. 3. To the hearing of the word, but
not to stay at prayers. 4. Next to the Sacrament. A smatterer in Antiquity (to
retort their own phrase) would not have given so incurious and imperfect an
account of their method of discipline.

For, first, however the footsteps thereof are not so plainly to be traced in
the Latin Church, (and yet Albaspinus finds them in that of Tertullian, Haet
expectat, haec exorat poenitentiam, quandoque inituris salutem) yet in the
Greek Church, the Monuments thereof are so frequent, that to him that has seen
things but per transennam, or tasted them only tanquam canis ad Nilum, it is
very obvious, that there were four degrees or states of Penitents (not three as
they limit.)

First, such as were Flentes or Plorantes, who stood and sometimes lay down
without the Church, weeping, and requesting those that entered to petition the
Lord for mercy toward them, (which at first was not imposed by Law, but
arbitrarily assumed.)

Secondly, Audientes, who stood in the Porch, and heard some portions of the
Scripture (not all that was read;) l. 2. observe. 29. p. 390.
and Albaspinus supposes, that in the first ages, Missarum concionibus, quae
lectionem Evangelii consequebantur, interesse non potuerunt, but they were not
permitted to join in prayers, either those of the Church and faithful, or those
of the Catechumens, nor yet to pray among the latter.

Thirdly, Prostrati, or succumbentes, who were admitted to a place behind the
Pulpit, or behind the Quire of the Church, called Catechumenium, (for there the
Catechumens stood also) who were permitted there to kneel, and pray amongst the
Catechumens; but (as some suppose) were permitted only their own prayers, not
those of the Catechumens, and they went out with the Catechumens, or (as some
think) after them.

Fourthly, Stantes, who I conceive were also called initiati, who were admitted
to join in all Ordinances with the Congregation, save the Eucharist, which
standing by, they might only behold others ( viz. the Consummati, as they were
called, answerable to the Epoptae among the old Heathens) to receive, but
themselves might not partake; nor beside were they permitted to bring their
oblations, nor participate of what was offered and blessed (which some have
mistaken for the Eucharist) neither had they the kiss of peace. These two last
steps the Apologists tread over, and the second they divide into two, as little
caring to understand the ancient discipline, as to model their own in
conformity thereunto.

2. They do truly observe, and we think it very observable, that such a course
the ancient Church took about admitting Penitents (and therefore Albaspinus
tells us, poenitentiam quasi ad quendam catechumenatum repraesentandum
institutum esse) and from thence shall re-minde them, that those several
degrees were only such as whereby Penitents were readmitted, not whereunto
they were directly and immediately censured; but having been first excommunicate
in order to their restoring to the Communion of the Church, they had the favor
of being admitted by these several steps of penance, and none were Penitents,
that had not been first excommunicate, which is diametrally opposite to their
way of suspension, whereby men are immediately and only made stantes, that were
never excommunicated, nor passed the other degrees of penance.

I shall conclude this History of the ancient discipline with that of
Hospinian, Historia de re Sacrament. l. 2. p. 40.
Catechumeni and poenitentes, finita concione, templo jussi sunt egredi,
antequam sacra peragerentur, ne cum reliqu's fratribus communicarent, ex quo
liquido clareque evincitur, caeteros qui remanserunt omnes communicasse: and
besides them of those notions, he tells us, Admissi sunt ad coenam, l. 3. p.
185.
quicunque doctrinam Christianam sunt amplexi, so that though only persons fit
and worthy were admitted, yet it is hereby manifest, that they accounted all
such fit and worthy, as were neither Catechumens nor Penitents.

Next, they take hold of what the Paper grants, that the Primitive Church saw
the use of public confession; it did so; but it also saw the abuse, and
thereupon abolished what had been formerly introduced; but that was done, they
say, after the abuse appeared, whereas now they say men sweat at the sight of
the saddle, or rather bridle, to curb their lusts. The confusion and abuse of
their way is as apparent, and therefore consequently it is to be laid down, --
Vel si mutabile pectus
Est tibi consilii, --
And besides, the wisdom of prevention is better than that of remedies, as
Hygieina is a safe and happier part of Physic than Therapeutica; but if any
sweat at the fight of the saddle or bridle, which have been ridden and galled
with it, it is no marvel, since neither are made only to mount and manage an
unruly stubborn horse; but the one is a Pack-saddle, fitted only for an Asses
back (by supposition of a general ignorance) and fashioned to be capable to
take any load or burden that may be laid on; and the other to check and turn
and lead us where they list, so as indeed it is like to become our bridle and
their reins.

Their examination, they say, is little more than public confession; I think
upon examination they ought to make confession of a palpable error, who
ignorantly or wilfully mistake confession of sins (which the Paper says, the
Ancients saw the use of) for confession of faith; the admitting some of their
members only upon public confession of faith, we have formerly traversed.
That others have done the same thing privately before two or three witnesses
(whereof sure their Elders have sometimes been none) has been (they say) in
tenderness and conde scension to their bashfulness. If they did this to any
formally as bashful, they should do it to all of that condition; for quicquid
praedicatur per se, praedicatur de omni; I believe of men, and am very
confident of women, the greatest part are bashful; yet I cannot learn they show
such tenderness or condescension to the greatest part, which may render it
doubtful that it is done to some with respect to the Gold-ring; and because
Heliogabal'us silken Nets are more proper to catch such Fishes, as St. Peter
took.

It is for the honor of Antiquity, that as all the different sorts of
Philosophers at Athens pretended to follow Socrates, so the new coyns of
doctrine and discipline would seem to bear the ancient stamp; the Apologists,
that have much nibled at, and detracted from Antiquity, would yet give their
discipline for its better pass, a Testimonial from the ancient Church. They
formerly bid us to remember the Gibeonites, and we cannot forget them, while
their like practice keeps up and refreshes the memory of them, by such a
counterfeit pretense of Antiquity, but rather it is the misfortune of this age,
that their mysteries so long hidden, were now first published, which has been
like the opening of the Chest in the Temple of Apollo, that Rhodiginus speaks
of, or the breaking up, by the covetousness of certain soldiers, greedy of
spoil, of the Image of Apollo Chomeus, which, as Ammianus Marcellinus tells us,
was brought from Scleuoin to Rome, from whence issued forth pestilent vapors,
which infected the adjacent Countries.

The Ancients removed some few from the Communion, and those only by judicial
sentence; for the scandal of some nefariousness, either evident, coniest, or
proved by Witness; whereas these suspend at once their whole Congregations, as
if they were guilty of one common Apostasy, not judicially, but arbitrarily;
not for notorious crimes, but upon suspicions; and admit none of them, till
they have approved themselves to their good opinions, by demonstrative signs of
holiness; and till they do so, they separate from all Communion in this
Ordinance with them, (which suspending first, and then making trial and
probation afterward, methinks holds some resemblance with Lidford Law, whereof
in our Country they say proverbially, That they bang and draw in the morning,
and sit in Judgment in the afternoon;) so as therefore, though we should be
unhappily obstructed and retrenched from the like discipline, as the ancient
exercised (which is our great sorrow, and not a little their fault (as I have
showed) who seem like an hard-galloping hot-spur, that asked if he might attain
such a place before night, and it was answered, Yes, if he rid softer) yet
farther to excite others to a compliance with their way, and to complain of
inconformity to it, and pretend it little varieth from the ancient, they have
therein as much of reason, as the Grand Signior had to pretend the Turks
descended from the ancient Trojans, and thereupon to invite the Italians to
assist them in the wars against the Greeks, the Enemies of that Nation, from
whence they had one common origin. It affects them to read in the few
Ancients they converse with Sancta sanctis, pronounced by the Deacon before the
administration; but they that are not conversant with many of the Ancients
(though it had been more happy for them, and us too, had they been acquainted
with more) have, (it seems) not learned that this was only in order to the
dismission of the Catechumeni and Penitents, Exam. part. 2. p. 109. Chrysostom.
Hom. 3. in Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 1. Tom. 4. p. 356. ad inquis. Jan. c. 13. Lilius
Gyrald. syntag. de diis, p. 498. Syn. 17. Alexand. ab Alexand. dier. genesis l. 6.
c. 19. p. 709. Servius in Virg. Aenead. p. 1017.
and no others, the rest being under the notion of Sancti, and was but
equivalent to the Ite, missa est, and (...), and also served to prompt the rest
to examine themselves, as they might have read in Chemnicius: And they might
also have learned from Chrysostom (if he be one of these few Ancients that
they converse with) that the Deacon also proclaimed, You that cannot pray,
depart; so as they were thought to be as indisposed for prayers, as for the
Sacrament; And those that were not under penance, were not thought unholy or
unworthy of those holy things, as they might have found in St. Augustine, Hoc
enim est indigne accipere, si eo tempore accipiat, quo poenitentiam agere debet.

The very Heathen had one to cry, Procul hinc, Be gone you that are profane:
But first this was not extensive to all their Holies, ad (...) sacra profani
admittebantur, says Gyraldus. Beside, to keep analogy with that custom, they
should (as the Heathen did) exclude those whom they judge profane, from the
Temple, and from all sacred actions, not one alone; and hence is profanus quasi
porro a fane; and therefore in that of Virgil, -- Procul o, procul este
profani, There is also added in the next Verse, -- Totoque absistite luco, And
that conclamation too, was after the sacrifice ended, Adventante dea, procul o,
etc. And farther by profane the great Grammarian Servius understands such only
as were not yet initiated into their Rites, Lil. Gyrald. ubi supra p. 498.
Sueton. in Nerone, S. 34.
and those were answerable to the Catechumeni, and the procul hinc was
therefore equivalent to their Ilicet, and to the Christians Ite, missa est:
Others think it meant of such as were polluted with homicides and flagitious
villainies, (such as Nero was, who durst not (says Suetonius) enter the Fanes,
through conscience of his Crimes) such as correspond with men among us cast out
for notorious crimes; and so learned Casaubon supposes the Procul o, procul
este profani, to bear fimilitude with that in the Leturgy pronounced by the
Deacon, Omnes Catechumeni, Exercit. 16. S. 43. p. 399.
etc. discedite (whereof were sundry forms) and had the force of an
excommunication; but there was no examination of men's lives, it was enough when
it was aloud said (...); to answer (...), without farther scrutiny. And some
farther think this was only an usage proper to their Eleusinia sacra, where he
was profane that was not wicked; and indeed there was little less impurity in
most of their Rites, for as for sins of the flesh, Alexand. ab Alex. dierum
Genial. l. 6. c. 26. p. 747. Dr. Hammond Tract. of Idol. and Annot. in 1 Cor.
5.10. Antiq. Lect. l. 12. c. 2.
(notwithstanding their Pontifician Law in Tully, Deos cast adeunto, etc.)
omnes fere mortales in templis coire and nefandis libidinibus commisceri nefas
non putarent, says Alexander Neapolitanus; and therefore a learned man
supposes, that in the New Testament, as Fornication is commonly joined with
Idolatry, so sometimes by Idolatry is meant sin of uncleanness, which always
attended upon Idol-worship; and as for Drunkenness, it was so common in their
Sacrifices, that Aristotle's (...) inflexum putat, (says Rhodoginus) quod
ebrii fierent (...), that is, post sacrificium; and both the one and the other
recommended under the opinion of Religion, and the prescribed way of worship.

The Ancients are censured for going too far this way; perchance they are so,
but for going too far not in theirs, but in a different way: Their rigor was
in excommunicating some for smaller offenses (for as far as I can discover,
Si redeant veteres, ingentia nomina, Patres, they would say, Excommunication we
know, and delivering to Satan we know, but for suspension, who are you?) and
in inflicting penance for so many years; to make men Flentes three years,
Audientes so many more, Succumbentes as many, Stantes for two years, and in
keeping some for more grievous Crimes from the Communion till death; and then
sometimes giving them only absolution and benediction, but not the Eucharist,
and granting no absolution after a second lapse, which as it gave an occasional
Rise to Novatus his Schism, (there being but this difference between him and
the Catholics, that he denied the power, and they often exercised not the act
of remission; they did not, and he taught they could not, absolve;) so it has
only that of Innocent to excuse it, Apud Albasp. ubi supra l. 2. obser. 5. p.
248.
Coactam compulsamque Ecclesiam severius animadvertere in delinquentes, quo
atrocitate disciplinae austerioris invecta in officio continerentur fideles,
contra persecutionum fluctus, and lest they, to escape and decline persecution,
should comply with Ethnic Idolators.

But this was not the general Rule of Discipline in all the first Ages of the
Church; but acts (in the nature of an exception) suited only to times of
Persecution, no constant method, but temporary and occasional, not of the
substance thereof, but accidental, pauca admodum vi tractata, quo caeteris
quies esset, as Tacitus in another case, and was like Galen's drawing blood in
some desperate pestilent Fevers, Usque ad animae defectum, which is not to be
exemplary or regular in ordinary practice, the like discipline being not
warrantable but in the like times, and with the like reasons. And as rigid as
they for that time were, their rigor only extended judicially, to reject some
for manifest and scandalous wickedness, not all till a manifestation of their
real holiness; neither does it follow, that if some few known Malefactors were
then too severely castigated, that now many that are not such, have no just
cause to complain for suffering (though) a lesser punishment.

And whereas they plead their distingue tempora too, for their actings
different from the Ancients, in gathering and ordering Churches, in respect
they live in a corrupt Church, which is not therefore to be stood upon:
perchance it were not, if the Innovation stood upon a bottom of more Reason,
than the retention of the ancient Discipline could do: but for ought they have
yet proved to the contrary, the new seems to be as far from having a better
Basis than the old, as it is now at last by their confession, from having any
buttress to support it, from a similitude with that ancient way, from the
causes which constituted it, and from the effects flowing from it; there are
clear demonstrations of the excellency of the one above the other; and such
constitutive causes as the old had, the new cannot have; and the old may have
the same effects influent on our times which it ever formerly had, that though
we shall not say with Tacitus, Scito super omnibus negotiis melius atque
rectius olim provisum, and quae convertuntur, in deterius mutari; yet in this
particular, we shall call for the old wine, as the better, (the new being
heady, flatulent, and too much purging.) Of the corruptions of this Church we
have formerly considered, and showed those corruptions ought not to be the
Generation of their Separation, which though they call a gathering of Churches,
yet by a denomination taken from the major part, may be rather called a
dissipating, or a gathering only of Ears, and scattering of Sheaves, to be
snatched up for some other strange Barn. And be the Church distempered by
corruptions, yet we shall be more glad to see the Cure undertaken in the way of
the old approved Methodists, or Dogmatists, rather than of Empericks, (who are
all for the knife,) for we fear those new Physicians that practice only on a
new Church, must according to the German Proverb, have a new Churchyard.

To show what Spirit the best of the Ancients were of in this matter, they
rehearse the testimony of Albaspinaeus (as they of late call him, though in the
elder Editions of his Works, he be named Albaspinus) viz. They thought it
detestable to God and Man, not only for them that were defiled with lesser
sins; but if under a Cloud of suspicion, to come to the Eucharist, and judge
it dangerous for absolved Penitents to touch those things, if not thought holy
enough by them, to whom the care of the Sacrament was committed. Next, they
cite Chrysostom, who, say they, is as full as can be wished (whom therefore
they wonder should be brought in for this suggested liberty) he admonishing
Ministers not to deliver the Eucharist to the unworthy; though he wear the
Crown, thou have greater authority than he, no small punishment hangs over our
heads, if we suffer any to come that we know to live in any sin, not saying,
If he will not submit to trial, you have freed your soul, if you exhort; but
says, his blood will be required of thy hands.

These being the only stakes in their hedge, cut out of the Forest of
Antiquity, we shall more diligently examine their strength.

First, concerning Albaspinus, I must re-minde them, that he speaks this of
such as had been first excommunicate for some scandalous offense, and then were
put under penance in order to their restoring; for he delivers it in answer to
the question, Why after the first three degrees of penance, the fourth was
appointed? so as this will be extra aleas, in respect to any defense of their
way, who discommon men from the Sacrament, that were never thus censured for
any scandalous crime.

Secondly, they show a respect more partial to their Cause, than just to their
Reader, by imposing on him in the Translation; for levissima macula inquinatum,
is not, defiled with lesser sins, but with the least, or lightest stain, viz.
of their former sins (which in all likelihood were great:) for those stains
the Ancients thought to be purged and expiated by penal acts (not the offense,
as an offense to God, or the punishment due to sin, which are opposed to
justification, but only the spot consisting in an habitual pravity, and opposed
chiefly to justification) and repentance and sorrow to be instrumental causes,
Dr. Chaloner, origin and progress of Here Is. p. 133.
whereby grace became effectual in destroying these sinful affections, so as
the meaning of levissima macula infectum, is in effect, defiled with the least
affection to his former sins.

Secondly, Maculae nebula offusum, is but the same thing in Hyperbole; and
though it should properly be rendered a Cloud of stain, and virtually may
signify a suspicion of a stain, (not as they would have it a cloud of
suspicion for lesser sins) notwithstanding lest Nebula so interpreted, should
prove (as it also signifies) a Road-net to catch Woodcocks, and might seem to
give some confirmation to what they practice in suspending men, because they
suspect their lives; it must also be known, that this was only a suspicion of
one that having once been duly convicted to have fallen, might be doubted not
to be perfectly recovered; and the Law determines, Semel malus semper
praesumitur esse malus, in eodem genere mali, and there is great difference in
the reason of delaying upon suspicion the restitution of one that has
notoriously sinned, and suspending one only upon suspicion of sin.

Thirdly, Those absolved Penitents, were absolved only of three degrees of
penance; not the fourth, as is evident by the Context, and the Ancients thought
a reconciliation or restitution, per saltum, to be the restoring of a man not
perfectly cleansed, but of one bringing back his spots upon him; this is that
which Cyprian complains of, that when nondum restituta Ecclesiae pace, ad
communicationem admittuntur, and offertur nomen eorum, and nondum poenitentia
facta, Epist. 10. page 30.
nondum exomologesi finita, nondum manu eis ab Episcopo aut Clero imposita,
Eucharistia illis data; and says he, Haec qui substrabit fratribus nostris,
dicipit miseros, ut qui possunt agentes poenitentiam veram Deo patri ad
misericordiam precibus and operibus suis satisfacere, seducantur, ut magis
pereant, and qui erigere se possunt, plus cadant.

Fourthly, The Imposture is more gross when quod non satis sancti and
sanctificati censebantur, quibus tanta res committeretur, is thus translated,
That they were not thought holy enough by them, to whom the care of the
Sacrament was committed; whereas it rightly should be rendered, Not holy enough
to whom so great a thing should be delivered. And whereto their changing of the
words and sense does tend, may be pertinently remembered, when we come to
examine, whether their way smack of Diotrephes, it being only regni causa, for
which it seems jusjurandum violandum est; whether the Apologists themselves
perused this Author, or it were a quotation lent them, we know not; but I now
find it requisite that we should peruse those which they quote.

But for Chrysostom, whose words might have been long enough sought for, by
their quotation of the 38. Homily on Matthew, (which though I am easy to
excuse as a Pen-lapse, (whereof in this kind they have many,) yet it seems not
such by a second referring us for them to the same place; but however we know
he owns them, and delivers them in the 83. Homil. on the 26. of Matthew, and
some of them elsewhere also.) Biblioth. l. 6. Annot. 152. p. 481.
And for answer to them, I shall not need to bring forth that Rule of Senensis,
Non esse concionatorum verba semper eo rigore accipienda, quo primum ad
auditores perveniant, multa enim declamatores per hyperbolen enunciant, and hoc
interdum Chrysostomo contingit: Themselves have taken notice of my answer, That
Chrysostom speaks of notorious sinners, (which are not pleaded for,) and as
for their Reply, That others are not pleaded against or excluded, but only put
under trial for example: those empty husks have bin so often ventilated, that I
shall not spend more breath to dissipate them; only I shall confess, that
Chrysostom says not, If they will not submit to trial, you have freed your
soul; for he could not say any thing of that, which was not, and which he
dreamed not of; for I shall desire them better to quote me, where he speaks of
any such trial which they ought to make, or submission which we should yield.

In the same Homily, indeed, he explains himself, to intend all this of
notorious offenders, and so Peter Martyr understands him, saying, Quod si quis
venerit cum sordibus, Loc. com. part. 4. p. 63.
ignoranter, nulla vestra culpa est, nam haec mihi de notis and manifestis
disputata sunt) and means it of such, as had been formerly censured, and were
under penance, He that partakes not (says he) is a Penitent, such as the
Deacons might take notice of by a precedent public sentence against them, it
is to them he speaks, In Matthew. Homil. 82.
You deserve no little punishment, if conscious of notorious crimes in any of
the Communicants, you connive at them to partake of that Holy Table: They were
the Deacons, who as they proclaimed Sancta sanctis, so themselves were cried
unto to look to the doors, and they shouted out three several times to them to
go out, that were not to receive, in the Leturgies of Basil, Chrysostom, and
the Ethiopick; and yet they will not say that the Deacon had power to examine,
De sacro participat. myster. Tom. 5. p. 328. Homil. 28. in 1. Cor. 11. Tom. 4.
p. 112.
or authority to cast out any not formerly censured. Besides, Chrysostom
notwithstanding all his thunderings here against admission of persons unworthy,
by his lightnings elsewhere it often appears, that he himself took notice of
many that came unworthily, and participated, as Licet sit aliquid a vobis
patratum acceditis; and also, non quemadmodum nunc facimus, temporis gratia
accedentes magis quam animi studio, neque ut praeparati ad vitia nostra
expurganda compunctionis pleni accedimus, sed ut in solennitatibus simus,
quando omnes adsint; and again, multos video temere quomodocunque consuetudine
magis, quam legitime aut consideratione and mente, de corpore Christi
participantes. Sermon. 3. in c. 3. ad Ephesians,
Chrysostom well knew such ought not perchance in respect of their proper
Consciences to have come; yet he was not ignorant, that in the judgment of the
Church they ought not to be repelled, unless notorious and scandalous; they
being different questions (as some conceive) Who may come, and, Who may be
admitted? and that he may have a right in foro Ecclesiae, which cannot approve
it in foro Coeli. Chrysostom resolved Judas did participate, and yet says,
Homil. 51. in 14. Math. Tom. 2. p. 115.
Nullus Judas hanc mensam adeat. If they have not been formerly duly censured,
at the instant of their approach, how can they be regularly rejected, where
neither any degrees of admonition, nor judicial process (which regularly ought
to precede) can at that suddenness be complied with; and in charity it may be
not irrationally supposed, that he that offers himself after admonition
(usually previous to the administration) that none unworthy adventure to come,
Advers. Anabap. l. 6. c. 9. p. 230.
has repented of his former sins, and comes with Vows of amendment? Quomodo
ergo fideles Ministri (says Bullinger) adeo facile, ut Anabaptistae volunt, a
coena Domini excluderent homines peccatores, sed tamen petentes gratiam Dei,
and qui hoc testantur, eo ipso quod accedunt ad coenam?

The Fathers generally (not only Chrysostom) do pathetically persuade men to
come prepared, and emphatically threaten such as come without due preparation,
not in order to excluding of all such as upon trial were not found to have such
preparatory qualifications; but to excite their solicitude, and quicken their
care to fit and dispose themselves, and try their hearts how they were
disposed; their Exhortations looked to make them come worthily, not to suspend
them, lest possibly they might be unworthy, as St. Paul menaceth damnation to
him that eats and drinks unworthily; yet forbids not to come, but commands
Self-probation; and I could instance in these Divines, who assert a free
admission of all Church Members, yet do with as much efficacy press and insist
upon a coming with holy and suitable affections, as those that are so
closehanded and tenacious of the Sacrament. So that sure Chrysostom is not as
full as they can wish, unless as Porus, when Alexander asked him, How he would
be dealt with? answered, As a King, and that was enough; so it be sufficient
that the authority of the Minister (it seems alone) be greater than the Kings:
but whether they have cause to continue their wonder that Chrysostom is
brought in by us to give witness on our part, we shall manifest in due place.
In the interim we shall give them this corollary, That because the ancient
Church repelled notorious sinners, for them to argue, that therefore they
admitted none without examination and trial of their Sanctity, is as if I
should conclude, that because the Laws of this Commonwealth punish Thieves
that are judicially attainted, therefore they put every man under a restraint,
until he approve himself a true man.

SECT. XIV.
Sending the Eucharist to Strangers, and persons absent, whether a Corruption?
Whether the Fathers were prodigal of Christ's blood? Of admitting to the
Eucharist, presently after Baptism. Of the Literae Formatae, and
Communicatoriae.

THe Paper to make some Dialectick proof, that there was no such scrupulous
examination of men taken previously to communicating in the ancient Church,
alleged, that then the consecrated Elements (which being received, became the
Sacrament) were sometimes sent to persons absent, and to strangers coming to
Rome, etc.

The Apologists Quorum vis animusque ferox contingit Olympum; take this for a
corruption, smelling of rank superstition, the Paper fetching it from Rome,
bidding us prove it to be an ancient practice, and they will prove it to be an
ancient error. -- Sternent
Adversas acies, quales cum montibus altis
Volvitur amnis humi.
But I have already verified the practice, Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 9. S. 32.
and need not farther confirm it, for Chamier prevents me by affirming negari
nequit, adeo frequentia sunt testimonia and exempla; but they have not yet
convinced the error: for it is not sufficient to prove it erroneous, to say it
came from Rome (yet it was only the sending it to strangers which was said to
be used, not instituted at Rome, in token of peace and communion) for this was
done when Rome was in her Virgin-purity, and before she turned Whore; when all
those glorious Eulogies were given her by the consentiens laus bonorum, and
incorrupta vox been judicantium; and to suppose she merited them not then,
because now she does not, is an error as wide upon one side, as that of the
Papists is on the other, who think she deserves them now, because then she
did. It is no Argument because Jordan falls into the dead Sea, that it never
had fresher streams, neither is Rome like the Birds of Phineus, that whatsoever
she has touched, must be afterward polluted.

It was enough for my purpose, that I proved the thing de facto; and I am no
more obliged to prove it de jure, than our Divines are to justify the
deferring of Baptism by some in the ancient Church, (and particularly by
Constantine) until toward their death, because from thence they collect an
Argument, Tertullian, Haymo, Aquinas, Erasmus, Glossae, aliique.
that Baptism was not then believed to be of such necessity; nor more than
those many and great names of Tertullian, Haymo, Aquinas, Erasmus, etc. that
conceive St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.29. did draw an Argument, to prove the
Resurrection from a practice either of the Cerinthians, or the Marcionites,
could suppose he intended to legitimate that custom.

But of this usage which we discourse of, however these austeri Aristarchi may
lash it; yet the modest sweetness of famous Chamier, (as, Ut quisque est major,
magis est placabilis --) will take with more complacency, than their harsh
censoriousness, Ubi supra S. 18. S. 28. p. 127.
who having said that consultissimum ut Sacramenti actio sit continua, adds of
this practice, quia olim factum a piis viris, non sumus adeo praefracti in
nostra sententia ut damnemus. And indeed, though Protestant Divines condemn the
reposition of the Sacrament, in order to circumgestation, and adoration, etc.
yet Sacramental actions being defined by their ends, and this transmission of
the Elements being only a continuance of their first Ordination to a
Sacramental use, and so the Sacrament being a Relative, and being not extra
usum, had still rationem Sacramenti; and the conservation thereof elsewhere,
being signified unto, and ratified by him that was to receive, since the words
work not of themselves, but by the understanding of him that communicated, may
seem sufficient: Therefore under these Aspects, this Custom which partly arose
in times of Persecution, l. 1. obser. 8. p. 60.
and partly was grounded on this reason (as Albaspinus tells us out of
Innocent) that they to whom it was sent, se a nostra communione non judicent
separatos, and perchance upon other reasons, of which, as of other usages,
though our great distance may render us ignorant; yet it seems they were so
weighty and considerable, that no Christian then living interposed any
Objections against them; I say, this Custom is not therefore condemned, though
not altogether approved by our gravest Theologues, as Morton, Chemnicius,
Gerhard, etc. But for my part, since the Apologists, Contra ibunt animis vel
magnum praestet Achillem; I shall not hazard the Charge, nor abide the Shock of
such bold Assailants, but quit the ground, having already served my turn of it.

They had the confidence in the fromer Section, to proclaim the Fathers were
for them; but now Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? being but a little
galled, they wince, and say that Antichrist has been long working in the
Church, (and the Fathers, it seems, were his Chaplains, and his Work was
carried on by them, and not only by the Gnostics, and other Heretics,) and
might be too prodigal of Christ's blood; I wish they could vindicate themselves
from being worse than Prodigals, that are so covetous thereof, and avarus est
deterior prodigo: But neither could the one lavish, nor can the other withold
from others his blood, but only that which properly is but the sign thereof,
and to become his blood to those alone that believe; and to be effectual in
sealing of Salvation by it, upon condition of Faith; yet that sign, without
prodigality to be exhibited to all that profess Faith, and can discern what is
thereby signified, and the Salvation to be offered in signo, to whom it was
never intended in beneplacito, Salvation, upon condition of Faith in Christ,
being but the tenor of the Gospel, which is held forth in the Sacraments, as
well as in the Word, only with a different manner of propounding; and
therefore anciently the Catechumeni, as soon as they were baptized, (and till
then they were not held faithful) were at once admitted to public hearing of
the Gospel, and participating of the Eucharist. Which Custom, as it is
witnessed, de facto, by our Divines formerly quoted, and by many of the
Fathers, mentioned by Lorinus; so the same Author thinks, In Acta. c. 2. v. 42.
p. 109.
it had its ground and rise from Act. 2.41, 42. where it being said that four
thousand were baptized in one day (of whose conversation sure there could be no
trial had, neither could they make any special confession of their Faith,
whereof their coming to be baptized only, was a real profession; which though
it was usual in the baptizing of such as came over from Paganism, that they
might testify they were Christians; yet there is neither the like Rule, nor
Exercise, nor Reason, for a Confession to be made at the Eucharist, by those
who have been bred in the Profession of the Faith, and where their approach and
desire to participate, is a special profession, as I have showed:) I say, as
soon as it is said they were baptized, it is added in the next immediate verse,
They all continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and
breaking of bread; (that is, in breaking of the Eucharist, as the Syriack
reads, and the general sense interprets it) and prayers.

From discrediting the Witnesses, they speak to enervate the Testimony, (viz.)
That Strangers by place, may upon knowledge of some members, or Certificate
from the Church, be admitted; but I briefly demand, Whether without farther
probation, upon such Knowledge or Certificate only, they shall find
admission, or not? If yea, they give up the cause Tam Scythae lasso meditantur
arcu
Cedere campis.
for this might always supersede all farther trial, and closes with what we
have asserted, That the knowledge of men collected by ordinary converse with
them, might frustrate and prevent all farther examination. If not, they given
us words that signify nothing, and which only Sunt apina tricaeaue, aut si
quid vilius istis.

Indeed it is obvious in Antiquity, that strangers were not regularly admitted
to the Sacraments, without Certificates from their proper Pastor, which were
called Literae communicatoriae and formatae: But their way is as dissonant from
this Rule, as the observing thereof would be destructive to their ends; Ne quis
sine literis Episcopi sui, in aliena Ecclesia communicet. 1. Council. Carthag.
Can. 6. Apud Centur. Magdeburg. 7. Apud Caranzam.
for such Literae formatae would altogether frustrate their new Formatae
Ecclesiae, gathered and made up of such as have no such Communicatory Letters.

SECT. XV.
Of daily communicating; of receiving at Easter; all the People anciently
communicated. No man to be repelled upon the private knowledge of the Minister
or other. Whether all did partake the Lords Supper that heard the Word? What
sins may exclude from the Sacrament? Whether the ancient Church knew or
practiced any such Censure as Suspension? The Negative proved, the Arguments
for the Affirmative profligated. Penitents were first excommunicate: What
Communion anciently did signify? What Abstinence denoted? What was the
Lay-Communion? What was meant by removing from the Altar? What Suspension
anciently signified, and in what sense that notion was used? What the School
determines of giving the Eucharist to manifest and occult sinners? Suarez
imposterously alleged by them. What Suspicion may warrant an Exclusion?
Whether the way of Separation be conformable to the Ancient? Of their care to
keep men off from the Sacrament. The Application of a passage in Chrysostom
redeemed from their Exceptions. Whether there be reason to examine
dispositively to hearing the Word, as well as to receiving the Sacrament, and
danger to the Unworthy in the one, as well as in the other? The casting of Pearl
before Swine, and giving holy things unto Dogs, what it intends? The difference
between the Word and Sacraments. All not anciently admitted to all the Word.
The Sacrament multifariously proved to be a converting Ordinance, and this to
be the common judgment of Protestants. What effects may be hoped only by
seeing the Administration, without partaking? The Sophisme discussed, He that
partakes worthily, is converted already; he that eats unworthily, eats
damnation. Whether men are prohibited those Duties, which they cannot well and
duly discharge? The moral works of natural men.

HEre (they say) is little that presses them: The Numidian Bears are so far,
that they feel no stripes; and it is said of an Eastern King, he was so fat and
so gross that he was not sensible of pain, when Needles were stuck into his
body: but it may be our Needles are not sharp enough to enter, we shall
therefore see what they are to the point.

In the Authorities also there is, they say, more confusion, than variety.
Answ^ Confusion may like scandal be given or taken, and it is also passive
as well as active, and I might excusably suspect, that those authorities have
somewhat confounded them, for to some they have found nothing at all to say in
answer, and to the rest, nothing to purpose. I shall not contest with them for
accurateness of method, neither do I think they need contend with any for
variety; the method is but accidental to the matter, and as long as Accidens
potest abesse sine subjecti interitu, if the substance be defended, I, that
seek not to interweave mine own image with Minerva's in this buckler, shall be
less solicitous of the credit of the method, whereof nevertheless I am as
little diffident, only for their censures, as I am distrustful of others
capacity, for the Sacrament, for their censoriousness.

The Paper pleaded not for keeping up a quotidian Communion (the reasons
perhaps that gave first rise thereunto being ceased) and therefore their
arguing against it is but a Sciamachy. Hieron. ad Lucinium and contra Jovin.
Aug. de Sermon. Domini in monte, 12.
Neither was it the assiduity that was principally insisted upon, but the
generality of communicating, Totum populum quotidie Eucharistiam sumpsisse, as
Hierom and Augustine. Nevertheless the daily receiving of the Ancients, shows
they made no such huge difference between preparation for the Word and for the
Sacraments, and it also upbraids their long procrastination of any communion,
of which though now at length they have reassumed the administration, yet
toward the far greatest part of their Congregations it is still discontinued,
and in diverse Churches, by their influence and promotion, are those placed as
Pastors, who long time were not in a capacity to administer it, (though by an
intolerable presumption without any calling thereunto they adventured upon
administering Baptism,) which I should think, (since the Casuists say, Filiucius
Tract. 13. c. 1. n. 14.
it merits the lesser excommunication to receive the Sacrament from the hands
of a Layman, and the Administer is more guilty than the Receiver) is a juster
cause to have suspended them from the other Sacrament, than any they can charge
upon many of those, whom they put under suspension. Those men have been since
ordained, after they had waited to see how the Horoscope would be formed and
settled, and what Aspects the Stars were like to have, and which would be
ascendent or descendent, and which aucti lumine, aut minuti, aut combusti, that
so they might resolve in what way to ordain them, for a more fortunate and
auspicious nativity.

Those that content themselves with receiving twice or thrice a year, or make
it only an Easter-formality, I neither am, nor shall be retained to be their
Advocate, yet perchance many may so infrequently receive, that are not content
with it, but rather patient of what they cannot remedy, and as these may share
of the same comforts which the Apologists hold forth to them, seldom is less
obnoxious, than never. Cavendum ne si nimium in longum differatur perceptio
corporis and sanguinis Christi, ad perniciem animae pertineat, said the Council
of Cabillon.

To receive at Easter, only through formality, Ad popul. Antioch. Hom. 61.
has frequent increpations from the Fathers, Chrysostom especially, when
Circulis rem definis, and when ex consuetudine magis quam legitime, aut
consideratione and mente, and temporis gratia, magis quam animi studio, Sermon.
3. in Ephesians. c. 1. in 1 Cor. 11. Hom. 28. Tom. 4. p. 112. contra Liter.
Petiliani l. 2. c. 94. tom. 7. p. 31.
as has before been declared; yet notwithstanding reproving the abuse, they
continued the usage of general communicating at that time, and not in that
Emperical way (as a grave Divine wittily speaks) applying the remedy to the
weapon, but to the patient, abolished not the act without trying to reform the
fault, in the manner of doing, but notwithstanding some abuse the ancient
Church still thought that an apt and opportune time for the celebration, when
as Augustine says in the like case, Ipsa festivitas ferventiores facit, etiam
qui in caetero anno pigriores sunt, and in their sense (who thought not the
least helps despicable, seeing small pullies serve to advance great weights)
the very season was a kind of prompter to remember them of that which the
Sacrament was instituted (with infinite more efficacy) to show forth, Aquin.
2.2. q. 2 art. 7. Durand. in 3. did. 25. q. 1. n. 9.
insomuch as thereupon diverse Schoolmen and Casuists make it an argument of
supine ignorance, that any should not have explicit knowledge of those
mysteries of Christ, which were so publicly solemnized by the Church, and
therefore though they laid no abstract necessity in the observation, nor
holiness in the time, yet they thought it had much of seasonableness, and
nothing of superstition, (which may be as palpable in not observing, as in
observing, set-times for duties) and it was decreed, that at that time every
one should communicate, not to imply that it was sufficient to do it then
only, but as Hospinian speaks of Zepherinus, Hospinian hist. Sacrament. rei l.
2. p. 124.
Cum vix unquam eveniret ut simul omnes communicarent, necesse vero erat ut qui
permixti erant profanis and idololatris, externo aliquo simbolo fidem suam
testarentur, diem certum in anno, ordinis and politiae causa, statuit, quo
totus Christianorum populus, fidei confessionem sumptione coenae Dominicae,
ederet: only these Antipodes to antiquity can endure no Communions at Easter
of any time else, of whom compared with the Ancients, we may say, as they do of
the French and Spaniards, That what the one is, the other is not; And perchance
as Maldonat tells us, That he approves an exposition (though another of
Augustine's be more probable) only because it most dissenteth from the
interpretation of the Calvinists; and Bellarmine says, That an opinion is the
better welcome, because the contrary thereof is embraced by the Protestants; so
they consultly declaim against the Sacrament at Easter, because the ancient
Church then used to celebrate it.

That the ancient Church decreed, that all having passed puberty should
communicate several times in a year, checks their impeding the far greatest
part from communicating once in many years. Had the Ancients symbolized with
them, they might more aptly and properly have decreed, that none should
participate the Sacrament, rather than that all should; for the denomination is
to be taken from the major part, and among these men far more are repelled than
admitted, and one of an hundred is none in comparison; and whereas they tell
us, They have also taken in some about fifteen or sixteen years old, (the age
of puberty,) I must tell them, that the thing which I directly and principally
intended was, that all were to communicate, not at what age they were admitted;
but they, contrary to Law, let go the Principal and arreign the Accessory; but
from the admission at that age, it may materially be observed, that the term,
until which they were excluded, and from which they were admitted, was their
puberty, not till upon trial they made demonstration of their sanctity. Let
them fix one eye on the ancient Church, and cast the other on their
Congregations, and tell me, if their admitting one of an hundred look with any
suitableness to that of unicuique praesentium in Justin Martyr, Distribuunt
unicuique praesentium, Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2. Unicuique populo permittunt
partem ejus sumere, Clemens. Strom. l. 1. Theodor. in 1 Cor. 11. Panis ille
quem universa ecclesia participat. Maxent. cit. a Centur. Magd. cent. 6. c. 4.
p. 115. Cunctus populus, Justin. Apol. Hosp. Hist. rei Sacrament. l. 2. p. 5.
and 52. Haymo in 1 Cor. 11. ut cit. Cham. Casaubon, Exer. cit. 16. sect. 31. p.
366.
unicuique populo in Clement, totus populus in Hierom and Augustine, that omnes
ex aequo in Theodoret, that promiscua multitudo, (which out of Rhenanus) tota
multitudo, (which from Chemnicius we have formerly mentioned) and that mixta
frequentia and multitudo hominum, and si quibus collibu^sset, which Hospinian
speaks of to have participated in the greater and more solemn feasts; and
whether it be conformable to that precept and reason of Haymo, Omnes communiter
ex uno pane communicate, quia illa oblatio unus panis est, and communis debet
esse omnibus. Whereupon Casaubon calls the Lord's Supper, Publica fidelium
omnium invitatio.

That all present at the Word were by decree to communicate, they grant might
well be, except such as were under censure, or obnoxious to it: it was never
intended to be decreed by them, nor meant to be alleged by us, but upon the
known Hypothesis of not extending it to persons under a judicial censure; but
while they dilate the exception to such as are only obnoxious to censure, (that
is, in a sense suitable to their practice, which else it self would be
obnoxious) such whom they shall judge unfit, (who repel so many, whereof not
one, that I know, was ever duly censured) is a gloss of their own; agreeable
with no Text of ancient Discipline; but the contrary is evident, by the
testimony of St. August. Nos a communione quenquam prohibere non possumus, n^si
aut sponte confessum, aut in aliquo judicio ecclesiastico vel. seculari
nominatum atque convictm. De medicina poenitentiae super illud, 1 Cor. 5. si
quis frater, etc. and Homil. 50. Mr. Bal. trial of the grounds of separation,
p. 188, 189. I. 3. de celebrat. missar. p. 121.
Augustine produced by the Paper, which (according to the caution given by that
ancient Sophister, at the encounter of an hard argument) they take no notice
of, neither has it any smack of justice or reason that any man should be
judged obnoxious, and thereupon be kept off, by any other man's, or ministers
private knowledge, but according to allegations and proofs of witnesses, or
evidence of fact: The common good necessarily requiring that such public
actions of this nature should be regulated by a kind of public not private
knowledge, which once admitted into judicature would soon fill the Church and
State with a world of scandals, injuries and inconveniences, and liberty should
be granted to wicked ministers to punish with this punishment, whomsoever they
please, as a solid Divine disputes more at large, not only according to the
Doctrine of the Schoolmen, (and particularly out of Suarez) but also of the
Canonists. The judgment of the former, we shall presently produce; for the
later, let him be their foreman to speak for them, who was second to none, our
learned Countreymnn Lynwood, Imo, says he, quilibet Christianus habet jus in
perceptione Eucharistiae, nist illud per peccatum mortale amittat, unde cum in
facie Ecclesiae non constet, talem am^sisse jus suum, non debet ei in facie
Ecclesiae denegari, alias daretur facul^as malis sacerdotibus pro suo libitu
punire hac poena, quos vellent. And if the Minister should proceed to act upon
his private knowledge or judgment, he shall do what Christ himself, did not,
and, themselves say, he ought not to have done, in the case of Judas so as such
a course is as much opposite to the practice of Christ; as the judgment of the
School and Canonists, whose judgment is steered by his practice.

They next ask, How agrees that Note upon the Margin of the Canons, in old
time all did communicate, yea, all that heard the word, by the decree of the
Council of Antioch? Chamier tom. 4. l. 7. c. 18. sect. 21. p. 194.
Such as were under penance, as well as Catechumens, (for licuit discedere in
missa catechumenorum, sed qui intraverit and Scripturas audiverit, id est, non
fuerit egressus cum catechumenis, hunc jubent canones excommunicari, vel
expectare missam fidelium, ac proinde communicare) such are still presupposed
to be seposited from our discourse, as well as they were known to be sequestered
from the Sacrament; they know we onelyspeak of the rest, and that of those, all
that hear the Word should participate of the Sacrament, agrees well enough with
the way of the ancient Church, and the way of righteousness too, but indeed
agrees not with their course, where an hundred of those that are neither
Catechumens nor Penitents, partake of the Word, and but one of them of the
Sacrament.

These then were dark times, unless they were holier than ours, that is, they
were dark, unless they had more light, they were holier doubtless, because more
humble, and more meek, and more charitable; but some men are like the Hermit,
who thought the Sun shined only into his Cell, and resemble Seneca's Harpaste,
who thought the rooms to be dark, when her self was become blind.

They tell us, a saying of a godly man, That all to the Sacrament is the great
Golias of those days, with whom the little David's of this age are encountering;
and I shall requite them with an Apothegm of a man, that perchance can be no
godly man, because not of their judgment, That none to the Sacrament, but whom
they please, is the great Diana of the Ephesians, for which all the
Silver-smiths of the times are making Shrines, as if the Image fell down from
Jupiter, when it was made by the Crafts-men.

The testimony that allows no cause of separation from the communion, but such
sins, as deserve excommunication, they say, bears no weight; yet it is alleged
out of St. Augustine, but Augustinus tecum erravit, as Corvicius. The truth is,
St. Ep. 118. c. 3.
Augustine reciting and allowing therein the sense and judgment of some pious
men in his age, speaks this of an active separation of a man's self upon
conscience of his sinfulness, and not of a passive, as it is commonly
understood by Gratian and others; but the argument holds with more nerves and
energy against a passive separation, since a greater cause is requisite to
exclude those that do come, than to deterr them from coming, and many may not
perchance lawfully approach, which yet cannot but unlawfully be repelled, as I
have said before.

And if the ancient Church excluded none but such as were or had been
excommunicate, we may be indulged to think no sins a cause of separation from
the Eucharist, but such as merit excommunication. I confess, my Horizon is very
narrow, (as men that are of no height, have no large prospect) and mine eyes
are weak, and do not discern all that I might, and my memory as frail to retain
all those species and notions, which sometime perchance I have received; but
sure I did never meet with (or have forgotten) any clear evidence in antiquity,
that warranted the distinction between Excommunication and Suspension, as now
it is apprehended and practiced, or that any were excluded from the Communion
antonomastically, but such as had been first separate from all Communion, or to
speak properly, from simple Communion.

The Apologist tells us indeed, that Antiquity has distinguished between
Excommunication and Suspension, but they verify it by no evidence, or
testimony, save their own, and we should advise them, rather to imitate
Pythagoras his Scholars in their silence, than to emulate their Master in his
Ipse dixit. Their Margin seems to quote Ames, as asserting what they affirm,
but though that learned man distinguish in the place cited, between the greater
and the lesser Excommunication, Cas. consci. l. 4. c. 29. sect. 29.
yet he produces neither Scripture nor authority to back that distinction,
(who elsewhere plainly confesses, that Suspension is not ex singulari Christi
instituto.) They say, the Paper it self makes the Excommunicate but one sort of
the excluded: True, but does it say, or does it follow from what it said, that
the suspended were another sort? The others suffered exclusion for natural
disabilities, we are speaking now of those that were separate for sins, which
are moral defects, and among those, though the Paper distinguish Penitents from
Excommunicate, it was not because all those under penance, had not also been
excommunicated, but because all excommunicate were not Penitents, these later
being (as I said before) communionis ecclesiasticae candidati; it was conceded
them as a favor to do penance, in order to their redintegration, which to the
others was not as yet vouchsafed.

But however the Apologists (like the Ostrich leave their Eggs in the dust,
that any foot may crush them, and so) have deserted all incubation upon
suspension, yet I am not ignorant that some others have engaged in a
vindication of the practice and exercise thereof, in the primitive times; but
however their sheets like that of Parrhasius, may seem real to other Painters,
yet they are but painted.

They show us, 1. That diverse sorts of men were not admitted to the Eucharist,
which were not under excommunication. And we grant it, but we ask, if it
necessarily follow that they must be persons suspended, that is, Ab
excommunicatis solis poenitentia peti poterit. Albaspinus not. in c. 2. ep. 3.
Innocent. ad Exup. p. 143. Multi reperiebantur excommunicati qui circum fores
ecclesiae poenitentiam flagitabant. Idem. de vet. eccles. ritib. l. 2. obser.
4. p. 240. Per poenitentiam ab excommunicatione sive a peccato
excommunicationis, ut loquuntur antiqui canones, liberabantur, Ibid. obs. 3. p.
227. Cum excommun^cato poenitentia concederetur -- ante poenitentiam
meminerimus poenitentem excommunicatum fuisse -- and poenitentiae benedictione
eum ab excommunicatione liberatum fuisse. Ib. p. 242. obs. 4. Aug. ep. 108.
tom. 2. p. 98. 3. council. Tolet. can. 12. and 6. council. Tolet. can. 7, and 8.
item Albas. not in can. p. 92, and 104, Idem de vet. eccl. rit. l. 2. obs. 4 p.
241.
such as were only debarred the Lords Table, and that immediately, without
having been first excommunicated, or cut off from the body of Christ his
Church, before they were kept off from his body in the Sacrament, or without
being first separated from a Communion in all Ordinances, as well as that of the
Eucharist? for this is that which they call Suspension, and this is that which
they must assert out of antiquity, unless they will give us a Cloud in stead of
Juno. And this we deny, and gainsay, that there were any such persons, or any
such ecclesiastic censure. Those censured persons that were kept off from the
Lords Table, and yet lay not under Excommunication, were Penitents; who indeed
were not excommunicate, but had been, and were in the way of redintegration
with the Church, from whose Communion they had been segregated, and though in
the way of their reuniting, they were joined first by one piece, and then by
another, and did communicate first in other Ordinances, before they did in the
Eucharist, yet they were first excluded from all, not that one of the Lords
Supper; and although at the fourth and last concoction of penance, were
admitted to Communion in all save that one, yet at first a total remotion was
the terminus a quo, whence they began to move farther in order to their
restitution and rest, and however some had the Salve ready, as soon as the Wound
was inflicted, and it seems were sentenced unto penance without their
Petitions, and a determinate time limited how long they should lie under it,
yet the very adjudging to penance, implied a former separation from Communion
in all Ordinances, and not only and immediately from the Eucharist. This might
be multifariously verified, but as one Caesar contained many Marii, so one
testimony of Augustine shall virtually involve many, and he tells us, Agunt
etiam homines poenitentiam, si post baptismum ita peccaverint, ut excommunicari
and postea reconciliari mereantur, sicut agunt in omnibus Ecclesiis illi qui
proprie poenitentes appellantur. Penitents had peculiar habits, being lapp'd in
sackcloth and ashes, their hair was polled, they came not near their wives, nor
intermeddled with public business, nothing of which is enjoined or inflicted
upon suspended persons. And Albaspinus informs us, Iisdem exorcismis paci
restituerentur poenitentes, quam catechumeni in Christianam familiam
transierant, unde dignoscitur de utrisque idem judicium apud antiquos fuisse.
We need not then be prompted that Excommunication differed from Penance, for we
acknowledge that they were different conditions, as are also aegritudo and
neutralitas convalescentiae, but the one is but a step from the other; yet
neither of these conditions was to be under Suspension. Amongst all those sorts
of Penitents there was none properly suspended, that is, immediately and only
removed from the Lords Table, there were sundry degrees of them, and those
degrees passed under several notions in diverse ages and places, but no Church
Lexicon will warrant that any of these denominations was synonymous with
suspended, as Suspension is now understood and practiced; (...), separatus, is
a term we grant appropriate to a person excommunicate, because the Ancients
knew no separation but by excommunication; but why (...), non acceptus, non
admissus, exors, should be translated suspensus, as that word is now commonly
accepted, Can. 13. (...) Zonar. annot. in can. 12. secundun^ ipsius comput.
(though we shall allow the Translation in that sense wherein the notion was
anciently used) and not rather be synonymous with that other of (...), or
denote Penitents, while it signifies only not to be received into Communion,
(as Penitents were not, although they differed from the excommunicates) and as
in the same Canon of the Apostles (whence the instance is taken) (...) and
(...) is used for such receiving, and (...) for the receiver, is (I suppose) a
writ that bears no test but meipso. And to argue, some were not received into
Communion, therefore they were suspended, is a fallacious affirming of the
Species from the G^nus. But Zonaras set it out of question by interpreting it
of one seeking to be ordained, and not yet approved or accepted in one place,
and was therefore forbidden to be ordained in another.

2. They vouch Antiquity to warrant, that some waited diverse years till they
were admitted to the Eucharist; and we acknowledge it, but know no reason why it
should be thereupon inferred, that these were persons suspended, that long
expectation being never the proper passion of Suspension, for the Catechumeni
were long in subliming, and the Penitents especially, upon every step of their
rise and readmission, made some stay and commorancy, as before has been
declared, and their probation was of more or less duration, respectively to
their offenses, and to the customs of several ages, and several Churches.

3. They would persuade us, that to be put from the Communion was only to be
denied the Eucharist, and that therefore Suspension is legible in all those
Canons, whereby a deprivation of the Communion is decreed. But surely, they
betray their own judgment to be weak, or hope that ours is so, that make this
allegation. Albaspinus will roundly tell them, L. 2. obs. 8. p. 258.
to suppose this word Communion ought to be taken for the Eucharist, -- is a
notable folly and ignorance, which he cannot incur that is but meanly versed
in turning over the Writings of the Fathers, or in the knowledge of Antiquity.
And his very first observation might have better informed them, L. 1. c. 1. p.
2. and 5.
that the Communion extends more largely than to the Eucharist, -- and
comprehends all those things which pertain to holy things, the usage of life
and society of men; and he concludes that the custom and use of this word as
now it is, is much deflected from the true, legitimate, and ancient acception
thereof, L. 1. obs. 4. p. 41
which is scarce ever used for the Eucharist, unless some other word be
appended to it, yet upon this false account much stress is laid upon the first
Council of Arles, as if it decreed Suspension, 1 Arelat. can. 3.4.7.19.
because it prescribed a separating from the Communion, whereas it is clear,
that as abstinere eos a communione, a communione separari, a communione
excludi, non communicare, are the forms of censure indifferently and univocally
used in the Council. So in the second of Arles, alienus a fratrum communione, 2
Arelat. can. 19.21.25.31.23.
ab Ecclesiae liminibus arceri, ab Ecclesia alienus, ab Ecclesia excludi, ab
Ecclesiasticis conventibus removeri, are but the same things in other notions,
which are frequent also in other Councils, and cannot be restrained to, or
expounded of Suspension from the Lords Table, but a separation from the Church
and Ecclesiastical Assemblies, (whereunto persons suspended are admitted.) And
if to be separate from the Communion, had been only to be kept from the
Sacrament, then to receive the Communion must consequently be to partake the
Eucharist. Not. in council. Elib. can. 1. and de vet. Eccles. rit. l. 1. obs. 1.
and 11. and not. in can. 12. council. Arel. 2. and can. 12. council. Vasens. etc.
But Albaspinus clearly shows, that many at their decease were received to the
Communion without the Eucharist. And out of the second Council of Arles, he
proves that some who happened to die before they had finished their penance, yet
had given signs of repentance, were restored to the Communion after their
death, by the receiving of their oblations, when there could be no reception of
the Eucharist, and accipere communionem, was only to be absolved, and the
Communion was fidelium societas, jus societatis, jus quod quis habere possit in
societate fidelium and corpore Christianorum, which was analogous to the jus
civitatis among the Romans, whereunto some think the Church had reference, and
therefore there is rarely in the Canons any mention of Absolution, it being
signified by these words, communion, society, consortship, and reconciled; and
notum est (says Albaspinus) reconciliationem esse ab Eucharistia distinctam,
ipsamque reconciliationem nihil aliud esse, quam corpori fidelium restitui eos,
a quo peccata illos distraxerant, poenitentesque de ea, non vero de Eucharistia
esse solicitos. Beside this censure, to be separate from the Communion, was
generally denounced for the greatest offenses, so that if thereby Suspension
only be to be understood, we should be at as great a loss, and as much to seek
of Excommunication, as now we are of Suspension; and the latter would have
justled out the former, and left no matter for it to work upon, for it self
alone would do all, and the lean Cow devour the fat; and seeing the sacrificing
to Idols, which the Eliberin Council calls Crimen principale, and summum
scelus, and Tertullian, Cyprian, Eliberin. Can. 1. and 52.
and other Fathers account the greatest offense, was only censured with
separation from the Communion, and the Libellaici, such as privately renounced
their Religion under their hands, dispersers of infamous Libels, were sentenced
to be anathematized: if to be separate from the communion, had bin only to be
suspended, and to be anathematized were to be excommunicate, at least if it
were not more than simple excommunication, viz. dirarum devotio, it would be
very admirable, that the greater crime should be adjudged to the lesser, and
the lesser offense to the greater punishment. And if not to communicate were
always strictly and only to be understood of having no Communion in the
Eucharist, the 28. Canon of the Eliberin Council, would look with a sad aspect
upon our Apologists, which in joins Episcopum ab eo qui non communicate munera
accipere non debere, for this would bring them to as great a penury of common
bread, as they have brought upon their people of Sacramental, since they should
then have nor Tithes nor Offerings, but from five or six in a Parish; for
about that number are those whom they admit to the Sacrament, and in some of
their Parishes, I think not one has admission.

Fourthly, the notion of abstaining has made some to surfeit with excess of
confidence to have found some tract of Suspension in the Road-way of the
ancient Discipline; but they are mistaken in their Trace, and it is another
Game than they hunt after; for though some learned men; both Protestant and
Papists, straining to suit the ancient practice to some resemblance with the
modern, and set the Sun to the clock, have supposed that the abstenti were
persons suspended; and that abstincre per quinquennium, and ut pauco tempore
abstineat, was only to be separate from the Eucharist, yet notwithstanding, 1.
as this term of abstention (if I be not deceived) is as often used as a form
of censuring in the Council of Eliberis, Council. Elib. can. 16. and 21. Can.
20, 62, 34, 37, 40, 41, 49, 52.
as in half of all the other Synods, so there we find it promiscuously and
synonymously made use of with those forms, ab Ecclesia arceri, ab Ecclesiae
communione arceri, alienus ab Ecclesia haberi, penitus ab Ecclesia absici,
anathematizari; etc. which beyond all possibility of Contest, denote an
Excommunication. 2. In those expressions were Censures denounced for as small
offenses, Can. 49. and 50.
as they were in that form of abstaining; for I should think it was no greater
crime to permit those fruits which they received with thanksgiving to God, to
be blessed by Jews, than to eat with them; yet the former was punished
expressly, Can. 16. and 61.
with casting out of the Church, and the latter with abstaining. 3. We may
observe, that in this very Council, abstention was inflicted for great crimes,
as giving their daughters in marriage to Jews and Heretics, (which was
forbidden by other Canons under pain of Excommunication,) and marrying the
Wives Sister; l. 2. obser. 3. p. 10.
whereas in those times, Lev^ssima peccata multorum annorum excommun catione
luebantur, says Albaspinus, (where take up by the way this observation, That
if the smallest faults were punished with Excommunication, there was no matter
left for Suspension to practice upon.) 4. When for Usury the same Council
sentenceth a Clerk, Can. 20.
beside degradation, to abstain; and a Lay man to be cast out of the Church, I
should conceive it denounces but the same Censure on both, since it is not
like the Church would castigate that sin in a Clerk, with a lesser
punishment, in whom this was a greater sin, especially since as under the Law,
Albasp. l. 2. obs. 34. p. 429. Erasmus in Cyprian. l. 1. epist. 11. p. 38.
secundum edit. suam. Pamelius annot. in epist. 62. secundum suam edit. and
Goulart. S. 13 p. 172. and epist. 38. S. 10. p. 91. Can. 61. In Cypriani epist.
l. 3. ep. 14. p. 93. Albas. not. in can. 47. council. Elib. p. 68. Idem de vet.
eccles. rit. l. 2. obs. 22. p. 320, 322.
the sinne-offering of the Priest was as great as of all the Congregation; so
Leo tells us, Haec quae in aliis Ecclestae membris non vocantur ad culpam, in
illis tamen habeantur illicita; and therefore whosoever had born civil office,
been a soldier, or done penance, was incapable of holy orders. 5. In the
ancient Idiom to abstain was only to separate and remove; and consequently
abstentus was but (...); for so Erasmus tells us in his Explication of the
words peculiar to Cyprian, prefixed to his Edition of that Father, and upon
that place abstinendo diaconum (whose ^^ence was none of the least, having lain
with professed Virgins) he notes absinere pro amovere; and Pamelius in his
Annotations specifies what kind of Separation or Removal that was, viz. Non
separare amovere simpliciter; sed separare a communione; and he more plainly
describes it, by saying, Peculiaris pene Cypriana phrasis qua abstentum pro
excommunicato and abstinere pro excommunicare usurpat -- quanquam alia
periphrasi saepe id circumloquitur, ejicere and de Ecclesia pellere. 6. It is
most evident by the first Council of Toledo, that with such as were under
abstention, it was forbidden to have any Commerce, (aut colloqui, aut
convivari;) which yet was never prohibited toward persons suspended, but only
with such as were excommunicate. 7. That abstinere was first to be removed from
all communion, may appear by the same Council of Eliberis, where he that
marries the Wives Sister is censured to abstain from the Communion for five
years, unless the necessity of his infirmity enforce, velocius dari pacem,
where by peace, is meant fraternity, absolution, and reconciliation, or
admission into the company of the Church, as Erasmus expounds, and Albaspinus
intimates; which shows, that he was before put from the Brotherhood, and cut
off from the body of the Church by Excommunication. 8. Albaspinus tells us,
Abstenti nec poenitentiae compotes essent; and farther, Idololatras and
abstentos ad Ecclesiarum aditum ibi fletu and gemitu elicere misericordiam
studuisse; Which renders it evident, that the abstenti were the same with
excommunicate; and that these two notions were (in his judgment) Synonymous,
Arel. can. 3.
as appears also by what he otherwhere delivers, ab hac societate non solum
arcebantur haeretici, schismatici, abstenti, sed etiam poenitentes and
Catechumeni, where abstenti must stand for excommunicate, or else they were
omitted by him, who were principally excluded from the Church. 9. Whereas the
first Council of Arles decrees, de his qui arma projiciunt in mare, placuit eos
abstinere a communione; Albaspinus also himself gives the sense and effect of
that Canon, Ut qui in pace arma projiciunt, excommunicentur, and adds this
note, Pauco tempore a societate fidelium abstineant, which is more than
Suspension (the suspended being not debarred from the society of the faithful)
as Abstention from the Communion, is more than Separation from the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, the former being of greater latitude than the latter. Lastly,
we shall often find, that after abstention from the Communion, penance was
imposed in order to restitution; and penance presupposes a precedent
Excommunication. But if Abstention were Suspension, and to be under Penance,
was also to be suspended only from the Eucharist, then Suspension had been
imposed to obtain a restoring from Suspension; and when we read in the Canons,
poenitentiam agere quaerunt, it should seem they desired to be suspended; but
neither was penance like to have been desired by them, unless to get out of a
greater evil, under which they lay before, viz. Excommunication.

4. They produce Testimonies to prove, That some were rejected until death, but
were not excommunicate so long; for some of those might have the Sacrament at
their dying hour, which persons excommunicate could not have. But -- Ubi
vincere aperte
Non datur, insid^^s armaque tecta parant.
If they were rejected until death, they were so long also excommunicate; for
in that second Canon of Neo-Caesarea, (which is referred to) Mulier si duobus
nupserit fratribus, abjiciatur in diem mortis, sed propter humanitatem in
extremis suis Sacramentis reconciliari oportet, ita tamen ut si forte sanitatem
recuperaverit, Matrimonio soluto ad poenitentiam admittatur: It is rendered
manifest by the first Canon, that this Censure was Excommunication; for there
absiciatur is explained by an addition of Extra Ecclesiam; and casting out of
the Church is Excommunication: neither does it follow, that she was not
excommunicate so long, because dying, she might have the Sacrament; for, first,
as we cannot be convinced that reconciliari Sacramentis, does properly and
only signify the admission to the Sacrament, but thereby by a Synecdoche is
understood perfecta communio, and maxima and absolutissima reconciliatio,
wherein a right also to the Eucharist is involved; Justellus instead of
Sacramentis reconciliari oportet renders it, poenitentiam habebit. L. 2. obser.
4. p. 239. Idololatrae, maechi, homicidae, apostatae. Council. Elib. can. 3.
Arel. 2. can. 24. Cyprian. l. 1. ep. 38. Cartag. can. 76. Nicen. can. 13.
yet though it were in their sens to be understood, nevertheless though no
excommunicate person, in sensu composito, could partake of the Eucharist, (as
neither could a person suspended, without a contradiction) yet he that stood
excommunicate, might in extremis, in fine, in necessitate infirmitatis, as the
Canons speak, be admitted to penance, to be assumed and undergone, if he did
recover into health; and in the interim receive not only the simple Communion,
but also the Sacrament, which seems clear and demonstrable from this very
Canon; as also does that other truth, that men were first excommunicate, before
they were made Penitents. Adducor ut credam (says Albaspinus) facinorosis and
ex omni scelerum and flagitiorum coliuvione concretis hominthus, vel etiamsi in
ea praecipites peccata abeant, poenitentiam (modo illa peteretur) nunquam
denegatam; and he cites the words of Caelestine, in an Epistle to the Bishops
of France, Poenitentiam morientibus denegari -- quid hoc rogo aliud est, quam
morienti mortem addere, ejusque animam ne absolvi possit occidere? And
howsoever in some of the first Times, and during the ardour of Persecution, for
some sins (four sorts of which Albaspinus recounteth) besides those which
Tertullian calls non delicta sed monstra; and offenses a second time lapsed
into (where it was decreed, in fiae Communionem non dandaem, ne lusisse de
Dominica communione videantur) the Communion was denied to be afforded in their
dying condition, (which manifests the falseness of that over-bold assertion,
That none were excommunicate until death) yet as this was decreed with a
condition expressed ( nisi digna satisfactione poenituerint, as the Canon
speaks) and as it appears by Gyprian, and by the third Canon of the first
Council of Arles, that Communion was especially denied to men at their death,
because they had not petitioned to do their penance, while they lived in
health. So not only the fourth Council of Carthage, held in the fourth
Century, expressly decreed, That penance should be permitted to dying persons
(which supposes them then under Excommunication) and then that the Eucharist
should be immediately exhibited to them, if they desired it, with condition of
performing their penance enjoined, in case they survived: But the great Council
of Nice also determined, Ut si quis vita excedat, ultimo and necessariv viatico
minime privetur; si vero desperatus and Communionem assecutus supervixerit, sit
inter eos qui Communionem orationis tantummodo consequuntur. Generaliter autem
omni cuilibet in exitu posito and Eucharisitiae participa^^onem petenti,
Episcopus cum examinatione oblationem impertiat; where if Viaticum be not the
Eucharist, (as Zonaras, Balsamon, and Casaubon suppose it to be) but only the
simple Communion, as Albaspinus, and others conceive; yet all, none dissenting,
agree, that the Lords Supper is spoken of in the latter part of the Canon; and
beside the Story of Serapion is Lippis and Tonsoribus nota, known to all those
that have but half an eye in Ecclesiastical History, and have top'd off the
least hairs thereof.

5. But they were at a greater fault, and ran away with a falser sent, that
hunting after Testimonies for Suspension among the Records of Antiquity, tell
us, that Penitents were persons only suspended the Lords Table, and not
excommunicate, because some adjudged to penance, were admitted to the Laicke
Communion: for if Penance were Suspension, then the privation of the Communion
could not be Suspension, because it was provided by sundry Canons, that such as
were deprived of the Communion, should be put to do penance before they could
be reconciled and restored; and that had been as much, in effect, as if they
should be suspended, in order to discharge them of Suspension. But then
secondly, the Lay-Communion, being only Laicorum jus in corpore Christi
mystico, and Ecclesia, as it was contradistinguish'd to Ecclesiastical, or
Sacerdotal Communion; the being put into the Lay-Communion, was neither the
doing of Penance, nor any essential consequent thereof, (though perchance some
that were adjudged to be degraded from being Clergymen, might also, Council.
Eliber. can. 50.
as their offenses were in merit, be sentenced to penance, Ut erat expressum in
eorum elogiis and judiciis, says Albaspinus; and it appears, that some, when
they had finished their penance, were put into the Lay-Communion,) but formally
and properly to be set in the Lay-Communion was only a degrading or deposing
of a Clerk, and reducing him to the condition of a Layman, being a censure
only inflicted on the Clergy, and but the same which Augustine calls
Degradation, and the Councels Deposition, and removing from Order, Council.
Elib. can. 51. Arelat. 1. can. 26. Chamier. Tom. 4. l. 9. c. 3.
and all Ecclesiastical Office; as appears not only by that of Gyprian, Ut
Laicus communicet, non quasi locum sacerdotis usurpet; but by a multitude of
other Testimonies produced by Chamier, Albaspinus, and others: To argue
therefore, they were admitted to the Laick Communion, ergo, they were not
excommunicate, is in effect to conclude they were made Laymen, ergo, they were
not excommunicated. And if Penance were Suspension, and the Lay-Communion were
any part or appendage of penance, it will carry a consequent implication, that
all Laymen were suspended, or else that to be suspended, was to be admitted to
the Eucharist, as Laymen were. And let the Lay-communion be, as Baronius, and
others would have it, to partake the Sacrament without the Railes, or could it
be as Bellarmine supposes, to receive in one kind; yet in either way there
was a communicating at the Lords Table, Non diffiteor qui communicabat laice,
accepisse eucharistiam more laicorum, Albaspin. de veter. eccles. rit. l. 1.
obser. 4. p. 4.
says Albaspinus, so as neither could penance formally have any affinity with
the Laick Communion, nor was any Penitent fully and perfectly in such
Communion, because during that state, he could not partake of the Sacrament:
but when his penance was ended, he entirely communicated as a Layman; that is,
had the right and privileges of a Laick only, because he was not restored to
Holy Orders; whereof, indeed, he that had done penance, was ever afterward
^ncapable: And therefore I have labored under much wonder to what end this
Argument was produced. I remember Maldonat tells us of a Text, Luke 2.34.
Facilior fuisset hic locus si nemo eum exposuisset; and perchance we might
have been more facile to believe that there might have been some evidence for
Suspension in Antiquity, if those that have so confidently assumed to prove it,
had not fallen so short of their undertakings, and our expectation; who as
Scaliger said of Baronius, that he did Annals facere, non scribere; so they
have rather made than found their proofs, and have rather imposed upon, than
informed us, so that we may not know, unless we shall continue ignorant.

But having cleared these mists, let us look what purer light can be reflected
upon us from the Monuments of the ancient Church, that we may see to trace
their footsteps, and discern what way they walked. The notion of Suspension is
scarce found in the ancient Fathers: Augustine often speaks of Church Censures,
and sometime specifies the several Acts of Discipline, Correption,
Excommunication, Degradation; but I have not met with the name, much less the
thing in all his Disputes against the Donatists, where it was most likely to
have occurred. And had the Church in his time known any such Censure
(especially inflicted for want of a visible worthiness) he could never have
said, as is pre-alleaged, Si peccata tanta non sunt ut excommunicandus quisquam
homo judicetur, non debet se a quotidiana medicina Dominici corporis separare;
or had it been denizon'd in Chrysostom's age, he would not have said, that
those which were unworthy to partake of the Eucharist, were likewise unworthy
to join in the Prayers and Hymns.

But as Alexander scorned to steal a Victory in the night, but would get it in
clear day, so we shall hide nothing that we can bring to light, which may be of
advantage to their cause, though it seem to have been in the dark to all those
which I have met with, that have defended it, who have said less for
themselves, than might be said for them, and are therefore obnoxious to David's
increpation, who when they take themselves to be valiant men, and who is like
them in Israel? yet have not kept their Lord so, but that any one of the people
may come to destroy him. But nevertheless, though Tellias get these new Pipes,
no Antinegidas need to be troubled, for they will not sound to his Tune, nor
make any judicious man to dance after him.

To deal ingenuously, as the Canons of the ancient Councels will lend the best
Prospect of the Discipline of the Church, those being the Mould wherein that
was cast; so we shall acknowledge, that in those Canons we sometimes meet with
the notion of Suspension, like as we do with those of Retentus, Sequtstratus,
Remotus, Segregatus, Exclusus, all of them Synonymous, and all to be limited
and defined by the terminus a quo, that from which was the Separation: But I
do with some confidence assert, that suspended is there taken in the proper,
not the modern appropriate notion, signifying a deferring of, or detaining
from; and that not only this one Ordinance of the Lords Supper, but all
Ordinances; and is, in effect, but Excommunication, carrying only besides a
connotation of a future restitution to Communion, after penance done, or
satisfaction given. The same words have not always the same sense in all Ages,
nor signify the same things, else we might conclude the Assemblies of the
Heathen to be Churches, and their Clerks of the Market to be Bishops; and to
argue, that the term Suspension is found in ancient Records; therefore there
was such a thing, as use has since made the word to import, carries as much
reason as the Papists have to conclude, that because prayer for the dead was
used in the ancient Church, therefore it related to Purgatory; or is with as
much sense as Valderama proves the order of Jesuits out of Scripture, because
it is there said, that God has called us to the society of his Son Jesus. But
that Suspension in the old Canons implies not a deferring of, or detaining from
the Eucharist only and immediately, but a withholding from all Ecclesiastical
Communion, is very clear and evident, because it is always said to be;

First, either a suspension from Communion, Agathens. can. 64.
as in the Agathen Council (one instance among many) and Communion was
comprehensive of more than a Society in partaking the Lords Supper, it is a
suspension from the communion of the Church, and from Catholic communion,
Aurel. can. 23. and 15. can. 31.
as in the fourth Council of Orleance; neither of which ever was, nor can be
restrained and limited to fellowship in one Sacrament; and in the latter Canon
it was denounced for Idolatry, the greatest sin, and therefore not like to be
censured with the lesser punishment: and in the same Council it is suspension
from the church; but into the church containing, men now under Suspension are
admitted, and from the church contained, are not cut off.

Secondly, it was a Suspension from all fellowship in talking and eating with
others; and therefore not a suspension from the Eucharist only; neither are
ever those which are put under this younger Suspension, (which is called the
lesser excommunication) proscribed from all conference and society in food; but
that the ancient Suspension was attended with such an interdict, appears
liquidly enough by the second council of Arles, Arel. 2. can. 30.
Si a communione sacerdotali (which was to be, and act as a clerk or
ecclesiastical person) fuerit suspensus episcopus (which seems the truer
reading, though some copies have suspectus) yet if this were all, it were but
only deposition or degradation, which excluded not from commerce, but that
which follows, shows it attended with a greater punishment, non solum a
clericorum, sed etiam a totius populi colloquio atque convivio placuit excludi
donec resip^scens ad sanitatem redire festinet. Aurel. 1. can. 11.
But if this canon leave it obscure, yet more clearly is it apparent by the
first council of Orleance, decreeing, Placuit eos a communione suspendi, and ab
omnium Catholicorum conviviis separari.

Thirdly, It was a suspension of that nature, as whosoever was blasted
therewith could not be redintegrated, but by doing penance (but none were made
Penitents that had not first been excommunicate) It is legible in the third
council of Toledo, Secundum formam Canonum antiquorum, detur poenitentia,
Tolet. 3. can. 11. and 12.
hoc est, ut prius eum quem sui poenitet sacti, a communione suspensum faciat
inter reliquos poenitentes, ad manus impositionem crebro recurrere, expleto
autem satisfactionis tempore, sicut sacerdotalis contemplatio probaverit, eum
communioni restituat; and it is apparent out of that more ancient council,
Arel. 2. can. 11.
the second of Arles, where those that sacrificed to Idols are thus censured,
Duobus annis inter Catechumenos, triennio inter poenitentes, habeantur a
communione suspensi. Not again to reflect on this, that it carries no
verisimilitude, that so great a crime was sentenced to no greater a punishment,
than removal only from the Sacrament: for explanation of this canon, we must
know, that to be among the Catechumens, and among the Hearers, Neo-Caes. can. 5.
was in effect the same; and it seems by the council of Naeo-Caesarea, that the
Catechumens, at least one sort of them, such as were not genuflectentes, passed
under the notion of Auditors, (Catechumeni, id est, audientes) and to be an
Hearer was the second degree of penance; and among the Catechumens and Hearers,
though not confusedly, yet in one common place, stood also those that were for
a certain time excommunicate, and likewise Jews and Heathens; for the sourth
council of Carthage, wherein Augustine was present, decreed, Ut episcopus
nullum prohibeat ingredi ecclesiam and audire verbum Dei sive gentilem sive
haereticum, usque ad missam Catechumenorum (though neither to the Catechumens
themselves were the Gospels read, as appears by the council of Aurange, ^.
Arausic. can. 18.
ne Catechumenis Evangelia legantur) where also incidently observe, that as the
ancient church admitted not all to eat the Sacrament, so they permitted not all
to hear all the words. But as those that were under Niddui might be present at
Divine Service, if they kept their distance of four cubits, so Albaspinus shows
that about the sixth age those that were for a set time excommunicate, De vet.
eccles. rit. l. 2. obser. 24. p. 336, 338. obs. 29. p. 390, 391. Poenitentes
tertii gradus (...) l. 2. obser. 32. p. 405. Poenitentia per appropriationem;
primus and secundus gradus dispositiones erant quibus ad tertium exequendum
pararetur. obs. 24. p. 357. and obser. 4. p. 243.
did also enter into the church, and stood among, or near the Catechumeni, to
hear some portions of the Word, and Expositions thereof, In eodem loco
consistere, ibique provolvere se ad genua, and aliquas preces interponere,
though they departed before the Mass of the Catechumens, that is, before their
Prayers, and before the Sermon too; as also did the Catechumens themselves. But
to prosecute the interpretation of the former canon, when those suspended
persons advanced farther, and from the Catechumens stepped to be among the
Poenitents (whereby Albaspinus understands the Succumbentes) even those in this
third degree of Penance, were not only suspended from the Eucharist, but
separated from communion in sacred offices, Orationes, preces, sacra,
sacrificia, oblationes, agapae, Stationes, vigiliae, jejunia and similia, -- ea
omnia poenitentibus aeque ac excommunicatis deerant, says Albaspinus, so as it
is very evident, that in this canon to be suspended from communion, was to be
excommunicate, because of the several steps of penance which were to be gone
over in order to raising and restoring to communion.

Fourthly, Ilerden. can. 5
if In the Ilerden council, Suspension is expounded by Segregation from the
body of the church, Veraciter as flictos non diu suspendere vel desidiosos
prolixiore tempore ab ecclesiae corpore segregare.

Fifthly, if I have not failed in my observation and account, the term of
Suspension is but twice only, less often mentioned in the fourth council of
Orleance, than in all the preceding Synods; but it is there arbitrarily, and
indifferently used with those forms, which without all color of contradiction
import Excommunication, viz. ex consortio fidelium vel ecclesiae communione
pellatur, Aurel. 4. (...) 16.12, 13, 20, 22.
habeatur extraneus, pacem ecclesiae non habeat, ab ecclesiae limmibus
arceatur, excommunicationis severitas imponatur. And not to advance farther
toward the West or Occident and Declination of Discipline, but to set up our
pillars with a nihil ultra at the fifth Council of Orleance, 5 Aurel. can. 2.
while it decrees that none be suspended from the Communion for small and light
causes: had the Fathers understood Suspension in the modern sense, they had
rather abolished, than regulated it, by taking away the proper object whereupon
it works, viz. lesser and higher offenses; and when they add, that
Suspension be inflicted for such offenses for which the ancient Fathers drove
the Offenders out of the Church, they did not so far relax the reyns of
Discipline, as to censure only with Suspension from the Lords Table, those
whom the Ancients punished by casting out of the Church; but their Discipline
had made them know no distinction between Suspension, and casting out of the
Church; and therefore they used them univocally, or the one as an Exegesis of
the other.

Lastly, we shall also fairly confess, that in ancient Monuments we meet with
those expressions of removing from the Altar, and separating from the communion
of Sacraments, and of being reconciled thereunto; but we are convinced to
judge, that they only by a Synecdoche complicated with a (...), signify a
rejection from, and restitution to a plenary and absolute communion, in
general, by one and the most excellent part thereof: And this may be
sufficiently proved by several passages in St. Augustine's Disputes against the
Donatists, Epist. 11^. c. 3. tom. 2. p. 108.
especially against Parmenian: But we need re-search no farther than that place
in his Epistles, which we have so lately agitated; for having said, Si tanta
est plaga peccati atque impetus morbi, ut medicamenta talia differenda sunt,
authoritate Antistitis debet quisque ab altari removeri, and eadem authoritate
reconciliari, hoc est enim indigne accipere, si eo tempore accipiat quo debet
agere poenitentiam, non ut arbitrio suo, cum libet, vel auferat se communioni,
vel reddat, caeterum si peccata tanta non sunt, ut excommunicandus quisquam
homo judicetur, non debet se a quotidiana medicina Dom nici corporis separare,
where we see plainly, that ab altari removeri, and excommunicandum judicari,
are either consignificant, or exegetical, as well as that he thought that none
were to separate from the Lords Table, but for such sins as rendered
demeritoriously excommunicate. And though this be a pearl of so great price,
that he which finds it, cannot but be willing to sell all the false notions
that he has to the contrary for the buying thereof; yet it is no Union, though
one, yet not the only Orient testimony, there being many others like and equal
to it: The first Council of Toledo decreeing, 1. Tolet. ^^a. 2.
that publicam poenitentiam gerens sub Concilio, divino reconciliatus fuerit
altari, implies, that to be reconciled to the Altar, was to be absolved of
Excommunication, and readmitted to communion with the Church; whereof to
partake of the Altar, was the most perfect and absolute act; for he that was
thus reconciled was under penance, and all penitents were such as had been
excommunicate. The Ilerden Council determines, Ilerden. can. 2.
Communione corporis Domini priventur ita ut his duobus annis vigiliis
orationibus and elcemosynis pro viribus, quas Dominus donaverit, expientur;
quod si definito tempore negligentiores, etc. prorogandi ipsius poenitentiae
tempus, in potestate maneat sacerdotis; whereby it is manifest, that by
deprivation of the communion of the body of the Lord, as the chiefest part of
Church Fellowship was the loss of all other Ecclesiastical Society, or
Excommunication intended; for as persons suspended are not sentenced to such
continual Watchings, Prayers, and Alms; so whosoever was a Penitent had been
excommunicate. The second Council of Tours defining, Eos ab Ecclesia
sanctrepellant, Turonen. can. 3.
nec participare sancto altari permittant, manifestly declares, that they
understood a repelling from the Church, and non-permitting to partake of the
Altar, to be identical: but such as of latter times are suspended, are never
repulsed from the Church, which is more than to be debarred the Eucharist. And
lastly, Can. 14.
the fourth Council of Orleance defining, Tam diu habeatur a communione
altaris, vel omnium fratrum ac filiorum charitate suspensus, makes the latter
to be exegetical to the former; and evidently proves, that to be suspended was
to be cast out from all fellowship with the Brotherhood, and Sons of the
Church.

Wherefore seeing the ancient Church knew not their Suspension, which is the
only penal, and indeed main act of their Discipline; yet for them to pretend
to affinity with the ancient Discipline, is a boldness like to find as little
success, as excuse; unless as that old Sycophant advised, Calumniare audacter,
aliquid haerebit; so they vaunt boldly of things, in hope they will stick with
some for their confidence; or as some Heathens commended the ancient Heroes for
fetching their Pedigree from the Gods, though falsely, because it raised their
spirits, and advantaged their reputation; so they think it will produce like
effects for them to derive the descent of their Discipline from the ancient
Church, though it can claim no kindred therewith.

They next come to give an account of their regard to the Schoolmen, but they
might have spared the Irony. Few are inimicous to School-learning, but they
that are ignorant thereof, such indeed despise what they have not; as Gallienus
when Egypt revolted, and Gaul was lost, said, Quid? sine lino Aegyptio esse
ne^ possumus? Number sine trabeatis sag is tuta Respublica non est? and as Iovius
speaks of Detractors, Fortunam suam ea vindictae voluptate consolantur. The
School indeed is a Libanon, or Forest overgrown with Thorns and Briers, yet
much good Timber may there be found to build and make Beams for the Temple;
and as Otho said to Salvius Cocceamus, nec patruum sibi Othonem fuisse aut
oblivisceretur unquam, nut nimium meminisset; so shall I say of that Learning,
it is not too much to be studied, nor altogether to be neglected.

They desire those that have the Schoolmen, to consult them on the third part
of Aquinas, (and if they have them, they might have given a more special
direction and reference, this which they give being like Magna civitas, magna
solitudo) who put it into the hands of the Minister, to deny the Sacrament to
all, whom they judge scandalous sinners, or unworthy persons. Reso. They say,
there is a Fish, whereof a part being eaten, it proves poison, if the whole, an
Antidote; so the doctrine of the School in this point being partially and
mutilously set forth, may seem to make for them; but fully and plainly
represented, will speak much against them. This dissertation will give us some
Prosopography of the Apologists, and reflect light to see how forward they are
to impose upon others (if these passages were oculis subjecta, and entered by
the horny gate) or how facile they are to be imposed upon themselves, (if they
were demissa per aures, and had entry thorough the Ivory Port.)

It must therefore be recognized, that the School distinguishes of sinners,
whereof some are secret, not of public note, or commonly diffamed, though some
few, and perhaps among them, the Minister may know them to be scandalous in
their ways. Some are public and notorious, either by judicious sentence,
confession, or such evidence of fact, as by no Tergiversation can be concealed,
or gain-sayd, so as they are generally known to be flagitious. To the latter
sort, the most of them (for some dissent, as Soto, and others) judge that the
Priest ought to deny the Sacrament; De duplici Martyr. p. 600. S. 31.
and we shall not much clash with their judgment, since such are juridice or
jure, demeritorie if not effective excommunicate, as we have before delivered.
And however (as says the pretended Cyprian) Tales interdum tolerat ecclesia ne
provocati etiam perturbent populum Dei: sed quid prodest non ejici coetu
piorum, si merueris ejici, nam ejici remedium est, and gradus ad recuperandam
sanitatem, ejectionem meruisse summa malorum est, ac frustra miscetur coetut
sanctorum in Templo manu facto, si summotus est a consortio Dei, and ab
universo corpore mystico Christi. Vasquez 3. q. 80. art. 6. disp. 209. c. 4. p.
417.
The former either secretly come to desire or demand the Sacrament (and a
secret demand (and denial) is as Vasquez determines, when no other is witness
thereunto, but he that denies, and he that is denied) or publicly do offer
themselves, and so demand to receive it: If the demand be sccret, they
prescribe, or at least allow the denial; and only of this occult denial does
Suarez make those deliveries of himself, which they recite, and imposterously
apply that simpliciter, which he speaks secundum quid, and enlarging that to
any public denial upon public demand, which he only restrains and limits to
occult, Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, and crimine ab uno, Disce omnes, and it is
of this kind of denial alone, whereof he says, quando non interveniunt
intrinseca in commoda (which passage they have clipped off from the rest) potius
consulendum dignitati and reverentiae Sacramenti, quam juri peccatoris; for
this, he says, Non est proprie punitio, quae judiciarium ordinem and
probationem delicti requirit, sed est prudens administratio Sacramenti; and as
he adds, is a certain virtual secret, and fatherly correction, for which the
proof of the offense, or confession of the offender is not always to be
exspected, it being no public judicial action, but private and hidden, and
which cannot otherwise be exercised: But for such an one as is not notorious,
Suarez in ^. q. 80. art. 6. disp. 67. S. 3. p. 856, 857. S. 4. Quamdiu occultum
est ejus peccatum non amisit suum jus in sacie ecclesiae, and ideo habet jus in
foro externo. Sylvius in 3. q. 80. art. 6. p. 336. S. 4. p. 858.
though known to the Priest, or some others, to be wicked and scandalous, if he
publicly demand the Sacrament, and come and tender himself to receive it
(which he calls a virtual demand,) Suarez in this case sings another note, that
the Priest without grievous sin, cannot deny him the Eucharist; and in this
assertion, says he, almost all Divines agree, which he backs with many
reasons: as first, To deny it him, were to diffame him. 2. Upon the denial,
follows a certain and infallible detriment of Infamy; but upon giving it, there
is no certain sacrilege of unworthy receiving; for it may be the offender may
be suddenly changed and inwardly converted, and so dispose himself, that he may
worthily communicate. 3. He ought to exhibit it, to avoid scandal. 4. Because
a secret sinner (that is not notorious) has a right publicly to demand the
Eucharist, and cannot be deprived of this right, until he be sufficiently
convinced of his crime.

And he farther adds what I formerly recited out of Mr. Ball, That it
appertains to the common good and convenient Government of the Church or
Commonwealth, that common good things or benefits, which are publicly to be
dispensed, and distributed according to the merit and dignity of particular
persons (as the Sacrament is) should not be dispensed according to the private
but public and notorious knowledge of the Administer, which he says, is a
moral Principle, which if it should not be observed, it would occasion many
scandals, troubles and injuries, and Ministers might defame whom they list, and
feign a sin and unworthiness, where there is none, and the faithful must often*
sear and be afraid, lest they should be defamed by the Minister.

And to those Reasons of Suarez, another (which he thinks of more efficacy) is
superadded by Vasquez, Here (says he) two Precepts concur, one of not
unworthy administering the Eucharist, Ubi supra, c. 3. p. 409.
which consists in this, That it be not administered to one unworthy; the other,
of not defaming our Neighbor, nor publishing his sin; the first is a virtue of
Religion against Sacrilege, the other a virtue of justice against Detraction;
and though the virtue of Religion be more worthy and perfect than justice, and
consequently the sin opposed to Religion be greater than the sin opposite to
justice; yet the commandment of not defaming more obliges, than the
administering the Eucharist to one unworthy, and a sinner, because as Thomas
says, 2.2. q. 32. art. 4. The obligation of Mercy is preferred before
Religion, for we worship God with external Sacrifices, not for himself, but for
our selves and our brethren; for our benefit, not his, who receives no profit
by them, and in this sense he expounds that of Osea 6. and Matthew. 12. I will
have mercy and not sacrifice. So as where they say, See the Schools say more
than they would have them, -- Exclamet Melicerta perisse
Frontem de rebus. --


For 1. The Schools allow no power to deny the Sacrament publicly to those
that in the proper judgment of the Minister are unworthy, but this power they
assume, withholding it from such as were never duly censured by any other
Judicatory.

2. The School warrants a public denial unto none but notorious sinners, but
they keep back the Sacrament from all that do not upon trial approve
themselves Saints, and though they pretend to hold, that none are rightfully to
be excluded, but such as are some way scandalous, yet actually they withhold
the Communion from those that they dare not say, much less have they been
sentenced to be scandalous, and are therefore more inexcusably culpable, to be
like Medea, To see and approve better things and do worse.

3. The School prescribes the Sacrament to be exhibited to secret sinners, if
they publicly crave it, that is, such whose sins though known to some few, and
among those to the Minister, yet are not notorious; but they to prevent the
virtual craving by their approach, and offering themselves, (like Julian who
struck at Christianity rather than Christians, so) they have excommunicated the
Sacrament it self out of their proper Congregations, that none might come to
demand it, and those that have come to them to require it, have been denied the
participation, though such as have not been patible of the definition of
notorious sinners; and though they suppose that it proves nothing, that the
Schoolmen and Casuists assert, that secret sinners are not to be kept off, yet
it proves their course not parallel with the line drawn out by the School, who
deny it to those, the far greatest part whereof can be but occult sinners, and
not within the definition of notorious; and it is something sure, that hereby
the School and Casuists must consequently conclude, that when a Minister does
(as he ought) distribute the Sacrament to him whom only by his private notice
he knows unworthy, he does no act simply unlawful, by partaking of the
receivers sin, or prostituting the privileges of the godly, or giving false
testimony, nor that he is to suspend him, until he has rendered, upon trial,
demonstrative signs of his conversion.

They say, Suarez tells us, That a violent suspicion is enough to deny the
Sacrament; but (as Pliny writes of the deceitfulness of the Panther) they show
forth those parts which seem fair for them, and hide the head, which would seem
stern and terrible; so Suarez indeed says this of a public suspicion, not of
any private, and of such a violent suspicion too, quae probabili rationi deponi
non potest, for if it be only probable suspicion, Sect. 6. p. 863.
that only suffices ad generandum dubium, non ad judicandum simpliciter de
peccato alierius, and in such a case says he, Melior est conditio possidentis,
Suspect's de aliquo crimine neganda est, si suspicio publica vehemens seu
violenta, sive si laborat publica infamia; non item si est suspicio solum
probabilis vel praesumptuosa. Sylvius in 3. q. 80. art. 4. p. 311. Dr. Twisse.
and quando aliquis non sufficienter probatur malus, praesumendus est bonus,
and a violent suspicion is described to be such quae moraliter facit rem
certam; such a suspicion Suarez thinks sufficient, because in rebus moralibus
non est quaerenda metaphysica evidentia, sed sufficit moralis certitudo, and
therefore this violent suspicion is (in Suarez his sense) equipollent to
evidence of fact, or little short thereof, for otherwise that any less
suspicion is enough to deny the Sacrament, is so far from being the common
opinion of Divines, that they commonly opine and directly resolve the contrary,
as I have elsewhere manifested, and it would otherwise be contradictory to
Suarez his own judgment, otherwhere delivered, viz. That the Sacrament is not
to be denied, but to him that is notorious by Law or fact; and his fellow
Vasquez (whom a famous Schoolman has weighed in his balance, and found to
ponderate more than Suarez) does tell us, that infamy (which is I think
somewhat more than suspicion) Licet sit sufficiens principium, inquirendi
contra ipsum de delicto ad poenam, non statim vldetur sufficiens ut statim
puniatur tanquam manifestus peccator, in conspectu ecclesiae, denegando ei
Eucharistiam, cum infamia illa non e^ rei evidentia, sed ex aliquibus judiciis
ortum habet, quae sufficere non debeat, ut ita graviter quis puniatur.

And seeing the public repulsion from the Sacrament is called the lesser
Excommunication, and that being defined to be an ecclesiastical consure, Cas.
consc. tract. 13. c. 1. Sect. 9. p. 254.
and Eiliucius telling us that ad ferendam censuram requiritur jurisdict^o fori
contentiosi, so that whereas Biel taught, That whosoever sinned mortally
incurred the lesser Excommunication, because he that remains in any mortal sin
deprives himself of the Sacrament. Vasquez refutes this opinion as false, upon
this ground, De excom. dub. 1. Sect. 7, 8.
because the lesser Excommunication is an ecclesiastical censure: hence
therefore it follows, that regularly according to the Doctrine of the School,
neither should the Minister alone inflict it, neither ought it to be inflicted
upon suspicion, but according to the judicial process upon proof or confession
of some crime, or evidence of the fact.

Their testimony out of Gregory may serve to assert what we confess, That for
such manifest faults as seem to be inconsistent with grace, and to exclude it,
a man may by authoritative sentence be put from the Communion, but tends not to
prove what we deny, that he may arbitrarily be suspended, till he demonstrate
himself to be in the state of grace.

They have the conscience to appeal to the Readers judgment whether there be
not more conformity between them and antiquity, than their adversaries can
pretend unto, that make no separation: But we approve, and shall cooperate in a
separation of others from us, by juridical censure, that are notoriously
wicked, for this suits with the ancient Discipline, but not a separation (as
theirs is) of our selves from them, that are not manifestly godly, no nor yet
from that Church, where that laudable Discipline, though de jure approved, is
not defacto, through some obstruction, exercised, for this sorts with the old
Donatisme.

The Chemists boast much of their extractions and separations of the pure parts
from the impure, but Sennertus commends an answer of Queen Elizabeth to one
glorying of such spirits, If, said she, we were purely spirit, we might be
cured and nourished by such spirits; so I shall say, If we were only and
altogether spiritual, we might have a Church universally holy, and a pure use
of the Ordinances, but till we come to be so, which will be only when we shall
be as those immortal spirits, the Angels, those violent separations are like to
leave us scarce any body of a Church; but because the ancient Church made some
kind of separation, and they also separate, therefore to infer, that theirs
must needs be the like kind of separating, and their way conformable to the
ancient, is such another argument, as the Chymicks use, that because Ezra
weighed out two vessels of fine Copper, precious as Gold, therefore they must
needs forsooth be of metal transmuted or improved by Chemical artifice. Ezra
8.27.


They know not who they be that are so careful to repel and exclude men from
the Sacrament; indeed every man being his own grand flatterer, he is the first
that sees his perfections, and the last that discerns his faults, and there are
some that misprise their faults to be their perfections, as the Mexicans think,
that to be beauty and gallantry which is the vilest deformity, to have their
lips by the weight of jewels pendent in them drawn down over their chins to the
imbearing of their teeth; but if to suspend whole Congregations, not because
they are proved to be wicked, but merely because they are not approved to be
Saints, (which is as if we should withhold a man's sood from him till he make
proof of his good digestion) to suspend the Sacrament it self in their proper
Churches, that they may better suspend their people, (which has some affinity
with Caligula's wish, That the whole City of Rome had but one neck, that he
might cut it off at once) to take so much pains to justify and defend their
suspending of so many as unfit, when (as he said to his Son encountering with
his Enemy, Percute qua aratrum) the same labor might have made the most of
them fit, and however they shall be fitted, yet to give them no admission or
entrance, but only by stepping over their threshold, which they have set up by
Gods threshold: he that shall deny that this is to be careful to exclude and
keep men from the Sacrament, and as Alcibiades persuaded Pericles, to be
studious rather not to give, than to give an account, so that this is to be
more solicitous not to give, than to give the Sacrament: he has been bred up
in Anaxagoras his School, where in defiance of sense, it was denied that the
Snow was white; and if I should do it, I should doubt that even for this I
should come too near the danger of incurring some of Chrysostom's stigmatical
Epithites.

Chrysostom was ere while as full as they could wish, now he is fulsom, and
their stomaces cannot digest an argument collected from his words: They very
calmly and with silence let pass the greatest and most forcible part of the
testimony, and only pick a quarrel to the application of one piece thereof.
Chrysostom had said, that he that stands by and not communicates, is wicked,
shameless and impudent. And the Paper thence (modestly as it could) offered it
to be considered, by arguing a pari, if not a fortiori, where or upon whom that
censure would fall, or how it would be-reversed, if those that stand by and
would, yet shall not be suffered to participate; hereupon Ignescunt irae, and
duris dolor ossibus haeret, They take this shaft into their sides, as if aimed
at them, and complain of the wound, and indeed cum vitia incessimus, reum ira
manifestat, but I shall say with St. Hierom, Neminem specialiter meus sermo
pulsavit, Tom. 1. ep. 2. ad Nepol. c. 26.
-- qui mihi irasci voluerit, prius ipse de se, quod talis sit confitebitur. As
our Savior told the Jews, That not he, but Moses accused them; so it was not
I, but Chrysostom that laid the censure, and leaves it not on them, but ex
Hypothesi, upon supposition, they do that which he censureth; it was he that
delivered the Law as the major, if their conscience become the witness against
them in the case, and make up the minor, for the conclusion, let any man be
judge. I could not borrow a nail from that Master of the Assemblies, (as the
words of the wise are called) and not drive it to the head, nor bring forth and
only show the weapon, and not strike with it, nor make it like Thebes, when
Epaminondas was slain, a spear that had no head or point. If they shall prompt
me how I might apply the words to make them argumentative, in any more modest
or candid manner, I shall be very docible, to write after their copy; and
excuse and expunge my former characters, or, Ut Lugdunensem dicturus Rhetor ad
aram, My tongue shall lick out and make amends for the blots of my Pen.

But noise and outcries (whatsoever some Nations imagine) will not help an
Eclipse. As in Tophet they set up a loud sound, and raised clamours to drown
the cry of the dying child; so perchance they keep this rattling about
thatwhich seems to pinch the credit of their persons, only to drown the sound
of that blow which-mortally wounds their cause; for what was transcribed out of
Chrysostom, That he which was unworthy of the Eucharist, was also unworthy of
the prayers; this they take no notice of, like weak souls that wink when they
are put in fear, and think the danger lessened which they see not; And this,
though his words seem yet to be the sense of the whole Church, which did
conclude all her public and solemn prayers with the receiving of the
Sacrament, so as Albaspinus tells us, De vet. eccles. rit. l. 1. obs. 16. p.
124. Mede Christian Sacrif. Sect. 1. p. 475.
Vix repories quenquam eo (i. solenniter) usum esse nisi ad Eucharistiam
significandam. As we vocally conclude all our prayers, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, so (says Mr. Mede) the ancient Church in the solemn and public service,
when she presented her self before God as one body, did visibly, by
representing him in the Symboles of his Body and Blood, he being thereby
commemorated and received by them (and us) to the same end for which he
suffered, that through him we receiving forgiveness of sins, God might accept
our persons and prayers. The Stations which were but dimidiata jesunia, Fasts
extended to the ninth hour, and not prolonged usque ad authoritatem demorantis
stellae, in Tertullian's Idiom, and which he tells us had their name from the
example of Soldiers, whose standing to watch before the Palace, being called
Stations, I. 1. obs. 14. p. 101.
gave the like appellation to the Christians coming together twice a week, and
continuing together in prayer for defense of the Church, and to impetrate Gods
favor, those Stations being (as Albaspinus describes them) Nihil aliud quam
coitio ac veluti conjuratio totius ecclesiae contra Deum, and whereby as
Tertullian speaks, quasi manu facta eo Deum perpellebant, adi. gebantque ad id
quod obnixe peterent, concedendum; But those Stations were always concluded
with the Eucharist, as the close and upshot thereof. In the fifty days betwixt
Easter and Whitsunday, L. 1. obse. 15. p. 106, and 108
a time of more solemn prayers, and which Albaspinus affirms to equal the Lords
day in Worship and Religion, every particular Christian (says he) most sweetly
was compelled and enforced to receive the Eucharist. Besides, they had no other
place where they offered the public prayers, but that whereon the memory of
Christ's Body and Blood was celebrated, and even as in the Old Testament, where
they called on the Name of the Lord, there they still built an Altar, and their
Sacrifices were Rites whereby to invocate God, as may be collected from 1 Samuel
13.12. So in the swaddling of the Christian Church, Breaking of Bread, or as the
Syriack reads, the breaking of the Eucharist, and prayers, are conjoined, and
both referred to their Christian fellowship, as the Exegesis thereof, showing
wherein the Communion of the Church consisted; so as therefore whosoever was of
the body of the Church did both partake of the Prayers and of the Altar, and
who was divided from the one, had no benefit of the other, as Mr. Mede
produces Ignatius to witness; Page 494.
and it was morally impossible, that those which were received as competent for
a conjunction in the former, could be rejected as incapable of Communion in the
later, seeing this was a concluding part, and as it were the peroration of that
other.

We would have as much care impended, and forwardness manifested, in making men
worthy partakers, as in having them to partake, but we do not conceive there
lies upon us any obligation to give, or on others to take, by trial, an
account of our worthiness: nor that their title to the signs and elements, the
Sacramentum rei and Panis Domini is rooted in or resulting from their
worthiness, but their Church Membership. We wish every Heir were a prudent and
temperate manager of his Inheritance, but he must not be suspended from the
enjoyment thereof, till he demonstrate his temper and thriftiness, his right
accrews as Heir, not as a good Husband or a sober man, and yet while he is in
infancy or an Idiot, he is not admitted to manage it, and by Outlawry he
forfeits his personal, and cannot sue for his real Estate, and by Attainder
forfeits the whole.

They tell us of the comforts they have found in their endeavors to preserve
the dignity of Gods Ordinance. They are very subtle or cautious to dispute
against us so often with those arguments whereof we can take no perfect
cognizance, and for truth whereof we must take their word, their inward
experiences. But to answer, the dignity of good things is their
communicableness, and it is no indignity to the Sun, that the Negro's partake
his light, though it scorch them; but it seems that the Apologists are like the
Eastern people, that think it conduces to the Majesty of their Kings to be
recluded and shut up from public intercourse, whereas it were more for their
honor to be employed in the administration of the Office, whereunto they were
designed. But if their endeavors have been, formally as an Ordinance, to
preserve the dignity thereof, they should have done the same toward all
Ordinances, by the Canon of per se and de omni, but their care has not been
like in such way to preserve the dignity of the Word and Prayer, which we
think, and shall endeavor presently to show, to be Ordinances of like dignity,
and to be in danger of as much indignity, as the Sacrament by a free and
promiscuous admission; so that we doubt, that it will start much suspicion that
there is an influence of Self and interest into their endeavors, and their
love to the dignity of this Ordinance is Amor concupiscentiae, non amicitiae,
as that which will better serve their turn, and fit their ends.

To condemn their people for not taking what they will not give them, is
parallel to the hard measure of some of our Kings, that compelled some to fine
for not taking the Order of Knighthood at the Coronation, when as they came to
tender themselves at the day, and could not obtain it.

It seems to them below reason, to see no difference between other Ordinances,
and the Lords Supper, as to matter of examination. It may perchance be below
their reason, which is at such an elevation, but seeing Nos, populus terrae,
quibus non licet esse tam disertis, are not at such an ascendent, it had not
been below their charity better to inform us of this difference.

To hear without faith makes the Word become the savor of death, In 1 Cor.
14.22. Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 73. tom. 5. p. 141. Confut. of Rhem. Test. p. 528.
and also to seal men's condemnation, as Diodate in terms delivers it, as to eat
and drink unworthily makes the Sacrament turn to damnation. Si nihil ex eo quod
huc convenimus and admonemur, -- lucrari deberemus, haec non modo nihil nobis
prodessent, verum and majoris occasio damnationis fierent nobis, says
Chrysostom; (do you think this a matter of less heinous offense to neglect his
Word, than his Body, says Fulk?) so there is no disparity in the danger of the
one or other. As previously to eating, there is a command for a man to examine
himself, so dispositively to hearing there is a precept, to take heed how we
hear, and several other qualifications are thereunto required, 1 Peter 2.1, and
2. James 1.21. so as there is no inequality in the obligation to bring suitable
dispositions. The formal part in faithless hearing, can no more be separated
from the material, than in unworthy receiving, so as there is no disproportion
in the hazard of sinning, and with as little difference are the Principles and
Reasons, supposed to forbid the admitting of unworthy persons to the Sacrament,
extensive and applicable to the non-admission to the Word, In 3. q. 80. art. 6.
p. 365.
Universaliter in omni materia est contra jus naturae admittere indignos ad
quaecunque beneficia, as Nugnus argues, and either the Word is no Pearl, nor
holy thing, or else though Pearls and holy, the Sacraments may as well as the
Word, (ex Hypothesi) be cast before Swine, and given to Dogs. That prohibition
primarily and directly respects, and is intended (as is elsewhere showed) to
the not preaching of the Word to those that may fall under that metaphorical
notion, and is applicable to the Sacrament (which was not then instituted)
only extensione quadam Scripturae, non proprio and literali sensu. To say,
that more apply this Text to the Sacrament, than to the Word, as it is
impertinent to tell us how it is usually applied, when we require how it is to
be rightly understood, so it is improper for them, Ad similitudnem non rationem
vivunt. Seneca.
to make any such aid-prayer, who would by a kind of Petalism exile, that
Topic of Authority, and make it an Utopick, save perchance when it may do them
service, and then as Ockham to the Emperor, they will defend with the Pen,
what shall protect them, as with a Sword, and if the Argument may be impressed
against an adversary, then only Hostem qui feriet, fuerit mihi Carthaginensis.
But however, if (as they confess) the Text may be extended to Hearers of the
Word, that comes full enough to our purpose, for if (as they dispute) because
the Pearl and holy things of the Sacrament are not to be cast or given to Swine
or Dogs, that is, persons unworthy, therefore it is of necessity to make trial
who are worthy, may not we with as good consequence, and as much force of
reason argue, that because the Pearl and holy things of the Word are not to be
dispensed unto such also, that therefore they ought to examine who are such or
not, antecedently to such dispensation? But farther also, if (as we argue and
the Context will evince) the prohibition be first and chiefly intended of
preaching the Word, then as the direct light is brighter than the reflected,
the first draught of any fancy in picture is more perfect than the second; so
the not casting or giving those Pearls and holy things being principally meant
of the Word, and applicable to the Sacraments only in an accommodate sense, it
seems to follow that those which are not such Dogs and Swine, but that to them
the Word may be preached, they are neither such, but that to them also the
Sacraments are administrable.

If they knew any did come to hear with a design to mock, or purpose to
blaspheme the truth, they would sense an obligation to exclude him from the
Auditory, and to frustrate this wickedness. Why is there not as great an
incumbency for examining of Hearers that they might be known, as to prevent
unworthy receiving, there is for probation of Receivers? Nay, I presume they
would advance farther and come up to Bellarmine, De eccl. mil. l. 3. c. 10.
that says, Si ecclesia possit dignoscere impios, incredulos and hypocritas,
nunquam admitteret, aut casu admissos excluderet. And does it not hang upon the
same hinge of reason, that because no wicked faithless person ought of right to
be admitted into Church Fellowship, therefore they ought to make trial of all
before their admission to be members (which is the state of that disease of
Independency, and Meridian of that New Light) as well as because no unworthy
person ought de jure to participate the Sacrament, Cit. a Gratiano 1. q. 1. c.
Interrogo. and ab Hospiniano Hist. Sacram. l. 2. p. 97. and centur. Magdeburg.
centur. 5. c. 4. p. 215. Casaubon exercit. 16. sect. 36. p. 378. and 363.
therefore they ought antecedently to make probation of every ones worthiness
before he be a partaker? St. Augustine affirms, the Word of God not to be
less than the Body of Christ; and Casaubon says, that preaching of the
Scriptures, which is called a spiritual Table, is another kind of spiritual
eating of Christ, as the Fathers teach us.

As indeed Origin says expressly, Of the Sacrament, p. 10. Hoc unum eatenus
inter ea discrimen est quod quae verbum in mentem per aures insinuat, ea
sucramenta per oculos in eandem ingerunt, Theses Salmuri, part. 3. sect. 13. p.
34.
Bibere autem sanguinem Christi non solum sacramentorum ritu, sed and cum
sermones ejus recipimus in quibus vita consistit. And the Word and Sacraments
tend to the same end, but by somewhat different ways, the same promises are
conveyed by both, but in one demissa per aures, in the other oculis subjecta
fidelibus.

Cranmer tells us, as the Word preached puts Christ into our ears, so likewise
those Elements of Water, Bread and Wine, joined to Gods Word, do after a
sacramental manner, put Christ into our eyes, mouths, hands, and all our
senses, so as neither for dignity are they unequal, nor different in the
effects and ends. And this seems to me to be acknowledged by the Apologists
themselves, when they tell us, Sect. 23. That the want of the Sacrament is
supplied by the Word, whereby God gives Souls to eat and drink the Flesh and
Blood of Christ Jesus by faith. As the Eucharist is only dispensable to such
as are capable to show forth the death of the Lord, and to examine themselves;
so Ezra brought the Law before the congregation both of men and women, and all
that could hear with understanding, Nehem. 8.2. As infants are debarred of
communicating till maturity, so not only among the Hebrews (as St. Hieron.
Proem. in Ezekiel. tom. 4. p. 727. Casaubon ubi supra, p. 399. ad 404.
Hierom tells us) none under thirty years of age was permitted to read the
beginning of Genesis, the Canticles, nor the Exordium or end of Ezekiel; and
Casaubon shows us, That as in the ancient Church, only the faithful were
admitted to some certain Prayers, so the Fathers distinguished the Doctrine
into (...), which might be published unto all, and (...) those secrets which
were not rashly to be evulged, which neither in familiar Colloquies, or
Catechisms, or Sermons, they temerariously mentioned before Pagans,
Catechumens, or any other not initiate; and in this thing (says he) agree all
the Greek and Latin Fathers ad unum omnes; and some of them do bottom this use
upon that very place of Matthew. 7.6. And from hence resulted that usual form
(especially used in mentioning the one or other Sacrament, Norunt initiati quod
dicitur, which is to be found at least fifty times in Chrysostom, and not much
fewer in Augustine. And as Casaubon tells us out of Dionysius, that none not
initiated were admitted to see the Administration of Baptism, so it is evident
out of the Monuments of Antiquity, Albasp. l. 2. obs. 22. p. 315. and obs. 23.
p. 327. L. 2. obs. 1. p. 190.
that to whom they divulged the mystery of the Eucharist, to them they
exhibited the use thereof, and to whom they thought not fit to administer it,
to them they deemed it not expedient to publish it. The Church (says
Albaspinus) took order during their instructing the Catechumens, Ut iis interea
nihil de sacramentorum arcanis aperiret. And in another place he tells us,
Catechumenos saluberrimis Christianae religionis praeceptis, omissa omni
mysteriorum and sacramentorum mentione, imbuerent; and therefore they went out
not only before the Administration, but also before the explication of the
Mysteries. When it was objected to Athanasius by his Enemies, that he had
irreverently broken the Mystical Cup, he in his Apology heavily accuses them,
that they had not blushed to discourse of the Mystery of the Lords Supper
before Catechumens and Ethnicks; and when Celsus scornfully hereupon called
Christian Religion, A clandestine Doctrine; Origin answers, That the most of
their Heads of Doctrine were publicly delivered, and if some were not
generally communicated to all, the Christians were therefore no more to be
reprehended, than the Heathen Philosophers, who divided their Learning into
(...), which were brought forth to all, and (...), which were confined within
their own School. The learned Grotius also shows out of Clemens Alexandrinus,
that Chaldaei, Hebraei, Aegyptii, Annot. in Matthew. 7.6,
vetustissimi sapientiae professores, praecepta sua tradebant (...), and indeed
as the Apologists have told us of the -- Proeul 6, procul ite profani. whereby
the Heathen excluded flagitious persons from their Sacrifices, Rosinus antiq.
Romans l. 2. p. 195.
so we could return, that they only commmunicated their mysterious Doctrines
also to such as were initiate, whence Mysterium dicitur (...), quod est es
claudere.

So as then all being not held capable of hearing the Word preached, (as well as
some were not of the Sacrament) it were consonant to their Principles, to have
examined who were or not, and consequently there might seem to be a parity of
reason for a probation previous to admission unto the one Ordinance, as well as
the other.

The Sacrament is a Seal of Faith, therefore say they, There must trial be
made of their faith, 1 Cor. 14.22.
that are to receive it, and has it not equal force in the consequence, to
argue, prophesying (which by the concordance of Interpreters is interpreting of
Scripture) is a sign unto, or serves for believers, therefore probation ought
to be made, whether they believe, that are to partake of Prophesying or the
Word preached. As the Lopers said, If we enter into the City we shall die there,
2 Kings 7.4.
and if we sit still here, we die also; so he that hears and believes not,
shall be damned, and he that eats and drinks without faith, can but eat and
drink his damnation, there is no safer sinning in the one or other. And
Aristippus would have found no odds in dying by the bite of a Lion or a Weazel,
nor Heliogabalus been sensible of any difference in the kind of his Halters
and Poniards, that should have killed him.

If the hope of learning and possibility of attaining faith, may support and
warrant a promiscuous admission to hearing the Word, though notwithstanding
many that hear, have no right to the promises held forth in the Word, nor any
interest in the salvation offered in Jesus Christ, but all those in effect
signify nothing to them, yet nevertheless all must hear, and those are
generally and indifferently to be propounded to all; if because the matter of
the duty, viz. Hearing, is commanded by God, it ought to be performed by all,
though many are not qualified to do it in due form, or to a right end, since
our powers or our prosiciencies are not the measure of our duty, but Gods
precept, and our obligation is not rooted in, nor results from what we can do,
but what God will have done, and the good commanded must be done, though evil
(not causally but consequently, not of it self, but accidentally) ensue in the
doing: Why either all these considerations should not (in some measure and
degree at least) be extensive and applicable to an admission of all
Church Members to the Sacrament, or why (considering this) their solicitude and
sedulity should not be extended and applied to the trying and preparing men in
order to worthy hearing, as well as to communicating, may seem not so much below
reason (as they say) to ask, as perhaps above it, to answer

But now when we can see no difference in the Grounds and Reasons, and yet do
behold such disparity in their affections and factions concerning the one or
other Ordinance, which did they simply and purely rise and flow from zeal to
purity of Ordinances, or salvation of souls, would equally respect all
Ordinances, and salvation of souls, in all like concernments.

We cannot be so blind or so connivent, as not to discern that which may
facilitate us to suspect, that the Sacrament is but the accessory, some other
thing is the principal which is reposited among arcana Imperii and ragion di
stato, and the wheels of their Discipline run Byas, and themselves like false
Proxinetes under color of wooing for their friend, court for themselves, and
only pretend to fit men for the Sacrament, but intend better to fit them for
their proper ends, Canponantes sacramentum: so that though Caesar apertly did
invade the Sovereignty, and Pompey pretends the name and interest of the
Commonwealth, yet the difference is no more than between a Storm and a Mine.

That there is not the same reason for a precedaneous examination in these two
Ordinances, they assay to prove, Because Heathens are capable of the Word, Go
preach the Word to every creature; The other is proper to Saints, to strengthen
and comfort the begotten, -- Has fundit dives facundia gemmas. But they forget
that we are not disputing ad rem, what is or ought to be done, but arguing ad
hominem, what should be done consequently to their Principles, viz. that
Ordinances are not to be dispensed to persons unworthy, who cannot but sin in
participating unworthily, and that they are partakers of that sin, which admit
them, from which and the like Aphorisms there seems to result a necessity of
examining Heathens precedaneously to their admission to the Word preached,
whether they are humble, docil, and facil, to captivate their understanding to
the obedience of faith, or not.

2. There is not the same reason for examining of Heathens, as of those that be
members of the Church; What has any to do to examine (more than to judge) those
that are without? The Ethics tell us, that some are not idoneous Auditors of
moral Philosophy, viz. young men, not defined by paucity of years, but weakness
of understanding, and inconstancy and levity of manners: now though perchance a
Reader or Master may sense it as the dictate of prudence, to make trial of the
ingeny and temper of such as by agreement are his professed Scholars, yet it
follows not, that if a stranger shall accidentally go into, or transiently pass
through his School, or being persuaded by some Declamations made abroad by the
Master or Scholars of the excellency and praise of the Art, shall purposely
come with some propensness to become a Scholar, if he shall like the Doctrine
which is taught; that he must suspend his Lectures, and impose silence on
himself, until he have tried the capacity and docibleness of his adventitious
Auditor.

3. Though Pagans may be permitted to be Hearers, (and yet in the ancient
Church they were not admitted to hear all the parts of Scripture indefinitely,
but only some special portions thereof) yet they hear it not as their Word, or
that wherein they can yet claim any actual right or interest. In 1 Cor. 14.22.
Prophesying is a sign for them that believe, a sign of favor and benediction,
whereby God teaches and blesses his people, (as Paraeus, Aquinas, A Lapide,
etc.) primarily and principally intended to the faithful.

Plato, who is therefore called Moses Atticus, (...)
seems to have been very conversant in the writings of Moses, whereunto some
think he refers in that frequent phrase, As the old saying goes: the fifth
Commandment is explicitly found in Homer, and diverse of Solomon's Proverbs in
the moral Philosophers, yet nevertheless it was the proper privilege of the
Jews, that to them were committed the Oracles of God.

A Writing or Deed belongsonly to him to whom, or to whose use, it is sealed
and delivered, though an unteressed stranger may perchance hear it read. In the
Charter of a City none has actual interest, until he be incorporate and made
free; yet a forreiner may hear the purport thereof, and perchance may consultly
be made acquainted therewith, to facilitate and inflect him to denizen himself,
through the alluring hope of participating the benefits and privileges thereby
granted; yet all that while the Magistrates hear no obligation to make
inspection into, or take account of his condition, that is not yet under their
government.

4. We are now disputing only of Christians, and such as are of years of
discretion; Defense of the Admon. S. 1. p. 118.
and of such Mr. Cartwright expressly says, If they be not meet to receive the
Holy Sacrament of the Supper, they are not meet to hear the Word of God, they
are not meet to be partakers of the prayers of the Church; and with what
lawfulness they may offer themselves to the Prayers, and to the hearing of the
Word, they may offer themselves to the Lords Supper; so he correspondently to
what has been elsewhere showed to be the judgment of Chrysostom; and upon
such account, there is as much need of examination, in order to fit them for
partaking the other Ordinances, as well as this. That of Mark 16.15. Preach the
Gospel to every Creature, is parallel to that of Matthew. 28.19. Go teach all
Nations; and to teach, is (according to the Original) to disciple; and then it
might seem consonant, that they should preach to such as were disciplinable,
and in a capacity to be made Disciples; and then next they may take notice,
that it follows (baptizing them) whence it will be consequent, that as they
ought only to admit to baptism, such as receive the Word with Faith; so to
receive, as their Hearers, such alone as entertain the Word first offered and
propounded to them, without any malicious blaspheming, or despiteful
persecuting thereof (for those only fall under the denomination of Swine and
Dogs, to whom Pearls are prohibited to be cast, and holy things to be given)
and then concordantly to their principles, even the Heathen should be examined,
whether they were such or not, previously to, admitting them to be constant and
professed Hearers.

But to seposite the Argument ad hominem, and to reflect upon that which may
perchance be hence collected and alleged ad rem, as, that if confession of
faith be requisite antecedently to baptism, then a pari, examination or the
like confession, is as necessary to the perception of the other Sacrament: I
shall hereunto reply, That the consequence does not hold, because the latter
has neither like example, nor equal reason with the former; we find precedents
for the one, and until they, like the old Mercuries, will with their finger
point us the way, where we may find the like for the other, we shall be like
the Mercuries too, stand still, and let them be like the Passenger to go on
their course. It carries much of reason, that he that renounceth his former
principles, should declare and let us know, what belief he is now become of;
and being by baptism to be initiated into the Church, should tell us what
Faith he desires to be baptized in; there is not the like reason for those who
being members of the visible Church, do formally, as such, make continual
profession of faith; the former by a great sum (as it were) obtain their
freedom, the latter are freeborn, but as the Children of Christian Parents,
being born, as it were Denizens of the City of God, the Church, do forthwith
receive baptism without adjournment thereof, till they are susceptible of
making profession of faith, so by similitude of reason, should those that are
baptized, and intelligent Church Members, be admitted to the other Sacrament,
without any farther explicit professing.

That examination should seem requisite precedaneously to be aring the word
(they say) has no conformity with Antiquity; for Catechumens and Penitents
were admitted to the Word, not to the Eucharist. But does it therefore follow,
that either they were not, or ought not to be examined, whether they were apt
and capable before they had such admission? This only shows, that some
admitted to the Word, were not permitted the Sacrament; not that those Hearers
were put under no trial, nor needed to be so. The Catechumens were only
Embrio's, and Christians in fieri, and but an higher story, or the first
winnowing of Heathens, and to them is applicable what we have already
discoursed of: the Penitents in their steps to restitution, who were admitted
to hear in the Porch some portions of the Word, not the whole, but before any
excommunicate person could be indulged the favor of penance, he rendered some
hopeful signs of repentance, which could not be collected but upon some trial;
which argues for us, that there was some probation of them, before they were
admitted to be complete Hearers; but when they first were cast out, they were
as well excluded from the Word, as from the Sacrament, correspondently to the
method of discipline among the Jews, where he that was under Cherem, did
neither teach, nor was taught, which both checks with the practice of the
Apologists, and confutes their principles.

To tell us out of Ames, that the Word goes before, the Sacraments follow,
does no more enforce this consequent, that therefore there needs no examination
precedent to the Word, than it follows, that because Baptism goes before the
Eucharist, therefore there is no necessity of any examination, or profession of
faith to be made antecedently to baptizing adult persons; or because seedtime
goes before harvest, therefore no care need to be taken, whether the ground be
cultivated and carefully manured, where we cast our seed. But though, as
applied by them, it savor more of Bellarmine, arguing that the Sacraments
excite not Faith, as the Word does, because Verbum Dei praecedit fidem,
sacramenta autem sequuntur; Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 8. p. 204.
-- unde verbum praedicatur infidelibus and haereticis quibuscunque, ut
incipiant credere, at sacramenta requirunt fidem saltem in adultis, nec possunt
recte conferri, nisi iis qui prius credunt: Yet we shall perfectly close with
what they allege out of Peter Martyr in this, and grant that the Word may be
preached to those that have not yet heard or understood it; and that from such
(viz.) Heathens, the communion of the Supper ought to be pure, if so they would
not foully clash with him in the rest, but admit thereunto such, who openly
profess themselves Christians (as I am sure all those do whom they exclude) to
whom he says it is given for a public thanksgiving. And it seems to me, to
carry no great disproportion of reason, if the Word may be preached to such as
have not heard or understood, in hope they may understand and believe, and in
order thereunto: that then also the Sacrament may be exhibited to them that
profess the Faith of Christ, without disquisition, whether they do sincerely
make that profession or not, because it is not only probable to Charity they
may have sound Faith, but possible their Historical or Dogmatical Faith (if
they have no other) may by that Ordinance be improved, and quickened into a
special lively working Faith.

But here they cast their Shete anchor, -- Cum fessas non vincula naves
Ulla tenent. --
and bring forth their Palladium, that must preserve the City, and which they
also think to be like the shield of Pallas, with the Gorgon's head, that will
blind and astonish all beholders into silence.

Who knows not that distinction between a converting and confirming Ordinance?
We know the effects and influences of one and the same Ordinance may be so
distinguished; but acknowledge not there is any such essential difference or
distinction between the several Ordinances of the Word and Sacraments, we shall
only grant,

1. That the Sacraments are no converting Ordinances, in relation to men out of
the Church, and to turn men from Ethnicisme to Christianity, although they be
such to men within the Church, Prae festi. Morat. p. 392.
and to convert them from an Historical or Dogmatical, to a
lively-active-saving faith, when Mr. Tombs inferres, then breaking of bread is
a converting Ordinance, Mr. Baxter answers, If you mean that it may convert,
who ever denied it? Yea, or it may be useful to convert unsound Christians to
sincerity?

2. That perhaps appropriately, rather than properly, by a denomination taken
from the more frequent and more ordinary effect thereof, the Sacraments may be
called confirming Ordinances, and so contradistinguish'd to the Word.

3. Though as seals obsignating, and assuring conditionally, they are not
without some efficacy toward conversion (as shall be showed) yet seeing in that
way they convert only by confirming, converting to a true special faith, by
confirming and quickening a common general faith; therefore as seals they may be
said to be primarily confirming Ordinances; and though also as seals actually
and absolutely confirming relative grace, and exhibiting the benefits and
privileges of the Covenant, they suppose faith either in fieri, or facto esse,
Faith being the Condition of the Covenant, whereupon those benefits and
privileges are bestowed; Art. 45.
or though as conjoined to the Word for more ample confirmation thereof (as the
Confession of the French Churches has it) they in that respect are also called
confirming Ordinances, ( Quomodo enim duo vincula dicuntur uno fortiora, and
duo testes fortiores solitario, sic proculdubio long plus valeat ad
confirmationem fidei, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 9. S. 32.
promissionis obligatio, and Sacramentorum pignoratio, quam alterutra seorsim,
nimirum quia and intellectus per se movetur in verbis, and per sensus, in
sacramentis, as Chamier discourses;) yet as they are signs showing forth, and
representing the death of Christ, and salvation thereby, unto believers; so
they are means, and moral instruments, to beget that real grace which converts
the heart, (in like manner as the Word does) those two, the Word and Sacrament,
not having different effects and operations, in relation to Faith; but only a
different manner of efficiency, and the one assisting and confirming the other
toward the same effect. But in their sense, though this distinction, this their
Palladium, (as the old Heathens fabled of theirs) may be pretended to have
fallen from Heaven; yet, as other Images, it was the work of men's hands, and of
a late framing; and whosoever shall hotly strive to preserve it, shall like
Metellus, rescuing the Palladium at Rome, hazard, in such flames, the loss of
his eyes.

But if we should, by hypothesis, allow the distinction in their sense, yet it
brings nothing pertinent in answer to our Argument; for who has so little of
natural Logic (if he have no artificial) to judge, that because the Sacrament
is only a confirming, and the Word a converting Ordinance, therefore it can
possibly be consequent, that pre-examination is requisite in order to right
partaking of the former, not the latter? Who would not rather, without any
Prompter, suppose, that such examination were rather to be required for
disposing men to be partakers of the Word, whose effects are more general,
gracious, and profitable, (as I have elsewhere manifested) and where the hazard
and danger both of damnum emergens, and lucrum cessans, is more to such
unpreparedness and indisposition? and either due preparation is necessary to no
Ordinances, save such as confirm Faith (and then men may come to the Word
unprepared;) or else men may come to some Ordinances duly prepared without
pre-examination. Like Iphilus treading on the tops of Corn, without any
pressing them, they tenderly insist upon this point, and do rather knock at
this door, than enter; but let us survey their discourse, Fatale aggressi
sacrato avellere templo
Palladium. --


Some have contested against this difference, but with small success: It may
probably be so, in respect of persuading such, as according to what Stapleton
advises, Look who speaks, not what is spoken; or such who are like Peleus,
Cedere nescius; or like the Canes of China, which are but hollow Reeds, yet are
as hard and impenetrable, as Iron; and like the Luciferians, easier to be
overcome, than persuaded, being perswasion-proof to all that checks with their
Interests; and therefore add the many grains of their affection, to supply the
weight of reason, and to turn the balance their way: Quod valde volumus, hoc
facile credimus: We know the Spartans out-faced their great Defeat at
Mantinaea, set up their Trophies, and arrogated the Victory; besides, the good
Cause may not always have the best advocate. Tully against Oppiaricus prevailed
in a bad Cause, and Aeschines against Ctesiphon miscarried in a good; and some
Advocates are like Pericles in the Theater, who being vanquished by Thucydides,
will by their bold eloquence persuade that they are Victors.

But it shall as much entrench upon discretion, as modesty, for me to enter
upon odious comparisons, between the persons they mention, or their Writings;
Vivorum, ut magna admiratio; ita censura difficilis: one of those whom they so
magnify (and I shall not strive to open wider the Pupil of their Eye, to make
either of them seem less) is (with one or two more of his Nation) as the Tower
of David, builded for an Armory; where hang all the Shields of mighty men; they
are, I confess, Stars of great Magnitude, and perchance my Astralobe takes
their Altitude at no lower Elevation, than does that of the Apologists; and
though I cannot move Concentrick with them in this Circle, nor make them my
Cynosure, or such Stars whereby I guide my course; yet the Apologists are more
Anomalous to other of their motions, and less follow their light. For Mr.
Prinne, although perchance, as he said of the Macedonians, Quis non in hoc
potest esse eloquens? Yet I shall not dishonor him by my poor Desence, which,
like Incense, will more cloud, than perfume his praise, Frigida ^aus species
est vituperationis; although I shall only say, that he being (...), and magnus
in omnibus, it could not be expected that he should be non minor in singulis;
and being no less eminent for the multitude of his Writings, than for the
magnitude of his Learning (and so much curious workmanship may not be looked
for in a great Colosse, as in a small Statue) and that notwithstanding his
Adversary encountered him in that subject, which he had chosen as his Sparta to
adorn, and to make it his Masterpiece, as Apelles did the Table of Venus,
wherein to display all his Artifice; and Pontice, rem solam qui facit, ille
facit. Yet notwithstanding all these advantages, I may truly say, Nec retulit
praedas, nec palmam victor ab host; but only to argue he had the better,
because he had the last word without reply, is an Argument taken from the Cart,
where anciently Scolds used to play their prizes; and they might as well
conclude that the Rock has the worst, because when the surging billows break
upon him, ^. 2. c. 1. De civitate Dei.
and fall into froth, he moves not forward to beat them lower, Quis disceptandi
finis erit and loquendi modus, si respondendum esse respondentibus semper
existimemus? says Augustine, there would then indeed be no end in writing many
books. But Quid Cannas Mithridaticumq, bellum,
Et Syllas Mariosque, Mutiosque,
Magna voce sonas, manuque tota,
Jam dic, Posthume, de tribus capellis;
We need not trouble our selves to inquire, how other have fought, or who has
been Victor in this Arena, but come to discharge our proper parts. But yet we
need not fight, for the Cause is given up, and the Weapons laid down, and the
finger held up as in dedition at the first encounter: for they franckly and
ingenuously confess, That at the receiving of the Sacrament, conversion may be
wrought, or there may be the first sensible feeling of grace wrought; but
though they quit the field, yet they will not come in and yield, but retreat to
this Fortress, That this effect is not produced by, or flowing from the
Sacrament, but from the word annexed to, and concomitant with it; and that the
Sacrament is yet no converting Ordinance, in an ordinary way; nor was
sanctified, nor may be used to that end. But Quisquis hominum sic respondeat;
nisi qui veritati adversatur, contra quam non habet quod respondeat? as
Augustine to Petilian; for what is this, but to say nothing, Cont. lit. Pet. l.
3. c. 36.
rather than seem to be convict by holding their peace; and to be like the
pulse of the flowing Sea, which seems ever and anon a little to retract those
waves which yet it sends up in a still rising flood toward the Shore? For to
recapitulate a little, when we argue that if Infidels and faithless persons are
to be permitted to be Hearers of the Word, because thereby Faith may be
begotten in them, that then also all Church Members may be admitted to partake
of the Sacrament, because by it, their historical and dogmatical Faith may be
elevated, and improved to a sound and saving faith: hereunto it is usually
answered, that it follows not, by like consequence of reason, because the
Sacrament is no converting Ordinance, but only confirms that Faith wherewith
men come thither. But now I beseech you perpend, whether it be not all one to
our purpose, and the scope of the argument, if conversion be wrought at the
Sacrament, which they grant, though attributing somewhat to their acuteness, we
concede, it be not effected by it, as long as Faith is wrought there, though
not thereby, there is the same reason for coming thither.

But then secondly, Is not the Word always an essential constitutive part of
the Sacrament, or can it be a Sacrament, but by accession of the Word (as well
instructive, as consecratory) to the Element? Institut. l. 4. c. 14. S. 4. p.
472.
that word quod praedicatum intelligere nos faciat, quid visibile signum sibi
velit -- quo tendit ac nos dirigit (says Calvin) who illustrates this truth,
by comparing the Sacrament without the Word, to a seal set to a Charter without
writing; and this indeed properly (which Allegory they otherwise misapply) were
setting a Seal to a Blank; and therefore he says farther, Comment. in 5. Ephesians.
Sola mysterii explicatio facit ut mortuum elementum incipiat esse sacramentum,
correspondently to Augustine, Detrahe verbum, and quid est aqua nisi aqua?
accedat verbum ad elementum and fit sacramentum: and then also the words of
Consecration, as likewise the visible word, the actions, instruct also: verbum
sacramenti est pars ejus instructionis, says Chamier, Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 15. S.
9. p. 16. Bell. Enerv. Tom. 3. c. 2. p. 16.
and as he tells us, that though omne concionatorium, non est consecratorium,
at omne consecratorium, est concionatorium; so Ames well directs, instruere
circumstantes, and consecrare elementa, non debent inter se opponi, quid per
instructionem circumstantium de elementi destinatione ad usum sacrum, elementum
ipsum ex part consecratur. Why then do they separate those which God has
joined, and sophistically argue a male divisis, ad been conjuncta, and
interpretatively, and in the last result only seem to say, that the Sacrament,
when it is no Sacrament, does not convert?

Thirdly, as Luther, Calvin, and Chemnicius, and other Orthodox Divines affirm,
that those sins lapsed into after Baptism, are remitted by Faith and
Repentance, renewed by the memory of Baptism; so also the word formerly heard,
but not then applied and laid to heart, being now re-minded by occasion of the
Sacrament, which else had not been recognized, may entitle the Sacrament to be
the present and immediate cause of conversion; and as the word afterward
believed, makes the Sacrament effectual to an Infant; so the Encharist makes
that word afterward more efficacious toward Conversion, which when it was first
heard, was not received with true Faith. The word calls it self a light, and
in creating the new man, illumination by the word has resemblance and Analogy
with light in the creation of the world, which had the primogeniture among all
the works of God, being mentioned to be first made, and is that whereby other
of his works are discerned and quickened, and enabled for their operations; and
as Light is actus perspicui, so nothing can be acted in any perspicuity or
clearness, without the enlightening word; yet notwithstanding in a clear light,
some eyes cannot read without the help of Spectacles; and will any man
therefore conclude, that those Perspectives are not means or Instruments of
discerning Characters, because they have no subserviency to that end, without
the adjument of Light? The Chemists boast much of their Universa medicina; and
some of them thereby understand the Calidum innatum and spiritum insitum, which
of it self works out, and mastereth many Diseases; but when some Maladies are
too stubborn and violent to be expulsed, and there is indication of some proper
medicine to be applied for cure, although no remedy can put forth its virtue,
or produce any effect without it be quickened and actuated by that Native
Balsam; yet we deny not therefore the force and operation of the Medicine, nor
dare to affirm it is no healing Pharmacon.

Fourthly, They will not adventure to say, the Sacrament does confirm Faith,
without the accession of the Word thereunto, even formally as it confirms;
and if the requisiteness of such a connection of the Word therewith, does not
frustrate the Sacrament of the denomination of a confirming Ordinance, why
should the like necessity of the concurrence of the Word with the Sacrament in
conversion, deprive it of the name of a converting Ordinance?

Fifthly, We pre-suppose, and lay it as our Hypothesis, that none but
Covenanters with God, and Church Members, are capable of the Sacraments, and
such have been Hearers of the Word, and are pre-endued with a
Dogmatical-Historical Faith; but all that have the Word of Faith, have not the
Work of Faith; they believe speculatively, but not practically; not laying the
promises to heart in an efficacious application; they can make out the
Proposition, but are not perfect in the Assumption and Conclusion; have the
Synteresis fixed in them, but are strangers to the Syneidesis, and Crisis: Now
the question is, whether the Sacraments are moral Instruments, and effectual
outward means to set that knowledge home to the heart, which before was only
floting in the brain, and to set open the passage between them, and to turn and
bring them, that before at distance looked toward him, to close up with Christ,
and to give their heart to him, and cast their dependencies upon him.

Not to fetch in any auxiliar strength from that opinion, or bottom any
argument thereupon, which some learned men embrace, that an Historical or
Temporary Faith differs only in degree, not in kind, from that Faith which
Tertullian calls Morata; and Augustine, Radicata and confirmata, which if it
were so, then the Sacrament only by confirming Faith, and elevating and
improving it to greater degrees, might, with more facility, work conversion.

But howsoever, if they differ in kind (which to me seems to have more warrant
from Reason) yet the raising and increasing of the degrees, may alter the
kinds, as air advanced to some more degrees of rarefaction, and consequent
heat, turns to be fire; so since the Sacrament by quickening and fomenting the
weak degrees of Faith, by confirming it, and making it take root, may add such
strength thereunto, as to make it purify the heart, and purge the Conscience
from dead works, seeing we see Augustine describes true Faith to be only a
confirmed rooted Faith; and if it have the essence of true Faith, it cannot but
have the consequent operation thereof, viz. to change the heart; and seeing
(what was hinted before) as Seals, the Sacraments do confirm Faith, whether
objective, making the matter more credible, or subjective, causing the persons,
both more facile to credit, and more firmly to adhere to it: therefore he that
had attained by the Word to a superficial floating, and ineffectual Faith, may
by the Sacrament, improve it to be lively, solid, and efficacious, as he that
thinks a Note under a man's hand to be no security, nor will engage or undertake
the performance of a duty upon such Assurance, will be facilitated to do it
when a Seal is added to the Writing; and as two Bonds are held stronger than
one, and two Witnesses more credible, than a single one; so without all doubt,
the Obligation of a Promise, and the Pawn or Pledge of the Sacrament, avail
more to the confirmation of Faith, the understanding being by it self more
moved by the words and by the senses in the Sacraments, In praedicatione verbi
and administratione Sacramentorum idipsum fere usu evenit quodin usuvini,
etenim ei qui assueti sunt, quotidiano potu vix ejus vim sentiunt, quibus vero
rarius aliquanto exhibetur, in iis ejus spiritus miram quandam efficacitatem
exerunt, cum ad vires corporis recreandas, tum ad alacritatem inusitatam animis
ingenerandam, etc. These. Salmur. p. 3. S. 17. p. 35. Idem hic fere usu evenit
quod in visu, quia natura duobus oculis objecta visibilia nos perspicere velit,
nisi aliquid moliatur extra ordinem, visu quidem non caremus, nec quidquam
videmus duobus oculis quod aliquatenus cernere nequeamus uno tantum, at id
facimus nimis commode and fortasse minus acutum. Ibid. S. 49. page 47.
as was even now alleged out of Chamier; and though the same things have been
propounded before in the Word, yet they may now take more impression, being
held forth in the Sacrament, even as the same proposition made in the Word,
does often acquire better and more happy effect at one time than another; and
much rather may it do so, when it is tendered as well in diverse ways, as times.

Whatsoever effect in the perfecting of Faith, and attracting and uniting the
love of the heart unto God in Christ, can be produced by the lively
apprehension, and serious meditation of the death of Christ, and his love in
dying for the salvation of those that believe, the Sacrament may be productive
of, which by institution sign^fies, and, by similitude, represents and shows
forth his death, and expressly tends, and directly and appositely conduces to
the remembrance of him.

And how frequently and urgently is the consideration of Gods love manifested,
in sending his Son to dye, and Christ's in dying for us, Joh. 15.12. and 13.
Romans 5.8. Ephesians. 5.2. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 John 3.16. and 4.9. and 11. etc.
recommended as the most exciting; and, as the Apostle speaks, constraining
motive, to the interchangable love of God and Christ; and also of our brethren,
as material objects of our love (whereof God is the formal,) and as
participable of that blessedness, which flows from Gods love in Christ?

This is plainly confessed by the Provincial Assembly of London, who
pathetically say, That the breaking of the Bread, understandingly looked upon,
Vindicat. p. 104,
is a forcible argument to break your hearts, -- and in the right use to effect
that which it does move unto, -- there is power in an applicative and fiducial
remembrance of Christ at the Sacrament, to heal all the sinful issues of our
souls, -- and if you practically remember the Sacrament of his death, you will
find virtue coming out thereof to make you dead to the World.

Can any tell me, Baxter praefestinantis morator. p. 393. Ex instituto Dei and
Christi, ad eadem illa objecta, quae verbo continentur, cum repraesentanda tum
praesertim obsignanda referuntur, nam and Christum testantur mortuum esse pro
peccatis nostris ac suscitatum a mortuis pro justificatione nostra, and in eo
nobis exhibent, quicquid boni specie and jucundi, and honesti, and utilis
animos nostros movere, and ad studium pietatis, and verae sanctimoniae excitare
potest. These. Salmur. part. 3. S. 11. page 33. Mundatio animae per gratiam
infusam accedit ad rationem creationis. Altisiodor. Objecti illa repraesentatio
in sacramentis quam in verbo before expressa fuit, ideoque movet efficacius.
These. Salmur. S. 46. part. 3. p. 46. vide S. 31. and 38. p. 38, and 40.
says a learned man, in what kind of causality the Word works, which the
Sacrament does not also work in? though in Conversion the work of the Spirit
concur with the Word, either by infusing a principle of new life, and
inspiring supernatural habits; as Principium quo, into the soul, which is
principium quod, as is the Tenent of most of Orthodox Divines; or by
superadding a real efficacy to a moral persuasion, as some others hold (who yet
seem far enough from any symbolizing with Pelagius, while they suppose not
this efficacy to be common or equal; nor to rise from the event; nor to be
founded in the annexed congruity, and due application of this persuasion, in
respect of any external circumstances, or the proper disposition of the
Patients; but in Gods Decree, and the special operation of his Spirit) yet
which way soever it be, the Word, though it have a practick Energy by
assistance of the Spirit, and be a practical instrument of righteousness and
salvation; yet the operation thereof is not Physical, but Moral, and
Metaphorical; not an efficiency, but an objective proposition and persuasion,
movere objective, per modum signi; and working Faith, not formally, but
consequently; not by causal influence, but as subservient mean, and by
mediation of its signification apprehended, though the manner of signifying be
very actual and efficacious, in which respect Faith is an acquisite habit, as
in regard of the operation of the spirit, it is an infused, and is produced in
the manner of a Creation. And the like kinds of propounding the object, and
signification, and persuasion, cannot be denied to the Sacrament, even in a
more extensive manner, striking more senses, and affecting them with
multifarious impressions; and therefore it must also be granted, that it has
the like moral and consecutory efficiency, in order to the begetting of Faith,
and purifying of the heart, and thereby bringing Christ to dwell therein.

To say that it is no proper sanctified means in an ordinary way for
conversion, nor may be used in Faith to that end, carries as little relish of
reason, as resentment of piety. Extraordinary and accidental causes, as they
do rarely produce their effects, so they are not ordinate to them, in their
own nature and the intention: Quae destinato consilio fiunt, nunquam dicuntur
per accidens, says Chamier; Quae fiunt a causa per accidens, raro; fiunt causa
efficiens per se, and quae natura sua and intention ad effectum ordinata est.
Alsted. Neque illi qui (Sacramenta) causas dicunt per accidens, etc. quae
fortuitae sunt, vel sine quibus non, fortuitae quibus alius finis, etc. Vide
Chamier. Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 2. S. 13. and 14. p. 28. etc. 3. sect. 33.
but as it is no rare thing for conversion to be wrought at receiving of the
Sacrament (as they speak,) or by it, (as we say;) so the administration has a
natural tendency and influence thereunto, and such a coherence as is between
causes and effects; by commemoration and representing of the death of Christ,
De doct. l. 2. c. 1.
and offering and applying the fruits and effects thereof. For a Sacrament is a
sacred sign, as St. Augustine tells us, that signum est res, praeter speciem
quam ingerit sensibus, al^ud aliquid ex se faciens in cogitationem venire; How
the Sacraments may be operative to conversion by their signification, see
Theses Salmur. part. 3. S. 44. p. 15. 45. p. 16. Ep. 25.
so as it is instructive by the nature thereof, and a virtual kind of teaching;
and as intellection is wrought by those either spiritual accidents, or
intentional things, the intelligible Species, which are but similitudes and
representations of things; so those signs impress upon the Understanding the
things signified, by that similitude which they bear unto them, a similitude
non per participationem ejusdem qualitatis, sed illam quae est
proportionatorum, ut sicut se habet hoc ad illud, ita hoc ad istud, as Biel
expresses it; and the form, and therefore the nature of a Sacrament, is the
union between the signs and the thing signified, being a spiritual relation,
founded partly in this analogy, similitude and proportion between them, Si
sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum rerum quarum sacramenta sunt non
haberent, omnino sacramenta non essent, says St. Augustine.

But to insinuate as they do, That the beholding a deaths head in a Ring, has
either equal, or the like kind of influence in conversion with the Sacrament,
is to avile and degrade Gods Institutions into the same Classis with Humane
Inventions, and God should then have no more power to ordain Sacraments, or
significant Ceremonies, than man has, if his Institutions are by his blessing
no more adopted and sanctified to the grace of Conversion, than man's are. And
this spot of their Pen shall demerit much thanks from the Papists, not only by
verifying their Calumny, that we attribute no more efficacy or operation to the
Sacrament, than to a Picture; but also by rendering them some advantage to argue
in defense of their Books for Laymen (though prohibited Books by Gods
command) and to plead, that to behold a painted or carved Crucifix, may excite
as holy affections toward Christ, In Gal. 3.1.
as to have him before our eyes evidently set forth crucified among us, as well
by his Sacraments, as his Word (as Bullinger, Piscator, Paraeus, and others
interpret it.)

2. What grace soever the Sacrament exhibits, it is by virtue of their
sanctification to that end, a Sacrament by the Scholastic definition,
signifying by institution, representing by similitude, and by sanctification
(they say, containing, we) conferring spiritual and invisible graces: If they
require an express special promise, warranting the use thereof for a converting
Ordinance, let them first produce such, to approve it may be used for a
confirming. As heat cannot be separate from Light in the Sun, so neither can
the virtue of converting be dis-joyned from that of confirming, in those Texts
which hold forth the nature and use of the Sacrament; but, as Metals, have
their name from (...), because their veins run together; so these powers are
in the sacred Mines of spiritual Treasure, concurrent and complicated, that let
them shoot any shaft for the one, we shall (as the Yorkists did in the Battle
of Towton against the Lancastrians) take it up, and return it to fight for the
other. If they suppose that it verifies the one power, in that the Sacrament is
called a seal of Faith; but it approves not the other, they forget that a Seal
is set to a gift and grant, as well as to a confirmation, and serves as well
to convey, as to corroborate; and besides, the Sacrament, as a Seal, gives and
confirms a relative grace, as a sign, it does the real, (such as is the new
heart) the former by obligation, the latter by signification. It is true, our
Divines usually call the Sacraments confirming Ordinances, but not in that
sense which they imposterously fabricate, exclusively to converting, but
because they are primarily Seals of Faith objective, being added to confirm
and ratify the certainty of the promises, though with some more particular and
appropriate application upon performance of the condition: Chamier. Tom. 4. l.
2. c. 9. S. 18
Easdem res confirmare, quae prius erant solis verbis conceptae, est enim ea
signorum natura, ut quae Diplomata in membranis sunt, fiant efficaciora,
sortianturque effectum suum. Sacraments having some analogy with an Oath,
wherewith God confirms the promise, willing more abundantly to show unto the
Heirs thereof, the immutability of his counsel, non suam naturam spectans, sed
nostram infirmitatem, and therefore Paraeus calls our Sacraments, In Hebr. c.
6. v. 17. p. 888.
God's visible Oaths, as the very words, says he, manifests; for Lawyers call
a solemn Oath a Sacrament; and therefore they are Gods Oaths, in confirmation
of his Promises; Si verbum meum non sufficit, ecce signum do, adds
Chrysostom; but then even in confirming Faith objective, they consequently not
only strengthen, but beget Faith subjectively (as a Seal in confirming the
Writing, begets a belief of the validity of the assurance) and so are means of
Conversion, producing a firmer assent to the truth of those Promises, which
before were not effectually laid hold of; Dico sacramenta (says Chamier) esse
notiora and efficaciora fidei faciendae, Ubi supra S. 24. p. 42.
(observe he says faciendae, non tantum confirmandae) ipsa promissione, codem
modo quo sigilla regia sunt notiora and ^fficaciora ipso diplomate, nimirum
quia solent apud nos esse cognitiora certioraque quae in oculos cadunt, quam
quae auribus admoventur. As then he that is not satisfied with a bare single
promise may credit an oath; and then that oath is properly the means whereby he
is persuaded into a belief; and as when a naked Writing is not held a good
Conveyance, until it become a Deed sealed and delivered, that sealing and
delivery makes good the assurance, and is that which invests the right and
interest; so when the Word preached does not profit, being not mixed with Faith
in them that hear it, the Sacrament, that superadds to the Dogmatical or
Historical Faith, a fiducial assent, does not only confirm, but cause that
Faith which justifies, and brings peace with God. And to say it cannot
properly be said to do this, because it does it not without precognition of
the word, is as if they should say, that because a Deed is a writing sealed and
delivered, that it does not therefore become of force from the sealing and
delivery, but from the writing read; or that an incorporal estate did always
pass, when the grant alone was read, and was only confirmed by the sealing and
delivery.

Though most of their cunning lie in such generalities; yet I shall not insist
on it, that Christ has promised to be with us in all his Ordinances unto the
end of the world. And that there are general promises, that their hearts shall
live that seek God, Psalm. 6.9.32. Prove. 8.17. Matthew. 7.7. Lam. 3.25. Psalm. 75.4.
that the Lord will be found of them that seek him, and is good to them that
wait for him, and to the soul that seeks him, and they that dwell in his
Courts shall be satisfied with the goodness of his house; and that this is
extensible and accommodable to seeking and waiting on him in all his ways and
Ordinances; and, as a general rule, extends to and comprehends all
particulars, not specially and expressly excepted; so they must show by direct
and explicit proof that the grace of conversion is denied to this particular
ordinance, or else it is included in the affirmation of such grace to be
annexed to ordinances in general.

As the generative faculty for propagation of the species is still supported
and enlivened by influence of Gods benediction, Be fruitful and multiply; semel
quidem dicta est, semper autem fit (says Chrysostom,) so the converting power
in the Sacrament, for continuance and dilatation of the Church, is maintained
and verified by the power of Christ's blessing of the Elements, to the
remembrance of him, which commemoration is efficacious to the engaging of the
heart to him.

The Sacramental Elements are the Body and Blood of Christ, and the Blood of
the New Testament, shed for many for remission of sins, as well by
signification, as by obsignation, and the obsignation is but an higher kind of
signification; they are the communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, In locum.
signifying and sealing them, accompanied with their effect, and spiritual
reality (says Deodate) by virtue of the Holy Ghost. And why should not the
signification be really effectual in production of real grace, as the sealing
to the causing of relative? or the signification have no such effect in the
Sacrament, which is so efficacious, when made in the Word? Beside, every
promise made to the Word, Homil. 3. a^^ Ephesians. c. 1.
is extended to the Sacraments, which are but visible words. And when
Chrysostom in his Exhortations to frequent communicating, affirms, not only
by these things set before us, viz. the Sacrament; but by Hymns also does the
Holy Ghost descend, he implies, that by the Sacrament the Holy Ghost more
evidently came into men's hearts, than by the other means; and whether that of 1
Cor. 12.13. of drinking into one spirit, which the Syriack, Ambrose, Augustine,
and others render, drinking of one spirit; and which Calvin thus expounds,
Participationem calicis huc spectare, ut unam Christi spiritum hauriamus; and
Piscator, Etsi verbi auditionem and sacramentor legitimam c. brationem spiritus
consolans and sanctificans sequitur remunerationis ergo, potiores ^amen esse in
eo sacramentorum parts, neque sane leviter praetereundum est quod Paulus dixit
nos spiri^^ potari, -- eui nihil unquam simile protulit cum de verbi
praedicatione locutus est. These. Salmur. part. 3. p. 40. Calvin in loc.
Piscator in loc. Gerhard loc. com. tom. 6. c. 20. p. 173. Chrysostom. in homil.
moral. 24.
Ut regenerentur ab uno spiritu, viz. Sancto, and Gerhard, Ex uno calice
bibimus, ut unum spiritum accipiamus, refer not to the conferring of real
grace, as well as relative; and so whether those Testimonies of Chrysostom,
and other Fathers, (which if I should muster up for my defense, I might, like
that Roman Vestal, be oppressed with the multitude of such Bucklers)
concerning the Sacrament, calling it Fundamentum, salus, lux, vita,
medicamentum immortalitatis, antidotum non moriendi, (the saying of Ignatius)
Renovationis and regenerationis causa, (which is Nyssen's,) and vivificatio
spiritus, which is Cyril's, Saint as mentis, which is Cyprians, etc. relate
only to confirming, not begetting of Faith, let men more learned judge, but
truly. I cannot believe.

Can they deny, that the Sacrament by showing forth and signifying the Lords
death, and putting us in remembrance of him, and his Body broken, and his Blood
shed for the remission of sins, is a part of the Gospel, or good tidings of
great joy, for a Savior, which is Christ the Lord; and must they not then also
grant, that the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation: Bellarmin. Evernat.
tom, 3. c. 5. p. 33.
from which very Text of Romans 1.16. Ames concludes, that aeque tribuitur
justificatio verbo and sacramentis, cum ambo justificent ut instrumenta Dei,
and ambo sua natura significent aliquid nobis fide recipiendum ad justitiam and
salutem, consequens est ambo justificare, mediante fide? Is not the
administration of the Sacraments a part of the work of the Ministry,
applicatio redemptionis in signis? and are not those offices, and that work
also, for the perfecting of the same, and the edifying of the Body of Christ,
Lapide in Ephesians. 4.12.
(...) (which Erasmus and Vatablus translate instauration, coming (says one)
(...), signifying rem collapsam restaurare and reparare. 2. perficere,
absolvere, consummare? which as they will grant in relation to the Word
preached, so they cannot deny it, in respect of the Sacrament, if that be a
Ministerial work; but Docemus sacramenta esse partem externi Ministerii
gratiae, quo Deus uti voluit ad promovendam salutem humanam, as Chamier
witnesses.

If they cannot deny the Word to be operative to Conversion, they must also
grant the like operation to the Sacrament, which works in the same generical
way, in order to the same effect, these being like two Needles touched with the
same Lodestone, which move together, and turn alike to the same point. If they
will not concede such efficacy to the Sacraments, they consequently and
virtually denegate it to the Word, these two Ordinances being such friends, as
to have things common between them; and like two Viols set to the same Tune,
Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 2. S. 3. p. 27.
touch one, and the other is touched also. Bellarmine delivers it as the common
tenent of the Protestants, Sacramenta mediate aliquid efficere, quatenus
videlicet excitant vel alunt fidem, quae homines justificat, quod tamen ipsum,
id est, excitare fidem, non faciunt nisi repraesentando; volunt enim eodem modo
concurrere ad justificationem sacramenta, Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 2. p. 177. Estius in
sentent. l. 4. did. 1. S. 8.
quo praedicatio verbi, nisi quod praedicatum adhibetur auribus, and per
auditum fidem, sacramenta adhibentur oculis, and per visum excitant etiam
fidem; and Estius seconds him, Docent Sectarii sacramentorum eundum esse usum
quem Evangelicae praedicationis, and proinde non aliter ascribendam volunt
hominis justificationem sacramento, quam verbo Evangelii, quia inquiunt, s^cut
sacramentum, ita Evangelium virtus Dei est in salutem omni credenti. And this
is true, which they affirm, but not the whole truth; for beside this virtue of
representing, the Protestants do attribute to the Sacraments also another of
obsignation, Ames. Bell. Enervat. Tom. 3. c. 3.
Operantur ultra repraesentationem per efficacem ordinationem and assistentiam
Dei, says Ames; and they are not only theoretical signs, to signify; but
practical, to confer the things signified, and have omnem efficientiam respectu
gratiae, quam signum practicum potest habere per ullam relationem, -- non tamen
efficere gratiam immediate, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 7. S. 45. p. 38.
sed mediante spiritu Dei and fide; yet so as that illa non proprie pendent a
fide, sed fides ex illis, and illa ex constitutione Dei; and as Chamier speaks
of Baptism, justificare excitando fidem non dicimus, sed potius justificando
excitare fidem, quando quidem fides non est causa praecedens; but that they
excite Faith, and produce real grace by their signification and representing as
the word does, is the common opinion of Protestants, the Provincial Assembly at
London say, Vindication. p. 104. Instit. l. 4 c. 14. S. 16. and 17.
As Christ in the Ministry of his Word preaches to the ear, and by the ear
conveyeth himself into the heart; so in the Sacrament he preaches to the eye,
and conveyeth himself into the heart, and therefore it is well called a visible
Sermon. Fixum maneat (says Calvin) non esse alias sacramentorum quam verbi Dei
parts, quae sunt offerre nobis and proponere Christum; and elsewhere he adds,
hac ratione Augustinus sacramentum verbum visibile nuncupat, Loc. com. part. 4.
p. 194. a.
quod Dei promissiones velut in tabula depictas repraesentat, and sub aspectam
graphice atque (...) expressas siatuat. And so Martyr calls them speaking
Signs; and Junius matcheth them and the word, as Twins, Quod autem for as est
in Ecclesia testimonium, aut in sermon positum est, Eiren. part. 1 tom. 1. p.
710.
aut in symbolis and sacramentis ejus -- unum sunt secundum substantiam, etsi
in specie materiaque externa differunt; so likewise sacramenta conferentia
gratiam significando per visum (says Chamier) alio modo significant, quam
Evangelium per auditum, and tamen utraque Cham. tom. 4. l. 2. c. 5. S. 7. and
15.
conferunt significando -- communis modus significandi, atque ita operandi in
intellectum quanquam per diversos sensus; and what he says of Prayers, is as
well meant of, and applyable to the Sacraments, Si preces habere possunt
intelligentiam, ergo and instructionem, nam haec nihil est quam intelligentia
communicata. Exam. Council. Trident. 2. part. p. 101.
Objectum fidei (says Chemnicius) est verbum and sacramenta, imo in verbo and
sacramentis verum fidei objectum est Christi meritum, gratia Dei and efficacia
spiritus, and fides ideo justificat, quia illa in verbo and sacramentis dicitur
justificare; and I could amasse an heap of Testimonies to this purpose, Vere
prius flores numero comprendere fas sit, and that this is to be understood of
real grace (not only of relative) and of the first conversion and change of
the heart, not only seems plain by that of Chamier, (who, like Plato, may be
instar omnium, and inter omnes, -- Tanquam inter viburna cupressus) Tom. 4. l.
2. c. 2. S. 8. p. 27. Ibid. l. 2. c. 12. S. 20. and 21. p. 13.
Docent Catholici in sacramentorum perceptione efficigratiam in fidelibus; but
farther by this, Effici antem concedimus sanctificationem, sed hanc geminam,
externam, alias internam -- internam sanctificationem esse credimus efficaciam
spiritus sancti in animum accipientis sacramentum, a qua efficacia fit etiam
arcana mulatio intellectus and voluntatis, cujus respectu agnoscimus sacramenta
esse instrumenta quaedam; and most evidently (as nihil incontradicibilius in
Tertullians phrase,) by this passage, Quicquid movet intellectum ad
assentiendum veritati divinae, rat fovetque fidem, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 4. S. 16.
p. 31.
geneat sacramenta movent intellectum ad assentiendum veritati divinae, ergo:
Major patet; quia fidei est assentire veritati divinae -- Minor etiam facile
probatur, movent enim intellectum qua signa sunt, itaque significant,
significationis vis tota pertinet ad intellectum, movent autem ad assentiendum,
quia signa sunt veracia, non mendacia, veritas autem quam significant, est
divina non humana; so as this may set it in the clearest Sun, that those which
deny the Sacraments to be converting Ordinances, in this point they are also
speculative separatists from the communion of Protestants. And as certain
Princes, in some straits of indigence, have coined Leather instead of Silver;
so this new-minted distinction of a converting and confirming Ordinance, was
stamped in such a distress and necessity, for want of better Bullion; and is
not Sterling (only I have not read of Princes that have fallen into such an
exigence at the Inauguration into their Principalities) or was false Coin
rather borrowed from the Papists, who deny this Sacrament, to confer the first
grace, Suarez 2. in 3. disp. 7. q. 62. Vasquez. disp. 205. c. 4. who cite
Hales, Durand, Bonaventure, Biel, Paludanus, Major, and others, for this
opinion.
but to suppose him just that receives it.

I recognize, that some interpose to tell us, that what use or effect the
Sacrament can have by representing, may be acquired by seeing the
Administration without partaking, and then it might be sufficient for some to
look on; but I shall regest, that to what end shall they look on, if they can
look for no fruit or good effect thereby? And wherein can the Aspect be
fruitful or effectual to men unconverted, but as it shall be subservient and
adjumentall to their Conversion? And if the Sacrament may be thereby capable of
any such efficacy by representing to the Eye only, it will be necessarily
consequent, that the efficacy thereof, in order to that end, must be far
greater, when it works also by signifying to the other Senses; and the
applying signs are also added to the representing: but though we should not
willingly turn out of the way, yet farther to remove this block out of the way
of freer admission to the Sacrament; we shall answer,

1. That the Blessing of our Savior sanctifies the Bread and the Wine, in
order to the taking of both; and eating of the one, and drinking of the other,
not to the seeing them administered, to the doing this in remembrance of Him,
not beholding it done, and he shall unwarrantably presume to expect the fruit
of the Promise, that performs not the Duty of the Precept; the Sacramental
Elements put Christ into all our senses, (as I have formerly cited out of
Chamier) not only into our Eyes, and significatio quo est expressi^r, hoc
magis. operatur (as Chamier) to him that ears not, Tom. 4. l. 9. c. 10. S. 36.
p. 246.
it is no Sacrament; for sacramenta ut relata, non habent extra usum, rationem
sacramenti: And Chaemier also approves a passage of Valentia to this purpose,
Scilicet rem sacram in proposito intelligi debere, quae sanctificat hominem
suscipientem recte ipsum sacramentum, Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 11.
quod talis rei sacrae est signum, ita ut intelligere d^beamus esse signum rei
fanctificantis practicum, quoniam significat rem quae in ipsa praxi and usu
talis signt sanctificat.

Secondly, Definitions are the very essence of things, and the Apostle defines
this Sacrament by the Communion, the Bread which we break is the Communion of
the Body of Christ, (not the Inspection) and we are partakers of one Bread, not
beholders. For the better amplification of the benefits of Christ's Incarnation
in special, there was to be a Mystical Incarnation of Christ in us, as well as
a real for us, Mede in 1 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. p. 582.
(as Nazianzen-defines, the Eucharist to be a Communion of the Incarnation of
God) which is not effected, but by receiving this Body and Blood of his,
changing them into ours by way of nourishment. St. Augustine tells us, that
without the similitude of the sign to the thing signified, there is no
Sacrament, but the Analogy of the Eucharistical signs to the Body and Blood of
Christ, consist in the respect of aliment and nutrition; which respect fails,
without eating and drinking; and a Sacrament being not ens Physicum sed
rationis, Tom. 4. l. 7. c. 7. S. 18. p. 174.
may be a Sacrament to one, and not to another, as Chamier disputes, it is but
common meat and drink, until it be consecrated; but the Consecration is not
perfected, nor in facto esse, until participation, as it is no complete motion,
until it have attained its term; Even Bellarmine, Valentia, and other Papists,
Tom. 4. l. 9. c. 10. S. 15. p. 245.
make Consumption to be of the Essence of their fictitious sacrifice. Nay
Chamier goes farther, and denies, Ullum fructum ex Eucharistia participi
videndo; ratio facilis quia non sit instituta, ut significet ea ratione sed
alia, -- quare cum Eucharistia pertineat ad gustum, ( sic Augustinus) ridicule
sophista (Bellarminus) dixit aeque significare per oculos, id est, videndo. And
when I shall find their Appetite as well satisfied, and their Stomachs as much
filled, by looking on a good Supper, as by eating it, I may be facile to assent
to their Hypothesis, and believe the Supper of the Lords may be alimental and
refective to the soul, by seeing, as well as by partaking.

Thirdly, As the benefit is not equal in seeing and eating, In Eccl. l. 3.
so the danger is alike in either, if they be without Faith; for since not
only (as says Hierom) in this Mystery; but in the reading of the Scripture,
we eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of Christ; and the Word preached (as I
alleged out of Casaubon) is a Spiritual Table, and another kind of spiritual
eating of Christ; therefore to whomsoever, or howsoever salvation by the death
of Christ is represented, if not laid hold of by Faith, it turns to his
condemnation, and he has no life in him, because he eats not the flesh of the
Son of Man, nor drinks his Blood; so that as a man may eat Christ spiritually,
and not sacramentally, and have the rem signi, without the signum rei; so he
that eats not spiritually, contracts damnation, though he be restrained from
Sacramental eating.

Fourthly, Therefore, says Chrysostom, not only they that sit down at the
Table, but they that are present at the Feast, without their Wedding Garment,
Mep. ad Ephesians. Hom. 3. Tom. 4 p. 356.
are subject to condemnation; for the Master of the Feast will not ask, How
durst thou sit down, but how durst thou come in, not having a Wedding Garment?

Fifthly, To be a spectator of the Celebration, and not a partaker of the
Sacrament, as it has no precedent in the practice of the ancient Church (save
among those that were in the last degree of penance) for those that were not
thought worthy to partake, were not held fit to look on, Albaspin. de vet Eccl.
rit. l. 2. ob. 2. p. 206.
but were dismissed in the Ite missa, cum ex more Diaconus clamat, si quis non
commun^cat, det locum, (as says Gregory) and it was thought all one, to behold
the Celebration, and to be a partaker; for if a Catechumen had by fortuitous
accident, beheld the administration, he was forthwith baptized, and from
Baptism was an immediate passage to the Eucharist; and whom they thought fit
to be permitted the inspection, they supposed worthy to be admitted to the
participation of the Eucharist: so to stay as a spectator, De consecrat. did.
2.
was censured to merit the punishment of Excommunication (as I have elsewhere
manifested) peracta consecratione, omnes communicent, qui noluerint
ecclesiaisticis carere liminibus, sic enim Apostoli statuerunt, etc. as Gratian
records.

Lastly, as it is Treason to carry Arms and Ammunition to the Enemy, so this
principle treacherously betrays the Protestant Cause, and brings Aid to the
Popish, furnishing them with an Argument, to justify or excuse their private
Masses, and mutilate Communions, if they may be profitable and effectual to
spectators of the Sacrament, when it is administered, as well as to
participators. And sure if they do not lend, they that use it borrow this
Argument from the Pontificians, Aut Plato Philonizat, aut Philo Platonizat;
Bellarmine telling us, in his Disputes against our opinion of the Sacraments
efficacy by exciting Faith, and operating by their signification,
correspondently as the Word does, (as in truth many of the Arguments usually
urged to disprove the Sacraments to be a converting Ordinance, are but feasting
us in that Idol-Temple, and with part of the sacrifices, which Bellarmine has
offered to the God of Ekron) that what effect the Sacraments have by
signification, may be acquired by seeing them administered, as well as by
partaking; and from this principle also he argues in defense of the Communion
in one kind, and with the Popish Heifers have they ploughed, that have found
out this Riddle, and (in allusion to the antique mode in founding Cities) have
turned up this Furrow, and drawn this Line, where to make a Wall to retrench
and keep out from the Communion. And perhaps also the Papists putting their
private Masses upon the score of the peoples indevotion, has prompted the
Apologists and their fellows, to lay their comparatively private Communions,
and the excluding of so many, on the account of their unwillingness to come,
and on their irreverence; and hereupon to put the blame for the with holding
both kinds from so many, as among the Papists they do for withdrawing one
species from all, except Priests and Kings, save that lately the consecrated
Wine is given the Laity, in some Countries, poured out into a Glass, which by
no means is to be drank out of the Chalice, that the Priest may have still
some privilege and elevation above the people (equal to Kings.) Wherein, as in
a glass, we may see somewhat besides Truth and Godliness does carry on and
biass the wheels of this kind of motions.

That Argument seems in some false glasses to show a more colorable face of
reason, which some have thus painted; He that receives worthily, is converted
already; he that partakes unworthily, ears and drinks to his damnation, not
conversion: But this is mere painting, which will neither abide the fire, (or
trial) nor the light of the Sun, and will be defaced by every strong breath
that blows upon it.

But first to seposite and adjourn the consideration, that there lies no little
weight of Reason and Authority in that scale, which propends to think, that the
unworthiness of him which eats and drinks unto damnation, is meant only of a
contrary, not privative unworthiness, and alone of such as come with a
presumptuous irreverence, and wilful contempt of the Ordinance; and not of
those, that approach with some sense of their duty, reverential esteem of the
Mysteries and moral conformity: I shall first propound it to be considered,
whether these be not some of the Weapons, (or formed by their Pattern)
wherewith fresh Sophisters use to play at foiles, such as those; Either a man
dies, while he is alive, or when he is dead; either the Light first enters into
a room, when it is dark, or when it is lightsome; either the soul had an
existence before it was infused into the body, or after; and with either of the
horns of this Argument, they think to push down an Antagonist, and make it like
a Crocodile, to vanquish him which way soever he takes.

But I shall, secondly, offer it to be recognized, that the Argument is another
Dialect of the Language of Ashdod; for not only in analogous manner,
Bellarmine disputes against the Institution of the Legal Sacrifices, for the
typical expiation of sin, viz. Either he that offered was just, and then
needed no such expiatory sacrifice; Tom. 4. l. 3. c. 4. S. 10.
or unjust, and then it could not be available to him; and Chamier tells him,
he might have formed the like Argument against the Eucharist, as against the
antiquated sacrifices, but also the Papists with like artifice argue against
justification by Faith, that before justification nothing in the natural man
can justify him, he being at emnity with God, and after he is justified, faith
cannot do that which is done already; and again, that no man can believe his
sins to be remitted, and himself to be accepted as just, until remission of
sins, and such acceptance be obtained, and afterward faith cannot impetrate
that which is precedently acquired.

Thirdly, I shall hold it forth to be perpended, whether this argument do not
lie as directly, and will not reach home as fully to dismount the Word also
from being a converting Ordinance; for that profits not, but where it is mixed
with faith in the heart, and therefore he that hears with faith, is converted
already, he that does not so, finds it the savor of death unto death, and not
of life unto life.

Fourthly, we grant that he that hears faithlesly, and he that communicates
unworthily, In sensu composito, persevering in that state and privation, cannot
be converted, but is condemned already, but in sensu diviso, he that comes
without true faith, and unworthy to receive, may yet be converted in receiving,
and be a worthy Receiver; and having eaten of that Lamb (as St. Chrysostom
speaks) may be transformed from a Woolf, that meat not being changed into the
substance of the partakers, but changing him that partakes into it self; and so
this Bread which signifies the Body of Christ, may not only strengthen or
confirm man's heart, but in that Blood, which the Wine represents, there shall
be life. Beside, the Sacraments are means of Grace; and therefore to suspend
men from the partaking thereof, till the work of Grace be manifest in them, is
to shut up the means from them, till they have acquired the end; to restrain
them from Physic, till they have recovered into health; to forbid them to wash
their hands with water, till they be clean; and to keep them from the fire,
till they be warm. A great Master of the School sets it down as one difference
between infused and acquisite habits, Christian and Philosophical virtues,
Estius in 2. did. 27. sect. 4. p. 384.
that Virtus Christiana non requirit praeviam actuum frequentiam, sicut virtus
Philosophica, sed etiam uno actu acquiratur, aut sine actu praevio infundatur.
But if infused habits were wrought in the manner of acquisite, (as some
conceive) yet as in natural generations, though the previous dispositions were
precedent, yet the introduction of the form is momentaneous; so in
Regeneration, though the Word heard have wrought some preparations and
predispositions, yet the new heart may be conferred at the instant of
receiving, and the new name be given together with the Manna, whereby the
ultimate disposition to that form may be wrought, by the infusion of the sacred
Spirit, and as though Sol and homo generant hominem, yet the man as the
proximous and immediate natural cause, is called the Father of the child, and
not the Son; so the Sacrament, though enlivened and quickened by the Word, may
be notwithstanding justly named the moral cause of conversion; and whenever
else that new heart is inspired, and that change wrought, yet as in natural
mutations, when there is a transition from one state to another, and from
privation to a form or habit, the same individual moment is the end of the one,
and beginning of the other, Illud in quo aliquid primo mutatum, instans est,
and the Ultimum non esse unius, est primum esse alterius; and thereupon as the
most of Philosophers affirm, Omne quod movetur, partim est in termino a quo,
and partim in termino ad quens; and also as In motu recto cum reflectione, non
datur quies intermedia; so in some analogy herewith, when there is (whether by
the Word or Sacraments) a change from a carnal to a spiritually regenerated
estate (though there be antecedent dispositions to grace, yet those being but
preludial influences of grace, therefore notwithstanding) though the last act
in the carnal state were suitable to that principle, yet the first act in the
spiritual, flows from the fountain of that new life, and it shall be a strange
piece of unreasonableness to argue, that because that man and that act were
evil in the former instant, that neither can be better in the next, or that the
precedent indispositions shall obstruct or vitiate the subsequent operations.

Relative grace is conferred by the Sacrament upon condition of faith, which it
may therefore presuppose, as precedent in nature, though it be simultaneous in
time, but real grace cannot precede nor presuppose faith, for then it should go
before, and be presupposed to it self; The gracious benefits of the Covenant
are promised and proposed upon condition of faith, but faith is not offered or
promised upon condition of believing. True faith only gives an interest and
right in the Res Sacramenti, and Panis Dominus, but an historical dogmatical
faith, and outward profession thereof, constitutes a Churchmember, and that
lends the title to the Sacramentum rei, and Panis Domini, (and yet the
receiving of the later may be a subservient means to elevate and promove that
historical, to a saving faith, which may bring to the participation of the
former.)

And as sound faith is necessary to that hearing, whereby the soul may live,
but not to hearing simply and absolutely, but men hear that they may believe,
not only because they have believed; so it is in the receiving the Sacrament:
and what Chamier tells Bellarmine, I may say to them, that will have none but
such as are approved faithful, to be admitted to this seal of faith, Paulus
circumcisionem pronunciat fuisse signum and sigillum fidei, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 3.
sect. 20. p. 29.
quid ergo sciebantue omnes ii qui circumcidebant infantes, eos esse vere
justificatos?

Yea though perhaps at the instant of receiving, Recordatio tantundem saepe
praestat vi illius spiritus, quantum rei ipsius eahibitio. Theses Salmurpart.
3. sect. 23. p. 37.
the heart feel no great warmth thereby, yet may it catch such sparks from the
ardency of Christ's love manifested in his death, which though at first it made
but a smoking flax, yet being fuelled by continuing meditations, may by
degrees grow into a bright and lively flame, and the strength of that meat may
be more manifested in the consequent walkings toward the mount of God, just as
Physicians advise weak and nauseous stomachs, to eat, though they have no
present appetite, because they shall feel the effects thereof in their future
increasing strength.

But as it did not follow, that if the Sacrament were no converting Ordinance,
that examination were a more necessary Antecedent to an admission, so neither
is it consequent, that therefore none ought to be admitted that cannot convince
others of their conversion, for that conclusion cannot be distilled but by such
a medium, that unconverted men must not be permitted to do or undertake any
duties which they cannot well and duly discharge; but he that so judges, is
not yet converted from an error, as dangerous, as manifest for the Apologists
eliminate Prayer also from converting Ordinances, yet know they have not yet
met with any such new light, as has led them to tha^ Paradox, that no man not
converted must pray. All the moral actions of natural men (though sometimes
these falling Stars make a greater blaze than the fixed, an Alchymy Lace has a
more glaring luster, than Silver) were but Splendida peccata, peccata, quia non
ex fide (which is that only Altar, where the Swallows can find a nest to lay
their young, says Augustine) Non bona, quia nihil bonum sine summo bono, nec
placere ullus deo, sine deo potest; they were but Falsae virtutes in optimis
moribus, (as Prosper) and but Vitia, quia non virtutes relatae ad deum, and
simillima celerrimo cursui, extra v^am; the Tree was not good, and therefore
the Fruit was not, and the inside of the Platter was not cleansed, (says
Basil) and they could not convert nor dispose unto conversion, for pure nature
has neither congruous, impetratory merit, nor proper preparations for grace
(as no stream can rise higher, than the fountain) yet these works good ex
genere and objecto, evil ex circumstantiis and fine, (neither formally nor
virtually ordinate to God) they were nevertheless obliged to perform, and were
sure of some reward for them, either by increase of temporal blessings, or
lessening of eternal punishments, they impetrate medious, though not the
highest mercy.

Ordinant bominem been, respecta finis ultimi in aliquo genere, L. 2. q. 65.
art. 2. p. 195.
non autem finis ultimi simpliciter, (says Aquinas) A man therefore must do,
and may be permitted to do, that good thing, which he cannot do well, and
especially when the frequent acts may conduce to the obtaining of that habit,
which may enable to do better.

There are sundry duties and several good works which convert not (which are a
kind of Isthmus between nature and grace) and like as the twilight is an
effluence of the rising Sun, so these are but the results of dawning grace, for
operamur ex justificatione, non ad justificationem, says Augustine, Ronus es
Domine animae quaerenti te, quid tum invenienti, sed hoc mirum est quod nemo te
quaerere valet, nisi prius invenerit, vis igitur inveniri, ut quaeraris, quaeri
ut inveniaris? Potes quidem quaeri and inveniri, non tamen perveniri.
and yet may be ordinate to conversion, as conditions and qualifications, by
the influence and effect of grace, in fieri, though not in facto esse, and why
the attendance upon this Ordinance of the Sacrament, if it were not converting,
may not yet be ranked in this classis, I cannot discover any cause to deny; and
then why those that cannot yet evidence their conversion, may not safely be
admitted to attend upon and partake of this Ordinance, they will not find
color to gainsay?

Their admission cannot be altogether frustrate, for though the Sacrament have
no immediate causality for such an effect, as conversion, yet it may be
adjumental intermediously, and subordinate thereunto, and though it beget not
the ultimate, Bernard. de diligen. Domi. p. 951. Cajetan. 3. q. 79. art. 1.
Valentia 3. disp. 6. q. 7. punct. 1. p. 91^
yet it may some previous dispositions for introductions of the form: He that
is less evil, is more capable of good, and he that moves but a foot, is nearer
the term, than he that stirs not at all. Cajetan (though therein he enterfeit
with his fellows, who generally deny the Sacraments to confer the first grace,
unless by accident, and by consequent, (as Valentia limits and explicates it)
confesses, Posse contingere, ut sumens sit, qui nec consequatur vitam gratiae,
nec de novo mortaliter peccet, sumendo, sed ita excusetur a peccato in sumendo,
ut propinquior sit vitae gratiae, ex qua appropinquatione, secundum aliquos
actus attritionis and desiderii divinae gratiae pautatim perducatur divina duce
misericordia, ad occasiones verae contritionis, ut ^andem alia forte vice
sumendo, gratiam verae conversionis percipiat.

When the Sacrament does not convert in act, and if it were not conversive in
power, yet is it not without effect, when received by such as bring not faith
with them at the reception; as the Fathers compare the Sacrament to Manna, so
like Manna (as some have thought thereof) it relisheth according to the quality
and disposition of the palate, he that cats and drinks his condemnation has
from justice a (suum cuique) and that damnation is sealed to him by that
receiving, who now being without excuse, shall be judged out of his own
unworthy mouth, and that kind of sealing is one genuine effect of the
Sacrament, for Dicimus effectum, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 2. sect. 4. p. 27.
ut totius ministerii, sic sacramenti, esse infidelium quidem damnationem, sed
fidelium salutem, says Chamier.

He that receives the seals of the covenant, seals back a counterpart to God,
accepts of the terms, and assents to the conditions, and as God obliges
himself to confer the benefits promised, if conditions be observed; so the
receiver concludes himself to suffer the punishments threatened, if he perform
not the conditions; as in the gift of an Estate upon condition, the Donor may
plead the Charter against the Donce, for a Forfeiture, upon breach of
conditions, as well as the Donee can allege it to prove his Title, as long as he
fulfills the condition; and yet that actual sealing of damnation, while men
persist in that estate of infidelity, may be a potential sealing of salvation;
as to that obsolete argument of the Pelagians, furbish'd up and new trimmed by
the Arminians, That supervacaneous were the comminations against Apostasy, if
there could be no falling from faith; it is answered, that the threatenings
against recidivation from the faith, are morally conducible and subservient to
confirm and establish us in the same, and as Luther says, The way not to go
into Hell by condemnation, is to descend into it by meditation; so the
impression of that seal of condemnation, making them know the terrors of the
Lord, may persuade men, and the spirit of bondage may so make way for the
spirit of adoption.

Whatsoever the Grand Inquest of learned judgments shall do, the Pety Jury of
tender consciences, will give up their Verdict of these opinions, ( viz. That
the Sacrament is no converting Ordinance, and that none that have not, or
cannot give convincing arguments of their sound conversion, may not partake
thereof) that they are Carnificinae animarum; for consequently to the
Principles of this Doctrine, he who out of distress and affliction of
conscience, cannot make out the evidence of his conversion to himself, (and as
we read of some Melancholiks, so there may be a melancholy in the conscience,
whereby men may suppose themselves spiritually dead, when they yet live) may
not dare to come, and he that being overcast with any cloud exhaled from men's
uncharitableness, prejudices or misprisions, or his own bashfulness, and
natural inabilities, cannot hold it forth to others, may not hope to be
admitted, and they shall be most capable who can deceive themselves by their
presumption, or others by their handsome expressions and fair shows, and so
this Wine shall only not be given to those that be heavy of heart, nor this
staff of Bread put into their hands that are weak and ready to fall; and this
will be interpretatively, as if he alone that is sick must not take Physic,
and a Physician may only administer to such, as upon inspection into their
state, he finds to be of sound health, and hereby also a way shall be smoothed
to a kind of private Masses, for the Minister must needs communicate alone,
when he can be sure of no man's conversion, but his own, and may not admit any
whom he has not assurance to be converted, for probability thereof is not
ground sufficient, but without faith thereof, it must be sin, since their rule
for admitting is not, whom they think to be converted, but who are so, and
therefore God sets us out of this perplexity, did we not involve our selves
therein, for he binds us not to be responsible for other men's consciences, but
for our own, because we cannot look into another, but into our own, he ordains
us not to give judgment where we can have no evidence (Et non datur scibile,
sine causis sciendi) nor sets up a mark for blind men to shoot at; but the
Directory for admission is that which we may well read and make easy judgment
thereby, viz. Church Membership with a dogmatical faith, and therefore we may
perceive that any other voyage will be with hurt and much damage, when neither
Sun nor Stars do appear from above (nor can we frame to keep any compass below)
whereby to steer our course, and being exceedingly tossed with such a tempest,
the only way is to lighten the ship of this load.

DIATRIBE. SECT. V.
By a free communion there is no Damnum emergens, by pollution of the
Ordinances, Minister, or Communicants: the visible Church is aggregated of good
and evil. It is Schism to renounce communion of Sacraments with evil men not
duly censured: the Administration not to be intermitted, because all are not
sufficiently prepared, or those that are unworthy may partake. The Similitudes
defeated of giving a Cup of poisoned Wine only with admonition: of giving a
Legacy to scholars of such a capacity and parts, which the Trustees cannot
otherwise distribute: of being guilty of the sins we hinder not: the weak to be
encouraged and promoved by admission. As much danger by mixed communion in the
Word and Prayer, as in the Sacrament. The Reasons pretended to debar from the
one, as argumentative to exclude from the other: Matthew. 7.6. examined: whether
the receiving the Sacrament be a duty enjoined to all, and a good work in all.
Whether it be a converting Ordinance? What the Sacraments seat, and how?
Whether they confer grace? The same evil effects ensue by maladministration
of Discipline, as by a free communion, and the same Reason which forbid
separation in the one, does also in the other case.

CLemens Alexandrinus magnifies it in Socrates, that he hearkened unto none but
Reason, and Plutarch tells us, Idem est deum and rationem sequi, suitable to
that Stoical Principle well illustrated by Perseus, Ni tibi concessii ratio,
digitum exere, peccas. which is very true, being understood of reason rectified
by, and subordinate to holy Scripture. Having therefore pondered the
authorities of Sacred Writ, and propended the testimonies of the ancient
Church, let us try on which side the weight of reason will incline the Beam, in
this controversy.

There is no Damnum emergens in admitting to, and there is Lucrum cessans in
rejecting from the Sacrament, any that profess the faith of Christ, though but
formally, and are not openly wicked and scandalous, to the manifest belying of
their profession, what then should rationally impede and obstruct their
admission, or promove and imperate the rejecting of them, whom it obliges in
duty to come, and in no man's duty is it written down, to repel them or
separate from them. There is no emergent mischief or inconvenience by their
receiving, either in respect of the Sacrament, (quod) others (cum quibus) the
Minister (a quo) or themselves (qui) the Sacrament is not defiled by their
partaking, no more is it by being preached unto faithless people, and that is
no more than our Lord Christ was by the kiss of Judas, or an Angel by
descending upon earth, into some unclean place. Those that communicate with
them, are not polluted, more than the sons of God were by Satan's coming among
them to present himself before the Lord, nor thereby defrauded of the fruit and
efficacy of the Sacrament, more than the rest of the Guests were deprived of
the Feast by the sitting down of one that had no wedding garment. God does not
bind us to set up an Inquisition into other men's consciences, Contra literas
Petil. tom. 7. p. 26.
(Nemo curiosus, qui non malevolus) nor can their hypocrisy or cold formal
profession, hurt any beside themselves: Tale cuique sacrificium fieri (says
Augustine) qualis accedit ut offerat, and qualis accedit ut sumat -- ita si
offerat deo malus and accipiat inde bonus, tale cuique esse qualis ipse fuerit,
quia and illud scriptum est, omnia munda mundis. To God (says a learned man)
they seem such as they are, Hooker Eccles. Polit. l. 5. sect. ^8. p. 370.
but of us they must be taken for such as they seem, in the eye of God they are
against Christ, that are not truly and sincerely with him, in our eyes they
must be received as with Christ, that are not in outward show against him.
Multi corriguntur, ut Petrus, multi tolerantur, ut Judas, multi nesciuntur
donec, etc. Many are amended, as Peter, many are tolerated, as Judas, many are
not known until the Lord come, who shall enlighten the hidden things of
darkness, and manifest the counsels of all hearts: De poenitent. medicina. tom.
9. p. 210. and homil. 50. tom. 18. p 115.
Ad mysteriorum divinorum signacula celebranda multi mali, etc. To the
celebrating of the Seals of divine mysteries, many wicked men also may have
access, for God in this life commends his patience, that in the next, he may
show forth his severity, says St. Augustine. Christ would be baptized with the
promiscuous multitude, and with the same Baptism wherewith the Scribes and
Pharisees were baptized, to confute (says acute Spanheym) those, Dub. Evang.
part. 3. p. 153.
who in imitation of the Catharists and Anabaptists come not to the Lords
Supper, if it be administered to such as are in their opinion flagitious: what
prejudice or pollution or reproof from the Apostle reflected upon the
Corinthians that were worthy receivers for the concurrence and communion of
those that came unworthily? who only did eat and drink damnation to
themselves, not to others; but when he said, He eats judgment to himself, he
sufficiently shows (says Augustine) that he eats not judgment to another,
but to himself, because the fellowship with evil men defiles not in the
participation of the Sacraments, but in the communion of works. The Master of
the Feast said to him that had no wedding garment, Friend, how come thou in
hither? Not, Friends, why come you in which such a guest? Neither were they for
his sake commanded or permitted to forsake the Wedding; our teeth shall not be
set on edg with the sour grapes that others eat: every one lives by his proper
righteousness, In Ezekiel. 18.
not another, and dies for his own sins, not another man's, says Origin,
Quibus mali placeant in unitate, ipse communicant malis, quibus autem, etc.
Those to whom evil men are pleasing in unity, they communicate with evil men,
but those whom they displease, who cannot amend them, nor before the time of
Harvest dare to root up the Tares, lest the Corn be also eradicated, they
communicate not with their actions, but with the altar of Christ, so that not
only they are not polluted by them, but by the Word of God they deserve to be
commended and magnified, because lest the Name of Christ be blasphemed through
horrible Schisms, Contra Donat. pertinac. tom. 2. p. 142. contra lit. Petil.
tom. 9. p. 26. contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 36.
they suffer that for the good of truth, which they hate for the good of
equity, says Augustine. And again, Quaerendum est quis habeat charitatem,
invenies non esse nisi, etc. It is to be inquired, who have charity, and you
shall find none but those that love unity; some likewise shall say, In thy
Name we have eaten and drunk, and shall hear, I know you not, which eat his
Body, and drink his Blood in the Sacrament, and acknowledge not in the Gospel
his members diffused through the whole world, with whom therefore they shall
not be reckoned in the day of judgment. And in another place the Apostle
saying, Be not partaker of other men's sins, Keep thy self chaste, to show
(says he) in what sort a man might communicate with other men's sins, he adds,
Keep thy self chaste, for he that keeps himself chaste, communicates not with
other men's fins, although he communicate (not their sins, but) the Sacraments
of Christ, which they receive to their judgment with them, from whom he has
severed himself, by keeping himself chaste. There may be a common concourse to
the material part of an act, without concurrence in the formal, neither can a
Physical concurrence make partakers in a moral act, there can be no such
transite from one kind of action to another, both People and Minister concur
to the receiving, not the unworthy receiving (if thereof they are no causes) to
the act, not to the ataxy or sinfulness thereof, they cooperate not in the
evil, but permit it, Contra epist. Parmen. tom. 7. p. 11.
as that which morally they cannot remedy: Quod non placet, non nocet, and qui
seipsum custodit, non communicate alienis peccatis, (says St. Augustine) for if
in evil actions, any man consents not to them, the evil doer bears his own
cause, and his person (says he) prejudiceth not another whom in consenting to
an evil deed, he had not his partner in the crime. What is said of him that is
born of God, Non facit peccatum, quia patitur potius, is in some sort appliable
to this purpose; the People (and the same may be said of the Pastor) are
physically active, morally passive, and neither give nor partake of the
Sacrament, to, and with, one unworthy, but one that is undivided from the
visible Church, the notes whereof must agree to it, as Proprium quarto modo,
omni, soli and semper, whence if the Word and Sacraments are those notes, (as
our Divines assert) though Non quoad essentiam ejus internam, certo and
necessario declarandam, tamem ad visibilem aliquem coetum designandum, qui est
Ecclesia particularis ex instituto Christi formata (as learned Ames;) All then
that are actually of the visible Church may challenge a right unto a free
enjoyment of these Sacraments, to the one, by being born of Christian Parents;
to the other, by being baptized, and having a dogmatical faith, which every
intelligent person is presumed to have, else there may be a part of the visible
Church not authoritatively or judicially sequestered, from the communion
thereof, which are not in a capacity of obtaining that which denotes the Church.

At no time can the Church pretend to, or hope for perfection of degrees,
rarely to that of parts; Jacob's Ladder had several degrees in it, and all were
not of one height or rising: perplexed and complicated are those two Cities
(says St. Augustine) in this world, and mixed one with the other, until they
are separated in the last judgment; Exhortatio ad conc. Eul. ep. tom. 2. p. 147.
the Church being no homogeneous body, constituted of singular parts: The Floor
has in it Wheat and Chaff, the Field Corn and Tares, the Net good fish and
bad, and it is observable, that at the Nuptial Banquet, was one found without a
Weddinggarment. With those and other similitudes (says Augustine) the Lord
confirms the forbearance of his servants, lest while good men may think
themselves blamed for commixture with evil, by humane and rash dissensions,
they destroy the little ones, Contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 35.
or the little ones perish. I keep the Church (says the same Father) full both
of wheat and Chaff, I amend whom I can, I tolerate whom I cannot, I fly the
Chaff, lest I become the same thing, but not the Floor, lest I be nothing. Let
no man (therefore says he) desert the Floor before his time, Contra ep.
Parmen. tom. 1. p. 11.
let him tolerate the Chaff in threshing, suffer it in the Floor, for he shall
not have any thing to bear within the Barn, he will come that has his Fan, and
divide the good from the bad.

To forsake the assemblies, because of the mixture and communion of hypocrites
and evil men, seems to be a kind of negative Schism or Separation, and a
positive, to gather and constitute a new Church, and I would willingly know if
it be not the renewing of the old Heresies and Schisms of Donatus, Lucifer,
Contra Faust. Manich. tom. 6. p. 60.
Novatus, and Audim? Whether it make not the Church of the called to be of no
greater latitude than that of the Elect? (whereas many are called, but few are
chosen; Cum paucis haereditatem Dei, cum multis signacula ejus participanda,
says Augustine) and whether in time by degrees, this singularity may not
antiquate the Sacrament, and make the use thereof wholly obsolete, and bring
men to be Seekers, and like the Phoenix, In 1 ad Cor. c. 11. v. 26. p. 430.
one alone in the kind of their devotions, and to that humor of the
Swenckfeldian in Musculus, that would never communicate, because he could not
in his judgment find any Church sufficiently adorned to make a fit Spouse for
Christ.

And as the better qualified people may not withdraw themselves from the
Communion upon pretense of mixed Congregations, and fear of prejudice by them,
so neither upon the like score, may the Minister withhold the Sacrament from
them, or intermit the Administration thereof; for can it be thought rational,
that the holy desire of a competent number should be unsatisfied, because the
greater part are not equally prepared, and so well disposed to join with them?
Is not this to eradicate the Corn for the Tares sake? whereas rather both
should be suffered to grow together until Harvest. It was a Principle of wise
Cato's, It is better many receive Silver, than a few Gold: and can it be held
just that none should have Silver, because all cannot receive Gold? or because
the Leven cannot be thoroughly purged, that therefore the Children must eat no
Bread? or because the Hedge of Discipline cannot be effecutally planted, that
the Field of the Church must ly altogether unmanured? and must the Wheat
receive no nourishment, because the Tares stand in the same Field? Shall a
certain essential duty be neglected, for an uncertain accidental evil? Shall
not this be to furnish Apologies for the Papists? who restrain the liberty of
the Scriptures, and withhold the use of the Cup, for preventing (as they say)
of contingent abuses thereof? Shall others be sterved, lest some surfeit? or
shall Stewards (as the Ministers of Christ are called, 1 Cor. 4.12.) detain
their food from the family, because many abuse it? Hypocrates tells us, that
Diseases of In anition are worse than those of Repletion, and it is a Maxim in
Physic, Omne peccatum quod commissum fuerit, magis committitur in tenui, quam
in paulo pleniore victu. And there is therefore less peril in administering more
food than may do good, than in substracting necessary sustenance. There was no
crown so honorable among the Romans, as the Civick, which was conferred on him
that had saved a Citizen, as being of more advantage to the public, than to
have killed an Enemy. And shall it then be judged reasonable to hazard the loss
of a Citizen, upon pretense to kill an Enemy (or rather indeed, lest we should
save him) and to disappoint those that are worthy, lest there be a concurrence
of such, as we think unworthy? Valerius lost the honor of his Triumph, because
Magis dolor amissis civibus, quam gaudium fusis hostibus, praevaluit. And as in
the Ethics, the covetous is determined to be worse than the prodigal; so in
Theology it seems to be more obnoxious, to withhold the Sacrament from such as
are worthy, than to administer it to those that are not, Satius impunitum
relinqui facinus nocentis, quam innocentem damnari, said the wise Historian.
And what prejudice resulteth to the Minister to distribute it indifferently, so
as he have, by public and preparatory teaching, and (as he shall find it fit
and seasonable, and meet with opportunites to do it) by private conference,
endeavored to principle and dispose them to a worthy receiving; Petitur a te
cura, non curatio, says Bernard, and sapientis est nihil praestare praeter
culpam. If thou teach, that is thine, if he will not learn, that is his,
take what is thine, and go thy way, says the same Author; if the Watchmen
cry, and the City will not be warned, their blood shall be upon their own
heads, he has delivered his soul: Exigitur a manducante, quod manducat, etc.
It is required of the eater that he eat (says St. Augustine, In Psalm. 142.
Tom. 8. p. 342.
who therein seems to distill and extract the very state of the question) Let
him not be prohibited by the Dispenfor, but let him be admonished to fear him
that will take an account: neither was the Pastor of Corinth blamed, for
admitting those that did eat and drink unworthily; but they were reprehended
that came so unprepared; nor were the servants checked for bringing into the
Marriage Feast, a man that had no Wedding Garment, though himself were cast
out into utter darkness; nay, if persons meriting to be excommunicated, shall
notwithstanding be admitted, the Minister of the Church, where Excommunication
is not settled, is excused, says learned Ursin, Catech. part. 2. q. 82. p. 588.
so as he willingly give not the Supper to such as abuse it, but be instant in
admonishing, and desire to prevent abuses; for blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness; and Calvin, with as much charity, as judgment,
suitable to himself, as harmoniously with Ursin tells us, Hoc quoque ad
disciplinae moderationem in primis requiritur, Instit. 4. c. 12. S. 11.
etc. This also is principally to be required to the moderation of discipline,
which Augustine disputes against the Donatists, That neither private men, if
they see vices not so diligently, as they ought, to be corrected, by the
council of the Elders, do thereupon presently make a departure from the
Church, nor the Pastors themselves, if they cannot as they wish, and according
to their affection, purge out those things which need correction, do therefore
lay aside their Ministry or trouble the whole Church with unusual asperity --
for it is true which he (viz. Augustine) writes, That whosoever, either by
rebuking corrects what he can, or (saving the bond of peace) excludes what
be cannot correct, or what, saving the bond of peace, he cannot exclude, does
with equity dislike, and with firmness support, such an one is free and
acquitted from the curse; and he other where (says Calvin) renders the reason
hereof, Because all godly purpose, and intent, and manner, and way of
Ecclesiastical disicpline, ought always to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, which the Apostle commends to be conserved by bearing one with
another; and which being not conserved, the medicine of punishment is not only
supervacuous, but also begins to be pernicious, and therefore cease to be a
medicine.

I know the trite (I dare not say trivial) similitude, that it fares with the
Minister, in order to the Sacrament, and the dispensing thereof, as with one
that has a Cup of Poison in his hand, for whom it is not enough to show the
danger in drinking thereof, and to persuade to abstain from the same; but if he
reach it forth, and deliver it to any, he is guilty of all the mischief,
consequent to the swallowing thereof.

They say no similitude runs on all four feet; but I am deceived if this have
ever a Leg; for, first, the Cup of Poison is in its own nature deadly, and
will certainly kill, but the Sacrament is good in it self, and of its proper
nature, and evil only by accident, and not only its possible, but probable,
it may do more good, than hurt.

Secondly, There lies no obligation upon any to deliver, nor any necessity upon
any to take the poisoned Cup; but I hope it is made evident that it is a duty
incumbent on the Pastor to exhibit, and on the People, to partake of the
Sacrament.

Thirdly, some would think it relisheth of some venom, In Johan. tract. 28.
to compare that to a Cup of Poison, which the Apostle calls the Cup of
Blessing. St. Augustine was of another mind, Securus accede, panis est non
venenum; and he tells us, that when amongst the Christians about Carthage, De
peccator. merit. and remis. tom. 7. p. 137.
the common appellation of the Sacrament of the Body of our Lord was life; what
other did they hold, but what was said, I am the Bread of Life? That which is
given, is not mortiferous, in respect of the Giver, or the gift, but through
the wickeness of the Receiver; for as we are taught in Philosophy, Quicquid
recipitur, In Psalm. 142. tom. 8. p. 342. de Baptism. contra. Donatist. tom. 7.
p. 89.
recipitur ad modum recipientis: it is not evil which is given, says
Augustine, but that which is good, is in judgment given to an evil man, that
which is good, cannot be well for him that evilly receives; and in another
place, Judas gave a place to the Devil in himself, not by receiving what was
evil, but by evil receiving: from that wickedness, God may reclaim and convert
the Receiver, in the very act of receiving, and the reception is a means
subservient to such Conversion; so as what Augustine says of love, may be
applied to admission to the Communion, Aut ama me, quia sum Dei, aut ut sim
Dei; he that has a wound seeks a medicine, says St. Augustine; it is a wound
that we are under sin, the celestial and venerable Sacrament is the Medicine;
De verbis Dom. etc. Sermon. 28. tom. 10. p. 24.
and of that wickedness or continuance therein, the Pastor and Elders can have
no morral certainty, need not make any curious inquiry, nor ought temerariously
to judge, Gratissimum veniae genus nescire quod quique peccasset, plurimum mali
credulitas facit, in quibusdam rebus satius est decipi, quam diffidere. What
place (says Angustine) shall be left for innocence, if it shall be one man's
proper fault, not to know another. And the remote probability, even
possibility of producing good effects thereby, is a sufficient Ground and
Warrant for the administration: for in doubtful things the safest part is to be
chosen; and it seems safer to do our duty, whereof good may also ensue, than
to neglect it, upon a doubt, lest evil may happen.

Fourthly, it is not the receiving condemns, but the receiving with that wicked
disposition; which remaining unrepented, would condemn, though they received
not; the act of receiving in the unworthy, is not evil, ex genere and objecto,
but only ex fine and circumstantiis, (as has been said) and the evil effect
is alone in the evil manner of doing; and as a cooperation by another in such
acts, or a permission thereof, does not contract a satiety in the evil, which
is not caused or consented to; so neither will the possibility, or hazard of an
evil accidentally consequent thereunto, palliate or excuse a Ministers
intermission of Divine Ordinances, for else he might be secure from any woe for
not preaching the Gospel, since the Word being a savor of death unto death,
when it is not received with Faith, (which all have not) it might be more safe
and more charitable not to preach it, lest it aggravate some men's condemnation;
and for ought I know, upon such principles he might forbear to hold sorth the
Lord Jesus, as the true way of Life, because he is also set for the fall of
many, Luke 2.34. and to be a stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense, Esa.
8.14.

I recognize another similitude (for in the agitation of this controversy,
similitudes do often supply the place of arguments) that as if a man bestow a
Legacy to be issued and distributed to Scholars of such a capacity and parts in
a College, the Trustees cannot exhibit it to any others, and they must
necessarily make probation of the parties, to get an assurance of their
capacities, so, etc.

But for answer;

First, here is Petitio Principii, a begging of the question, by a presupposing
that the Sacraments were entrusted by Christ with the Ministers, to be
distributed to such select persons only, as in their way of probation, they
shall judge capable of them: But we cannot so enclose that which St. Jude calls
the common salvation, nor make the Rose of the Field (as Christ is called) to
be a Flower of private Gardens; Allow to God (says Oecumenius) that his Garden
be diffused far and near (long lateque) in plain terms we say, that every
actual and not duly separated member of the visible Church, having an
Historical Faith, has a right unto that which is one of the Notes of the
Church, the Sacrament; and since eadem est ratio partium, and totius, as that
cannot be a visible Church, to which the Notes agree not; so he is no actual
external member of the visible Church, that is excluded from that which denotes
it.

Secondly, by retorsion, as in a College, all that are (as we use to say) of
the Foundation, do partake of the Donatives of the Founder, until upon
expulsion or sequestration upon just cause, they forfeit them; and that
miscarriage is discovered not by private scrutiny, but by public observation
and judgment; nor upon surmises, but proof and sentence thereupon given; so
have all intelligent persons actually within the visible Church (the College of
the faithful) by Title of their common Historical Faith only, a right to the
Ordinances, and external common privileges, bequeathed by our Lord Christ,
until by obstinacy in notorious sins, they merit to be expelled, and put from
the Communion, and are accordingly sentenced judicially, not arbitrarily, or
upon private surmises and suspicions; and in very deed there is no one false
species has more imposed upon them, than this, that if none ought to be
admitted, but such as are worthy, that therefore special probation must be made
of the worthiness of every one, which has a palpable fallacy in the
consequent; and is just as if I should argue, the Law allows no Idiot to be
admitted to the managery of his estate, therefore every man must come under
examination, (whether he be an Idiot, or not) as if a general observation and
converse could not suffice to make discovery and give judgment.

I am conscious also of that Rule, that a man is guilty of every sin he
labors not to hinder; but notwithstanding it thereupon follows not, that the
Pastor and Elders engage and enfeoffe themselves in other men's unworthy
receiving, unless they make probation of them, thereby to discover and impede
their sin of receiving unworthily.

For first, no man is guilty in not hindering that sin which he knows not, (
nullius crimen maculat nescientem, says Augustine) nor has any command, nor
any authority to make particular search and enquiry after, the Church is only
to judge of open crimes and scandals, not of things secret and occult.

Secondly, it must be an imminent, an apparent evil, and evil in it self, and
in its own nature; for I am not obliged to snatch away a man's meat, left he
surfeit; nor take his purse, lest he squander his money in debauches; no nor at
all times to seize his sword, lest he do mischief with it, unless it be
evident to me, that he intends so to abuse it; and into his intention, if
secret, am not bound to make any solicitous scrutiny; nor to disarm him upon
the warrant of my proper suspicion, much less may I hinder him of doing that
which is good in it self, for fear lest it become evil to him by accident, else
I must keep him from hearing the Word, lest he receive it not with faith, and
so it condemn him; the possibility that he may do well and receive good with
or by the thing, especially when that thing is intrinsically good; and the hope
which Charity should prompt me to, that it shall become good to him, is
sufficient to disoblige me from impeding him in it.

Lastly, if the matter be necessary, and the failer be only in the manner of
doing it, the rule holds not; for (to crop one Ear of a whole Harvest, and
instance in one of many cases) how else could a Christian Prince with a safe
Conscience, for confirmation of a League, take an Oath from an Heathen by his
false Gods, and not rather hinder such Idolatry; but that the Sacraments are
respectively necessary, necessitate praecepti, is denied by none, and granted
by most, to be so necessitate medii ordinarii.

Now lastly, concerning those that should receive (whom we know to have the
greatest interest in the lucrum cessans, while the Sacrament ought to be
exhibited to them and is not; and whom they suppose to have no less share in
the Damnum emergens, when the Sacrament is administered to them, and ought not)
I shall say, that as it was spoken of Adrian, The multitude of Physicians had
killed the Emperor; so let some men consider, whether or no, while they fear
accidentally to lose or hazard those souls, they do not more endanger them,
and their own souls too, by withholding from them the Sacramenr, which is
Gods Ordinance; and therefore the likelyest means conducing to their salvation:
It is a cruel fault to deny corporal bread to the hungry; a greater to
withold the food of the soul; and that of Gregory is here applyable, He
kills, that doth-not feed; Christ chose to converse with sinners, that he might
win them off from sin unto himself, and the servants of the King gathered
together to the Marriage Feast, good and bad; the separation was made by the
King at his coming, not by his servants, Matthew. 22.10. And who can gainsay,
but that as Christ by breaking of bread, was made known to his Disciples at
Emaus, whose eyes were formerly holden that they could not know him: so the
frequent receiving of the Sacrament may better fit and dispose them for
receiving, and bring them to a clearer sight, and more special application of
Christ unto salvation. There is scarce any, but takes some little reverence of
the mysteries, improves or renewes some notions of the redemption of mankind,
by the death of Christ, carries away some small impressions of good things, at
least for the present, some dispositions, though not habits; and how those weak
seeds may be quickened and ripened by frequent communicating, can be only known
to God; but we may charitably hope for multiplied acts, beget and perfect
habits; and in this respect there is a similitude between habits infused, and
acquisite (though the acquist of the former have a special assistance and
inspiration of Gods gracious Spirit) Use makes prompt; and Physicians tell us,
that when Appetite is dull, and digestion weak, yet both may be increased by
moderate refection; whereas to exclude any from the Sacrament, because he is
not so well prepared as he ought, is to deny a man a medicine, because he is
sick, for which cause he chiefly needs it. Defects in the manner and form will
not discharge or supersede any from the matter of duties, else they might plead
excuse for the intermission of prayer, or excluding others from it, because
they cannot pray without distractions and other indispositions; and from
hearing, because of defects in the attention of mind, or devotion in the
affections; he that performs the matter, and communicates, though with a failer
in the manner, so it be without malice or presumption, does some part of his
duty; and shows some, though but an outward regard and conformity to Gods
Ordinance; and so I should think were a less sinner, than he that altogether
despises or neglects it. Est aliquid prodire tenus: the one is malum per se;
the other only per accidens; that which is not done with a perfect heart, may
yet be good in the sight of the Lord; as it was said of Amazias, 2 Chronicles. 25.2.
it may be bonum, though not been; and it may be impetratory of some reward,
though not of one eternal. And though Hypocrates have an Aphorism, that
Corpora impura quo magis nutris, eo magis laedis: yet that cannot justify any
to defraud another of his wholesome meat, lest it turn into crudities, and
cacochymick humors, though perchance Physicians may think fit to abate it
sometime toward those that are notoriously sick, and sensibly lapsed into a
Dyscrasy. One chief end of the Institution of the Eucharist, was to show forth
the Lords death: And the recordation thereof, and external acknowledgment of
Christ to be the Redeemer of the World by his death, being made by a greater
number, though not all so well disposed, or inwardly qualified as they ought,
may yet somewhat conduce to Gods glory, and the end of the Institution. It was
matter of rejoicing unto St. Paul, that Christ was preached, though out of envy
and strife, and contention; not sincerely: An outward formal humiliation in
Ahab, was so far accepted by God, as to mittigate his punishment; and the
external performance of the command by Jehu, though upon sinister ends, and
with culpable affections, procured a temporal reward. He that is not against
us, by being scandalous, is on our part, Mark 9.40. and therefore should be a
partaker with us; and its our part to cherish and encourage him, in hope to
bring him nearer, rather than by a discountenance and discouragement, to hazard
the driving of him farther off; The perfection of the best, is an imperfect
perfection; the best part thereof consists in the sight of their imperfection,
says Bernard; and the greatest piece of our righteousness, is an agnition in
truth, and a confession in humility, of our unrighteousness; and Gods commands
are then only reputed to be done, when that which is not done is forgiven,
says Augustine: If the denomination be taken from the major part, our firmest
believing is rather unbeleefe, than faith; as he that said in the Gospel, I
believe Lord, yet prayed, help (not my faith, but) my unbeleef. He that has
the best preparation and dispositions of Spirit, for an approach to these holy
mysteries, must yet fly to Christ Jesus, to have the blemishes thereof covered
with his righteousness; and the defects thereof to be supplied by his fullness;
and he that owns the meanest, and the weakest, if in any degree sincere, may by
the same means obtain an elevation and acceptance thereof; for it is only
Christ his stamp, and not our metal, that can make it pass current, and the
garments of our Elder Brother alone, that can make us capable of the blessing:
As therefore the ancient Church for several Centuries (though upon erroneous
principles) gave the Eucharist to Infants in years; so the Church ever did, and
upon such considerations may still, without error, exhibit it to Babes in
Christ; and such we are charitably to suppose the weakest to be, that profess
his Name, and by the great transgression, and abominable iniquity, do not
evidently belie their profession.

We have been cautioned by the admonition of Marlorat and Spanheym, that to
desert or separate from the Communion, because of the admission of some, in
their opinion, wicked or unworthy, does symbolize with the Anabaptist, and has
a raste of their Leaven; but whether those principles, that it is of necessity
to make probation of their fitness and worthiness, that are to be admitted to
the Holy Supper; and that this Sacrament being a Seal of Faith, ought not
ordinately to be administered to those that have not Faith, may not also be
extensive, and as well applicable to the Sacrament of Baptism, and so do
tacitly advance and drive on also the interest of the Anabaptists, who will
have none to be baptized, until they have given sure evidence of their sound
Faith and real Conversation, and unawares militate in the Tents of, and run
Biass toward, that faction, I shall not make research into, much less dare to
determine, but transfer and resign the consideration thereof to more
comprehensive judgments, it shall be enough for me with the Pismire in the
Apologue, To awaken the Lion, and make him look about.

But I shall now bring it to the Scales, and more importunately offer it to be
weighed by judicious men, whether those Reasons wherewith some men make so
specious a Muster, and whereof they make ostent with so many plausible
amplifications, if they were mutato nomine, fitted and applied to the hearing
of the Word and Prayer, they might not serve as well, and have as much force and
efficacy, First, to stave off and exclude unconverted men from those duties, as
from the Sacrament. And secondly, to introduce a necessity of probation
antecedently to the ordinary partaking of the Word (in those who are born
within the Church, and bred up in the profession of the Faith) and of Prayer;
as to the participation of the Lords Supper. And thirdly, render it as piacular
to join with Congregations wherein persons unconverted and unworthy are mixed in
hearing the Word and Prayer, as in the Communion of the Body of our Lord;
though the Reasons might be indifferent, and the same or the like in all, yet
for method and perspicuity sake, we will take our instance for the first in
Prayer, and make our experiment of the second in hearing the Word, and take an
assay of the third point in both.

To abridge and sum up the Reasons produced for debarring unconverted men (that
is, such as satisfy them not with demonstrative signs of Godliness) from the
holy Table; they may be reduced to this Compendium, that they neither can
perform the duties requisite to, nor can be capable of the mercies of the
Sacrament, that by partaking unworthily, they do but multiply their sin, and
aggravate their damnation, whereto he also is accessory, that either does
exhibit it, or consents to it, or suffers them, or by partaking with them,
countenanceth their receiving, according to those branches of this rule,
Consensus palpo -- participans, nutans, non obstans; now turn those against an
admission and conjunction with them in prayer; have unconverted men those
dispositions and affections, and elevations, suitable with, and requisite to
religious prayer? the clean hands, 1 Timothy 2.8. Faith without wavering, James
1.6. Fervency of Spirit, Romans 12.11. Can they call on the name of the Lord
Jesus, that depart not from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19? Are they susceptible of any
holy communion with God, or of the gracious effects of Prayer, or capable of
any share of the righteousness and intercession of the Lord Jesus, which must
be spread upon their persons and their prayers, to make them acceptable? Will
not the multiplied sins of distrust of Gods promises, irreverence toward so
glorious a majesty, dullness of spirit, deadness of affection, and extravagances
of thoughts, increase their guilt and irritate their judgment? shall so
precious a duty be thus profaned? so high a privilege, as this is, to power
forth our wants into the bosom of God, be prostituted? and so great blessings
as are held forth to faithful prayers be despised? What dishonor results hence
to the name of God? What a grief is impressed on the spirits of the godly? What
a profanation reflected on so sacred an Ordinance? Were it not better for them
to forbear prayer, than only to pray, to the promoving of their condemnation?
Is there nay promise they shall be heard? Are they not expressly told that God
will not hear them, whose prayers are abominable? Psalm. 66.18. Isa. 1.15. 1 John 3.22. Prove. 28.9. Are not they that admit them to a communion in prayers
(where they but flatter God with their mouth, and lie unto him with their
tongues, in all that is said) guilty of those sins, because they hinder them
not? and do only concur to farther and accelerate their damnation, and so
deface the purity, and defile the beauty of so divine an Exercise? You may see
what an Harvest he might make of this Stubble, that were torrens suadaeque
medulla; and happy in sermonis divite vena; and now consider, I beseech you, if
the same apogogical or abductive reasons may not be as speciously and as
plausibly urged and amplified, to bring off unconverted men from prayer, as to
take them off from the Lords Table, and have not as much energy and force, in
order to the one, as to the other.

Secondly, concerning hearing of the Word; The conclusion that it is necessary
to take examination of men previously to the Sacrament, and to make trial
whether they are worthy or not to be admitted, is deduced and extracted from
that principle, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body. But now try and examine (I
beseech you) since the Word is said to be the savor of death unto death, and
that the Word shall judge them in the last day that hear it; and there is a
caution, Take heed how you hear, and qualifications required in hearing, 1 Pet.
2.1, 2. Jam. 1.21. and men hating instruction are not to declare his Statutes,
or take his Covenant in their mouth, Psalm. 50.16. and he that discerns not the
Word of God from the Word of Man, hears his damnation, and lets it in at his
ear, as well as the other eats and drinks it, and the Word and Sacraments
represent but the same Christ, and the same promises under diverse notions, and
to several Senses, the one to the Ear, and the other to the Eye, Hand, and
Mouth; the one being an audible, and the other a visible, tactible, gustable
word, and both are Divine Ordinances for the salvation of souls: whether there
should not be as great a necessity incumbent, to examine men (already
incorporated into the Church) of their fitness and dispositions and
preparation, in order to hearing of the Word, as to the receiving of the
Sacrament; and upon the same score, why should it be more perilous, or hazard
more pollution of our selves or the Ordinances, to join in mixed Congregations,
in eating of the Sacrament, than in hearing of the Word, especially since that
prohibition, not to give that which is holy to Dogs, and cast Pearl before
Swine, (which is sometime superciliously enough alleged to justify this
Economy of repelling from the Communion, such as they suppose unworthy) is
first and principally intended of the Word of Instruction and Reproof, as
appears by the Text, and the sense of Interpreters.

Though surely by the way, that Text cannot be very pertinent, nor well
applyable to the point for which they produce it; for those Pearls are
prohibited to be cast before Swine, Jansenius in Mat. 7.6. Idem Estius in 4.
sent. d. 9. S. 9. p. 123.
and those holy things forbidden to be given to Dogs, upon this caution, lest
they trample them under feet, and turn to rent those that dispense them; but
there is no danger, says Jansenius, that if the Sacrament be given to sinful
men that desire it, they should turn and rent those that exhibit it, but
rather that they will tear those that deny it; neither can any be understood
under the notion of Dogs or Swine, that are not notoriously wicked and
scandalous; and such only are here properly and especially meant, as are
Blasphemers and Persecuters of the truth, and malicious resisters thereof: but
in these we plead for, their reverence to the Sacrament, and desire to partake
thereof, supersedes all fear, and anticipates all caution, lest they approve
themselves such Dogs and Swine, as to trample the Ordinance under feet, or rent
the Dispensers thereof. But to stigmatize all those for Dogs or Swine, whom
they admit not to the Sacrament, Dignos laud viros, labe notare, would be
either rodere dente canino, or else porcino foedare modo, and canina facundia,
according to Lex Remia, might render them obnoxious to a literal stigme and
real brand, being a calumny unworthy, not only a charitable Christian, but a
moral man.

But let us examine what they interpose to disprove our parallel of reasons;
verily much pargetting there is, to show a dispariry between the Word and
Prayer and the Sacraments, and to set them at difference, which agree so well
in the common and generical notion of Ordinances; and it is remarkable to
contemplate how the Sacraments are used, like Casting-Counters, sometimes
standing for one hundred, and then again but for ten, according to the pleasure
and interest of the Disposer, to serve one turn they are sometimes advanced
into a Sphere higher than the Word, and we may somewhere meet with a fardle, of
what by a charitable construction, we may call Reasons, packed together to this
purpose, and Rhetorically enough displayed, which yet indeed are but parcels of
small Wares, and which are like the Duke of Britain's Soldiers, Briton's in
English-mens Cassocks; to accommodate another end, they are at other times
degraded, set many Orbs lower, and their virtue more disparaged and alleviated,
as upon this instant occasion, we are told by some, that Prayer and hearing the
Word is a duty commanded; but there is no Precept, that wicked men should come
to the Sacrament; that in the one, the matter is good, and there is only a
failer in the manner; but in the other, both matter and manner are faulty, and
that by Prayer and hearing of the Word, they may acquire some good, temporal at
least, and mitigation of punishment, but not so by communicating; and therefore
the Reasons are not alike for the admission, probation of, and conjunction with
unconverted, irregenerate, and unworthy men, to and in the former and latter
Ordinances.

But I take leave to answer, That it is the unanimous suffrage of the Fathers,
asserted by our Divines against the Papists, in the question whether the
Communion in both kinds be necessary, that Take, Eat, Drink ye all of this, Do
this, Show forth the Lords death, (as some learned man will have it read) are
explicit commands, words not only of invitation, of power, of liberty,
Piscator.
but of command, and precept, as Justin Martyr and Chrysostom in terms
expressly. A Theologue of no ordinary elevation for learning and piety, Perkins
cas. consc. l. 2. c. 10.
resolves in his Cases of conscience, that by virtue of these commandments,
every man of years, living in the Church, and being baptized, is bound in
conscience to use the Lords Supper; and so also does the School resolve, In 3.
q. 80. ar. 11.
though they extend not the obligation to a receiving in both kinds, as there
is no formal command in terms requiring wicked men to communicate, so neither
is there such for them to pray; the commandment is proposed indifferently and
in general terms to all men, and the Genus includes the several Species, and
the Species all the Individuals (as our Divines answer the Anabaptists,
objecting there is no formal command for the baptizing of infants, which are
comprehended under the general notions of all Nations, and Houses, and
Families) neither can the want of those special qualifications or powers
enabling to the discharge thereof, exempt from, or dispense with, the
obligation of general duties, otherwise we might reverse and cassate the whole
Moral Law, which we are obliged to keep, though we are not now able to perform
our duty. It seems to me a sad and piacular enunciation, that the receiving of
the Sacrament by an unworthy person, is said to be materially evil, or ex
genere and objecto, though I deny not, it may become so, Ad hic and nunc, ex
fine and circumstantiis. I suppose the Author that dropped those inconsiderate
words, might justly with the Annular or Physick-finger, touch the place behind
the right ear consecrate to Nemesis, which among the Ancients was used by them,
that begged pardon of their gods for any inconsiderate and obnoxious speech;
what influence and effect the participation of the Sacrament may have upon
unconverted and faithless persons, I have elsewhere spoken, and need not here
to recapitulate.

That which is most commonly, and most speciously, and by the best learned,
objected to prove that there is not the like reason in this case, in relation
to the hearing of the Word, and receiving of the Sacraments, is this, that the
Sacraments are not converting Ordinances, (as the Word is) there being no
institution, nor promise, nor command, to use them to that end, but they are
only sealing Ordinances, and confer not, but confirm Faith, presuppose it,
and testify our union with Christ; not beget it; that the Word is to be
preached to those that believe not, but the Sacraments to be administered only
to believers, and those properly and really believers, which not only assent
to the Word of Faith, but to the work of Faith, believing practically, as well
as speculatively, else the Seal should be set to a Blank, and there should be a
false testimony in witnessing that which is not, and so be a practical Lie;
some few perchance attribute more to Baptism, as to be a regenerating
Ordinance, but the Lords Supper they think is nothing like, as if it were more
to be the Laver of Regeneration, than the Body and Blood of Christ, or as if it
were not the same internal grace, exhibited under diverse external significative
Elements.

As the Lutherans, to verify that opinion that the Sacraments confer grace
ex opere operato, are constrained to assert a Total falling from grace; so
these men to defend and maintain with more facility this Tenent, that the
Sacraments are no converting Ordinances, have also thought it expedient to deny
also, that they confer grace, and with an admirable confidence obtrude this,
as the Doctrine of all Reformed Churches.

I am not willing to start and prosecute more Controversies at once; this which
I have primarily taken into agitation will engage enough of time and paper. I
remember Torquatus his fate, that though he killed an Enemy, yet suffered
punishment, because he went out of his Rank and Order to do it: I shall
therefore appositely to the present subject answer, That they need not tell us
of differences between the Word and Sacraments; no several things but have
their different properties, else they could not be several things; they might
deliver us more disparities; but what are those they mention to make a
difference between the Preparation or Probation, needful to the one and the
other, and the Communion and Fellowship in the one and not the other. Let it be
(as it is pretended) that the one is a converting, and the other a confirming
Ordinance; does it therefore follow, that there must be a preexamining of the
fitness of men in order to the one, and not the other? that we may admit of the
society and concurrence of formal Professors in the one, and not in the other?
Let it be so, (as it is suggested) but is not then the Word the more blessed,
gracious, and venerable Ordinance? as to give being, is more than to supply
food, and to infuse life, more than to increase strength, and so calls for more
reverence, purity, and preparation, in order thereunto, as more honor is due
unto our Parents, than to our Nurse, and Lawyers put more weight upon those
words in a Deed, Give and Grant, than upon that of Confirm. Ipsum esse
perfectissimum omnium, 1. q. 4. ar. 1.
comparatur enim ad omnia, ut actus, nihil enim habet actualitatem nisi in
quantum est, says Aquinas, and the more noble Effects make the Causes more
noble; and is not the World to all Ordinances, (as Faith to the Just) and to
all righteousness, the life and soul thereof? Others beside Believers (say
they) may be admitted to the hearing of the Word, but yet must no care be had,
nor trial made, whether those that hear, believe or not, or are disposed to
believe? And is it no matter whether the Word become the savor of death? only
course must be taken, that the Sacrament become not deadly, no matter though
the word be so? And if none must be admitted to the Sacrament but those that
have Faith, then none can receive admission, for who can be assured that
another has Faith, which is rooted in the heart, which only God searches?
the hidden man of the heart is invisible to any foreign eyes, the hidden Manna
cannot be tasted by any other than he that imbosomes it, and the new name is
not legible by any, save a reflected beam of light.

If it be answered, that they intend only that such are to be admitted, who by
a discursive knowledge collected by external signs in the conversation, and
reasoning from one thing to another, they conclude to be faithful and
regenerate: I answer, that such knowledge is not infallible, they may be
deceived, and doubtless are in many; and therefore in admitting of some, they
must needs set the seal to a blank, and are false Witnesses, and practical
Liars, in relation to such, as notwithstanding this probation do deceive them;
neither can their endeavors to the contrary salve the thing, being
notwithstanding done, though it may render the persons more excusable for doing
it, who also must still be perplexed and anxious, whether the signs be
sufficient, and the judgment regular.

There may be also a partial and maladministration of Discipline, and an
approbation of the unworthy, who may perhaps ascendere ad altar per gradus, by
stairs of favor sundry ways impetrated, and in such cases (wherein they yet
prescribe, that there ought to be no intermission of the Synaxis, nor
separation from the Church) all the prejudices, and pollutions, and
profanations, which they so much amplify and declaim against, in mixed
Communions, do arise and occur.

But what do the Sacraments seal, more than the Word assures? save that the
one applies that more particularly, which the other holds forth generally, and
does it by a representation to the eye, and hand, and mouth, which the other
does unto the Ear: Circumcision is indeed called a seal of the righteousness of
Faith; And as by an analogy and proportionable accommodation, may our
Sacraments be so named; so God opens the ear, and seals instruction; also
Job 33.16. and binds up the testimony, and seals the Law among his Disciples,
Isa. 8.16. Methinks when I reflect on this Argument of theirs, I re-mind that
sophisme of the Arminians, who argue, That which every man is bound to believe
is true; but that Christ dyed for him, is that which every man is bound to
believe: ergo, Which Argument seems to me to have some similitude with this,
That which seals Christ, and remission of sins unto Faith, pre-supposeth Faith
in them, to whom the Scal is applied; but the Sacraments seal Christ and
remission of sins to Faith, ergo; and the like answer may serve to the one and
other fallacy, viz. That as no man is bound to believe that Christ dyed for
him, unless he believe and repent, but is rather bound not to believe it, the
death of Christ becoming effectual to him only upon condition of his Faith
and repentance, and the assurance thereof, viz. That he shall be saved by
Christ's death, being a conolusion that results from a Major proposition (he
that believes and repents shall be saved, by the death of Christ,) and a Minor
(I believe and repent) so the Sacraments seal not the donation of Christ, and
remission of sins, in and through him, but upon the condition of faith and
repentance, just as the Promises hold forth Christ in the Word preached: And
therefore the Seal is not put to a blanck, but offered to be set, if Covenants
be performed, as a man seals a Writing to become his Deed, when Conditions be
performed, else to be as an Escrol; to the faithless the Sacrament is a Seal in
actu primo, not in actu secundo: a Seal still in its own nature, not in the
effect, a Seal objectively, viz. of the conditional Covenant and Promises, not
subjectively, viz. of Faith in that person, as the Seal does not ratify the
services of the Tenant, but the Grant of the Lord upon condition of performing
the homage and fealty.

Whether the Sacrament be a converting Ordinance or not, I shall only say
succinctly, That they which deny it, do but prevaricate; for they say, that
the Sacrament abstracted from the Word, and without it, converts not, which is
as much as to say, that the Sacrament, when it is no Sacrament, does not
convert; for without the annexion of the Word, it is no Sacrament, Accedat
verbum ad elementum, and fiet sacramentum; which our Divines (with excellent
reason) understand not only of the Word as consecratory, but as concional, and
as a word of Doctrine, teaching the nature, end, and use thereof, for they have
no efficacy, but by mediation of Faith, and that has always relation to the
Word, such a Word as is effectual, not quia dicitur, sed quia creditur, says
St. Augustine. But whether Conversion be wrought by the Sacrament, or at the
Sacrament (as they would have it) observe (I beseech you) to be all one to our
purpose, so as Conversion be effected; but indeed Faith has three acts,
Knowledge and Assent in the Understanding; and Affiance in the Will and
Affections; so that true justifying Faith, is a fiduciall Assent pre-supposing
Knowledge; now the question truly stated is this, Where there is an acquist and
antecedency of knowledge and assent only, which is but an Historical or
Dogmatical Faith, whether that affiance, which is a casting of a man's self upon
Christ, and a closing up with him, and together wherewith is always a
Conversion of the heart, and a renewing of the spirit of the mind, cannot be
wrought in the instant of receiving, or be the effect of the Sacrament, (as a
moral cause) as well by the holy Spirits infusing of that internal formal
principle, or gracious habit of justifying faith; as also quickening the present
actual exercise thereof, in embracing of the Lord Jesus, whom though they had
formerly heard of by the ear, yet they never, until then, felt in the heart?

This I think, so well explained, cannot well be denied; and until our age, I
am confident, was never questioned. In this same way miracles, afflictions, the
conversation of the Wives, may actually convert, much more the Sacrament, which
effects it not accidentally and extraordinarily, as the other; but ut medium
ordinarium, and ex natura suae institutionis and speciali ordinatione divina.
The Word begets Faith, only by way of object propounded; for Faith (as all
spiritual graces are) is infused into the soul, and there produced, per modum
creationis, not by any natural operation, but by a supernatural and immediate
act and influence of Gods Spirit, which begets Faith, by illuminating of the
mind, and inclining the Will to apprehend and embrace the object; and in the
same way that the Word works, are the Sacraments operative; Exam. council.
Triden. part. 2. p. 77.
for illum (scilicet Christum) pater proponit fide apprehendendum and
accipiendum ad remissionem peccatorum and in verbo and in sacramentis, says
Chemnicius; and when the same object is held forth in the Sacrament, what
should there obstruct the same operation of that Spirit, which Bellarm.
Enervat. tom. 3. c. 5.
blows how, as well as where, it lists; and therefore in the same manner
do the Word and Sacraments justify, says learned Ames. It is true,
whatsoever is received, is received according to the mode of the receiver; and
so the Sacrament converts to Faith, or confirms in it, according to the
condition and estate of the receiver; but because the confirming of Faith is
the more frequent and sensible effect, the denomination is taken from that
which happens, utplurimum, for the most part; and because they are added to
the Word for confirmation of the object of Faith, to make it more credible to
any subject, as Seals to Writings; hence the Sacraments are commonly called
confirming Ordinances, Gerhard. loc. com. tom. 5. p. 1.
and more especially the Eucharist is called the Sacrament of confirmation, in
a relative opposition to Baptism, named the Sacrament of initiation.

But that the Sacraments do confer grace, was (for ought I know) never denied
by any in the Reformed Churches, Zuinglius excepted, (for as for the
Anabaptists, Dr White Pref. to the Orthodox Faith, etc.
and Socinians, I cannot yield them the honor of that notion) the altercations
we have with the Papists is not de re, sed modo rei; not about the thing, but
the manner; He was a very learned Divine, who upbraiding the Papists how they
calumniate us in our Tenants and Doctrine, to reflect an odium upon our
persons, and profession, reckons up this among the rest, that they impute to
us, that we deny the Sacraments to confer grace; We indeed deny (what the
Papists affirm) that the Sacraments confer grace, as the nearest, immediate,
and proper causes thereof, by any force or virtue intrinsecal, Neque vero
naturam efficaciae sacramentorum ij satis explicant, qui aiunt Deum agere ad
eorum praesentiam tantum, eum enim in finem instituta sunt, non ut nos
admoneant Deum agere aliquid, sed ut ipsa sint instrumenta efficacia quibus
Deus utatur ut in nobis aliquid operetur, habent ergo efficaciam insitam
aliquam, at objectivam and quae requirit facultatem cognitivam, excitatam illam
and ut loquuntur in actu. These. Salmur. part. 3. S. 43. page 14. Yet this is
not all that other Protestants ascribe to them.
inherent, or seated in them, as Physical and real causes whereby grace is
effected and brought forth, ex obedientiali potentia animae, or so as a
medicine cures a disease in the body, without any previous motion, or thought
of man's mind; but we grant notwithstanding, that they are impetratory,
instrumental, moral causes of real grace, by their signification, of relative,
at least, by exhibition and obsignation, in respect of God ordaining them to
that end, and by a certain assistance of divine power and virtue, (which the
School calls assistiam ex pacto) as being practical, and not only theoretick
signs, but effecting what they signify: for God being called upon by reason
of his promise, is present with his grace, and works inwardly to the
similitude and proportion of that which the Elements do outwardly; (as the
Waters of Jordan cured the Leprosy of Naaman, by the power of God working with
them,) who had first ordained, that they which should do what he commanded,
shall receive that which he has promised, just as a Kings Letters Patents,
sealed with his Seal, are said to confer an Office or Lordship upon him, to
whom they are granted; and that saying of Hugo has a Passport on all fides,
Fideles ex istis elementis salutem non quaerunt, etiamsi in istis quaerunt,
ista enim non tribuunt, quod per ista tribuitur; God not resigning his grace to
them, but by them imparting it unto us, by the mediation of our Faith and his
Spirit. I might be voluminous in amassing testimonies of our Divines to this
purpose; but viso Solone, vidisti omnia, do but peruse the great master of
Controversies, Chamier, and read him direct and express for this point, citing
both the confession of the French Church, Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 1. and 2.
and Calvin, as witnessing to the truth hereof; and whereas Calvin affirms that
God works by the Sacraments, as by Instruments, but by a force internal and
intrinsic to himself, and not passing forth from himself into the Sacraments;
Chamier tells us, That this is the very state of the controversy; with what
ingenuity then could a great Champion of the opposite opinion, among other
Divines, muster up both Calvin and Chamier to be on his part? and in what sense
all the other testimonies cited by him were meant, judge by this one, that
where he argues, that the Sacraments being by their definition signs, cannot
be causes of what they signify; neither are the things signified, the effects
of the Sacrament, he cites Chamier, as adstipulating to that assertion, quia ut
efficientia toto genere suo differt a significatione, etc. Whereas Chamier
urges that Argument, not to disprove all efficiency of the Sacrament, but
inhaerentem sibi efficaciam, which are his express words in his entry into that
Ninth Chapter a very few lines before the words cited: so as the Reciter
imposes upon us with a fallacy, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter;
as if Chamier denying one kind of efficiency, denied all, and the same answer
may be given to his other alleged testimonies, which are in the same sense to
be understood.

This puts me in mind of Nugnus the Dominican, who disputing against the
Jesuits in the Controversies concerning Predestination, Grace, and Freewill, he
tells them, They will rack men to witness for them, though evidently known to be
of another judgment; which made him say, he feared they would deal so with him
too, when he was dead, notwithstanding his express opposition to them: of all
our Divines, that I know, C. 8. p. 139.
learned Whitaker has gone farthest, concerning the efficacy of the
Sacraments, who in his Answer to Dury the Jesuit, to close with Peace, yet not
check with Truth, does thus express himself, Si Alani sententiam amplecteris,
eam ego minime reprehendam, sic enim ille de hac causa scribit, Gratiam in
anima hominis Deus operatur per Sacramenta, tanquam per instrumentalem causam,
non alia ratione, nec minus vere, quam homo dicitur scribere per calamum;
scriptio vero, (adds Whitaker) non includitur in calamo, sed calamo ad eam rem
apto and instituto scribitur, ita Deus per Sacramenta sua, tanquam media and
organa, gratiam in nobis efficit, and tamen Sacramenta gratiam in se nullam
includunt. So he, which is more than the Franciscans would concede to the
Dominicans at the Council of Trent.

Lastly, let it be thought upon, what advantage is given to the Socinians and
Anabaptists by this Thesis, that the Sacraments have only a signifying power
and virtue, and only to confirm Faith, and not to confer Grace, for
frustrate and supervacaneous shall the Administration thereof prove, where is
neither actual Faith to receive confirmation, nor understanding, to apprehend
what they signify.

Thus long have I staid, like the Samaritan, to put Wine and Oil into the
wounds of this Truth, which I found wounded in my way, but shall leave it with
the two pence (which some expound the two Testaments) to be better cured by
others, and go on my journey.

Last of all, let us take one prospect farther, and upon view make trial,
whether the motives used, to persuade the Administration of the Lords Supper,
and the Retentives applied to keep men from deserting the participation
thereof, when by a maladministration of Discipline, either through negligence
or corruption, wicked men are admitted, cannot also be as apt and proper and
suitable to the same ends and purposes generally in mixed Congregations, and
where Discipline is not at all established, or for weighty Reasons cannot be
executed. They tell us in that former case, that we join not with wicked men,
but they with us; that for us to join with sinful men in sinful matters, would
bring guilt upon us; but if some bad men will join with us in good matters, it
proves no prejudice to us. To celebrate the Lords Supper, is in it self
exceeding good, if others that ought not will come and go as far with us, as
the outward act, it is evil to them, but none to us, having to our power
opposed their presence (which power we are elsewhere taught to be admonishing,
reproving, and mourning, etc.) We are farther bid to take heed that we neglect
not an undoubted duty, to escape an uncertain danger; a peril merely supposed,
will not warrant the omitting of a practice clearly imposed; O bracteata verba!
whereupon I shall make no long reflection, but briefly say, that great is the
truth and will prevail; and only ask whether this breath blow not away all
their former similitudes and arguments; Whether this be not herbam dare to give
up the cause, and flight or quit their strongest holds? and like Penelope, to
untwist her own Web, and to become like an Eagle struck down with an Arrow,
feathered from her own Wing, as was Julian's Motto, Propriis configimur alis:
for now, Nescio quo pacto, vox tua facta mea est. Only if they shall interpose
that in maladministration of discipline somewhat is yet done, and only some
few evil men are admitted, but in non-establishment, or non-execution thereof,
nothing is effected, and many more do intrude to the Holy Table; I answer,
that as magis and minus non variant speciem, so the multitude or paucity cannot
give form, though it may degrees to the quality of the action, in the one case
or another: if it be evil to admit or communicate with many hypocrites or
wicked men, it is also evil to do it, though but with a few such; and the
evil is greater, because done by them, who are always so much the worse, by how
much more they pretend to be better; and by the help of Discipline established,
have the means to conduct things better: but let such Discipline be
established, so that where and when they please, it may be exercised; and then
it seems it is nothing so perilous or placular, though some be admitted or
communicated with, as unworthy, as those that now are repelled. Truly, the
reflection upon those, and the like passages, is that which tempts some
circumspect men to suspect, that the Silver-Smith is still at his Workhouse
for his Diana, (and quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam) whose
Arguments, though hammered at the Forge, have more energy and influence, than
those which are borrowed from the Schools, and such Topics beyond all
Apodicticks.

DEFENSE.
SECT. XVI.
The removing the scandalous by the power of the Keys, no Ingredient of our
question, nor any part of the Discipline which they practice. What scandals may
deprive of the Sacrament? Whether formal Professors, if they could be known,
were to be admitted? How holy things may be polluted? As the Sacrament, so in
like manner other holy things may be defiled. By a free admission the Sacrament
is not polluted by or to the Minister, nor others that communicate worthily,
and it is no more dangerous for the unworthy to come, than to keep off. Whether
mixed Communion be a burden of sin or pain? In what cases it is lawful to have
Communion of Sacraments with evil men. The Godly were always commix'd with the
Wicked in Communion of Sacraments, proved through the History of the
Sacripture. Sacrifices were of like nature with Sacraments, and for offering or
eating thereof, no signs or trials of real Holiness were required. Whether
there be an equal necessity of profession of Faith at the receiving of the
Eusharist, and of Baptism? The Church of Corinth was corrupt, yet in reforming
thereof the Apostle prescribed no such trial. When and how far admonition and
reproof may be sufficient? Of Ambrose his proceeding against Theodosius. What
are the effects of the society of evil men with good? The errors of Audius,
Novatus, and Donatus. Whether the Apologists symbolize with them?
Church Fellowship consists chiefly in communion of Sacraments: they make the
Church of the Called to be no larger than that of the Elect. The state of the
Church, according to the Parables of the Floor, Field, and Net, Matthew. 13. Our
Thesis asserted in the express words of the Ancients: The Pastor of Corinth not
reproved for permitting mixed Communions, 1 Cor. 4.21. considered. The Parable
of the Marriage Feast. Of sealing men thereto. Free Pulpits, no free Tables: of
Preaching without Ordination. A recapitulation of much of the Discourse.

THis Section cuts out little work for them] Like the Spaniards at the siege of
Amiens, when the French came to the Assault, they sit down and play; here is
indeed little work that they will do (and therefore magna pars temporis
effluit aliud agentibus) but enough that they should have done; some arrows
(they say) are well drawn, but aimed at a wrong mark; but I doubt haeret lateri
lethalis arundo; we cannot suppose that they have (as it were) been dipped in
Styx (like Achilles) and are altogether invulnerable; but rather that this is
an Assay of the Spartan valor, who being struck down by a mortal blow, used to
snatch their mouths full of earth, that they might not be heard to quetch or
groan, thereby to affright their fellows, or animate their enemies; however it
is pity, they are unhappily fallen upon an encounter with so weak an Adversary,
whom it shall be no honor to vanquish; Egregiam vero laudem and spolia ampla
reportas; yet it would be great ignominy to be overcome by, Cedere majori
virtutis sama secunda est, Illa gravis palma est, quam minor hostis habet. In
which (they say) the Paper objects and answers it self, there they shall not
need to intermeddle, Una eademque manus vulnus, opemque tulit; but it had been
propitious, if the Paper had indeed answered it self, for I doubt it will not
be found, that they have made any reasonable answer thereunto.

That the Sacraments are necessary, necessitate medii, they grant is true; yet
to be administered in due manner, and with care; but they are content, if not
cautious, not to take notice, that this was interposed to defeat one of their
most colorable Arguments, that a man is guilty of every sin which he does
not hinder, and consequently of others unworthy receiving, etc. whereunto it
was among other particulars answered, that this Rule holds not, where the
matter is necessary, and the failer is only in the manner; but to receive the
Sacrament, is a matter of necessary duty, etc. yea necessary to him that yet
cannot receive it, Eucharistiae sacramentum omnibus mandatum a Domino.
Tertulli. de corona militis. c. 3. p. 121.
in that due manner which is requisite (as has been elsewhere demonstrated)
but from this greund they have thought fit to retreat, and have thus left one
of their Champion-Arguments bleeding, and not ferch'd it off.

But what ever work they have here to do, ours is brought beforehand, and we
have anticipated their often re-doubled charges, by our as frequent Defenses,
That our Concessions and Arguments make up a kind of Janus, and look two
ways, (yet which way soever we look, we can see no instances thereof;) That
the scandalous cannot be kept back, unless the Minister have a power to impede
them, (as if any body could be so silly to think, there could be any acts
without Powers, or Powers without Subjects, nothing of all this being ad
Iphicli boves, only the object and manner, in the exercise of the power being
controverted) that this power he cannot have without a concurrent and
subordinate power to examine, whereunto men must then subject, (which is in
effect to say, that I cannot shut up or manacle a madman, unless I have
authority to examine all men in the Nation whether or no they be in their
wits;) that a free admission (even of those that are not scandalous, but of
those that have not been tried and approved) is to partake of their sins (where
we cannot partake with them in the sin of so frequent Tautologies) the
similitude of a poisoned Cup which he is not excusable that holds forth, though
he warn of the danger (which is to us a Cup of Trembling, to hear the Cup of
Blessing (as the Apostle calls it) compared to a Cup of Poison; and it has
some analogy with that horrid act of the Papists, who made it Corporal Poison
for the Emperor Jews, as they make it Spiritual Poison) that men godly and
well-disposed (that is, those who have been measured for such by the standard
of their peculiar Sanctuary, nil rectum nisi quod placuit sibi ducit) may have
it, if they desire it, (that is, if they will take their yokes upon their
necks, and suffer them to plow and turn up their bosoms, they may then draw
toward the Holy Table, and reap the sacred Bread) that the fewness of those
that are accepted, is from their unfitness (unfitness to partake of Christ's
body, who yet are still members thereof; and to eat at his Table, who yet are
of his Household by profession of Faith) and unwillingness (but if they accept
some, and not others, yet those others must offer themselves, else they cannot
be not accepted; and if they offer themselves; then they were not unwilling:
but sua vitia aliis exprobrant, the unwillingness is in themselves to accept
not in those to come, who though they would sell all they have, to buy such a
pearl of the Master, yet are perhaps unwilling to say to the Servant, as the
Egyptians did to Joseph, Buy us for bread, and we will be thy servants; or as
in profane Story Lysimachus did give up himself and his forces to Dromocheta
for servants, to be refreshed with drink.) And because they will have it where
they please (no but where it has pleased Law, and established order to
determine it should be had, that where men live of the Altar, there they may
serve at the Altar; and if they will, out of singularity, or interest, remove
those ancient Landmarks, seeing obedience is not only limited or regulate by
the quantity or degree of the matter commanded; but the kind thereof, and the
authority of him that commands, they that now command their attendance eight or
ten miles, may call them forty, or one hundred) and will have it as they
please, (no but as the Church of God, by constant practice has given witness
to be most pleasing and agreeable to his will that first ordained it: but in
the last result, since their own pleasure is directed or limited by no certain
Canon or Rule of licet, but only libet, it must be only as themselves please,
as the gloss speaks of the Pope, in his quae vult, ei est pro ratione
voluntas; and as Platina reports, that Paul the second used to say, Omnia jura
in scrinio pectoris nostri collocata esse, sic stat sententia, loco cedant
omnes, Pontifex sum) that coming to this Ordinance, is a Disciple-privilege,
(true) that is, the privilege of Christians; Disciples and Christians being in
Scripture synonimous: it is the privilege of Disciples in profession, not only
of those that are such in verity, every one that is a Disciple is not perfectly
disciplined, De verbis Apostoli, sermon. 23. tom. 10. p. 76.
Si fidelis est seu potius fidelis vocatur, as Augustine determines: These and
all the rest of that pile of so often sodden Coleworts, (the ventosity whereof
may well offend any stomach) we have often, very often profligated, and showed
to be as impertinent, as importunate, and though rallied here and put into new
array, yet, I may say of them, as that Roman General said of a recruited Army
of Enemies, that those African Nations mustered under several names, were but
the same men whom they had formerly beaten under the notion of Carthaginians.
As for their excuse of non-administration for want of a competent number, we
shall hereafter manifest it (we hope) to be a most incompetent defense, and
though among their Arguments, it be of the number, yet to bear no weight.

And whether or no my arrows were aimed at a wrong mark, I am sure theirs do
not look at all to the right scope, but they transfer and impute their proper
faults to me, as that Indian beast, resembling a Ferret, to escape the pursuit
of the Dogs that chase him, casts back his own Excrements, to defile and annoy
them therewith.

Their Remuria, or the honor they would seem to do to the power of the Keys,
which themselves have broken, and hammered out into new Wards (and which is but
as the solemn Festivals which Romulus instituted to Remus, when he had murdered
him) their asserting of the subject of Ecclesiastical power, to which
themselves in truth have left no esse, which an inesse presupposes, (and which
is but as if the Athenians, after they had put an Ostracism upon Aristides, for
being too just for them, should have afterward inquired where he should have a
Mansion in the City) their backing of the Keys by the Sword, and reflection on
the authority of the Ordinances of Parliament, issued for keeping back the
unfit and unworthy, (where we must tell them, Hac sit iter, manifesta rotae
vestigia cernes. The Ordinance is intended for repelling persons scandalous;
and if they would keep within that line, these lines had been superseded; but
perchance they will take as little content to be admonished of it, as we shall
do complacency to check them therewith, how the Parliament resented the claim
of a power Jure divino, to keep back from the Sacrament, etc. but Pars ultima
vocis, In medio suppressa sono est.) All these are but Parerga, and but
Respondere de coepis, cum rogo de alliis; for did I ever directly or by
consequence deny the power to cast out persons scandalous and notoriously
wicked? that I assert the contrary, I cannot make more legible than I have
done, unless, with Friar Bacon, I had the art to make my Letters to be read in
the Moon: do I call in question the subject of that power, or is this any
constitutive part or consequent appendage of our question? If they have
forgotten, we cannot but reminde them, how themselves have stated and
abstracted the controversy; Whether in the reforming of a long corrupted
Church, it be necessary that all the members thereof, do submit to some
examination or trial of their knowledge, before they be admitted to the Lords
Table? This is indeed but a cryptical definition of the question, and a paring
and multilating thereof, as I have elsewhere evidenced; but let it be pieced
and enlarged by extending the examination and trial to be of their real
holiness, as well as of their knowledge (according as is their practice consonant
to their Principles) and that makes up and compleats the whole matter
controverted. Now then let it be inspected, whether the casting out, or the
suspending of notorious scandalous Offenders, fall within the verge or skirts
of this question?

For first, they limit and confine this trial to the reformation of a long
corrupted Church; but the casting out and suspending of the scandalous, is a
Discipline not only accommodate to the reforming a long corrupted Church, but
requisite to all Churches, though refined from dregs to the greatest purity,
Aug. contra Faust. l. 13. c. 16. tom. 6. and 60. and de unit. Eccles. tom. 7.
p. 109.
they are here capable of, for that there will be Zizania and palea usque ad
diem messis and ventilationis, hoc in Euangelio dictum, hoc a Prophetis antea
praedictum, ante enim praedictum est, Sicut lilium in medio spinarum, ita
proxima mea in medio filiarum, -- unde appellat spinas, nisi propter
malignitatem morum, and easdem unde filias, nisi propter communionem
Sacramentorum.

Secondly, where crimes are notorious by evidence of fact, examination is
forestalled, and offenders are tried to their hand, and when it may fall out to
be requisite to examine the offenders themselves, and witnesses against them,
yet this is to be, not in order to admission to the Sacrament, or to manifest
their right thereunto, but only succedaneous to a violent or pregnant
suspicion, in a judicial way of proceeding for trial, whether by such crime,
of which they are particularly accused, they have forfeited or not, that title
which they had, as Church Members, to the Sacrament, together with their
Church Membership, which was the root and foundation, whereon that interest was
raised and bottomed.

Thirdly, will they proceed also to suspend the use of our senses, and exercise
of our reason, as to imagine we could believe, if they should tell us, or will
they contract the guilt of such a fault, which perchance in some others, they
would say merited suspension, as to tell us, that all (I doubt scarce any) of
those whom they exclude have in such a judiciary way and method been censured
for scandals particularly charged, and verified against them? they suspend not
so much particular persons, but whole Congregations, not upon forfeiture of
their title, but till they can obtain their confirmation of a right to the
Sacrament, not for any definite or special scandal charged and approved against
them, but upon a general charge of unfitness, whereof they are arbitrary
judges, without any certain rule, whereby men's fitness shall be measured, (Tota
ratio facti potentia (seu voluntas) facientis) and without evidence of
witnesses; this is that yoke which we strive to shake off, which neither we
(but we cannot say our Fathers, for it is the heavier yoke, because green, and
the hewing thereof is of later date than their days) nor our posterity is able
to bear, and this is that which they should assert and justify, the proof
whereof while they desert and impertinently fall to make long harangues, to
demonstrate that scandalous and notorious offenders ought to be cast out or
suspended, this is only to act, what they dare not defend, and to defend that
which they act not, nor needs their defense, Nemo magis rhombum stupuit, nam
plurima dixit,
In laevum conversus, at illi dextra jacebat,
Bellua, --
It is but part of the Foxes skin, set to piece out the Lion's, when it falls
short to serve the turn, and is an imitation of that cunning stratagem of war,
that, when the ground is not tenable by them that have engaged to defend it, to
set up lighted Matches elsewhere, to draw the Enemies Vollies to a wrong Mark,
while they in the interim retreat silently and unpursued.

No, no, we quarrel not the power of the Keys, nor the regular use of them, nor
the proper subject of that power, the ground of our quarrel is, because they
exercise not that, but assume another power, and lay aside the Keys, to make
use of Pick-locks, and in stead of using that paternal power, seem like Nimrod,
to become mighty Hunters: we judge that Excommunication would make a perfect
System of disciplinary Physic, both Hygyene, to preserve, and Therapeutice, to
restore, the collapsed health of the body of the Church; we are offended to see
these empyrical ways of cure, new, and violent, and perilous, Not. hist. l. 29.
c. 1.
by such Physicians, as Pliny speaks of, Non dubium est omnes illos famam
novitate aliqua aucupantes, animas statim nostras negotiari, such as he says
Archagathus was, Mox a saevitia secandi urendique, transiit nomen in carnificem
and in toedium ars omnesque medici; we would have Physicians to dissect and cut
up dead bodies (such as are in deadly sin) not with Vesalius to practice their
Anatomy upon living men (that are not convicted of scandalous offenses) for of
such Anatomists Tertullian might have fitly said, what he unjustly spoke of
Herophilus, Qui hominem odit, ut nosset, of whom he doubts whether he were
Lanius aut Medicus; we can be content they should use Suspension, but not as
Bellarmine and Valentia say, The Pope determines matters of Faith, either with
or without a Council, whether he use means and diligence in finding out the
truth or not, voluntarily and prophetically, Quod ego volo pro canone erit, and
hoc verum est, si ipse velit and non aliter, (as Luther says, Every man has a
Pope in his own breast, so this were to triple-crown a Pope in every
Presbytery) neither can we patient that after the conquest of the Prelatical
party, they should deal with us in our right to the Sacrament, Speed.
as William the Conqueror did with the English, seizing (says the Historian)
most part of every man's Revenues into his own possession, causing them to
redeem them again at his hands, with reservation of Rents and Services, and
making a Domus-Dei Book, to take a particular Survey of every man's Estate for
his advantage, and none but his own party could bear any Office, or carry any
credit, or receive any countenance; and when there wanted but one Groat in
weight of a Sum required, he exacted above so much more than the first
proportion, and reversing the ancient Laws, set up his own will in stead of
them, and all must hold by the copy of his countenance; and when Frederick the
stout Abbot of St. Albans, who opposed him, told him, he had done the duty of
his Birth and Profession, and if others of his rank had performed the like, as
they well might and ought, it had not been in his power to have pierced the
Land so far. And when the Barons contested with his Successors for recovery
and redintegration of their Laws and Liberties, both he and they might as well
have pleaded the profitable and necessary use of good Laws and Government,
thereby to color their arbitrary rule and oppressions, as the Apologists
assert the power of the Keys, to blanch their breaking of the old Locks, and
setting up new Bars, Non de vi, neque de caede, nec de veneno, lis est mihi de
tribus capellis.

They first seem to pitch upon this ground, that the scandalous should not
come; so far we advance with them, but they will not here cast up their fence,
which would too much straighten them, they have therefore another plot, and
they take it in, by adding unfit to scandalous; but Dolus latet in generalibus,
they should have particularly defined, wherein that unfitness consists, unless
they tacitly imply, that all those are unfit, whom they shall arbitrarily judge
to be so; What are scandals, every man can judge, but unfitness it seems must be
left indetermined in respect of particulars, that for that (as Caligula was
wont to say) he would reduce the Pretors in all their decisions to say, Eccum
Caesarem, so we must subscribe Eccum Presbyterum. If they shall (as perchance
they may seem to do) interpret or limit this unfitness to be ignorance, we can
produce pregnant instance of some whom they have laid aside, and (what if they
have been formerly admitted too) whom they cannot be ignorant of, to be far
from ignorance, and whom it shall be a scandal to themselves, to say they were
scandalous; but for our part, we shall not through their retrenchments seek to
force any way for the notoriously ignorant, only we are doubtful whether the
protracting of their admission until they are better instructed, may be
properly named Suspension (as it signifies in their account, a Church-censure,
and a lesser Excommunication) more than we may say those are suspended, who
when their brother has ought against them, are commanded to leave their gift
before the Altar, until they be reconciled, and then to come and offer, and we
are also desirous that the Shekel of knowledge for the Sanctuary, may be reduced
and fixed to a certain determinate weight, lest perchance upon tender of a
great sum it may be rejected (as it once was by the Conqueror) for the want of
a Groat in their account.

They can yield no reason, why men not scandalous nor ignorant, should be kept
off* Resp. The more inexcusable are they, to act that, for which they can
allege no reason, for elsewhere they say it is an odious surmise, that they
think all to be scandalous or ignorant whom they admit not. If their mind be
to admit all that come not under those qualifications (I should think them
rather unqualifications) why contract they that resemblance with Medea? --
Video meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor. --
And seek a similitude with the Papists, of whom a judicious man observes,
Sand's Europae specul. p. 3.
That their Religion is not so corrupt in the Doctrine (as in the Schools they
deliver it, and publish it in their writings, where manifold opposition holds
them in aw, and has caused them to refine it) as it is in the practice, and in
their usage among themselves, -- so that sundry, whom the reading of their
Books have allured, the view of their Churches has averted from their party.

But whereas they would salve or palliate the matter by saying, Their mind is
to admit all that are not some way scandalous, I fear this will only ampliare
odia and restringere favores, and rather retrench and straighten the way of
admission than enlarge it, by leaving no access, but at their will and
pleasure, for whos^ever shall cross their way in any one step, may be perchance
accounted some way scandalous; for their way is some way, and let wiser men
consider, while -- me solicitum timor anxius urget, if this be not a likely way
to turn Bookland into Folkland, and our Charters into a Tenancy at will; and to
say, their mind is to admit all that are not some way scandalous, will be
virtually and in the last result, their mind is to admit, whom they have a
mind to admit, for they will easily find a staff to beat away those, whom
they shall say are Dogs, from the holy things, since even he that takes the
right way, Aug. de civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 27.
yet often stumbles therein, and therefore Justitia nostra quamvis vera sit
propter very boni finem ad quem resertur, tamen tanta est in hac vita, ut
potius peccatorum remissione constet quam perfect one virtutum; and then in
every sin there is somewhat of scandal, as that signifies a snare to catch, or
an obstacle to detain or stop, or a stone or block at which men may stumble and
fall, and whereby in general in this life, as in the way wherein we walk toward
blessedness, there may be an occasion to another of spiritual ruin, by
tempting him to imitate evil; as a learned man observes, that in stead of
scandal the Ethiopick Translator of the New Testament uses a word signifying
Temptation, Lud. De Dieu. Ames. Medul. Theol. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 49. p. 316.
or impeding, or retarding them in doing good, or diverting them from the
Gospel; In omni opere malo quod aliis innotescit, scandali ratio inest, says
Ames; and however the Schools resolve that Scandalum activum non possit
inveniri in viris perfectis, yet besides that we have here only an imperfect
perfection consisting most (as St. Augustine determines) in an acknowledgment
of, and craving pardon for imperfections; the Scholars do interpret this of
their Master to be understood, Aquin. 2.2. q. 43. art. 6. Valent. 2.2. disp. 3.
q. 18. punct. 4. p. 747. Sylv. 2.2. q. 43. art. 5. and 6. Filiucius tr. 28 c.
10. sect. 239. p. 174. aliique, etc.
Non nisi ordinary and utplurimum, verum est quod asserit D. Thomas.
Regulariter and ex majore part, says Sylvius out of Bannes and others, and so
also do the Casuists determine; and though perchance as one says, Infirmitates
omnium piorum communes, quando ipsis non indulgetur, non babent aptitudinem in
sese ad alios inducendos in peccatum: and others ex iis rationabiliter non
potest sumi occasio peccandi; yet though in themselves, or rationally, they are
not apt to do it, yet accidentally in some they may occasion it, and men may be
censured or suspected to indulge those infirmities, which he that knows their
hearts (which we cannot) may know they reluct against, and so may still be
somewhat scandalous. I should therefore rather adventure to say, that only by
great scandals, not repented, and obstinately persisted in after admonition,
should the right of admission to the Sacrament, be forfeited; the father of
mercies (whose imitation is our perfection) does not withdraw for every sin,
nor separate from the soul for many corruptions; as some sins are allowed by
Divines, not to be mortal, (not in the Popish sense, but) because ex genere, in
respect of the matter, not being repugnant to the main Offices prescribed by
the Commandments of God, Field of the Church, l. 3. c. 9. p. 277, 278.
or ex imperfectione actus, not being committed with full consent to the
quenching of the graceful operations of Faith, Hope, and Charity, toward their
main object, and which are reconcilable with true Repentance, and the sincere
estate of Regeneration, and such are remissible or venial; Negative per non
abiationem principii remissionis: so correspondently, some scandals may be so
tolerable, as not to exclude from the seal of the Covenant of Grace, by not
meriting an ablation of the Root and Principle of Admission, viz.
Church Membership.

If they could know men to be formal (that is, dead and hypocritical) though
they were not scandalous, they should be kept off.

But Disputent, non jubeant, Disco, non pareo; I had rather think, that unless
before they admit, they will take an examination of Gods Book of Life, as well
as of men's lives, and get a certainty as these are not at present real and
sincere Professors; so they never can be, they have no warrant for this, for
because men are not yet converted, to forbid them the Sacrament, which may be
an adjumental means of their conversion, is as if any should have been denied
to look upon the Brazen Serpent, because they were not cured of the stinging of
the fiery Serpent. As Beza said of one that upbraided his former faults, This
man envies me the grace of Jesus Christ, (which now he had) so this were to
envy them that grace which by this means they might have. De occultis non
judicat Ecclesia. We had rather walk in the footsteps of our Savior, than in
that track which they would score out; he knew Judas to be a formal and false
Professor, and yet did not repel him, and themselves confess, there was no
visible cause for his exclusion, (because he was not convicted of any notorious
crime or scandal) and Christ (they say) therein dealt as man; and therefore no
man ought to repel another for such an incapacity, especially when he knows it
only per scientiam privatam, non publicam and notoriam. And this also is the
divine Economy of God omniscient, to hold forth the means of salvation to
those, who he knows will not make any saving use of them, only for their
inexcusable conviction, not infallible conversion, so to will the saving of
them voluntate signi, quamvis non voluntate beneplaciti.

The Apologists are like raw Chemists, who resolve things into smoke and
vapors, but distill no Spirit, nor make any clear or liquid Extraction; they
tell us often of polluting and defiling the Sacrament, but do with no clearness
explain the reason or manner thereof; to break up those mists, we shall hold
forth this light, that in the sense of Scripture, to pollute, is to do an
injury, to contemn, or to hold as vile, Jer. 34.16. Mal. 1.7. Lev. 18.21. and
19.12. and 21.6. Sometimes this pollution is understood to be in the opinion of
men, Sanctius in Jer. p. 75, 34. 6. p. in Malach. 1.7. p. 1711. Willet in
Levit. 19.12. p. 457. Lapide in Levit. 19.12. Dicuntur ea mali polluere quantum
in ipsis est. August. contra Parmen. l. 2. c. 13. p. 9. Sanctius in Malach. 1.7.
sometime in the profane attempts of men, who as much as in them lies, defile
the name and things of God, in this notion we shall grant, that the Sacrament
may be said to be polluted by an unworthy Receiver.

But first also, no less is every holy Ordinance by an indign Partaker, both
the Word when it is preached to those that reject it, or receive it not with
faith: and Prayer when it is made without reverence or devotion, and so
likewise is every duty, when it is discharged negligently and inordinately, and
the Name of God, and Religion, and the Church of God are polluted in all those
vicious and defective performances; Si quispiam alteri vile aliquid offert,
vilem illum esse demonstrat, quia haec aut moribus aut meritis, accommodata
fatetur, says a very good Commentator; and ungracious persons can no more
actually or intentionally sanctify Gods Name in undertaking any other duties,
than the Apologists say they can, in approaching to the Lords Table; and if so
many as they are doubtful or dissatisfied of, or have private exceptions
against, must be suspended from the Sacrament, lest that be polluted; they
ought, by a parity of reason, to forbid them to profess to be Christians, for
the Name of God may be also polluted, Ezekiel. 20.39. and 39.7. Isal 48.11. and
thrust them out of the Church, for the Sanctuary also is subject to be
polluted, Ezekiel. 44.7. Zeph. 3.4. and drive off from all holy things, which are
obnoxious to pollution, Numb. 18. and banish them the Land, for that also is in
danger to be polluted, Numb. 35.33. and perhaps they ought not to receive their
Tithes when they are brought them, for Gods holy Name is polluted with their
gifts, Ezekiel. 20.39. But it seems there is no fear of contracting, nor need to
be care of preventing, pollution, but in the Sacrament.

Secondly, this being a relative, not a real pollution, (for the Sacraments
being moral, and not physical causes, are not capable of real pollution)
therefore not properly to preserve the purity of the Sacrament, but to maintain
the dignity of all Ordinances, and chiefly the honor of the Christian faith,
(lest the Word of God be blasphemed, Dum Christi infamatur Evangelium. Hier. in
locum.
Tit. 2.5.) and the Churches Discipline, lest that contract some scandal, by
suffering and indulging such nefarious offenders, was that wholesome expedient
of Excommunication first instituted, and (as we have always granted) is still
to be exercised, and for this very thing contest with them, because they
practice not that old way of cure, but rather prove practices, such as carries
some resemblance with that perverse custom of the wild Irish, who rather than
they will thresh out the Corn, and winnow off the Chaff, do burn the Oats in
the straw; and we have ever suffraged to that of St. Augustine, De fide and
oper. c. 5. tom. 4. p. 13.
Sic vigilet tolerantia, ut non dormiat disciplina, and we shall concur with
him and say, Cum iis per quos Ecclesia regitur, adest, salva pace, potestas
disciplinae, adversus improbos aut nefarios exercendae, tunc rursus ne socordia
segnitieque dormiamus, etc.

But thirdly, it is one thing to cast out and separate notorious offenders,
another to withdraw and separate from those that have not tried notes of true
holiness, and therefore for such as juridice aut jure, effective vel
demeritorie, are not excommunicate, or salvo pacis vinculo, cannot be so, for
their multitude or other obstacle, and such as have not approved their real
sanctity upon trial, and may be supposed to have no other, but a relative
holiness, as that they are Church Members and Professors of the Faith, and
perchance walk not so ordinately, but to give rise to a suspicion of their
unsincerity, or if some way faulty, yet only known to be so to some few, and
not publicly or notoriously defamed by the course of their lives, yet by
admission of such to the participation thereof, the Sacrament is no more
polluted in it self, nor annulled toward others that communicate therein with
them, than are the Word and Prayer, by their being partakers of them, (and that
is only no more, than the Brazen Serpent was, by being looked on by men
envenomed by the fiery Serpent) or their Christian Religion is, by their being
admitted or continued Church Members, neither is there in order to the
conservation of the one, than of the other, from pollution, any greater
necessity to put them under trial, or to separate from them, nor more cogent
reason to deny them the Sacrament, Homil. 3. in Ep. ad Ephesians. tom. 4. p. 356.
than to forbid them to do any materially good work or duty, yea or to exclude
them from being Church Members, Non equidem dixit Rex, (says Chrysostom) ut
quid accubuisti mensae, sed jam ante quam invitareris, aut introires, te
indignum fuisse pronunciavit, neque enim ait, ut quid discubuisti, sed cur
intrasti?

Fourthly, nay farther in that very case of notorious evil men, Aug. tells us,
Cum sive per negligentiam praepositorum, sive per aliquam excusabilem
necessitatem, Ubi supra.
sive per occultas obreptiones, invenimus in Ecclesia males, quos Ecclesiastica
Disciplina corrigere aut coercere non possumus, tunc non ascendat in cor
nostrum impia ac perniciosa praesumptio, qua existimemus nes ab his esse
separandos, ut peccatis eorum non inquinemur, atque ita post nos trahere
conemur veluti mundes sanctosque Discipulos, ab unitatis compage, quasi a
malorum consortio segregatos, veniant in mentem illae de Scripturis
similitudines and divina oracula, vel certissima exempla, quibus demonstratum
and praenunciatum est, malos in Ecclesia perm xtos bonis, usque in finem
saeculi tempusque judicii futuros, and nihil bonis in unitate ac participatione
Sacramentorum, qui eorum factis non consenserint obfuturos. A Testimony, which
like Thunder and Lightning, might cast down the very Foundations of those
Babels of Gathered Churches, which some have built to get them a name, (such
and such a man's Church) and lest they be scattered abroad upon the face of the
whole Earth, (among such as they suppose less pure) and which the confusion of
Languages that is among them, may in time make them to desist from farther
advancing.

Fifthly, the Sacrament, in this notion of pollution, is not polluted by the
Minister and his admission, but by him to whom it is administered by his
accession, neither to him that communicates worthily, but to him that
unworthily participates.

And for him that so partakes, to abstain, is as dangerous as it is perilous to
come, as for him that cannot plead his interest in Christ, to eat or not to eat
common food, is a perplexity on either side mischievous, for if he eat, he is
an usurper of the Creature; if he eat not, a murderer of himself; so not only
by the censure of the Canons, the abstainer from the Sacrament is among such,
Qui sibi praescribunt poenam, declinant remedium; Decret. part. 2. cause. 33.
did. 1. c. 56.
and is as if he that is dangerously sick, forgetting the incumbency to use the
means to preserve life, and possibility, that the Medicine may work
effectually, should desert that Physic, whereof the operation is doubtful,
lest if he do not purge or alleviate the humors, it irritate them, and make
them more malignant, and the Disease more mortal; but also in the judgment of
Chrysostom, is in the certain way to destruction, for Quemadmodum frigida
accessio periculosa est, ita nulla mysticae illius coenae participatio pestis
est and interitus; and is as if a man did fly from a Lion, and a Bear met him,
or went into the house, and leaned upon the wall, and a Serpent bit him; and as
it is reported of one of Antigonus his Soldiers, that he became more
adventurous and undaunted to think, that if he fell not by the Sword to an
Enemy, he must how ere perish by the mortal Disease he had within him; so the
polluted conscience which he still bears about him, will condemn him, though he
forbear to pollute the Sacrament; and as Bias as much checked with true
Philosophy, to cast his riches into the Sea, as he could have done in taking
the fruition of them; and Ahaz sinned as much through infidelity, in refusing a
sign, as the adulterous generation did in seeking it; so the Sacrament is
as much polluted (that is, contemned or vilified) by the want of a precious
esteem thereof, and an holy care to dispose and fit our selves to the
participation thereof, though we do not partake it, as it is by a presumptuous
and unworthy receiving thereof; and as he that offends being drunk, merited a
double punishment, by Pittacus his Law, one for his offense, another for
drunkenness; so he contracts a double guilt, that neither comes, nor is
qualified to come, to the Sacrament, whereas he that performs the matter, does
some part of his duty, though he do not the whole, by discharging it in due
form and manner, and an impotency to perform a duty, as he ought, does not
cancel the Obligation to do it, he does well that comes, but he does evil that
comes unworthy; thou believe there is one God, thou do well, says the
Apostle, James 2.19. yet he did no more than the Devils did, and sinned in
believing no otherwise than they did, yet did well in believing so much.

Secondly, he that exhibites, profanes not that which he applies to that use
whereunto it was ordained, and does the work of his calling in administering,
and performs an act of justice, in rendering to every one his own right.

But first, the Sacraments by their Ordination, are to be used by all that
profess the faith of Christ, being Testes professionis Christiana, as Chamier.
As Pompey said, Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam; so it is necessary they go to
the Sacrament, whether they can come worthily or not, though the due manner of
coming be also of as great necessity, as is their going.

And secondly, they have a right to partake of them that are members of the
Church of Christ, Membra Ecclesiae praesumptiva, as the School, and Ecclesia
conjecturalis, as Cusanus speaks, the Sacraments being a note of the true
Church, and receiving an act of Communion with the true Church, Unum corpus
sumus, qui de uno pane participamus; and by the Rule of Contraries, Qui de uno
pane non participamus, non sumus unum corpus, as Albaspinus argues, the
Sacrament being Signum unitatis, Vinculum charitatis, as Augustine affirms;
and as a visible being in covenant, or professing true Religion explicitly or
implicitly, makes a visible member, Baxte^ Inf. Bap. p. 243.
and sincerity in the covenant makes a member of the invisible Church; so
Church Membership is a sufficient evidence to the aged, of their interest in
the Lords Supper, till they blot that Evidence, says a godly learned man; Tom.
4. l. 7. c. 19. sect. 17. p. 196.
and as Augustine affirms, Simul bibimus, quia simul vivimus; so they that
live together in the Church with us, and are not judicially cast our, have a
right to eat with us of the Sacrament; and therefore the famous Chamier,
disputing against private Masses, and answering the Objection, That the People
are not worthy to partake, says, Scelus hominis! Cur indignos Sacramento
dicis, quos indignos negas pace Ecclesiae? Itane tibi videntur qui censeantur
in corpore Christi, ut indignos pronuncies qui vescantur Christo? at
Chrysostomus negabat dignos esse, qui vel precibus interessent; and having
then, till they be judicially separated, a right thereunto, in foro exteriori,
to suspend them from the fruition thereof, till they evidence their title in
foro interiori, is as if because in foro coeli, nothing is ours in property,
but as we feel our claim in Christ, nor in use, but as it is sanctified by the
Word of God and Prayer, therefore they should sequester a man from his legal
rights, until he verify his title by faith in Christ Jesus, and permit none
to be a civil Owner, till he approve himself no spiritual Usurper, which were
to dash on that Heresy (which is falsely imputed to Wickliff) That all Dominion
is founded in grace.

And thirdly, the exhibiting the Sacrament is a part of the work of the
Ministry, who are to take all to be with Christ, that are not notoriously
against him, and who are the Servants to set forth the Feast before those many
that are called, the separation of those few that are chosen, being the work of
the Master: and not only Nugnus affirms, In 3. q. 80. art. 6. diffic. 4. p.
367.
Qui confert Sacramentum peccatori publico, non facit immediate illam actionem
quae peccatum est secundum se, quia possit alius been recipere Sacramentum,
quemadmodum qui petit ab alio pecunias, qui tamen non vult confer nisi sub
usuris, non peccat licet sciat, quod alius non vult confer, nisi sub usuris,
quoniam totum hoc est per accidens respectu petentis, similitor dicendum est in
nostro casu, etc. But also Suarez (who in the name of the School, as if he
alone were the School virtually, as the Pope is said to be the Church, they
say, speaks more for them in this case than they would have) does consent,
Actionem dandi Eucharistiam homini indigno, In 3. q. 80. art. 6. disp. 67.
sect. 4. p. 859.
non semper esse intrinsice malum, sed tunc solum, quando ipse qui dat
Sacramentum, est aliquo modo causa indignae sumptionis, vel quando commodo vel
debito modo exercendo munus suum, potest illam vitare and non facit, ac denique
quando illi constat eum qui petit esse indignum, ea scientia and modo, quo opus
est, Scil. per scientiam publicam and notoriam.
quando moraliter vitare non potest actionem dandi, quando prava dispositio
petentis, non est illo modo cognita, quo opus est, tunc actio dantis non est
mala ex part dantis, and intentio ejus est bona, quamvis ex part recipientis,
receptio sit mala, quod nullo modo imputatur danti, quia nullo modo potest esse
causa, quod alius indigne sumat, neque cum action ejus est per se ac
necessario conjuncta, indigna susceptio, quamobrem ibi est nulla cooperatio ad
malum, Praebere illud indigne communicaturo, non est malum, nisi quatenus
praebens cooperatur peccato indignae sumptionis, qui autem praebet, quia debet,
nec habet justam rationem impediendi, non cooperatur ejus peccato, Sylvius in
3. q. 80. art. 4. p. 316.
sed sola permissio, quae moraliter vitari non potest; nam qui dat Sacramentum,
solum cooperatur, ut hic homo sumat, non tamen ut indigne sumat, posset enim,
si vellet, digne sumere, quamvis autem sacerdoti constet hic and nunc indigne
sumpturum, tamen non potest id vitare, ideo neque tenetur, neque illa censetur
cooperatio, sed permissio, atque ea ratione non operatur sacerdos tunc contra
conscientiam, quia dictamen conscientiae tunc non est regulandum per scientiam
privatam, and quasi speculativam, quod is qui petit est indignus and peccator,
sed per scientiam practicam, qua homo considerat quid hic and nunc agere
oportet, concurrentibus his circumstantiis, scilicet occulta malitia hujus
hominis, cum publica petitione hujus Sacramenti, tunc enim verum dictamen
conscientiae est, dandum esse hic and nunc Sacramentum huic homini. And as we
can thus borrow Jewels from the Egyptians, so we may also take the offerings of
the Israelites, for making the Tabernacle, Trial Grounds, sep. c. 10. p. 205.
and setting up the Altar; for Mr. Ball has the same deliveries insubstance,
saying, The Minister may reach the Sacrament to an unworthy Communicant, and
yet be innocent, for he does not so much give it him, as suffer his Communion,
because he has not power or authority to put him back, he reaches him the
signs, as that which he cannot withhold, because he is held in by the
prevailing power, without which he cannot be debarred; in this case the
Minister is neither actor nor consenter to his admission, because he does it
not in his own name, but according to the order establ^shed by God, who will
not have any member of the congregation publicly denied his right and interest
to the holy things of God, by the knowledge, will and pleasure, of one singular
Minister, -- if his unworthiness be not notorious, if it be not so judged by
them that have authority, he must administer the sacramental signs unto him,
not as one worthy or unworthy, but as to one undivided from them.

Besides, as a good man may unpolluted receive the Sacrament from an evil
Minister, so a good man may undefiled exhibit the same unto an evil man, and I
may proportionably apply to the one act what St. Augustine declares of the
other, Contra Crescon. l. 2. c. 28. tom. 7. p. 50.
Ille vero qui accipit, si homo bonus ab homine malo, si fidelis a perfido, si
pius ab impio, perniciosum erit danti, non accipient, illud quippe sanctum male
utentem judicat, been accipientem sanctificat, si autem and ille qui accipit,
inique acceperit, nec sic rescissum, sed agnitum, quod per se oberat, correcto
proderit sacramentum.

Thirdly, neither is the Sacrament polluted to him which communicates with an
unworthy Partaker:

First, Ubi supra, p. 192, and 199.
no more than by a Communion in any other Ordinance, which is the same for
substance as this, (says Mr. Ball.)

And secondly, such Communion in his sense, being not free and voluntary, but
necessary, in respect of the duty enjoined of God, through the enforcing Law of
meeting the Lord in his holy Ordinances, and preserving the unity of the
Spirit, in the bond of peace and love. And Ut teneamus charitatem, fine qua and
cum sacramentis, and cum fide, nihil sumus, says Augustine.

And therefore thirdly, Ep. 2. p. 28, 29.
in the judgment of famous Beza, Nec ut rite ad coenam accedam, scrutandam est
mihi, qua quisque conscientia ad eam accedat, sed de mea ipsius conscientia
mihi laborandam est, itaque and cum adulteris, and cum homicidis, and cum
sceleratissimis quibusvis, modo nulla mea culpa tales sunt, si ad coenam castus
and purus accessero, nihil illorum impuritas nocuerit, and quod de moribus
etiam de doctrina dico, etc. He that receives worthily is no more polluted by
communicating with him that partakes unworthily, than the believing Wise was
defiled by continuing with the unbelieving Husband, who was rather sanctified
by her, and the groundless fear of such pollution, is no better warrant for any
to separate, than it can be to such a Wife, to depart from such an Husband, and
those that shall refrain the Sacrament, because some unworthy are admitted to
partake it, have some resemblance with the Indian Prince, That would not go to
heaven, because the Spaniards went thither. And if, as Petilian argued,
Conscientia dantis attenditur, quae abluat accipientis, so the conscience of
him that receives must be looked after, lest it commaculate the partaker, as
St. Augustine said, A quibus baptizeris, angelos quaere: so must we either
communicate only with Angels, or (as Constantine bid Acesius) set up our
Ladder to go to Heaven alone; for other men's consciences, we have neither means
perfectly to discover, nor authority at all to research; and surely the
Sacrament is as much annulied, and our consciences commaculated, to receive it
from a wicked Dispenser, as together with a sinful Partaker, there being also
a command, that he must be sanctified that offers the Bread of his God, Lev.
21.8. and 21. And he that has a blemish ought not to come nigh the Altar,
as well as he that was unclean ought not to enter the Sanctuary; and whosoever
of the seed of Aaron should go unto the holy things, Augustine tells us the
Donatists held that in communione sacramentorum mali maculant benos. De unico
Baptism. c. 14.
having his uncleanness upon him, should be cut off, Lev. 22.3. But to hold up
the one or the other, however the Apologists may blanch and palliate it, or be
irritated and imbittered to hear it imputed, is pure-pute Donatism, and but
Particulas de magni coenis Donati: and therefore the Disease being the same,
the same Recipe's and Cordials may be aptly and properly administered, which are
still extant in St. Augustines Pharmacopy, that tale cuique esse qualis ipse
fuerit, that to the pure all things are pure, nec praejudicat causa causae, nec
persona personae, communio malorum non maculat aliquem participatione
sacramentorum, sed consensione factorum, he puts an emphasis on that word
himself, he eats and drinks damnation to himself, to no other, immundum non
tangit qui ad peccatum nulli censentit, displicuit tibi quod quisque peccavit?
non tetigisti immundum, separate thy self, non corporis separatione, sed vitae
dissimilitudine; and then thou communicatest with the Altar of Christ, not
another sins; every one shall bear his own burden, liberet te ista sententia,
says he; and tale cuique esse qualis ipse fuerit; farther, qui seipsum
custodit, non communicate alienis peccatis, the Sacrament being indeed received
by every one secundum modum recipientis; and this Spiritual Manna (as some
suppose of the Corporal) relishing with, and affecting every one, according to
his proper Palate and Disposition, not suitable to another, as has been said.

And therefore whereas the Apologists say, That if they knew ungodly men to be
admitted, it must be a sore burden unto them, and that under this burden
godly people have long groaned.

I shall say first, that whereas it is the burden of the Song, (no mixed
Communion) that Father tells them, Cont. Parmen. l. 2. c. 21. tom. 7. p. 11.
and l. 3. c. 1.
mixtus reis and obnoxiis nisi per conscientiae maculatam consensionem nullus
recte dici potest; and that malus malis misceri potest, bonus autem nullo modo,
quamvis cum iis in una congregatione miscetur.

Secondly, by this Burden they either understand a load of sorrow, or of sin,
malum poenae aut malum culpae, if the first, though it is absolutely true, that
we contract and enfeoffe upon our selves those sins, which we see and mourn
not for; and as the best complexion has the perfectest touch, so a righteous
soul like Lot ( Cujus persecutio facta mala sodomitarum erant, says Augustine)
cannot but be vexed with unlawful deeds; yet comparatively, why the sin of
unworthy receiving should be singled out, as a more special object of, or
greater motive to sorrow, than other sins; or that it should lie with more
weight, or more tender resentment upon the spirits, to communicate in mixed
Congregations with unworthy Receivers, than with those that hear or pray
without Faith: surely this seems to me no passion resulting from any sensible
cause, but an Antipathy, whereof no Reason can be assigned; and I think there
is as much cause of grief and obligation to sorrow, for the one as the other;
like as St. Augustine told the Donatian Bishops (if we shall gratify
Cresconius so far, as to call them so, rather than Donatists) refusing to sit
with the Orthodox in the Assemblies, and justifying their refusal by Psalm. 1.1.
that they had as much ground from that Text, Not to stand in the way of
sinners, as, Not to sit in the seat of the scornful; and therefore in this
comparative respect, this is a burden or scandal acceptum, non datum, and
nothing need to make the Load so heavy, but to think it is so. And I doubt it
fares with them, as with those laboring under the Disease called Incubus, who
complain of somewhat lying heavily upon them, when the perturbation is only
from their own distempered humors and phantasms. And as the Altar which
Pausanias mentions, whereby the Women Prophetesses (those fatuae fatidicae)
divined in the Temple, some felt it light, and some heavy, according to their
condition; so it is only the weak or sore shoulders, which renders light
things burdensome, nihil gravitat in proprio loco; and as they say, he that
lies at the bottom of the Sea, feels not the weight of the incumbent water,
because both are in their proper places, the man nearer the Center, and the
Water farther removed; so those that unworthily approach the Holy Table, yet as
long as they continue Church Members, being in their due place, their coming
should not be so extraordinarily burdensome to any. Sustineas ut onus, nitendum
est vertice recto,
At flecti nervos si patiare, cades.


But secondly, if they understand it of a burden of sin, if the members have
no Ulcers so foul, infectious, and immedicable, as to indicate an excision, and
their faults are not so notorious and scandalous, to merit Excommunication; or
if their Sores shall be of that nature, and their Crimes of that guilt, yet if
to cut them off, shall be either morally impossible, or it cannot be done with
congruous Discipline, which violates not unity, as St. Augustine speaks, then
as long as they are not consentientes quibus haec placent, Contra. lit. Petil.
l. 2. c. 17. tom. 7. p. 34. Contra. Epist. Parm. l. 3. c. 2. tom. 7. p. 13.
Contra Donat. pertinac. Ep. 162. tom. 2. p. 142. Contra Ep. Parm. l. 3. c. 2.
p. 13. tom. 7.
sed tolerantes quibus haec displicent, (as he also distinguishes,) non
operantes per morbidam cupiditatem, sed tolerantes propter pacificam
charitatem; and only pro unitatis bono tolerant, quod pro bono aequitatis
oderunt; and when misericorditer corripit homo, quod potest, quod autem non
potest, patienter fert, and cum dilectione gemit and luget, donec ille desuper
emendet and corrigat, aut usque ad messem differat eradicare zizania and paleam
ventilare: in such a case and manner, to communicate with such, does not
commaculate; and to partake with them in the Sacrament, is not to participate
of their sin; and if the contrary opinion be not the great principle of
Donatisme, the Apologists, or their Friends, should do well to write a
Commentary, better to explain St. Augustine's books against those Heretics;
for without some such new Light, I cannot possibly see how to understand him
otherwise.

And indeed by a Communion of Sacraments, they have as much ground of fear, to
contract a burden of sin, as Artemon's servant in Plutarch, to carry a Canopy
over his head whither soever he went, lest the Heavens should fall upon him;
hearken I beseech you to St. Augustine, (of whom I may say more truly what he
did of Miltiades, O filium Christianae pacis, et patrem Christianae plebis)
Every one shall bear his own burden -- let him carry his burden, De verbis
Apost. Sermon. 23. tom. 10. p. 76.
and thou thine; because when God has shaken off one burden from thee, he has
imposed another, he has taken off that of Covetousness, and laid on that of
Charity -- let not them beguile you that say, We are holy, we will not bear
your burdens, and therefore will not communicate with you: They carry greater
Burdens of Division, Schism, Dissension, Animosity, False Testimonies,
Calumnious Accusations, etc. and elsewhere he exhorts the Donatists, Let
every one bear his own burden, Contra lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 67. p. 27. tom. 7.
both among us, and among you; but cast away the Burdens of Schism, which you
all carry, that you may bear your Burdens in Unity; and those that carry evil
Burdens, if you can, you may mercifully amend; if you cannot, you may patiently
tolerate.

As we should not be scandalized, Etiamsi multi nobiscum manducant and bibunt
temporaliter sacramenta, qui in fine habebunt aeterna tormenta; so we may not
hope to anticipate the Angels work to gather out of Christ's Kingdom (...), all
scandals, Matthew. 13.41. Non te agnoscerem Angelum eradicantem zizania, nec si
cum messis venisset, ante messem, non tu, sed quisquis fuerit, non est verus:
qui designavit messorem, designavit and tempus; -- Angeli tibi nomen potes
imponere, tempus non potes breviare, itaque falsum dicis qui sis, quia nondum
venit quando sis. It were passionately to be wished, not only that all were of
the body of Christ, that partake of his body, as Augustine, August. in Joan.
tract. 27.
but that all were Candidata familia, as Ambrose speaks; and not only that
there may be a parcel of Holy Communicants, but that all the Church should be
holy and without blemish; Aug. de Ovibus. tom. 9. p. 224.
and therefore there may seem to be as great an incumbency to admit none by
Baptism to be Church Members, as to give admission to none unto the Eucharist,
until they had approved their holiness; and we must not acquiesce in the bare
wishing hereof, but in order thereunto, I grant, what we may do, we must; but
Illud possumus, quod jure possumus: it was not enough that the Ark was shaken,
and that Uzzah might well have staid it; and therefore he ought or lawfully
might have put to his hand to support it; no, but because he inconsiderately
laid hold of it, without a Warrant from God, and beyond his Vocation; and as
the Jews conceive, distrusted God, as if he could not have upheld his Ark
without his unlawful assistance, he was struck dead; and as the Rabbis say,
was blasted with Lightning; and as Seneca says, one kind of Lightning is
called Fulnmen monitorium; so that stroke may enlighten and admonish us of this
truth, that pretenses, though of Reformation and Holiness, will not secure, nor
good intentions excuse, any actings and intermedlings without a Warrant and
Commission; and therefore in diverse cases and emergencies St. Augustine thinks
it to have more of prudence and piety too, to have Communion of Sacraments with
evil men, than to separate them, and much more then to separate from them; and
that we may suffer them sine crimine, whom we cannot cast out sine discrimine.

As first, if in gathering the Tares, Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 4. p. 35.
tom. 7.
the Wheat also be in danger of being plucked up, Absit a servis
patrisfamilias, ut immemores sint praecepti Domini sui, and sic adversus
zizaniorum multitudinem, flagrantia sanctae indignationis ignescant, ut cum ea
volunt ante tempus colligere, simul eradicetur and triticum. And sure this is
the very case of the Apologists, for in a large Field wherein grow five hundred
Blades, upon pretense of rooting up the Tares, they have left but five or six,
whom they will own for stalks of Wheat.

Secondly, when there is danger of Schism any ways to happen and arise, Cont.
Epist. Parm. l. 3. c. 2. p. 13, 14.
Fiat hoc ubi periculum schismatis nullum est -- cum sine periculo violandae
pacis fieri potest, quia nec ipse (Paulus) -- aliter fieri voluit, ut a
congregatione bonorum separetur malus -- quando ita cujusque crimen notum est
omnibus and omnibus execrabile apparet, ut vel nullos prorsus, vel non tales
habeat defensores, per quos possit schisma contingere, etc. and this
consideration might have kept up the hedge against that breach which they have
made; and the recognizance thereof should have bound them to the peace, to
prevent that Schism, whereof if their undertakings rendered them no prognostic
signs, their actings have lent us the Diagnostick; for if to separate from so
regardable a number, who were never by any judicial sentence separate from
them, whose Crimes were not known to all, much less execrable to them, where
the Defenders for number (perchance for weight) exceed the Accusers, (all which
Checks with St. Augustine's Canon,) and only because they had in suspicion
their lives, as not approved for their real Holiness, and submission to their
Discipline (which was the case of those of the foundation of their Church, the
cives primitivi) and because they were offended with the grossness of their
Administrations at home, where no separation is made (as they express
themselves) which is the condition of those that were the superstructure of
their Church, and civitate donati, (and perhaps e civitate Donati,) if to have
(as they choose to have) a separate Administration, and no Communion of
Sacraments, Filiucius tr. 22. c. 9. S. 298, 299. p. 49. Camer. praelect. de
Eccles. de Schism. p. 324. Polanus syntag. l. 7. c. 22. p. 549
be secedere in religionis negotio, and delectari congregationis dissidio, and
non tanquam pars Ecclesiae, sed quasi quoddam per se exercere spirituales
actiones, if that secession be unjust and temerarious, which is neither for
grievous and intolerable persecution, nor for Heresy nor Idolatry in those
from whom they separate, but in the best pretense (and they lay no better
color thereon) is only for corruption of manners and scandals; though I shall
not say that this is a Disease of Schism in state or vigor, (for it may please
God it may be without pertinacy; neither are they Members wholly cut off, but
hang yet to the Body by some Nerves and Ligaments, and thereby have communion
with it in some things) yet if it be not Schism in the increment, or at least
the beginning, they must (cancelling the old) give us a new definition of
Schism, together with their new Discipline.

Thirdly, when there is a numerous multitude of offenders, St. Augustine sends
forth a Ne procedas, and a prohibition to Ecclesiastical Discipline, Quicquid
sceleris and iniquitatis multitudinem inebriat, amittet veritatis examen; And
this judgment he sounds upon St. Paul's dealing with the Church at Corinth
(as is elsewhere showed) when there were many offenders, Non iis praecipit
Corporalem separationem, Contra Donatist. post. collat. c. 20. tom. 7. p. 125.
multi quippe erant, non sicut ille unus, -- long aliter vitiosa and curanda
and sananda est multitudo, ne forte si plebe separatur, per schismatis nefas
etiam triticum eradicetur. And herein judicious Calvin consents with
Augustine, and Reason with both: For, as Lapidaries deal with precious stones,
if they have a small cloud, or flaw, they grind or cut it out; but let it
remain if it be so great, that it cannot be taken off, without much lessening
and deteriorating of the stone; so where a few are notoriously and obstinately
peccant, Discipline may justly and prudently be exercised for cutting them off,
but not where the Corruption is Epidemical; Institut. l. 4. c. 12. S. 13.
for this were to cure the parts, by destroying the whole: If therefore the
Plague of Leprosy have covered all the flesh, (and not a part only) let them
be as clean, according to the Law, Lev. 13.13. And these Contemplations might
have procured a Supersedeas, not only to their de proprietate probanda (by
putting men under trial to prove their right to the Sacrament) but also to
their de leproso amovendo (or casting out contaminated persons) if those whom
they have removed had seemed (as they do not the most of them) defiled, non
per vana convitia, sed per vera testimonia, as St. Augustine speaks; and from
this Rule are they therefore also Heteroclites, in declining to have communion
with such, a far greater part of their Parishes, as that those whom they
admit, are rari nantes in gurgite vasto; and their number carries the
proportion of but one to an hundred to those whom they reject; so as if periere
nocentes, yet it was cum soli poterant superesse nocentes; and this was only
as Lucan observes of Sylla, to let out the corrupt blood, when there was in a
manner no other left in the body. But they should rather have perpended (as
Bullinger advises) that of the Apostle, Data est mihi potestas ad
aedificationem, non ad destructionem; and that of Seneca had not been unworthy
their consideration, Divina potentia est gregatim and public servare, multos
occidere and indiscretos, incendii and ruinae potentia est.

Let them set upon it never so specious a color, and blanch it with pretenses
of necessary Reformation, and flourish it with the gloss of just zeal, to the
purity of Ordinances, and purging out of dross, and winnowing the chasse, in
order to the restoring of an Holy Communion, Epist. 162. tom. 2. p. 142.
(Nunquam sic errat genus humanum ut non agnoscat ventilatorem Parmnianum) yet
St. Augustine will confidently tell them, Objiciuntur nobis crimina malorum
hominum -- quae si vera and praesentia videremus, and zizaniis propter frumenta
parcentes, pro unitate toleraremus, non solum nulla reprehensione, sed etiam
non parva laud nos dignos diceret, quicunque Scripturas sanctas non surdus
audiret, legant qui volunt, legant qui possunt eloquia coelestia, invenient
omnes Sanctos Dei servos, and amicos, semper habuisse, quos in suo populo
tolerarent, cum quibus tamen illius temporis sacramenta communicantes, non
solum non inquinabantur, sed etiam laudabiliter sustinebant. If we shall take
our account, and Epoche ab urbe condita, from the first foundation of them, De
civit. Dei l. 10. c. 4. De civit. Dei l. 15. c. 5.
yet ever permix'd were these two Cities, as Augustine speaks, and conjoined
in a Communion of Sacraments, quam porro antiquus sit in sacrificando Dei
cultus, duo illi fratres Cain and Abel satis indicant, says Augustine; and
Cain ( primus terrenae civitatis conditor (as St. Augustine calls him)
primogenitus diaboli et archetypus impiorum, as he is commonly named) has some
evidence to claim pre-possession of the Altar, being the first that is recorded
to have hansell'd it with sacrifice; and it is very probable, because he
brought no holy dispositions to that service, and carried thence such malicious
affections to his brother, (nemo repent fuit turpissimus) that he had rather
formerly given signs, that he was of that wicked one, than demonstration that
he was a Saint; yet as a member of the visible Church, being within the
Covenant, he was not without a capacity of sacrificing; and though he could not
wash his hands in innocence, as he ought to have done, yet he might compass
the Lords Altar.

The sacrifices before and under the Law being Seals of the Covenant between
God and his People (as expressly say the late Annotators) could not be other
than a kind of Sacraments, or analogous to them, In Psalm. 50.5.
Sum. contro. tract. 3. q. 1. p. 9. Loci com. tom. 4. p. 291. S. 71. Panstrat.
tom. 4. l. 1. c. 6. and 8.12. and l. 3. c. 4. in Genesis c. 5. v. 3. p. 145 -- 6.
those two not only agreeing in generali signorum notione, as Rivet; but also
ratione finis, as Gerhard; and they not only fall within the definition which
St. Augustine has given of Sacraments (which makes Bellarmine to reject that
definition) but Chamier expressly disputes against Suarez, that the Sacrifices
were Sacraments; because, says he, they were Ceremoniae institutae a Deo
significantes gratiam; and he adds Omnia sacrificia quae ab hominibus in
remissionem peccatorum offeruntur sunt sacramenta; and before the institution
of Circumcision, the people of God had no Sacraments; if sacrifices were not of
that denomination, and though we are not facile to credit what the learned P.
Fagius relates out of the Rabbis, That the fire consuming the sacrifices, was
formed into the figure of a Lion, to emblem that the Lion of the Tribe of Juda
should give himself a sacrifice in the fullness of time; yet it is evident, that
the sacrifices not only were Visibiles conciones de Messia ejusque beneficiis,
solennis confessio peccatorum, et solennis supplicatio ad Deum pro remissione,
as Paraeus; but also praedicamenta unius very sacrificii, as Augustine; figurae
et protestationes Christi immolandi pro salute mundi; as Liranus; Ubi supra.
signa rei sacrae, signa protestantia fidem in Christum, signa confirmantia
fidem, as Chamier.

And though, as Rivet amongst others observes, that in Sacraments we receive
from God, and in sacrifices we give and offer somewhat to him; yet quia
vi^^ssim mediantibus illis sacrificiis, Deus aliquid dabat hominibus, hoc est,
sua conferebat dona et bona, Loci com. tom. 4. p. 280.
et in futurum sacrificium Messiae, mentes fidelium convertens, fidem eorum
confirmabat, ideo non abs re, hoc quidem respectu sacramentorum vice defuncta
esse sacrificia pronunciamus, says Gerhard; and what is signified and
exhibited to us in our sacraments was also to them in these sacrifices; of the
one sacrament Augustine says, Contra Faustum. l. 20, 21.
Hujus sacrificii caro et sanguis ante adventum Christi per viotimas
similitudinum promittebatur, in passione Christi per ipsam veritatem
reddebatur, post ascensum Christi per sacramentum memoriae celebratur; and of
the other Gregory, Quod apud nos baptismus, hoc egit apud veteres pro majoribus
virtus sacrificii.

And it is also observable, that as the Sacrificer presented somewhat to God,
whereby to find favor in his fight, in tender whereof a sinner agnized
himself to be Gods vassal and servant; so in token of Gods acceptance he had
some part thereof returned again to him, in sign he was reconciled and
restored to his Covenant, by the atonement and forgiveness of his sin, the
sacrifice being munus federale (says a great Divine,) forasmuch as according
to the use and custom of Mankind, Mede Diatrib. part. 4. in Ezra. 6.10. p.
258, 263.
to receive meat and drink from the hand of another, was a sign of Amity and
Friendship, much more to make another partaker of his Table, as the sinner was
of Gods, by eating of his oblation: and therefore upon this reason, the
Ancients called the Eucharist a Sacrifice, for the analogy the one had to the
other, both being Epulae federales, those of the Old Covenant, this of the New,
both being Rites of Atonement; or for impetration of remission of sin.

And the same learned man elsewhere says, That among all the Sacrifices of the
Law, Diatri. 3. part. in 1 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. p. 585.
none either for name or nature comes so near the Sacrament of the Supper as
the Eucharistical, -- a part whereof was burned upon the Altar, as in other
Sacrifices; but the remainder and greater part was eaten by the faithful people
who brought it, that so their Sacrifices being turned into their bodies
nourishment, might be a sign of their incorporation into Christ to come, who
was the true Sacrifice for sin; so whereas other Sacrifices were only
Sacrifices, this was also a Sacrament; the rest were only for expiation, but
this also for application, being a Communion of that Sacrafice which was
offered, rightly therefore was it added to all Sacrifices: for what profit was
there of expiation of sin, unless it were applied, well might it then be
called a Sacrifice of Peace, as containing in it a Communion of Peace, and
Communion with Jesus Christ, etc.

And to verify this similitude and correspondence between the Eucharist and
Sacrifices Eucharistical, the Altar is called the Lords Table, Mal. 1.7. and
12. and the Offerings named the Bread of God, Lev. 21.21. Joh. 3.33. 1 Cor.
9.2. 2 Timothy 2.19. Ezekiel. 28.12. Joh. 6.27. Romans 15.28. 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13.
and 4.30. Rev. 7.3. In Psalm. 50.5.


And though there may be said to be a signal difference between Sacraments and
Sacrifices, in that the latter are only signa, the other also called sigilla
gratiae: surely whatsoever confirms, or secureth, or perfecteth, or remarketh
another thing, is in Scripture Idiom called a Seal; and therefore (methinks)
there should not be such an Emphasis or Antonomasie set upon that one single
place of the Apostle, where he calls Circumcision a Seal of the Righteousness
of Faith; yet farther also, not only Paraeus fully enough affirms, that the
sacrifices were signa promissionis gratiae, quibus fides de remissione
peccatorum propter Christum confirmabatur, sicut de circumcisione dicitur, quod
erat sigillum justitiae fidei, and ita sacrificia vicem sacramentorum
praestabant; but also Deodate in express terms asserts, that the sacrifices
were seals of Gods Covenant; and Moller, that fuerant tanquam sigilla; and
(...) hujus pacti.

But then I assume, was there any such Discipline of putting men under trial,
whether they had presented their bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to
God, before they were admitted to present their sacrifices to the Altar? Was
there ever such a separation made of men, or thrusting out any from compassing
the Altar, who were admitted to enter the Temple? Or were they denied a
Communion in sacrifices, which were not discommoned from other both religious
and civil conversation? We find general and indefinite commands to sacrifice,
Numb. 28.2. Reproofs for not doing God the honor to sacrifice, Isa. 43.23. the
number of sacrifices to be of equal latitude and extension with that of all the
people, 2 Chronicles. 7.4. and all the Congregation, 1 Chronicles. 29.20, 21. all Israel
was in Covenant with God; Hammond. Answ. to Quaer. p. 180. tit. bapt. inf.
and they are described to be those that had made a Covenant with him by
sacrifice, Gather my Saints together to me, those that have made a Covenant
with me by sacrifice, Psalm. 50.5. Sanctos vocat omnes Israelitas, says
Jansenius, They were all the Members of his Church and People, sanctified by
his Covenant, and the seals thereof, by his calling and profession, though
many have denied the truth and virtue of it, Singuli in locum.
as Deodate. Or those whom he sanctified by his Sacraments (adds Bellarmine)
though maxima multitudo eorum erat impia and profana (says Moller) tamen non
dubium est hanc sententiam de toto corpore populi esse intelligendam, non
separatim, vel ad impios vel pios trahendam; and it must necessarily be so
comprehensively understood, seeing Interpreters understand this of gathering
together by the Angels at the last Judgment, where all must appear, without any
separation, save what shall be made afterward; and though some learned
Interpreters think, that the making a Covenant by sacrifice, carries an
allusion to that solemn Custom of Nations, where to strike more Religion,
Alexand. Neapol. dier. genial. l. 5. c. 3.
Leagues were entered into with victims and sacrifices, Caesa jungebant federa
porca (or porco, as Servius would mend it, who rather marres it, quia in
omnibus sacris plus valent feminini generis victimae) whence also some fetch
the Etymology of fedus, a porca foede lacerata; yet others suppose the Psalmist
specially alludes to Exodus 24.8. where the blood of the Covenant was sprinkled
on all the People, or refer it generally to all sacrifices, which were seals
of Gods Covenant; and correspondently the Rabbis say, that Israel did not
enter into Covenant, but by these three things, Circumcision, Baptism, and
Sacrifice; so that then though only clean Birds might be brought to be
sacrificed, yet they were not all clean that came to the Altar to sacrifice;
neither had all those that sacrificed, an house and a nest where to lay their
Young in the Altar, that is (as the Fathers allegorize it) had not Faith to
breed and bring forth their good works, though their sacrifices were not
sweet, Jer. 6.20. but were as the bread of mourning, Hos. 9.4. and polluted
bread, Mal. 1.7. yet their offerings were not to be intermitted, but rectified,
and their ill doing did not cancel the duty. Nunquid and Samuel Saulem
nesciebat, says Augustine, quem per os ejus aeterna sententia damnarat Deus,
verumtamen and ipsum and sanctum David, unum Dei tabernaculum intrantes, inter
eadem sacrificia videbat, sed distinct utique videbat, quia distinctos
videbat, August. cont. Donatist. post. col. c. 20. tom. 7. p. 125.
and unum eorum in aeternum amabat, alterum pro tempore tolerabat: Nay, when
Saul was so far from convincing any of his sanctity, as that he had
manifested to all his Hypocrifie and Unholiness, immediately from the
increpation of his sin, and menacing of the punishment; and when he rather
gave pregnant signs of impenitency, than rendered manifest signs of repentance
(for when he said, I have sinned, he only made a confession without sincerity
or internal contrition of heart, swelled up with worldly pride (as Deodate) Non
humiliter dixit aut sensit, Singuli. in 1 Samuel 15.24.
(as Serrarius out of Rupertus) Gloriam non Dei, sed suam ista confessione
mercari voluit, and confessed only for fear of the people, and the loss of his
Kingdom; as Willet, Nam non prius dixit peccavi, quam audiit regnum alio esse
tranflatum, as Gregory, so as Culpabilis fuit ista confessio, as Bernard, Neque
vox est animi vere poenitentis, sed ejus qui poenitentiae simulatione atque
umbra, aliquid a se malum removere studet, -- sane quem vere poenitet neque de
honor retinendo satagit, quem peccando videtur jure perdidisse, neque umbram
quaerit quam praetendat culpae, as Sanctius, in concurrency with Gregory, Lira,
Cajetan, etc.) Yet notwithstanding all this, holy Samuel was induced to afford
him his presence, communion, and assistance in the sacrifice, as Josephus
notes, Graviter eum corripuit, and cum eo tamen ad offerendum Deo sacrificium
sine excusatione perrexit, says Augustine; cum eo revertitur, says Serrarius
out of Gregory, Contr. Donatist. post. col. c. 20. tom. 7. p. 125.
quia potentibus hujus seculi sic est damnanda iniquitas, ut bonum quod habent
exasperati non perdant. If the Priests had known, or would have made use of
those Catoptricks which are now in so much request, whereby a shadow seems a
substance, and a mere species appears a body, they might have here had a
subject would have afforded as many Umbrages, and as much specious pretense for
building Castles in the Air, wherein to have secured the sacrifices from being
touched or laid hold of, as the Apologists have done for shutting up the
Sacrament from being taken but at their will and pleasures, they might have
urged, that unless men had showed forth their hands, and approved them to be
washed in innocence, they might not come within the compass of the Altar, and
pleaded, that whatsoever touches the Altar should be holy, Exodus 29.37. that
there must be a sanctifying of themselves to come to the sacrifice, 2 Samuel
16.5. that the sacrifices of the wicked are abominable, Prove. 21.27. and as if
they had cut off a Dogs neck, Isa. 66.3. whereby the sacrifices, as well as the
holy things, are polluted, Hos. 9.4. And seeing the sacrifices were munera
federal^a, signs of their incorporation into Christ, where the Offering was a
recognition of being Gods Vassal or Homager, the acceptance was a testimonial
of being reconciled and interessed in Gods Covenant by remission of sin, and
the admission to eat at Gods Table, an Argument that he was of his Household:
unless then the sacrificer had by evident signs convinced the Priest of his
real holiness, there was danger of giving false testimony, and putting seals
to blanks, and prostituting the privileges of the godly: but as Angustine to
Gaudentius, O dolor! fraudata sunt tali Magisterio tempora antiqua, quon^am
nondum natus eras. And surely my infirm eyes can discern little difference
between what the Apologists now allege and practice, and what the Priests
might then, with as much reason have urged and done, save that perhaps some may
suppose, it was of more advantage to the Priests, to admit many to the Altar,
who had there greater share of their Offerings, but to give access unto the
Table to a few, may (for ought we know) be more of the interest of the
Apologists; whose Offerings may increase by their admission of such only as
they shall approve of and elect; but sure had the Priests admitted but one of a
hundred, to have sacrificed, as they do not above that proportion to
communicate, I doubt they that served at the Altar, would hardly have lived of
the Altar: that which some may interpose of shutting out unclean persons under
the Law, we shall put under suspension, until a farther and more proper
opportunity, when we shall hope to shut out that instance, because it is clean
beside the purpose.

But whatever judgment may be given of the sacrifices, yet Circumcision and the
Passover, were univocal Sacraments, and Signs and Figures of the same things,
which ours represent and signify, and antitypes, and (...) (as Rivet calls
them) to ours; and upon this Analogy of Circumcision to Baptism, we draw an
Argument for baptizing Infants now, which were then circumcised; and the like
reason may carry it farther, to argue for such admission to the Lords Supper,
as was then practiced by Rule for admitting to the Passover.

And so also during that policy (in relation to persons adult at least) I think
there was the same reason for admission to Circumcision, as to the Passover,
and no disproportion in the qualifications and dispositions requisite to the
one and other; and I suppose the same may be verified of Baptism, Aug. Contra
Crescon. l. 4. c. 45.
and the Eucharist. But notwithstanding the many and great corruptions of that
people, those who did not communicate in the sin, yet held Communion in the
Sacraments, Sicut Prophetae sancti and septem millia virorum, qui non
curvaverunt genua ante Baal, a populo tamen suo, and a communibus sacramentis
non se diviserunt. Sunt alia quae pietatem ejus in dubium vocant, videtur
defecisse a parentis pietate. Rivet in Genesis 18. Exer. 91. p. 353. and in c. 21.
Exer. 104. p. 403. Ita Paraeus express in Genesis 16.12. and 17.21. p. 249. and
259.


Though the Covenant were established with Isaac, yet Ismael, whom the Hebrew
calls a Wild Ass; and the Chaldee paraphrase retains the Original word.
Metaphorice pro homine insociabili and ferinis moribus praedito, says Rivet;
and whom he, and Paraeus, Cajetan, Pererius, and others judge to be a profane
man, and a Reprobate; and Mr. Broughton thinks to be the only evil man, whose
name is foretold in Scripture, though he had then no Title to the Inheritance,
yet he had the Seal of Circumcision to show for it; which was also given him
(says Paraeus) very observably, Ut ei non minus quam aliis offerretur, and
rata maneret federis gratia, donec eum ab ipsa manifesta apostasia excluderet,
and ita redderetur (...) deinde propter Disciplinam, cuj omnes Abrahae
domesticos subjectos esse voluit, ut servaretur ordo and vitarentur scandala.
And so also at the first Institution of this Seal, all the Males of Abraham's
Family were the Virgin Wax (as it were) to receive the stamp thereof, as well
those bought with his Money, as they that were borne in his house, and it was
impressed on them the same day, that the seal was ordained, and they could then
be put under no long trial, or great preparation; and though it have better
Evidence than that of Genesis 14.14. (where his trained servants are (according to
that which some will have to be proper to the Hebrew) rendered his catechized
servants) that Abraham had taught his servants the knowledge of God, Genesis
18.19. Yet that they were by any former probation found all of them, to have
evident signs of holiness, and that Abraham's Family had a Prerogative beyond
Christ's, and was a Paradise without a Serpent, it is very hardly imaginable; or
that it was (as Scaliger of Virgil) such a monstrum sine labe, but their
capacity of Circumcision was rooted in their being parts of Abraham's Family
(the Church) and their admission to that Seal of the Covenant, is made an
Argument to prove that even the Children of Infidels, Rivet. in Genesis 17. exer.
89. p. 343.
taken or bought, by and in the power of Christians, may be baptized, as has
been determined in a National Synod of the French Churches.

When the seal had been disused, and for 40. years antiquated, at the great
sealing day, when that great Body of the People was circumcised, Josua 5. and
that Body was not, nor could be, without some Excrements, and therein, as in
Mines, there was vile Earth, as well as precious Metals; and when that Ore was
brought forth out of the dark Mine, and was capable to have been sifted, or put
under a fiery Trial, or have been brought unto the Test, yet without any such
separation of the precious from the vile, we do find that all Israel was
circumcised, v. 8. and that without any examination, or any profession, save
general and virtual, that we can find; and then immediately follows their
keeping of the Passover, v. 10. so it was ordained that every soul that was
circumcised should eat the Passover, every soul that was susceptible of a
journey to the place which the Lord had chosen, and was capable to eat such
solid meat which Infants were not. And upon this account the Rabbis also,
except the Blind, Lame, Deaf, and Idiot; yet was the Command for eating thereof
an absolute and general Rule, with no other exception, but of being on a
journey, or under any legal uncleanness; and even these were not to omit, but
to adjourn it one month, In Lev. 9.13.
else to be cut off from their People (for that omission of duty (say the late
Annotators) is dangerous, as well as commission of sin against God) we do
not find so much as that moral uncleanness was a bar to the keeping thereof
by any that continued of the Congregation of Israel.

And not to conceal a truth, there is no footsteps of any cutting off, or any
Law or Precedent for such casting out from the Congregation, by sentence of
Excommunication, for any notorious crimes or scandals in all the Old Testament;
I shall not gainsay, there may be some Evidence found among the Rabbinical
Writings for the practice thereof, which may only argue it to be then an
Ecclesiastical, but no Divine Institution. But it cannot be imaginable, how
there should be any such examination antecedent to admission to partake of the
Passover, when the Lamb was neither brought to the Temple, nor killed by the
Priest, In Exodus, 12.6. p. 890. In Genesis 17.11. Exer. 80.
but slain and eaten privately at home, as Rivet proves out of Philo, Josephus,
Liranus, and others, and of the same opinion is Gerhard.

Rivet extracts the definition of a Sacrament out of Genesis 17.11. which he
defines Signum federis inter Deum and homines, and the partaking of the
Sacrament is a renewing of the Covenant with God, and much upon this account it
is pretended, that a profession of Faith is exacted as previous to the
participation: the same inconveniences then may seem to refult from an
admission to a formal and explicit covenanting with God, as from being admitted
to take the seal of the Covenant, and consequently the like Reasons may seem to
prohibit the one and the other. Unless we shall think it less to be entered
into a Gild or Company, than to wear the Livery; or suppose it not strange,
that he that is taken Tenant, shall be denied his Evidences: but now long
before this National Circumcising, there was a covenanting with God by the
whole Nation of the Jews, all the people in the whole heap or floor without
winnowing away of the Chaff, Exodus 24.7. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 12. many of which
notwithstanding, the Psalmist sings a sad note of them, They flattered him with
their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongues, for their heart was not
right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Govenant, Psalm. 78.36, 37.
and Moses himself renders this Character of them, that they were a stiff-necked
and a foolish people, and had not eyes to see, nor ears to hear, nor hearts to
believe; yet in respect of the Covenant and Promises, he nevertheless calls
them an Holy Nation, and the peculiar People of God; and therefore like as
Aeneas Sylv^us said in the case of Priests Marriages, howsoever there might be
some Reasons for excluding of such as are not approved for Personal Sanctity;
yet there are more Reasons for admission of such as are not by judicial Censure
cast out of the Church, because of their federal Holiness; and we may therefore
say of their new Chemistry, whereby they pretend to separate the pure from the
impure, as Gerson did of some constitutions, Eorum sanctior esset omissio.

When (as they say of the Viper, that having bitten a man, he runs to the water
to prevent death) so Jerusalem and all Judaea, and among them Pharisees and
Sadduces, that generation of Vipers, mali corvi malum ovum, which by
persecuting the Prophets, had been destructive to their Mother the Synagogue,
came to the Water of Baptism, though under the notion of Vipers, which are
for as speciosae and quasi pictae, In Mat. 3.7.
intus autem veneno plenae (says Barradius) whereby it was signified they were
malitiosum simul and astutum maxim hominum genus qui scirent summam impietatem
maxima pietatis specie obtegere (as Jansenius) yet John did not assume to judge
which of these Serpents had cast forth their poison when they came to the
water, without a purpose to resorbe it, and which not, who were truly, and who
fainedly penitent; nor did he suspend the Water of Baptism, till he had made
trial who was worthy to receive it, he repelled none that confessed their
sins; and that Confession in all probability could be only implicit and
virtual, they being such a multitude, or at most but general; and so our
Divines assert against the Papists, Annot. in loc.
alleging this place for Auricular Confession, (whereas they exact it in
particulars) their very coming for Remission, being a tacit acknowledgment of
their guilt, Baptismus Johannis erat externa professio poenitentiae, says
Estius; and so consequently the very approach unto the Sacrament, whose
institution and signification respects remission of sins, is an implicit and
interpretative confession of sins; yet besides there is none also at any time
admitted, without joining with all the Congregation together, in the express
and explicit confession thereof.

But a confession of sin satisfies not those Censors without examination and
trial of the truth, and seriousness thereof. Page 191.
And however they frivolously suppose, that John baptized not those Pharisees,
which he called a generation of Vipers, because it is said Luke 7.30. But the
Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God, being not baptized of him;
and that therefore those of them that came, did come to see; or as sent, Joh.
1.24.

Yet first, it is so evidently beaming from the Text, that some of the
Pharisees were baptized, that I know not one Interpreter that does not see and
acknowledge it; and to that of Luke. 7.30. they say, he spoke not of all the
Pharisees, but of many, and those that were then present at that discourse of
our Savior, Quia (says Maldonat) de universo loquebatur genere, non de
singulis hominibus, neminem excepit, alioqui nec omnis populus nec omnes
Publicani, a Johanne baptizati fuerunt, illique crediderunt, and tamen
generaliter dicit, omnem populum and Publicanos fulsse baptizatos; and says
Estius (and Jansenius correspondeth) potest and sic exponi, quod dicit Lucas,
Pharisaei and Legisperiti, qui a Johanne baptizati non fuerunt, spreverunt
consilium Dei in semetipsos, qua expositione non dicit multi fuerunt an pauci,
sed tantum significat aliquos fuisse, etc.

Secondly, those mentioned Joh. 1.24. as they are called Priests and Levites
(though I deny not, but that notwithstanding they might be Pharisees) yet they
might be sent at another time, and others than they that are here mentioned:
those coming only to be baptized venientes ad baptismum, id est, ut
baptizarentur, says Barradius: Why else did John wonder who had forewarned
them to fly from the wrath to come? (to come as Spies, was no way to escape,
but to procure wrath.) Chrysostom. in Mat. 3. Homil. 11. p. 28. Estius Annot. in
loc.
And Origin supposes they came to be baptized, thereby to ingratiate with the
People, who held John in so great esteem; and this occasioned John to excite
and quicken them to verify it, that they came rightly by their after-works and
fruits; as Chrysostom, and Estius; but he did not suspend their Baptism,
until they had given satisfactory signs thereof.

Thirdly, they forget that Luke relates this increpation, O generation of
Vipers, to be spoken to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him,
not only to the Pharisees; and yet that multitude upon their confession of
sins in such manner as is said, without farther probation, was baptized.

At one of the greatest Draughts that ever was made by the Fishers of men, when
Three Thousand were taken in the Nets of the Gospel, they were all put into the
Water of Baptism the same day, without farther trial, which were good Fishes,
and which bad; and in the next verse we find their admission to breaking of
Bread, they continued in fractione Eucharistiae, says the Syriack; and that
this is spoken of the Eucharist by a Synecdoche membri, is the judgment of
Luther, Calvin, Bullinger, Gualter, and Piscator; besides Lorinus and Sanctius:
and though Beza and Aretius understand it of the Agapae, yet harum potissima
pars fuit Eucharistia, Tom. 4. l. 9. c. 2. S. 34. p. 231. in Art. 242.
itaque bic sane nulla controversia esto, says Chamier, and hinc porro
colligitur illa consuetudo Ecclesiae antiquissima dandi Neophytis Eucharistiam
immediate post Baptismum; as Lorinus observes.

But they suppose this Argument will sorsake our Armies to fight under their
Colors, Page 192, 193
and militate for them; for they say, What more could be said of the truest
Saints, than is said of those Act. 2. 1. They were pricked in heart. 2. Were
desirous of the ways of salvation. 3. They were steadfast in the Communion with
the Apostles, and practice of Holy Duties, whereas many of their People (and
those many must be all those which they reject from the Sacrament, or they talk
impertinently) are as void of the knowledge of Religion, as Heathens, and in
practice worse then Pagans.

But for answer, we may first observe what obliging and endearing ways they
have to work upon and win their People, and they might consider, that it as much
derogates from the credit of their Ministry, that they have such a people, as
from the Honor of their Charity, that they can speak nothing but Dirt and
Daggers of them; but as when a Virgin was to be put to death, she must first be
defloured and vitiated, before she could be executed, so they must needs avile
and asperse their People to justify themselves; but when Rubirius condemned by
Caesar appealed to the People, Nihil aeque ac judicis acerbitas profuit, so we
cannot but look more compassionately upon their Congregations, because they use
them so spitefully, whom we are confident a great part of them like Anteius and
Ostorius in Tacitus to be inter damnatos magis quam reos, and their quarrel
against them, to be like that of Fimbria against Scaevola, totum telum non
recipit, they will not receive their Yoke.

Secondly, for those Converts there is no more recorded of them, than may be in
those, which are brought to embrace the Word of Faith without the Work of
faith; and to make an external Profession without any real Conversion of the
inward Man, they were pricked at the heart, but compuncti fuerunt Cain and
Judas, says Calvin: As the denunciation of judgment struck Ahab into a low
posture of Humiliation, so it is possible many of those Ultorem metuunt
regnantem, quem occiderunt benedicentem (as Erasmus;) Their continuing
steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship and breaking of Bread, and
Prayers, Calvin says, is the form of the Church, but all that are of the
visible Church are not of the invisible; a man may continue in the Doctrine of
the Apostles, yet not in the practice of that Doctrine, he may be no
speculative Heretic, nor Apostate, yet may be a practical Heretic, there may
be a pure light without heat, or influence, as in Glowworms or Cucuija, he may
give all his Goods to feed the Poor, and not have Charity, (parting with the
Substance to catch a shadow, for honor est umbra virtutis) he may perform
external duties, without the hidden Man of the Heart, like Architas Dove and
Regiomontanus Eagle, make a brave flight without a Principle of life, carried
by other wheels, and engines, most of this (if that fellowship be, Communicatio
ad mutuam conjunctionem, eleemosynas, aliaque fraternae communionis officia, as
Calvin) may be verified of many of those whom they suspend, save that the
Breach they have made, keeps them from breaking of Bread, and though desirous
of the ways of Salvation they find this way obstructed.

But thirdly, do they soberly opine that all those were real and perfect
converts? I suppose then they are solitary in that opinion; not only these
three thousand, but the rest about that time coming into the faith, found
present Baptism, a door into the Church; among these first converts were
Ananias, Saphira, and Nicholas, and yet these first Blades of the seed of the
word were blasted, and withered without sound fruit.

But fourthly, whatsoever they were, it was not the truth and reality of their
faith, that admited them to Baptism, but the external profession of the faith,
their continuance steadfast in the faith what ever it imports, was a thing
subsequent, they had not continued, when they only began to believe, and then
were they Baptized and brake bread, and the Apostles suspended not their
Baptism, till probation had, whether they would so continue, and their
continuance was in breaking bread also.

When the Eunuch had made a draught of his faith by profession thereof; Philip
did not suspend the seals; when he came to water, there was no haeret aqua,
though there was not time enough to verify the unfainedness of his profession,
yet nothing hindered him to be Baptized, and when the prisoner of Jesus Christ,
had brought into captivity the thoughts of his jailer to the profession of an
obedience to Christ, although he immediately before resolved to have given
himself a wicked kind of Baptismus sanguinis, by killing himself with his own
sword, yet without suspending him for such a desperate resolution, he received
the Baptismus flaminis, and that straightways (which is a word of no more
Latitude than their immediately ((...)) here being equivalent to (...), John
13.30. Which leaves no proportionable time to take any evidence of the
soundness of the work of grace in his conversion, and what ever probable signs
thereof himself might give, yet nothing is recorded of those of his house, but
that the word of the Lord was spoken to them, which doubtless they professed to
receive with faith, and without more ado, all his were Baptized too, being
upon that profession taken to be of the household of faith.

Primus haeresiarcharum, as the Fathers call him, and primogenitus Sathanae, as
Ignatius styles him, Simon Magus, whose fresh sorceries and witchcrafts were
such, as might have justly put his profession under a suspicion of counterfeit,
and if ever to have brought any to the trial, now to have done it, and to have
expected some signs, that he that was to be washed, were also sanctified, and
as they say of Lapis Armenius, that it must be often washed ere it be approved,
so on the contrary he should have been often proved ere once washed; yet we
find notwithstanding that without suspension or probation, upon his profession
to believe, though he were still in the gall of bitterness, which poison he
sucked from the old Serpent, and therefore there was no hope that the Spirit
which appeared at Christ's Baptism in the likeness of a Dove, which is without
gall, should descend upon him, who only in Ecclesiam ut Corvus ingressus est,
quaerens quae sua sunt, says Augustine, and probatus est ad aquam
contradictionis (as St. Hierom accommodately) quia in hypocrisi accepit
baptismum: Yet he was admitted to Baptism, which there was an active right in
the Apostles to give without examining whether he had a passive the receive,
Quem prodidit orbi, Poena sequens nescisse fidem, sings Arator.

It might appear by prolix induction (but that longum iter per exempla) that
the first profession of faith gave a right to Baptism, whereof Livery and
Scisin was thereupon taken, and when any deserteth the tents of Paganism and
comes into the quarters of the Christian Church, before he be entered into the
Muster-Roll, take his Sacramentum Militiae, and march under their ensigns, or
be otherwise received than as an enemy, he ought to show wherefore he is come,
and profess himself to be for that party, and therefore that a profession of
faith is requisite antecedently to Baptism, In Act. c. 9. v. 37.
is not contradicted. Est regula universalis, says Calvin, Non ante
recipiendos esse in Ecclesiam, qui ab e^ fuerant prius alieni, quam ubi testati
se fuerint Christo credere, for it were (says he) an impious and too gross
profanation of Baptism to administer it to an infidel, to one that assents not
to the faith objective, and has not faith subjective, viz. a Dogmatical and
Historical faith, (wherein is founded a title to the Sacraments) and how else
shall we know that they are become Christian believers, unless they profess to
be so, and make it known; but as that great Divine adds, inscite and perperam
fanatici homines Paedobaptismum hoc praetextu impugnant, so I may say that
irrationally and ilfavoredly shall they seek to conclude an equal necessity of
the like profession previously to the Eucharist; for the same reasons which Mr.
Calvin produces evince to, there is no such necessity that the Baptism of
infants should be suspended until they are capable to make profession of their
faith, are as apt and applicable to prove, that it is not necessary that such
as are baptized, should profess or be examined of their faith before their
admission to the Lords Supper, those who once were aliens, when they were made
Denisons of the Church, made this profession at their naturalizing (or rather
unnaturalizing, this being a translation from the state of nature to that state
of grace) but those that were children of the faithful Dicimus, says Calvin,
Ecclesiae filios nasci, and ab utero reputari in Christi membris, and this may
as well supersede the necessity of profession of their faith at the partaking of
the Eucharist, as he concludes it to do at the receiving of their Baptism. And
it seems to me to have as much reason, that the parents should give evidence of
their faith, when they bring their children to Baptism, (the Childrens right
being rooted in their faith) as when they offer themselves to the Lords Table;
but their constant conversation and fellowship in the Church makes them
Confessors, and they need not be made Martyrs by farther trial; until justice
convict them to be evil, charity must conclude them to be good; and sicut
difficile aliquem suspicatur malum qui bonus est, sic difficile aliquem
suspicatur bonum qui ipse malus est, says Chrysostom, it is the Character of a
strait heart, and close hand, to examine a poor beggar of his whole life,
before they think him worthy of a morsel of bread, whereas it is better to feed
diverse, that are unworthy, than suffer one to want that is worthy, Semper habet
unde det cui pectus est plenum charitatis, says Augustine, and habere omnia
Sacramenta, and malus esse potest, habere autem charitatem, and malus esse non
potest, adds the same Father, and though that of the wise man may seem a
paradox, Melior est iniquitas viri quam mulier benefaciens: And that be an
hyperbole that the worst Grecian is better than the best Cretian, yet it is a
just truth, that the errors of charity are better than the best pretenses of
rigor and censorious uncharitableness, and it is nearer the partaking of the
Divine Nature, to spare many for the sake of a few good men, than to dissolve,
or shatter a whole Church for a few evil.

The Church of Corinth was a very corrupt Body, Morbus est partium viventium
corporis humani ad actiones naturales exercendas impotentia seu ineptitudo ab
earundem constitutione praeter naturam ortum habens. Sennertus.
and needed purging as much as any, there were not only Cacochymical humors
mixed with the blood, but they were gathered and ripened into Spiritual
diseases, there being an impotency or unaptness in the parts of that body to
exercise spiritual actions, springing from their constitution beside grace;
there were diseases in their state and vigor, diseases of all kinds, morbi
intemperiei, they were too hot at strife and contention, 1 Cor. 3.3. and 11.18.
And too cold in their love and zeal to the reverence of the Sacrament, 1 Cor.
11. To the honor of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.10. And to their weak brethren whom
they scandalized, 1 Cor. 8.12. They were too moist with intemperate drinkings,
1 Cor. 11.21. and their profane distempers in receiving the Sacramental food of
their souls, which had brought them to an Atrophy and Apepsy, together with
their uncleanness, fornication, and lasciviousness, wherein they had sinned
already, and had not repented, were a compounded intemperateness, 2 Cor. 13.21.
There were morbi totius substantiae, though not arising from occult qualities,
yet otherwise, not only as they were carnal, 1 Cor. 3.3. But through their
denial of the resurrection of the dead, which is the life of faith and
substance of Christianity, quae est singularis fides Christianorum, says
Augustine, there were morbi compositionis, in figura, the immodest and
irreverent habit of their women, 1 Cor. 11. In magnitudine, they were puffed
up, 1 Cor. 4.18. and 5.2. There were swellings among them, 2 Cor. 13.20. In
numero, there was one member continued and cherished in that wickedness which
was execrable to the heathens, which should have been cut off, 1 Cor. 5.1. In
situ, there were tumults, 2 Cor. 13.20. Eating and drinking in the Church,
which they should have done in their own houses, 1 Cor. 11.22. Eating in the
idol temples, and partaking the cup and table of Devils, 1 Cor. 8.10. and
10.21. And lastly diseases solutae continuitatis, in their envyings, strifes,
divisions, 1 Cor. 3.3. and 11.18. And going to law one with another, for
trifles, and that before Infidels, Chap. 6.1, 2.

Yet notwithstanding all this, Contr. Donat. post. Collat. c. 20. Tom. 7. p.
125.
there were many pure and precious souls among them, and tamen omnes ad unum
altar accedebant, and eadem Sacramenta communicabant, qui eadem vitia non
communicabant, says Augustine: What then does the Spiritual Hippocrates (to
whom might more plausibly be applied what Macrobius attributed to the Coan, Nec
falli potest, nec fallere) he first acknowledges them to be the Churches of
Christ, and a society of Saints, he does not Unchurch or Anathematize them, and
although the same men that did partake of the Table of Devils, were partakers
also of the Table of the Lord, and though they met together for the worse, and
in effect did not eat the Lords Supper, but held a kind of Bacchanal rather,
yet he denies not this promiscuous Communion, he does not command, nor permit
such as found themselves precious, Vbi supra p. 126.
to separate from those they saw vile, non corporaliter separat, sed
spiritual^ter separare non cessat; Nolite seduci, corrumpunt bonos mores
colloquia prava, non eorum congressum, sed consensum timet, says Augustine, he
increpates not the Church-governors for admitting such, nor lays any injunction
of excluding so many of them, nor gives any advice to suffer none to pass to
the Lords table, but through the Strainer of Examination, but he allows them to
continue the use of the Lords Supper, and only corrects the abuses, whereby
they provoked the Lord, and lost the fruits of their refection, being not
strengthened in Spirit, but rather made weak and sick in body, and soul too
(some of them) who did eat and drink damnation only to themselves; and when he
says to themselves, Vbi supra p. 125.
quid aliud nisi istos vaniloquos cogitabat (says Augustine,) ut ei non
sufficiat dicere, judicium manducat and bibit, nisi adderet sibi, ne hoc etiam
ad illos pertineret, qui pariter quidem, sed non judicium, manducabant: he
wills them not to resrain the Supper but their sins, to amend their stomachs,
not to leave their meat; to use some preparatives, not to lay aside the main
Physic; he prescribes them to examine themselves, not to subject them to the
examination of another, but (so) to eat, not abstain, In 1 Cor. 11. p. 438.
and (so) to eat without any forain examination, Nec dicit abstinete igitur a
pane hoc, etc. says Musculus, hoc pacto malum quod reprehendit non emendasset;
si Medicus dicat aegroto quia comedis ac bibis secus quam valetudini tuae
restituendae conducat, consulo ne posthac edas and bibas, hoc ipsum consilio
non curat and restituit sed perdit, etenim non restituitur valetudo non edendo
ac bibendo, sed competenter pro qualitate morbi edendo and bibendo; consimili
modo non correxisset Apostolus malum hoc Corinthiorum consulendo ne in posterum
de pane ederent, etc. -- hoc Apostoli exemplum sequatur Minister Christi,
sicubi viderit esse quosdam qui coena dominica abutuntur, neque suspendat
institutionis dominicae usum, neque jubeat ut ab illo abstineant, sed urgeat
potius ut in seipsos inquirant, and gratiae Dei sacramento se competenter
accommodent.

Though when as a single person had perpetrated and persisted in such a
notorious and execrable crime, as appeared horrible to the Gentiles, who yet
beheld it by a Dim light, then liberiore correptione and excommunicatione
judicat dignum, the Apostle strikes and blasts him with the thunderbolt of his
censures, ut poena ad unum, terror ad omnes; then cum inter dissimiles peccavit
-- cum congregationis ecclesiae multitudo ab eo crimine quo anathematizatur
aliena est, (as St. Augustine speaks.) But when the corruptions were great and
Epidemical, then the Apostle both suitably to the Aphorisms of Physic, which
prescribe that in statu morbi non est purgandum, sed praestat qu^escere; and
also si sanguis nimis corruptus est, Hippoc. 2. Apboris. 29. Sennertus Instit.
and ratione causae (cum hoc modo in cacochymiam exquisitam degeneraverit) and
ratione signi (cum vires imbecilles denunciet) venae sectio non convenit; and
also agreeable to the practice of Physicians, who in a Tympany dare not let out
at once all that corrupt water of the Belly, whence death would follow in stead
of health; so this Spiritual Physician does not drive them all at once from the
Communion, nor (as if to the reformation of that Church it had been necessary)
make them probationers for some time until they were readmitted to a
Church Fellowship upon demonstrations of Sanctity; but to his reproofs, his
doctrine, his exhortations, he only adds his mourning, Epist. 64. Tom. 2. p. 61.
Cum multos jam comperisset and immunda luxuria and fornicationibus inquinatos,
ad eosdem Corinthios in secunda epistola scribens, non itidem praecipit ut cum
talibus ne cibum sumerent, multi enim erant, nec de his poterat dicere, si quis
frater, etc. sed ait, ne iterum cum venero ad vos, Contra Parmen. l. 2. c. 3.
Tom. 7. p. 13.
humiliet me Deus and lugeam multos, etc. per luctum suum potius eos divino
flagello coercendos minans quam per illam correptionem, says the same Father;
and this pattern he commends to the imitation of every pious and prudent
Christian in like cases, patienter ferat and ex dilectione gemat and lugeat
donec ille desuper emendet, and corrigat, atque usque ad messem deferat
eradicare zizania, etc. And it is upon this account that a judicious Divine
observes, Mr. Balls answer to Can. part. 2. p. 57.
that the Apostles tolerated great abuses in private persons, which they could
not redress, doubtless they condemned the having many wives at once, but when
that Custom prevailed amongst Jews and Gentiles, they gave no command for the
casting such out of the Church, but only prohibited them to be chosen Bishops,
so as it is evident that what St. Augustine professes has been practiced in
all ages, Toleramus quae nolumus, ut perveniamus quo volumus.

If the Apologists could meet such an example, or find such an argument to
condemn promiscuous Communions, as might be fetched from Corinth to defend them
(cuivis licuit adire Corinthi) they would speak thunder and look lightning, and
in decrying mixed Communions, would mix Heaven and Earth, or rather set them
farther asunder, and yet at what distance soever, sublimi ferient sidera
vertice, Yet notwithstanding all their courses, togather and constitute a pure
and unmixed Church and Communion, will be like the course of the eighth Sphere,
which shall be finished only at the end of the World; in the mean time (as the
Chemists tell us) the lesser fire the purer Distillation, and this fire must
not be such a purging fire as the Schoolmen say the fire of the last
Conflagration shall be, thorough which all alive must pass to be purified, the
best as well as the worst, this fiery trial ought neither to be so violent nor
Universal; fire mollifies and hardens Steel according to the varieties and
intensions of heat, and so Rheubarbe if gently decocted, purges, if overmuch
it binds, and Galen tells us, that quaedam medicamenta pulverizata exlgua
quantitate ulceri inspersa cicatricem inducunt, eadem vero si largius
usurpantur carnem absumunt, and ulcus cavum efficient, et contra
cathaereticorum quaedam si parcius usurpentur in cicatricem inducunt, et fiunt
epulotica; so in Purgative Discipline a little may do much, and too much
nothing, leniter castigatus reverentiam exhibet castiganti, asperitatis autem
nimia increpatio nec increpationem recipit nec salutem, Council. 3. Can. 6.
says the Bracaren Council: What Arnoldus in his Aphorisms advises the
Corporal Physician, is as proper for the Spiritual, Prudens et pius Medicus
morbum ante expellere satagit cibis medicinalibus, quam puris medicinis --
nunquam properabit ad pharmaciam, nisi cogente necessitate, and especially
ought he to be sparing of Purgatives; Galen himself assuring us, Omne purgans
medicamentum corpori purgato contrarium, etc. succes et spiritus abducit,
substantiam corporis aufert; of them therefore that are so much for Purgatives,
when alteratives might do the Cure, that drive out so much of the pure Blood,
to expel the evil, which being left mixed with the other, might be perhaps
concocted and assimilated; we may say truly, plus periculi a Medico, quam a
morbo, the injustice of this repulse makes those sad that ought not to be sad,
and the commonness thereof strikes less shame into those that should be
ashamed, and while they are not convinced to merit it, they will despise the
censure, et contra audentius ibunt, and by degrees may some of them grow to
disesteem the Ordinance, which they are persuaded it is not their fault that
they cannot have, and will little fear to wax worse, since if they should do
so, they cannot fare much worse.

But they say, it is an unsound position, that a previous exhortation on the
Ministers part frees his soul, more is required of him, suspension is an
effectual means, and he must suspend such as he knows, or may know to be
wicked, or he defiles his own soul with other men's sins, more is also required
of the people, praying and informing and declaring among them. Chrysostom bids
them to deny the Sacrament to some, Ambrose kept often Theodesius, an Emperor,
which was more than admonishing. Resp. Paterculus says of Cato, He did well
because he could do no other; but it seems the Apologists do so often fall into
ignoratio elenchi, because they can do no other; for we do not say, that a
Previous exhortation is absolutely and universally sufficient, but respectively
for some persons, and especially such as are the most of those whom they repel,
and (Enough) exclusively to particular examination, not to just
excommunication, such as are notoriously flagitious, and obstinately so after
admonition, we shall not only concede, but commend the keeping of them back,
or casting of them out by the Church Officers, if it may possibly, and also
prudently be done, as we have formerly expressed; such vipers as are likely to
poison others, by a vicious example or manifest Scandal, we judge fit to be cut
off, and to make Triacle of them for the curing or preferving of others, Qui
non corrigit seipsum, alii corrigant se per ipsum; for such therefore we shall
grant that excommunication is more effectual Physic, and not gainsay that for
such as lie under a violent suspicion of such atrocious crimes till it be tried
and adjudged, whether they be guilty or not, suspension may be no unwholesome
preparative, and if the Officers have a power without obstruction, and the
exercise thereof may be without destruction (sine periculo schismatis) and cum
congrua, and quae unitatem non violat, disciplina, (as Augustine speaks,) and
yet if they do not their duty, the People notwithstanding have done their duty,
if they inform, admonish and reprove the Officers; (for even the Bells of Aaron
sometime need to be moved by others to make them sound) and do the like also to
the offenders, although they communicate with them in the Sacrament, or else
St. Augustine was deceived in his sense and application of Scripture, and with
him the Church, De verb. Dom. etc. Sermon. 18. Tom. 10 p. 18. et 19.
who spoke by his mouth against the Donatists, Duobus modis te non maculat
malus, st ei non consentias, and si redarguas -- objurgando liber est in
conspectu Dei, cui neque sua peccata Deus imputat, quia non fecit, neque aliena
quae non approbavit, neque negligentiam quia non tacuit, neque superbiam quia
in unitate permansit; But when that Discipline of casting out cannot be in such
manner exercised, and when they are many, who though their cleanness be not
according to the Purification of the Sanctuary, yet their defilements are not
notorious and Scandalous, so as to merit casting out, Aug. Contra Ep. Parm. l.
3. c. 2. tom. 7. p. 13. In. Psalm. 48. Tom. 8. p. 93. August. epist. 64. To. 2.
p. 61. Gratian Part. 1. de consecrat. d. 2. Fol. 417.
in these cases also we have a warrant from St. Augustine, that a previous
exhortation from the Pastor, is a compliance with his duty, for having advised,
Cum idem morbus plures occupaverit, -- homo patienter ferat, and ex dilectione
gemat atque lugeat, donec ille desuper emendet, etc. He adds turba iniquorum,
cum facultas est in populo promendi sermonem, generali objurgatione ferienda
est; and elsewhere says, exigitur a manducante quod manducat, non prohibeatur
manducare a dispensatore, sed moveatur timere exactorem; And such was his
advise to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage; Non ergo aspere quantum existimo, non
duriter, non modo imperioso ista tollantur, magis docendo quam jubendo, magis
monendo quam minando; And from Augustine Gratian takes the note to sing the same
tune, that the Stewards may not by any means keep back those Nimrods, and fat
ones of the Earth, from his Masters Table, but warn them fairly of the ensuing
danger: And a judgment and practice contrary hereunto, was that which sormed
and denominated the Schism of the Donatists, Qui cum cernerent in Ecclesiis
vitia, quae verbis quidem reprehenderent Episcopi, Instit. l. 4. c. 12. S. 12.
sed excommunicatione non plecterent, (quia non putabant se hac via quicquam
profecturos) in Episcopos atrociter invehebantur, tanquam Disciplinae
proditores, and a Christi grege impio schismate se dividebant, says judicious
Calvin. And therefore it is good counsel from Anselme on 1 Cor. 11. Itaque o
fratres mei, cavete jam indigne illud sumere; cavete cum schismate ad illud
convenire; and it is a grave observation of Moller, upon the 26. Psalm, where
it is said in the fifth Verse, I have hated the Congregation of Evildoers, and
will not sit with the Wicked; and it follows, v. 6. I will wash my hands in
Innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar, In Psalm. p. 214. Cont. Ep. Parm.
l. 3. c. 4.
O Lord; Est ante in hoc loco notandum (says he) quod David quanquam affirmet
se fugere consuetudinem impiorum, etc. tamen eorum odio non deserat Ecclesiam,
neque abdicat se a focietate divinitus mandata, in which tune Augustine was
praecentor chori, singing of David, etc. Lavabat manus cum innocentibus and
circumdabat altar Domini, Videtur alludere ad lotiones manuum quibus
sacrificaturi utebantur, vel ad veterem ritum lavandi manus cum se innocents
profiteri vellent. Menoch. Annot. in locum.
ideo quippe tolerabat nocentes, ne desereret innocents cum quibus manus
lavabat.

Yet the Fathers, they say, enjoined and practiced more; but for that, as the
Scythians stopped at the Sepulchers of their Fathers, to fight Darius; so we
have formerly made some stay at the Monuments of the Fathers, to defend them
from their violence; but the Apologists discourse, as if we denied the power of
Excommunication, or that this were the Poles of the Controversy between us:
Whereas we have often confessed with the mouth, and still believe in our heart,
the not only lawful, but profitable use of that Discipline; we contest not
with them for practicing this, but for not practicing it; not for casting out
those which have forfeited their Birthright by Conviction, or Attainder for
great Crimes; but disseising them, and keeping them out of their right, till
they recover it by a Trial before their Tribunals; not for tracing the old
Paths, but for treading out new ways; and not by the Line of the Fathers, who
will never father this suppositious Issue: Excommunication is indeed the Child
of Antiquity, and the Pedigree thereof may be traced like Adam's, to the
ancient of days; and since Non est mortale quod opto, I seek not Humane
Inventions, but reverence and submit to those of Divine Original, Hoc erat in
votis; but if a Serpent shall catch up this Child, and interpose it between
himself and our Darts, to stop or divert them; we hope to appear such
marks-men, as can wound the Serpent, yet not hurt the Child; but when they
should prove their way of suspending whole Congregations (not some few
particular persons) and upon a general charge only of unworthiness, no
special Crimes or Evidence, and put them to prove their right, before it might
be justly questioned, this which is the Hinge whereon the weight of the
Controversy lies, and the Center whereunto the Lines should tend and move,
they slip over this improvisum aspris veluti qui sentibus anguem Pressit, and
insist upon the power of excommunicating persons scandalous, which is not
controverted, Haec sunt tua Candide (...), Quae tu magniloquus nocte dieque
sonas, but having nothing else to speak to any purpose, they are still saying
this, though it be nothing to the purpose. But we shall say as in like case St.
Augustine said of the Donatists, Ita vos putant non habere cor, ut non
intelligatis eos omnino non esse superatos quando vobis ea dicunt, quae omnino
non dicerent, si aliquid utile quod dicerent invenirent.

But it is not inconsiderable, that Ambrose his keeping of the Emperor
Theodosius, is singled out as the only Example of Antiquity, where this
Discipline was so frequently and constantly exercised, as if they would strike
the more terror by so formidable a precedent, and make the greatest know, they
must be awed by that Power which coerced an Emperor: Novus per pectora cunctis
Insinuat pavor; but if they would write after this Copy, we should not blame
their hand; but such Letters would be like Bellerophon's, Davenant. determinat.
q. 48. p. 233. Willer Synop. Cont. 4. q. 8. p. 204.
destructive to themselves, and their present way. To Ambrose they have
appealed, to him let them go; not therefore to question the proceedings de
jure, in this particular case, which some will not approve of, that suppose,
however soeveraign Princes are absolutely excommunicable; yet for some
respects, not practically to be excommunicated, especially with the greater
Excommunication.

In the additions to Aquinas, there is cited the Gloss of Augustine upon Mat.
13. which says, That the Prince and a multitude, are not to be excommunicated.
And reges si aliquando potestate abutantur, non sunt a nobis exasperandi, sed
ubi sacerdotum admonitionibus non acquieverunt, divino judicio sunt reservandi,
says Ivo Carnotensis; and therefore they suppose, that Ambrose herein exceeded
his limits, especially (which is the judgment of a greater number) if he
undertook by his sole power to excommunicate an Emperor, unless it proceeded
from some extraordinary spirit; or as if he were prompted thereunto by such an
Angel as Jvo says, an Arrian saw suggesting to him, when he preached, and now
sent forth some of that fire which Paulinus his Secretary is said to have seen
to enter into his mouth; but indeed he seems to have done it by the counsel
and public judgment of the whole Church of God in Italy, 11. q. 3.
as the Ecclesiastical History declares in Gratian, Ob hoc, cum a sacerdotibus
Italiae redargueretur, agnovit delictum; but howsoever allowing him his sting
as well as his honey (which were both emblem'd by the Bees that swarmed on his
Infant-lips;) and to insist on the matter de facto, they may please to take
notice;

First, That Theodosius had perpetrated a notable great Crime, Cent. Magdeb
cent. 4. c. 13. p. 847. Tom. 2. Contr. 4. q. 4. p. 626, 627.
Quae sit atrocitas a te commissi facinoris, says Ambrose to him, rem faedam
commisit, -- propter tumultum temere Thessalonicae concitatum, misit milites
suos, qui ejus jussu, magnam promiscue multitudinem, cives, peregrinos,
nocentes, innocents trucidarunt, atque ita propter tumultum paucorum, septem
millia hominum perierunt, in the words of Whitaker; so as this was no light or
ordinary fault, but an execrable offense, Non delictum, sed scelus, as Calvin
distinguishes.

Secondly, the matter was notorious by Evidence of Fact, Baldwin. cas. l. 4. c.
10. p. 1127. Willet ubi supra.
and the Emperor also confessed it; so as the proceeding, as it was judicial,
so it was just and rightly grounded; not bottomed or carried on upon
suspicions, light Conjectures, or fallible Reports.

Thirdly, the Emperor was by Ambrose excommunicated, not only suspended, L.
2. obs. 15. p. 295. Tom. 2. l. 5. c. 13, S. 3.
de Theodosii imperatoris excommunicatione and octo mensium poenitent^a memoria
proditum est, says Albaspinus: He was forbidden to enter the Church, Occurrit
ei ad vest bulum, prohibuit ingredi sacra limina, says Chamier out of
Theodoret; he was scarce allowed to look on the Church, Qu^bus oculis aspicies
communis Domini Templum; not at all permitted to conjoyn in the Prayers of the
Church, Quomodo manus extendere stillantes injusto sanguine; he was set among
the Penitents; In luctu and lamentatione menses octo exegit, regio ornatu
deposito, nec post tantum tamen temporis receptus prius est, Cent. 4. c. 10. p.
673. and c. 3. p. 82.
nisi ab Ambrosio iterum duriter reprehensus, doloris sui in Templi vestibulo
in pavimentum se dejiciens and plorans, certa fecit indicia, ac in loco
poenitentium subsistere non recusavit, say the Centurists; and elsewhere
poenitentiae curriculo completo ad Templum postea cum lachrymis rediit -- in
terram pronus se prosternens ac cum Davide orans, Adhaesit pavimento anima mea,
De civit. Dei l. 5. c. 26. tom. 5. p. 70.
etc. receptus ab Ambrosio, populo pro eo deprecante, (all according to the
mode of the Penitents) so as imperatoriam celsitudinem (says Augustine) pro
illo populus orans, magis fleret videndo prostratam, quam peccando timeret
iratam: By which it appears, that this was fully an Excommunication, a casting
out from all Communion, not a suspension from the Sacrament only, with an
admission to join in the Assemblies, and to partake of other Ordinances. When
they shall in all these particulars reconcile their way to this example of
Ambrose, we shall be reconciled to their way; but when they shall do that, Jam
gryphes jungantur equis, aevoque sequenti, Cum canibus timidi vement ad pocula
damae.

The society wherein the wicked are is corrupted, defiled, and leavened, (not
to justle with the Hypothesis, as that they are wicked whom they keep off,
which themselves will not speak of many of them; but say only they are
inconformable to their Disciplinarian Trial; nor to tell them that the Apostle
in the place they respect, by Leaven, understands quod est lethale and
contagiosum, non est fermentum Apostolo quod potest tolerari) we acknowledge
that evil society is a Malignant Planet, Camero de Eccles. p. 328.
when it is auctus lumine, and shows it self formally as evil; but why it
should especially shed its influence at the Sacrament, as if it were their
only Topical, is beyond our Astrology. Such as they communicate not with in
the Lords Supper, to them there is not denied either os, orare vale, mensa,
they hold Fellowship with them in other Ordinances, they refuse not civil
commerce with them; and if they entertain them not at their own Tables, yet
they deny not (being invited) to eat with them at other Tables, Why then should
the Lords Table only become a snare, or trap or stumbling block to them? They
do not there see them give any evil Example, that Malignant Planet is there
minutus lumine, or combustus; and why should not there, the exemplary Devotion
of others reflect and infuse some goodness into them, since also bonum est sui
diffusivum. And the Aspects of Malignant Planets are somewhat meliorated, when
they are in conjunction with those that are of benign influence, Ecclesia
membra impura in se habet eisdemque interdum circumfluit, Ecclesiast. l. 1. c.
4. tom. 1. p. 1938, 1939.
says Junius (who speaks words which quatiuntque summos fuimina montes)
quicunque ex Ecclesia visibili sunt, iidem revera sunt ex Ecclesia Catholica,
eosque haberi aequum est in membris Catholicae -- i am vero (ut ait
Chrysostomus) ob hoc ipsum Deus (...) ita constituit omnes homines promiscue
and bonos and malos in unum coalescere; ut and horum vitium resecetur, and
illorum virtus reddatur illustrior; and out of C^prian he alleges, Obesse
mali bonis non debent, sed magis mali a bonis adjuvari; and the wise Heathen
could say, Bonorum virorum conversatio paulatim in pectus descendit, Caten.
aur. in Mat. 13. p. 56.
and vim obtinet praeceptorum, and est aliquid quod a magno viro vel tacente
proficias. And as Aquinas tells us out of Augustine, that boni dum adhuc infirmi
sunt, opus habent in quibusdam malorum commixtione, sive ut per eos
exerceantur, sive ut eorum comparatione magna illis exhortatio fiat, and
invitentur ad melius. So also the hope that the Unbeleeving Husband might be
sanctified by the Believing Wife, that is converted, as Augustine, Theodoret,
Lira, Carthusian, Hammond, Lapide, etc. Or, the assurance that he was
sanctified, that is, not polluted, or defiled; as Chrysostom, Anselme,
Paraeus, Calvin, etc. was a stronger motive with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. to keep
them together, than the fear of being leavened, or corrupted, or made partaker
of his sins, was a persuasive to depart from each other. And there is beside
more danger of Contagion from them in ordinary Conversation, which is more
frequent, and insinuative, and where they are less strict and composed, and
where the virtual Contact may disperse the Contagion; and therefore to keep at
distance there rather, may be a wholesome caution. That of 1 Cor. 5.11. with
such a one, no not to eat, I hope to show in due place, to be meant only of
common and civil eating; and therefore to strengthen and maintain the Nerves of
that Argument, a minori ad majus, such as they refuse to communicate with at
the Lords Supper, they should not participate with at Common Meals. En rogat
ad coenam melior te Classice rectam, Grandia verba, ubi sunt si vir es, ecce
nega. The unclean persons under the Law, were not only suspended from the
Passcover, but also proscribed the Tabernacle; yea some of them put out of the
Camp, Numb. 5.2. and they collect an argument from that precedent to exclude
men from the Sacrament; therefore the force of the same Reason will require
that they be propelled out of the Church also; and seeing those who once have
swollen into a Wisdom beyond Sobriety, and have strayed beyond measured and
fixed Bounds, Unde discedant fortasse facilius sentiant, quam ubi consistant
inveniant, these arguments perchance be at length dilated and expanded, to
infer not only a necessity of exiling them from all Fellowship in any Sacred
Ordinance, but of interdicting them of all Secular Commerce, and of having any
compliance with them in civil usages, and transport some not only to like
superstition and stubborness with the Donatists, who would not sit in the
Assembly of the Orthodox, because it was said Psalm. 25. (as the Vulgar Latin
reckoned it) Non sedi consilio impiorum; and who as Optatus told them, would
scarce have had Heaven and Earth in common with them: but to like inhumanity
and desperateness with Mr. Gresnold (whom Mr. Ball mentions,) who of a
Separatist turned more than an Anchorite, and would neither commerce, nor speak
with, or receive ordinary food or help, from those whom he thought wicked, or
not called, and which might pollute him, till he and his Children were starved
or perished for want of necessaries.

But they have in readiness a Reason, why the Wicked more defile the Sacrament,
than the Word, because Gods Word allows a visible mixture at the one, not at
the other; but we expected they would have brought forth some Arguments to have
proved, that ex natura rei, a Communion with wicked men (though this he
excentrick with our present subject, which is not of men manifestly wicked, but
not evidently godly) had been more influxive and apt to pollute at the
Sacrament, than at the Word; but at this Obstupuit retroque pedem cum voce
repressit; and it seems only that the difference resulteth not from the
contagion, but the unlawfulness of the one, more than the other; which
unlawfulness they say was plainly proved before, but sure, if they made any
plain proof, that any which were put from the Sacrament, lest they might else
have polluted it, or the partakers thereof, were yet allowed by Gods Word to
have public communion in the Word, without any danger of such pollution, their
Book has met with the Index Expurgatory before it came to us, for there are
now no such passages therein legible.

The Errors of Novatus, and others, the distinguishing of the Church visible
from the invisible, the estate of the Church here, all this they yield, and yet
can see nothing gained upon them. Resp. A dangerous symptom, for Hippocrates
tells us, that quibus cerebrum concussum fuerit and doluerit, percussis aut
aliter lapsis, statim privantur voce, non vident, non audiunt ac fere
moriuntur, but they will not so easily purge themselves of Donatisme, while
they suppose a Communion in Sacraments with evil men, without consent in evil,
does pollute or commaculate; for Cur Ecclesiae non communicate pars Donati?
says Augustine, videlicet ne a peccatoribus polluatur -- orbem christianum per
communionem sacramentorum maculatum peccatis criminabantur alienis; Contra
Crescon. l. 3. c. 65. and l. 4. c. 1. etc. 28.
but he tells them, Etiamsi vera atque peccata sunt, bonorum societatem
maculare non possunt, neque enim boni communicant peccatis alienis, quibus
utique faciendis non consentiant, quamvis cum ipsis qui ea faciunt, donec area
dominica, sicut palea, ventilabro ultimo separentur, non eorum peccata sed Dei
sacramenta communicent. We shall howsoever endeavor that they may not only
recipere totum telum, but also be sensible of the stroke and the wound.

First, they grant what the Paper proposed, that to forsake the Assemblies, or
to make a separation, because of the mixture of evil men, was the Heresy of
Donatus, Audius, etc. But what it tacitly assumed, that they were guilty of a
like separation upon like grounds, that they think they may be confident to
deny. But although perhaps there be not such an exact agreement between them
and those Heretics, as they say there was among the 72. Interpreters, who
though in several Cells, yet punctually accorded in the same Translation; yet
that there is some conformity in judgment and affection between them, as they
write there is among those, between whom there is a Synastry, and who have the
same common Stars and influences at their Nativities: if themselves will not
see, we hope to make others to discern; for first, they separate from those
which by no judicial process are separated from them, so did those Heretics.
2. Their separation is carried on by the same motives, for they confess that
diverse of their members have forsaken Communion with their proper
Congregations, Centur. Magd. cent. 4. c. 5. p. 208. L. de unic. bapt. c. 14. S.
9.
because they were offended with the grossness of the Administrations at home,
where no separation was made, just as Theodoret tells of the Audians,
Recedereque a communione Ecclesiastica dicebant quod in illa ferrentur
faeneratores and impuri; and right as Augustine, and others (elsewhere
alleged) show us of the Donatists, that they separated from other constituted
Churches, because of the mixture of godly and wicked persons in one Communion,
and because some whom they thought of right ought to have been so, were not in
Fact excommunicated. 3. That Reason the Apologists have backed with a second,
adding, that the commixture of the Wicked with the Godly, defiles and
polluteth; and therefore they refuse Communion with them in the Sacrament. And
these were the very Dictates and Arguings of the Novatians and Donatists,
Centur. Magd. cent. 3. c. 3. p. 71. ubi supra.
as Cyprian and Augustine inform us, In communione sacramentorum mali maculant
bonos, etc. so as plainly the lives of the one and other are paralels, though
in a different Meridian. If to excuse themselves from symbolizing with those
Heretics, they shall allege that they do not suppose the Church either
should, or can, be constituted of such as are free from all sin, but such as
are clear of Crimes, not who are really, but only who are visibly worthy: We
shall re-minde them, that those Heresiarchs were pure from so gross an error,
as to think there were no Hypocrites in the Church, or that all of their
Societies were pure without mixture, or perfect without defect; neither did
they pretend to have read the Book of Life, to know who were Elect, nor presume
to know the hearts, (Gods peculiar) and to discern who were Hypocrites; but
they would admit of communion with none whom they could distrust to be culpable
in any sin; or that had not a visible worthiness (as the Apologists would
qualify their members) they would not communicate with those they judged to be
impure, as is mentioned of the Audians, though they were not yet cast out, nor
thought fit to be so.

-- Mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur. -- Secondly, If to vindicate
themselves they shall suggest, that they admit such to Church Fellowship in
other Ordinances, and only deny it in the holy Supper (besides that some men
may build higher upon the like Foundation, and run farther in the same way)
we must remember them, Sociari, cohaerere, fratres esse, misceri, in and by a
Communion of Sacraments; and St. Cont. Ep. Parmen. l. 3. c. 2. tom. 7. p. 12,
and 13.
Augustine tells us, that Cyprian and alia frumenta Dominica, quod in illa tunc
unitatis Ecclesia cum avaris and rapacibus, cum his qui regnum Dei non
possidebant -- panem Domini manducabant and calicem Domini bibebant, (which
frustrates any interposition that this Communion of Sacraments was only in the
one Sacrament, and not in the other,) and that they were together not only
unam cum iis intrantes Ecclesiam, but also in una Congregatione paria
tractantes sacramenta; for quia non poterant ab iis corporaliter separari, ne
similiter eradicarent and triticum, sufficiebat iis a talibus cord se^ungi,
vita moribusque distingui, propter compensationem custodiendae pacis and
unitatis, propter salutem infirmorum and tanquam lactentium frumentorum, ne
membra corporis Christi per sacrilega schismata laniarent; and as it is not
Ecclesiastical Communion, but Schism, rather in the judgment of Mr. Ball, to
use the one Ordinance, and not the other; Cited before.
and they are not to be reckoned of the body of Christ, which are unworthy to
eat the Body Christ in the Sentence of Chamier; so Casaubon tells us farther,
Exercit. 6. S. 52. p. 145.
Eos 'qui ad Christianismum adspirarent, priusquam sacramentorum facti essent
participes, neque esse, neque dici posse, Christianos, neque ad Ecclesiam
pertinere, -- aditum, -- per baptismum, sed neque satis hanc semel esse
ingressum sed -- oportere and conjungi Christo -- per sacramentalem ejus
manducationem. L. de Pastorib. c. 13. p. 221. tom. 9.
They were not by Antiquity held or named Fideles, that did not partake of the
Eucharist, the Celebration whereof was therefore called Missa fidelium?
Quaeris, says Augustine, ne forte Catechumenus irruat sacramentis? Respondet,
fidelis, which implies, that every of the faithful (which was a member
contradistinguish'd from the Catechumens) and only those that had the name of
Faithful, used to communicate; neither were they esteemed Brethren that were
not partakers of the Sacrament; L. 1. obs. 19. p. 141.
for so Albaspinus tells us, that the Penitents and Catechumens were not called
Brethren by the Faithful; so as the denomination being taken a fortiori, it
cannot be absolutely called Church Fellowship, that is without Communion of
Sacraments, which is employed and tacitly assented unto even by themselves, who
call those only the Church, whom they admit to the Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ.

Thirdly, if to defend themselves, they shall interpose that they separate not
from the Catholic Church, but from corrupt Congregations, I shall admonish
them, that seeing the public Worship is not sinful; but it is only pretended
that sinners are admitted to a Communion therein, and those that are pure may
join in that Worship, without concurring in any sin, save that which they
suppose is contracted only by a Communion with such men, though not in evil
(but rather in that which in it self is good) and formally as it is a Communion
only with those that are evil; That to separate on this account, was both the
root and pith of the Schism of the Donatists, who did not own any separation
from the Catholic Church, but impropriated that Church to themselves, and
held Communion with many Churches of their Model, but separated from others,
and therefore might have put in the same Plea with this; but seeing those
Churches from which the Apologists separate, are Members of the Catholic
Church (as till they be cut off juridice aut jure they are so) and in this
consideration, Eadem est ratio partium and totius, and all Members are
conjoined to the Body; See more of this
therefore if they separate from any such particular members, they divide from
the body of the Catholic Church, as I have before proved by the authority of
Junius, ab hac illave Ecclesia, i.e. membro particularis corporis ex
infirmitate particulari.

Next, that they remove the ancient Landmark of that distinction between the
Church of the Called, and that of the Elect, may be discerned by any that
passes by their way. There are many externally called, who are only relative
and notional Saints; Saints in the judgment of Charity, because they have given
their names to Christ, entered into an outward Covenant with God, and do make
profession of their Faith, but such as are effectually called, and are united
to Christ in virtue, as well as profession; and in whom the Spirit of Christ is
operative by influence of grace and salvation, such only are Elect Saints,
real Saints in verity. Now if they will admit none to an entire
Church Fellowship (which is not, as was said, without Communion of Sacraments,
others that communicate not, being not owned by themselves to be of the Church)
save such as give demonstrative signs that they are elected, do they not (
quantum ad hominem, though it be impossible quoad rem) contract the Church of
the Called, and make it no more extensive than that of the Elect, and turn
those many that are called, into a few that are chosen: sure I think this
cannot but be visible to any, unless to one Cui lumen ademptum.

And by this means also there may be multi hirci intus, multae oves for as.
Hom. Deonibus tom. 9. p. 224.
Since as Augustine meekly, scit praedestinatione and praescientia oves, and
hircos, ille solus, qui praedestinare potuit, qui praescire -- si autem multas
oves for as errare plangimus, vae quorum humeris and lateribus and cornibus
factum est, non enim haec facerent nisi fortes oves; quae sunt fortes? de suis
viribus praesumentes; quae sunt fortes? de sua justitia gloriantes -- humeris
audaces ad impellendum, quia non portant sacrinam Dei, latera mala,
conspirantes amici, societas pertinaciae, cornua erecta, elata superbia, --
mitte for as quod non emisti, certe ipsa tota causa est, quia tu justus, and
alii injusti, and indignum erat ut justus esset cum injustis, indignum scilicet
ut frumenta essent inter zizania, indignum ut oves inter hircos pascerentur,
donec Pastor veniret, qui in separando non errat; ita tu angelus eradicans
zizania, non te agnoscerem angelum zizania eradicantem, nec si jam messis
venisset, ante messem non tu sed quisquis fuerit, non est verus, qui designavit
messem, designavit and tempus -- angeli tibi nomen potes impoere, tempus messis
non potes breviare, ita falsum dicis qui sis, quia nondum venit quando sis --
noli velle zizania eradicare, quando tempus non est, sed tu ipse intro redi cum
tempus est, -- cornua sunt ista ventilantis, non mansuetudo pascentis -- non
expectas finem, nesciens quando tibi sit finis, unde hoc? nisi quia and ipsos
tanquam hircos accusasti, falso accusasti, nam si vere accusasses, non te
separasses, tua separatio illorum est purgatio.

Lastly, for the state of the Church, Exponere similitudinem istam ne conati
quidem sunt -- illam similitudinem -- omnino attingere nolucrant -- Brevic.
collat. cum Donatist. tom. 7. p. 117. Cont. Donat. post. collat. c. 7. p. 122.
tom. 7.
which is a floor where chaff is heaped with Wheat, a Field where Tares grow
intermixed with Wheat, a Net where bad Fish is involved with good, etc. most of
those similitudes Quibus Dominus suorum servorum tolerantiam confirmavit (as
Augustine) they, like the Donatists of old, (whose Copy it seems they have
chosen to write after) will take no notice of, as any way concerning them; but
I doubt it is only nihil ad nos, because supra nos; and they do not answer
it, because they cannot, durum, sed levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere est
nesas; for seeing Ecclesiastical Communion is described by a Society in the
Sacraments, and therein principally is constituted; and if there shall be a
commixtion of evil men with good, not only in the Congregation, but also in
Una Congregatione paria Sacramenta tractantes, as was even now alleged out of
Augustine; and not only in the Word, but as idem verbum Dei simul audiunt, so
also simul Dei sacramenta percipiunt: then whatever they suggest to the
contrary, thus much is gained hereby, (which will be on their part the loss of
the question.)

First, that none ought to be so offended with the grossness of their
Administrations at home where no separation is made; as thereupon to remove,
August. de verb. Dom. in Evang. Matthew. Sermon. 18. tom. 10. p. 18.
and separating from them, to gather themselves into another Church, (which yet
they confess to be the case of diverse of them) the Corn lay fast in the same
Floor with the Chaff; and that only was volatile, Non vos seducant perversi,
paleae nimis leves avolant ante adventum ventilatoris ex area; and therefore he
directs elsewhere, ex eo ubies, disce quid es, and consequently advises,
nemo ante tempus ventilationis deserat aream, In Psalm. 25. tom. 8. p. 26.
Brevicul. collat. cum Donat. 3. die. tom. 7. p. 117. Cont. Donat. post collat.
c. 6. tom. 7. p. 122. In Psalm. 149. tom. 8. p. 360.
quasi dum non vult pati peccatores, ne praeter aream inventus, prius ab avibus
colligatur, quam ingrediatur in horreum, the good Fishes break not the Net to
get out from the bad, Commixtos bonis malos intra retia suorum sacramentorum;
And this commixture will continue while we are in the Sea of this World, intra
eadem retia, donec ad littus perveniant, pariter divina sacramenta percipiunt,
then shall the separation be, when the Nets shall be without hazard of breach
of Schism; the Wheat grows still in the midst of the Tares, so the Vulgar
reads it, ( Nunquam in part triticum, in part zizan^a, per totum triticum,
per totum zizania, says Augustine; and again, Unius communionis sunt -- and
communione Sacramentorum participandorum cohaerent, as is elsewhere alleged)
and this Wheat transferres not it self into another field, and that field where
both grow together, is the Church, as the Catholics asserted in their
Disputation with the Donatists; for the Commons of the World will bear no
Wheat, Quaest. in Mat. tom. 4. p. 78. q. 11. C. 28. tom. 1. p. 11.
that grows only in the Enclosure of the Church, extra exclesiam soli sunt
mali; and the Angels shall gather out of his Kingdom all Scandals, and them
which do iniquity; therefore they were in that Kingdom, which is the Church,
as Augustine acknowledges in his Retractations; and though our Savior
interpret the Field to be the World, it was (says Calvin) only by a
Synecdoche, transferring that to the whole, which agreed only to a part, and
especially Quoniam passim aratrum suum ducturus erat per omnes mundi plagas, ut
sibi agros excoleret in toto mundo: and because, says Estius, Ante jactum
bonum semen non potest intelligi Ecclesia, quae constat ex fructu seminis,
Annot. in Mat. 13.
i.e. tritico, propterea dicitur semen jactum in agrum, id est, mundum, non in
Ecclesiam ex semine construendam; and therefore out of those Premises it was,
that St. Augustine concluded, (as is formerly rehearsed) Cum ergo sive per
negligentiam praepositorum, De fide and operib. c. 105. tom. 4. p. 13.
sive per aliquam excusabilem necessitatem, sive per occultas obreptiones
invenimus in Ecclesia malos, quos Ecclesiastica Disciplina corrigere aut
coercere non possumus, tunc non ascendat in cor nostrum impia and perniciosa
praesumptio, qua existimemus nos ab his esse separandos, ut peccati^ eorum non
inquinemur, atque ita post nos trahere conemur, veluti mundos sanctosque
discipulos ab unitatis compage, quasi a malorum consortio segregatos; and as
the motive hereunto, he adds, Veniant in mentem illae de Scripturis
similitudin^s etc.

Secondly, De fide and operib. c. 105. tom. 4. p. 13.
it is consequent from hence that the mixed communion in Sacraments of the evil
with the good, does neither (as they suggest) defile the Sacraments, nor
corrupt or commaculate the Assemblies, nihil bonis in unitate and
participatione Sacramentorum qui eorum factis non consenserint obfuturos, as
Augustine infers, they were still good nets and good fishes though evil fish
was included in them; it was the Lords floor, and it was corn though compiled
with chaff; it was wheat though interserted with tares, and it was to be
gathered at last into the barn, Quibus parabolis and figuris Ecclesia
praenunciata est usque in finem seculi, bonos and malos simul habitura, ita ut
nec mali bonis obesse possint, cum vel ignorantur, vel pro pace and
tranquillitate Ecclesiae tolerantur, -- si eos prodi, aut accusari non
oportuerit, aut aliis bonis non potuerit demonstrari -- non itaque polluunt
mali bonos in eodem agro, in eadem area, in iisdem pascuis, in iisdem retibus
constituti, quia non iis communicant boni, sed altari and Sacramentis Dei, as
it follows afterward, Custodit D^us innocentiam sanctorum and fidelium suorum,
Coatra, Donat. post Coll. c. 4.5.10. p. 12, 21 23, 124. tom. 7.
sicut piscium bonorum, sicut pinguium frumentorum, ut intra ista retia non iis
noceant permixta genera reprobanda, and in ista area non iis nocent permixta
palea ventilanda, -- quia nec causa causae, nec personae poterit praejudicare
persona -- non corporalis sed spiritualis contactus, qui sit per consensionem,
ipse polluit homines quorum causam unam facit ipsa consensio.

3. Although nec emendationis vigilantia quiescat, nor those acts of discipline
be laid asleep which may be exercised salva unitatis pace -- sicut enim and
disciplina servat patientiam, and patientia temperat disciplinam, and utrumque
refertur ad Charitatem, ne forte aut indisciplinata patientia foveat
iniquitatem, aut impatiens disciplina dissipet unitatem, and therefore that
Sinite utraque simul crescere usque ad messem, is no supersedeas for any
particular man, whose crime is known to all, and appears execrable to all, as
Augustine speaks, Cont. ep. Parm. l. 3. c. 2. Annot. In Matthew. 13.
but that such rank overgrown and notorious tares, may in due manner be weeded
out, Excessus peccatorum justa severitate plectantur (as Estius,) as well by the
Ecclesiastic as Civil powers, when metus iste non subest of rooting up the
wheat, and where per culum schismatis nullum est -- sed omnino de frumentorum
c^rta stabilitate certa securitas manet, In Matthew. 13.
yet it is a prohibition for the generality of wicked men, says Deodate,
prohiberi extirpationem malorum omnium in genere, says Jans^nius, restraining
either power, ut semel et simul omnes malos separet, says Estius, many whereof
are not so perverse, but their salvation may be hoped, and many belonging to
Gods Election are to be converted in due time, neither is it possible or
expedient, corporally to separate all evil men from the good, all endeavors in
order to such forestalling the Angels work by a perfect separation and taking
away all scandals, will be frustrate in the success, and superstitious and
unwarrantable in the undertaking, In reformatione Ecclesiae nimiam (...)
sectantes plus nocent quam profint Ecclesiae, In locum. Ecclesiast. l. 3. c. 2.
tom. 1. p. 1967.
says Paraeus, quod si per severitatem censurae Ecclesiasticae periculum
superventurum Ecclesiae videatur, presbyterium patienter ferto, quod cum pace
Ecclesiae nequit corrigere, ne cum Z^zaniis triticum extirpetur, adds Junius,
Colligere volens Zizania simul cum iis eradicet triticum, et nec sic quidem
quod volet efficiet, ut Zizania a tritico separet, sed magis triticum, id est,
Contra ep. Parmen. l. 3. c. 2. Tom. 7. p. 13. De verb. Dom. in Evang. scrm. in
Matthew. Sermon. 18. tom. 10. p. 19.
seipsum and alios in Zizania perverso separationis studio convertet, as Estius
infers, agreeably to what Augustine long before had taught, non per diligentiam
segetem dominicam purgant, sed per temeritatem potius inter purgamenta
numerentur, and therefore cum ipse dixit, Sinite utraque crescere, cum ipse
dixit messores angeli, ipse cujus est ager, qui sevit bonum semen, -- non te
permittet Dominus interpretari quod vis, ipse qui exponit hanc parabolam
claudit os tuum, os sacrilegum, os impium, os profanum, os tibi contrarium, qui
contradicis testatori, etiam te ad haereditatem vocanti; quomodo claudit os
tuum? dicendo, Sinite utraque crescere usque ad messem; and elsewhere, ipse
nondum separat, tu vis separare, ipse mixta tolerat qui seminavit, -- servi si
vel in ipsis zizaniis evellendis aliquid sua sponte facerent, ipsi zizaniis
annumerentur -- tolera, ad hoc enim natus es, De ovibus tom, 9. p. 223.
tolera quia forte toleratus es, si semper bonus fuisti, habeto misericordiam,
si aliquando malus fuisti, noli perdere memoriam -- si ego, qui semper recte
judico and qui falli non possum, differo judicium meum, tu ignorans,
quemadmodum judicandus sis, audes tam praepropere judicare -- modo ergo tempus
separationis non est, sed tolerationis.

And consentiently with all those, Annot. in Mat. 13.14.
judicious Grotius, Quanquam vero certissimum est hoc Christi dicto, non
magistratibus publica judicia adimi, quae malos formidine poenae coerceant,
neque Ecclesiae jus segregandi a suis coetibus eos qui Doctrinam adulterant,
aut vitae turpitudine maculant Christianum nomen, tamen quia levitas and
patientia divina aliqua saltem ratione omnibus hominibus, atque inter cateros,
etiam Magistratibus and Ecclesiae praepositis imitanda proponitur, minime
dubitandum -- quoties magnus erat peccatorum numerus atque inter eos, ut fit,
multi excusabiliter prolapsi, remissum aliquid de rigore Disciplinae multis
exemplis probari possit.

Clearly therefore, while they unchurch the generality of their People, suspend
them (and as they say, in effect, because they suspect their lives) from the
Lords Table; any so by denying them to eat of his Bread, imply them to be none
of his Family, and hold them unworthy of a Communion of Sacraments, which is
the Bond and Knot of Church Fellowship, since they raise such tempestuous
Winds and Storms, as blow away the whole heap at once, Chaff and Corn
together, and so fall under Augustine's Censure, Tuo vento pessime
ventilaberis, and will not suffer their Net (that has too narrow a Mash) to
gather out of every kind, Ubi supra de evibus.
good and evil, says Deodate, Tam ex putridis quam ex bonis piscibus, as
Piscator, but will be gathering Churches only of approved Saints, and out of
an unwarrantable zeal (stomachati adversus zizania) to gather up the Tares,
have rooted up all the Wheat, save five or six Blades in their large Fields,
where were used to grow so many Hundreds: indubitably therefore this practice
of theirs, is so diametrally opposite to those Parables in the scope and formal
part of them, which is unquestionably argumentative, Estius.
(of all which I may say as a learned man has said of one of them, Videtur
haec Parabola dirigi contra futuros haereticos, qui tantae essent superbiae ut
nullorum malorum communionem, in Ecclesia admitterent, dicerentque solos bonos
esse in Ecclesia, and si qui mali in eam irrepsissent, continuo ojiciendos
esse, ut Donatistae and alii similes) and does so sensibly clash with those
Rules and Consectaries, which Augustine has extracted from them; who as it is
said of Aristomenes, that he being judged by the Oracle to be the best man of
Greece, was the best man of the World; so he being Praecentor Chori, and
Prolocutor of the Church in their Contests with the Donatists, was as congruous
and as competent an Interpreter, as any whatsoever, of the sense of these
Scriptures, so much agitated and disserted among them, (and therefore I have
chosen to speak so much from his mouth) Os d'gnum aeterno tinctum quod fulgeat
auro,) that for the Apologists to face it out, that nothing is hereby gained
upon them, is but a piece of craft taken up of such Merchants, who being like
to break in their Credits, dissemble their losses.

That of the Net they touch not with, lest they be taken with it; the heap,
they leap over, being not to be removed out of the way, but that of the Tares
they think to tread down or pu^l up, and tell us, That Tares signify not
profane men but hypocrites, such as come so near Christians as they cannot
distinguish them, De plantis sacris, c. 46. Cum fructum fecisset, id est, cum
Ecclesia ministri malos bonis admixtos esse ex pravic eorum actionibus
deprehon-dissent. M^n^c. annot. in loc: Brevical. Collat. 3. die tom. 7. p.
118. Offendicula tam in doctrina tum in moribus. Beza. Quos vocat scandala and
qui qui faciunt niquitatem quia nempe sua impia vita and doctrina sunt and sibi
and aliis scandalo. (i.) Offendidiculo and ruinae ex hac expositione quae est
est Christi patet non hic agi de solis hereticis -- agitur in genere de omnibus
peccatoribus. Tirin. Sermon. 233. de temp. etc. tom. 10. p. 229.
which are like the wheat in growing up, but scandalous men are not like
believers. It is not clear what kind of weed Zizania is, some say the word is
originally Arabic, others Syriack, and indeed the Greek Etymologists are not
very happy in the derivation, many tell us, it is the same with infoelix
Lolium, Cockle or Darnel,, and because some of the Fathers thought those Tares
to be Heretics, some would fain fetch from hence the origin of that name
Lollards, whereby the Papists called such as opposed their errors,
superstitions and usurpations. Diodate thinks it was a kind of hurtful plant
which spoiled the corn in Palestine, and was great and grew in branches, and is
unkown in these days. Lemnius, he sacred Herbalist tells us, Ziz aniorum
nomine designatur omnis inutilis, vitiosa, noxia fruticatio, ^uae sementi and
frugum incremento officis, and correspondently Castalion translates it, malas
herbas. It is not like then that it was like wheat, but if we should allow it
to have been so in the growing up, yet we must remind them, that it was after
the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, and appeared to be Tares, and
they were discerned plainly to be such by the servants who would have pulled
them up; that after this it was said by the Householder, Let both grow together,
etc. had they at first stood there under the protection of hypocrisy, yet now
that mask was fallen off, and that varnish lost, Nec latere sed cerni, says
Augustine out of Cyprian.

It shall be superfluous to show that Hierom, Augustine (though sometime they
think heretics set forth under the umbrage of Tares) some other Fathers, and
the generality of modern Interpreters understand those Tares to be Emblems of
wicked and scandalous men, Ad zizania reseruntur omnia scandala, says Hierom,
scandala tum doctrinae tum vitae, as Piscator agreeing in sense with Beza, the
children of the wicked one, that is, Heretics, Schismatics, Hypocrites,
wicked and profane men living in the Church, as the late Annotations out of
Theophylact, Euthymius, Augustine: when beyond all those we have better
testimony from the Word and Truth, Christ himself interpreting this parable,
who expounds the Tares to be the children of the wicked one, and them which
do iniquity, which is too comprehensive to be restrained only to hypocrites,
and seeing that which the Angell-reapers shall gather at the last great
harvest, is the same that the servants discerned to be tares, and would
precipitously have plucked up; that being expressly said to be scandals in the
original, and the same word is retained by the vulgar and Tremelius, and
Offendicula, whereby others render it, is the same in sense, though not in
sound, those Tares must be concluded to be scandals, and though they come near
Christians bearing the name, and owning the profession, and therein indeed like
believers, yet they may be distinguished from sincere Christians, otherwise
they could not be scandals, and though they may be denominated hypocrites in a
large and general notion, because their actions give the lie unto their
profession, In Ecclesia Christi ficte intrantes, promittentes and non
facientes, voventes and non reddentes, renunciantes malo and iterum idem
facientes, as Augustine, yet the falsity of that profession, and the difference
thereof from their actions, was as discernable as the Tares from the Wheat.

But it seems the Apologists will allow none to be in the Church save such
only who appear to be godly, and will cast out all whom they dscern not to be
sincere, he that had imbibed the Philosophy of Pythagoras, would suspect the
souls of the Donatists had made a transmigration into their bodies, for had
they with Aethalides been dispensed with for drinking of Lethe, they might have
said with Pythageras (remembering when he was first Aethalides, and after
Euphorbus) Cognovi clypeum l^vae gestamina nostrae, and have owned the Shield
of this answer for the same with that of the Donatists, Contra Donat. post
Collat. c. 8 p. 123. tom. 7.
or very like it, who being pressed by the Catholics with arguments drawn from
those similitudes, chose to answer to that of the net gathering of every kind;
malos in Ecclesia usque in finem seculi permixtos esse confessi sunt, sed
occultos cos esse dixerunt, quoniam sic a sacerdotibus ignorantur, quemadmodum
pisces intra retia, cum adhuc in mari sunt a piscatoribus non videntur, to whom
Augustine the then speaker of the Lords house (his Church) replies, C. 10.
Propterea ergo and arcae comparata ost, ut etiam manifesti malicum bonis in ea
pronunciarentur futuri, neque enim palea quae in area est permixta frumentis,
etiam ipsa sub fluctibus latet, quae sic omnium oculis est conspicua, ut potius
occulta sint in ea frumenta cum sit ipsa manifesta. As also in that Conference
where were 306 orthodox Bishops, Brevical. Col. lat. 3. die. tom. 7 p. 118.
Quamvis debeat vigilare Ecclesiastica disciplina ad eos non solum verbis sed
etiam excommunicationibus and degradationibus corripiendos. Contr. Donat. post.
Collat. c. 10.
and no fewer than 296 of the Donatists, it was asserted that i^ was not
destructive to discipline, nor incompatible with the watchfulness thereof for
correption of evil men, not only by words, but also by excommunications,
although, mali non solum in ea latentes nesciantur, sed plerunque propter pacem
unitatis etia neogniti toleremur, and therefore this gloss being in the
judgment of the ancient Church so corruptive of the text, Augustine tells them,
Quanto melius seipsos corrigant, quam Euangelia sancta pervertunt and ad vanum
suae mentis errorem eloquia dominica detorquere conantur.

Though the beauty of holiness (which like the Sun gilds those that look toward
him though with squint eyes) may give some specious advantages to those
Declamations which are made against mixed communions, as spots to that beauty,
yet this is rather paint or color laid on, than any true beauty, and as they
say, the use of the artificial fucus despoils the native candor, so real
spots are contracted by those assayes to cleanse the imaginary, and by those
separations to make the Church more pure, it becomes nimio candore deformis,
and propter venustatem invenusta, and the face of the Church more blemished, by
being made not only lean and hollow, and withered, but also defective in many
integrall parts, and were they all only parts superfluous, yet is there more
peril in their removal, than their remaining, as Chirurgions tell us, that
sometimes the cutting off of a Mole as an alloy to beauty, has occasioned the
cutting off of life. It is a grave censure given by Calvin (that Augustinus
redivious) cum sub studio perfectionis imperfectionem null^m tolerare possumus
in corpore aut in membris Ecclesiae, tunc diabolum nos tumefacere superbia and
hypocrisi seducere moneamur.

What was the judgment of the ancient Church in this case of mixed communion,
may be seen by the verdict of Augustine, who in the Controversies with the
Donatists, as well as in the contests with the Pelagians, was the Foreman to
say for them, and that judgment as it was never reverst in after Ages by any
Writ of Error, so it is as direct to our issue, as can be conceived, for we
have heard expressly, that evil men are to be permixt with good in the Church
till the great day of judgment, and in one congregation, (in una
Congregatione) and not only in hearing the same word of God, (idem verbum Dei
simul audiunt) but also communione sacramentorum (they receive the same
sacraments, paria sacramenta tractantes, simul Dei sacramenta percipiunt,) not
only participating of the one Sacrament of Baptism, but also of the other of
the Supper of the Lord, De verb. apost sermon. 23. tom 7. p. 76. Cont. Donat.
post coll c. 20 p. 125. tom. 7
quid si communicares cum illo (malo) mensam Domini, and omnes ad unum altar
accedebant, and they did eat panem Domini, and drink calicem Domini, and those
evil men are not latent, or undetected hypocrites, but known to be evil, etiam
cogniti and manifest evil, manifesti mali, and this is as full and as express
as can be wished or imagined, so that as the Fathers in a Council against the
Pelagians, formed their Canons out of the very words of Augustine, so we in
this controversy need say no more, than he has said before us and for us, and
as he that to avoid the shot of an enemy, took up his son in his arms and held
him there as a shield against his darts, so we close with Augustine, that none
can strike us but through his sides.

But whereas the paper set forth that the Pastor of Corinth was not reproved
for permitting of a mixed communion, and admitting such as did partake
unworthily, but they only were reprehended that came unprepared, the
Apologists answer, That he whole Church is blamed for it, Dic quibus in verbis
and cris mihi magnus Apollo. Why 1 Cor. 4.21. this rod was (they say) for
abuses, and their negligence in this might be one. Resp The Canonists call the
Gloss upon Gratian comparatively Palca, but sure this gloss is absolutely and
purely chafe, and the offer to catch us with it, implies they overvalue
themselves or despise us, as if any thing would take from them or pass with us,
secure defacilitate credentis, as Tacitus said of the Orators in Neroes time.
We are disputing what was, and they alone tell us what might be: but if only
it might be, then also it might not be, and so Suillus his si ita est ibis, is
no better than Trochilus his, si non est redeo, for fear one fallacy might not
be a snare strong enough to hold us, they have twisted a twofold cord, that it
might less easily be broken, here is first an argument a genere ad speciem
affimative, things are eprehended, go. this thing. 2. petitio principii, abuses
are increpated, but this is an abuse, go. We argue this was not reproved,
therefore it appears not to be an abuse, they conclude this is an abuse and
therefore it was blamed.

A text in this fashion glossed, will prove like a Delphick sword to serve for
any occasion, a common place, or general repertory, from whence to fetch an
argument to confute or condemn any thing, it is but to say, it is an abuse, and
therefore might be in this or that place reprehended. Even such a catholicon
and panacea, and common retreat do the Papists make of their traditions, for
they say whatsoever the Church believes or practices, and is not contained in
Scriptures, must be presumed to have been derived from and confirmed by
tradition, and so also this rod will serve the Apologists to whip any thing,
and such arguments may not only become rods, but axes too, both the ensigns
and the instruments of their power to cut off whomsoever, for whatsoever they
shall call abuses, but the rod which the Apostle here shakes over them, (in the
judgment of A Lapide) threatens them for their elation and vain confidence,
which he taxes them for in the foregoing verses of this chapter, or rather
properly respects the execrable crime of incest, and their conniving thereat,
which he increpates in the consequent chapter, as is the consonancy of most
Interpreters, that they might see there was just cause of so severe a menacing,
and that they were such, as merited to feel the rod, In locum.
rather then to be handled with lenity, he now lays to their charge this
notorious and detestable offense, says Hierom, Aquinas, Calvin, Paraeus,
Piscator, Cajetan, Estius, etc. Cont. Ep. Par. men. l. 3. c. 1.
and Augustine seem also of the same judgment, and therefore (as Calvin and
Piscator admonish) that this last verse of the fourth, ought aptly to have been
the first of the fifth chapter, so Estius tells us, that the Greek Scholia's do
so dispose and institute it. But I believe scarce credet Judaeus Apella, that
the Apostle should here in a general reproof, tax them for a fault which he
particularly mentions not until seven chapters after, or that he should blame
them for it here, where the matter was not mentioned, and when they could not
understand what it was which he meant, and yet cast no censure upon it, where
he specially recites it, and when they might have known what it was that he
censured; or that he should increpate abuses, and yet not tell them in any the
lest word expressly, or involvedly that this was one of them; or that though
Paul is said to have been seen infusing into Chrysostom when he preached, yet
neither he, nor any other understood this to be the Apostles sense in this
place, till the Apologists found it by I know not what inspiration, surely
these painted grapes are so badly colored that we cannot be so far tempted
as to pick at them.

To that which was offered from the parable, that the servants were not checked
for bringing in one without a wedding garment to the nuptial feast, but only
himself was cast out: They oppose,

First, That this is a parable and proves nothing but only in the scope of it,
Resp. Dicimus inficias, De civit. dei. l. 16. c 2. tom. 5. p. 192. In parabolis
multa dicuntur non ad significandam, sed ad implendam narrationem, non quasi
parabolae parts sed quasi emblemmata and ornamenta, non quod unicuique parti
sua apodosis sit reddenda, sed quod cum illis adjunctis ita apud bomines sieri
solet. Menochius in Matt. 13.26.
sed vox ea sola reperta est. We may say of raising arguments from parables, as
Tacitus does of a kind of Mathematicians, In civitate nostra and vetabitur
semper and retincbitur, but for my part I am sufficiently consci^us, that as in
pictures, so in parables (which are pictures for the ears, and picturae
sonantes) the design and scope, which is the formal part, is only to be
observed, the parerga and accessories (though without them the other could not
well be set forth) yet signify nothing: what Augustine elegantly writes, of
the types and prophetical histories of the old Testament, is as applicable to
parables, Non save omnia quae gesta narrantur, aliquid etiam significare
putanda sunt, sed propter illa quae aliquid significant attexuntur, solo enim
vomere terra proscinditur, sed ut hoc ficripossit, etiam c^tera aratri membra
sunt necessaria, and soli nervi in citharis atque hujusmodi vasis musicis
aptantur ad cantum, sed ut aptari possint insunt and caetera in compaginibus
organorum, quae non percutiuntur a canentibus, sed ea quae percussa resonant
his connectuntur, ita in propheti^a historia dicuntur and aliqua quae nihil
significant, sed quibus adhaercant, quae significant, and quomodo religentur. I
shall therefore take my aim only to the scope of the parable lest I miss my
mark.

Secondly, They make a great question whether this is to be understood of the
preaching of the Gospel or the Supper of Grace at large in the Word taught, not
in this Ordinance. Resp. Promissa est nobis recta, at data sportula, to tell us
liberally of a Supper of Grace at large, and then to straiten and contract it
to one dish as it were, viz. the Word taught, is such another kind of
contradiction in the adject, (save that it differs in the transposition) as we
deride the Papists for about their Roman Catholic, an universal particular; a
totum pars. But that the Sacraments are part of the entertainment at this
supper, though their calling that proposition into doubt (yet without pretense
of any reason) might make it a problem, Dona piorum c^tui destinata
significantur. Grotius annot. in Matt. 13.41
yet it is past a question, and is become a conclusion in the consentient
judgment of Interpreters, who thus give us the bill of fare (if I may so speak)
at this Supper, nuptiae sunt desponsatio and copulatio Ecclesiae cum Christo,
aeterno quidem consilio electionis praeordinata, in tempore autem ministerio
verbi and sacramentorum manisestata, in the words of Paraeus, Corporis cibo
animi significat alimenta, Nuptiale conviviumest mensa doctrinae Evangelicae,
sacramentorum (praesertim eucharistiae) and omnis generis gratiarum inquit
Origin. Author imperfecti etc. and Euthymius, apud Tirinum Annot, in locum.
Sermon. 2. de verb. apost Centur. Mag. Cent. 5. c. 4. p. 215. Chrysostom Epist.
ad Ephesians. homil. 3. tom. 4. p. 356. Bonos and malos sine discrimine, Sa Annot.
in locum. Cont. Donat. post coll. c. 20. p 124. De fide and operib. c. 17. tom.
4. p. 16.
quae Deus nobis praebet, videlicet Evangelicam doctrinam, sacramenta
caelestesque divitias, says Barradius, and if they will have it from the
mouths of their witnesses, nuptiale convivium quo Deus in hac vita mentes
fidelium pascit; jucunda and salutaris doctrinae Evangelicae praedicatione and
variis sacramentorum and. spiritualium charismatum serculis, adds Jansenius,
and without contradiction whatsoever the Church of Christ is here nourished or
conforted with, in order to a conjunction with him, is part of this feast, and
therefore though we should consent with them, that the Sacrament did not
ingenerate, but only nourish faith, yet without all question, they are some of
the provision served up at this Supper: Boda thinks that the Eucharist is
allegorically set forth by the vitulus saginatus, that was prepared for this
feast, and Augustine by way of excellency (as it were caput coenae or coena
coenae, as Athens was called the Greece of Greece) or perhaps by appropriation
(because that is most proper and suitable to a Supper which is per modum gustus
and nutrimenti, as there is an Asia propria in Asia) says nuptiale convivium
(i.) altar domini, and so also Chrysostom applies it, mensa regia apparata est
ti^i -- accumbe mensae and esto particeps dominici corporis.

Thirdly, They do not find that the servants brought in that man, for then they
might have been questioned too, Resp. This seems to me an implicit concession,
that this part of the parable is then argumentative, and therefore of the
scope, and since if they think it reason to argue, that the servants brought
not in the undeckt man, for then they might have been questioned for being
therein culpable, I suppose we may raise a more rational argument, that if they
did bring him in, and were not blamed for it, that in so doing they were not
faulty, though whether they brought him in or not, will not lay any turning
weight in the scales, for the beam will be swayed as much by their not casting
out, as by their bringing him in, yet it very manifest that he was brought in
by the servants, who being sent out, gathered together as many as they found
both good and bad, (and we meet with none of the bad but this one) where though
pauciores boni in convivio dominico viount, yet one is mentioned because in
illo uno grande corpus figurabatur omnium malorum ante domini judicium convivio
dominico permixtorum says Augustine, and though they were bad yet if a mortuis
operibus poeni entiam non recusant, they are to be admitted to the Supper,
only qui recusant and non intrare cupientes repellantur, as Augustine; and so
if this man should have been such an one (as the spirit of the Donatists has
inspired them to think) as ab invitatoribus videri non poterat -- and in turba
latenter irrepisse ignaris, (howsoever Augustine be of contrary judgment,
saying, neque enim and ipse sicut piscis sub fluctibus erat, and sic ab
invitatoribus, quomodo piscis a piscatoribus, videri non poterat,) yet it is
farther hereby evident, that other bad ones were gathered by the servants, who
had no power of discrimination, nor of gathering Churches consisting only of
good, and upon their gathering of good and bad, the wedding was furnished with
guests, (such guests as they had gathered) and then comes the King, and takes
notice of this man, not they that had invited him, says Augustine, Cont.
Donat. post coll. c. 20. In locum, so also the late Annotations.
(who therefore implies he was brought in by the servants) sed ipse dominus
cujus erat convivium ligari jussit and projici, and he calls him friend, only
because invited to the wedding, (says Hierom) but who brought the invitation
but the servants, he was as it were a friend, by reason of his faith (adds the
same Father,) viz. a common or dogmatical faith, for to come to the Feast is so
to believe, dicuntur venire ratione fidei and sacramentorum fidei quae
suscipiunt, as Iansenius) and they that came not, being invited, did not come
because they believed not, Romans 10.14, 15.
therefore on the contrary, they that came believed; but now how could he
believe, unless those that were sent had invited him by preaching, and if he
were called he was brought in by the servants, for themselves make calling and
inviting synonomous, but that he was called is apparent, for otherwise it were
no apt or rational inference, to conclude from his casting out, that many are
called but few are chosen, and we know no ordinary way of bringing into the
Church, which is the Palace where the King makes this feast, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
but by his servants whom he gives for this work of the Ministry.

They think he said well (whose echo they are) that parables are like
spectacles, they help some men to see, but others see the worse for them. We
all see the worse for them in signo, for it argues an imperfect knowledge to
see things in aenigmate, as only dim eyes need spectacles, so our dull
apprehensions introduce a necessity of adumbrating heavenly things by earthly,
spiritual by corporal, that what is scarce intelligible in it self, by
disproportion of the subject apprehending and the object apprehended, may be
perspicuous in another; if any see the worse by occasion of them, it is vitio
subjecti, non objecti, aut medii, yet we shall easily yield, that parables are
like the infusion of Borage, whereof the first extractions are cordial, but if
too much be drawn forth, it is seculent, or like the Pyrhite which may be
gently cut and formed, but pressed too hard it burns the fingers; but the
Apolegists would have us look only on this parable through their spectacles,
and would like Praxiteles break our glasses, because they show forth their
deformity; but weak eyes may without any spectacles discern, that the scope of
the parable, which is confessedly argumentative, Maldonat.
is the same with that which our discourse aims at: some Interpreters tell us,
that the same thing is signified by this parable, which was set forth by those
of the tares and the net, the scope whereof we have (we think) evinced, is to
manifest that evil men will be, and may be permixt in the Church with good,
Ubisupra.
in the communion of Sacraments, or permixt (as Augustine) convivio dominico
ante domini judicium, by which Feast, that he especially understands the Feast
of the Lords Supper, appears by what immediately follows, A quibus se boni
interim cord and moribus se separant, simul and manducantes and bibentes
corpus and sanguinem domini. And from the servants gathering here good and bad,
Gregory collecteth the same Corollary, which Augustine extracteth from the
other parables, in hac Ecclesia nec mali sine bonis, nee boni fine malis esse
possunt, bonus autem non fuit qui males tolerare recusavit, and as in the
parable of the tares, the zeal of the servants was expressly controuled,
Jansenius.
that would root up and cast them out, so here their charity is tacitly
approved, that brought in the bad. Others find a special aim that this parable
has in some parts thereof, viz. admoneri fideles, ne satis sibi esse putent
quod credant, and baptismate abluti sunt, atque intra Ecclesiam recepti, iisdem
participent sacramentis, eodemque nutriantur doctrinae pabulo, sed opus esse ut
vivant vitam sua vocatione dignam, and then it were frustrate to admonish them,
not to confide in perception of the Sacraments, unless they were admitted to
partake of them

But whereas they are jealous that if the utmost be made of each branch of the
parable, to advance sacramental liberty, not only admitting but even
constraining of the worst, might be inferred, which every one might see to be a
sandy foundation. We take not our timber for building from the branches, but
the stock or stem, which is the scope, and we suppose the sand is in their
eyes, not in our foundation, as sometimes that is insite in the organ which
seems inherent in the object, we think it will stand firm and unshaken if we
say, that the worst of those that only have no wedding garment, may not only
be admitted but constrained to come, constrained by the power of the word and
force of persuasion, as the Shunamite constrained Elias to eat bread, 2 Kings 4
8, and Lydia constrained Paul, Acts 16 15. Alexand. ab Alex. Dier. genesis l. 5.
c. 21.
and as Hercules Gallicus constrained men to follow him by chains issuing from
his mouth, and hitcht in their ears, for their coming may be a means to obtain
a wedding garment, as the master of the wedding often conferred vestments on
his Guests that were invited, Annot in Mat. 22.10.
and he that has but a common or dead faith may be often eating at this Feast,
improve it to the growth and strength of a special and lively faith. They are
not invited because good, but are made good upon his invitation? and it was not
his coming without the garment that occasioned his condemnation, but his
continuing divested after he was come, Vocari omnes sine discrimine ad nuptias
jubet and mali simul cum bonis veniunt, vecato quidem bonos efficere debet.
Hilarious apud Quistor pium. annot. in Mat. 22.14.
none brings his robes with him, but they only are cast out which will not put
them on when the Master of the feast holds them out to them. The Apologists if
they would rub their eyes from this sand, might see that we put a difference
between having no wedding garment, and having a foul nasty garment. We approve
the casting out of those few that are notoriously and obstinately wicked, but
not the keeping out all that are not manifestly gracious. For the honor of the
Church, the reformation of offenders, and admonition of others, they have power
to throw out the scandalous, but have no warrant to gather Churches of those
only which they shall upon trial find good, (the serva^^s gathered good and
bad) they may cast out those that have garments abominably defiled, not take in
none but such as they have tried to have them accuratly neat and shining, they
are judges to take cognizance of the apparent stains and spots, not search to
make inspection into the substance of the Clothes, much less of the linings,
least of all to reject them because they are not of their fashion.

The servants in all probability could not be so blind or incurious, as not to
observe before the King came, that the man had no nuptial vest, Vbi supra.
but says Augustine, Non illi qui invitaverunt (where by the way take notice
that he was brought in by invitation) sed ipse Dominus cujus erat convivium
ligari jussit and projici, and among modern Commentators he is not only e
grege, sed egregius, that has given us this observation, Hic qui regis oculis
displi^uit, satis placuit reliquis convivis, a quibus ejectus prius suisset si
perturbatorem se molestum exibuisset, Jansenius.
quemadmodum and Ecclesia eji^ic ante diem judicii manifest criminosos, aut
Ecclesiae pacis perturbatores, reliquos peccatores occultos, aut non ita
scandalosos relinquens divino judicio, and from him Diodate runs no great
discord (and with both is Piscator symphonous) for whereas it is said, that the
servants gathered good and bad, that is (says he) indifferently worthy and
unworthy, as well in regard of their condition, base or honorable, as in regard
of their goodness or badnesse, to signify that in the Assembly of those that
are called, which is the external Church, many hypocrites and wicked men are
gathered together with the good and true believers.

They conceive that the Gospel way of inviting all sensible sinners (to be fure
of the sense of which expression we my say as Cajetan in another case, non
ingenio sed divinatione opus esse) suits the parable well, but no sacramental
liberty can be there inferred, the unsealed may be called or invited, but the
uncalled may not be sealed. Whether the administration of the Sacraments be not
one track of the Gospel-way, and those that are sensible of their sins, and
would take that way as well for the obtaining of faith, as the strengthening
thereof, and remission of those sins by faith, may not have that way free and
set open for them to go in, he whose own reason does not apprehend and
dictate, may perpend whether what we have formerly offered for proof thereof,
do not look like reason: as none else will think the objection, so neither can
we suppose the answer to be among such things, quae decies repetita placebunt,
but if the unsealed may be called, if they be not only actively but also
passively called and come in, why may they not have the seal of their calling,
and being called to believe, partake of the Sacraments, the seals of faith? And
though we think it not proper to say that men are sealed but the promises to
them, yet like Mercury to battologize with Battus, and use their forms, we are
not so foolish to think, whether or no they be so fond to imagine, that any
that are uncalled should be sealed, for the Sacraments being the proper
cognizances of Christianity, are not communicable to any but Christians, and
the profession of the faith is as tessera hospitalis, without which none must
eat at the Lords table. But if the uncalled may not be sealed, does it
therefore follow that the called may not be sealed? we rather think the
contrary to be consequent. It is not only denoted by the Greek name of the
Church (...), but warranted by the constant Idiom of Scripture, that the Church
and the Called are confignificant, Romans 1.6, 7. and 9.24. 1 Cor. 1.9, 24. and
5.11. and 7.18. Col. 3.15. etc. and therefore though none but of the Church and
called, yet all that are of the Church and called may be sealed, but it seems
still they will have none but the chosen to be called, and so make the Church
of the called to be of no more latitude than that of the elect, which we
observed before, though they would take no notice thereof, like the Ostrich
which when he hides his head and sees no body, supposes no body sees him. But
to speak properly, men are not sealed, but the promises to them, and the
Sacrament by sensible things and actions assures their faith, that if they
believe in the death of Christ, they shall be saved by it, which is to them
only a conditional sealing also. And then likewise as is their calling, such
will their sealing, an external calling takes only the outward conditional
seal, an inward has the internal and absolute seal also. And beside, before
any come to the Supper of the Lord, he is not only called but sealed too, with
one of the seals, viz. Baptism, for that seal hitherto they impresse upon all
them and their children, as many as the Lord our God shall call, so that many
are sealed that have no inward call, and though upon another account, of other
qualifications more requisite to the Eucharist then necessary to Baptism, all
that are baptized do not communicate, but only those who being intelligent, are
capable of a Dogmaticall faith, yet formally as the Sacraments are seals, why
any one should be susceptible of the one, that is not capable of the other, my
ignorance cannot apprehend, and I doubt their learning cannot prompt me.

But whereas they say, They like a free Pulpit, but condemn a too free Table;
Sadly they and their friends have made their pulpits too free, suffering others
to intrude there as Ambassadors for Christ who had not his commission, and of
their Table have been too parcimonious, and the Stewards have grudged the
liberality and abridged the allowance of their Master, In 1 Cor. 11.
for oportet communes mensas esse communes (says Oecumenius) atque illam
dominicam imitari quae omnibus aeque prostat, in the former they have been
carried away with an epidemicall stream, occasioned by the common shower of
folly falling in those times, (where preacher seem to be bred) as the best
Meteorologists tell us, those frogs are, which though some may vainly imagine
to be rained down from heaven, yet indeed are generated of the dust of the
earth, diluted and levened with a little humor and spirit of the rain that
comes from cloudy meteors, and yet crawle about and croke in every corner, when
they are not yet perfectly formed, for what ever the inward parts may be of any
of them, they are but half made up without an external calling) but whether in
the later (of no free Tables) they have some resemblance with Philoxenus, who
being a Musician and defining the soul to be the harmony, was said to put his
own affection into his Philosophy, I will not determine.

To that serious caveat given them which might challenge a more prolix and
intentive consideration, Not to hazard their own souls while they are
scrupulous about others (the paper had it legible thus (while they fear
accidentally to lose or hazard souls, whether they do not more endanger them
and their own souls too, by withholding from them the Sacrament, the likeliest
means of full, and perfect recovery of them?) they answer, that unworthy comers
do directly quoad corruptionem actus, defile and destroy themselves, nor is the
Sacrament a proper or likely means to recover such as they keep back, but
rather likely by accident more to blind and harden them, and to prevent men's
sins and damnation cannot hazard their souls, but will comfort their
consciences; under this buckler they fight.

The things which they here answer were alibi damnata priusquam hic nata, and
do but resemble vagrants, which being whipped in one town, will in another still
be begging (viz. the question.) Of this subject we have elsewhere (we hope) said
enough to satisfy discerning and equanimous men, to those that are not such we
have said too much, the one we trust will be satisfied, of the other we are
satisfied why they will not be. We have copiously showed, That if unworthy
persons eat and drink damnation, it is s^bi non aliis; That it is one question
who may come, another who may be admitted, and they are not warranted to
proceed in doubtful things who are not commissioned to be judges save only in
things manifest; That though another cannot comply with his duty in worthy
receiving, yet the Minister may not cancel his, in not giving the Sacrament,
nor dispense with a certain duty for an uncertain danger, nor has any warrant,
much less precept to withold that which is good of it self, upon fear or
suspicion that it may do evil by accident, for upon this score may all good
things in the world be inhibited; That though indifferent things being abused,
may be denied or removed, yet what is good in its proper nature and direct
effects, may not be laid aside or withheld for any accidental abuses; and
that seeing he does as much evil as he might do good, which neglects to do it,
and he kills that might help to save and omits it, therefore there is equal
danger in withholding this food of life from those that are or may be worthy,
as in exhibiting it to those that are or may not be such, yea rather more
danger, because it is sarer to err on the account of charity, then on the
score of unmercifulness and censoriousnesse, and where is hope of doing good,
he cannot be excused of the omission to do it, upon a lesser fear of evil,
and the fear must needs be less then the hope, because the later is grounded
on the certain goodness of the thing, and the good that may be either in fieri
or facto esse in the person, and the fear is only founded in the evil that
may be only in the person; That inability to make due performance of the duty,
cancels not the debt; that he which discharges the material part only, does
some part of that duty, and does better than he that neglects all. As it is
said of some in Scripture (as particularly of Amazias, 2 Chronicles. 25.) He did
that which was right in the fight of the Lord, though not with an upright
heart, for faciunt illi rectum, sed non recte, as Piscator on that place, who
also observes, Etiam hypocritarum opera externa quae cum lege Dei consentiunt,
ei placent quatenus legi ipsius conformiasunt. And the very coming to the
Sacrament is a real or virtuall acknowledgement that the death of Christ is
the fountain of life, and is an external profession at least of dependence
upon him for salvation; and therefore seeing those that are not against us (by
any scandal) are on our part, Mark 9.40. they should not be denied to partake
with us, and it is our part rather to draw them nearer by cherishing and
countenancing that little good they have, than to lose them by contempt, and
let their spark expire for want of fomenting. Conceduntur (says Paraeus on
that place of Mark) esse externe, and aliquo modo cum Christo qui Christum non
oppugnant: Iutelligit (adds Calvin) quatenus non nocent, prodesse; est enim
proverbialis sententia qumonemur; Non esse movendum bellum donec simus
lacessiti: It is as if Christ had said, In this furious hatred which the world
bears me and my Church, you ought to hold it as a favor; And again; If any
one be not against us, if God himself rewards small benefits done to his, you
ought likewise to accept of and love those who make profession of my Name (as
Diodate paraphraseth it.) It has been also disputed, that the same peril of
damnation is impendent on wicked men in refraining as well as approaching, and
the same hazard is contracted by their partaking of other ordinances of the
Word and Prayer, as well as by their communicating at the Sacraments, for the
word by accident does harden and also blind men, and therefore upon like
account men may be driven or kept back from the Word as well as from the
Sacrament, which is but a visible word, and represents the same premises though
in a different manner, and which by the ordination and rendency thereof is a
means to convert and meliorate those who have yet only a common and
Dogmaticall faith; and though in firm eyes may in some degree be blinded by
great light, yet light is the means of seeing, and they do not see better by
being kept in the dark, and it will seem strange if men should be blinded by
having this light made surer, or clearer to them, he that believes in the
death of Christ, shall have life by it (which is the conditional promise that
the Sacrament seals) and that therefore to seek to prevent their sins and
damnation by not permitting them the Sacrament, is to endeavor to advance the
end by withdrawing the means. And lastly, that of those who are kept back, such
as are in any degree good, are deprived of the means which might better their
graces and comforts, and such as are not notoriously wicked, are rather
irritated than humbled.

This and much more was otherwhere laid open and spread abroad, and therefore
shall not farther be brought forth here in packs, and therefore if they fight
under this Buckler which they talk of, although it be such a Buckler as was
Agamemnons, wherein Pausanias tells us, terror was pourtraied with a Lions
head, and with this inscription, Hie pavor est hominum, and perchance is such a
shield as the Emperors at their inauguration were set upon, and lifted up to
be shown forth to take the acknowledgements of their Sovereignty from the
Soldiery, and others, yet surely it is not like the brazen shield of Liberius
Mimus in Agellius, which dazelled men's eyes, for we may yet see where to strike
and wound them, notwithstanding this shield, and whether they have not lost
this shield (which was ignominious among many Nations, and therefore according
to a particular punishment for this offense, among the old Gauies, where they
did arcere a sacris those who did lose their shields) they should not
henceforth be kept from those holy things (which they have withheld from
others to reserve for themselves only) Doctorum arbitriores dirimendajacet.

DIATRIBE. SECT. VI.
Whether this Discipline suit with Romans 14.1. and 10. or check not with
Charity; relish not of the Pharisees. Whether it sort with the qualifications
of the high Priest, Heb. 5.2. or the example of Hezekias. Whether it smell not
of Diotrephes. Of examining persons set beyond suspicion. Whether their way
were cast in a like would with Popery. Of their Elders. Their way is
Independent. A complaint of our Schisms and Heresies. Persuasions to mildness
and moderation.

WE first (though preposterously to the Roman order) brought forth our Triarii
to the shock, and considered the authorities of Scripture; next we lead up our
Principes, and examined the testimonies of the Fathers, afterward we drew out
our Hastati, and surveyed the force of reason on both sides (though herein
unsuitably also to the Roman discipline, for they put more confidence in their
Principes than their Hastati, as being better men and better armed, whereas we
cannot but attribute more to reason than any humane authority) we shall lastly
in the same unconformable method, produce our Velites, which are a militia not
altogether of different kind from the former, but a lighter armature and
skirmishing at more distance.

I should be glad that the Architects and Modellers, or patrons and propugners
of this discipline, would by any strength of reason remove the prejudices which
some prudent and moderate and godly men have concerning it, and with any
clearness and liquidness of evidence satisfy them that there were no cause to
doubt

First, Whether it suit with the rule of the Apostle, Romans 14.1. Him that is
weak in the faith receive you? Whether it be not a judging and setting at
naught of thy brother, and so contrary to verse 10? and whether it check not
with the precept, Phil. 2.3. esteeming others better than themselves?

Secondly, Whether this economy that seems to hope or believe nothing, but
suspecteth all to be ignorant or hypocrites, and therefore of necessity to come
to probation, resent of that charity that hops, believes all things and
suspecteth not?

Thirdly, Whether it savor not much of the old Pharisees, (who had their name
from separation) touch me not, for I am bolier than thou? as if they would not
touch with the rout, and it were the hazard of vitiating their pureness, to
have a mixture with Congregations of people, that know not the Law (being
ignorant) or break it (being unholy) or whether it relish not of that Pharis's
standing and praying by himself in the parable? where Beza notes a singularity
and sequestring himself from the Publican, who must stand a far off and pray,
which, as one says, was not supplicatio but superlatio, so that he turned
proditor virtutis and by his pride and censoriousness and singularity became
worse than the Publican, so verifying at last what he formerly said, that he
was not like this Publican, who was indeed better than himself: unasuperbia
destruit omnia, which occasioned St. Augustine to say, Observe brethren that
humility in evil deeds, pleased more than pride in well doing.

Fourthly, Whether it smack of that character and qualification of the high
Priest, Heb. 5.2. to have compassion of the ignorant? Si deus benignus est, ut
quid sacerdos ejus austerus? vis apparere fanctus? circa vitam tuam esto
austerus, circa alienam benignus; nonne melius est propter misericordiam
rationem reddere quam propter severitatem? (says Chrysostom) or carry a
conformity to that tenderness and moderation of Hezechias, who prohibited not
them the Passover, that were not cleansed; but prayed for them, that the Lord
would pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of
his Fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
Sanctuary, which affection had the stamp and seal of divine approbation, for
the Lord hearkened unto Hezechias and healed the people, 2 Chren. 30.18, 19, 20.

Fifthly, Whether it smell not strongly of the spirit of Diotrepbes that sought
the pre-eminence, and be not a Lording it over Gods heritage? It seems to tend
to a reducing every one to an awful and servile subjection to his Minister,
lest his reputation be blasted by being repelled from the Communion, and this
is the more suspected, because not only persons which they may suppose they
have cause to doubt to be of incompetent knowledge, must pass this tried by
examination, (and so likewise is it when persons without crime and unrebukable
must be Probationers) but generally every one, not only such of whom they
might be doubtful (and yet in dubio melior est conditio possidentis bonam
famam, (as I said before) but those of whom (sure) there can be no such violent
suspicion, as to make the thing morally so much as probable, which only (by
the opinion of the Casuists) may warrant such a trial, but even those that
perchance were more susceptible of Catechizing the Elders, and whose shekels
are known to be double to those of the Sanctuary, which makes it look more like
a design than duty, and may render them suspected of that which Augustine
says in a case not unlike, Cont. Epist. Parmen. l. 3. c. 1. tom. 7. p. 11.
Instit. l. 4. c. 12 S. 12.
and Calvin mentions, Non odio iniquitatis alienae, sed studio suarum
contentionum infirm as plebes jactantia sui nominis irretitas, vel totas
trahere, vebecrte dividere affectant -- ne luce veritatis carere eos pateat,
umbram rigidae severitatis ostendunt, and to think there is cause to suspect
every ones insufficiency, is to imply (as the Papists have abusively perverted
that of Gregory upon Job) that while the Oxen labored, they were all Asses
that fed by them.

If it shall be replied, That persons of conspicuous knowledge and approved
abilities are therefore called under examination to be exemplary unto others,
and to prevent and remedy their opposition and repining at this course; I
answer, That this is to make Aemilius suffer because Rutilius has deserved it,
to enlarge an impost and burden extensively, to lessen the sense thereof
intensively, and might as well excuse a Justice of Peace to require sureties of
the good behavior of all the honest men in the Parish, lest a suspected person
should repine, whom he has thought fit to bind to the good abearing, or oblige
a person of honor patiently to suffer his house to be searched for stolen
goods, and a man of unquestionable innocence and integrity, tamely to permit
himself to be taken up and examined upon an hue and cry for a Felon, only to be
exemplary to suspicious persons to submit to, and patient the searching of
their houses, and to undergo such Arrest and examination: In a word, it is to
provoke some men without just cause, lest others be irritated for doing that
which, in respect of them, may not be unjust.

And since this way is obtrued to the world under the Notion of Presbytery
(which sure is a misnomer, for by the proper principles of that Discipline, it
seems that Children only are to pass examination) it grieves some, that
suffrage for the Presbyterial Government, Bailey disswasive, p. 164.
to hear others hereby take a specious advantage to suspect, that it was cast
in the like mould with that of Popery, whose main, if not only principle, was
the advance of the power and grandeur of the Prelates and Priests: as they
among other things would seem to have a power to damn any man, while they
taught a necessity (necessitatem medii) of partaking the Sacraments, as
absolutely medious to Salvation, and the efficacy of those Sacraments to depend
on the intention of the Minister, Gr. Valentia l. 1. c. ult. de missa.
(for it was no Sacrament if he intended not to consecrate the elements) and
that also in the Mass (which is a sacrifice for sin) there is a certain
portion belonging to the Priest which he may dispose of for he behoof of
whomsoever he by his Memento shall think good; so this Discipline vesting a
power in the Pastor, (without any notorious offense and without any such
judicial proceeding as the Presbyterial way requires, and that very justly,
because exclusion or suspension being an Ecclestastick punishment, requires and
Ecclesiastical Judicatory) to exclude from the Sacrament, ad libitum and
placitum, impowers him to put men by from the ordinary means of salvation, and
so coacts an awful servile dependence upon him and subjection to him.

If they shall interpose, that the Pastor acts or undertakes nothing soly or
arbitrarily, but has always the concurrence of the Eldership, I shall answer
them as we do the Papists concerning the worship of Images, What ever we hear
of their doctrine, their practice is otherwise, and (as he in Tacitus, quid
verba audiam cum facta videam?) the experience of the contrary falls within our
Horizon, and if some of their Symmists mistake not, or misreport not their
model, not the Elders only but the whole Church are the common Judges of men's
sufficiency (though rarely notwithstanding convened upon such occasions, as I
think) which is more suitable to the Independent way, but were it so, as they
allege, yet (though perhaps having talents proportionable to private
Christians) how incapable and how incompetent those Elders are, ad hic and
nunc, to be set up as Judges, being of such parts and education, I need not
say, who as little dare to undertake, as they are unable to act any thing
without the infusions and conduct of their Pastor, and though I will not say,
as the Italians do of the Cardinals in the conclave in relation to the sense of
the Pope, That they do assentari non assentire, yet others cannot but observe,
that the Elders of those Churches (which be spoken without any odious extension
to all of that Notion) are but Ciphers, serving only to add the more of
number, and like Mercury in conjunction with the Sun, lost in the light, and
having no influence but what is derived from him, and as in the Consulship of
Julius Caesar and Bibulus, because the one carried all the sway and honor from
the other, they dated writings, Julius and Caesar being Consuls, no mention
being made of Bibulus; so notwithstanding the conjunction of the Elders, the
Ministers are virtually and in effect sole in the action, and act arbitrarily
too, for any rule or Canon that ever I could take notice of to regulate their
proceeding; but in whomsoever the power be vested, yet, nec unquam satis fida
potentia est, ubi nimia est; and whatsoever the men may be that exercise it,
yet, Vespasianus moderatus, sed imperator, non libertas.

Lastly, Whether this be not more than half way toward the Independents, and
symbolize not with the Congregational way? for what sub^^antial difference is
there between their gathering a Church, and this collecting together of
Communicants, some out of one place, some out of another? What material
disparity is there between this admitting none without profession made, and
satisfaction rendered of their sufficiency both in faith and manners, and then
entering into fellowship, and the Independent Covenant? As their way of
gathering is the same, so their way of governing the Church is very like; the
Independents admit any to the hearing of the Word, not to the Communion of of
the Body and Blood of Christ, so do these; they have further conformity in
admitting and countenancing their gifted brethren to pray publicly, and though
not in their public places of convention, nor in the formality of preaching,
Bailey diswas. etc. p. 174.
yet to teach in their private Assemblies and Meeting Houses, according to the
medious way excogitated by some Independents, to reconcile the different
opinions among themselves upon that matter, and it is said, that not the Elders
only, but the whole Congregation does occasionally make judgment Are not both
(they and the Independents) equally guilty of an Allotrioepiscopacy, of
removing the ancient Landmarks, and confounding of Churches and limits, and
taking in such, of whose souls they have by no law nor consonancy to good order
any proper or special care? and of a resemblance with the Partrich, Ier 17.11.
which gathers the young which she brought not forth, as was the ancient, and
is still the marginal reading? and of that magic which Furius Cresinus among
the old was slandered with, of charming and bringing other men's fruits into his
field, contrary to holy Scripture, Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. Heb. 13.17. Can. 17.
not. in quosdam Canones Council, Gal. p. 160. Can. 20. Can. 6. apud Magdeburg 7.
apud Caranz. L. 1. Epist. 5. Epist. 6.
contrary to that rule of righteousness, what you would that men should do unto
you, even so do unto them, Matt. 7.12. contrary to the ancient Canons of the
first Council of Arles, Ne quis Episcopus alium Episcopum conculcet, hec est
involare in vicini sui diaecesim, says Albaspinus, and the third Council of
Carthage, Vt^a nullo Episcopo usurpentur plebes alienae; and the first Council
of Carthage, nequis vel clericus vellaicus sine literis Episcopi in aliena
Ecclesia communicet; and contrary to the judgment of Cyprian, singulis
pastoribus portio gregis est adscri ta, quam regat unusquisque and gubernet,
rationem sui actus Deo reddat, oportet eos quibus praesumus non
circum-cursitare: and again, sine spe sunt and perditionem maximam indignatione
Dei adquirant, qui schismata serunt and rolicto Episcopo alium sibi for as
pseudo-episcopum constituunt?

So as they must excuse me to think that they only take magni nominis umbram,
when they sometimes assume the name of Presbyterial Churches, at best they can
be but blended, and by mixture constituted of some of the principles of the one
way, and the other, Amphibii, Zoophytes and Epicaenes, like the Chymicall nail
in the Duke of Florence his cabinet, part Iron and part Gold, like the
Amphisbaena that has two heads, and moves two diverse wales, that have a Crow
for Caesar and another for Anthony, or as the Angel in the Revelation, that
flew between heaven and earth, is by a learned man interpreted to be Gregory
the Great, who was the last of the good Popes, and the first of the bad; so
they may pass for the worst kind of Presbyterians, though the best sort of
Independents. But surely as Aristotle said of the Milesians, That they were not
fools, but yet they did the very same things that fools do; so if these be not
Independents, yet they have the same actions and ways. There may be and are
some differences perchance in opinion and practice between the one and the
other; but that impedeth not, but that they may pass under one notion and
denomination. The Churches of France and Spain are in many points Antipodes
each to other: Azorius will tell us, that what is the common opinion in the one
kingdom, is not so in the other, (as concerning the immaculate conception of
the virgin Mary, and the worshipping the Cross with Latria, etc.) yet both are
Papists, and so are all they among whom Bellarmine himself by the account of
Pappus, reckons up above three hundred different opinions, and perhaps we might
find far more among those who properly and professedly pass for Independents,
and so many perchance as are not to be reduced to a fixed and certain number,
except by a second Clavius, who has in one sum set down the number of the
sands that would fill up all the concave space between the Earth and the eighth
Sphere, or peradventure so many as there are Indulgences in that one Church of
Lateran, which a Papist says none but God can number, and he Indeed at his
great day of account will be sure to number both the one and the other.

And as these men's ARguments are most of them Arrows taken out of Independent
Quivers, and sharpened on their Anvils, so let assay be made by some skilfuller
hand, more versed in these controversies, whether the forces mustred against
separation, fight not most of them against this new model, which I know nor
how to blanch or palliate with any other name than a Separation, a separation
of themselves as the purer part, from the dregs of the common sort, as if
common and unclean were still synonomous in relation to all subjects, for
though it may differ gradually from other separations, yet magis and minus non
variant speciem, especially surveigh that rich Armory which St. Augustine
furnished against the Donatists, and try if most of his weapons may not be
appositely and properly made use of in this present controversy against our
Antagonists.

It were indeed a more humble zeal and better placed, and more discreetly
regulated, for those Ministers to engage their endeavors to frame and
constitute their several Towns and Parishes according to the way of
Presbyterial Churches, where they have a more warrantable call, where their
special work lies, and where they receive their maintenance, and to take heed
to those Flocks whereof the holy Ghost has made them overseers, rather than
to be gathering and forming (without obligation or warrant) of new Churches out
of Churches, of such persons as by remoteness of place are not susceptible of
any frequent communion together in the ministry of the word, and have one
pastor for the Word, another for the Sacraments, at least if any body can tell
who is the Pasos of some of those Churches, in which are so many Ministers,
that have several pastoral charges elsewhere, and some other of these (in
like manner) gathered Churches, who have stepped farther, and stand at greater
distance in their separations, have only such Teachers as can be called
Pastors no otherwise than the Idols of the Gentiles were called Godsn,
uncupatively or ironically, or by antipbrasis, so that by a Charientisme we may
say of them as the Athenians did of Alexander, If he will be a God let him
pass for one. And I would have those that are lawfully ordained Ministers,
abstracted from Self and Interest, (for pessimum very affectus venenum sua
cuique utilitas,) to consider with what right they can take tithes from them
whom they will not own to be of their Church, and seeing officium and
beneficium sunt relata, with what conscience they can exact the whole tyth as
their due, when they omit a great part of their duty? And for such as are
univocally and completely of the Independent way, I would, gladly know how it
is coherent with their principles to receive tithes at all; for to say they
take them not immediately, while yet they do by mediation of their Farmers and
Agents, is such a palpable imposture as the Capuchins gull the world with, who
may not touch with silver themselves, but they have their boys at hand to
purse up all they can carch

Lastly, I shall hold it forth to the serious consideration of prudentiall and
godly men, whether this setting of the Sacraments in an elevation of purity and
holiness above the Word, as a lower and higher story, or sphere, have not been
the spring or source of those manifold schilmes and heresies which of late
years have made the Church of God as an heap of sand, without unity or
communion, and whether that opinion have not been fomented by an ambition of
pre-eminence of power in some men, and singularity of holiness in others.

Episcopacy like a tree not bearing good fruit, has been howen down and cast
into the fire, but is it seasonable, or ^uits it with prudence, or is it of the
Interest of religion, in the ashes thereof to be like Archin edes, drawing of
lines and circles, and figures of Church Government according to our several
models, while the enemy is at the gates of our Syracuse, or in a more proper
Allegory, like the factions of John and Simon and Eleazar, to be at feude among
our selves, while the Romans have laid siege to, and are like to surprise our
Jerusalem, to divide and break our Ranks, when we should stand close and
conjoyn our selves to withstand the impression and charges of our enemies? To
ravell more threads in the coat of Christ, when it is more than time and need
to stitch up the rents? In these unstable and ensnaring and lapsing times, to
quench the smoking Flax, which being not tenderly cherished, either will
altogether expire, or catch after strange fites, and new lights? to hazard the
blasting of the blossoms of Aarous Rod with sharp and nipping censures at their
first putting forth?

Hoc I thacus velit and magno mercentur Atridae. They are prudent principles
and worthy of reflection, Novum imperium inchoantibus utilis clementiae fama:
Potentiam cautis quam acrimoribus confiliis tutius haberi: Remissius imperanti
melius paretur.

Numa built a Temple for Faith and Peace under one roof, and Charity and Peace
must have some Sacrifices, if it be not with neglect of the Altars of
indispensible truth, lest we have daily more cause to exclaim passionatly with
Nazianzen, Loving Peace, loving Peace, loving Peace, where did thou leave us?
Some things also may be just, in Ecelesia constituta, which in constituenda are
not fit. It rendered a complacency to wise Solon to have given the Athenians
Laws, the best of those they would have received, Excellentissima
animdvertenti, ne mediocria praestare quidem rubori oportet esse: And he was a
judicious Physician whose Maxim it was, Frustra disputamus utrum satis tutu^
sit remedium quod est unicu^. The wisdom of God himself has taught us, That
no man puts a piece of new Cloth into an old garment, otherwise the rent is
made worse, nor puts new wine into old bottles, else the bottles break and
perish, and the wine runs out, and no man having drunk old wine, straight
way desires new for he says the old is better. Quid jugum vestrum super eos
aggravatis quorum potius onera portare debetis? says Bernard; and he was the
greatest propagator of the faith, and advancer of the truth that ever was, who
was made all things to all men that he might by all means save some. Seraphins
which have their name from love, are an higher order in the Scholastic
Hierarchy, than Thrones, Dominations, Principalities and Powers; and Doves
whose wings are anointed with sweet ointment (the Emblem of love) draw all
others to the house, as it is in St. Basil; not only Tacitus commends Agricola
that rarissima moderatione maluit videri invenisse bonos, quam fecisse, but
when St. Paul questioned Agrippa concerning his faith, he anticipated his
confession and answered for him. And when the King acknowledged that he did but
almost believe, the Apostle by a Charientisme presumed to know that he
believed: That great Fither of men knew it was the best bait to catch souls to
gra^ulate our brethren in their weak beginnings, and to pretend a considence
they are such as we desire they should be, to take hold of such as are coming
forward, and to draw them farther with signs of love and indulgence, and to
seem to hope well of them, not to discourage or set them out of countenance, or
to distrust or disparage them, ctiam fictilia vasa confringere domino soli
concessum, says Cyprian. And surely there is no more obliging way, or more apt
or expedient to excite or quicken men to the acquiring of any ability, than to
account and commend them as having in some degree made acquist thereof, for as
Qui monet ut facias quod jam faeis, ille monendo
Laudet, --
so convertibly, Quilandat quasi secisti, te sic monet, ut quod jam laudat,
facias. And Bernard sweetly tells us, Si non est itasicut dicitur, fit ita quia
dicitur; most men are like the herb Basil, (as the Genoans told, Sforza's
Ambassador, that themselves were) which stroke it gently, it yields sweet,
hardly, an unsavory smell, or like the Colossus at Tarentum, which you may
move with your finger, but not wag it if you you put all your strength to it:
gentle instruction is more effectual than rigid censure, Moses was blamed for
striking the rock (which might have produced fire) when he should have spoken
to it to bring forth water. Some Chymicks think the mild warmth of a Lamp is
fitter to improve and transmute other metals into gold, than the violent heat
of fire: the same arrow dipped in Median oil, shot from a strong Bow, loses its
force, if from a gentler is more efficacious: Ne excedat medicina modum, lest
as he said in Tacitus, Non medicina sed clades est, moderation and clemency are
virtues more proper to our times, and indeed at all times more subservient to
edification, than rigor and austerity: It is sometimes true that molesta
sar^ina vir bonus, and quaedam virtutes odio sunt, severitas, obstinatio, and
invictus adversus gratiam animus: discretion (toll hanc and virtus vitium
erit) perpends not only what is good, but what is fit. It was said by Tully to
be Cato's fault, that he was too strist and severe, as if belived in Plato's
commonwealth, not in the dregs of Romulus, Nocuit (faith the Historian)
antiquus rigor and nimia severitas cui jam pares non sumus. If they think there
be a general unfitness in men for this ordinance, (which we concede not) yet
not to produce that of Tiberius, Praestat omittere praevalida and adulta vitia,
quam id assequi ut palam fiat quibus vitiis impares sumus, let them only
reminde the wise counsel of Bodin, Though it be wholesome if one member be
putrid, to burn or cut it off, for the safety of the whole body, yet we m^st
not therefore use cauteries or cutting off, if all the members be putrified and
infected with a Gangerne; or rather let them take cognizance of the advice of
the judicious and meek-spirited Augustine, who tells us, Siex separationc vel
schisma metuendum, Contra Parmen. l. 3. c. 2. p. 13. tom. 7.
vel contagio peccandi etc. If through separation a schism be to be fearad, or
the contagion of sinning have invaded a multitude, the severe mercy of divine
discipline is necessary, because the thoughts or counsels of separation are
then vain, and pernicious, and sacrilegious, because they are impious and
proud, and do more porturb infirm good men, than correct stubborn evil And a
little afterward, Let a man with mercy rebuke what he can, and what he cannot,
let him patiently suffer, and with love grieve, and lament, until he from
above dee amend and correct, or defer until harvest, to root up the tares,
or winnow the chafe, and yet as Christians of good hope, secure of their own
salvation, among desperate ones whom they cannot rebuke, let them continuc
imunity, let them put away the evil from themselves, if they cannot put away
evil men from the midst of them.

And in conformity to and in the pursuance of the same principle, writing to
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, with complaint of the rifenesse and impunity of
drunkenness in Africa, he advises that some remedy be applied by a Council
of Bishops to be convened, but adds, Non ergo aspere, quantum existimo, non
duriter, etc. Not sharply, (as I think) not with rigor, not in any imperious
way, let these things be taken away, but more by teaching then commanding, by
admonishing than threatening (monendo quam minando) for so it ought to be done
with the multitude of offenders, but severity is to be exercised toward the
sins of a few.

There is much dispute whether the Martyrs shall be raised up before the last
and general resurrection, Epist 64.
but we have lived to see the old heretics to have a kind of resurrection in
the reviving and now raising up of their abominable heresies, so that what
Prosper Aquitanious wrote in reflection upon Pelagius, Pestifero vomuit coluber
sermon Britannus, might now be amplified and extended to the plural number,
we having whole nests of those Adders spawning through the whole land, the
venom of their damnable heresies, destructive to the very fundament^lls of
Faith, and all this while we are quartelling about trimming up the house, while
the foundations are shaken. It was St. Augustines advice, that in the time of
an heresy, every one should write, yet how few uncase and impresse their pens
against the enemies of our common faith, or are valiant for the truth, and
contend earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints. -- Vix totidem quot
The barum portae, vel divitis ostia Nili,
But many (and perhaps too many that Ante leves volucres censebis in acre.) are
disputing of Church government with that acrimony, as if Fortunae Graeciae in
hocsitae, and we had no other arae and foci to contend for. Sylla could say,
Ante frangendus hostis quam ulciscendus civis, but we engage our forces against
our brethren, and let the enemies of Gods truth enlarge their conquests through
our distractions and diversions, every man is erecting a Kingdom for Christ,
that himself with his model may sit therein at his right hand, and we hear of
this man's Church, and that man's Church, as if by the revolution of a Platonic
year, we were come again to those old Emblems and Idioms of Schism, I am of
Paul, and I of Apollo, but every one claims to be of Christ; but it is an acute
observation, Christus noluit ficri judex ad divisionem, and with what hearts
others do resent it, I know not, but I look on it with sadness and
astonishment, that this and that form of discipline is cried up, (in a manner
antonomastically) for the Kingdom of Christ, as if he had new made his Scepter
of late, which we have been formerly catechized to be his word; discipline may
be subservient and adjumental to the Kingdom of Christ, but how it should be a
part thereof properly, either integral, subjective, or potential, I confess I
am yet to learn.

And yet howsoever notwithstanding, he that shall declare against, or be not
satis fied with, or complies not with their ways, is forthwith blasted with
the airs of being an enemy to Godliness, as if (as the Gracchi said,) apud se
esse rempublicam, and Eudemon boasted of the Jesuits, Penes se esse imperium
literarum, so these men's opinions and practices were the rule and measure and
touchstone of things, and they had the monopoly and mintage of godliness, and
nothing must pass for current but what flows from them, Sedul. Apol. pro libro
conform. l. 1. c. 20. and c. 13. and l. 2.1.6.
and carries their stamp. The Book of conformities blasphemously tells us, that
St. Francis was deified, that he was made one spirit with God, and that God did
obey him at a beck in every thing, and that he knew the secrets of all hearts,
but I will not, nor dare not so to aggravate the greatness of their
presumption, nor yet at all urge, how bold they make with God, that set his
stamp upon all they coin without his Letters patents, and vouch him to warrant
all their deeds, and make him their second in all their duels, without his
leave or consent, but I shall only say, as that Spartan did before the
approaching battle of Lectra, the day is coming, that will show who is good (or
a godly) man, in the mean time it shall more suit with godliness to make an
arrest of judgment. But vir bonus est Sejus sed tantum Christianus; the
Waldenses are without blame and unrebukable, only they blaspheme the Church of
Rome, the inflexibleness of some men to move along with them in these
excentrick orbs, is the only rotten grain in their Pomegranates; would they
but strike in, and be carried about with them, for that only stamp sake,
without any melioration or refinement of their metals, perchance they might
pass current too for precious pieces, now they are only bitten because none of
theirs; As they say the Snakes in Syria sting all forrainers, but never any of
the Inhabitants, and the Hedg-bore has sharp prickles without, and is smooth
and soft within, so they have pondus and pondus, and balance their own party
and their opposites with several weights and in diverse scales. Let me add also,
that the pretense of godliness cannot give things their pass port, for Luther
tells us of a proverb, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum, nor can the
reverence and esteem due to some men's persons, seal all their opinions and
practices, for the same man has a smart saying, Nunquam periclitatur religio
nisi inter reverendissimos; neither can the aim and intention of doing some
good, or greater good to some, protect or countenance a consequent train of
greater evils intensive or extensive, for the Apostles rule checks with such
designs, and Salvian tells us of some that do errare bono animo, and
Lactantius of others that honesta voluntate miscri sunt. The Church therefore
(according to the Italian proverb) had need to pray especially to be defended
from her friends, and it is no new thing to receive wounds in the house of
friends, Zachary 13.6. and for the Spouse to complain, that the Watchmen that
went about the City have smitten her, have wounded her, the Keepers of the
walls have taken away her veil from her, Cant 5.7. And surely such as are
Heteroclites to their rules and Anomala's to their ways, would more patiently
bear the harsh censures they are asperst with, did not the Church of God
suffer; but as when Alchymists under pretense of multiplying metals and
improving and transmuting them into Gold, do decoct, consume and turn Gold into
nothing; and as the Woman in the Greek Fable that was mortally sick, telling
her Physicians her symptoms, who answering her, all was good, she cried out,
That good had undone her: so the Church is in danger of being ruined under the
Notion of being better built, and not only hereby, that utque ante hac
flugitiis, ita nunc legibus laboratur, but some are like Pompey, gravior
remediis quam delicta erant; and as if things were like the Hebrew to bespeld
backward, instead of Godliness, profaneness, and not neglect alone, but contempt
of Ordinances, Schisms and Heresies not only creep, but break in, grow, and
spread among us, and while we hear all will be now well, we see and feel that
stark naught could scarce be much worse, -- pudet haec opprobia nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
And although the effect hereof like those of an eclipse, are like to be more
felt long after, yet we are already but too sensible of the fruits which these
grounds bring forth, wherein some men have prepesterously thought so great a
part of Gods husbandry does consist, fruits indeed wherewith our teeth are so
set an edge, that we can have no great stomach to them, and I dare say with
some confidence, that were the Laws of this Church Government (whereunto some
perhaps will shrewdly apply that of Demonax, quibus boni non egerent, mali
fierent nihilo meliores.) to receive a comitial rogation, more Romano, the
far greatest part of Intelligent men (except such as are biassed by interest,
and jurati in verba sua; so as to sacrifice Troy to their Helena, and as
Demetrius of the table of Protogenes, to be more tender of the draughts of
their own pencil than of the City) would give their suffrage with A. rather
than V. R. As the Wolf said in Plutarch when the Shepherd slaughtered a Lamb,
At si ego id fecissem, if I had done it, the whole Country had been raised
against me. But it falls out sometime suitable to what happened at the battle of
Montlchery, where Comines tells us, that some lost their places for running
away, which were conferred upon others that fled much further.

And sadly, while some men of one sort of principles, have shut up the Church
door, by intermitting, or restraining and contracting Baptism, the Sacrament
of Institution ( januam Ecclesiae as one calls it) and some of other
principles, have walled up or new railed in the Communion table, and either
omit, or confine and enclose the Eucharist, (which has almost lost its name of
Communion and Synaxis, and by a denomination taken from the greater part may be
rather called an Excommunion or Apaxis,) the greatest part of men are left
excommunicate and made as heathen and Publicans, and being not added to the
Church become such as shall not be saved, and God only knows, (for who else
can give a stop unto, or predefine the bonds of fancy and singularity (Quo
teneam vulius mutantem Protca nodo? whether as the Chemists also by frequent
sublimations and separations reduce the substance of things in a manner to
nothing, so whether these separations and gatherings out, (which may perchance
to grow one out of another (like a line which is divisibilis in semper
divisibilia) and the later pretend to be upon as good reason as the former) may
not reduce the Church unto a very small cantel, and really expose the greatest
part unto a kind of paganism, and so the zeal of those men may become
antipodes to that of David, and eat up the house of God, (for experience as well
as philosophy tells us that omne divisibile est corruptibile, and the Church is
like the controverted Ship, si dividas perdes) and so the new ways of
gathering Churches may in the end be patible of the description which he gave
of Chemistry: a multiplication of the whole by nothing Et quod praesenti vix
tempore credimus, auni
Sera diesque decent.


I shall close up all with a signal and excellent passage of the incomparable
St. Augustine, -- Cui doctior orbis,
Submissis desert sascibus imperium:
a piece of discou^se flowing with mild and honey, or rather melle dulcior,
lacte candidior, which as it holds forth the whole state of the controversy,
so it may aptly and opp^si^ely serve for the decision and up hut of the same.

Forte in populo Dei stat juxta te avarus raptor, inhians rebus alienis, De
verhis Apostoli Ser. 23. tom. 10 p. 76.
quem nosti talem and sidelis est vel potius sidclis vocatur, non potes eum de
Ecclesia pellere, non habes aliquem aditum castigando and corripicudo
corrigere, accessurus est tecum ad altar, noli timere, unusquisque proprium
onus portabit, memento Apostoliut scurus accedas, unusquisque proprium onus
portabit, tantummodo tibi non dioat, porta mecum, nam ficum illo communicare
volucris avaritiam, onus non minuitur, sed duo gravabuntur, portet ergo
sarcinam suam, and tu tuam, quoniam quando ex humeris tuis dominus tuus talem
sarcinam excussit, alteram imposuit, excussit cupiditatis, imposuit charitatis,
-- non vobis fumos vendant qui dicunt, sanctisumus, non portamus sarcinas
vestras, ideo vobis non communicabimus, majores-isti portant sarcinas
divisionis, majores isti portant sarcinas praecisionis, sarcinas schismatis,
sarcinas haeresis, sarcinas dissentionis sarcinas animositatis sarcinas
falsorum testimoniorum, sarcinas calumniosarum crimina ionum: has sarcinas
conatisumus and conamur deponere de humeris fratrum nostrorum, illi amant
tenentes illas ad se, minores esse nolunt, quia ^psis sarcinis tumuerunt, nam
and qui pouit sarcinam quam gestabat collo quasi minor fit, sed pondus posuit
non staturam -- nonne melius i^sum serres quam te for as efferres -- ecce
quomodo serres si attenderis Apostolum dicentem, unusquisque proprium onus
portabit, liberet te ista sententia, non enim cum illo communicares avaritiam,
sed communicares cum illo Christi mensam, and quid tibi obesset si cum illo
communicares Christi mensam? Apostolus dicit, qui enim manducat and bibit
indigne judicum sibi manducat and bibit, (sibi) non tibi, sane si judex es, si
judicandi potestatem accepisti, Ecclesiastica regula, si apud te accusatur, si
innumeris documentis testibusque convincitur, coerce, corripe, excommunica,
degrada: sic vigilet tolerantia, ut non dormiat disciplina.

DEFENSE SECT. XVII.
They misrepresent their Church Way. Whether the Quaeres of the Diatribe were
doubts of Friends or Enemies. What are properly Scruples.

THe Apologists hope their Principles and Practices will carry their Pasports,
if they be not mistaken. Confidence is indeed a kind of Charm upon others of
weak wit or spirit, and as Calumniare audacter, so also Gloriare audacter,
aliquid haerebit, but why then (quasi caeco loquuntur, audienti quid dicunt,
non videnti quod agunt, as Augustine speaks of the Donatists) do they seek to
lead men into mists and mistakes of those principles and practices, with
specious pretenses of their suspending only some persons convict to be
scandalous, as if this were the hinge of the controversy which we had with
them, and palliate their casting off whole Congregations, whereof the far
greater part are not garbled with scandal, and gathering new Churches of such
as are offended with the grossness of their administrations at home, where no
separation is made (as they speak?) Perfect wares never use to be held forth
by false or half lights, and therefore it seems they would withingly have
their principles and practices mistaken, being such (that as Cardan says, Qui
acute vident minus amant,) so men must like them the worse, by how much better
they understand them,, -- Si non videare
Tota places, neutro si videare places.


The Doubts and Quaeres made in the Paper seem to them the hard thoughts of
Enem^es rather than doubts of Friends. But first, it greatly matters not which,
for Antisthenes well said, Ad tuendam sanitatem opus est aut ingenuis amicis
aut acribus inimicis, and as honey enlightened the eyes of Jonathan, so gall did
those of Tobit.

Secondly, but why of enemies, unless they are become such because they tell
them the truth? Veritas (quae assentatione gratiam non parat) odium parit. But
I suppose rather as Hypanis is sweet in the Spring, but bitter falling into
Exampeus, so what is odiously resented, may be amicably meant; Non amo nisi
offendero and he that was the harbinger to a Prophet for recovering of life,
was neither to salute or complement with any by the way, but to lay on the
staff.

Thirdly, Scrupus est proprie lapillus levis qui pressus sollicitudinem creat,
undescrupulus dictus. Servius in 6. Aeneld.
Enemies perchance they are to their separation, not to their persons, and are
like that skilful Archer Alcon, who when the Dragon was complicated with the
child, could strike his arrow in the one, and not hurt the other, Qui vitia
odit homines amat, and Augustine pithily, Hoc est perfecto odio odisse, ut
vitia non homines oderis, nec vitia propter homines diligas.

They pretend not to be willing to contend about words, yet fall into a
Logomachy and aucupium verborum, Scruples (they say) are men's doubts in their
own way, that much impedes and intangles their conscience in their own actings,
that is their Scruple.

Scrupulus, which originally and properly signifies a little stone in the
shoe, Azor. moral. tom. 1. l. 3. c. 20. p. 97, 98.
or otherwise troubling any in his going. ^is metaphorically transferred to
denote any doubt or suspicion whatsoever. The Casuists define a scruple to be
in anima solicitudinem, suspicionem, and dubitationem hominis, conscientiam
pungentem and cruciantem, instar lapelli exigui in calcco latentis, qui^edem
laedit and vexat as Azorius: but though this be the Ecclesiastical sense of
the word, it does not follow, that it may not be used in another notion, no
more than because Idolum and Sacramentum (and the like may be said of sundry
other terms) are in the Church Idiom appropriate, the one to an Image worshipped,
and the other to an outward sign of an internal grace, therefore the one may
not be used for the visible species, or a vain imagination, nor the other for
an oath or gage: in the former sense I had neither occasion nor meaning to use
it, for scruples are there understood to be leviuscula argumenta and fundamenta
(as Azorius and Filiu ius;) leves rations, as Balwin, but we are not persuaded
the reasons and arguments alleged are of that kind, Filiucius tract. 21. c. 4.
Sect. 175. p, 11. Baldwin Cas. cons. l. 1. c. 10. p. 24. De Instit and jure, l.
2. c. 29. Dub. 2. Navar. Manual. c 27. Sect 280. p. 1037.
(though by a Meiosis or Charientisme we styled them so) until they have better
convinced us thereof; and scrupulus est tenuis suspicio mali circa rem bonam vel
adiapheram, says Lessius, and only makes the con^cience ass^n^ing and
adh^ring to one part of the question, lightly to recede and a little to doubt
thereof; but the judgments which we desired might be satisfied, are rather
more fully persuaded by other reasons, and not a little by those, not to assent
or adhere to this way, which seems evil, though they affectionatly wish, for
some of their sakes that trace it, that it were not so evil, as upon these
reasons it seems, or may be suspected to be: so as whereas Conscientia
scrupulosa contra id quod judicat habet argumenta (as Navar) these arguments
are rather contra id quod non judicat.

But whereas they say, Scruples are men's doubts in their own way (where sure
they use the word Doubts as improperly and incu^iously in resp^ct of the
Theological sense, as they suppose we do Scruples, (for a doubt and a scruple
are different no^ions amongst Casuists) we shall grant in Ames his words,
Scrupul mess formidinem animi circa suam praxim, but we cannot yield that we
used the notion in any other sense, for that which by ex^enuation we called
Scruples (^ut we shall not from henceforth use so much indulgence and
compliance among those that have not learned inter bonos been agier) are
arguments, which though opposed to ^he way of the Apologists, yet make men more
searfull and sollicitous to concur and cooperate with them in that way, and
so are concerning their proper ways and actings likewise.

But that you may see the Apologists are not unlike some fierce men, Ames Cas.
Consc. l. 1.6. p. 15.
which they say will sight with their own madow, and that they quarrel with an
expression which is but the shadow or image of their own, cast back your eyes
but upon the close of the precedent Section, and see if the word Scruple be not
used by them in the like sense which they carp at here in us, for expressly
they say, While we are scrupulous of others, which necessantly inferres, that
scruples may be in their conception, as well of other men's ways and actings as
of their own. Yet for my part, let them call them what they please, Nihil apud
me distat in verbo quod non distat in sensu, as Ambrose, I shall not strive in
words to no purpose, which is as Augustine interprets, Non curare quomodo error
veritate vincatur, sed quomodo tua dictio dictioni praeseratur alterius, for I
have also learned from Plato, Nos ditiores ad senectutem perventuros fi nomina
neglexerimus, and if they think I have been guilty of a misnomer, and this
Scruple (which is but the third part of a grain) can add to their weight, I
shall readily put it into their Scales, yet I doubt it will not much ponderate,
where any other thing is in the Balance, or discretion holds the Beam.

DIATRIBE. SECT. XVIII.
Romans 14.1. and 10. discussed Whether they judge or despise their brethren. Psa.
15.4. vindicated. No other qualifications required in order to communicating in
a Church member having a Dogmaticall Faith, but to be without scandal. Whether
they reject only the wicked. Whether their way render them not guilty of
temerarious judgment. Of judging the heart. Of bearing infirmities of moral
men.

THe first Qu^re which the paper sprung from Romans 14 1. and 10. they think as
light as the paper, ludibrium venti, easi^y blown away with the least wind of
their breath. But though we did not pretend to fetch those arguments from the
Peripatum, but rather from the Academy, and brought them forth not as
demonstrative but considerable for their probability,, and as arguments minorum
gentium and senatores pedarii, yet how weak soever they may seem in the faith
or belief of any, we shall strive they may be received, and will seek to fetch
them off from doubtful disputations.

They say, The Apostles scope is far from the business in hand, he speaks of
eating herbs, not the Sacrament, and it is only a not receiving the weak to
doubtful disputations. But may not the same arrow that is shot to one scope or
mark, be aptly aimed and sent forth toward another? If they have forgotten that
the same principle is pregnant with many conclusions, and by the virtue and
officacie of the same middle term, or probative medium, may sundry conclusions
be inferred, or if they recognize not that natural notion and principle of
discourse (one of those two feet whereupon all syllogismes stand and move) de
omni and nullo, viz. quodcunque affirmatur aut negatur de toto and genere,
affirmatur aut negatur etiam de part and de specie, and therefore consequently
any truth derived out of another truth must be therein contained, or if they
remember not that Canon in Divinity, quod particulariter dictum est
universaliter applicandum, yet we must remind them, that neither the Sacrament,
nor any preparation or trial in order thereunto, is the scope or subject of
those places of Scripture, from whence they have labored to draw and form all
the arguments for defense of their Church way (that one of 2 Cor. 11.27. only
excepted) as without any further light held forth by us, will be obvious to any
that shall make inspection into the texts which in due place shall be
considered.

We do not pretend that this precept of the Apostle does directly or expressly
command a receiving to the Sacrament, yet (according to Diodate and Hammond) it
enjoining a receiving of the weak in faith to the Communion of the Church, we
opine that it consequently requires the reception to the Sacrament,
Church Fellowship chiefly consisting in, and being described by a communion of
Sacraments (as has been declared) and Church Communion being comprehensive of
all other special acts, and parts of common and public Christian duties or
privileges; if that be prescribed to be afforded in general, the other are so
commanded, as being included under, and contained in that, and we do propound,
that by force of this Canon, it is clearly enjoy^ed, that qui robustiores sunt
operam impendant insirmis sublevandis, and qui magis profecerunt safferendis
rudibus -- as Calvin, the^e is c^mmanded nolite ahji^ere -- cujus nondum
confirmata est fides as Gagnaeus, qui nondum erant in fide satis instructi, as
Menocbius and Tirinus. Fraterne agendum cum rudioribus, caveantque ne eos a
professione Euangelii deterreant, as Piscator. Ad conversationem vobis
adjungite and habete ut fratrem, neque repellite tanquam a^ienum in Christo, --
tolerandus est ne forte resiliat ah incapto, as Estius. Affectu cbaritatis
vobis conjungite ad supportandum, as Aquinas, and therefore none may judicandae
fratern ^conscientiae licentiam ad se trahere, as Calvin; de se potius quam do
aliis solicitos esse oporteat, as Paraeus, the reason being rendered, quod
potestas julicandi de aliorum conscientiis, propria sit Christi, quod
unusquisque illi ratiouem de scipso redditurus s^t, as Piscator. And then we
assume, that for them (as if there were no other way to rectify their
Assemblies than as Candiot corrected Ficinus his translation of Plato, with one
common spung:) to put from the Communion whole Congregations (which is not to
improve the health or growth of the Church, but to reduce it to an atrophy and
consump^ion by such continual violent purgings) and t^ do thus, not for gross
and palpa^le ignorance or notorious offenses and scand^ls, but because they
have not approved their knowledge or holiness to those Censors, and like
Procrustes to rack and draw them to the length and measure of their bed, is not
to support or animate, but cast down and dishearten, not to assure and
evidence, but to irritate and imbitter men, not to bear with them, but to bear
them down or overbear them, since most men carry some an logy to the leaves of
the arbor tristis, whereof Nieremberge tells us, that being roughly handled
they scarce smell, but gently touched do spire forth an excellent odor, nor is
this to hold, or converse with them, as brethren (the ancient Church calling
none brethren that communicated not) but rather as ali^ns from Christ, being
not by the Apologists reckoned of the Church; aliens, because not of the
faithful, for the ancients named those only fideles, which did receive the
Sacrament; and aliens from Christ, because not worthy to partake of his body,
and when men manifestly discover not themselves by scandals, yet to reckon them
unworthy of the Communion, is

First, To judge their consciencies by determining of things occult (whereof
the Church never pretended to any judicatory) for they have not manifested
themselves by crimes that are notorious.

And is secondly, to despise them, not only speculatively to esteem them evil,
22. q. 60. art. 4. in c. in 22. disp. 5. q. 4. punct. 5. p. 865.
but practically also, to deal with them as evil, for qui habet malam opinionem
de alio absque sufficienti causa, injuriatur ei, and contemnit i^sum, says
Aquinas, and in dubio per malam opinionem de proximo, indigne is contemnitur,
adds Valentia, and there can be no sufficient cause, nor indicia vehementia,
nor can their condition be otherwise than doubtful, where the actions are not
scandalous, and if when they call them dead and bastards (as here) and account
them Dogs and Swine (for upon that score and in that notion they say elsewhere
they administer not the holy things to them) they shall yet deny that they
despise them, I think they shall despise our reason also to hope to make us
believe so, and they have as much reason to say this is not contempt, as the
Gloss in Gratian has to deny any may be called a Whore till she have been
culpable with 23000 men.

But whereas they insinuate that the 4 verse of the 15 Psalm will warrant and
bear them out to contemn vile persons, I shall say if they are not scandalous
for notorious crimes they are not vile, and if they be not vile they are not to
be contemned. Junius and Piscator tell us that according to the Hebrew it
should be translated, contemptus est spreius, and they render ^^reprobus, as
the vulgar does malignus, In locum.
and to contemn, is not to flatter, (as Junius;) or voluntarily to honor vice
and impiety for flattery or any worldly respects, (as Diodate;) to cover or
excuse their vices by filthy adulation, Quantumvis opibus, potentia, gloria
florentes -- non veretur peccantes redarguere and impedireubires and occasio
postulat. Tirinus in locum.
and seek friendship and have commerce with the impious and slaves of Satan,
(as Molle;) and it would seem prodigious if it should more check with this duty
to admit into Communion those that are not notoriously flagiti^us, then to
reject them shall clash with that property in the former verse, that takes not
up a reproach against his neighbor, dictis aut factis (as Junius;) non admisit
ad aures suas vituperationes, detractiones, susurra jones, calumnias
contraproximum (says Bellarmine;) Omnem proximi contumeliam and injuriam
avertere conatus est, as Ianseuius

And we think we may therefore take up for a conclusion that Epiphonema of
Paraeus upon this text, stolidus fanaticorum error improbatur, qui Ecclesiam
veram non putant subsistere, nisi ubi emnes sunt pariter firmi fide, pariter
sancti in vita, and nulla Zizania cum tritico in agro domini pullulare
conspiciantur.

They say the Apostle speaks of not receiving the weak to doubtful
disputations, and he does so, but he does not only speak of that, but first
prescribes them to be received, and afterward prohibites their reception to
doubtful dispu^a^ions, but as the Ganonists say that fictione Canonica,
Saturday and Sunday are all one, so i^ seen^s the Apologists would sain have
receiving and not receiving to be the some; they infer therefore, men are not
to be called is such exercises as may be hurtful to them; and we grant it of
such as have a direct tendency unto, and natural efficiency of hurt, but not of
such as may indirectly and by accident only become hurtful, for then they may
not be conv^cared to the hearing of the Word, which by accident does blind and
harden, and is the savor of death unto death, In since the inhibition to
receive them to doubtful disputations is bottomed on this apagogical reason,
lest they should be disquieted with troublesome: questions (as Diodate) we
suppose the reason to be as illative to forbid their examinations and trials,
whose questions do occasion and produce as much of trouble and disquiet as can
ordinarily result from disputations, but they unwittingly mistake or would
willingly take others in a mist, while they with as much solemnity, as little
pertinency discourse, as if by weak in the faith, were to be understood only
such as had a sound lively and saving faith though feeble in a remiss degree,
such as have a true Godly fear and some degree of graciousness; whereas by the
very light that naturally beams from the text, and is reflected also by
Interpreters, it is meant of such as are not yet full in knowledge, nor
persuaded of Christian liberty (as Diodate) qui in doctrina Euangelii rud^or
est, nondum satis edoctus and persuasus de liberate Christiana, (for here
fides est persuasio de usureram indifferentium per synechochen generis as
Piscator, and Calvin in effect consenting with him, and however they rebel
against this light, yet it strikes on their eyes to make them see and say also
in this very Section, that the Apostle speaks of those who were not of a pure
gospel judgment, about ceremonies. Paraeus only by a proportionable
accommodation extends it to those that are infirm, circa mores and studium
pietatis, -- qui languidius profecerunt and saepius hallucinantur in vita, such
as are carnal, not simply but in some respect, and therefore concludes (in
opposition sure to their principles) tali inaequalitate domesticorum dei non
est quod offendamur.

But they here part hands with their brethren, who they confess go beyond their
warrant when they take Saints of the first magnitude only into fellowship. But
sure their warran^s are brethren too as well as they, and they can pretend no
better warrant to exclude all, save of the second or third magnitude, then
their brethren can show to reject all save of the first. We think that though
one starr differs from another in glory, yet every the least star while it
stands in the firmament of the Church, ought to be in fellowship and
Constellation with the rest, and till he prove a falling star, a nebula, or
plain nebulo, it will be only a by blow of the tail of the Dragon to cast him
to the earth. I is Gods prerogative to tell the number of stars, there are many
pure stars more than we can see, the Galaxi is but a Congregation of them, and
some stars that are eclipsed toward earth, shine upward to heaven, and to own
none for stars, but those that will move concentrick with them, and borrow all
their light from them, is a false astronomy, and fits none but those that would
set their nest among the stars.

The judging of others estate and condition, the ways and cautels of doing it,
are but perergas and heterogencals to our question, for it is not men's goodness
or regeneration, which is the foundation of their right or interest to the
Lords Supper, bu^ Church membership with a dogmatical faith compleats a title
to Ecclesiastical Communion, and consequently to the Sacrament, and it is a
contradiction in the adject, and a mere bull, (though such an one as Mariana
says are sometimes let loose in Spain in solemn places, which gore and
overturn and trample on the people) that a man should be a member of the
Church, and yet not be recelved to Church fellowship. Whatsoever other
qualifications are requisite to the person in order to his coming to the
Sacrament, yet they are to require nothing more in foro exteriori for his
admitting, cum enim quilibet Christianus, ex hoc ipso quod est baptisatus sit
admissus ad Dominicam mensam (says Aquinas) non potest jus suum ei tolli, nisi
pro aliqua causa manifesta, 3. q. 60. art. 6.
they need look for no other positive thing, if they discern nothing privative
( viz. no notorious crime) that may forfeit that right; if they see nothing to
disprove it, they may spare to seek for what may farther prove and verify it,
charity carries with it an obligation, practically and negatively at lest, to
judge all those to be good that are not manifestly evil, and therefore he that
is not visibly unworthy, is visibly worthy, because a visible member, and if
worthy of a Communion in other Ordinances, (as has before been argued) why not
in this also? unless as the Orators exalted eloquence that themselves might
rise therewith, so they elevate the Sacrament to a higher sphere, because
themselves pretend to be the Intelligences that must only make it move or
rest, and I should desire them to show me any Scripture ground whereon they can
build this bypothesis, That those intelligent persons, who are worthy to have
Communion in the Word and Prayer, are unworthy of fellowship in the Sacrament.

It is granted they may make judgment of such as actually discover themselves
by scandal, or perhaps potentially by a violent suspicion, but to make
discoveries of others, in order to judge of their state or condition, they have
none but a forged warran, that bears not the Test of heaven, nor is
exemplified in the Rolls of the Scripture, and therefore whereas they say, That
Calvin affirms that judgeing in this place, Romans 14.10. is to bring men under
our own laws. Though I find not that he makes that interpretation, yet it
being true secundum quid, because a divine truth, though perchance not
simpliciter, because not proper to the place, yet supposing it were so, we
cannot but conclude they judge their brethren, because we find their laws
under which they would bring them, but they are yet to seek of those of Christ,
unless they will do as the Gloss on Gratian has done, to cite a whole
sentence for Scripture which is no where, or will have us to think of them as
Hosius teaches of the Church of Rome, Did. 43. Si quis verb. postulat.
that what pleases them, is the express word of God.

If (as they profess) they exclude not, but take the weakest, then they ought
to admit all those that are not guilty of scandal, for other sins are but
weaknesses, and so denominate their subjects.

If (as they say) they refuse none but the dead, and bastards, and contemners
of Gods waeyes. It is a sad topicall fate which has befallen the places they
settle in, if all those grounds they cultivate bear no other fruit but such as
that near Sodom Lake, which how specious soever it seems, yet proves to be but
dust and emptiness when they take them in hand, and it is no personal
felicity to have the luck of the worst harlot, that theirs is always the dead
child, and after all their fishing for men, they rather have the fortune of
those (which indeed is just about their proportion) that do fish for pearls in
Mare del Sur, where Acosta relates that there is scarce one round pearl found
for an hundred rags, and their people so desperately evil, that nothing else
could rectify them but that which Antonius Augustinus borrowes from Martial to
apply to Gratian, Vna litura to blot them all at once out of the communion; but
if they refuse none but such as are dead and bastards, they cannot pass this
dreadful verdict upon them, unless they have convicted them to be
scandalously wicked, and yet they tell us we pass an uncharitable judgment
upon them to account that they judge so uncharitably of those they receive not,
whereas it cannot but be clear, that all are wicked whom they reject, if they
refuse none but such as are wicked.

Yet as truth is like light, which cannot be hid, but will find some crany to
show it self, and was anciently (says Pierius) described Hicroglyphically by a
Peach, which is like an heart, and a leaf hanging thereon in resemblance of a
tongue, to show that the tongue should adhere to the hear^, and utter the truth
thereof; so truly we have found their heart hanging on their tongue in this
matter, and however they would else blanch the business, yet they have dropped a
confession elsewhere, that it is nonconformity to their discipline, which is
the ground of their exclusion, and here they reply that scandal is not that
alone for which they reject, but they must see some measure of true godly
fear, some degree of graciousnesse in those they admit, it is not enough that
they have nothing against them, to defeat that title which as Church Members
they have to Church Fellowship, but they require from them a farther proof and
verifying thereof by signal demonstrations of sound grace. And though we shall
grant as they say, That it is a smoakie house where ordinarily the smeak breaks
out, yet it does not follow, that they make break into every house to examine
whether it be sullied with smoke or not, but rathertarry and tie up their
judgment till the smoke break out, and rather suspend their censures through
charity, then men by precipitation, which is noverca justitiae, and seeing they
pretend to judge of men by their actions, what need is there of other
examination, when they may be sufficiently read in those real characters, and
till they can charge them with offenses in particular, instanced, and evidenced
in their circumstances, they should supersede the notion that they here give
them of offending Brethren.

Besides, Though Smoke shall break out of an house, there may be other ways to
rectify it, then by pulling down the chimney, admonition or reproof may be a
means to amend what was a miss, and perchance the fault might be in the present
ill-laying of the wood, or some violent storm, as few chimnies but smoke by
such accidents, as a strong tentation and sudden passion may overbear or
transport a man contrary to his constant course and frame of spirit.

But though they read not as they write, nor sing as they prick (as it is said
of the French) but fit the Notes according to the Ears, and to the interest of
the occasion, yet let them say or unsay it, we know that very many of those
whom they reject or lay aside, are not justly aspersible with notorious crimes
(which only constitute scandals) and very few or none that we know, have been
duly or judicially convicted for such, and therefore not only speculatively to
esteem them criminous, but practically to deport themselves toward them as
such, seems to ly^ within the precincts and bounds of temerarious judgment.

To stave off and evade the charge of rash judgment, -- illis robur and aes
triplex
Circapectus crat;
they make a Threefold Defense, saying, 1. That they judge not men's hearts, Nor
2. The^r final estate but present condition. 3. They make judgments by their
actions.


If we should gratify them with a concession of the Hypothesis, yet the brush
will not white the Wall, nor wash out the stain; we may allow their Ple^, In 22
q. 60. art. 3. Ubi supr. Baldwin, l. 4. c. 12. Cas. 7. p. 1177 Lessius l. 2. c.
29. dub. 2. p. 296. Azor. par. 3. l. 13. c. 11, pa. 1150. Filiucius tract. 40.
c. 1. sect. 2. p. 386.
and yet they will fail of their issue, and a Writ of Error lie against their
judgment, temerarious judgment taken generally, being assensus ^ve certus ^ve
incertus vel etiam dubitatio de malo proximi, quae oritur ex levibus indiciis,
atque adeo insufficientibus, as Sylvius delivers it (from whom the School and
Cas^ists dissent not) and thereof Aquinas (and Baldwin, Lessius, Azorius,
Filiucius out of him) make Three degrees, 1. In ipere dubitare de bonitate
alterius. 2. Certo aestimare ejus malitiam. 3. Procedere ad aliquem
judicialiter condemnandum;


And those may be light and insufficient reasons to warrant the 3 degree, which
may justly prompt us to the 2, and those that may induce us to the 1, may not
justify the 2; therefore though they neither judgemens hearts, nor final
estate, yet if they make judgment of the present condition by such actions,
Ames cas. cons. l. 5 c. 11. p. 295.
as are an insufficient foundation for such a superstructure, it will be rash
judgment formally, although it be true judgment, as a true assertion may be a
lie (as Ames observes:) But to interpose our exceptions to their pleadings in
particular,

First concerning the judging of their final estate, I think that it is such a
fault as covetousness was to Luther, contrary to his nature, he was never
tempted with it; so I think few men do offend in this, or presume to judge of
Gods eternal counsel, but only according to men's present justice, not to
censure others abselutely but conditionally, as they shall repent or go on in
their trespasses, none being ignorant that God can raise children to Abraham
out of stones, and perfect the new Creation as he did the first, out of
nothing; and unless therefore they could also create something out of nothing,
this part of their answer will little fa^isfie or conduce to their excuse.

2. Though they deny it, yet they do judge the heart, if they judge the man and
his estate, for the heart is the man and makes the estate, as Apollodorus his
heart told him in his dream, when he seemed to be in the boiling choldron, that
it was he that did him all the mischief: If they shall think to salve that sore
by the second part of Physic, which they prevented not by the first, and shall
say they mean that they judge not the heart immediately or by intuition, but
mediately by the actions and by discourse, and judge not the intentions when
the actions they cannot, Then

Secondly, If the actions cannot give result and bottom to such a judgment, if
more be put in the Conclusion then flows from the Premises, and the branches
sprout farther than the root can bear them, the heart is judged without or
beyond the actions; but seeing every man's heart is conscious of that which
Augustine says, Totam vitam humanam circumlatraripeccatis, In Psalm. 129.
our justice consisting not in perfection of virtues, but remission of sins,
(upon which place of Augustine Vives well n^teth, boni sumus, non quod been
vivimus sed quod commissorum scelerum nobis fit a Deo gratia, for as our
corruptions are (as the Historian said of the Germans) triumphati potius quam
victi, so also consequently all our righteousness here is in ficri, non facto
esse, being neither pure but mixed, (as those we call pure Elements have much
impurity, only the celestial bodies are fully purified) nor perfect, for
there sometimes want parts as always degrees, and the best men are imperfect
not only in latitudine entis, or in genere, but in specie also, as the learned
distinguish and aliter hic non potes esse perfectus nisi scias hic te non posse
esse perfectum, says the same Father, In Psalm. 38.
for every regenerate man is two men, like that monster Camerarius speaks of,
which was two above the navel in every part, though one beneath, which would
often be at disagreement and contention, and like a Plant-animal, having some
sense of heaven, yet like a vegetative drawing much from the earth, like the
flying Fish, that can one while fly toward heaven, and anon is under water, and
therefore as it was said of Seneca, he was inter Christianos ethnicus, inter
ethnicos Christianus, so a sanctified person though in respect of the men of
the world (as Ambrose speaks) he be a righteous man (the denomination being
taken from the better part, and the inhaerent quality denominating the subject,
though together there be an inhaesion of the contrary quality) yet in regard of
pure and perfect righteousness he is sinful: therefore as long as any is free
from peccata sauciantia, grievous and exitious crimes, I think there is no
sufficient sign or rational cause to judge and conclude him a wicked man, for
they must sure be beams whereby to build such judgment, moats will not suitain
it, and he that without other premises concludes him such, I think judges the
hear: None knows so well the things of a man, as the spirit of a man which is
within him, and seeing it is no easy or sudden work for a man to discern and
determine of his own estate, it must consequently be more difficult and
deceptious for any other to undertake it, and therefore considerately Augustine
says, Tract. 90. in Johan.
we ought continere and prohibere firmas defini jones and sententias de
proximo, and however some have designed and limited the signa pathognomonica,
or the proper characters of what are the spots of Gods Children, and what are
not, yet they are rather characters whereby a man is to make trial of himself,
whereby the spirit in man only can judge, and are rather signs in abstracto
than in concre o, what makes a righteous man, than who is such; and though the
rule be right, yet there may be error in the application, the proposition may
be true, and yet the assumption be so false as to viti^te the conclusion: Cont.
2. Epist. Pelag.
Nos silios diaboli non faciunt quaecunque peccata (says Augustine) peccant
enim and filii Dei, if a man therefore I Have without scandal, I suppose other
faults can render his condition at most but doubtful, and though they could
beget or foment a probable suspicion of his evil estate, 22. disput. 5. q. 4.
punct. 3. p. 862.
yet since opinio est asser sus sed vacillans propter conjunctam actu vel
potentia propinqua formidinem, as Valentia, -- unde suspicio dicitur quasi
sub-aspicio qua debiltter videatur per suspicionem res, tanquam si videret^r la
ens sub altera, and Lactantius could say, Id opinatur quisque quod nescit, and
Bernard, Opinio si habet asscrtionem temeraria est, a probable suspicion
suffices only ad generandum dubium, non ad judicandam simpliciter, as was
formerly alleged out of Suarez. And since, Honesta sama est alterum patri,
enium, and fame is weighed in the opposite se^le against life, Et quisque habet
jus naturaliter ad bonum nomen and famam, quae est b^maopinio de virtute
alterius in menten stra -- and proprium bonum depositum anatura in aliorum
mentibus, (as Ames and Filiucius, Vbi supra. Sect. 4,
) and then also me ior est conditio possiden is, and therefore qu^mdiu aliquis
nen sufficienter probatur malus praesumendus est bo^us, as was also cited out
of Suarez, 22. def. 5. q. 4. punct. 3 p. ^.60. Suarez. ubi supra. uhi supra.
Conclus. 4 p. 316. De Sermon. dom. in monte l. 2. tom. 4. p. 258. L. 2. de sermon.
dom. in monte c. 28. Vbi supra. art. 4 p. 315.
and seeing cjusmodi bona existima ione continetur cujusque fama, (as
Valentia,) therefore uisque apud omnes debet esse bonae existima^i nis
quandecunque ma^ifeste malum de ipso non constat, (as Azorius and Lessius,) but
non constat de illo, (says Sylvius,) quamdiu solum est dubiam -- sufficiens
ratio ad been jud candum de proximo, est ipsum jus qued habeat ut bona de se
opinio concipiatur quamdiu contraria manifest non probatur, and in this very
reason, among others, is that Theorem rooted, which is unanimously delivered ly
he Schoolmen and Casuists, Dubia, (de personis) sunt in meliorem partem inter
retanda, which St. Augustine thinks, (though perchance too rest ainedly) was
that which alone was commanded, Matt. 7 1. and though it be not necessary to
interpret all doubts positively in the better part, but the act of judgment may
be suspended, yet even dubia rationabilia positive in meliorem partem
interpretanda sunt, ex suppositione, hoc est, supposito quod re utrirque dubia
aliquis actus sit eliciendus, ille debet ferri in meliorem partem, for ubi non
apparent, says Sylvius, manifesta inditia de malitia alterius, si ea quae
dubium movent non interpretemur in meliorem partem, non habemus ipsum pro bono,
hoc autem non fine ejus injuria and contemptu est, quando non suppetant
sufficientia argumenta; and confirmatur, frater habet jus ut de illo been
judicetur donec legitime constet contrarium, ergo suo jure fraudatur, si quis
dubia non inter^retetur in moliorem partem, and however we may (says he) by
such a positive act expose our understanding to some error, yet it is such an
error, as is not adverse to prudence, Ita etiam Caietan, and Valentia, etc.
nor the perfection of man, or the practical understanding, but only the
speculative, quamvis enim actus quo judicamus hunc hominem esse bonum, possit
esse falsus, quia fortassis ille homo est sceleratus, actus tamen quo judicamus
talem aest imationem hic and nunc esse formandam, est verus; prior namque
pendet ex conformitate ad rem, Nocere potest intellectui ut cognoscens est, pro
quanto falsam cognitionem quandoque ingerit sed prodest intellectui ut dirigens
est, quia facit ipsum dirigere conformiter ad appetitum rectum, atque per hoc
intellectum ut dirigentem esse verum. Caietan in Thom. Aquin. 22. q. 60 art. 5.
Vbisupra.
posterior ex conformitate ad rectam rationem; prior actus si erretur, est
aliquo modo malus, sed tantum secundum quid, quia neque appetitum respicit,
neque ad mores pertinet, quorum tamen respectu aliquid dicitur simpliciter
bonum vel malum; posterior etiamsi erretur in persona, quae judieatur bona cum
sit mati, est absolute bonus, ideoque alterius actus errori praeferendus, cum
enim bonum morale consistat in recto ordine voluntatis ad finem, voluntas autem
ad fivem dirigatur per dictamen rectae rationis, illad judicium est simpliciter
bonum quod dirigit voluntatem ad sequendam rectam ratienem, ejusmodi vero
judicium est dictus posterior actus, dirigit enim voluntatem ad quod prudentia
justitia and haritas dictant, ad eligendam scil^cet bonam opinione^ de proximo
hic and nunc, quando non licet habere aliam, ne alioquin faciamus ei injariam;
And however in order to cautel, to avoid a damage, or apply a remedy, doubts
may be interpreted in the worst part, not definitively judging one to be evil,
but suppositively searing he may be evil, and deporting our selves so, in
respect of caution, as it he were such, yet in all punstive acts (says
Caietan) because they so low the judgment, the former rule holds, and
therefore he concludes with this Epiphonema, Exista regula praelati debent
subditos subditasque ex dub is factis non malitiae arguere, aut punire, sed
bonam de iis opinionem ut prius de iis habere, and tamen cantelas, cu^^odias,
remediaque adhibere, ac si mali essent, provide tamen ne aliquid fiat quod
famae proximi deroget, hoc exim esset injuriari illi, quod in dubiis vitandnm
est.

Thirdly, and howsoever other faults may rationally suffice to raise or support
a speculative judgment that such is an evil man, yet practically to judge of
him in this special respect of debarring him the Sacrament, all other offenses
beside such as for their greatness, obstinacy and notoriousnesse are scandals
are levia indicia, light either in respect of the matter, or the vehemence, and
cause a temerari^us judgment in the third degree, and that also as well by
taking the liberty of contradiction as of contrariety: for as to the matter
they ought to be excessus peceatorum, that are punishable by such a just
severity, as was produced out of Estius his Annotations on the Parable of the
Tares.

Dr. Willet out of Zago zabo, relates, that the Aethiopians forbid none the
communion for any sin save murder, Synop. Contro. 13. q. 7. p. 6, 8.
and though they too much restrain the matter, yet they shall too much enlarge
it, that shall extend it to any thing save seclus aut affine sceleri; other
sores, though they may need the Epulotick of admonition, or the Cathaereticks
of increpation, yet merit nor knife, nor Causticks, and such lapses I suppose
the Snuff-dishes should be of purer gold, that shall cover them in order to the
communion, In Psalm. 99. ^om. 2.2. p. 23.
Quid si and ipsum (says Augustine) antequam proficeret, nemo vellet pati? si
ergo quia proficit, nullum hominem vult pati, convincitur quod non profecerit;
intendat charitas vestra, sustinentes invicem (ait Apostolus) in dilectione,
etc. non babes quod in te alius sustineat? miror si non est, sed ecce non sit,
co robustior es ad caeteros sustinendos, quod jam non habes quod et in te alii
sustineant; non sustiner is? sustine caeteros: non possum (inquis) ergo habes
quod in te alii sustineant Even Seneca could say, Iniquus est, qui commune
vitium singulis objicit, non est Aethiopis inter suos infignitus color --
quicquid itaque in alio reprehenditur, id unusquisque in suo sinu inveveniet,
mali inter malos vivimus, una res nos facere potest quietos, mutuae facilitatis
conventio: Church Censures should not be like Cob-webs (as Gonsalvo said of a
Soldiers honor) that every small Fly should stick in them, nor must they cut
off men for such small faults, (so as (they say) in Italy with a pocket
stone-bow held under a Cloak, they will shoot needles to pierce a man's body,
yet leave a wound scarre discernable) for if they be suffered to get over this
hedge, and that to be free of scandal shall not be a fence sufficient against
such censures, we shall scarce know where to find them, nor where they will
drive us; perhaps not only small practical errors, but speculative
differences may at length be looked upon through such multiplying glasses, as
to be thought meritorious of excommunication, and whether or no Mr. Broughton
and Mr. Ainsworth proceeded so far in their controversy about Aaron's Hood,
whether it were of blew color, or Seawater green, or if Johnson Pastor of the
Brownists at Amsterdam (some of whose blood runs in the veins of these men and
their brethren) and his brother had not advanced to that height about the Lace
and Whales-bone in his wives gown-sleeve, yet we know wiser and better men have
broken out into such inordinateness, for as small a matter as an inconformable
keeping of Easter.

And then also as the matter must be flagitious, so also it must be notorious;
that which in other judgments and estimations of men, may be vehement signs,
in this case will not be such, as in no occasion we may pass judgment upon a
fame; (for famae nemo credit nisi inconsideratus, quia sapiens non credit
incerto, says Tortullian) and therefore in famy (as was recited out of
Vasquez) is only sufficiens principium inquirendi) nor upon suspicion, for
that is insufficiens ratio condemnandi, for it being, as Aquinas defines out of
Tully, opinio mali ex levibus signis, (and to judge upon light signs, Rivet.
Explic. decal. tom. oper. 1. p. 1445.
is that which constitutes and denominates the judgment temerarious) or
according to others is acceptio unius partis cum formidine alterius, so as it
leaves the matter uncertain, for ita uni parti assentitur ut tamen credit se
falli posse, and verum esse contrarium ejus quod opinatur, but we must judge
none evil, unless it manifestly appear he be so, and it appears not as long as
it is doubtful, for there must be no more in the understanding than was in the
sense, neither can the stream (as we find in Aqueducts) be elevated above the
fountain, we can have no certain knowledge resulting from uncertain principles;
so also in this case the private certain knowledge of the offense by the
Minister, or one or two other single persons, is no sufficient or rational
ground for such a censure, because none may be condemned but by a public and
notorious knowledge of his crime, for every man has a right, that no public
punishment be inflicted on him, but for a public fault, and it is a moral
principle, That benefits are publicly to be dispenc^d and distributed
according to the merit of particular persons, not according to the private, but
public and notorious knowledge of the dispenser and distributer, which to
instringe or clash with, would open a gap to innumerable scandals, Sect. 15.
troubles and injuties; all which has been more clearly and copiously declared
and asserted, and therefore I need but to touch it here tanquam canis ad Nilum,
and go on.

Lastly, not only when a man cries guilty and says he will amend, yet until
he gives himself the lie by a relapse, practically to judge him a wicked man,
because his conversion cannot be sudden (as they declare their judgment in the
subsequent Section) I fear is a judging of the heart, but when men are
harmless and blameless, and yet are denied to be the sons of God, and being
allowed only the title of Moral men, cannot be afforded the attribute of
Godly, I think this is not only a judging of the heart, but the very dreggs of
temerarious judgment, for whereas Augustine thinks that the prohibition of
judging Matthew 7.1. De sermon Dom. in monte, l. 2. p. 258. tom. 4.
does first forbid to reprehend that which it is uncertain with what mind it is
done, and charity (as Bernard says) should excuse the intention when it cannot
the action, this contrariously is to condemn the intention when the action
cannot be reproved. And why only Moral men? do they perform the duties only
of the second Table, and make no conscience of the first? The love of our
brethren is the ordinary Diagnostick sign of our love toward God, yet because
the rule rather holds negatively than affirmatively, to disprove that love to
God to be unfeigned, which is not verefied by our love to our neighbor, rather
than to prove that he truly loves God, who performs external acts of love to
his brother, with an affection of humanity, (unless it be also understood of
true Christian Charity, whereof though our neighbor be the Material object,
Estius in 3. Sent. Did. 27, Sect. 5. p. 29.
yet God is the formal, and so since in all that are so loved, there is one
reason and respect of loving, viz. God, as the chiefest good, who as such is
loved above all, and to whom other things loved being considered in that
respect and for such reason are referred, therefore it is one and the same love
according to the habit whereby we love God and our neighbor, Vnus amor, duplex
objectum, and thence it is evident, that since nothing can separate from it
self, the love of God and our neighbor cannot be separate one from the other:
but because thus to understand the love of our neighbor, were to beg the
question (this being the thing controverted) therefore let them then be
arraigned for the wilful neglect and breach of the Commandments of the first
table, (though the observation of the first is in most of the particulars not
to be discerned by intuitive but abstractive knowledge, where the conformity of
our actions to other the precepts, is the medium to prove it) if there appear
no evidence to convict them, then they must necessarily suppose, that their
outward actions flow not from a principle of grace as their efficient, nor are
directed to Gods glory as their final cause, which since none can see but he
to whom the heart is transparent and pervious, do they not by thus judging the
root, when they cannot blemish the fruit, not only forestall the judgment of
God, but usurp his peculiar throne, and are guilty of laese Majesty to entrench
upon his royal prerogative?

But as it was said by Erasmus of the times about the Nicaene Council,
Ingeniosa res est esse Christianum, so it seems it is now a fashionable thing
to be a Christian, as he that wears rich stuff, yet if his clothes be not also
of the fashion, he seems ridiculous, so if men trim or suit not their religion
according to the mode (though the fashion is very changeable) yet however like
the new Moon, they may shine toward heaven, yet the earth looks upon them as
without light; but I do seriously with, that since most men love to be in
fashion, there be none that took up religion as a complement, in conformity
rather than con^cience looking losser qu^ eundum est, quam quo itur, and were
not like some Boats on the Danew, that can only row with the current, and as
the full-bellied O^^er, that alone does swim with the stream, like Mercury,
whose influences are only borrowed from those greater planets he is in
conjunction with, and like the inferior Orbs, are carried about by force of the
superior, and only dance to the tune, and keep time according to the music
which the Spears make above. For the greatness of thy power shall the people
lie unto thee, so Junius, Piscator, and the Vulgar read Psalm. 66.3. and so the
Greek Fathers expound it.

But though we have sufficiently disputed and evinced it against the Papists,
that the keys were not given to Peter alone, but in him to the whole Church,
yet some men will nevertheless seize and appropriate them to themselves, as if
no other but those they hold in their hand, would set open the gates of Heaven,
where is no going in, unless in such and such a party, nor admission, but under
such or such a notion, and as the Statute of 11, H 7. appoints that the
Standard of weights and measures shall he kept in some certain Towns only, so
also it were constituted, that no weights or measures of the Sanctuary (or
rather Sanctity) could be allowed, unless sealed and afficred according to the
Standard of such a Town or such persons, hoc sanctum est si ip, e velit and non
aliter, and quos volumus sancti sunt, and perchance as the Carthusian said to
Comines of Galeazo, Nos in hac terra solemus omnes appellare sanctos qui bone
faciunt nobis, if to other gists he add not this, to have one of some sort of
men, that -- erit sibi magnus Apollo, from whose Tripos he shall fetch his
Oracles, and to whose Altar he bring his offering, tam bona cervix simul ac
jussero demetur (as Caligula was used to say.)

But howsoever some are not forward to purchase credit with them at the price
of their consciences, by concurring in a separation, (for nihil charius emitur
quam quod conscientia emitur, quae dum integra est facile consolatur famae
egestatem) nevertheless let them judge as they list, this is the source of
others comfort, De Pastor. c. 7.
that as their hearts are not men's Senate (as Chrysostom speaks) and therefore
they should not judge them, so since oportet nos omnes exhiberi ante tribunal
Christi, non te timeo, non enim potes evertere tribunal Christi and constituere
tribunal Donati (as Augustine pathetically) and elsewhere, homo sum de area
Christi, palea si malus, Cont. lit. Petil. l. 3 c. 12.
granum si bonus, non est hujus areae ventilabrum lingua Petiliani -- quicquid
autem in ipsa frumenta maledictorum calumniarumque jactaverit, fides eorum
exercetur in terris, merces augetur in c lis.

Augustine (they say) makes it pride to contemn discipline, and we assent to
it, so it be a discipline that does not bring some men into causeless contempt
and carry a suspicion of, or a tentation to pride in others. When it is said in
the Gospel, Jesus answered, when none spoke to him, some interpret it, that he
answered to truth speaking in his conscience: Whether the Apologists in the
excuse of themselves for pride, answer to their own consciences, I know not,
but (as I conceive) that the paper never taxed their persons with pride, so
here in this place it did not impute to their way, that it did bear appearance,
or might prove an occasion of pride, unless as pride is the root of every sin
(since none turns away from the chiefest good but out of an inordinate
affection in some thing or other of his own excellency (which is the effence of
pride) or as more specially it is the source of judging and despising others,
or may be a symptomatical disease consequent to this other. Pride therefore
like it self usurps and takes place of other things here, and we shall bid it
sit lower, and shall trasfer that consideration to the 21 Section, when we come
to dissect Diotrephes, whereof pride is the very form or proper passion.

In the mean time, to tell us, First, that religious courses have been usually
branded with pride, and rigor and sullenness, (which is but commune argumentum)
since such misprissions are not the proper passions of religion, and this being
held forth in relation to themselves and their defense, does

Secondly, imply, that they are humble and godly, and that we say the contrary,
which is ignorantia clenchi, for we desire not to beat down Plato's pride with
pride, nor think Satan can cast out Satan, and therefore will not commit the
fault while we are decrying it, that is, to judge others while we dispute
against judging others, we are not tempted to think the Apologists ungodly, we
define not of their state, we only by way of admonition tell them their way
and actions have the appearance of evil.

And thirdly does insinuate, That their separation is an holy and not an
humerous singularity, (which is but petitio princlpii,) and

Fourthly is but an appeal for the truth of all this to their consciences,
which is only testimonium domesticum. And besides, in propriis caecutimus
omnes, and as the reflex beam is weaker than the direct, so we see our selves
more partially than we do others. And also Augustine advises, curemus etiam
nihil facere quod veniat in suspicionem, and elsewhere renders the reason, duae
res sunt, conscientia and fama, conscientia necessaria est tibi, fama proximo
tuo, qui confidens conscientiae negligit famam crudelis est; yet in all this,
if they will sit down like Narcissus to contemplate their own image, we shall
not here trouble the water, nor bring up truth from the bottom to represent
them another face, (not of their state, but of those actions) though elsewhere
we suppose we have held them forth a glass that may better show them their
feature, which I hope will not find the like fate with that in the fable, which
the old woman cast away in anger for showing her more odd and ill favored than
she pleased her self with a conceit of; all this is but shooting at Rovers not
at Pricks, and therefore if the arrows did fly as thick as to darken the sun,
(as they are more like to bring darkness than light) yet we may securely not
fight (as Diaeneces said by occasion of the boast of the multitude of the
Persian shafts) but sit down in the shadow.

SECT. XIX.
1 Cor. 13.7. considered Whether they suspect not much evil, believe or hope
little good of their People. Of examining the knowing, to be exemplar to the
ignorant, or to manifest their humility. Whether it be their duty to submit to
such a passive examination. Whether to call them to it, be not directly to
detract from them, or interpretatively to defame them. Small matters are often
great in consequence. 2 Cor. 11.2. examined. The properties of charity in
hoping and believing. All the ignorance charged, is not to know it to be duty
to submit to their commands. Whether conversion may be sudden. Whether the
Church have loss or gain by these Ways of pretended reformation.

THese Sections of theirs, which like the Gemini, when one goes out the other
appears, are twins indeed, and very like, ovum ovo non similius (as the Poets
sable the Gemini were produced out of eggs) -- facies non omnibus una,
Nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse sororum.
All these are but lusoria tela, non decretoria, wherewith they do ventilaze
non pugnare, (as Seneca,) and flourish rather than fight: They scornfully
upbraid and despise my writing, as being Rhetoric only; I wish I could say
that theirs were such, the Palm may give a shrewd blow (the Emperor Maximinus
therewith struck down a Tribune to the ground) and if it reach home and fall
with force, makes greater impression than a loose and half clinched fist of a
weaker armo, but let an equal Arbiter judge, whether they deal not here with
me, as Tissaephernes did with Xenophon, who followed him where ever he marched,
yet at distance, and came not to any close Encounter, but only raised fire and
smoke about him.

The Scripture hinted at by me, they say must be 1 Cor. 13.7. but they might
have pleased to have took notice also of the 5. verse, and to have taken in
totum telum, those texts fully and plainly demonstrate, (as is liquid enough by
the words without clearing thereof by consent of many Interpreters) that it is
the property and character of charity, Omnia tolerare aut continere, est enim,
says Menochius, metaphora sumpta a tignis, pondus aliquid fulcientibus, vel a
vasis quae nihil exudant liquoris -- valde proprium charitatis aliorum defectus
tolerare, and silentio premere quae aliis nocitura sunt, aut famam denigrando,
aut alia ratione incommodum aliud afferendo, not to suspect the worst of any
man, not to reckon or impute evil to any man, as the Greeks, Vatabius, and Dr.
Hammond, thinks the word (...) signifies; in melius omnia interpretatur, as
Aretius; non facile mali quicquam suspicatur, dubia in partem accipit meliorem,
as Grotius; and omnia meliora credit and sperat, as A Lapide; etiamsi in
speciem vita and mores minus respondeant, imodiversum praese ferant, etiamsi
parum spei conceptae respondeant mores, as Marlorat out of Meyr; meliora semper
defiderat and subsequutura sperat, as Bulliuger, and inverts the verse, says
Martyr, and says Qui non est hodie cras magis aptus erit, and it inclines a
man to believe without prejudice all the good that he hears or can have any
ground in charity to believe of him, to hope what he believes not, Cas. Consci.
l. 5. c. 15. p. 296. Ames. Explicat. decal oper. tom. 1. p. 1445.
and never so far to despair of his repentance, as to give over the using all
probable means that may reclaim him, as Hammond paraphraseth, and therefore
Ames, upon this sole ground that charity thinks no evil, lays the
foundation of that conclusion, that doubtful things concerning persons are to
be interpreted in the better part, and Rivet inferres, that evil suspicions,
though they break not out into full judgment, are condemned by the Law,
because charity which is the end of the Law is not suspicious, as appears 1
Cor. 13.5. and how then can it suite with this eulogy of charity, or be
conformable to this character, to suppose and believe the worst of so many,
rather than to hope the best, and to have them in suspicion, when of all
doubtless it cannot be a violent suspicion, and for all of them there cannot be
vehement signs to warrant it, and when of the most or a considerable
multitude, their condition can at most be but doubtful, yet to interpret that
doubt in the worst part, and to improve and pursue that suspicion, so as to
suspend them of the Sacrament till the light of further trial have dispeld
this cloud of suspicion under which they lie, for ignorance or sinfulness, and
in the interim to frustrate them of that means which might make them better,
and to renounce the hope that they may be imbettered by it, even when the
conversation of very many, if not the most, holds forth nothing that might be
obstructive to such hope? if they be charitable, why do they suspect so much,
believe and hope so little? Vt quisque est vir optimus, ita alios sui fimiles
facile suspicatur, only evil dispositions are of evil suspicions, (as to eyes
vitiated with the yellow jaundice all things appear yellow) and in this sense
also, quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis: If they suspect not,
why do they seek to make such trials and researches of men? for who makes any
inquisitive examination for discovery of that which he has not some doubt and
suspicion of? this was that which the paper sought to be satisfied of, -- fari
jubet, and responsa reposcit,
Ordine cuncto suo.
-- Quaerenti talibus Illi,
The particulars of 1 Cor. 13.7. are in the judgment of the learned to be
referred to God not man: I wish the Apologists which are so eager to examine
others, did better know how to express themselves, that we needed not so often
to examine them of their sense and meaning, so ambiguously do they here deliver
themselves, as to leave it as flexible to a construction, that God believes
and hops all things, as that a charitable man (or charity concretively)
believes and hops all that is to be believed of God and hoped from him. But
because we are persuaded the Apologists are no way sowred with the leven of
Vorstius, and because the later sense is that which is delivered by the
Interpreter they quote, we shall so also understand them, and concede that
several Expositors (especially the Latins of the middle ages) do so expound
it, but they are notwithstanding born down by a stronger current of
Interpreters, and ciearly outshined by the light of that truth naturally
beaming from the context, and though the Apologists have a Velleity, yet they
have no will to contradict it. They deny therefore, that they are without hope
of all, or suspect all. And that may be a truth if there be but one whom they
hope well of, and suspect not; but do they not suspect the most, and the far
greatest part of their people? else why do they not admit them till probation
have cleared up and set them out of suspicion? And however the general rule may
have some exception, and whatever blanch they give to their trial of some
particular persons, whom (they say) they examine to be examples to others, not
to take satisfaction to themselves, yet the general reason whereupon that
examination is bottomed, is a suspicion and unsatisfiedness they have of men,
and those few are brought forth to be tried to give a slide unto, and to
facilitate the trial of the rest, and so in the last resolution and remote and
mediate impulsive, suspicion is the cause of their probation also, and is causa
causae, quia causati; And if they suspect not all, yet if that suspicion of
some be not violent, or the signs vehement, it is as sinful to suspect their
people distributively, as well as collectively; for eadem estratiopartium and
torius, as sinful aeque, though not aequaliter, the same formal and intensive
sin, though not the same gradually and extensively, and though a probable
suspicion may warrant a trial, and a Metaphysicall evidence, (as Suarez
speaks) be not always necessary whereupon to give judgment in moral things,
yet a moral certainty is pre-requisite for censuring any to be debarrred the
Sacrament, and the crime that shall merit it must be public and notorious, and
so consequently be past an ordinary or probable suspicion.

Such as are removed beyond suspicion of ignorance are examined, say they 1.
For example to others; but they that profess to be satisfied with nothing but
Scripture, might have remembered, that omnis homo exse aestimat alterum, and
conceiving us be of the like principle, they should have therefore offered us
some precept or example out of Scripture for examining such as are elevated
above all doubt of ignorance, only to bring in those of a lower Form: (for so
they phrase it) If when persons of greater elevation in the world; may probably
be suspected to be grossly ignorant of the things of God, they had called such
under examination for example and encouragement of those which are of lower
station, yet obnoxious to the like suspicion, this were free from exception and
worthy of commendation, but when there is transitio a genere in genus, that
knowing men must be brought under the discipline to endear it, and to make it
more receptible with the ignorant, this is to do an apparent wrong to some,
that others may appear not to be wronged, and calls to my remembrance the
history which Seneca relates of Piso, who though he were a multis vitiis
integer, ye^ being one cui placuit pro constantia rigor, and having condemned a
Soldier upon suspicion to have slain his fellow whom he brought not back, and
upon the point of execution his fellow returning, and the Centurion bringing
both back to Piso, to manifest the innocence of the condemned person, Piso as
if the extending and multiplying the injustice, could lessen the odium thereof,
condemns not only those two, but the Centurion also, because his commands
ought not to be disputed whether right or wrong, Honestior illi pertinacia
videtur quam poenitentia: which that can warrant a notional examination, and
give it any firm root, is a suspicion lest men should be ignorant, as that
which can warrant and support excommunication, are crimes notorious,
obstinately continued in after admonition, if therefore they will examine, and
suspend until they have been examined, such as they are not ignorant of to be
knowing, to smooth and levigate the way by their example to the examination of
those that are ignorant, by some proportion of like reason, why may they not
excommunicate innocent persons to persuade and induce such as are flagitious,
patiently and humbly to submit to those censures?

2. The more pliant such men are, the more they think their humility will
commend their knowledge; As it was answered of old to him that persuaded a
Democraticall government, That he should first begin to set it up in his own
house, so we shall desire they would rather manifest their own humility in not
exacting this subjection, than to persuade others to demonstrate theirs by
undergoing it. But it seems as Brennus, when the full weight of money was made
up for the ransom of Rome, put his sword in^o the Scales, and would have that
weighed out also; so though men have their knowledge to the full weight, yet
they must also acknowledge the power and authority that these m^n have to
impose upon them a farther load. But certainly to lay needless burdens upon
men, and then persuade them that it becomes their humility to undergo them,
comes somewhat too near that of Julian, when he struck the Christians upon one
cheek, and told them they were commanded to turn the other.

3. The try^ll of such may be necessary (but if it only may be, it is not
certain that it is so) relatively to the Church and the work of reformation,
but I have elsewhere examined this reason for examination, and I hope have
showed cause sufficient to suspend and cast it out, but h^ving already
perchance too long troubled the Reader about it, I will not here sees, Kid in
his mothers milk, that is, as Philo moralizeth it, add trouble to trouble.

4. They do in the 21 Section bring forth another Reason, Because such as are
able and godly, so know not their abilities as to oppose them against their
duty. But he must have very poor abilities whom they can without better
Arguments impose upon, that it is the duty of any knowing man to degrade
himself from one of the Fideles to be one of the Catechumeni, and to make so
low a stoop to that which has an appearance of evil, viz. of ignorance, and to
be accessory to the stealing from himself the reputation of a man of knowledge,
and suffer himself to be practically taken for an ignorant person: As it has
been said of Women, That their comportment is a better fence to their Chastity
then their negative, which denies without denial, and secures even from
tempting, and that she has forfeited somewhat of modesty, that has not
forestalled all sollicitatio^; as that he comes too near that comes to fetch a
denial, so here in this case he is somewhat garbled, that is only questioned,
and though he pass the trial, yet it is a diminution to be put to it, and a
disparagement, that (as Socrates said to one that excited him to defend himself
against the calumnies of Aristophanes) his Conversation had not made his
Defense beforehand.

It cannot (unless per antiphrasin) be their duty subiici humanis
praesumptionibus, when as religionem, quam paucissimis and manifestissimis
Sacramentorum celebrationum sacramentis misericordia Dei liberam voluit, Epist.
120. c. 19.
servilibus oneribus premunt, as Augustine speaks; nor so cheaply to give up
their liberty, in a kind of blind obedience (for we cannot see any reason in
the commands, and it is an obedience that befits only the blind and ignorant)
and to let them build high to dam up other lights, and as the Papists at one
part of Summer Masses (though for another mystery) do put out all the Candles
save one, so to permit them interpretatively to conclude at the celebration of
the Sacrament, that only the Pastor has light, and the rest of the people have
none, nor are they engaged in duty to bow down that these may go over; and as
was said of Pompey the great, to let them become great by their diminution, and
like Valerian to Sapores, to become their footstool to mount on horseback,
and when they are in the saddle, and hold the reins, who knows how far, or how
fiercely they may use their spurs to ride? For though the things at first
aspect seem but small, yet like some seeds, they are great in the virtue and
consequence. A Deed of Gift of all is executed and perfected only by the
delivery and giving up of one parcel of the Goods, and there may be livery and
seisin had and taken of a great Lordship only by the giving and receiving of
one turfe of Earth; if we give way to remove the old Landmarks, who can either
foresee or undertake where they will fix their bounds? As long as none may be
shut out from the Sacrament, but for palpable ignorance or notorious
wickedness, we know what gives us a good and indefeasible estate of Free hold,
and what can forfeit it, but if we must all be sequestered before we have
pleaded and proved our title in their Courts, and at their Bars, and until our
fitness and worthiness have been weighed in their beams, without any certain
standard set down and determined, but the Laws are only in scrinio pectoris,
sure we are all but Tenants at will, or hold only by the copy of their
countenance; and if we so far resign our liberty, and subject our selves to
such a power (as Philip the 2. said of his Father Charles the Emperor) the
second day of our resignation will be the first day of our repentance; and if
this people will be so deceived, I will not say with Cardinal Caraffa, let them
be deceived; but only, if when the Priests will bear rule, the people will love
to have it so, what will they do in the end thereof? And whatever moderation
they may pretend, or for a while practice (although sufficient for the day is
the evil thereof) yet who can bind the influences to be sweet, or lose the
bands if they should be cruel, of those stars that shall arise to morrow,
Quenquam posse putas mores narrare futuros?
Hic mihi si fueris tu Leo, qualis eris?
Neither are we apt to believe that their government which begins so roughly,
will commence more sleek and smooth, or be like that Viper in Chiaca, which is
poison in the morning, but not at night. It is a most impolitick and unstable
security which is not rooted in the limitation of the power, more than in the
tempers of those that manage it, cui plus licet quam par est, plus velit quam
licet, for men are too apt to be like those little Crabs Carinades, which first
get into little shells, and prospering there to more growth, remove still from
less into greater, and are too often found like the Indian Taddy, which is
sweet in the morning, but being shined upon and warmed by the Sun, turns sour.

What concernment can it h^ld with duty to take Physic enforced upon them when
they are not sick, and to receive a Salve that is proper for another sore? that
which may be a wholesome medicine for curing a disease in one, may cause it in
another; this may be a proper recipe for an ignorant person, but renders a man
of knowledge interpretatively ignorant; like as Mirth stops a bleeding vein,
and makes a sound to bleed; and Trifolium laid to a wound made by a Viper heals
it, but put to whole flesh causes the same pain that the stinging of a Viper
does What obligation of duty can it have, to give proof of that which cannot be
doubted, to satisfy those that are already convinced, and to translate the
Stage into the Church, making some Histrionically to personate that which they
are not, and a knowing man to play the part of an ignorant, only for a show and
in a kind of pageant? And the Marcionites who used to give Baptism to men
after they were dead that had not received it in their life, and set one under
the bed to answer interrogatories for him, might have defended their pageant
(which Chrysostom and Epiphanius so deride) with this specious pretense, that
it served to set forth the necessity of Baptism (in respect of the Precept)
and to excite others that were alive to partake it, as well as the Catechizing
of men grounded in and approved for knowledge, is here supported by this
counterfeit color, that it conduces to supple others that may need to undergo
this trial.

They cannot by overmuch Charity be prodigal of Church Privileges, and therein
of Christ's blood. Aquinas 22. q. 119. art. 3.
I shall not remember them that it is determined not only in the Ethics but in
the School, that the Covetous man is more deteriorate than the prodigal, and
that upon this score of reason, because prodigality is beneficial to many, and
more approximate to liberality, a more plausible and endearing habit, and more
easily to be rectified, though these circumstances perchance might not ineptly
be applied to this case; but I shall first deny, that there is any inordination
of giving beyond the measure of reason, to whom, and for what, and as it ought
not, for time, place or manner (which carries the definition of prodigality)
when the Sacrament is exhibited to those that are not cast out for notorious
wickedness, but is rather an act of justice, as it respects their debt, and of
charity, as it regards another good, and to prove this, this whole discourse
is a medium.

2. It seems then that Baptism is no Church privilege, Dr. Morton, Cathol.
appeal for Protest. l. 2. c. 22. sect, 15. p. 108.
and that Ambrose affirming that in Baptism there is the invisible blood of
Christ, and Augustine saying that every one Baptized, before he eat of the
Bread of the Eucharist, is notwithstanding by virtue of Baptism partaker of
the body and blood of Christ, were both grossly mistaken (though our Divines
have alleged those testimonies against the Papists to show the Fathers spoke
the same of the Sacramental Element of Water, which they did of those Bread and
Wine) Or else in Baptizing all the Infants of their Congregations, they have a
commission to be prodigal only of such Church privileges and of Christ's blood
also in such manner, as they shall think fit and expedient, and as it shall be
subservient to their ends and interests.

3. Not to insist on here, what has been considered elsewhere, how far the
partaking of the word and prayers, is a Church-privilege, yet the blood of
Christ, is as well held forth and offered to us in the word preached, as in
those visible and tangible words, the Sacrament, and we drink the blood of
Christ, when we hear his word (as Origin expresses it) it is the same thing in
both, though in a different manner, as has been formerly demonstrated.

Paul was jealous and afraid, Diodat. Annot. in utrumque locum. In locum.
Ardenter vos in Deum depereo. Menoc. annot. in loc.
yet not uncharitable. Paul had indeed a jealous care of the Corinthians, 2
Cor. 11.2. but it was not so much a distrust as a desire to keep them in union
with Christ, Ambio vos Dei zelotypia, metaphora a zelo parauymphi, pro gloria
sponsi, and salute sponsae (says Piscator) non patier aemulos pseudoapostolos
qui vos quasi virginem meam ambiunt (as A Lapide) and consonantly Aquinas and
Estius, and Ostendit (says Calvin) cur desipiat (gloriando) nam hominem
zelotypia quasi transversum rapit, and he was afraid of the Galatians, Gal.
4.11. for declarat pro iis suam solicitudinem, says Estius, and solicitudo is
only rationabile sludium ad aliquid consequendum, but let it be properly fear,
which is any expectation of an impendent evil, or ex imaginatione futuri mali
corruptivi (...) dolorem inserentis perturbatio quadam ac dolor, there was
evident ground and cause sufficient for such a fear, and we do not dream that a
just fear cannot be compatible with charity, but nevertheless that fear did
only move to an admonition or reproof, and there did rest, it did not
transport him to divine of their estate, and suspend them from the Sacrament,
we impugn not all doubtings or suspicions of others, if the signs from whence
they result be not light, nay we have conceived that in order to cautell, or
admonition, for avoiding a detriment, or applying a remedy, even doubtful
things may be interpreted in the worst part, Silvius in 22. q. 60. art. 4. p.
317.
not definitively judgeing another to be ill, but suppositively fearing he may
be such, and demeaning themselves externally in these respects as if he were
such, for such acts neither are nor include a judgment of another as evil,
but involve only a judgment that they ought to be cau^ious, and wary and
tender of them, but we only limit and prescribe them to abstain from what may
be defamatory and poenall, for else they will go farther than the Apostles
example, or any line of Scripture will reach or extend unto.

What they say of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, his trying some, we have
elsewhere made trial of, and showed it can be no Angel tutclar for them or
their course.

Charity (they say) is not blind, but sure it is so dul-sighted in nothing, as
in prying into, and censuring other men's faults, and especially their state and
condition, it has eyes clear from all vitiating humors which receive the
species according to their tinctures and dispositions, it has no close nor
contracted pupil whereby (according to the Optics) men's faults seem bigger
than they are, but large and dilated, whereby they rather appear less, and is
contrariwise affected toward their graces.

They are not bound to hope contrary to their knowledge and experience: then it
seems they have broken the bands in sunder that Charity laid on them, for it is
the property and Eulogy thereof to hope that good of men (that it may in future
be obtained) which they cannot discern at present, to hope that which they
cannot believe, Etiam si in speciem vita and mores minus respondeant, imo
diversum praese ferant, as was formerly alleged.

But we know not by what lights the Apologists behold them (as there are lights
of such composition as set off all that are seen by them in ugly and monstrous
shapes, nor through what glasses they look (as there are Dioptricks which
represent things in other postures and forms than in truth they are) or what
suffusio notha may be in their eyes, which so depraves the sight, that the
clouds and vapors within, seem to be motes without: but unless they can see
things invisible, or that which no man else is capable to discern, they can see
nothing in the greatest part of their people which may retrench or forbid, not
only a charitable but a rational hope, that they are such as are admissible
to the Sacrament. And whatsoever they may pretend to know by some of them, yet
as long as it is only by a private and no public and notorious knowledge, it
is no sufficient cause to debar them of the communion.

But how many of them have been judicially censured for notorious wickedness?
How many of them have they convinced of any great inordinateness in their
ways, persisted in after admonition? Nay how many have they privately
admonished of this or that exorbitancy, before they have rendered them as
heathens and publicans? and yet this is evident to us ought to be the method of
their duty, and that the lightning should precede the thunder, and fulmen
monit^rium go before discutiens, and however it seems they think them, (as
Aristippus said to Aeschines) so insanable, that they deserve not to be
admonished, yet be their hearts Rook, they should first be spoken unto to bring
forth the waters of repentance, before they be stricken with the rod.

But that which follows renders it evident, that their suspicion is not founded
in any wickedness or ignorance detected in them, which may be privative of the
Sacrament, but because they have not discovered in them some signs positive of
grace, for they say it is not against charity to suspect ignorance and
unfitness when the contrary is no way discovered, but we hope it is
sufficiently confirmed in the precedent Section; Vt quandiu aliquis non
sufficienter probatur malus, praesumendus est bonus, and sufficiens ratio ad
been judicandum de proximo est ipsum jus quod habet ut bona opinio de se
concipiatur, quamdiu contraria manifest non probatur, since supposito quod re
utrinque dubia aliquis actus sit eliciendus, ille debet ferri in meliorem
partem, and as in other things, so especially in order to admission to the
Sacrament, does this rule hold.

But what ever goodness may be in men, yet if they walk not in their way, it is
to no end, for they have such an (...) here, as might make Archimedes leap out
of the Bath again; let a man be as learned as Abulensis of old, of whom it was
said, Hic stupor est mundi, qui scibile discutit omne, or Scaliger of late, of
whom Casaubon says, Nomen absolutissimae eruditionis, non hominis, yet he is
but an ignorant if he submit not to the trial of his knowledge in their way,
for he (they say) shows his ignorance of his duty. Socrates said he knew this
one thing, that he knew nothing, and some have been very ignorant of one thing
especially, viz. wherefore they should be accounted so ignorant, but the
mystery is now unravelled, probus, innocens, etc. cujus unum est, sed magnnm
vitium quod est poeta, this is that primo cognitum, that which -- Si nescis
nihil est si caetera noscis, and perhaps -- si noscis nihil est sicaetera
nescis, and perchance a lesser mass of knowledge (and sanctity too) will pass
for full weight in one that knows this point of obedience, when a greater will
not, where this has not been learned, as the same Counter in one place stands
but for one, in another for an hundred. This must be a thirteenth Article added
to the Creed, such as the Popes supremacy is called by Bellarmire, Summa totius
rei Christianae, and therefore if Queen Elizabeth would have acknowledged that,
she might have had content by indult in other things from Pius 5. other matters
may be connived at, but says Pope Boniface we declare, affirm, define and
pronounce, that it is altogether necessary to salvation, to be subject to the
Bishop of Rome; and as he told Philip the fair of France, they that maintain
the contrary, we hold them madmen.

If they know any to be an often swearer or guilty of those debauches they
speak of, let them be duly cast our, if they go on still in their trespasles,
obstinately after admonition, for admonition, veluti est quadam diaeta
aegrotantis animae, as Clement, and it is an aphorism of Hippocrates,
Cuicunque potest per alimenta restitui sanitas fugiendus est penitus usus
medicamentorum, but till a man be cut off for immedicable, if he approach the
table, and cry guilty and say he will amend, (as they speak) they have not yet
showed any warrant to reject him, and I think to receive him is more suitable
to that which God (our righteousness being but an inchoative imitation and weak
resemblance of that in our heavenly father, whose indulgence infinitely
furmounteth ours) commands us to do toward our brother, who if he sin against
us seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to us saying I
repent, we shall forgive him, Luke 17.4. Quomodo ergo (says Bullinger) fideles
ministri adeo facile (ut Anabaptistae volunt) a caena excluderent and
separarent homines peccatores, Advers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9. p. 231.
sed tamen petentes gratiam dei? and qui hoc testantur eo ipso quod accedunt ad
canam, quandoquidem dominus ipse qui optime potuisset hoc faccre, in Juda
proditore hoc non fecit, nos autem miseri homines ex depravatione naturae
nostrae alioqui suspiciosi sumus and saepe hominibus nullam habemus fidem? etc.
And we find in Scripture also such presidents as may warrant an admission in
such a case. The Jailer from a purpose and attempt to have destroyed himself,
came immediately to know what he should do to be saved, and was received to the
Sacrament of Baptism, without time taken to make trial of the sincerity of his
conversion, and such or worse we have showed was the condition of Simon Magus,
who yet found a present reception: besides to doubt of their repentance till
the insincerity thereof be manifested by a recidivation, is (I conceave) to
judge the heart (which they protest against) seeing there are no internal
actions from whence that judgment can result, August. de fide and operib. c. 17
tom. 4. p. 16.
Qui seculo saltem ver bis etiamsi factis non renunciant (says Augustine)
veniunt quidem and inter triticum seminantur, and in area congeruntur, and
ovibus aggregantur and retia subeunt, and convivantibus admiscentur, and he
there thinks, both that an external profession that they will amend, does
render susceptible of Baptism, and that here is the like reason for admission
to the Lords Table as to Baptism.

As I have no propensness to quest after that point which they have sprung
here, whether sound conversion may be suddenly wrought, so I have no incumbency
to pursue it, not only

First, because though they seem absolutely to deny that it can be a sudden
work, yet they again mollify this hard saying, and affirm that commonly it is
not so, and that implies it sometimes is so, and therefore may possibly at any
time be, and therefore at no time can they either infallibly or safely conclude
that conversion is not sound because it is sudden.

And secondly, because this carries no aspect or reflection upon the point in
hand, for they need not in order to admission, require more in any intelligent
person than to be free of scandal, and therefore well may suspend their further
disquisition whether he be truly converted, the title to the Sacrament being
not founded in regeneration, but Church membership with a dogmatical faith; yet
since they put this upon our account, that to believe a wicked man may be
suddenly made good, is a neglect of Gods revealed will, and a flying to his
absolute power, we cannot but summarily tell them, that by their asserting the
contrary, they presumptuously limit and contract his power, and falsely pretend
and impose upon his revealed will; his Spirit like the wind blows where (and
how) it lists, and though Naturalists teach us some signs and presages of
approaching winds, yet often they rise suddenly without any Prognostics, and
so the Spirit comes suddenly in a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind
(and that as well in respect of charis as charisma) the dispensations of God
are various, and his workings unlimited, neither does he always take the same
way to the same end, he is a most free Agent and restrained by nothing but his
proper will, and if we look for the revelation of that will in his Word, we
find conversion there set forth under the notion of such things as are not
only subitous but instantaneous: It is called a creation, Aquin. 1. q. 63 art.
5.
and not only the School resolves us, that creatio est in instanti, but
Paraeus adds ad creationem tres conditiones requiruntur,, 1. Ut aliquid fiat ex
materia nulla 2. Vel ex materia indisposita. 3. Absque motu, in instanti.
It is named Regeneration, and generation is by consent of all Philosophers in
an instant: it is true though the introduction of the form be in a moment, In
Genesis c. 1. v. 1. p. 26.
yet there are praevicus dispositions thereunto, and so we grant there is in
regeneration, though the form of the new man be produced instantly, and such a
disposing hability is the general vocation and common graces in such as they
dispute of, what other preparations there may often be, yet as it is not
necessary that always there should be some, for God can raise Children out of
stones to Abraham, so neither that they should be the same, for the subject and
manner of operating is diverse, and if the spirit of bondage do always
harbenger the spirit of adoption, yet it does not follow, that he must enter
very long before him, or come with any great noise or public notice, and
therefore neither also is it certain that those preparations cannot be short
and sudden, for grace is an habit infused by Gods Spirit, not acquisite by
multiplied precedent acts, and Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus sancti gratia,
says Ambrose, Ubi deus magister est quam cito discitur quod docetur, as Leo,
and good dispositions as they are but grace in fieri, the Aurora thereof and
preludial beams of the Sun of Righteousness rising in their hearts, so they
are properly preparations to the manifestation of grace rather than the
existence thereof; Arg. in disp. advers. these. p. 356. 1.2. q. 112. art. 2.
operantur ex justificatione non in justificationem, so as we may hold with
Camero, Darimedium non inter naturam and gratiam, sed inter naturam and ultimum
gratiae complementum, and affirm with Aquinas, praeparatio hominis ad gratiam
habendam quaedam est simul cum ipsa infusione gratiae -- cum homo ad gratiam se
praeparare non possit, nisi deo cum praeveniente and movente ad bonum, non
refert utrum subito vel paulatim aliquis ad perfectam praeparationem veniat.

It is thirdly styled Illumination, light being the first thing in the new
creation of the little World, and Aristotls has taught us, that lux momentanea
action se explicat.

It is fourthly entitled a Resurrection from the dead, which is no successive
motion, nor has any precedent alterations. Camero defines conversion to be
velle bonum quod noluisti, nolle malum quod voluisti, and Volition is ranked by
Philosophers among those mutations which are instantaneous.

And if we shall inspect into the works of God in converting men, and for that
consult with the sacred sheets, we fall upon examples of Matthew and Zaccheus
the Publicans, of the Thief on the Cross, of Paul and (him from whom some
think he borrowed his name, as Scipio the African did his cognomen from the
Country he conquered) Sergius Paulus, Lydia, the Jailer, etc. and not only
single stars but Constellations of 5000, (whereof some doubtless were
converted to a special faith, as all were to a common) that cast beams of light
upon this truth, and we cannot suddenly convert our selves to behold the
vocation of any, but it was a sudden conversion, and if we shall research for
the witness of time and light of truth in other histories, we shall encounter
so many instances of conversions wrought even in an instant, as make caena
dubia, where we are less troubled where to find examples than which to choose,
being so many -- quot flores Sicula nascuntur in herba,
Quotque ferat dicam terra Cilissa crocos.
But as tria sunt omnia, so I will only crop three of the flowers of the
spring of the Church, which history, as the Herald or Ambassador of antiquity,
has recorded.

First, that lapsed Scholar of St. John, whom he Apostle with one word, when
he was turned thief upon the high way to damnation, made to stand to deliver up
his heart to God.

Secondly, Genesius who in a full theater under Dioclesian scoffing at
Christian Religion, at the same time became a confessor of the faith, and a
Martyr of Christ, and with his own blood washed out the aspersions he had cast
on Christianity.

Thirdly, Anthony, who traveling upon those occasions of the world which
ingrost all his heart, passing by a Chapel and hearing that portion of
Scripture read, If thou will be perfect go sell all that thou have, and give to
the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me,
instantly took up a resolution neither to follow on his journey, nor the world,
but only to go after Christ, and to enrich the poor with his wealth (forthwith
distributed) and himself with heavenly treasure. And if we reflect on later
ages, and autumnal flowers of history, we may refresh our memories with the
examples

First, of Waldus, who had a sudden rise to life by seeing one suddenly fall
dead.

Secondly, the Marquess of Vico, who by one elegant simile in a sermon of
Peter Martyrs was persuaded to lay down all his honors and interest at the feet
of Christ.

And thirdly, Junius, unto whom the reading of the beginning of St. John's
Gospel, without any previous dispositions, was the corruption of an Atheist and
the generation of a faithful servant of God.

Not to mention what a malignant influence their contrary doctrine has to
blast all hopes of a death bed repentance, whereof yet as none ought to
presume, so none should despair, and whereof we may perchance fitly say, what
the Cardinal perversely said of the doctrine of justification by faith, It was a
good supper doctrine, but not so seasonable at breakfast; yet I shall offer to
be considered, that since our Divines who have listed themselves in defense of
Free Grace against the Pelagians (distinguished by their several regiments) to
beat down merit of congruity, the power and good use of Free Will, the acquist
of the habit of grace by frequent virtuous acts, have made use of this
argument; that God very often does not only call those that are furthest of,
even the greatest sinners, but stops them in their fiercest carreir, and
suddenly turns them in their full course, when they had neither hability, nor
promptness, nor inclination to any good, whether then the Apologists their
cancelling this Hypothesis, and rasing the foundations of this argument, by
denying such sudden conversions of wicked men, be not an imbeseling of armor
and habiliments of war provided for those soldiers, which is Felony by
Statute.

What is more raked together in this Section of the prostituting of Gods
Ordinance, (sure they have made a prostitute of this reason, it is so commonly
abused) Of ^ampling the blood of the Covenant, (of which no account is made
when it is done thereunto as held forth in the word) Of the incompatiblenesse
of loving men and suffering them to drink damnation, (but it may consist well
enough with love to let them hear damnation, and to withold from them that
which in it self conduces to salvation, and to damnation only by such an
accident as they can neither foresee nor prevent) That the work is not good
unless the men be good, (the work is good in the kind and object, though not
effectually good to him that does not do it well in respect of the end and
circumstances, as no other good work is, and he that does the material part
without the formal, is somewhat more in his way, and not so far off from his
end, as he that does not, nor is permitted to do either, and upon like motives
as they keep him from the Sacraments, he may be kept off from all other
ordinances and duties) all this is scarce like the entertainment which
Flaminius had of his host, for that, though i^ were the same Pork, yet it had a
various dress and different sauce, but this is still se^ before us cooked in
the same nauseous manner, and is more like that African Beast called Dubh, that
for some days after he has been formerly killed, his flesh being heated at
the fire will move again; only whereas they add in the close, that a freer
admission is against charity to the Church, lying under loss and reproach
through neglect of Order and Discipline, some separating absolutely, others
staying with grief, I must tell them, that as improper Physic is often more
destructive than the disease, Quot Themison aegros Autumno occiderit uno, so
the Church was never at more loss and reproach, than since they have intruded
upon this way of cure, unless it be neither loss to shrink it from an hundred
to one, nor reproach to have but one of an hundred fit or worthy to partake of
the Sacrament; and as Egubinus tells us of melancholy, plerique hoc morbo
medicina nihil profecisse visi sunt, and sibi demissi invaluerunt, so I presume
that not only many in their Churches, but of their Churches many also, might
have like Pausanias been the better, if they had not used these Physicians, and
what Hippocrates in his Aphorisms says of Physic, will be more verified of
theirs, quicunque pharmacatur in juventute, deflebit insenectute, who when they
should cut off an immedicable member, hew the whole body in pieces, and with
Catiline do extinguere incendium ruina, but it is very pretty that they
separate to prevent a separation: Physicians sometimes Vt curent spasmum
procurant febrim, but I do not find that they induce one kind of Fever to
prevent another, as to cause an hectic to remedy a causon.

But it seems the Apologists will take in with the Paracelsians, who though
Curatio sit motus a morbo ad sanitatem, and motus fit per contraria, yet they
affirm that similia similibus curantur, and as the Romans to preserve that
Target which fell from heaven, in the preservation whereof the incolumity of
the City depended, made many others by that pattern, so like it, that none could
discern the original; so to preserve others from separating, they go along with
them and make themselves like them; and as for those that stay with grief,
perhaps it may fare with them, as with Standels in a wood, which scarce ever
prosper when their fellows are cut down, and themselves left naked, but if
there be any scandalous persons, that spring just sorrow to them by their
communion, let them be duly cast out if they merit excision, si sine labe pacis
and unitatis, and sine laesione frumentorum fieri potest, but if without
checking with these, that cannot be effected, let them take that which is their
own, nihil aliud bonis restat quam dolor and gemitus, they must de peccato
dolere for a time, but will de dolor gaudere in the end, grieve they may but
stay they must, it is better to be passive in grief than active in schism,
Eligerent potius fortes esse in tolerandis malis, quam impii in deserendis
bonis, as Augustine: But when they tell us of such as stay with grief, they
forget how many they have cast out with sorrow, like Empiricks that are still
recounting the few they have cured, and make no account of the many they have
killed, whereas though the Sun must see the one, yet the Earth cannot cover the
other: the Romans used to tyth men for punishment, saving nine, and executing
the tenth; but they contrary centuriate men or choose one of an hundred to save
from schism and sorrow, and cut off ninety nine from the means of salvation
and comforts of the ordinance.

SECT. XX.
Whether the Apologists are charitably suspected, or can be justly charged with
Pharisaisme. Whether their actings proceed out tenderness of conscience. A
parable between the Apologists and the Pharisees in some things.

EVil fame takes the revenge of evil courses, and irregular ways are made
odious by the footsteps they leave behind them, it being just that the
complacency in doing ill, be lost in hearing ill; and therefore many that
conceit themselves to be fair and are not, are angry with the glass, like
Holena that grown old oftered up her Looking-glass to Venus. It Is true indeed,
though fame and other men's testimonies are a Mirror wherein men see themselves;
yet as is the glass, so is the reflection. And we will also promptly take in
the Allegory of the Apologists, That sometime things savor according to the
disposition of the palate, and the stomach marres the taste, but shall then
desire them to consider, whether the unsavouriness and loathsomness which they
seem to relish in others, and for which they spew them forth, may not be as
much in the organ as in the object, and persuade them first to purge themselves
of some affections, and then perchance they will not find the distempers of the
Church to indicate such vehement purging, Prope est ut inique puniat. qui nimis.

What taste, say they, have the godly ones among them, that so deadly a weed as
rank Pharisaisme should be shred into their pot, and yet they find their food
savoury, and eat it with blessing. This Coloquintida it seems brings death
into the pot; but by bringing meal (whereunto some have allegorically resembled
the Sacrament) there had been no harm: If they aim their Preface against those
that suspect their way of Pharisaisme, and insinuate their palates and stomach
to be imbewed and vitiated with Pharisaisme that taste or savor any such thing
in their courses, alas! those are the Publicans not the Pharisees, such as must
not be touched because unholy, not that will not be touched because holier; but
as they tell us, that the stomach marres the taste, so we know by experience,
that in marring it makes it conformable to its own ill humors, as those which
have the Pica, can well relish, and greedily swallow things not only not
nutritive, but abominable; and therefore Pharisaisme may be in the pot, and yet
some may well enough relish the broth, if the stomach by distemper be
comformed and assimilated to such a taste; if there be an intus existens there
will always be a prohibens alienum, and there can be no great disrellish where
the aliment is suited to the element, and that is true which Dousa commends out
of Plautus, Qui amat, quod amat si id habet, id habet pro cibo.

This saying, Touch me not, has been the old attendant of that nickname
Puritan, the label of profane lips. It Is possible they have heard so much,
though I have not, who desire not to have my ear so near in fellowship with
profane lips. But this rather shows the odium of the name, than the innocence
of those that are asperst with it: all men are not alike guiltless, that lie
under one common accident, neither does it follow that some may not wear this
livery, because it has been unjustly pined upon others sleeves, or because
Cato was 46 times accused and acquitted, that therefore Verres may not be
condemned. I wish they had more of the old Puritan, and less of the new
Separatists; and then though this charge hung heretofore as a label at never so
many lips, yet it should now have had a seal set to it. We know the old
Purritan was a maul to beat down, or (as Phocion to Demosthenes) an hatchet to
cut off, not a trowel to build up Separation.

But if they may not suspect others of hypocrisy, why are they suspected? Are
they fallen below all good thoughts and hopes? At the worst, the case would be
the same as betwixt Alexander and the Pirate, the one pilfred with a small Bark
in a little Creek, the other roved with an Army to rob all the world; but
nevertheless we must tell them, that first it is their suspicion only that was
suspected, Autores ferunt tela retorta suos. They had not been passive, but for
having been active, Oculos rapuit, reddat de sua caecitate solatium; (says
Quintilian) in n^llo mortalium praeferre possum secleris sui impatientiam;
brevissima est justiciae vindictae cum facinus mensura poenae est: Yet because
that may be justly suffered, -- neque enim lex justior ulla est,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua,
Which yet may unjustly be done, illi quod meruere, sed quid tu ut insurgeres?

Therefore secondly, Comment. in 22. q. 60. art 4. ad 2.
they not only went before, but go beyond others, who suspect not their estate
or persons, but their actions; not that they are unrighteous men, but lest they
do some unrighteous things. And Cajetan tells us, that if we think an action
evil, not for the intent of the actor, but absolutely because such an act is
evil in its kind, that judgment respects not persons but things, whereof we
are to judge according to what they seem to be; and though some of his ways
are not warrantable, yet a man may be denominated good, though checked with
some evil actions, as we say the Moon shines when a good part thereof is not
enlightened; and that it is bright when yet it is blemished with some spots; and
that it is round when notwithstanding not only the perspectives but other
observations show that it is indented with gibbous and hollow parts.

Thirdly, it is a suspicion of such a fault as themselves have publicly taught
us is one of the spots of Gods children: for such they say are pride (together
with anger and worldliness) though some did think they were not duly cautious
to define and limit those spots, so as might farther tempt some to a suspicious
inquiry, whether as that famous Carver formed Jupiter to the similitude of his
own Amasius, and the Negroes depaint Angels to their proper color, and they
say, if a beast could limb God himself, he would draw him according to his
shape, as superstitious men also do: so in determining what spots might be
compatible with the beauty of holiness, they selected such as perchance might
be visible in their own faces.

Fourthly, though they be suspected, yet they are not suspended, nor thought
worthy to be so: suspicion that leads only to admonition may be charitable,
when that which is carried on to suspension may be Pharisaicall; as Galvano
tells us of a tree in India, the one side whereof, which respects the East, is
antidote, and that which looks to the West is poison: and as the Dates in Egypt
which ripened beyond such an hight, inebriate, but are otherwise wholesome. It Is
such a suspicion as a Physician may have that observing the symptoms warns of
the disease to persuade to use of remedies; not such as the Spaniards had
toward their slaves, who when through faintness they could not answer
expectation, they straight knocked them in the heads, to prevent more trouble
with them: it is like bath col or the filia vocis among the later Jews, which
though it came with thunder, yet it was always for instruction, and never
attended with a thunderbolt.

Fifthly, all of this way are not suspected to walk with the same affections,
there are some happily who (as Whitaker was wont to say of Bernard) do follow
Absalom with a simple heart. Finis operis and finis operantis are not always
concentrick: there are some callings which sonant in malum, and vergunt in
malum, yet some men happily contract not all the evils whereunto all callings are
a tentation, and wherewith many are ensnared that manage them; the grapes may
be sour, yet all teeth may not be set on edge with them: And howsoever a good
intention cannot make that to commence good, which in the kind and object is
evil, as an evil end or efficient vitiates that which is in its proper nature
good; yet the actors of that evil may not all have the same impulsives and
affections, and therefore it may have diverse accidental qualifications and
degrees. When the Donatists propt up their heresy with the authority of
Cyprian, Lyrinensis tells them, that the authors of the opinions are judged
Catholics, but the followers thereof are Heretics; the Masters are pardoned,
but the Scholars condemned. But peradventure we may invertedly say, that the
first projectors and prime leaders are more culpable than those that take after
them, who in the mixture and compounding of this discipline may have added some
ingredients and infusions, which to the others are not discernable. It is an
happy ignorance in those of shallow judgments, that they know not these depths.
Clavius has demonstrated, that in a man walking, his head moves faster than
his feet. The superiors and masters have farther reatches and co^prehensions
than those of lower form, and the chief heads go farther than others follow,
and there may be implicit Pharisaisme where is no explicit; as those charmers
who undertook to cure distempers by words, or by such applications as have no
natural influence upon the effect, are therein successful only by a compact
with the Devil, yet the most of those that practice this sorcery know nothing
of this covenant, yet proceeding in that way and method which by the first
contract being used in order to those ends, the effect follows by the
operation of Satan, and therefore they are said to work by an implicit compact.

St. Jerome tells the Pelagians they are worse than the Pharisee, for he gave
God thanks, which they seemed not to do. And Saint Augustine puts the same on
their score, because they ascribe to their proper strength that good which the
Pharisee attributed to the favor of God.

Some of our Divines, (and particularly Humfries and Gerhard) have laid the
Pharisee at the door of the Papists: Pharisaism. vetus and novus, loc. com.
tom. 5. sect. 6. p. 393.
yet Pelagius (they say) was otherwise a man of an humble spirit, and if he
were not, yet I am persuaded that many both among the Remonstrants, and the
Papists, who have been soured with this leaven, have not much swollen therewith,
and are Pharisees not without that righteousness wherewith they may enter the
kingdom of heaven. As Bibliander said of Erasmus his Enchiridion, there was
more devotion in the book than in the Author; so sometimes also there may be
pride in the opinion, which has no influx or diffusion into the person.

And therefore when they say, it is possible their actings may as well preceed
from the tenderness of their consciences, and love of holiness, as an
overweening conceit of their own pureness, and that they are persuaded a man
may be humble, and yet wary in his society in Gods Ordinance: we shall concede
it is possible, and it may be actually so in some, but we cannot be persuaded
that it is therefore consequent hat it is so in all: for the argument follows
not a posse ad esse. Its possible the Milesians may be no fools, yet they do
the very same things which fools commonly do, and if they be not sick of such
a malady, the symptom belies the disease, It Is possible that Alpheus, one river
among a thousand, may pass from Elis under the earth and sea unmixt to Arethusa
in Sicily, and the Danow and Savus may stream together in one chanel, without
blending of their waters; but he that shall suspect the contrary of all other
rivers, will rather assert the strength of his reason, than betray the weakness
of his faith.

But would not this Apology have suited with as much handsomness, and sounded
with as great grace in the mouth of the Pharisee? (which indeed seems to be of
purpose fitted for him;) Might not he have asked why his complacency in not
being as other men, might not have proceeded from an heart raised up in
thankfulness to God who had made him to differ, as well as from a spirit lift
up in pride? (Proditio est ea tacere quae quis studiose perfecerit.) That his
scoring up his good works might have flowed as well from a desire to have
advanced the honor of God, that men by seeing his good works, might have
glorified his Father in heaven, and to have excited them to imitate his
example, as from an affection to make some sacrifice to ostentation, Camero ad
Matthew. 19. v. 3.
and turn the house of God into the temple of his own honor (Author est bonorum
sequentium qui relinquit exemplum.) That in his praying by himself far off
from the Publican, seorsim (as Beza and Camero render it) he was humble
notwithstanding, but wary in his society in Gods ordinance of prayer, and his
despising of him was only a contemning of him that contemned Gods ways, and a
contempr of a contemner, (as they speak Sect. 18.) It is great pity that the
Pharisee had not retained such an Advocate, or found out such a plea; perhaps
he had then never been cast at his arraignment, si -- Tali auxilio and
defensoribus istis non eguisset. But with what parget soever men may daub, or
with what color they may depaint those things, seriously when we please our
selves too much, we please God nothing; even in this, his ways are not like
our ways, we condemn our selves, he acquits us, and condemns us when we
applaud our selves; not only other men's eyes, but our own as much, are
latrones praemioru^. And as they say Hunters lay glasses for the Panther, that
staying to behold himself in them, they may the better overtake and destroy
him: so he that knows that the contemplation of his own excellency with too
great complacency was that which cast him down from heaven, uses the same
snare as most effectual to entangle others. And to despise our brethren in our
eyes, makes us most desplcable in the sight of God: in other things we ought to
imitate God, but in this he imitates us, and in this respect is made in the
likeness of Men. Facilius parcit his qui in ipsum offendunt quam qui in
proximum, says Chrysostom. Lines the nearer they approach the center, come
the nearer to each other, and they are at greatest distance from God, who are
farthest off from each other in pride and uncharitableness.

But neither is the beam so upright between tenderness of conscience and love
of holiness, and an overweening conceit of pureness, or betwixt humility and
wariness in society in Gods ordinance, as that a cast of charity may turn the
scale to to the better part. Conscience (says Aquinas) is the order or
application of our Science to somewhat, or (it being to be taken
intransitively) our science or knowledge applied to particular acts: but truly
we have yet seen no scientificall demonstrations for this way, which may beget
such a firm and certain assent to the goodness or truth thereof: ex mero motu
it may be, but not ex certa scientia; and what principle soever it be, that
directs our actions in good or evil, if it have not the force of some law
justly obligatory, whereof it is but the crier or proclaimer, it is not
conscience, but fancy it may be (which is an irrational animal conscience,
fancy in bruit creatures being (as Aristotle tells us) that which supplies the
place of reason) or humor it may be (and then according to the Hebrew proverb,
behold it is Leah, or consonantly to the Greek, it is to court the maid in
stead of Penelope) or passion it may be (and that is, as in an Egyptian
Temple, a beast instead of a Deity.

We doubt if that be true which they say, That in Peru is a plant called
Drakena, whose root is alexi-pharmacous, and the leaves venomous; but it is
impossible that so sweet a root as conscience and love of holiness, should give
spring to so bitter and intoxicating a fruit as Separation. True moral virtue,
and the grace of holiness, have only some formal difference, and a right
Conscience is near allied to both, and virtue (to which the Synteresis, Quae
est notitia principiorum moralium, Lessius de justit. and jure, l. 3. c. 1.
dub. 3. Sect. 20. Malderus in 1, 2. q. 55. dub. 2. memb 3. p. 182, 1. 2 disp. 5
q. 1 punct. 2 p. 405. Vasquez in 1.2. disp 84 c. 2. Sect. 12. p 579
praescribet fines, so as virtue considered according to her essence, supposes
no other dictamen of Prudence, than that of the Synteresis) is that qua nemo
tanquam principio male utitur: and if an act be thought good which indeed is
evil, virtue concurres not to that act, because being materially evil, it
remains also formally evil; in that case, neither can prudence dictate it to be
done, because that is not circumspectly enough judged to be good, whose evil
may be deprehended by a just indagation; for virtue tends to no act but
prudently and formally it ought to be good, that it may be within the latitude
of the object of virtue. As in natural things (says Valentia) we animadvert,
that the cause produces no effect but such as is endued with the persection
thereof: so virtue which is sometime defined to be dispositio perfecti ad
optimum, can be productive of nothing either formally or materially, which
bears not its image in perfection. And Vasquez observes, that virtue can never
be a principle of an evil operation, because it is an habit of doing things
promptly and delectably; but when a man does an evil thing ignorantly
supposing it to be good, since no vincible ignorance can be with full
inconsideration, but it must needs be attended with some doubting of the less
safer part, wherein is sin, in this respect, that such a dubitation emerging,
yet nevertheless he judges that not to be sin which he ought so to judge, and
so the affection is retarded, and prosecutes not its object promptly and
defectably. De bapt. contra Donatist. l. 1. c. 13. epist. 162.
But then Separation is such an evil, that Augustine can scarce find colors
black enough to paint it out suitably, Separationis immanissimum scelus: and
again, levati altaris horrendo scelere maculati: and more, prepter ipsam
separationis sacrilegam iniquitatem innocents esse non possunt. And he rather
assures us, Contra ep Parmen. l. 1. c. 4.
that origo pertinaciae scismatis nulla sit alia nisi odium fraternum. And
however they may blanch it yet in the very notion of gathering a Church out of
another, is a separation implied from those whom they gather not, De bapt.
contra Donat l. 1. c. 11.
as Divines argue, that even in the decree of electing some, there is included
the negative reprobation of others.

Besides, to say that their rejecting of so many from the communion, results
from the love of holiness, insinuates, that to communicate with them will not
suit with, but pollute or blemish their holiness. And this is the very spirits
and extract of the Pharisee, which they therefore hugg closer to them while they
seem to thrust him off, and are like Ovid, who when he said he would make no
more verses, made one in saying so. It cannot spring from wariness of their
society in Gods ordinances, for then they would be as cautious of their company
in other ordinances, since as we have elswere argued, Quod dicitur per se
dicitur de omni. They admit those men to fellowship in other ordinances, whom
they separate from in this of the Sacrament; nay, to a communion in the other
Sacrament. And to say it may flow from humility, (though they give it forth
without the least color of reason, which yet had been very necessary to
persuade us that the course and stream of that virtue, should be upwards, which
was not wont to come down to the lower grounds) St. Augustine will stop or turn
that current (as well as the other of holiness) by saying Qui si vere justi
essent, Contra Epist. Parmen. l. 3. c. 4. tom. 7. p. 15 Filiucius Cas. Tract.
21. c. 4. Sect. 124. Vasques. 1.2. tom. 1. disp. 60. q. 19. c. 3 p. 421.
and humiles essent; si autem humiles essent, etiam si vere malos in su
evicinitat is congregatione paterentur, quos ab unitate Christi expellere non
valerent, charitate Christi tolerare diligerent. From an erroneous conscience
probably it may proceed, and such a conscience the impurest and most
blasphemous of all heretics, even the Gnostics, and the wildest and most
desperate, even the Circumcellions might have pleaded and pretended to: In such
a notion conscience is become the greatest malefactor, or Sanctuary for
malefactors in the world, and a tender conscience plays the part of Davus in
the Comedy, (and I wish it acted not in Tragedies too) It is the Savior which
inordinate men have set forth in the likeness of their sinful flesh, who must
justify them, and bear and answer for all their irregularities. But as it was
the law of Pittacus, That he which offended in his drunkenness should suffer
double punishment, one for his offense, and another for his drunkenness: so it
seems as rational, that he that perpetrates any fault by an erroneous
conscience, which is a spiritual drunkenness, should incur a twofold
penalty, one for his error, another for the fault: but however, if it dee not
aggravate the evil, yet error in the conscience cannot make the matter
commence good: For every vincible error is voluntary, and he acts imprudently
that follows it, and he that is imprudent is not good; and that an action be
good, the cause ought to be integrous, but the cause cannot be entire although
the object be apprehended as good, but it is also necessary that in the
understanding there be an integrous reason of the apprehension of it as good,
that is, that it be judged good in the understanding, and that in no manner it
may be judged, or ought to be judged evil, which cannot be as long as the
error is voluntary, because vincible.

But because, Jam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. And as in the
Taliecotion rules, when the man dies whose flesh was cut off to be fitted and
fastened on another, to supply and repair a mutilated member, forthwith the new
part corrupts and perishes, and as in Burgravius his pretended Lamp, composed
and kindled of the blood of a man, when he expires, the Lamp also goes out: so
therefore as Moncaeus undertook to purge Aaron from Idolatry, because the
golden Calf and popish Images of God made to that pattern must stand or fall
together; so the Apologists seek to reverse the judgment against the Pharisee
by a Writ of Error, doubting it seems if he be attainted as principal, that
they may be indicted as accessory: they tell us therefore that Esaias. 65.5. Touch
me not for I am holier than thou, is spoken by the people to the Prophets, who
had reproved them for their corrupt worship, and this the best think, but they
quote only Musculus for this interpretation, who though a good one, is but one
Expositor, neither Des nominis hujus bonorem that he should be as Scaliger said
of Aristotle, Unus super omnes, singulis qui omnes fuit; Yet I shall not deny
that there are some others that go in consort with that sense, but it has
little verisimilitude, that persons so abominably should conceit themselves so
much holier than the Prophets, as to be in danger of being polluted by their
contact, and it carries far more probability that this referred unto, and was
directed to the Gentiles, (as Sanctius, a Lapide, Sa, Menechius, Tirinus, etc.)
whom those Jews contemned, though themselves were more contaminated; which
interpretation suits aptly with the context, the Prophet foretelling the
conversion of the Gentiles in the first verse, as Sanctius says is the common
judgment of Interpreters; and then upbraiding the Jews in the following
verses, who notwithstanding their odicus defilements, had such proud opinions
of their own sanctity, and detestable thoughts of those Gentiles. But however
it were, as we should not fail of our end, so neither did we miss our direct
way, for the paper did not quote nor refer unto this place of Isaiah, to
prove this was the supercitious humor of Pharisee. Many indeed both ancient and
modern conceive that the Pharisee was the mark against whom that sh^t was
directed, but it seems the Pharisee is not of so ancient descent and
extraction; for the great learned Scaliger affirms, that the Hasidees had
their original but from the times of Ezra, and the Pharisees were the issue of
those Hasidees, Dogmatists, who reduced their formerly free and voluntary
observations unto Canons and necessary injunctions, Ipsi impuri cum essent
alios ase ut impuros arcebant sicut Samaritas Geographus Arabs clamasse ait, ne
attingas. Grotius. Annot. in locum.
and thereupon called themselves Peruschim, separated both from the other
Hasidim and from the vulgar. And besides it is observable that those here
inveighed against are charged to eat Swines flesh, which to the Pharisee was
abominable, but like enough it is (says Sanctius) they were guilty to do the
same, quod postea feccrunt hypocrita illi, qui cum bonamente pudorem deposucre
-- et ingredi praetorium noluerunt ne gentilium consuetudine contaminati, etc.

But though these were not formal and professed Pharisees, who thought their
holiness would contract a stain by a society with those whom they looked upon
as sinners; and that which they hold forth were the more genuine sense, yet it
cannot set us at any loss, if we find this doctrine from thence however to
result, that they are fastuost arrogant^sque hypocritae, to whom not only the
sincere Prophets, but also Germana ecclesiae membra praeipsis fordent, as
Junius delivers i^; Late Annotat.
so whether they were Pharisees or not, yet the Pharisees were like them, and
Interpreters take notice of it upon the place, and though it be not colligible
from this text, Origin, Tertullian, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Scaliger, Drusius,
Pagnin, Montanus etc.
yet it is otherwise evident, that the Pharisees thought their sanctity in
danger of being defiled by any commerce with or contact of these whom they
thought not so holy as themselves; and therefore had their name, as the learned
carry it by vote, from Perushim, because of that separation they made from the
vulgar, tanquam egregii Judaeorum, says Augustine, and they were called by the
Greeks (...) Separatists. That they held it piacular to eat with sinners,
appears Matt 9.14. Luke 19.7. It was one of their Canons, He that eats a
Samaritans bread, be as he that eats Swines flesh: and it was one of those six
approbries to be avoided by the Disciples of the wise, viz. eating with the
vulgar, populus terrae. That they held the touch of a sinner pollutive, is
manifest Luke 7.39. Camero ad. Matt. 19.3. p. 175. Hall. pharis. and Christ.
Purchase pilgri. l. 2, c. 8. Sect. 3.
And therefore when they came from the market they washed, because having there
to do with diverse sorts of people, they might unawares be polluted, they
baptized themselves as the word is Mark, c. 7.4. which implies washing the
whole body: upon this account it seems the more zealous did constantly wash
themselves before dinner, and this occasioned the wonder of the Pharisee toward
our Savior for not washing, Luke 11.38. And so superstitiously did they tie
themselves to this observation, that Drusius and Buxtorfius tell us, Godwin
Moys. and Aaron, l. 1. c. 10. etc.
that in case a man had not water enough to wash and drink, he should rather
choose to wash than drink, though he dyed with thirst.

We are far from any odious supposing that there is a symbolizing and
conformity between the Pharisee and the Apologists in all parts or degrees of
their separation, much less in the System of their opinions: there may be a
similitude and resemblance though it hold not in all things, but in some; as we
say such a man is like another, though he resemble him but in some parts of his
face, not all. Neque enim omnis imago habere debet quaecunque illud cujus est
imago, says Plato. Things may touch though but in a point, and hang together
by a string or two, and Morea is as well a part united to Greece, though but by
an Isthmus, as Thrace that leanes upon it with the whole side.

That spice of the Pharisee which their way seems to carry a smack of, was
their separating themselves from a Communion of Sacraments with those men who
continue members of the Church, and are not judicially or justly cut off or
cast out, and upon this express account, that both the Ordinance shall be
polluted, and themselves defiled by their society.

The original of this sin we think was from the Pharisee, and from him derived,
not by propagation, but according to the mode of Pelagius, by imitation.
Thcodoret speaking of the Andian heretics who separated themselves from the
communion of the Church, because Usurers and impure persons were there
tolerated, adds, Apud Gerhard loc. Com. Tom. 5. p. 230.
Ipsum institutum arrogantiae plenum, et quaedam Pharisaicae doctrinae
posteritas est, nam Pharisaei accusabant animorem et corporum medicum, dicentes
sanctis Apostolis, cur Magister vester cibum capit cum Publicanis et
peccatoribus? et per Prophetam de talibus ait Deus, qui dicunt, Purus sum, ne
attingas. Indeed the note is now changed, and is not, Why eats your Master with
Publicans and sinners? but, Why do they eat your Master (Sacramentally?) St.
Augustine tells the Donatists, Nec mali bonis obesse possunt, cum vel
ignorantur, vel pro pace et tranquilitate ecclesiae tolerantur, Contra
Donatist. post Collat. c. 5. Tom. 4. p. 122.
si cos prodi aut accusari non oportucrit, aut a^iis bonis non potuerit
demonstrari, -- ista cum fiunt a bonis, non inquinantier a malis, quia nee
little peccatis consentiendo communicant, and ab eis eisi non corporali
segregatione, tamen spiritali vitae dissimiliudine and morum diversitate
discedunt, -- nam qui hec non spiritaliter observandum pu^ant, arrogantia
vanitatis in illud incidunt, quod per eundem prophetam dominus detestatur,
dicens, Qui dicunt noli me tangere, quoniam immundus sum, etc.

I might perchance draw out these parables to a greater extent and multiply
them to fill the whole Charte, but three or four will be enough to make up a
Climate wherein to set them together near about the same height or elevation,
and much about the same distance from the Equator of truth and peace; as
first, that the Pharisees would have every holy man of the precedent ages to
have been a Pharisee, of one kind or other (whereof there were diverse) as
Abraham to be a Pharisee of love, Job of fear, etc. So the Apologists will have
us believe, that the ancient Fathers have scored and beaten out this way before
them, as their guides, or to stand as Mercuries to point them to it. But as
Cymon was used to increpate his Athenians with, At non tales Lacedaemonii: so
we have showed the Ancients were not such, they are not of the lineage of the
Fathers, not derived from any line of theirs, -- Vana fides genus esse Deorum.
Had the Fathers in the fervor of their conflicts with the Donatists fallen
asleep, and had not awaked until this intervall of so many Ages, (as they say
some in a Cave slept for many years in the heat of Dioclesians persecution, and
awaking conceived they had taken but a short nap, and to have found things in
the same posture they left them, though they saw them in a different condition)
so would the Fathers contrariwise think that after a long sleep they found
things in that estate wherein they left them, when they expected they should
have been altered, and that they still hear the Donatists arguing, whom they
must again address themselves to follow in fresh suit, and continue to
encounter with.

2. The Pharisees thought none holy but their Sect, and if the Apologists do
not speculatively judge so, yet others not of their way, although such as they
cannot track in wicked ways, they look upon only under the notion of moral,
not godly men, and like the men of Pontus, that thought there was no more Sea
but that which washed their shore, and therefore denominated the Sea from their
Country, so it seems they fancy holiness to be entailed upon their way, not
to be discontinued by a recovery by any other, and practically esteem the rest
unholy, while they give them not holy things, and judge a communion with them
to be contaminative.

3. The Pharisees despicably called the rest of the people of God populus
terrae, This people that know not the Law are accursed, so the Apologists
scornfully name them the dregs of the people, and the rout, with whom they
will not partake, and Bastards, and implicitly and interpretatively account
them Dogs, Swine, Canaanites, and the like, for under these notions they
argue that they may and do exclude them. Barradius borrowes this color from
Gregory to paint forth the Pharisees, Dum se omnibus praeferunt, alios quidem
de fatuis sensibus, alios autem de indignis meritis reprehendunt, id est alios
censent nihil scire, alios non been vivere. And who that looks on this Table
would not take this to be drawn for the picture of the Apologists, who if they
did not suspect, what needed they to examine, and therefore bring all under
examination, have all in suspicion, and shut out such a multitude from their
communion, upon the account of ignorance and wickedness, per vanas
suspitiones, ne dicam factiosas calumnias, as Augustine of his Donatists? as if
like the men of China, they thought all the world blind beside themselves, and
be they never so learned (yet as they say of the men of Europe) they have but
one eye, and that not the right, that show their ignorance (they say) in this
very thing, that they refuse to submit to the trial of their knowledge, but
says Maldonat speaking of the Pharisee and the Publican, to the four sorts of
pride reckoned up by Gregory and Beda, this was a fifth kind in him, Quod tanto
studio aliorum vitia and suas virtutes enumeraverit, non enim est tam ingeniosa
and subtelis humilitas, nec aliorum vitia nec suas virtutes videt.

4. Jansenius tells us, it was the Pharisees fault to condemn him whose heart
he knew not, and in whom he might have adverted signs of penitence and
amendment, because he saw him enter the Temple with him, and by external
gestures declaring his repentance; and would not the Apologists have contracted
the same guilt, had they met the Publican in that place and posture? And are
they not still culpable of the same uncharitableness, who in the former Section
inveigh against those who having lately beheld a man in his sins, yet if he cry
guilty, and say he will amend, can next day believe a change in him? and
themselves profess to credit no conversion that is sudden, Homil. de Davide and
Saul, tom. in p. 156.
whereas though the Publican ad summam progressus erat malitiam, yet
notwithstanding simplici verbo omnem deposuit iniquitatem, -- a^sq^e longa
temporis mora, says Chrysostom; and Jansenius to the glory of Gods mercy
adds; Quanta sit Dei benignitas qui tam brevi oratione tamque parva poenitentia
s^peratus, mex p^niteniem in gratiam recepit!

They wish every Pharisee had hypocrisy written with a Sunbeam on his
forchead, and then many a worldling and politician would be detected; but since
now fronti nulla fides, there may be yet light enough to read Pharisaisme in
the characters of some men's ways and actions. What is legible in men's hearts,
will not appear till the Son of righteousness with the brightness of his
coming manifest it to all the world, in the interim they suspect hypocrisy
visible in the hearts of most men, or else what need their spectacles and
perspectives of farther examinations and trials, whereby to discover more then
is obvious to the eye? But as things written with Allom water, are to be read
only when the paper is heated by the fire: so the fire of trouble would give
some light to forestall the beams of the Sun, and we might then find some to be
Pharisees, Sichemites, that are such only for the advantage of the times, who
like the herba mimosa do send forth their blossoms but in the eye of the Sun,
and shed them when he withdraws his light; or like the Heliotrope, which
expands and turns her self always toward the Sun, and closes at his setting.
Perchance some that like the Eastern people worship the rising Sun, would then
like the Asrican Nations, curse him when he scorcheth them: and perhaps if by
the motions of superior bodies their aspects should be changed, hypocrisy
would not only in some Politicians be written in Court-hand, but in others in
text-letters, and with a running hand after the world as much as in the most.

When they sent forth their Sphynx, they should have given us an Oedipus also,
I know not how to unriddle the close of this Section, when they say, Many like
those in Esays time stand off from them as too holy. By propriety of
construction it should seem to be, that they from whom is the standing off,
should be those that are thought to be too holy, for holy should refer to
that which went immediately before, and this seems more suitable to what
follows, that they yet blame them for standing off from these as Publicans,
but to carry analogy with those in Esaias, they which are too holy, should be
those that do stand off: for those that thought themselves holier, forbad the
other to touch them. And this I rather divine then judge to be their sense. But
who those are besides their brethren, (we have built a story higher upon the
same foundations) others being driven off from them as not holy enough, I
cannot divine by inspection into any other intralls: indeed they are as much
Publicanes to these, as others are to them; and therein is seriously
considerable

First, the irradiations of justice, Lex recta est cum quis patitur quae
fecerit ipse, as others are not permitted to sit with these Adenibezeks at
table, but to gather their meat under it, so others requite them as they have
done (...) and this was the case also of the Pharisee too: for as he would not
touch with the people of the earth, so the Samaritan, if he met the Pharisee
(says Drusius) cries to him, touch me not; and if casually he had suffered a
contact, would dip himself under water for expiation. And to the late Dippers
the Apologists are also intangible, ( viz. the Anabaptists) as well as to
perfect Independents their brethren, (yet they are a strange kind of brethren
with whom they have no communion of Sacraments) and those though not
Anabaptists, yet seeing they baptize none but the children of those of their
own Church, if others did not wash those children whom they leave in their
blood, when they grow up to a desire and capacity to be of their Churches, they
must before they admit them, become Epibaptists, and postbaptise, though not
rebaptise them.

Secondly, as remarkable is the influence of Separtion, which having broken the
banks, knows no bounds, Nec scit qua sit iter, nec si sciat imperet illis.
-- Quoque eat aut ubi sit picea caligine tectus
-- Nescit, et arbitrio voluerum raptatur equorum,


And when there has been a distillation by one part, yet another thinks that
extract to have some impurity, and so resolves of a rectification (as the
Chemists term it) and thus one separation grows out of another, and such
multiplied soparations of the parts are like in time to be the destruction of
the whole, the proceeding of all things from their principles, being resembled
to a Pyramid, but the destruction of things obumbrated by an inverted Pyramid,
which by degrees lessening it self, determines in a point, and that in nothing:
Of whose making is the distance between them and others, we hope we have
formerly made it so clear to every man's understanding, that be it said as of
him as in the Poet, -- Arbitrium litis trajecit in omnes.

SECT. XXI.
What was Diotrephes? What his ambition? Whether the Apologists exceed not the
bounds of ministerial power by bringing all under trial, excluding and not
for scandal, and that so many, and by common continaall practice? Whether this
check not with 1 Pet 5.3? Whether those they reject are scandalous themselves,
separated and left the Church behind them? Of Ecclesiastical power, what it
is, and how far extensive? The duty of Stewards. It is Christ's honor to have
an universal Church. 1. Their actings not commanded or warranted by Gods word.
2. They act solely. Of their Elders. Of ruling Elders in general: not by
divine right, yet a prudent constitution, requisite to be continued in some
way. The interest of the whole Church in Censures. The Elders representatives
of the Church. Whether the ancient Church knew any such? 3. They act
arbitrarily. Of the former Bishops. The Flowers of the Apologists canina
facundia, which they cast on the Opposites of their way. The aspersions wiped
off, and some of them reflected. Of small things, and whether their Injunctions
are such? what may be the consequences thereof, viz their own power and
greatness in the intention, which yet in effect may be thereby lessened.
Whether their promiscuous examination be to prevent respect of persons. Of
examining persons known to be knowing. Of the Shekel of the Sanctuary. Of their
aviling of their people, and thereby giving advantage to the Papists to upbraid
us. Of the former Bishops. The lack of light in some places through want of
some to hold it forth. Whether the Diatribe aspersed Presbytery to be modelled,
like Popery. The Apologists no friends to Presbytery. Their way has some
analogy with Popery, and accidental tendencie thereunto.

THey first give us a taste of a new dish of Philosophy. As the other section
tasted, so this (say they) smells; insinuating that this is more odious than the
former, and that implies that the object of smelling is more abominable than
that of tasting. But truly he that shall be of such judgment, I shall not envy
him to receive a nasty thing into his mouth, rather than take it in his nose.
But Nasutus sis usque licet, sis denique nasus, what other smell has it than
such as rotten ulcers do always exhale when they come to be launced and
opened? and deal never so gently with such, etiam mel ulcerata mordet. Such
hard thoughts they are more grieved to read than troubled to answer. The truth
is, they do not much trouble themselves to answer, levamentum aliquid est
miscriarum, non reniti. And perhaps the Parde has wounded the Dog, that
though he open, yet he cannot bark. But they may perchance be grieved to read
what does Auriculas teneras mordaci radere vero, and are as impatient to hear
the name of Diotrephes, as Caligula that was rough and hairy could not abide
the mention of a Goat.

They next give us a smell of their flowers of Poesy, Pudet haec opprobria
dici, and non potuisse refelli, (say they,) but this is the ill luck of it (to
borrow their phrase) that having in all their walk made but this one step on
the feet of verse, it falls out to be lame and maimed, and only thereby have
made it more their own, Nam male dum recitas incipit esse tuus.

The Camel (say they) troubles the water that his own deformed image may not be
therein conspicuous; so the Papists to set the Pope out of suspicion of being
Antichrist, have painted forth that man of Sin with such lines and colors as
carry no resemblance with the Bishop of Rome, and so the Apologists give us a
false copy of Diotrephes, lest they should appear to be his counterpart. But as
the Coryphey of our Judges and Oracle of our Laws was wont to say, that if a
Pursevant should be sent forth to fetch up Antichrist that were described by
such characters as he is held forth in Scripture he would doubtless seize upon,
and bring in the Bishop of Rome, if he had power to do it; so if a hue and cry
should issue for such persons as carry the marks of Diotrephes, I doubt if some
men would not be apprehended, and though Apelles convened many beautiful
Virgins the better to limb the picture of Venus, yet perchance fewer would
serve from whose comportment to draw a perfect image of Diotrephes.

They say, we are mistaken of Diotrephes, his ambition rather crossed John than
oppressed the people, he was an heritick that depressed John, and would be in
the Church above him, but was no rigid imperious Presbyter toward the people;
and for this interpretation they allege Estius

Not to make any reflection how incuriously they take Authors in hand, or
credulously receave them on trust, who might else have known that Estius
carried on his Commentaries on the Epistles no farther than the seventh verse
of the fifth Chap. of the 1. Ep. of St. John, and what is additional in that and
in the following Epistles, was the continuation of Bartholomaus Petrus; nor to
step out of our way to enquire whether Diotrephes were an heretic, because it
has no tendency or aspect toward our end, (there are no records of him more
than are extant in this Epistle, and howsoever some have opined, Justinian
notwithstanding effers very rational arguments to vindicate him from the guilt
of heresy) it beams clearly from the text that he did, Idem Menochius and
Tirinus.
parvi facere apostolum, se malevolum et infestum praebuisse Johanni Apostolo,
munus Apostolicum et Iohannis authoritatem contemnere, in the words of Petrus
which they refer to, but there are as bright irradiations that show us this
was not all his sin or inordinateness. Petrus also tells us, Amat primatum
gerere in iis, In locum.
-- sese in praefecturam illius ecclesiae ingessit (observe, he intruded, he
had no call to it) eaque praefectura delectatur tanquam magno q^odam bono --
gau det praeesse non ut prosit, sed quia grande aliquid putat pr^esse, but
Justinian, -- paulo majora canendo, sets it to an higher key, insolentius et
arrogantius principem in ecclesia locum appetiuisse, and Aretius, in sua illa
ecclesia solus videriet excellere voluerit, he assur^ed a power greater than
John, comparatively, but upon the Church, objectively, he was ambitious to be
above John, but only over the people, to have pre-eminence beyond him among
them, inter cos qui tunc erant in ecclesia, as Aquinas (or he that bears his
name) with whom Menochius, Tirinus, and others consent. A Bishop and a
Presbyter I fin^ synonymous in that age, and to say they read nothing in him
over the people above the state of a Bishop (or Presbyter,) and that he was a
rigid and imperious Presbyter, is an odious aspersion on that Office, as if to
love to have the pre-eminence, (praesse non prodesse) as Petrus, Se tanquam
principem genere, (as Justinian) insolence, arrogance, the exercise of tyranny,
and abuse of the power of the keys, were but the estate of Presbyters, and
therefore they might be, and do all this, and yet must not be accounted rigid
and imperious, Citius crimen honestum quam turpem Catonem effeceris, and this
is somewhat like that of Valentia, who when he could not well deny the Church
of Rome to be idolatrous, he tells us some idolatry is lawful, because the
Apostle: eter only condemns abominable idolatries; and upon this account
Vasquez thinks a man may with good intention worship a Stone, or a Stick, or a
Straw: so it seems like courses to those of Diotrephes being not easily to be
denied to be taken by some of the Apologists or their friends, they must boldly
therefore be justified, and avowed not to be rigid or imperious.

If this were so, they need not wince so much, for they could not then be
galled though Diotrephes were clapped on their backs, if he were only a
Presbyter, and not proud, rigid or imperious, (for here is no St. John that
they can despise or exalt themselves above, they must needs be clear of all
suspicion of that now.) But Whitaker expressly says he exercised tyranny; the
Centurists impute to him an abuse of the power of the keys, and we need fetch
no reflected beams, Contro. 4. q. 5. tom. 2. p. 685. Centur. 1. l. 2. c. 4. p.
116.
the text directly yields this light, that he was inhospitable, (he receaves
not the brethren,) Imperious (forbidding them that would,) using the keys to
open a way to his own designs, and shutting out those that oppose them,
(casting them out of the Church,) Exemplum excommunicationis injustae, says
Aquinas.

But the gl^sse explains the manner, Ejicit non de consortio fidelium, sed de
loco in quo convenient, but Tirinus supposes, tum de loco et coetu -- Neque
suscipit vel in hospitium, vel ad Euch^risti^ distributtonem, and such also as
would in that way receave them, (and permit them to receave the Sacrament) he
did eject also, De coetu et congregatione fidelium, (says he,) Diotrephes
would not admit such into association, all which look with an ugly aspect upon
some parallel courses. And Aretius hence gravely observes, Proprium est primatus
alios aspernari, nec aliud quam sui pectoris judica admirari et magnifacere,
reliquos facile damnare, et ut ineptos exsibilare -- meminerint igitur
ornamenta quoque ecclesiae qualis est disciplina, et ipsa sacramenta etiam ab
impiis saepe rapi, ad suer^m affectuum patrocinium et muniendam tyrannidem.
This was the dir^ where ^ith the Apostle shows the face of Diotrephes to be
defiled, whereof if the Apologists can no better clear themselves than they
have purged him, they will haerere hec luto.

To lord it over Gods heritage is (in their sense) to go beyond ministerial
power and infringo the liberties and privileges of the Sairts. And if we shall
receave this description, it will serve as a weapon (though as they have
pointed it, it is somewhat a blunt one) wherewith to sight against them, and
wounds made by a blunt weapon are worse than those which are caused by an acute
one.

Not to controvert here whether there be any such ministerial power to keep off
from the Sacrament these who are not cast out of the Church, but continue
members thereof, nevertheless that which falls within ministerial power for the
kind, may be an excess in respect of the number and condition of the objects
whereupon, and the manner how and the meritorious and final causes for which
it is exercised.

First, they constrain to come under examination, not only such as might
justly be suspected to be ignorant, but all indiseretely, even those which are
in every man's, and in their own judgment, elevated above any such suspicion,
which therefore cannot be intended to prepare them for the Sacrament, but
rather for subjection, and only to render them as Tiberius said of the Senate,
Homines ad servitu em paratos, and to make a trial, and take an essay and
earnest of their obedience, and to receave their homage and fealty for the
Sacrament, which they must hold of this Seigniory or Lord^^ip of theirs, and
cannot be allowed to sue forth their livery or O^^stre le mane till they have
acknowledged upon examination what they hold in Capite.

Sec^ndly, they exclude not those only which have first shut out themselves
(as Augustine speaks) by the scandal of nefarious crimes, evident in the fact,
or confessed, or judicially evicted; hitherto they should come and no further,
and here ought their waves to be staid, we might then know with what banks to
bound their power, and where to keep a secure station, that the water floods
might not overflow us, quid potest esse foelicius quam homines de solis legibus
confidere, et casus reliquos non timere, says Cassiodore. The saying is good,
if Shimei dwell in Jerusalem, and go not forth any whither, let him live; but
if he will be straying to Gath among the Philistines, let him surely die. If
(as it well appears and is legible in the draught and copy of Presbytery) the
Communion be as Chatter Land and Boock Land, which we hold as granted for a
certain estate, under express covenants and conditions, we know our term and
interest, we cannot lose or forfeit our Tenement, if wilfully we break not our
covenant nor fail of the condition. When men are cast out for scandal, they
are convinced of all, they are judged of all, every one, even the parties
themselves (being left without excuse) sense the cause to be just, while the
merit is manifest; but they reject in a general notion of being unfit and
unworthy, and that unfitness and unworthiness is determined or limited by no
Canon but their will or opinion, and the Laws (as Wat. Tyler said those of
England should do) come out of their mouth, that not only horned beasts must
be driven from the wood, but every one which the Lion shall say has an horn;
and when there is no Law for what they do, yet (in analogy to what the Persian
Magi told Cambyses concerning their Kings) they have a Law that they may do
what they list, and that Themis must sit as near and as constantly by them, as
An^xarchus told Alexander that it did by Jupiter, the pattern of Kings, to show
that whatsoever they decree is just, so as this can tend only to make all men
Villanos sock^nannos (as Bracton speaks,) or as it was of old in Ireland, one
Freeholder in a Country, and the rest his vassalls, and to make all fall
prostrate before their rods and axes; for every one that will not loose the
fruit of the Sacrament, must comply with the Dragon that watches and guards
the Hesperides, and he that will not forfeit his reputation, must sell his
liberty to purchase their favor, whereon his credit depends and not only
espouse all their opinions, but by all manner of compliances strive to merit
their good opinion, which is his title to the Sacrament; and therefore he may
not dare do any thing but by their conduct, lest offending these Censors he be
motus tribu and put in Ceritum tabulas, ignominiae causa, and he made aerarius
(pendere era) sit to pay tithes or duties, not to partake of the privileges,
and therefore must surrender up his will and intellects to adopt theirs, and
have no affections or actions but such as are borrowed, with like superstition
to that of Zene his Scholars, who (as Athenaeus tells us) thought that the
broth could not be good, that was not made after Zeno's direction, whose use
also was to prescribe to the twelfth part of a Coriander seed.

Thirdly, they shut out not some few only that may be peccant, but in a manner
all, which cannot every one be culpable, and multis minatur, qui uni f^cit
injuriam, and have obtained what Caligula wished, that all their people have but
one neck, which they cut off at once, nor do they like Chirurgions only launch
tumors, or cut off dead flesh, but like Mountebanks do wound and flash the
whole and sound flesh, upon pretense to heal it again, and to bring themselves
and their salves into more request and practice, and whereas the terror only
should come to all, they make the punishment (proper for a few) to be
universal, not punishing only those that are necent, but like Theodosius at
Thessalonica (for which Ambrose thought he merited excommunication) cut off all
promiscously without discrimination, the innocent as well as the guilty, that
when one man perhaps has sinned, they are wroth with the whole Congregation,
(and then notwithstanding Irae suum stimulum, Zelum vocant;) so as the
generality and commonness of the punishment, taking away the sense of shame and
fear thereof, frustrates the end of it, as it is no odious deformity to be
black among Negroes, where all are of that color, a white man (and some such
they have born there) is more monstrous to them, and therefore as Physician:
say, that the disease which all or most men commonly have, must spring from the
same common cause, and our Divines tell us, that the corruption of the Mass
cannot be the cause of reprobation, negative, because that is commen, but that
which makes to differ is peeuliar; so it cannot be any crime or incapacity in
the persons wherein their exclusion is rooted, for all are not incapable or
criminous, but there is some cause that is common to all, and that can be no
other but that they may have a preheminent power over all, whereinto this is
their Inauguration.

Fourthly, they exercise not this power only occasionally and upon an exigent,
but make a common and continual trade thereof, and consequently making the
Church such a meddow as Lewis 11. said France was, which he mowed not only
when it was rank grown, but as often as he pleased; nor do proceed as Arnoldus
says a wise and a modest Physician ought to do, which is never to use
medicines but upon urgent necessity and that sparingly too, but their constant
practice is to keep men under this purging physic, which were it cordial,
would ferfeit its virtue by too frequent use, but being purgative medicines
must not be used as familiar as meat, when there is no purgative (as ^hysitians
confess) but is contrary to nature, and consumes the very substance of our
bodies, so as qui medice vivit, miscre vivit, and this is to make the Church,
as he said of the State of Thuscany under the Medices, like a body exhausted
with continual purgings, the blood and spirits consumed, and nothing left but
weakness and melancholy, and we may say of them as Seneca did of others,
Moverer si judicio hoe farerent, nure morho faciunt, faciunt non quod mercor,
sed quod solent, and judge of their course as Demosthenes did of calumny,
Aliquantisper audientium opinionem confirmare, progressu vero temporis nihil ea
imbecillius.

Upon these considerations, that which they call ministerial power is
Tempestas, non potestas (as the Lawyers speak,) potentia ruinae et incendii (as
^eneca.) Corn^a sunt ista ventilantis, non mansuetudo pascentis, (as
Augustine.) And if this do not border upon that of Ifidor, which he says of
some, that they bear themselves upon their Priesthood as if they had a tyranny,
yet whether it be not the second part of Diotrephes, and the playing over again
his ambition of pre-eminence, and whether these probations and suspensions be
not a kind of hunting of men thereby to make themselves mighty ones in the
earth, and instead of the old paternal government to introduce a Lording, In 1
Pet. 5.3.
(which is the same thing which Diotrephes practiced) (as Aretius,) alios vobis
imperiose subjectos esse volentes, (as the Commentary asscribed to Aquinas,) to
be imperious masterly persons, ruling roughly and harshly, (as Hammomd,) by
which prohibition the Apostle reprehends severity, tanquam ab ecclefiastica
mansuetudine alienam, (as Justinian,) and lessoneth Parstors and Governors in
the Church, magis apparere humilitatem et mansuetudinem quam potestatis
ostentationem, ac severitatem, et amorem magis quam terrorem, (as Estius,) and
if their course clash not with this precept, so interpreted, yet whether it
check not with that which he thereby prescribes, ut absit non solum animus sed
species dominandi in plebem subjectam, as Estius, the Apostle saying, Neque ut
deminantes, non solum non dominantes, quia nihil debent exterius praetendere
per quod possit de iis opinari, ut videantur velle dominari (as Aquinas.)
Though they may be somewhat in passion to hear the quaere, yet we shall not be
much out of reason to make it, and we are sure without question, that this
rejecting of all till they be proved and approved by them, as Musculus ranks it
with the withholding of the cup from the Laity by the Popish Priests, so it is
that dominion, which if otherwise it cannot be redressed ^he says God will
restrain.

And whereas they say, To Lord it over Gods heritage is to infringe the
liberties and privileges of the Saints. Whosoever is a Churchmember I have
formerly demonstrated to be in Scripture ideom and general acceptance, a
Saint, and to debar any intelligent member of the Church of communion in the
Sacrament, is to infringe his liberties and his privileges, in the crown
whereof that communion is a rich jewel; but the learned ^unius tells them,
Vtriusque communionis cum Deo inquam and Ecclesia ad sanctos omnes promiscue
pertinentis, (I might set^ an asterisck on that for the observation) indici. a
Deo data, certaque E. clesiae verae documenta, eculis omnium exposita sunt ea,
quae communis usus Sacramenta nuncupavit, -- atque haec quidem communionis
genera, qua sunt spiritualia, semper and ubique ab hominibus sanctis
percipiuntur, qua autem sunt ^orporalia coluntur in templo, id est ad to um
Ecclesiae corpus conju^^cte pertinent, neque ullus ex Ecclesia Dei esse
putandus est, qui se ab ullo istius communionis genere ultro subtraxeri, a
passage like the pillar of a cloud and fire, which gives light to us, and casts
them under darkness.

To keep away ignorant and scandalous persons, exceeds not Ministerial power,
is no Lording imperious thing. But first, were they whom they keep away such
delinquents, yet the number of the guilty should manacle the hands of the
Judge, and periculum schismatis send an injunction from the Court of equity. If
the one member be gangrened, the excision thereof may be just and necessary,
potius pereat unus quam unitas, (as Bernard) but if the body be infected with a
scab, other medicines may be applied without dis-joynting or dissecting the
whole. They plead for Ministerial power which they have as governors of their
Churches, and we should check the thoughts (if any could arise in us) that
should oppose or repine at it, while it is regular and limited, and while the
head does not drop acrimonious defluxions to emaciate and wast the body, for
then caput malum est caput mali, and the head is the parent of all diseases, as
Physicians say. Defer Deo in nobis, and deferemus Deo in te, as Symmachus in
Augustine. But as Furfidius counseled Sylla, Sinendos esse aliquos vivere ut
essent quibus posset imperare, so they should not unchurch so many that they
might have some to govern; and as he said in the patrocing of women, though
they could not live so contentedly with them as was desired, yet without them
they could not live at all: so though their Church should be less pure by the
communion of those they reject, yet it will be scarce a Church without them,
and the spirits which they shall extract by separation, will not quit the cost
of the turning of so huge a substance to caput mortuum; and if we should grant
their separations could produce gold, yet it must needs fare with them as Pliny
tells us it did with Caligula, Invitaverat spes Caium principem avidissimum
auri, quamobrem jussit excoqui magnum pondus, and plane fecit aurum excellens
sed ita parvi ponderis ut detrimentum sentiret, -- nec postea tentatum ab ullo
est.

Secondly, to whom are they scandalous? Some four or five are scandalized by
four or five hundred, for about that proportion their Church bears to their
Congregation, and those hundreds are more scandalized by their separation, then
the units can be by their comportment or condition. Quos projecerunt video,
quos unuerunt ipsi dicant, says Augustine to his Donatists. These centuries
were never judicially cast out, but separated from, and how could they
regularly be cast forth, when the rest are hardly members enough to constitute
and organize the Body? They were rather the Body of the Church from which the
separation was made, the denomination being taken from the major part, and what
Livy says in another case is appliable to this, In duas parts discessit
civitas, aliud integer populus, fautor et cultor bonorum, aliud forensis factio
tenebat, Contr. Ep. Parmen. l. 1. c. 6.
and as suitable is that which Augustine tells the Donatists. The Nations are
given to Christ for an inheritance, you would appropriate it to your party,
Quasi propter vos Christus apud nos haereditatem perdidcrit suam. Philosophers
say, Omnis motus est super immobili: that was the Church rather which stirred
not, when they moved a way in their separation, not that which removed, and
they were the whole, the separatists but a part; and though one member may be
cut off to preserve the whole, yet it is a wild and desperate way of cure to
dissect the whole to conserve a part. Ecclesiast. l. 3. c. 5. tom. 1 p. 1978.
Cum Ambro^o^statuaut, (says grave and learned Junius) Non tanti esse homines
pauculos ut propter cos dejiciantur ecclesiae dei, pluris esse aedificationem
omnium ecclesiarum quam praesentem unius conservationem in officio
deflectentis, and the same may be said of persons in the Church.

Thirdly, Wherein are they scandalous? Non pejores erant Judah traditore, cum
quo Apostoli receperunt primum sacramentum coenae, cum tanti sceleris reum
inter se jam scirent esse, as Augustine; Cont. part. Donati. Psalm. tom. 7. p. 2.
as their ignorance lay in not knowing it to be their duty to submit to trial,
so in all likelihood their scandal consists in their unwillingness to be
subject, and standing fast in their liberty. Perchance pro part Dorati
tolerarent, quos pro Christi unitate tolerare nolunt: would they acknowledge
their power, and submit to their discipline, by this relative without other
real thange, the scandal were removed, as the dogs in the Dictaean Temple at
Crete, and the birds of the Diomedes in the Adriaticke, they are only
infestous to those they account Barbarians, but gentle enough to their social
Greeks; the Livery of their Church, like the name of Alexander with Caracalla,
would frustrate all accusation; like the papal Chair, if it find not men good,
it makes them such. Ex codem naturae utero continentia nata est, and Cato,
holiness and their discipline are twins, and must according to their Hypothesis
stand and fall together. Cum hoc Aristide ipsa sanctitas emigrabit, and it will
be true of their party compared with others, what Bellarmine both of his
Catholics in comparison of Heretics, Praefat. ad controvers.
Si catholicus quispiam labitur in peccatum, -- nihilominus quoniam adhuc
aliquis vitae sensus, adhuc adificii sundamentum, adhuc lumen aurorae, multa et
magua praesidia ad salutem habet, non ambulat in tenebris, n^vit medicum suum
-- Neque deest illi maternus ecclefiae sinus, et patent quoque officinae omnes
spiritualium pharmacorum, at homo haereticus nihil horum habet, etc.

Fourthly, What evidence is there of their crimes that should produce this
scandal? Nam quo eccidit sub crimine, quisnam delator, quibus indiciis, quo
test probavit? nil hotum, -- Verbosa et grandis epistola venit. August. cont.
Ep. Parmen. l. 1. c. 7. Idem Epist 162. tom 2. p. 142.
(I would have said Apologia, sed tu syllaba contumax repugnas.) It seems
sufficit accusasse, and therefore quis erit innocens? and they cast them out
suspicionibus suis sicut semper damnando, as Augustine of the Donatists, and
whereas Incerta crimina pro certa pace dimitterentur, nisi magis falsa factio
fingentium quam ratio vera convincentium praevaleret: We rather find that
objiciuntur crimina malorum hominum, -- et ipsa partim incognita, Idem con. Ep.
Parmen. ubi supra.
quae si etiam vera et praesentia videremus, et Zizaniis propter frumenta
parcentes pro unitate toleraremus, non solum nulla reprehensiene, sed etiam non
parva laud nos dignos diceret quicunque Scripturas sanctas non cord surdus
audiret, but they rather frumenta falsis criminationibus insectantur, dum ipsi
ab ecclesia potius tanquam levissima palea variis tumorum flatibus sep^rati
sunt.

That which is usually termed the power of the keys, Polanus thinks ought
properly to be called Ministry, Polanus syntag. l. 7. c. 18. p. 544. In Bell.
de translat. imperii. tom. 2. Sect. 27. p. 897. Ames cas. consc. l. 5. c. 24.
p. 310.
and Junius tells us, Quae potestas proprie appellari potest aut Politica aut
despotica est, ut recte in politicis distingunt Politici; Ecclesiae non proprie
potestas sed administratio, vel ministerium; But yet as it is called power, 2.
Cor. 13.10. so they that carry and exercise it, however considered in
themselves and in their manner of acting, which respects their persons, they
are ministers, yea servants of all, yet considered as delegates of Christ,
bringing and executing his Command, they act with authority (as Ames
distinguishes.) A power therefore it is, yet nevertheless the sword must not
be the bound of their power, as it was sald to be of the dominion of Sparta;
nor is it to be extended as far as they have strength to carry it, but rather
as Pompey said, to be terminated by justice, and not to make that Law which is
of the advantage of Sparta, and that honest which is profitable: Iunius in
Bell. cont. l. 3. tom. 2. p. 497.
their power is, as Junius, Legatiouis, non imperii, nam domini non servi
imperium est, mandatoris non mandatarii -- et Legatus exhibebit literas
legationis suae ad hoc ut credatur ipsi; it is no Dictatoria potestas, neither
Praetoria that has power jus dare, but only dicere, being restrained to the
prescript of divine Laws, Ubi supra Sect. 28, 29.
and they to be only praecones et interpretes, and not imperare aut dominari,
ne in spiritualibus, sed docere, monere, hortari, obsecrare, minari, terrere,
as Paraeus: They say, They are Stewards in Christ's house, and we wish they
would remind themselves to be so; for a Steward has no dominion in the house,
Non veluti Dominus res tractat sed veluti aliena et herilia dispensat, non sua
esse dicens quae sum heri, sed e diverso quae sua sunt heri esse, as
Theophylact takes the hint from Chrysostom, he may not smite his fellow
servants, and shut them out at doors at pleasure, he must give their meat to
those of the household, not keep them hungry to draw dependancies upon himself,
by dispensing it only to such as can evidence and merit his good opinion; this
is not fidelis dispensatio sed crudelis dissipatio, this cannot be compatible
with that faithfulness to the peoples right, which they speak of, and as little
is it subservient to the dignity of the Sacrament, (an argument borrowed from
the Popish School, who blanch their private Masses and maimed Communion with
regard to the reverence of the Mysteries.) The dignity of the Sacrament is not
(as the Abyssiue Princes supposed of themselves) to be shut up from the people
(major e longinquo Majestati reverentia,) it consists in the use thereof to
those ends it was instituted, to be Communem caenam, et communem mensam, et
communes mensas, (as I have brought forth the verdict of the Ancients) and it
has the more honor by being accknowledged, by a greater multitude reforting
to it, to be a divine institution, which it is their duty to attend upon the
partaking of, and to be a moral instrument of gracious effects: And as the
honor of the King is in the multitude of his people, so Christ the King of
Glory is more honored, when so numerous assemblies acceding to the Sacrament
do thereby witness their faith in the death of Christ, which is there
represented: and as God gave unto his Son the Nations for his inheritance (as
Augustine tells the Donatists;) so it his Glory that his Church is Catholic
as well as holy, and is signal for the extent as well as the purity; and that
all that have entered themselves into his household shall be fed at his table, In
Mark. 9.40.
while they remain in the house, and that it shall be only their proper fault
if they do him not faithful service.

Did they impose any thing not commanded of God, or act Bishop-like in a sole
Jurisdiction (they confess) they could not avoid this blame; And then first I
doubt, -- Manet indelebile crimen. For as for any authority from God, though
they have framed and brought forth a draught, Grant and Conveyance, yet whether
it have the Testo of the Court of Heaven, and be signed and sealed by the
Spirit speaking in Scripture, is that which is in issue betweeen us, and after
our traverse and pleading let the godly and learned give their verdict. What
their Scripture-evidence is, we shall farther examine in due place, and make
experiment; Whether or no perverso cord scripturas non eas faciunt obesse
nobis sed sibi, as Augustine to Parmenian, and if or not remanet iis nisi sola
infirmitas animositatis, quae tanto languidior est, quanto se majores vires
habere aestimat. We know that sometime the clouds seem formed according to men's
imaginations, and the Organ makes the species; sometime affection makes
promptly credible that which agrees and suits therewith: Quicquid amatur
imposturam facit; sometime wit makes a Mercury of a Log, as Carneades having
plausibly argued for a thing, could suddenly convert his discourse with as much
energy against it; sometime audaciousness that transports themselves,
fascinates others, as Appollonius pretended to understand the language of
birds, which no others could discern or find out, but yet all these elegant
frauds or cunning impestures or deceptions of sight are but like a Magicians
feast, which takes the eye with speciousness, but gives no strength nor
nourishment; or like the house and furniture of the Lamia at Corinth, which
vanished when Appollonius (a juditious man) entered and surveyed it. If they can
produce out of Scripture any command to enjoin, or warrant to justify to
decoct a Church from an hundred to one, to break into pieces and demolish an
established Church, so to patch up a small one out of the ruins thereof, with
such parts as they shall approve and be well satisfied of, and so the Pastor to
choose his Church that was wont to be chosen by them; to gather new Churches
made up of those which had formerly entered into the Church by the door of
Baptism; to drive men in herds from the Communion, that the far greater
part of those adult persons that communicate in the one Sacrament, and the Word
and Prayers, do not in the Lords Supper; to cast out any that is not convicted
of some positive special crime that has rendered him scandalous, and
accordingly is duly censured; to constrain those to come under examination of
their knowledge, that cannot justly be suspected to be ignorant; or to debar
any such from the Eucharist that will not submit to be examined: If they can
produce such evidence, surely I shall not so much gratulate the felicity of
this age, Quod genus humanum ingenio superavit, et omnes,
Perstrinxit stellas,
which can read and understand it, as cendole the blindness of former days, --
quantum mortalia pectora coecae,
Noctis habent!
which could not see or comprehend it: and though it be nothing strange that I
-- (Oculis qui lippus injunctis,) cannot discover and observe it, yet it is
admirable that not one of elder times, though -- tam cernit acutum
Quam aut Aquila aut serpens Epidaurius,
should discern or be convinced thereof.

Secondly, whereas they disclaim to act in a sole jutisdiction, we know indeed
that they have such as they call Elders also, but we have as certain knowledge,
that they are not held so necessary to the conduct and management of their
Church affairs, as good works are determined to be to justification, wherein
they have their presence, but no efficiency; but these are not always so much
as present at their Counsels, or of the Qaorum at trials, and hereof we can
render particular instances. And however they may set off those Elders to those
at distance, -- (Ignote reverentia major.) And as it is said of the Athenians,
That by the advantage of the feathers or quils of their countrymen, they flew
higher in fame than truth; and however they being beheld with the advantage of
the Basis they are set upon, and conjectured to hold out the weight that some
others carry of that like notion; yet the truth is, those Elders being so
inconsiderable for number, and weight too, in respect of parts and influence,
are but as images which seem to bear up the roose of Churches, but are only
for show, and serve not for support; or like the Characters, which Magicians
and Charmers make use of, that have no real influence into effects, but serve
to amuse and delude men, and fortify imagination: and as Charles of Burgundy
was said to carry all his Council behind him on horseback, so all the powers
sit in the same Chair with the Minister.

I am not so insensible or inconsiderate to strike at, or move against the
standing of ruling Elders in the Church, (rebus sic stantibus) which are an
excellent composition for the attempering and restraining the power of the
Ministers, which else might become arbitrary and unlimited) and who may
perchance serve them in like stead as Gracchus his servant did to his Master
Cui orami a tergo adstabat, fistuid concinnata -- tonu^que Plutarch de ira
cohibenda.
suggerebat, quo heri asperitatem, and iracundiam vocis delinitam auferebat;
Prudence will prompt us, that it is not safe to entrust so great power in the
hands of a single person, and it not onley lessons us in the words of Plutarch,
Nimis periculosum est velle quae non decet eum, qui quae vult facere potest;
but it also cautions us by the voice of Cyprian, Nemo diuautus est periculo
proximus. And divine wisdom has prescribed in censures,, Tell the Church, and
if he hear not the Church, Aug. de verbis Dom. sermon. 16. in locum.
and. And I hope the Minister will not assume to be as the Pope, the Church
virtually. Augustine will check such presumption, who tells us this correption
is to be Coram omnibus, and Paschasius, Coram omni Ecclesia inspectante, or,
Tota Ecclesia, as Eucherius, and the Gloss. And Dic Ecclesiae being (in the
sense of Hierom) multis dicendum est, and Aquinas interpreting Dic Ecclesiae i.
totae multudini, Cypr. Ep 27, p. 62.
and Cyprian stating the Church to be in Episcopo and Clero and in omnibus
astantibus constituta: And when the incestuous person at Corinth was to be cast
out, the Church was to be gathered together, and (they) were to put him away,
(they) to whom he wrote, which was not the Ministers only, but the Church
collectively, Chrysostom in 2 Cor. c. 2. hom. 4. tom. 4. p. 167.
Universis in nomine Domini congregatis, says Theodoret, and Chrysostom very
sully, assumpsit illos in ejus sententiae consortium, dicens, Congregatis vobis
tradere illum, duas res maximas accurans, ut and proferretur sententia, and ne
ne id fieret absque illis ne videretur hoc illos facto laedere, ac neque solus
pronunciat, ne videretur Apostolus esse praefractus ipsosque contemuere. And
certainly it appears very liquidly that in Ecclefiasticall concernments and
agitations, the whole Church was consulted, and consentient in the
deliberations and resolutions: for when Judas was gone home to his place (whose
demrits had made the place of damnation to be his) and another to be chosen in
his, which he had unworthily occupied, the election was carried on by common
consent of the Church. Idem in Act. c. 1. homil. 3. p. 138. tom. 3.
Erat turba nominum (says Chrysostom) simul fere centum and viginti --
Considera quam Petrus agit omnia ex communi discipulorum sententia, nihil
authoritate sua, nihil cum imperio. And when Deacons were to be ch^sen, that
serving of tables might not be a snare to the Apostles to tie them up from a
better work, in the institution and choice of them, the Apostles proceed in
the same method, Acts 6.2, 3, 5. Non propria sententia faciunt (says the same
Father) sed prius rationem reddunt multitudini; sic and nunc fieri oportebat;
whence the interlineary gloss took the hint, consensum quaerunt multitudinis,
and quod in exemplum debet ^ssumi; so conformably it pleased the Apostses and
Elders wi^h the whole Church to send chosen men, Acts 15 22. who being come to
Antioch, when they had gathered the multitude together, delivered the Epistle,
v. 30. from whence Calvin concludes, Cum tota Ecclesia communicare debent ipsi
doctores quod ex verbo Dei statuerint.

The like course may be traced down the succeeding Ages, the footsteps whereof
appear not more conspicuously then in Cyprian, who, as it was his resolution
Nihil sine consilio vestro and sine consensu plebis meae privata sententia
gerere, Cyprian Epist. 6 p. 17, cp. 14. p. 41. Ex editio. le Preux secundum
Pamel. and Goulart. epist. 12. page 37 epist. 31. p. 70.
out of the sense he had that Hoc verecundiae and disciplinae and vit^ ipsi
omnium nostrae convenit, ut Episcopi plures in unum convenientes, praesente and
stantium plebe, quibus and ipsis pro fide and timore suo honor habendus est,
disponere omnia consilii communis religione possimus; so it was his constant
practice, Examinabuntur singula praesentibus and judicantibus vobis. And
correspondently, pariter and stantibus laicis lapsorum tractare rationem, and
he asserts and ratifies the course by this reason, quoniam nec firmum decretum
potest esse quod non pl^rimorum videbitur habuisse consensum.

Yet nevertheless as the consent of the people is requisite to those laws
whereby they are to be obliged, yet that consent is usually, as most
expediently, given by their Representatives; so because the integrall Church
now grown to a greater body, cannot always be so easily or fitly convened upon
such occasions, nor so well contained together ((...) Rondoletius his fish,
which being little, could be comprehended in a small glass, but afterward
waxed too great for i^,) and some considerations may persuade that they should
not be all congregated; and though the head were of goid, and the whole
primitive Church was invested with those excellent gifts and graces, 1. Cor.
12.9. Romans 12.6. which rendered them susceptible of a share in the regiment; yet
the feet are part iron and partly clay, Mede Diatribe in locum. p. 207.
and the community of Christians are now too apt to be embased with the alloy
of violent factions and carnal affections, and so less capable of such
undertakings, that therefore Elders should be chosen as Representatives of the
Church, is a very prudentiall Institution.

And truly beyond that height I cannot derive their offspring: Chrysostom. in
1. cpist. ad Cor. c. 1. hom. 3. tom. 4. p. 59.
for as for that Argument extracted from 1 Timothy 5.17. to prove them to be of
divine right, The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, especially
they that labor in the word and doctrine, besides what has been offered by
the most learned Mede, to enervate the force thereof, it is clearly and fully
defeated and profligated by that passage in Chrysostom, Siquidem nuncsenioribus
quidem qui inutiliores sunt, hoc munus (baptizandi) tradimus, verbum autem quod
doceant senioribus, hic enim labor and sudor est, quamobrem alibi inquit, Qui
been praesunt Presbyteri duplici honor digni habeantur, maxim qui laborant
verbo and doctrina; whereby it is evident that in Chrysostomes time the Church
supposed that text to imply two parts or duties of Presbyteriall offices, but
not two sorts of Presbyters, neither did the Church know any such duplicity;
and there is very pregnant reasons in-laid in the context; which will evince
that this is spoken only of such Elders as received stipends, as an honorable
maintenance from the Church, which it is evident that Lay Elders now have not,
nor can it be ^asserted that they ever had: For that doubie honor should he
given them is confirmed from Scripture saying; Thou shall not muzzle the Ox
that treads out the corn, De subsidio victus interpretantur veteres Pamel.
annot. in Cypr. Epist. 66. sect. 10. p. 196.
and The labourer is worthy of his hire. Both which texts are applied in
Scripture to prove a maintenance due to the Ministers of the word; the one so
interpreted, 1 Cor. 9.9. the other produced Mat. 10.10. and therefore these
Elders here mentioned, can be no other than such as were to have maintenance,
which were only Ministers of the word.

Therefore neither dare I to assert, that in the way of the ancient Church any
plain tracks may be discerned of such Elders, formally, in such a small defin^e
number, and in office specially designed to such undertakings and actings. The
characters thereof are so obscure, as not legible to the best eyes, without a
supply from imagination.

That which seems to me to carry the fairest species, Blondel de jure tleb.
etc. p. 37.
is what Blundel cites out of the Epistle of Purpurius to his se low Bishop
Sylvanus (and Albaspinus mentions the like in his history of the Don^tists,)
Adhibete conclericos and seniores plebis Ecclesiasticos viros and inquirant
diligenter quae sunt istae dissentiones, but it is not evident whether these
were called Ecclesiastical persons for their office or affection, having
animes saccrdotales, or for their experience in Church affairs, wherein
occcasionally they had been interessed, The Elders of Israel so often
assembled, were not all men in office, specially seposited for the occasions
whereabout they were convened, and wherein they engaged, Romans Antiq. l. ^. c. 5.
Elders denoting the principal men for age, wisdom and piety, power and
honor, (as Homer uses seniores for optimates, and as Romulus called his great
Counclll the Senate, because says Rosinus, it was composed of such Qui per
aetatem maxim superent, and genere praecellerent, and as the old Saxons in
this Nation entitled some Eldermen, not say the Laws of King Edward, propter
aetatem sed propter sapientiam and dignitatem, cum quidem adolescentes essent,
jurispcriti tamen, and super hec experti: And in ancient monuments of the
Church, when we read of Elders, for the most part it is intended of Bishops or
Ministers, though by misprision some places have been construed otherwise: and
when we find Elders distinguished from those of the Clergy, very often they
signify civil Magistrates, as in the Council of Carthage holden Au. Dom. 503.
de conveniendis per Magistratus and Seniores locorum Donatistis Episcopis etc.
And in another Council there Anno 407. Maurentio reo judices dari decrevit,
universas cunctarum provinciarum curatores, magistratus and ordinis viros, nec
non and auctores and procuratores vel seniores singularinm locorum, etc. So An.
D. 458. A Basilio praefecto principales vel seniores urbium singularium quam
reliquorum corporum compelli jussit Majorianus Augustus. And such acception the
word has in many Councels, where Lay men assisted and subscribed under the
notion of Seniores, Verbo Aldermanuas, p. 28. Seldom. titl. h^nor. fol p. 605.
which is most abundantly verefied in those Synods held in this nation in the
time of the Saxons (as it is every where obvious in them, as they are fet forth
by Sir Henry Spelman) who also tells in his Glossary, that Aldermen (whose
appeilation was derived from Seniores) did signify principes, provinciarum
comites, praefides, senatores, tribunos, generali nomine; so that where it is
read, Matthew. 20.25. Principes gen ium dominantur suis; the Saxon renders it,
Aldcrmanni dominantur, as Mr. Seldom likewise shows, that Pri^cipes Judae,
Psalm. 68.27. are translated A^dermanni Juda, as the Emperor Charles the Bald,
and Lewis the second, are either of them in ancient monuments called Senior,
and from that appellation is Grand Seigneur among the Turks, and Shaughsc^h,
etc among the Persians, originally deduced.

Yet nevertheless, ut jam sunt res humanae, the same prudent reason which
introduced, is of force still to keep up the continuance of those ruling
Elders, and there wants not sound reason to persuade that they should be more
than two to assist and concur with the Minister, that more safely so great a
trust may be deposited with them, and that there may be more health in the
multitude of such Counselors, unless possibly there should be some design to
have them so few, that the Minister might more easily have an influence upon
them, and with more fac^^i^y govern them, or carry the more considerable weight
in the counter-scale against them; and if he can make one of the two to be one
with him, they two may be all in all.

Besides, seeing they are Representatives of the People, no man that has not
forfeited or enslaved his reason, but will judge it most rational, that they
should be only and freely chosen by them whom they represent, without any
interposition or Insinuation of the Minister, Cujus nutus pro imperio est, who
it he do not immediately choose the Elders, yet mediately he uses to do it, and
in alio, while he selects his Church that elects them, and who are commonly so
awed in their elections, as Piso seemed to be by Tiberius in the Senate, Quo
loco censebis C. sar? si primus, habebo quod sequar; se post omnes, vercor, ne
imprudens dissentiam. But it is all the reason in the world, that I only and
not another should elect him, whom I must entrust to represent me and speak for
me, and we should rather do it in this concernment, because we see some by
design to cause a choice only of such for Rulers as will be tamely ruled by
them, and which will serve only as Organs to sound by that breath which they
infuse by drawing them, and to such a tune as they shall set and play upon
them, so that indeed as among the Zaini (those Indian hogs which Nicremberge
mentions) the weakest and poorest are chosen to be chief of the Heard; so they
pick out such Elders as having no eyes of their own, must borrow theirs, and be
gladly led by them, and having no substance in themselves, hope only to
purchase some esteem by being their conformable shadows.

Which consideration is seconded by another, that notwithstanding all former
pomp and solemnity of a ^us divinum regiminis ecclesiastici, yet some of them
have of late publicly asserted, That the ruling Elders have no foundation in
Scripture, but are only a prudential constitution (which however it be truth,
yet the world has been born in hand with the contrary, that the discipline
might enter with a smoother slide,) and then seeing what seems to some to be
prudence, and in some circumstances we may be told it may appear to others, and
in other circumstances not to be so, therefore this constitution will in effect
be arbitrary, and only accidental, quod potest adesse et abesse, and like the
Pope it will be the Ministers only that have the authoritative power to
determine of things whether with or without a Council: This renders much cause
of suspicion that this conjuncture and consent of Elders, however they have
pared it to lessen and lighten it, is yet such a yoke, as they would be eased
and exempt of (and which the Apologists, since they have new modelled
themselves, have quite laid aside, as far as I can understand) that so like
Lewis the 11. assuming an arbitrary power, they may bring the Crown out of
ward, and they have begun to study that politic Aphorism in Tacitus, Eam
imperandiesse rationem ut non aliter ratio constet quam ut uni reddatur, and
those ruling Elders are like to run the same fate and upon like motives with
those (whatsoever they were) which are mentioned in the Commentaries upon the
Epistles, by some attributed to Ambrose, by others to Hilary the Deacon^
Ecclesia seniores habuit quorum fine consilio nihil agebatur in ecclesia, quod
qua negligentia obsoleverit, nescio, nisi forte doctorum desidia, aut magis
superbia, dum soli colunt aliquid videri.

Next, as they are sole, so also arbitrary in their proceeding; as Bodin
relates of the Tartar King, that at his Inauguration he tells them, Mea vex
prosecure et pro gladio crit, and Caligula said to the Consuls, Quid nifi uno
meo nutu jugulari utrumque vestrum statim posse? so are they loose and absolved
from any certain rule, Nos penes arbitrium est, et fas et norma regondi: Their
Will is their Law, and their Ipse dixit the Oracle, -- Credant de sonte relarum,
Ammonis;
for they have not yet (that we know) formed any Canons to regulate their
judgments, nor determined what is the minimum quod sic, which may render men
capable of communion; but they that speak of sealing men, though they must be
Keepers of the Seals (and so let them, if they keep them not too fast, and make
them Privy Seals, not the great Seals of the Church, nor apply them to wax
great, and seal the Patents of their pre-eminence) have yet sealed no certain
standard whereby to measure men in order to their admission. A visible
worthiness they require, but as Aristotle uncertainly places that mediocrity
wherein Virtue consists, in the judgment of wise men; so this worthiness has
no other determinate weight or measure but their judgment, and this visibleness
is intended to be their eyes; for it is all one, not to be, and not to appear
to them: so that as the Caxonists say, If the Pope should draw innumerable
souls unto hell, no man must say to him, What do thou? and Bellarmine tells
us, That if the Pope should err by commanding vices and forbidding virtues,
the Church were bound to believe vices to be good, and virtues to be evil: so
when they clave errante drive innumerable souls from the Communion, and censure
those to be vicious that are godiy, seriously I do not know what remedy they
can find, nor where they can fetch their redress, -- nil fecerit, esto!
Hoc volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas:
Which is certainly a condition as requisite to be retrenched, as dangerous to
be incurred; Miscra scrvitus est ubi jus est vagum aut incognitum, is a Maxim
of Law, says the great Lawyer Stanford, and therefore Non sinimus imperare
hominem sed rationem, says Aristotle in his Ethics, and no less prudently in
his Politics, Qui itaque hominibus una cum legibus imperium tradunt, etiam deo
tribuunt imperium; qui uero solum hominem sine legibus imperare volunt, ji
quodam modo belluae tradunt imperium, nam cupiditas tale quippiam, et ira cos
qui praesunt, etiam viros optimos, detorquet.

And therefore whereas only, -- Praecedenti spectatur mantica tergo; and
though anciently the place stricken with thunder was not afterward trodden upon;
and Pliny tells us, That icti a Scorpionibus nunquam postea a crabronibus,
vespis apibusque seriuntur: yet to exonerate themselves they transfer this
Lording (as other inordinatnesses in this Section) on the Bishops, -- Sequitur
fortunam, ut semper, and odit
Damnatos:
(Though perchance -- Idem populus si Nurscia Thusco
Favisset, hac ipsa Sejanum diceret hora
Augustum)
I must say, Maevius absentem Nevium cum carperet, heus tu^
Quidam ait, ignoras te? an ut ignotum, dare nobis
Verba putas? egomet mi ignosco, Maevius inquit,
Stultus and improbus hic amor est, dignusque notari.


How culpable soever the Bishops were, or meriting reproof, yet only Just
alios reprehendit qui non habet quod in se alius reprchendat, says Augustine,
Et ille potest facere, qui non meretur audire, as Ambrose: and therefore cum
mali accusan^ vitia, alienas parts agunt, themselves have still a Bishop in
their belly, as Luther used to say, every man had a Pope, and as the Pope
complemented the Duke of Florence, that he should be King in Thuscany not of
Thuseany; so though they are not Bishops of this or that Church, yet they are
Bishops in them, and act as solely and arbitrarily, and suspend more and for
less, than the Bishops used to excommunicate: if they assume not the pomp,
they usurp the power, and as Favonius told Pompey (or as some) Casar, it makes
no difference whether he wear the Diadem on his leg or his head, and while
the Cailiph wears the Crown, it is no matter though he cover it with a black
cloth: like the Sybils Books, when one or two are destroyed, yet there lies as
heavy a price upon the rest, and the weight presses more, because we expected
to have found it more easy and light. As he that had never lain in Plato's
cave, did not so much regret it, as he that having seen some light, and hoped
to enjoy it, yet was again remanded to darkness: and as a new wound where there
is a Cicatrix, is more dangerous, and recidivations are more destructive than
the first lapse into a disease, so it fares with us in our condition, and did
not the equanimity and moderation of some that are of other principles redeem
from this infamy, and like a perfume take away the ill odor, we might say, that
the lopping off the luxuriant stem of Episcopacy, was only to let many suckers
and spriggs gtow up as exorbitantly out of the same root. And as Lodovieus
Suessanus told Adrian the sixth, that if he demolished the statue of Pasquil,
and burning it cast the ashes into the river, they would turn to Frogs in the
bottom thereof, and croak worse then before; so the continuous quantity of
that enormous power is not abated, but the discrete is enlarged, and not so
much the power as the subject was quarrelled at, nor have we changed our
bondage, but the efficient thereof. So true is that which Dio Cassius delivers,
Long proclivius est alios reprehendere quam sibi moderari; saciliusque fit, ut
quarum rerum causa poena alios dignos judicant, has ipsi easdem admittant.

I hope they will be facile to give pardon to any comparisons (much more
allusions) which need to receive it for their own, that are so odious: and if
they receive any irritation, will with Dionysius, when he waited long at
another door in Corinth, recognize whether he had not made others formerly do
the like. Those that conform not to their model of government, they expose
under ugly notions, to be bitten dente canino, as the persecutors lapt the
primitive Christians in beasts skins, to be devoured by dogs, and other beasts.

They first bundle up their opposers with Anabaptists, but I wish they had no
more analogy with them in their separation, than we in despising government.
Anabaptisme is the heretical Metaphysics, and the principles of other modern
heresies are, I cannot say, there demonstrated, but derived from thence, and
sure their doctrine of pollution by a communion with persons unsanctified, of
administering the Sacraments to none but those that give demonstrative signs of
holiness, and the like, are but grains of that golden Calfe, some sprinklings
of that fountain -- Cujus de gurgite vasto
Combibit arcanos erratica turba furores:


Secondly, we are packt up with the Erastians: but as we have showed that our
Elements symbolize not with those of Erastus, so we compassion that Godly
learned man (for that stamp Bullinger and Gualter, and others have impressed upon
him) for being still enrolled in the black band of heretics, and every one
that comes by him (as the Jews and Mahumetans do when they p^ss by Absaloms
pillar in Palestine) cast a stone at him. He confined and limited indeed all
Ecclesiastical government to doctrinall direction, and the force of
persuasion, and would not have it extensible to censures or coertion, and the
tender and timid man, as he thought Antimony rather a poison than medicine, so
he had the like suspicion of excommunication in order to purging of the Church,
and thought neither the power lawful, nor the exercise profitable. This was
the heresy the good man was guilty of, wherein Bullinger and Gualter, and the
Divines of Zurich came in to be his Hyperaspists against Beza; yet for this
misprision in every Bulla exnae when heretics come to be excommunicated, he is
thrust into the herd, and for denial of excommunication, does as it were
suffer it. The Apologists are well reconciled to the Independents, whom they
call Their dear brethren, and yet Independency has been the dung-gate and Port
Esquiline not to carry forth, but to let in filthy heresy, but with the
Erastians Nullus amor neque faedera sunto,
But rather
Dum terra coelum medialibratum feret etc.
Nunquam meus cessabit in poeuas furor:
As if when many more precious truths lie in their blood, this were more worthy
to have its wounds tendered and dressed: which shows how much apter men are to
take a tender resentment of things, as they clash with their proper interest,
than formally, as they check with Gods truth. So that Father gravely told the
Emperor, who reproved him for observing his son with no more reverence, That
he had more respect to his sons honor than to the glory of the Son of God, whom
he suffered to be dishonored by heretics; and so Demetrius lest the other
Idols, (which to him were Gods) to shift for themselves; but Diana which
brought great gain, merited the engagements of all their powers in defense
thereof. So the Pope also in his taxa camerae Apostolicae rates the Absolution
of falsifying his Apopostolicall letters at 17 groats, but incest with a man's
own mother is taxed but at five groats only.

Thirdly, we are mustered among them that opposed Luthers reformation, and
professed they had rather live under the dominion of the Turks. But Luthers
reformation pleases not the Apologists, they must reform the reformation, and
gather new Churches, as if we had none before, and theirs are the only reformed
Churches. But whereas they speak of living under the dominion of the Turks,
let them consider if their dear brethren do not use those of their Congregation
that are not of their Church like Turks, and they themselves deal but little
better with them: for though indeed they baptize their children (which the
other do not, who therefore practically repute them as heathen) yet they
receive them to no other communion then they would do Turks, Vectigal quod per
occasionem aedificationis templi fuerat impositum, etiam obsoluto tempio
exigcbatur and jam non in res sacras sed profanas expendebatur. Menochius
annot. in 3 Reg. c. 12. v. 4
for those they would admit to hear them preaching for instruction, and suffer
them to partake of their prayers, if they would with reverence be present (as
the Apologists tell us, That the godly have prayed in the presence of the
unbelievers, as Paul in the ship in the presence of the passengers.)

Fourthly, we are resembled to the factious Israelites, which regretted at
Solomon's government, and causlesly complained of their burdens which were only
subservient to the building of the the Temple; but it seems to us, that they
rather demolish the Temple to build a poor Synagogue, or rather (the major part
denominating, if I may so speak) an Apagogue, for they drive away more than
they gather, and we have rather had a sadder sense of our burdens, because they
are imposed only to build that which has more analogy with Solomon's Throne,
than with his Temple. And it seems they have taken a wrong aim in their example
as well as in their application, and are as wide in their protasis as in the
antapodosis, for the burdens that the Israelites complained, and sought to be
exonerate of, were in the judgment of Interpreters, Conseruntur so pressos
jugo quia cogebantur ministrare Solomoni per menses singulos expensas regiae
familiae -- Valde grave quia Solomonis mensa sumptuosa admodum erat and
magnifica -- propter fastum inexplebilem tot reginarum idololatrarum sumptusque
immensos. Estius Annot. ibid.
not those laid on them toward the edifying of the Temple (Tulerant usque
tempus extremum Solomonis impositum vectigal, tum quia minus grave, tum quia ad
templi sabricam, and Israelitici imperii praesidium and ornamentum, and ad
alios communes and publicos usus conferebatur, says Sanctius:) but this yoke
was either the bringing in Corn for nourishing his family and horses, as Junivs
and Piscator collect out of the sourth Chapter: or this grievous service was
either inflicted on the Canaanites only, and they only sought to be
alienated; or the service, which before was common to be done by them to all
the people, was now reduced to the King only, wherein they were wronged (as
Diodate:) or they were immania tributa, which they could not patient, because
suas potius spectaret delicias delirus senex. and faeminarum, quibus erat supra
modum addictus, usibus non semper honestissimis extortas a populo divitias
impenderct. (Quomodo enim aliter cum regio fasta 700. reginas and delicatum
genus, and 300. concubinas aleret?) far non potuit immanes illos and
impudentes sumptus, as are the words of Sanctius, and consent of Serrarius, and
Estius.

Fifthly, They set us in the tents of those wicked men, Korath, Dathan, and
Abiram, and they have opened their mouth to swallow up our name, as the earth
opened her mouth and swallowed them: But as we shall hearken unto Moses in all
things, only the Lord our God be with him, and we do not murmur against Aaron,
nor shall break his Rod, though we cannot worship his Calfe, nor are we
ambitious to share any of his powers, but desire he should keep them, so as
they keep their regular limits; so with these wicked men the quarrel was not
concerning the power, but the subject that should be invested therewith. The
sons of Reubcu thought the principal sovereignty of right appertained to their
Tribe, whose Progenitor was the first borne, and the Children of Levi envied
the appropriating of the Priesthood to Aaron and his offspring, which they
would have had common to the Tribe, or to the first borne, whereof Korah was
one, as Theodoret, Isidor, Ab^lensis, Menochius, Tirinus, and others mentioned
by Lorinus, and A Lapide. That which our Translation reads, Ye take too much
upon you, Junius, and Tremelius, and Piscator read, satis esto vobis: The
Septuogint, Onkelos, the Samaritan and the Vulgar, Sufficiat, nonne satis
dominati estis? as the Arabic: that is, satis diu cum gubernastis rempublicam,
alter politicam, alter Ecclesiasticam, definite nunc, and aliis quoque ad
gubernationem idoneis locum concedite, as Piscator wherein Junius concurreth:
so as they did not opposed the power but the persons, and sought not to subvert
but to divide the dominion, which the Bishops were wont to say was the design
of those that oppose their pre-eminence, who when they were told, ye take too
much upon you, in the words of Korah and his accomplices, they used to answer in
those of Moses, Ye take too much upon you ye sons of Levi, Ep. 164. and alibi
contra. Ep. Parmen.
and St. Augustine makes frequent use of this example against the separation of
the Donatists, being more applicable against Schism, whereof I shall remind
the Apologists.

Lastly, We are yoaked with the sons of Belial hat are impatient of Christ's
yeake, but we desire to take his, though we cast off theirs, we would bear the
old yoke, for old yoakes are light and easy, not their new one, for new
yoakes are hard and heavy, Willet in 1 Samuel 1.16. R. Kimchi. apud A Lapide in 2
Cor 6 15. and Jansen. in Proverb. 6.12. Pineda. in Job. 34.18. So the
Pentateuch lately set forth. Menoch. in Deutro. 13.13. Hierom in Ezekiel l 11.
c. 34. tom. 4. p. 979.
neither can we yield to be yoaked; so that we must either draw their Plow, or
be pricked with their Goad. As some derive Belial from Beli^ol, without yoke,
so others do from Beli jaal, which is to be without profit, and others from
Galath to ascend: We have no tentation to retort that attribute of the sons of
Belial upon them as it signifies the sons of iniquity (so the Thargum of
Onkelos renders it, Deuteronomy 13.13.) but perchance it may be applicable to them as
being without the yoke of law or rule in their arbitrary precedings, Filii
Belial (1.) exleges, says Menechius, and so going on unyoaked, Fortes,
lateribus and humeris suis impugnant, atque collidunt infirma pecora, and
cornibus ventilant, nescientes in lege taurum cornupetam debere puniri;
impingebant autem lateribus and cornibus, ventilabant donec dispergerent et
ejicerent oves for as: Superbia enim majorum and praepositorum i^iquitate
frequenter pelluntur de Ecclesia ut dispergantur quos ipse salvavit, as Hierom
complains. And whether their way be not then a child of Belial, as being
unprofitable to any good end, and conducible only to make themselves ascend,
if the truth be not yet apparent, time will bring it forth; but the sons of
Heli are plainly called sons of Belial, because they exacted and took by force
from the people what they pleased, when they drew near to sacrifice, and
thereby made them to abhor the offering of the Lord, and they may try how that
parable and resemblance may fit them.

But when this heat is rebated and the vapors spent, what is the extract and
quintessence that can be distilled from this argumentation, save merely a
complication of fallacies? As that because there must be a government,
therefore it must be theirs; Because some powers are just, therefore theirs are
not exorbitant; Because some have causelessly repined, therefore we have no
cause to complain; Because some have been reluctant to all government,
therefore we will have none that contradict theirs: And also their arguments
are not proper to their case, but common to the opposite, like the tragaedian
buskin, subservient to any foot, and those very arrows have been shot by the
Episcopal party against the opposites of Prelacy, and they have sung the same
ditty, but whether in the one, with better aim to the mark; or in the other,
with an apter tune and fitter cadency, and a righter conformity according as
truth has pricked the lesson, -- tantas componere lites
Non opis est nostrae.


But we regret not government, -- neq, enim libertas gratior ulla est: We
assert and plead for it, but we would pluck up the weeds that the corn might
flourish, and cut down the Ivy that the Tree might prosper; for he that spares
what is evil, hurts that which is good: We shall ever rise before the hoarie
head of ministerial power, and honor the person of that old man, but we cannot
with Rehoboam consult with those young men that are grown up with us, and stand
before us: their counsel will but provoke Israel to rebel. When the sons of
God espouse the daughters of men; when divine Institutions are perverted and
degenerate into a subserviency of humane interest: when the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven are abused to open a door to secular dominion, then are
Giants in the earth, and they be the Prologue to a flood, and of those Giants
says Baruch, c. 3. v 27. Non hos elegit Dominus, neq, viam disciplinae
invenerunt. Water being confined within its proper channel runs pure, and is
fit to cleanse others; but if it overflow its banks, it contracts filth, and
bears down all before it: and fire restrained within the hearth is of
necessary use and comfort; but if it get up to the top of the chimney, it puts
the whole house in danger. Too much power is always a treacherous and
ensnaring thing, especially in some professions; like Helena of old, and
Bru^halt of later times, it ruins all that court it, and is like that Sejan
Horse, which all that mounted fell unfortunate.

To tell us of small matters and small things that are exacted, besides that it
is Petitio principii, is a net vainly spread in the sight of nay bird; as
Hiltenius said of the Romans, Est proprium Romanae potestatis ut sit ferrea, et
licet digiti minoren ur ad parvitatem acus, tamen manent ferrei. A small needle
may prick mischievously, and small things may be great in the effects and
consequences. A great Oak is virtually in a small Acorn; an huge sum may be
granted in a little earnest. Nullum vitium definit u^i incipit, says Seneca,
Et non ibi consistunt exempla ubi caepere, sed quamlibet in tenuem recepta
tramitem latissime evagandi viam sibi faciunt, as Paterculus. If the serpent
gets in his head, he easily works in his whole body. He that lays his
foundation in the Conscience, shall soon build as high as he will, and he that
has the mintage of same and honor, has nothing privileged from his purchase,
for not only Honestus rumor alterum patrimonium, but Fama and vita
aequiparantur, as Civilians judge: and we have elsewhere touched the abuse of
Excommunication was that which lifted up the foot of the Pope to be set upon
the necks of Emperors, and was the stirrup which raised him to that height of
power, as to compel them to hold his stirrup; the unbuttoning and getting into
the bosom of men (which whether effected by examinations or confessions will
spring no vast difference) and the putting of them under arbitrary penance,
was the very stairs to that throne (which like Solomon's was over laid with
gold, in the effluence of riches, and guarded with Lions for the terror
thereof,) whereon the Roman Clergy was exalted; And Cajetan advised Adrian the
sixth, That this was a sure way to get an absolute Command over the People,
Scire volunt secreta domus a^que inde timeri: Suarez, who they said speaks more
for them than they would have, yet affirms, that if the Sacrament should be
dispensed according to the private knowledge of the Minister, Cited before.
it would occasion many troubles, scandals and injuries, and Ministers might
defame whom they list, and fain a sin and unworthiness where there is none, and
the faithful must often fear and be afraid lest they should be defamed by the
Minister. Quod si ergo novam in Ecclesia tyrannidem his principiis stabiliri
posse metuimus, quis nos absq, causa id timere dicet? says Gualther: and he
produces this reason, Epist. ad Bohem. Epist. ad Co. mit. de Witycustem.
Est equidem insatiabilis hominum ambitio, and rari inveniuntur qui potesta^e
sibi data non insolentiores fiunt: and in another place, Quid ergo fore
sperabimus, si quando regnum suum stabilierunt, cum hae disciplinae ejus
primi^iae pro qua illi tantopere digladiantur? And if a power guided and
limited by a certain rule, and exercised so rarely, as scarce upon one of an
hundred, was so suspicible and destructive to him, how tenderly would he have
resented, and with what indignation declaimed against this arbitrary
proceeding, whereof scarce one of an hundred but complains to be wounded by the
paws thereof? And do but seriously perpend what the judicious assertor of
Infant Baptism delivers, That it would turn all into confusion, Bax^er p. 131.
-- and put the greatest power and opportunity for lordliness and tyranny into
the hands of the Ministry that ever did any doctrine in the Church, if the
Minister only must judge who shall be baptized, -- so that if the Minister be
not pleased neither Prince nor People shall be Christians -- we must all then
stoop and couch to Ministers, and give them what they would have, lest we
should be no Christians, nor be baptized. If the Fable of Purgatory drew so
much lands and revenues to the Clergy, how much more would this be like to do
it? -- the Ministers would be indeed as men that carried the keys of Heaven
and Hell under their girdles. So he, and verily as Passus in Lucian bid turn
the table and the horse with his heels upward would be passant; so for ought I
can discern, the same in some degree and proportion might be applied to the
other Sacrament, and said of Ministers, if they should dispense it only to
those who had approved themselves fit and worthy in their judgment, and what
Nauclerus falsely said in another case of the voice heard from Heaven would
then fall out true in this, That now poison is cast into the waters of God and
his Church.

They may therefore please themselves and impose upon their Prosylites by those
species, that theirs are Gods ways, (by decree and permission indeed, not
precept and approbation, his providence so sweetly disposing and governing all
things, that that which falls out against his will, happens not without it:)
that they study to preserve the privileges of the Saints, (as the Duke of
Florence takes up and keeps safe the commodities of his Country to issue them
at his own rates,) and raise a fence that they may not he trodden done by wild
beasts, (rather to let no Sheep to enter, but such as they fancy and bear their
mark,) that they gather out the stones of Gods Vineyard, (and leave a great one
in their hearts to so many of their brethren:) that all that is down is by
voluntary agreement of those that freely submit, (true, of them that are in
favor to be received, not by agreement of those that are wrongfully excluded,
and who deny submission, and are no parties to the contract, this may make it
somewhat equitable to the one, but their agreement cannot make it cease to be
an injury to the other, no more than when the Anabaptists harrowed and
plundered all the Country about M^nster, it could excuse them for stealing from
others to say, they do nothing but by mutual agreement between themselves, for
the injured people agreed not to be robbed of their properties:) they
excommunicate none (it were wholesomer and better reguled discipline to
excommunicate those that merited it, and to entertain communion with the rest,
but that they have mistaken the boxes where the Antidote lay, and made use of
those wherein was the poison, and have pulled up Gods threshold and set down
their own, over which to go in and out of the Temple and house of God:) that
they redress abuses, (just as he that should tear the whole Ship in pieces with
the broken planks thereof to build and trim a cabin:) and promote the national
engagement, (which was never so much vilified as by their brotherhood, who have
made it as the bridge of Caligula at Pu^zol, Quo fine structum nisi ut
destrueretur? as Lipsius, or like Scaurus his Theater, Temporarium and vix uno
mense futurum in usu, or as Cardinal Cusanus profanely speaks of the
Scripture, that it was fitted to the time and ^ariably understood, so that at
one time it is expounded according to the current fashion of the Church, and
when that fashion is changed, the sense also is changed:) that theirs are
Essays of rule and order, (or rather a rule beyond their order:) it is a fallacy
a been conjunctis ad male divisa, dividing ruling from well, (which the Monk
said spoiled the text,) it is a ruling not ut profint, sed ut praesint, as
Augustine.

But notwithstanding all these dawbings and pargetings, as in that famous Tower
in the Isle of Pharus, the ambitious Architect engraved thereon in Marble this
Inscription, Sostratus of Gnidos built this, which he covered over with
plaster, inscribing the same with the name of the Founder, Ptolomy
Philadelphus, that that soon wasting, his own name might be legible to
posterity: so though on this high Tower of Discipline they have set the Name of
God, as if it were built by him and for him, yet when Time, and Truth her
offspring has washed away this plaster, it will be visible and apparent, that
for themselves only, and their greatness it was medelled and raised, and all
this contention and stir which they have started about it, is not so much pro
aris quam pro focis, they have sought their own things, not the things of
Christ, and as Vignier said of Baronius his Annals, he should rather have
entitled the book De Primatu Romani Pontificis; so they might rather have
named their writings, An Apology for their Lordliness, than an Apology
asserting their administration of the Lord's Supper in a select company.

And yet as of pride, Prima est baec ultio, that it frustrates its own ends,
and has a natural influence to defeat it self of what it intentionally
drives at, which is honor and esteem, (pride being a most despicable and
disobliging quality:) so the Apologists in seeking too much, find too little of
Sovereignty, and that which is like to be less permanent, and by grasping too
much at the Corn-heap, hold less, Vis te Sexte coli, volebam amare:
Parendum est tibi; quod jubes, coleris;
Sed si te Sexte colo, non amabo.


If the Angel of the Church stand at the entrance with such a flaming sword as
turns every way (not only against the scandalous but others also) it is only
to keep out and fright men from approaching that Paradise, not to invite or
offer admission: and he that is an old man in wisdom and experience knows that
he shall not have the people servants for ever, that does not serve them this
day (of new establishments) and answer them and speak good words to them. Soft
drops pierce and enter into hard stones, when impetuous billows are broken
without effect upon rocks, You may gently bow and inflect that plant, which per
vim manibus reflexa resilit, says Naz^anzen. Flectitur obsequio curvatus ab
arbere ramus,
Franges si vires experiare tuas.


When one told the Emperor that he had made his Sovereignty by some
condescentions less absolute, he replied, But more safe. And when a Roman
Senator asked the Carthaginian Ambassador, how long the peace should last? That
says he will depend on the conditions you give us; if just and honorable, they
will hold for ever; if otherwise, no longer than till we have power to break
them: Moderata durant, but Nec diu potest, quae multorum malo excercetur, stare
potentia.

To excuse the calling of all to examination, (a promiscuous examination by
them that deny all promiscous Communions,) even an examination of such as are
more knowing than their examiners, they answer, That duties of Religion are to
be used without respect of persons, which is as if when a felony is committed,
a Justice of Peace should send to the Goal all the inhabitants of the town, as
well those of unsuspected integrity, as those that are suspected to have
committed the fact, and justify the proceeding by saying, That acts of justice
are to be used without respect of persons: Aquinas 22. q. 63. art. 1. Valentia
disp. 5. q. 7. Punct. 1. Sylvius in 2.2. q. 61. art. 1. Lessius de iustit. and
jure. l. 2. c. 32. dub. 1. Ames cas. l. 5. c. 5.
Acception of persons is when in any distribution the merit of the cause is not
respected, but some condition of the person, impertinent to that distribution,
as the School and Casuists: But when m^n are reduced under examination to make
trial whether they are ignorant, and those are exempted who are sufficiently
known to be knowing, it is the cause that is respected, not the person:
Consistit enim aequalitas distributivae justitiae in hoc, quod diversis
personis diversa tribuuntur, secundum proportionem ad dignitates personarum: Si
ergo aliquis consideret illam proprietatem personae, propter quod aliquid quod
ei confertur est ei debitum, non est acceptio person^ sed causae, as Aquinas.
And Valentia therefore resolves, that if in distribution of commen good things
the condition of the person be not attended which makes him worthy of the good
that is conferred in that distribution, that it is respect of persons; and the
same reason holds in distributing punishments also, so at it here will follow,
that they rather accept persons, who in examining those that may be ignorant,
except not those that are removed beyond all doubt of their knowledge.

They think it possible, but not so usual, that the Pastor may be exceeded in
learning by some of his congregation. If it fall not out often, yet if it
sometime happen, that supports the Hypothe^is, and in such a contingence, if
Phormio were accounted so delirous to dispute of military discipline before
Hannibal, it were greater madness for a less knowing man to take an overly and
suspicious examination of one of more knowledge, and some would unhappily think
sus fi^ly joined with sacerdos, if in such a way sus Minervam,

But does learning (they ask) exempt from obedience? No, but from a Tyronical
or rather a Tyrannical examination, and from that obedience which is proper
only for the unlearned. Ministers though less learned, must be obeyed by more
scientious auditors, when they speak in his name, and upon his embasly in whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: but they are not to expect
such obedience of any when they speak of themselves, and seek their own glory.
Conscience is the only forum divinum, and in that Court they are not Praetors
but publishers and interpreters; we call no man Master, In Matt. 23.8.
Quasi penes quem esset scripturam pro suo arbitrio exponere and intelligere,
as Calvin, or, ut verum putemus quicquid ille docuerit, quia ab illo prosectum
est, as Estius. It is the slavish superstition of the Papists, that (as Gratian
tells us) they rather desire to know the ancient institution of Christian
Religion from the Popes mouth, than from the holy Scripture, and they only
inquire what is his pleasure, and according to it they order their lives: and
it is the ambitious tyranny of their Prelates to teach, That if the consent of
diverse Divines affirm such a doctrine to be the sense of the Church, the
people are bound to believe it though it be a lie, (as Valentia) and they shall
commit a meritorious act by believing such a falsehood, as Biel and Tolet: but
nobis non licet esse tam indiscrtis, they might then justly account and deal
with us as ignorants indeed.

They must be obeyed in what they derive from Gods Word, not in what they teach
as it were inspiredly and voluntary, and in things within the sphere of their
power to command, and i^ what is proper and proportioned to the subject whereon
the command is imposed; but it no less exceeds the limit of our obedience, than
the extent of our patience, to suffer men to bring us into bondage (we cannot
with these Barbarians in Ap^ian desire to be rid of liberty and spoil our
selves potiore metallis Liberate,) and to permit them to devour us and take of
us (even our other patrimony, our reputation) by an interpretative rendering us
simple ignorants and making us per gradum Simconis to commence catechumens,
when we have long been in the degree of the faithful, and to exalt themselves,
to make us the Basis, and to render us as Jacks in Virginals, to fall down that
their usurped keys may go up. Non bona patientia, says Bernard, Cumpossis
esse liber servum te permittere fieri, nolo dissimules servitutem, in quam
certe indies dum nescis redigeris; hebetatis cordis indicium est, propriam non
sentire continuam vexationem. Vexatio dat intellectum audi^ui, sed nimia non
fuerit, nam si sit, non intellectum dat sed contemptum. The most learned we
grant must still be kept under teaching because we know in part, but not be put
under examination if he knows in part. Every Christian must be a disciple, and
in Christ School his Ministers are the Ushers, and those of the highest form
that know most, the more do know that they know but little, the greatest part,
as one says, of what we know, being the lest part of what we know not, and all
humane understanding being like the vial of Oil which Xerxes found in Belus
sepulcher, which after continual infusions could not be filled up: and besides,
he that is skilled in the doctrine, yet is too often to seek of the application
and the use, which is to set home by continual exhortation, and thereby are the
affections to be reconciled to reason, and charmed into a compliant
subserviency, and those sails (for affectus sunt vela arimi,) to be spread and
trimmed and filled with a continual breath to carry on the mind to the port
designed; but there is no such necessity of our being examined by them, the
Church must receave edifying, and they are given for the edifying of the body
of Christ, but if they will be wise Master Builders, they will not be still
laying again the foundation in those that have gone on unto perfection, nor
level the walls after they have been built to some hight to try how the
groundwork was settled, for as it is said to be the madness of jealousy to seek
that which it is loath to find, so it is, if not a madness, yet a mockery, to
seek that which is found already.

A Wife may have more knowledge than her Husband, some subjects more policy
than their Governors, yet this cannnot justify disobedience nor null
authority. Neither do we dream, that he that has a richer stock of Knowledge
than his Pastor, may despicably extrude or renounce him, or proudly detract his
obedience to Gods Commands in his mouth, or presumptuously usurp upon his
office, and be dealing with his stock and laying it forth in public teaching,
but can only claim his privilege to be exempt of such a derogatory
examination, and not be apprehended and stopped in his access to the Lords Table
as a poor suspected person, till he have gotten their Let-pass. We do not
imagine (however it sometimes may be true in some respects, Tu major, tibi me
est aequum parere Menalca, and Cyrus was wont to say. Neminem debere s^scipere
principatum nisi melior his in quos susciperet,) that every superior must be
higher by the head than all those subject to him, and that it must be among
men, as it is they say amonst Angels of light, that every one of an higher
Order is more illuminate than any one of an inferior; the title to superiority
has often another root than an absolute deturdigniori; but yet an Husband, if
he will dwell like a man of knowledge, must net deport himself toward his Wife
as if she were a fool, or interpretatively and implicitly make her such, if
she be a woman of knowledge; nor a King that will be just, deal with wise men
as with idiots, and practically make them such, for justice partly consists in
giving every man his own, and to be so despicably examined is not proper to a
knowing but an ignorant person. A King may seize the lands of an idiot, and
issue a writ de leproso amovendo, but may not hold every man out till he plead
and approve his soundness of body or mind, and obtain his charter of allowance
thereof; and though he may remove or keep out a manifest Leper, he must not
deal so with every one that has some other less sore.

And though (as they say) it be not usual that any e grege of the Flock for
knowledge be egregious in respect of the Pastor, yet it is exceeding frequent
that they are more knowing than to be degraded from the Temple to the School by
an examination proper for tyroes and novices, Ecclesiast. l 1. c. 4. tom. 1. p.
1939.
and so be set to School again, Duo instituta s^nt conventuum sacrorum
publicorumque genera, (says Junius:) Unum totius Congregationis, cujus locum
docendi causa Templum nominabimus, veteres Ecclesiam dixerunt, (...) etc.
Alterum puerorum tyronumq, (...), cujus locus Schola appellatur graeco
vecabulo, Acts 19. The ancient Church knew but these two ranks or degrees of
her members, so that he which was not placed among the one, had his station
with the other, the one the Catechumens, the other the Congregation of the
faithful, and to all the later promiscuously the Sacrament appertained, as was
before alleged out of the same Author.

That an humble man may submit (the question is not de facto, what he may, but
de jure, whether he must,) to one of meaner abilities to avoid exceptions,
(theirs only, that their commands may be general rules without exceptions; but
to avoid just exceptions, pride should rather not exalt it self, than teach
that it is humility to condescend,) and to encourage others; (rather to
encourage them to carry on and go through with their designs, when some yield
to be as decoyes to lead on others into the snare;) that the able and godly
know not their abilities so as to oppose them to their duty, (the more they
know, the less they know it to be their duty to follow their triumphall
Chariot, and to become accessory to their usurped Lordlines, and their own
bondage; it is only ignorance that can be the Mother of this devotion;) that
being tried it will add to their esteem to be found knowing, (it is sure more
estimable never to have been questioned and reduced to trial, as Aeschines
justly thought it a greater glory to Cephalus never to have been accused, then
to Aristophon to have been 75. times acquitted.) All this, which has often
been set before us, -- eadem cantabant versibus jisdem,
Occidit miseros crambe repetita magistros,
we have elsewhere as frequently (we trust) made manifest to be only painted
and carved dishes, like those of Heliogabalus, which cannot satisfy, and like
those seeming fat hoggs which Del. Rio cut of Dubravius tells us that Zyto the
Magician sold the Baker, which though forbidden, he brought to the water to be
washed because they looked filthy, and then all proved to be but waddes of
Straw. -- Cum scclus admittunt superest constantia. They disdain with
Aristippus to die of the biting of a Wezel, they provoke the teeth of a Lion,
they will not pusillanimously excuse one fault, but boldly avow another, Pudor
veluti vestis, quanto obsoletior est, tanto incuriosius habetur.

They think we mistake that their greatest suspicion is of ignorance, it is
men's hearts not their heads which they suspect; but they are mistaken of us,
not we of them; we know, and through this discourse have taken notice, that
they not only suspend such as are palpably ignorant, but also all which have
not upon examination satisfied them of their knowledge, nor those alone that
are scandalously wicked, but all that have not upon trial convinced them of
their holiness, and this later we look upon as their axes, on the other but as
their rods; that as the chastisement with rods, and this with Scorpions. This
we dispute against as the superlative obliquity and inordinateness of their
way, that they will allow no man's title to the Sacrament, till upon inspection
they have confirmed his evidences, and do disseise every man of his possession,
till he do suit to their Court, and acknowledge to hold of them by homage and
fealty. So the right is rooted in their favor and approbation, as the next and
nearest cause.

But whereas they say, that the greatest part that stand off from them, do it
upon suspicion of their practice, and their not living as they expect, they do
but transfer that blame which themselves have contracted, and exprobrate to
others their proper faults, they accusing those to stand off, whom they drive
or keep off, and like men putting off from land to sea, they conceit the shore
passes away from them, while they go off from it: They say we mistake their
suspicion to be of one thing when it is more of another, therefore the
suspicion harbors in their bosom. Those which (stand not off, but) are kept
out, know not of scandal by themselves, yet are not thereby justified with
them, and therefore if they suspect any thing, it is only that they are
suspected by them, and are therefore passive, not active in the suspicion: yet
when the water is troubled, the lamb must be accused, though he stand below,
and can have nothing come down to him, but from the wolf at the head, and they
deal with their flock as those did with King Richard the 2d. who having meat
set daily before him, was not permitted to eat a bit, and being thereupon
starved, they gave out that he was felo de se, and killed himself by a
voluntary abstinence.

If they knew any susceptible of catechizing them (which was only spoken
comparatively and by hypothesis,) they might in policy (the great wheel of
their motions,) for bear to call them forth, (lest like Mercury near the Sun,
they might be eclipsed by brighter rays, and receave less veneration,) and
would in ingenuity say as one said to an eminent man in like words with John to
Christ, I have need to be taught of thee, and come thou to me? It seems
counting one by one it was but one of a thousand they have found, and one
swallow cannot secure us that it is a summer, there may many storms yet be
impendent. One Anacharsis cannot redeem and expiate all the barbarism of
Scythia, -- Catilinas
Quocunque invenias populo, quocunque sub axe,
Sed nec Brutus erit, Bruti nec avunculus usquam.
If one did not abuse this power, others may, and our security is to be rooted
in the limitation of the power, not the goodness of the person that exercises
it: Though we hope the best, that he will not hurt us, yet we ought to provide
against the worst, that he may not be able to hurt us if he would. And the
neglect of this provident principle has set open the widest door to tyranny,
and has made good Governors to create the worst presidents, and if in this
one this were commendable and exemplar, why do they not all follow the
pattern, not only toward such as have ascended to eminent degrees of
knowledge, but in some degree to those also who have stepped above the flat of
this puny and elementary tractation, unless like the Athonians in the Theater,
they know what is just and fit to be done, but can be content the
Lacedaemonians should do it? But what can this select example pretend to?
Either that he was like King Ste^hen and Richard the third, of whom our
Cronicles say, that they moderately used that power which they usurped; or else
that he deserved such thanks as Anytus said Alcibiades did merit, for taking
but a part when he might have caught all; Or else that he did only receave
with a particular complement him, whom their general command had laid hold of
and brought unto such submission, as the Lord we know did yet use to kiss his
tenant, when he h^d constrained him to kneel uncovered, with his hands jointly
together between the hands of the Lord, and so to do him homage. Did he
disclaim the principle that all must come to be examined? Did he plainly
profess and constantly practice to call none but such as were under just
suspicion of ignorance? If otherwise, all this was but mendax humilitas, (as
Hierom;) only a Nolumus Episcopari, (as is the mockery of the Canon) a
dissembling to be willing to do that which was his drift and design to have
done; a looking one way and rowing another, and is but as if that Indian
serpent which Ni^remberg mentions, when by his breath he forcibly dr^wes a
goodly Stagg into his mouth, should turn his head aside, when he takes in his
prey to swallow it.

In expressing That they honor the Graces above the Muses, they recite what one
said of the present estate of Oxford, That there had been more Muses
heretofore, but never so many Graces. I could repay them with the saying of
another, That the present Graces to the former Muses, hold the same proportion
that the Graces dee to the Muses, which is Three to Nine: but when ever that
famous University is any way to commence, I shall not dare to deny her Grace,
and if that which they repeat be not historical, I wish it may prove
prophetical, and that her present Graces were multiplied by her former Muses,
and her modern Muses by the number of her ancient Graces: and however, yet for
my part I should rather dormire M^coenati, and abhor with Nero to dissect my
mother, lest the womb where I lay might not prove so fair as I expected.

They found no occasion to discuss, and we see no reason to determine, Whether
the Shekel of the Sanctuary were greater or less than the common, though we
suppose both to be equal, which they forget to consider of, though they might
have been prompted to it by A. Lapide (if they had looked no further) in the
place they quote, and that it was called the Shekel of the Sanctuary, because
kept there as in a safe and sacred place, to be the Standard whereby the common
Shekels were to be weighed and tried, (as at Rome the Amphora of the Capitol
was that which was there reserved to the like ends.) But whether the common
Shekel and that of the Sanctuary were of equal or different weight and price,
it matters not, since an Allegory may be bottomed upon a common opinion of
things, and requires not a precise truth to found it on, and to deny this
liberty, were to make destruction in the Sylva Allegoriarum, and to root up a
great part of Sylva Moralium. Sanctius in Isaiam, c. 13. v. 5. n. 11.
It is the Rule of a learned Commentator, that the Scripture it self
accommodates its speech oftentimes not to the truth of things but opinion of
men, which he demonstrates by several instances and more might be added, as
Psalm. 5.8.4. and 5. Eccles. 10.11, etc. But I think it n^i^her suits with truth
nor common opinion, what they seem to imply, That there were any Shekels of
Iron, or Brass, or Gold, though some pieces of either of those meta^s, and so
also other commodities might weigh a Shekel, or be a pi^ce of so many Shekels
(as a Shekel had its name from Shakel, to weigh, or put into the balance) but
a Shekel as a gold or brass coin, there was none so called, none but of
silver; but whether there were any such or not, yet sure the Bells of Aaron
were neither to be of sounding Brass, nor hard and dull Iron.

But this is dolor ubi digitus, they cannot take it for current payment, that
any common Shekel should be greater than that of the Sanctuary this is
insufferable, and not to be allowed to pass at their beam, for if the one
scale rise up, the other will as much go down: Pompey can endure no equal,
Caesar no superior, Ille sapit solus, volitant alii velut umbrae. As the vulgar
Muscovites say, The great Duke knows all, and as the Pasquil said, That the
King of Spain had gelded and divested all others of their honorable titles that
he alone might be most high, Nil majus generatur ipso,
Nec viget quicquam simileaut secundum;
so some men must be as the Phae^ix that has no other of the same kind: For
envy is always the proper passion of pride, Estius in 2. Sent. c. 6. sect, 4.
for dum affectus alicujus tendit in aliquid ^ppetendum consequenter renititur
opposito, id est ciper quod impediatur ab co quod appetit assequendo, dum ergo
quis a petit excellentiam singularem quod est superb^ae, staim reniti ur
excellentiae alienae ta^quam suae excellentiae, quam singularem esse vult,
impedimentum obji^ienti; and therefore there is aliquod malum propter vicinum
bonum, as the arbor Tristis sheds all his fl^wers, and seems withered at the
rise of the Sun, Claro invidens, tabescit obscurus videns.

But why should it be odious in us to propound such an Hypothesis, when they
acknowledge that it is possible that the Pastor may be exceeded in learning and
gifts by some of his Congregation, and themselves make an ostent of an example
of one that confessed he had need to be taught of an eminent person under him,
which I hope was neither lying humility, nor complementall hypocrisy, only
perchance they may be of like mind with Cardinal Langius, that what Luther said
was true, but it was not to be suffered that such a fellow as he should have to
do with it?

But the allusion, they say, every one sees reflects on the particular
Ministers; rather none can see it, not those to whom it is visible that those
Ministers fall short of the parts of some of their congregations, none but only
they to whom my breast is diaphanous and my heart transparent, but from my herat
I profess that without any such reflex I writ Mathematically, and abstracted
my lines from all subjects: but if they will needs have an inherence to be of
the essence of this accident, and that this must needs refer and be
restrained to certain particular persons, and they will rack me to confess
what I should be contented to conceal, I shall yet only say, that such a
reflection had been no such heinous or piacular offense, and that the
Hypothesis (as I meant it though they will perforce make it a Thesis) is as
far from disparagement as impossibility. He that by discourse has poysed and
selt the weight of their Shekels will be easy to believe, that no great mass
need to be laid in the counter-scales to balance them, that some common
Shekels may aequiponderate the most of them, and some perchance may need their
allowance of some grains to make them pass the Standard of the Sanctuary. And
if in any degree they shall be madded at this, sure it is not overmuch
learning that makes them mad. But be their Shekels whatsoever, yet let them be
like those old Israelitish coins, which had on one side stamped the pot of
Manna, as well as on the other Aarons rod blossoming, whereas they are all for
the one, and forget the other.

We run in confort with them, while they sing that not the largest Shekels, (I
suppose they mean for extent of knowledge) BUT THE HOLIEST are best, for we
prefer the tree of life before that of knowledge, since the one always makes
to live for ever, the other sometime casts out of Paradise. But though Gold be
more precious than other metals, yet Iron is more regardable at a Muster, and
when men are examined whether they be ignorant, knowledge is that which is
chiefly looked after. And so also though in the definition of an Orator, vir
bonus be a better attribute then dicendi peritus, yet that which is proper and
formal to a good Orator, is to be skillful in the Art of speaking, etc. And so
it is likewise constitutive of a good Minister to have his Shekel of full
weight as well as of pure metal, and to be learned as well as godly.

And what they say, That knowledge adorned with humility, and engaged to
advance piety, of any what ever measure or extent, is after the Standard of the
Sanctuary, is not true, if applied to a Minister, for as Gregory pithily, He
that is the Pastor ought so far to excel his flock generally, as compared with
him, they may seem but of the herd; the Well should be of more capacity than
the Bucket, and for the sheep it is enough to drink there, but Jacob ought to
be of greater strength to remove the stone, and open the well, (according to
Origens allegory) but if in themselves or others so few grains of knowledge may
make up a Shekel of a passable weight, why are they so rigid at other times in
the trial thereof in their Scales? and whereas they require that knowledge be
adorned wi^h humility, and engaged to advance piety, we shall so far second
them, as to confess that where there is a weighty Shekel, it depresseth the
scale, and sets it lower, and also that all the gold and silver which has been
brought out of Egypt, and all the Earrings (what ever the ear has learned)
ought to be subservient to the building of the Tabernacle, and no Shekels (as
too many are) should be (like those of Micah) converted to the making of a
Teraphim, but we cannot consent, that only that piety is pure and passable
metal, which has the touch of the Tower which they are building, or is
current coin which has their stamp and mintage, or that as Eagles are tried by
looking against the Sun, so that it is only genuine piety which can endure
their new light.

To that of the paper, That to suspect the knowledge of the generality of their
people, is to imply (as the Papists have abusively perverted that of Gregory)
that while the Oxen labored, they were all Asses that fed by them, they
answer, They need a pair of tongs to deal with so odicus a comparison. And
perchance they need them indeed, lest it be felt so hot as to burn their
fingers; but if non dico nugas esse, sed esse puto, if they do not expressly
call them Asses, as they implicitly call them Dogs and Swine, which is worse,
yet virtually and practically they judge them such, and deal with them as if
they were no other, and make them such by an interpretative declaring them to
be so (as in common acception they are said to make a man a fool that use him
as if he were one, as also magnifacere is but magnum dicore;) for if they think
them to be of knowledge and understanding, why do they doubtingly examine them?
Who enquires after that whereof he is already satisfied? if they suppose there
is reason to bring them under such a suspicious trial, then they are not
persuaded but that they are (at least may be) these simple ones whereof the
Ass is the hieroglyphick, and if they did not imply them to be Asses, they yet
hold forth themselves as Lions, that will have all beasts of the Forest,
others as well as Asses to prostrate themselves in such obeisance. But
perchance the quarrel may be, that as the Pope said of England, Etiam asinus
meus recalcitrat; so the Ass will no longer lie down under his burden, and
sure as it is said, nothing will hold the water of Styx, that perforates all
other things, save the hoof of an Ass; so perhaps it may be well supposed,
that this doctrine of submission to their trials can be only proper to those
whom they suppose that animal may emblem.

But they will leave the comparison to those from whom it came, Popish Priests
and E^iscopall spirits, who advanced themselves by the ignorance of the Laity.
And indeed in the Church of Rome, this was among the Arcana Imperi^, and part
of the mystery of iniquity too: and as to vent false wares they darken the
shop; and to rob the house, extinguish the candle; and to reign like Nahash,
put out the right eye; so did they upon this account both canonize ignorance
(which Hosius affirms is in most things best of all, and to know nothing is to
know all things,) and by inhibiting the Scriptures, (wherewith not, only great
Doctors of Physic were unacquainted, as Julius Alexandrinus Physician to the
Emperor Charles the fifth, hea^ing Divines alleging S Paul, replied, Profecto
oportet me aliquando legere vestrum istum Paulum, but Bishops themselves were
ignorant of them, as Justus Jonas tells us of one that reading the Bible, and
being asked what book it was, answered, He could not tell, but it was a book
contrary to their Religion) and deterring men from reading thereof. ( Thyraus
says, He knew some men possessed with the Devil only because they reasoned and
disputed of the Scriptures) and anciently (for of late in diverse things Rome it
self is become a reformed Church) neglecting all other ways of teaching in
effect save reading of the Legends to make men laugh, which Beleth commends,
and asserting, that if a man were asked of the greatest Articles of the faith,
he might sufficiently say, he could not tell, but believes as the Church does,
and that would save him: but that their Church is that people which obey the
Pope who is Christ's Vicar, must be explicitly believed. But we cannot
henceforth with that confidence lay this at their door, when they will be apt
to retort it back by recrimination and tell us, that notwithstanding what ever
we judge of them who know them not, yet their people are not so ignorant as we
confess ours to be, whom we have better knowledge of, whereof one of an hundred
by our own account, is not capable to partake of the Sacrament; and though
Campion said most falsely of our Ministers, Eorum ministris nihil vilius, yet
they will say with color of truth, Eorum plebe nihil vilius, if they are so
wretched and unworthy. Erubui, gremioque pudor dejccit ocellos.

Whether Episcopal spitits were parcel guilt with this close design, I shall
say little in their condemnation or defense, but this is manifest, that many of
them were like the fish called Lucerna, whose tongue Pliny says did shine as a
torch, so did their tongues cast forth light, and they shined by preaching, Ut
pura nocturno renidet,
Luna mari, Gnidiusve Gyges.
And as the same Author says, that those calami or reeds whereof paper was
made, yielded flowers whereof crowns were formed; so their calami or pens put
to paper, brought forth such flourishing works, as shall crown their names with
immortal honor,, and though they are fain and gone, yet the monuments of their
learning (which help to make others learned) shall stand for ever, -- nec Jovis
ira, nec ignis,
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.
It is true that some of them, when they lighted the Lamps did not burn
incense, they having no good odor for their indiscrete Ordinations, setting up
rusn candles and sometime smoking snuffes, and withal blowing out and puffing
off some clear lights of the Sanctuary, and so might in this consideration seem
to favor ignorance, as he that gives a blind or drives away a good guide does
causally or antecedently tumble into the ditch: but this was paucorum crimen,
and nevertheless there was not darkness upon the face of the deep before the
other lights were created in the firmament of this Heaven; but where is Plato's
Num-nam and ego talis sum? rather it is true what Salvian tells us, Multi
horrent sed paucissimi evitant, in aliis quippe borrent quod in se semper
admittunt, mirum in modum and accusatores ecrundem criminum and excusatores,
execrantor public quod occulte agunt, and per hec dum damnare se caeteros
putant, ipsos se magis propria ammadversione condemnant.

It was said of Isocrates and Quintilian, That they pleaded not, yet made many
Orators, but contrariwise though others do teach, yet have they not made others
become no teachers, and left several places without teaching, and so
consequently furthered and promoved ignorance; Let them be lights in the
firmament, yet they are but topical stars, and their beams and influences are
limited and confined to certain places, and in many other Horizons the stars
are as thin set as about the Southern pole, and I doubt others beside the
Bishops may be culpable in an accidental and consecutive diffusing of dark
ignorance by casting down many stars to the ground and stamping upon them, so
as more than a third part of them in some places is darkened, and let them put
their hands into their bosom, and see if they come not forth leprous by having
been hands in this, if not per se, tamen per alios, if not directly and
immediately, yet whether not by the guilt of consilium, consensus, palpo,
recursus, Nutans, non obstans, etc. according to the several ways of partaking
sins, and so have been some part of the tail that has drawn this third part of
the stars of Heaven, and has cast them to the earth. However those stars
were not pure in their sight, and some gave not their light, yet neither are
all those in Heaven free from spots, yet are permitted to shine, and some
apparently shine not to us, yet doubtless have their light and influence; and
if some men have forgot that, Quam saepe veniam qui negavit petit! and that
Eutropius was haled by Chrysostom from that Sanctuary which he would have had
the Emperor shut up, yet they should remember that if the lights burn dim,
it is a wildness instead of snuffing to put them out. The Indians when they
have no candles are glad of an Cucuji; where there are Ministers, though
perchance non Ex meliore luto, nor -- nati faelicibus ovis, yet there is a face
of public worship, a convening at the places appointed for it, men are kept in
the recognition of their duty, taken off and inhibited from other tentations,
not only in loss of time, (negatively in doing nothing, but positively in
doing evil) but loss of acquaintance with Ordinances, and degenerating into a
kind of paganism. All cannot resort to places very distant to supply the want
in their proper Churches, and sometimes the distance is so wide, as few or none
can be accomodate for recourse. In a twilight a man can better see his way than
in the dark, and if the prodigal had not a while sustained himself with husks,
he would not have lived to have eaten his fathers bread. Let the stinking
snuffs be trodden out, but my weakness is apt to think, that better suffer weak
lights in every angle, than set up a few in a vast room, which must needs have
many corners under much darkness; better suffer some tares than to root up much
wheat, and perchance only to change the weed but not cleanse the field, as
where the corn stands thin, weeds will rise, either empty husks, who (as
Hierom speaks) loqui nesciunt, tacere non possunt, docentque Scripturas quas
non intelligunt, prius imperitorum magistri, quam doctorum discipuli, or (as
Bernard says,) Prius effundere quam infundi velint, loqui quam audire
paratiores, docere prompti quod nunquam didicerunt, or else venomous and
contagious plants, qui pro alicujus temporalis commodi and maxim gloriae
principatusque sui causa, falsas and novas opiniones gignunt vel sequuntur, as
Augustine. We should like it well, if as Pacuvius told his Capuans concerning
the Senators, they could be provided of new, before they satisfied their anger
upon the old, but else we think it better to spare them for the time in hope of
amendment hereafter, and that as Aristides advised, Laconico and Perfico more
parva multis and minora majoribus condonarent. A good Master (said that Father)
may be honored in a bad servant, and mihi accusatio etiam vera contra fratrem
displicet, as Hierom, and though Noah were drunken, yet Cham was accursed for
discovering his nakedness, and however perchance illi quod meruere, sed quid tu
ut adesses? and Lactantius tells us that we murder him in whose death we take
complacency, though executed by a righteous sentence. But though in the natural
body the blood and spirits run to cherish any wounded part, yet in politic
bodies we find it is rather as in an Arch, where if a stone be loose the whole
frame sets upon it with all its weight, and most men are too ready to sees a
kid in his mothers milk, that is, as Philo interprets, to add affliction to the
afflicted, -- turpes instant morientibus ursi,
Et quaecunque minor nobilitate fera est.
We wished it were the worst thereof, that some men, like the unspunne silk of
Chies, would draw and suck up all moisture; we more fear lest this he some of
the teeth of that worm that lies at the root of Ministry, and that this
pretended sweeping and garnishing of the house is only to make way for seven
more wicked spirits, and that some men are so blind like Sampson unawares to
grind for the Philistines, and are deceived by the wooife in sheeps clothing
to seek to hang up the dogs upon pretense they are dumb or mangy: and are so
fascinated like him at Constantinople whom Nicetas mentions, that supposed he
had been pushing upon a Serpent, when he broke in pieces his own earthen
vessels; so some may think they are strising at the old Serpent, when they are
breaking vessels of the Sanctuary. Certainly the Jesuits will not be decieved
or discouraged from attempting upon this Church by a supposall that because we
cast out so many, we had Ministers enough to defend the truth against their
machinations, as the Gauls were disanimated to pursue the seige of the
Capitol, as not reducible by famine, because the Romans cast out over the
walls all their provision of bread.

Lastly, They bear false witness against us by mis-interpreting our words, and
then spi^in our face and buffet us, they accuse us to say that they shape
Presbytery to Popery, and this they say is the dreggs of this bitter Cup. And
this had been dreggs indeed, yea, -- crassi gutta veneni, had it dropped from our
pen, and had made it a cup of abomination, if this had lain in the bottom
thereof, but sure it is the dreggs of the cup of their fancy, and like to
Alexander the sixth, the cup they have mixed for us, will envenome themselves,
Nihil est Antipho quin male narrando possit depravarier, tu id quod boni est
excerpis, dicis quod mali est.

The Apologists carry some analogy with the Samaritaus; when the Jews
prespered, then they were brethren, but if they were under water, the Samaritan
would drench himself in water if he had but touched a Jew; so if the
Presbyterians be about the Zenith, they are calculated also for the same
Meridian, so as (in their own words) to be nearer to them than to Independents,
but if in the Nadir, they are Antipodes to them, having fitted their Church way
in such a latitude as to suit with every elevation and formed it like the
Giraffa made up of a Libbard, Heart, Buff, Camel, that none can well know what
to call it of late (though intruth they are only dow-baked Independents) and
like the froggs generated of dust after it is fermented with certain showers
are but half made up, part earth and part conformed) yet most often they take
the livery of Presbytery, and the paper upon that supposition, inferred that
their way being obtruded under that notion, gave occasion to some, that took
that for the face which was but a vizor, to suspect that Presbytery was
modelled and cast into the like mould as Popery, Sands Europae speculum. p. 3.
where the Prelates made their greatness, wealth and honor the very rules
whereby to souare out the Canons of faith, and then set Clerks on work to
devise arguments to uphold them, and this odious suspicion in others, was a
spring of grief to the friends of Presbytery, who could not without indignation
hear some say of Presbytery as that Cardinal did at the bustling and factions
Elections in the Conclave, Ad hunc modum fiunt Romani pontifices. Of this pinch
of the inference they will not be sensible, nor do seek to clear their way of
this stumbling block, viz. that it is a way which leads only to their own ends
of power and greatness, but turning out of the way, extravagantly tells us,
that men that like not the restraint of their lusts (and we must needs be those
men) or whosoever else they be perchance, they cannot think fit that their
lusts be restrained by giving liberty to others lusts, and letting them do what
they list, as Vives says Philostratus corrected Homers lies by greater lies,)
by any Church government, (for if they like not theirs, of necessity they will
not abide any,) cry out of Popery, Covetousness, Ambition, Praelacy, etc. which
are but fig leaves to cover their nakedness. But their paper leaves are not
worth a figg to vail that cause which they have left naked of defense, for --
si hac Pergama dextra, if this plea may defend a government, then all -- una
hac defensa fuissent, this might be pleaded in defense of any the most
tyrannous governors, and they might also infer, that because some like not
the restraint of their lusts by any government, therefore themselves do not
govern according to their lusts, and Bellarmine might with as much reason
conclude, that whereas Cyprian says Heresies and Schisms have no other
spring, but only because the Priest of God is not obeyed, nor one Priest and
Judge for the time in the Church is reminded to be In the stead of Christ,
therefore the Bishop of Rome usurps no unjust authority, nor is a tyrant in the
title or exercise of his power.

A man that is not fond of Presbytery (that is such a man as themselves, so
coldly and disaffectionately they speak it,) may say this for Presbytery what
ever it be else, (a suspicious Aposi^pesis as if it were somewhat else which
Ille quidem caelare cupit, turpique pudore,
Tempora purpureis cogit velare tiaris,)
is the strongest bar that ever was set against Popery. We shall plead
nothing in bar to that supposition, being far from going about to lessen
their good opinion of Presbytery, which we would rather cherish, and do wish
they did like and love it better, and were more Presbyters, but we cannot illis
dare nominis h^jus honorem, and may rather expostulate, -- quid pulchra
vocabula pigris
Obtendis vitiis?
or complain with Cato in Salust, I am pridem equidem nos vera rerum vocabula
amifimus, so as Aristippus said of precious ointments, male sit Cynaedis qui
diffamarum, beshrew them, that by incrusting their way with that notion have
brought Presbytery under such suspicions and censures. We therefore cannot
suffer Ahab to set Josias disguised in his habit and chariot, and to expose the
King of Judah to the hazard of those arrows which were intended against the
King of Israel, or permit another (as in the Roman story) to be vested with the
vestments of Panopio when he was proscribed, and to be slain in his stead, nor
allow Zopyrus that his maimes and wounds were inflicted by Darius only for his
love to the Babylonians, when his design was to insinuate into their favor
and compassion, that he might more opportunely betray them.

They deal with Presbytery as the Athenians did with Aristides, confess him to
be just and then banish him; as Caracalla with his brother Geta, Sit inter
divos, modo non inter vivos, and when if they did affectionately espouse and
keep faith with Presbytery, they might be happy in a fruitful issue, and see
their seed, which should become a multitude and be established, they rather
choose with Pigmalion to fall in love with a dead image of their own forming.
Presbytery may be a bar to Popery, yet the corruption of Presbytery may not
be so, the liquor which was sweet in the wine is sharp in the vinegar, and that
which is pure in the top, may yet have dreeggs in the bottom; the verdant
Juniper Tree gives a cool shadow, but being inflamed yields the hottest coal;
the basis may be the same in several medicines, yet the addition of other
ingredients does change the nature and the operation. He shall not limb a man
that does, Humano capiti cervicem jungere equinam; Christian Religion checks
with many things, which Popery which is a degenerate Christianity, does
countenance; there may be in their model somewhat thereof, but it is not all
or only Presbytery, and they say of Cantharides that the whole body is
Alexipharmacous, but some parts single are deleterious, and some do prescribe
ex cochlearum et testudinum carne multum edendu^ aut nihil; so Presbytery in
the entire frame may uphold a Church though when some parts thereof be mixed
with other compositions, yet may the lump be destructive. No hook will take
without some bait, in lotteries their are some few prizes among many blanks to
keep up the game, and Alchymists bring forth commonly some true and real gold
out of their furnaces, pretending it made there, which was secretly conveyed
thither, to bring their impostures into credit; and so they have given their
discipline some tincture of Presbytery to set it off with more plausibleness.

But we say not that their way (though the corruption of Presbytery) carries an
omnimodous or multifarious similitude with Popery, so as that Sic oculos, sic
ille manus, sic ora ferebat. They are like not as ovum ovo, but as Humani
existet simulator simius oris, not like simpliciter sed secundum quld, not in
respect of all or many, but some one part, as an Aethiop is white in regard of
his teeth. Their way has a like tendency with Popery to the greatness and
pre-eminence of the Prelates, both steer by the same point of the compass, and
are upon a like voyage to the Levant (so called ab elevando) the one sailing
for Majorca, the other to Cephalany.

And though Popery be not much of the constitution of their way, we fear it may
be of the consequent, and by accident, if not directly, may introduce it. As
Constantine by removing the Legions and Colonies from the Northern frontiers to
the Eastern, made way for the inundations of the barbarous Nations, and his
translating his impetiall seat to Constantinople, left Rome exposed to their
fury: so the digladiations about discipline, have laid open doctrine to those
destructive wounds it bleeds under, the discountenancing and depressing of so
many learned Champions of the truth, has been the leaving it without a guard,
and with Justinian in the case of Aetius, the cutting off the right hand with
the left, the horrid heresies which have entered at that door of liberty which
Independency has set open, do scandalize and confirm Papists in their errors,
and the desperate schisms animate them to assault us, and render us less
united in our strength to resist them, as a house set on fire is sooner robbed
by a Thief. The unchurching of so many, and separating from them, may tempt
men into a facility of being reconciled to that Church, which seems to have a
larger and a gender bosom, as in a besieged town the scarcity of victuals
constrains some to eat unwholesome food, and prompts others to be fugitives into
the enemies quarters, where they are like to find a more favorable reception
and a freer communion. I pray God their keys do not help to open the pit for
smoke to arise, and out of the smoke those Locusts the Jesuits to come amongst
us: for as persons of honor and integrity have undertaken to assure the world,
that actually diverse Jesuits have passed incontroulably under the mask and
notion of Independents, so it is obvious to any that probably it may be so; for
Independency is an apt disguise for a Jesuit, since he that takes on this
Livery, may under that Cloak suit himself with other clothes for stuff and
fashion as he list without further question, and may use his liberty of
contradiction to believe or not, to come to Ordinances or not, as well as his
liberty of contrariety what he will believe, or what Ordinances he will resort
unto: So that what was once said of the Jesuit, That he was every man, may now
be verified of the Independent, and while the Jesult dresseth himself like
birds of this feather, he may safely fly together with the flock, and find
means and opportunity to decoy them in the snare of Popery, and so like
Penelope unweave in the dark what they seemed to have woven in the light, and
only with the adversaries, Ezra 4. weaken the hands of the people and trouble
them in building, while they pretend to build with them, and seek their God as
they do. Of all those evils Independency (which is the major part that
denominates the Apologists) is that Trojan Horse which they have broken down
the walls to bring into the City.

They stand not much upon the saying of them that voted for Presbytery, and we
believe it (because they stand obstaculous in their way, who stand not for
Presbytery) and no man's sayings must be stood upon, that will not fall down
with Dionysius his flatterers, to lick up whatsoever fails from their mouth,
Martius anguis erat cristis prasignis and auro,
Ac media plus part leves erectus in auras,
Despicit omne nemus.


Some, say they, perchance voted and acted for wrong ends, (and all did so
doubtless that would not be carried toward their ends, nothing was just or
good that was not of the interest of Sparta.) Perchance some might do so, yet
charity should prompt tather to excuse the intention, if they could not the
work, rather than to accuse the intention, when the work they cannot, and
rather to hope the best until worse be evidenced: Perchance those which the
paper intimated were not such, and without perchance ought to be believed
certainly to have been such.

But they are sure some were once in a neernesse to act in that way, who were
unmeet for the work. It is possible that some might indeed not be fit, for
every logge, though it be sound timber, is not fit to make a Mercury. But they
have more certain knowledge of their own hearts, and might be sure of their
proper unmeetness, and perchance (as well as they may) they speak this first of
themselves by the light of a reflex beam, they had no heart to that work, and
quod cor non facit, non fit, they had no love to it, did not set about it con
amore, as the Italians say, it was not for their turn, some other way was aimed
at, like fierce Racers in the impetuousness of their course, they did overrun
and go beyond their Goal: and like the Tiger which Pimenta speaks of, that
pursued his prey with such violence, that he overleapt it, and fell into the
mouth of a Crocodile, it being no new thing to fall from one extreme to
another, as an eager opposition to the heresy of Manes, occasioned the rise of
that of Pelagius. Errant homines non servantes modum, De fide and operib. c. 3.
and cum in unam partem procliviter ire caeperint, non recipient divinae
authoritatis aliae testimonia quibus possint ab illa intention revocari, and
in ea quae ex utrisque temperata est veritate and modera ione consistere, as
Augustine.

Or secondly, they say it of those that were of their choice and
recommendation, whose Icarian wings being not natural, but set on, soon would
melt with their shameful fall when they soar high, or come into much light; or
like Barschocab the pretended Messiah, who, says Hierom, had gotten a trick to
kindle straw in his mouth, and breath it forth as if he had spit fire; so they
for small matters talk with a fervent zeal, but are as incompetent to carry on
the work of reformation and settlement, as he was to accomplish the deliverance
of the Jews.

Or thirdly, perchance that sum which they cast up to be unfit, were indeed not
fit for their spurious and suppositious Presbytery, and unfit for their ends
and interest, who would approve of, or like none that were not like those in
Tacitus, Qui very copiam non faciunt, sed suspensa and quo ducuntur inclinantia
respondent, and none to act as Church Governors which would not in acting be
governed by them as the prime agents, and were unwilling to set up any Oracles
that would not Philippize, and sought to have no planets in the Spheres that
will not move concentrick with them as the Sun, and receive all their light
from them, and if not like Mercury that shows himself but once in thirty
years, yet like the other planets when they are in a Diametrall line with the
Sun to seem retrograde, and give place and way to him; for those whom they
assume to assist in the work, they called with the same intent, with which
Xerxes convened the Lords of Asia when he designed the invasion of Greece, to
give more luster and countenance alone (as he said) to the expedition, and
only to obey and not to advise him.

SECT. XXII.
Of Independents their godliness, their schism. The confessed imperfection of
the way of the Apologists, the desire of an union with the Independents. An
admonition to the Presbyterians. The confounding of Churches and Parishes by
the Apologists. Their gathering of Churches. Whether they are guilty of
disorder against Laws. Whether Magic were laid to their charge. Whether they
are culpable of schism or sedition, or injury to other Ministers. Of their
hatching others Eggs like like Partridge.

AS Arminius thought it a good Quaere why Semipelagianisme might not be
accounted true Christianisme, because if that were false and counterfeit coin,
Arminianisme could not be current, both being of like metal though of
different stamp: so the Apologists having generally been willing to pass under
the vizard of Presbytery, yet being researched, and like to be detected for
Independents, when they can no longer keep on the mask, they seem to own the
face, at least suppose it need not be disowned, and tell us, That Independents
are no such formidable creatures to them.

First, and to them indeed they need not seem fearful, Cognatis maculis parcit
fera, And Junius tells us out of Pliny. Animantia in suo genere probe degunt,
congregari videmus and starc contra dissimilia, Eiren. part. 1.
Leonum feritas inter se non dimicat, serpentum morsus non petit serpents, nec
maris quidem belluae and pisces nisi in diversa genera non saeviunt.

Secondly, they are not so formidable indeed to any as the Spaniards were to
the Indians, that they could not think it an happiness to go to heaven in
their company, nor to consort with them in any good way that leads thither.

Thirdly, neither are they so terrible at any Scholastic encounter, as that if
-- Crispinus minimo me provocat. none should dare with them -- tentare peri ula
belli; Or that their names like Warwicks at the battle of Banbury, should
strike terror enough to win a victory; but I doubt when the light of truth
shall hereafter ascend nearer to her meridian, and dispell these mists which
now hinder men to see clearly, they will seem Nomina quae ipso sunt pene
tremenda sono.

Many godly men, say they, lie under that distinction of judgment, and I wish
it were only a distinction without a difference.

But first, I doubt the Independents will account this opprobrii loco, because
it is frigida and tenuis laudatio: for all of that denomination must needs be
very godly, who usurp that definition for their way, which the Chemists
arrogate to their Art, puri ab impuro separatio. As all that fire which is
spheared on high and separate from commixture, is a pure element; so their
Churches are questionless pure and clear like Egypts sky, and have not a black
cloud in them, and Adam in them seems not to have sinned.

But secondly, if we take Independencie in the lump, not in some parcels that
may be extracted, and take the denomination from the major part, the notion of
Godly and Independent are not only at distance, but Diametral opposition: for
as in tempering medicines, there is somewhat which they call the Basis,
whereunto they add other ingredients that have their several qualities and
operations: so Independency is the Basis of most modern heresies, and the
fertile Africa of these Monsters. And as ubi definit Philosophus incipit
medicus: so where Independency ends, there other heresies begin, who are
generally Independents, and aliquid amplius, and as after the battle of
Salamis, in honor of the victory, every man gave the second place to
Themistocles, though he named himself first; so if one be an Antinomian,
another a Socinian, another an Antiscripturist, yet every one is an
Independent, that as Pacianus said, Christianus mihi nomen, Catholicus
cognomen, illud me nuncupat, istud ostendit; so Independent is the praenomen,
what ever be the agnomen of heretics.

Thirdly, but I cannot truly deny, nor shall unwillingly grant, that there are
some godly men of that notion, yet though I shall not say as Vopiscus relates
it was said of good Princes, In uno annulo posse praescribi and depingi; at
contra quae series malorum? nor altogether with Eubulus the Comicall Poet that
checked himself for declaiming against wom^n, for if this were naught, yet that
was not good; but soon found, himself at a stand, not being able to find more
of the good, but multitudes of the evil, yet I believe those godly men are
Rari nantes in gurgite vasto, Like the Israelites, as two little flocks of
Kids, but the contrary kind like the Syririans fill the Country.

And then 4ly, it was no great honor to Sodom that one Lot was their Citizen,
there are some white men among the Negroes, yet is that the land of
Blackmoores. Even Mercury, a desperate poison, has some parts which being
separated from the whole, are Antidote.

Fifthly, Those purely mere Independents which have no mixture of other heresies
or profaneness, and are godly men, yet their light does not shine so bright,
that as in the Sun those lesser stars that move about him do seem as spots, so
their holiness should be defiled by a communion with others less holy; neither
are they like the Sun which by his matchless light perstringeth and eclipseth
all other stars and attracts all eyes upon his pearless beauty. Their
godliness may only be an apology for their station and immunity, as Photius
tells us, that those which made Synesius a Bishop before he believed the
resurrection, made this defense for so doing, that they found many excellent
graces in him, and that they could not but think them useful to the Church of
God, and hope that God would not let them all perish.

Lastly, as some of them are purged from filthiness of the flesh, so I wish
they were also as much from that of the spirit, and were holy as well in spirit
as in body; yet as heresy, so schism is ranked also among the works of the
flesh, Gal. 5.20. where if it stand not under the notion of heresy, (as indeed
Tremelius out of the Syrivck reads Schisms where we do Heresies, and betwixt
these two there is such an affinity and complicition as betwixt the Midiauites
and Ishmaelites, that one is taken for another, or each intermixed with other,
and Schism says St. Augustine, is sometime called Heresy, not that it is
Heresy but because it disposes to it,) yet it falls under this comprehension
of variance, emulations, wrath, strife, etc. and as Schism springs from pride,
and an overweening conceit of themselves as the efficient, whereof the signum
pathognomonicum is a fastidious contempt of others, so the impulsive thereof
Gerson tells us what it is, propter quaestum and propter vanam gloriam, sutably
to that whereby Augustine defines an Heretic, qui alicujus commodi temporalis
and maxim gloriae principa^usque gratia falsas and novas opiniones vel gignit
vel sequitur, and I wish Independents could acquit themselves of these
Imputations, and should be glad if they would set off themselves clear from
those exceptions, who in one respect like the clove tree, drink up all the
moisture of the Land, and as well pretend to ingrosse the very dewes and showers
of heaven to themselves, as they really intercept the fat streams of earth,
and in another respect are like the tree in Ferro (one of the Canaries) from
whence must drop all the water, and from thence only to be conveyed to the
whole Island.

And therefore what ever may be said of the godliness of Independents, yet
since they cannot well traverse or plead not guilty to an indictment of
Schism, I think as the Greek proverb says, That a good Goat, a good Cat, etc.
are bad beasts, so the best Independent is in this respect evil, Contra Donat.
post Coll. tom. 7. p. 122.
if in no other; for as St. Augustine, Quantumlibet laudabiliter se vivere
existimet, yet being separate from the Church, hoc solo scelere quod a Christi
unitate disjunctus est, non habebit vitam, Schism in his judgment being a sin
of deeper grain than idolatry, for Qui fecerunt idolum usitata gladii morte
perempti sunt, Epist. 162. ions. 2. p. 142.
qui vero schisma facore voluerunt, hiatu terr principes devorati, and turba
consentiens igne consumpta, diversitate paenarum diversitas agnoscitur
meritorum.

But dissentiunt inter se, contra unitatem omnes consentiunt, (as Augustine of
his Donatists,) they see some imperfection in the Independent way, (and they
see very little that discern not much imperfection therein,) and they know not
their own to be altogether free, (and how can the stream be clear when the
spring is corrupt?) the one and the other are parallel ways, trodden out by the
same line, and leading down the same precipice, and diffet but as iter, actus
and via in the Law, the one is a little larger and more extensive than the
other, there may be some little did inction but no material difference
between them save in this only, that the one Baptize the Infants of those that
are not of their Churches, which the others deny to do. They here acknowledge,
they agree in the greater and differ but in the less things, which I think may
be restrained and limited to discipline especially, and they confess both
parties to have the self same interest, or rather it should be, the same self
interest; and therefore when they accuse the Independent way of Imperfection,
In tabulam Syllaejam dicunt discipuli tres: and as we see it truth which Tully
says, ut oculus, sic animus Je non videns alia cernit; so it is as true that
they are dim and decaying eyes which can better discern things at some
distance than nearer hand, and apprehend other men's imperfections more clearly
than their own. And if they know not their own way to be altogether free from
imperfections, why can they not patiently abide to hear that which may make
them know it to be imperfect? how do they so confidently assert that way, and
in malis suis defensionis fomitem quaerunt, as Gregory speaks? Non semper
corrupta est men's male operantis sed emper corrupta male desendentis: wherefore
so violently enforce it, unless as the Pope said he would write Fiatur in
despite of Grammar, so they will have a Fiat for their imperfect model in
defiance of truth, and usupre a like power to that which Stapleton arrogates to
the Church, that even fabulous and apocryphal things, by their authority may
become canonical?

But the imperfection is scored up upon their inability to do more, their
reformation being not the measure of their will, but their power. Although they
otherwhere left weightier things untoucht, yet in the 17. Sect. they cannot let
a scruple pass without handling the poyse thereof; but however careful they be
of weight, they are injurious of measure, or else they would never have said
their reformation was not the measure of their will but power: Though they may
suppose themselves so pure as necessarily to be separate from the common Mass,
yet their language is not pure from impropriety. But not to run descant in so
poor a ditty, I suppose they would have said passively, their reformation is
not measured by, or is not according to the measure of their will, but their
power, and perchance should more truly have said, their will seconded with
their power is the measure of their reformation. But if they are conscious that
they ought to do otherwise than they have done, but cannot do it, then they
should have said they knew that their way is not free from imperfection, not
that they knew it not to be free. But as it impresseth wonder to hear that
their reformation is measured by their power not their will, since it is with
them as the wanton Emprosse said to her lustful Son in law, quic quid libet
licet, so it strikes fear to consider it, seeing they have power enough to
receed and remit somewhat of their rigor, and if they want power to carry it
higher, and go further, then we are in a sad case that are secured only by
that which kept the Christians (as Bellarmine tells us) from deposing heathen
Emperors, quia defuere vires.

They next set forth their Eirenicon, and first wish an accommodation between
them and their dear brethren of the riged Independency. But they agree too well
already to divide and rent the Church, for as the peace of Heretics is the
war of the Church, and the war of the one the peace of the other; so the
Ceraunia of our quietness might be bred in the midst of their thundrings one
against another, and we shall less fear and better deal with their rods and
axes if they were single and not in a bundle.

Secondly, They profess what they would do propter unitatem Donati, that will
do so little propter unitatem Christi, they would go many miles barefoot, to
meet peace with them, but I wish they would go with their feet shod with the
preparation of peace toward their people.

Thirdly, They give their sense of the calamitous consequences of the discords
in the Church, and we are as conscious, dissidia nostra sunt amicorum
dispendia, hostium compendia, (as Hierom) and publica irae divinae incendia, as
Junius, and to sacilitate an harmony between them.

Fourthly, They propound the opinion of Mr. Baxter in some branches (it seem;
some others of them bear such fruit as set their teeth on edge:) what passage
they reflect upon I cannot divine, the page quoted by them having nothing of
that concernment in that last edition, but to make even with them, I shall
desire them to peruse and perpend what is formerly cited, and which he delivers
in his Saints everlasting Rest, Part 321. Sect. 7. p. 3. and Part 4. Sect. 3.
p. 104, 105. of the edition of 1653.

I have elsewhere set down by these waters of Siloam, and not hanged up, but
sounded there my poor harp, and I may therefore here -- Claudere jam rives,
seeing elsewhere I hope, -- Sat prata biberunt, I will only say that however I
affectionately vote for unity, (for as Chrysostom, Integrum si in multa
dividitur, In 1 Cor. 1. Homil. 3.
non modo non multa fiunt, sed unum absumitur, as the Pumice stone swims being
whole, and sinks when broken into parts,) and passionately bewail our
divisions, who when we are on a light flame, and half burnt to ashes, yet like
the flames raised by burning the dead bodies of Eteocles and Polynices we
cannot unite and conjoyne; yet I should as passionately regret to see an union
made up at the only cost of the Presbyterian, and that their coalition with
Independents should be like the conjunction of Rivers with the Sea which
falling into it lose their names and course, and vitiate their qualities; or
that they should become one, as the Picts did with the Scots, where the former
were as it were eaten up and digested by the later Nation. Let the Independents
return to them, not they turn to those, nor to be like Pisistratus the tyrant
of Athens, who when some of his party had revolted and fortified Phyle against
him, he came to them with his baggage, and professed that if he could not
persuade them to return to him, he was resolved to abide with them. I know not
whether it gives impression of more wonder or indignation to see old Tragaedies
once played between the Orthodoxe and Arians acted over again, under other
names and in another Scene, whereas at the Councils of Ariminum and Seleucia,
the worse and lesser party outwitted and overacted the better and greater, and
they that at first pretended only to desire Churches for themselves, grew at
length to that powerful insolence to deny them to others. And as much
ingratitude is observable in it, that those which like the Ivy grew up by
embracing the tree, should exhaust the sapp and strength thereof, and like
Quicksilver should eat out and consume the metal they closed with; so
perchance somewhat of justice may be considerable therein, that as it was said
of Henry the fourth of France, That he fell by that Religion to which he fell;
so all the compliances of the one party have only occasioned them to suffer
from those whom they have too indulgently suffered: and as when that King was
wounded in the mouth by Castle, he received an admonition, That having denied
the truth with his mouth, he was there wounded, and if he cast it out of his
heart, he was like to take in the knife there also; so I shall humbly reminde
those Presbyterians which have varyed and lapsed toward an Independent model,
that since such applications and condescentions have been only paid with
contempt, and have borne no other fruit but obstinacy in the one part, and
danger to the other, that they would adhere unto and cherish their proper
principles, which need covet no other likeness than their own, (because truth
is incomparably fairer than the Grecian Helena, as Augustine,) nor pray in any
support from carnal prudence, (because honesty is the best policy,) and
remembering whence they are fallen would do their first works, lest their
Candlestick be shaken, as well as their light has been somewhat contracted and
obscured.

They would persuade us they comply not with riged Independents, but then it
seems they are to be ranked among the gentle Independents. The digladiations of
Sects are sometime as eager among themselves as against the truth; the
Maximinianists did virulently contest with the Primianists, yet both were under
the denomination of Donatists; they may be all in the same way, which yet run
faster and go further one than another. As the Schools say, that every Angel
is a several species, so if some difference or singularity might constitute a
several form, we should have among Independents almost as many Religions as
men. It is like enough they render no complacency to the rigid Independents,
and do yet find no pleasing reception among the right Presbyterians, such a
Catastrophe is the result of a midling indifference, and it fares with men of
that temperament as with the hypocrite, the world hates him because he seems
good, and God abhors him because he is not truly such.

They leave the rigid Independents to answer that charge of confounding
Churches, and then it seems they depend upon them to be Advocates for them
also, as well as to plead their own cause. For however self love may transfer
the guilt, and censure that in others what it will not see in it self, (as
Demosthenes said nothing was so hard as to know, or so easy as to deceave ones
self;) yet this charge has a thou art the man for them also, for he is
somewhat confounded in his judgment that cannot discern, or will not confess,
that to constitute, as they do, Polydor. Virgil. de inventoribus rerum. l. 4.
c. 9. p. 268. Quo quisque suis finibus limitibusque contentus esset. Platina in
vita Dionys. Selder Histor. of tithes c. 6. p. 8.
one Church of persons gathered and extracted out of twenty or thereabout, is
to introduce a confusion of Churches, and what is that else but to defeat that
ancient and laudable constitution of dividing parishes into several
Presbyteries, as proper cures, and making them definite and appropriate, which
if not instituted by Dionysius about the year 260. in the Roman Patriarchate,
and soon after in other Diocesses by his example, or rather the institution by
him revived after the disturbances of persecution, as having been first settled
by Euaristus at Rome within little of the first Century, yet profound
Antiquaries acknowledge, that in the very first times, Parishes were divided to
several Ministers according to the conveniences of Country Towns and Villages,
which division and distribution, has been constantly ratified and supported by
our municipal Laws as necessary to order, and subservient to many expediences.
And also the violation of this order, and such appropriation was forbidden by
the Canons of ancient Councils, neque confundito Ecclesias, decreed the first
Council of Constantinople, Constant. can. 2.
and neparochiam cujustibet Episcopi, alterius civitatis Episcopus Canonum
temerator invadat, Avern. 9.
was the determination of the Synod of Averne.

And this is also to remove those ancient landmarks and bounds which was not
only piacular among the Romans (Si quis transerre ausus fuisset aut a^tollere,
Rosin. Antiq. Rom l. 2. c. 19.
lege terminali caput ejus his diis devovit, interfectori ipsius tanquam
sacrilegi impunitate promissa and puritate a scelere) but obnoxious to a curse
by the Law of God, Deuteronomy 27. and 17. In Prove. 22.28.
and coming under frequent prohibitions, Deuteronomy. 19.14. Prove. 22.28. and 23.10.
Sub hoc autem literali sensu, parabolice intelligendum est -- ne quis rectae
vitae praescripta, a patribus laudabiliter constituta pro concordia and ordine
ac politia inter homines conservanda, violare and immutare nova doctrina and
impio contemptu praesumat, says Jansenius.

And if it has not much of confusion, yet not little of irregularity to
communicate with one Church in the Word and Prayer, and only with another in
the Sacrament, to be common hearers of the Word among those with whom they deny
to have communion in the Sacrament, and to partake of the Sacrament with them
amongst whom they do not constantly hear the word, to pay their Tithes to them
who serve not at the Altar whereof they partake, and to yield no Tithes
(whatsoever offerings they bring) to those that officiate at those Altars where
they participate. And yet Ignatius tells of the ancient Christians, Omnes ad
orandum in idem loci convenere -- quemadmodum ad unum Altar (they had not then
several Altars that had one common place of prayer) and a Bishop and an Altar
were made correlatives, Mead hCurches in and since the Apost. p. 50.
so that every Bishop had an Altar, and but one, and not one Altar among many
Bishops, which interfeers with their practice.

Those aspersions wherewith they complain to be bespattered, were not (the most
of them) cast by the paper, neither were they so blotted by any drops shed
there, yet let us try whether it fall not out with them, as we have not only
read in story, but seen by experience, to have happened to some, who commenced
suits and brought actions of slander, and upon the traversing thereof, have
been convicted of those crimes which they sought to clear, and to get
recompense for being accused of, and have contracted those penalties, whereas
they might have been quit, if they could have been quiet. They say they are
falsely impeached.

First, For disorder against Law: And we suppose indeed this confounding of
these Parish Churches whereof Law has determined the limits, and made the
appropriation, comes under that denomination. Our laws have forbid, and do
inflict penalties for using any artifice to entice and withdraw Pigeons out of
another Dove-house, and Bees out of others Buts, and therefore doublesse
cannot allow the tolling and seducing other men's natural sheep from their
folds.

Secondly, For Magic: I think it will rather prove to be for silliness, or
uncharitableness; the paper only said that their tempting and withdrawing the
fruits of other men's labors, and those committed to their culture, to make up
their Churches, did carry some analogy with that magical transferring of other
men's corn into their fields, whereof some Romans were falsely accused. A man
might suspect that they were indeed passive in Magic, and thereby fascinated
hereupon to think, that this Allegory lays Magic to their charge, and
therefore while they suppose that we question them properly for that crime,
they cannot but leave not only their wit and temper, but their charity and
innocence under greater question, Vlcera ad levem tactum, etiam ad suspitionem
tactus condolescunt; nunquid sine querela aegratanguntur?

Thirdly, For Schism; Though their way be not schism in the achme, yet it is
more then in the Embryo; and though it be not ripe in all the fruit, yet it is
more than in the seed, and if not schism, yet somewhat schismatic: They
separate from a communion in part of the ordinances, and so it is in part
schismatic (but the part is of the same nature with the whole.) They refuse
to communicate or associate (as they speak) with those Churches wherein is a
free admission to the Sacrament of all those that are not duly cast out, and
they will not admit any of those Churches to have communion with them in the
Eucharist, until they be new modeled, and entered into their Churches. But that
Church Fellowship consists especially in communion of Sacraments, and is
principally defined by it, Sect. 9. De unit. Eccles. c. 13. Schismaticos facit
communionis dirupta unitas, Aug. quaest. ex Matthew. tom. 4, p 78. Camero oper.
Field of the Church, l. 3. c. 5, p. 80,
and that the commixtion of evil and good, is intra eandem sacramentorum
communionem and connexionem, and that to desert and to deny such a communion
with those that are Churches of God, is the dregs and sediment of schism, we
have formerly showed out of Augustine; that to detrect to receive the Lords
Supper with any, is tacitly to renounce their fraternity, was instanced out of
Altingius; and that to separate from this or that particular Church, that is a
particular member of the body (of the Catholic Church) is schism, we have
instanced out of Junius, as it is also to make a separation from that
congregation, Ubi Deus colligit Ecclesiam, as may be added out of Camero.
Schism (says a sound Writer) is a breach of the unity of the Church, which
unity of the Church consists in three things; First, the subjection of the
people unto their lawful Pastors. Secondly, the connection and communion which
many particular Churches, and the Pastors of them, have among themselves.
Thirdly, in holding the same rule of faith. But they rent and infringe this
unity in the first respect, by gathering those into their Church that have
other lawful Pastors. Qui schismata faciunt, says Cyprian, Epist. 76. p. 247.
and relicto Episcopo alium sibi for as Episcopum quaerunt. And in the second,
by denying to have a communion with other Pastors and their Churches in this
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and it cannot sow up this rent, nor make up this
fraction, to say, they communicate in other ordinances with them, for not only
Church communion is chiefly communion of Sacraments, but (as was cited formerly
out of Mr. Ball,) to use one ordinance and not another, is to make a schism in
the Church. Frustra sibi blandiuntur qui panem cum sacerdotibus Dei non
habentes, obrepunt and latenter apud quosdam communicare se credunt, as was
alleged out of Cyprian.

It is schism, says Valentia (and truly, 22. Disp. 3. q. 15. punct. 1. p. 690.
if he misapplied it not) Nolle se gerere ut membrum hujus corporis in aliquo
vel aliquibus spiritualibus actionibus ad hoc Ecclesiae corpus pertinentibus,
atque adeo nolle subesse visibili hujus corporis capiti, neque aliis ejus
membris communicant, ut illi capiti subjecta sunt, sed velle agere scorsim ab
hoc corpore, and independenter ab ejus capite. And since anciently a Bishop and
an Altar were made Correlatives, and a schismatic Bishop was said
constituere aut collocare aliud Altar, Mead ubi supra
(says a learned man) therefore they that erect other Altars for them to
partake of, which have lawful proper Pastors, and they that participate at
other Altars than those of their own Pastors, tread too near upon Schism. Nay
also, they that separate from a true Church to partake of an Altar in a Church
apart, do not participate of the Table of the Lord, for in una domo (says
Rivet.) In Exodus c. 12 tom. 1 p. 916.
quae est Ecclesia Dei viventis, commedi debet agnus -- carnes ejus quatenus
cibus noster sunt extra illam domum non efferuntur.

And then as the Act of separation, so the Reason thereof denominates
schismatic, while they affirm the separation to be occasioned by the
grossnesse of administrations elsewhere, where no separation is made by
exercise of Discipline; which very thing, (viz. that any corruption of manners
or want of Discipline (which is among corrupt manners) to expurge those that
were corrupt, was a sufficient ground of separation) brought forth and gave
rise to the schism of the Donatists, and was that which rendered them
schismatics, and that which S. Augustine impressed himself especially to
fight against, as is liquid through the whole torrent of his writings against
them, some drops whereof our former discourse has been sprinkled with. Cited
by Mr. Baxters Saints everlasting rest, part. 4. p. 105. marg.
I shall here only say as learned Davenant professes (speaking of the Divines
of Germany) Haud dubitem affirmare, illos qui falluntur, and tamen communionem
fraternam cum aliis retincre parati sunt, esse schismate coram Deo magis
excusatos, quam qui veras opiniones in hisce controversiis tuentur, and mutuam
communionem eum aliis Ecclesiis, etiam desiderantibus aspernantur; so I think
those Churches more excusable which have not the exercise of discipline in
casting out offenders, yet lack not a desire of a fraternall connection, and
mutual communion with other Churches, than those that set up discipline, and
lay down communion and unity.

To say, That they separate nor from true Churches; First, as it can no more
palliate their guilt, than it could cloak that of the Donatists who made the
same defense (and indeed this is the Catholicon, the common place and plea of
all Schismatics, that if they forsake one Church they go into another;) so
secondly, they do make a separation from true Churches, seeing they separate
(as was said) from all Churches that give a free admission to all that are not
duly cast out, and if those are no true Churches, then they are not in the
state of salvation, for all that shall be saved are added to the Church, and
all that may grow capable of admission into their Churches out of the other, it
may seem requisite to baptize before they are admitted, baptism being a note
of the true Church, and therefore agreeing thereunto, as proprium quarto modo.
They were such Churches wherein many of them received ordination to the
Ministry (who are not yet reordained) and by the Ministry whereof faith was
wrought in them (wherein I hope they were built up before they laid the
foundation of their new Churches) and to believe is to be added to the Church,
which is Synonymous with the household of faith, and wherein if they had
suffered death for the profession of that faith, they would have thought
themselves entitled unto martyrdom, (and yet out of the Church are no
martyrs;) neither can they pretend to reform the Church, if they acknowledge
not those from whom they separate to be true Churches, for then they rather
form a new Church, and it is not an alteration which is Motus a qualitate in
contrariam qualitatem, but a generation, motus a non esse ad esse; and is not
mutatio status sed essentiae. But this is that root bearing gall and wormwood,
which being shrunk and dried up among the Brownists, has been watered and
cherisht by them to repullulate and spread its branches and is grown now to
this height, that we are now no true Churches till new gathered.

Fourthly, For Sedition, if any laid that upon their score, he may perchance
have put them to a heavy reckoning; but if he charged them with it before
repealing or antiquating the Statute of 35 Elizab. c. 1. I believe he should
neither have contracted any great Fine pro falso clamore, nor they have
obtained much damage upon any Action of the Case; and however things yet
stand, whether the setting up a new Legislative power in the Nation, by
arbitrary Conventions forming Obligatory Canons, putting out of their communion
or association all those that will not comply in a conformable obedience, if it
have not some spices of Sedition, yet whether it grate not with the Statute of
25. H. 8. c. 19. is only for wiser Lawyers and deeper Statesmen to give
judgment of.

But perhaps he that imputed sedition to them, only juged sedition to be
inherent in, or complicated with every schism, Contra Epist. Parmen l 2. c.
18. tom. 6. p. 11.
according to the sense of S. Augustine saying, Cum id facere per seditionem
schismatis voluit, prius a bonis spiritaliter quam a malis corporaliter
separentur; or else considered that as ( Camero says) Sedition is a Civil
schism; so schism might also be said to be an Ecclefiasticall sedition.

But seditious they cannot be, because the present Authority is for them, at
least not against them, and they are no underminers of them. First, I know not
what they mean by (them,) for in short time Ego non sum ego, They are not They,
who like the Tornados have in short time shifted many points of the Compass,
and like the Indian plant which Nieremberge mentions, have every year
different leaves and fruits. They have not now altogether the same way and
model of discipline, which first started this controversy between us, and
wherein they walked when the book came forth: so as in some things they have
confuted themselves, and might supersede me to do it; but yet I dispute against
them as they were and acted at the first, and for several years together. And
those that favored them all that time, cannot favor them so much now, if they
still are favorable to one and the same way, save that they have this help for
it, that as inferior bodies depend on the motion of the superior; so they aim
to conform themselves to the higher revolution, to be more capable of benigner
aspects and influences, and when there is a tempora mutantur, there follows
also, nos and mutamur.

Secondly, I understand not what they intend by the present Authority; that
which was present when they writ this, being past when they pri^ted it, unless
they intend that all the spokes of Sesostris wheel, turn how they will, cannot
but be good spokes in their wheels, and as Nigidius Figulus demonstrated by his
wheels, that the higher spheres had speedy revolutions, and therefore did
suddenly change their postures; so it becomes not me to be so saucy as to
enquire into the aspects and influences of the superior bodies, who am not
skilled in State-Astrology, but am procul a Jove, and therefore long a lumine,
and desire not to be prope fulmini, by having to do (save in reverence and
obedience) with them that command the Legions; only it is enough for us to
know no established laws that are for them, or that authorize their way, and
whether the present Powers favor them, or only connive at them or not. Yet I
presume first, as they would have us believe that they are indulgent to them,
that so every one else might be Contra libertum Caesaris ire timens, So
secondly, I suppose themselves conceive their way is plausible with the higher
Powers, or perchance else they might take another, and they being supposed to
be shadowed by Greatness, even that shadow (as the Hyaena's does a Dogs) might
shut up every man's mouth from barking at them, for temporal prosperity is a
note of the Church with them, (however they are not Papists) which they form
somewhat like that Venus, which as Apelles told the Painter, that though he had
not drawn it fair, yet he had painted her rich. And like him at Athens they are
still falling in love with the Image of Fortune, and like Cassale the famous
Painter at Sienna, that drew his own Image in the eye of a great Prince whom he
limbed, they would fain be still in the eye of Potentates. And thirdly, I
suppose indeed their way needs the support of some great powers, being not like
to take much or continue very long, unless it be held forth like the Alcoran
with a sword in hand.

Fifthly, For being injurious to other Ministers, I answ. It is some injury to
modesty as well as truth, to outface so palpable a wrong, for is not their
course and way of practice in gathering Churches an equivocal or analogical
plagium, to rob the spiritual Fathers of their Children, etc? Is it not the
coveting of the stones of their neighbors spiritual house which he is building
for God, or of his wife, (for the Canons say there is matrimony betwixt a
Pastor and his Church,) or of that which is his? Is it not the promoving,
occasioning or countenancing many to waive and renounce their own Pastors, and
to forsake the assembing of themselves, to adjoin and unite themselves to their
Conventicles? Can it be other then a dishonor to those Ministers both by a
tacit disparagement and despising of their parts or pains, (and so a kind of
bearing false witness) and a lessening of their people in the multitude whereof
is some honor, and discouraging of them both in contracting their harvest, in
the largeness whereof is the laborers incitement? and can this be other than
an injury? It is that which the old Canons call Conculcare episcopum, and to
trample upon another is to injure him, Et tamen alter si fecisset idem, caderet
sub judice morum: They would sense it injurious if done unto themselves, and
they did so resent it, not only in the tailor (who going beyond his measure
has cut out in another fashion and stitcht up a Church more straight laced out
of some shreds of their Congregations;) but in them also who have outraced
them, and gone beyond the goal which they have set up, and separating further
from them, have adjoined themselves in a Church fellowship with them that are
full grown Independents. They plead they constrain no man, but

First, That is not sufficient, they ought not to persuade or invite any to
desert their own Pastors and Churches to engage with theirs, they ought not to
receave them if they came voluntary, they are guilty of that evil which they
do not hinder and prevent.

Secondly, He that entertaines another man's servant that has forsaken his
lawful master, and has no certificate of his legal departure, is obnoxious to
the penaity of the Statute, though he neither constrain nor persuade him to
relinquish his former service, and by a parity of reason and equity, they are
as culpable that admit to their communion without those literae formatae and
communicatoriae, such as are under another Pastoral charge.

Thirdly, The Donatists coacted none to associate with them, (they decryed all
constraint, and complained of the Imperial Edicts made for their coercion;) yet
this excused not the leaders of that Schism.

Fourthly, But they do constrain men, and in such manner as any other absolute
and imperious powers use to do, who constrain men only by reward and
punishment, and such constraint they practice, for he that will go with them in
their way, may come to the Sacrament, and he that will not, must (for them) go
without it.

They say, they clock no man's chicken, but to deprave and vilify other men and
their practice, to magnify their own, and hold it forth as the only
reformation and best advantage of godliness, and theirs as the alone pure
Churches and discipline, and their catching after all that they can thereby
decoy, and draw in by these like baits, what is it other than a call for the
birds to divide them from the flock, and lime twiggs to hold them fast from
flying back, and a virtual (if there were no other express and explicit
persuasion) clocking of others men's birds from their proper nests, to take
their flight with them? Honesta lucra quibus nemo laeditur, says Cassiodor,
and been acquiritur quod a nullis adhuc dominis abrogatur, whereas they trim up
their Church like Aesops Crow, with others feathers, for they have mewed almost
all their own, and are like Antiochus surnamed The Hawke, who patcht up a
Kingdom out of what he wrested from others. They think they only hatch some
Eggs of their nest for them; but I had thought they are full grown and high
flying birds of Paradise before they can be admitted into their Aviaries, or
received under their wings.

But secondly, if they have such a dexterity in hatching other men's Eggs, how
happens it they bring forth so few of their own, unless they resemble
Archymists, that can make gold for others and have none for themselves?

Thirdly, if they hatch other men's Eggs, Hieroglyph. lib. 24. c 41.
it is but like the Partridge mentioned Jerem. 17.11. Fovit sive congregavit,
as the Chaldee, Hierom, and Augustine; or incubuit, as Vatablus, O ca quae non
peperit, and it may fall out with them, by the bringing forth of truth by time
into more light, which Pierius tells us out of Hierom and Ambrose happens to
the Partridge, Vt cum pullos eduxerit, illos amittat, hi siquide^ audita illius
voce quae ova pepererat, naturae vegetatione perculsi, hac voluti nutrice
deserta, ad eam se conferunt, quae ova illa unde exclusi essent ediderat.

And who they are that hatch others Eggs like the Partridge, Saint Augustine
will tell them, even heretics, who says he, Christianos, Contra Faust.
Manich. l. 13. c. 12. tom. 6. p. 59.
quos maxim Christi nomine seducant, cum per ipsius Christi Evangelium natos
inveniunt, and faciunt illos divitias suas, non sane cum judicio, sed cum
temeritate inconsiderata; non enim intelligunt ibi esse veram and salubrem and
quodammodo germanam atque radicalem Christianam societatem undeastas
separarunt, quas ad suas divitias congregarunt, -- -- in novissimis suic erit
insipiens, id est, qui primo tanquam perpollicitationem and ostentationem
excellentis sapientiae seducebat, erit insipiens, (i.) apparebit insipiens. And
Pierius adds also, that Adamantius per perdicemaliena ova confoventem,
intelligit haereticos, genus quippe hominum perdicis instar malignum,
fraudulentum, callidum, quodque decipiendis venatoribus multum insumit operae,
ubi tamen verae matris sanctioris quippe institutionis, vox audita fuerit, eos
deseri atque ita poenas suae insipientiae luere; so that then by owning this
comformity with the Partridge, in that wherein he is the hieroglyphick of an
heretic, they have contracted another similitude with that bird which
Augustine also mentions, Perdix nimis contentiosum animal, notum est quanta
aviditate contentionis currat in laqueum.

But to answer this comparison which the paper took out of the ancient reading
of that in Jeremy, of the Partridge gathering the young which she brought not
forth, they produce only a resemblance borrowed of another, which though it be
an elegant one, yet is no more pertinent to the matter in hand, and has no
more of answer to what the paper insisted on, than if they had rehearsed any of
Pierius his other Hieroglyphics,

SECT. XXIII.
Why they have not the Sacrament in their own Churches. Why only at Pyworthy.
Whether it be no great matter to be called or drawn thither. Of their return to
their own Churches. How they stigmatize their people and judge their hearts. Of
serving the times. They confess the Word and Sacrament to be the same thing.
What thereupon follows.

HAving thus defended my own works, I might spare to make any sallies, and
having born out and repelled their assaults, I need not fall out to attempt
upon their lines, and think of storming their Forts; but I might now sit down
at rest, and enjoy that which Archidamus wished the Elians when they were upon
their march, bona quies: For he that is silent, shall every way hold his peace.
But I remember it was a politic and successful counsel that Achmetes Bassa
gave to Mahomet the Great, that when he could not take Scodra by forcible
assaults, he should block up the City with Forts built about it, which would
so distress it for want of relief, as it must finally surrender it self: so
perchance though we might defend the ground we have undertaken to make good,
notwithstanding any of their former storms or batteries, yet as long as so many
appearing Fortresses, pretending to be built upon Scripture grounds and
foundations, stand about it undemolished and inexpugned, it may seem
straightned and distressed, and the ways of any further access and more aids
will be retrenched. I shall therefore examine with what brain they have stuffed
these Heads, as they call them, and what they hold in capite, and Qua nitidum
tarda compserit art caput, which they say ( after they have followed the
Author step by step (though it be rather sometimes per saltum, having leapt
over many steps and not touched upon them) they have purposed to pass over,
though I think it had been better to have stood and insisted upon them with
more weight and circumspection.

And however as Plato teaches, De prolixitate vel brevitate scribendi curare
nimis ineptum est, non enim brevissima aut longissima, sed optima sunt
eligenda. Yet being conscious that my discourse, though it has been my care
with Sydonius, potius causam implere quam paginam, may for the length thereof
have already as much exceeded the readers patience, as my intentions, and
remembering what the same Plato admonished Amisthenes, Orationis modus non est
penes dicentem sed audientem, I shall henceforward endeavor to be more concise
and succinct, and begin etfi tacere necdum, certe taciturire, and say but
little, for breviloquium silentio est finitimum, said Lycurgus, only I shall
aim at such brevity (which Ammianus Marcellinus says alone is laudable) quae
nihil subtrahit cognitioni justorum.

Indeed as the wise man tells us, The beginning of strife is as when one
lets out water, Prove. 17.14. And as rivers let loose out of a Dam, stream
forth at first with a great flood, and afterward more sparingly; so being
enforced to break forth from that restraint which I would willingly have put
upon me, my discourse (the subject, whereof also I found like that lake in
Sicily, quem si quis ingreditur in latum extenditur) was easily carried into
such a profluence, as like Demosthenes, I was more troubled what to take off
from it, than to add thereunto, and the rather because I desired that
(according to what Gregory advises) as a river also, Si valles cavas ex latere
contingit in eas protinus sui cursus impetum divertit, ^umque illas
sufficienter implepleverit, repent se in alveum resundit; so that my discourse
juxta positam occasionem congruae aedificationis, quasi ad vieinam valle^ se
retorqueat; but hereafter I shall endeavor it shall rather stillare quam fluere,
and with Phocion, shall be solicitous to abridge or cut short what I shall say,
yet so as to reconcile the care not to say so much as may beget fastidiousness,
with the study not to speak so little as may argue negligence

I profess I was never of Laelius his mind in Seneca, Dic aliquid ut duo
simus, I love not to start or multiply quarrels, nor to catch at every thing
that may be capable of exception; De minimis non curat lex (sive charitatis
sive prudentiae) though I have nothing of the lofty wing or quick sight of the
Eagle, yet I desire to resemble him in not making a stoop to Flies: Yet because
the Apologists have made this part of their game (though I hope without making
any great prey, or fastening on any Flies that make the ointment stink) I have
sometimes sought to make them sensible that such Flies stick upon their soars,
and rather than remain in their debt, I would pay them with the like coin as
themselves have both minted and lent out, but henceforth I shall forbear to be
an Aristarchus upon forms of speaking, and to beat the clothes in stead of the
body, as Artaxerxes was wont to do in clemency, and I shall be more sparing to
trouble my self, or attediate my reader with any thing that is not of
concernment with the controverted subject, and be cautious to leave nothing
unhandled that is necessary, nor yet touch with that which is not pertinent;
but however other may be questionable, yet shall give them their pasport,
interdum non minus est Oratorum tacere quam dicere; even a golden Ball, if it
come a-thwart me like Atalanta, shall not tempt me to turn out of my way.
Fantumne est abs re tua otii, aliena ut cures caque nihil quae ad te attinent.
If the Apologists shall only beat the air, not strike home at me, I shall
quietly stand by to hear the sound, while I feel not the stroke; I cannot fear
they shall have that power over me which they say Witches have over others,
that when they prick an image of their own making, the party that they malign
pines away by it. And when also I meet with any broken troops, which I think I
have formerly beaten out of the Field, and yet they will appear again upon some
hill, or supposed advantage ground, only to Alarm, not to Charge, I shall not
advance toward them, but march on, and shall speak very little in answer to
such passages as have formerly come under discussion: for as Epaminondas told
the Spartans, when his successes had set them at a loss, and cast them behind
hand, That he was glad he had brought them to long speeches; so contrariwise
when we hope we have done the work before hand, we may speak short and
Laconically, and may be excused to expend no more spice to correct the
flatulency of twice sodden Cole-worts; so neither shall I sprinkle much upon
those that are fresh, if they arise from the same ground, and are of like
substance, though growing up in different form, especially seeing as the same
Recipe often is subservient to several maladies, and one true proposition may
be destructive to many false, so out of what has been delivered upon former
occasion, may an answer be fitted to refute or frustrate that which comes in as
a second or reserve; so as what I take no notice of, I shall say with
Augustine, De fid and operib. tom. 4. p. 18.
Tale esse arbitratus sum, cui mea responsio necessaria non fuisset five quod
ad rem de que agitur non pertinet, five quod tam leve esset, ut a quolib et
redargui facillime posset.

The first head which they show forth, is, Why not the Sacrament in their own
Congregations? From which head, (upon the former account) cutting off that
which is superfluous to it, as the hair to the head, though it may seem to deck
or set it out, and which we are deceaved, if they have not already been
discussed all to an hair; it is first to be considered what they answer, viz.
That it is in some, but then that answer is only for some, and leaves the most
without defense. I do not know that before their Book came forth the Sacrament
was publicly administered in any of the proper and peculiar Congregations of
those of this association, save in the Cathedral or Mother Church, as I may
call it, at Pyworthie, unless they take all that be of their communion to be
also of their combination. But if it be in some, why not in all? if not in all,
why in some, if the reason why it ought to be in some of them, is common to
all? and what special reason can they produce why it cannot be in all?

They say, because at home after their intendment and desires of such a work
spoken of in the pulpit, there appeared not a competent number to carry it on,
which when there shall be found, they are resolved to return; in the interim
they were enforced to adjoin themselves to a Church which was formed in one of
their Congregations, viz. at Pyworthy.

But the covering is narrower than that he can wrap himself in it; the standers
by, who commonly do not see less than they that play the game, cannot discern
that there is a greater number of persons at Pyworthy fit and willing to
receave the Sacrament, than might have been found at Holsworthie; and it will
seem strange to us that where there has been a succession of topicall Stars
of greater magnitude, that there should be still less light, and less effects
of a quickening and fructifying influence; neither can it but eclipse the
dignity of those Stars, seeing causes are best judged by their effects. But
perchance they were only not so fit or willing to come to the Sacrament in
their way, and to leave their liberty behind them, surrendering up that right
which they had to the Sacrament by the character of Baptism, and being Church
members with a Dogmatical faith, to take a new grant thereof by the copy of
their countenance, and a tenancy at their wills, and when the Statute Quia
emptores terrarum forbids the creating of new civil tenures, to suffer them to
erect new holdings in Spirituals. Their pulpit discourses were directed only
to dispose them for this way of subjection, and for their ends, not for the
right end, the Sacrament.

But secondly, If they at Pyworthie were more malleable free stones and easier
to be wrought, yet seeing the stones whereof this Church was to be built and
constituted, were drawn forth out of several places, and were brought first to
be formed and fashioned at Holsworthie, and some of them hewed out of that
rock, why should they be carried thence to be laid in Pyworthie? Quod petis hic
est,
Ut U lubris, animus si te non deficit aequus.
As St. Hierom said, Heaven was as near Britain as Jerusalem; so they had been
as near to Christ in the Sacrament in the one place as in the other. He was the
master Architect of the frame at Pyworthie, who first prepared for the edifice
at Holsworthie, Ubi Imperiator ibi Roma, -- and Vejas habitante Camillo,
Illic Roma fuit:
that was the more signal place, why should Pyworthie be the Patriarchal or
Metropolitan Church, and as I may say, the Rome, from which Church all must be
denominated, of what place soever they were, and Catholic must be joined to
Roman, or else it is not right, so they must be named of the Church of
Pyworthie, of whatsoever Congregation else they be, and why should this be so,
especially seeing the Pontisex maximus that has the greatest influence upon
the members of the Church, was the proper Pastor of another place, unless also
that be here applicable in the resemblance which Bellarmine tell us, that the
Apostolical seat may be separated from the Bishopric of Rome, and what
Cameracensis says, that the Papacy and Bishopric of Rome are two distinct
things, and not so necessary conjoined but that they may be separated? There
might be some reasons of thrift in the conduct thereof, which is a principle
that has more influence upon those of the Independent principles, than on the
more hospitable Presbyterians; or of Policy, that their own peculiar Churches
might be kept for a reserve, and to be modelled according to the mode of the
time and exigence of emergencies; for whereas they talk of their being a Church
formed at Pyworthie, in the choice of a Pastor, etc. as they were the
efficients by whom; and the matter of which it was formed, so though at their
first sitting down there was a Pastor duly (I think) ordained, yet when he
removed his quarters (the phrase is not improper) he that next assumed that
charge, was not for diverse years after in Orders, and all that while sure they
had no Church formed there according to the rules of Gods Word, in the choice
of an appropriate Pastor, etc. and therefore then not to have reverted to their
proper Congregations, and rechurched them, is without excuse.

Thirdly, Since there are some of every of their own peculiar Congregations
aggregated into their catholic Church at Pyworthie, had it not been, not only
more orderly and decent, but more just and necessary to have modelled them into
special and proper Churches at home, where their proper work lay, and which was
the sphere wherein they ought to move, and the Sparta which they should
adorn? and though by a figurative polygamy ^hey have taken another wife, and
the later is beloved, and the former hated; yet since the first borne son was
hers that was hated, he should not have been disinherited, but have had his
double portion; and If these Churches would perchance at first have been
diminutive, yet should they have been augmentatives of their honor and peace,
which as they complain, do suffer for neglect hereof, (I fuge, sed poteris
tutior esse domi.) and those little Churches have been likelier to grow by
apposition of parts contiguous, the corporeal contact facilitating the agents
in assimilating, and the sticks lying in the same pile easily kindling one the
other, which they cannot do being separated. As opportunity sometime tempts to
evil, so also often does it prompt to good, and though Bellarmine have falsely
thought, That the only efficacy of discriminating grace consists in the annexed
congruity, or as Fonseca, the due application thereof, yet it is a truth, that
the external means of grace are more effectual by the congruous and fit
application thereof, and the circumstances of convenient place and facility of
resort have some conducency to that congruity and fitness, for wise men have
been taught by experience to conclude, that what is little in the cause, may be
great in the effect and consequent, and the day of small things is not to be
despised.

They deny that they had a competent number for the work, but they leave us to
divine what they judge to be a competency, Suarez 3 q. 8. art. 6. disp. 67.
sect. 5. Item Vasquez. Junius Eccles. l. 1 c. 4. tom. 1. p. 1936. Maimonides
says, Where ten men of Israel were there ought to be built a Synanagogue.
for they determine it not. The School tells that ten suffice to make up a
Parochial Church, and this is also the judgment of the Canonists, the
Independents contract it to seven, and think so few may constitute a Church.
Ecclesia (says Junius, Grammaticis quoque testibus, vox est sylleptica quae
non unum aliquem spectat, sed plures complectitur, divinitus in unum Caetum --
in privatis quoque domibus Ecclesia, and ita vocat Apostolus, Romans 16.5. 1 Cor
16.19. sed ea constat ex familia justa, in qua non minus tribus animis esse
oportere omnes noverunt Oeconomi, ac omnes Philosophi and Jurisconsulti
docuerunt. Correspondently Tertullian, Vbi tres sunt, ibi est Ecclesia, and
neither of them unsuitably to what the Lord Christ has promised, Where two or
three are gathered together in his name, that he will be in the midst of them.
There was a Church in Paradise where there were but two persons, and they had
Sacraments there, for such was the Tree of Life, and I suppose that to help
forward the saving and supporting but of one soul, is a matter of more honor
and comfort, than to engage and lead a Sect. I know they had, (some of them at
least) more than three in their appropriate Congregations, that were sealed
with their approbation for the Sacrament, why then was it not administered to
them at home? I hope they can give spiritual Alms without sounding a Trumpet,
and are not like the Nightingall, which they say cannot sing well unless she
be overheard; or as they say of the Tortoyse, that she hatcheth her Eggs with
her eyes; so others eyes (I trust) are not that only which must quicken and
bring forth their duties.

First, they suppose it No great matter that is required, for men to go out of
their Parishes to participate the Sacrament: In Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 3. sermon.
14. Seneca.
but says Chrysostom, Propter hoc magnum est malum, quod nihil esse videtur:
etenim quae nihil esse videntur facile contemnuntur, q^ae vero contemnuntur,
augentur ae multiplicantur etiam, quae autem augentur redduntur ^^iam
incurabilia, and therefore upon this account the great Moralist advises, Non
negligere minimum ne si^tibi inter minima. Not to remind them of a frustra fit
per plura quod potest fieri per pauciora, when a necessary obedience and
submission is exacted in that which they have no power to enjoin, and others
have no obligation to observe, his dat qui cito dat, it creates a president,
and begets an encouragement to command more and greater things, and he that
once quits his Freehold to be a Tenant at will, though at first he may fit at
an easy rate, may at length be enforsed to raise his rent, and hold upon such
terms as his Landlord please, or lose his Tenement. Quae nunc virgulta sunt,
crunt si negligantur robora; ista quae modo facili avu^sione dirimantur, postea
vix securibus succumbunt, says Cassiodor.

Secondly, they think it no evil, no not in appearance, for them to require
it. An appearance of no little confidence and no great ingenuity! however they
may struggle to prove it not to be such in reali^y, yet who can deny, and not
first send a denial to Modesty, that it has an appearance, First, levati
Altaris, or of a schismatic separation of themselves from a sacramental
communion with their peculiar Churches? And whereas they say they are joined to
the society of a Church formed in one of their congregations, that does not
stave off or frustrate the appearance of schismatic separation, for else the
Donatists might have cleared themselves thereof by the like defense, saying,
that though they divided themselves from other Churches, yet they adjoined to
the Churches formed in their congregations, to wit, those of Parmenian,,
Petilian, Gaudentius, Emeritus, etc.

2. It has an appearance of Allotrio-episcopacy, of being busy in other men's
Diocesses, and incurious and negligent in their own. And which also appears to
be a desertion of their old Spouses, and seeking after new Loves.

Thirdly, Of Injustice, 1. toward their peculiar and appropriate Churches to
whom they do not the office, yet from them receive the Benefice. 2. Cum
Episcopo portionem plebis dividere (l.) a pastore oves, filios a parente
separare, which Cyprian condemns in Felieissimus, epist, 38 p. 90.
Toward other Ministers, whose sheep they allure to stray away to enlarge their
fold.

Fourthly, of breach of that Canon, whose observation was kept up so
religiously in the ancient Church, that none should communicate in another
Church without the Formed and Communicatory letters of his own Pastor.

Fifthly, Of violation of order, established in the defining and limiting
appropriate Churches.

Sixthly, of transgression of that Rule of Righteousness, Quod tibi fieri non
vis, alteri ne feceris; for I know they would regret another to put his sickle
into their crop, though they make up their harvest of other men's corn, and
therefore unless that must seem good in them which appears evil in others, as
Quod in alio audacia suerit, in Catone fiducia erat, this must needs have an
appearance of evil.

Though they proclaim that they are likely to walk in that society to which
they are joined, till they see truth and reason against them yet incoherently
they profess, that they have still resolved to return to their places as to
this Ordinance, when a competent number shall appear fit and willing to carry
on so great a work.

And then it seems more light has arose upon them, and some Collyrium has
cleared their eyes to see the truth and reason against them, and perchance as
Epaminondas told the Spartans after the battle at Leuctra, That he was glad
they were brought now to make long speeches; so some such like occasion may
have brought their Prolocu or to return and carry back the Sacrament with him
to his proper Church, that has so long stood under Interdict, and to say
expressly that all is Null which was done at Pyworthy: yet I do not find the
number increased of those that are visibly fit and willing more than at the
first, nor has he yet to this day taken into participation above one more at
home than followed him abroad: so as he might have at first found as competent
a number as he has since made, if not a greater number, since it is possible
that some perchance may have found some more irritation and animosities by
having all this while been left lying under contempt and neglect. As Pyrrhus in
the judgment of Cyneas might have been as happy before he left Epyrus, as he
could expect to be after he had traversed Italy and conquered Sicily and
Africa; so I think they might have found the work as facible, and their
undertakings as successful before their going out from them, as they are like
to do upon their coming back. If their return be upon the score of
resipiscence, far be it from me to be such an one as Beza complains of, Hic
homo invidet mihi gratiam Jesu Christi; but if it be upon any other acccount,
or if when they are come home to their Congregations, they yet come not home to
the ancient Ecclesiastic discipline, but only Coelum non animum mutant, I
shall say as the Turk did to Gentlemen whom he saw walking several turns up and
down a Cloister, Are you out of your way, or out of your wits? If your
business lie here, why go you thither? If it be there, why come you here? and
I shall conclude, Levis est malitia, sape mutatur, non in melius, sed in aliud.

In what account they set their people, and how they are obliged to them for
their good thoughts and report, is very legible in those blots wherewith their
pen has here asperst them, putting their noncompliance with their way upon
the score of their worldly fear, doubting state-changes, want of zeal, and
boldness in the matters of God, and for worse reasons, (and that carries the
worst ignominy, for Simpliciter pateat vitium fortasse pusillum,
Quod tegitur majus creditur esse malum.)
Whether those are endearments and Charientismes likely to charm and win upon
their affections; (Ignosci aliquatenus iguorantiae potest, contemptus veniam
nou meretur;) whether this be not a provoking of their children to wrath;
(gravius contumeliam ferunt homines quam detrimentum;) whether this be not
obloquious to themselves, that they have not meliorated nor lickt them into a
better shape all this while, since by the law Falcidia, the parents were
punished for the continued faults of their children; whether this being a
judgment, not of men by external actions, but by the hidden causes thereof and
their secret intentions, which cannot be evident to them by any violent signs,
and at most there can be only a probable suspicion that the actions spring
from such a fountain, be not temerarious judgment and a judging of the heart,
since such a suspicion is sufficient only to spring a doubt, not to support an
absolute determination, which must be founded only upon manifest grounds, and
as long as things are but doubtful, they are not manifest, and the most
rational doubts are to be interpreted in the better part, (as has been
formerly demonstrated;) and then whether the Apologists have just cause to
complain of, or can have hope to be condoled for the hard thoughts and
untempered words which they say they suffer from others, since Judicium si quis
quae fecit perferat aequum est, as Vespasan thought it punishable, Senatoribus
maledici, but not regardable remaledici, of all these, if the Apologists will
not consider, others will take notice.

What they diaper their margin with out of Mr. Baxter, of the desperate
opposing and villfying, and scurrilous railing at desired discipline, is but as
Urias his letters in the sacred story, or Bellerophons in the profane, which
are destructive to themselves, for their dear brethren, and such as are germane
to them in principles, are most engaged in that guilt, which in that place is
most reflected on, who have endeavored to make that Oath of union, (according
as they have called it,) an old Almanac, fitted to the interest of State, or
impiously (as Cusanus says the Scriptures are) fitted to the time and practice
of the Church, so that one time according to the current the they are expounded
one way, and when that rite of the Church changes, then the sense is changed.

They conclude the Section with intimation of fear to suffer in their estates
as well as their names and quiet, for adhering to those principles and proceeding
in this way. As they have not hitherto felt any detriment, so we cannot see any
imminent danger thereof, but whether the pluralities of a Church and a
Congregation, which springs an income as well of offerings as of tithes, have not
brought some advantage and improvement; or whether a pastoral Church and a
gathered Church may not countervaile two Benefices, or the Semestrian
visitations of some of them, may not balance the Triennial visitations of the
Bishops, especially since as he said of Grotius, Odi sapientem qui sibi non
sapit, and also, In steriles campos nolunt juga far juvenci, I shall not
pretend to know, though I am not ignorant -- quantus tota rumor in urbesonat. I
shall only say, They accuse their people to be time-servers or observers, but
can they say soberly as Pope Paul the 3d. did of his son Petrus Aloysius, Haec
ille vitia non me commonstratore didicit, for though they suspect them, yet it
is manifest of it self and very obvious, that there is much Quicksilver in the
composition of them, and that metal does never endure the fire, and being
liquid is conformable to any mould, and I hope therefore they will as did the
Romans, make fortunam fidei comitem, and as the King of Navar professed to Beza,
not advance beyond the possibility of a safe retreat: Hectora non nosset, si
faelix Troja fuisset, and it is adversity can only try what friends they will
be to their way, and whether they affect Alexander or the King. Sure I am their
undertakings are not like the Ceraunia, a Jewel only bred in a storm. They
suppose and publish that authority is for them, or not against them, but if the
superior bodies should have different aspect and influence, whether they would
then turn tables again, or not; and whether they would be like the regina
aurarum, quae obsistit ventis immobilisque contra nititur adversantibus, as
Nieremberge, or like the hedge Bore that having many hoses to his den, does
always stop that which is toward the bleate wind, that would be the question,
and in order to some (perhaps) no very difficult question. Contra Ep. Parmen.
l. 3. c. 6. Cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 98.
But whatever they would undergo, (as St. Augustine to his Donatists,) let
them take heed lest perchance Coecis vendatur reprobus lapis pro gemma
pretiosa, (l.) carnalis duritia pro spirituali patientia, and that non fortiter
sed pertinaciter non timetis, -- Quoniam qui pro pace Christi omnibus terrenis
caruerit, deum habet; qui autem pro part Donati vel paucos nummos perdiderit,
cor non habet.

But I shall for conclusion remark, that to excuse the omission of administering
the Sacrament in their Churches, they say it has been supplied by holding
forth Christ in the word, and giving souls to eat and drink his flesh and blood
in the word: whence it follows, that it is the same thing that is exhibited in
both, but in different manner. All to whom Christ is offered in the word
receave him not, nor are qualified to do so, as well as all embrace him not
(...) he is propounded in the Sacrament, nor are conditioned to do it; those
(...) we not perfect understanding in the word, yet to all them it is preached,
that they may understand and believe, for it is verbum practicum; why then by a
parity of reason should not the Sacrament be administered to those, who by the
word have attained an historical and dogmatical faith, and are intelligent of
the nature, use and end of the Sacrament, without further scrutiny whether they
have a true faith? seeing that true faith may be wrought by reception of that
which is signum practicum, why then should the one be the privilege of Saints
more than the other? why should it be prodigality of Christ's blood in holding
it forth to all in the Sacrament, and not when they tender if to all in the
word, seeing the same blood is offered in the one and other? unless this be
even such another crotchet as the Papists grate our ears with, who tell us
that the blood of Christ represented by the cup is also exhibited with the
bread, which signifies his body, by a certain concomitancy, but yet the Laity
that partake of the bread, may not for some great mysteries participate of the
cup, the blood may be some way administered, but they must not drink it.

SECT. XXIV.
Whether they are Butchers or Surgeons. Whether guilty of Schism. Of negative
and positive Schism. What are just causes of separation. Whether our Savior
separated from the Jewish Church, for instance, in eating the Passover. They
condemn what they practice by confounding Churches, and by separation. They
grant Professors to be visible Saints, which destroys their Platform. Their
reasons why all sorts are to be admitted to the word and prayer. Whether there
are not better reasons to warrant a like admission to the Sacrament: whether
the same conclude it not. Whether the Churches of England are all true
Churches. Sacraments notes of the Church, and therefore communicable to all
Church members. They grant discipline enters not the definition of a Church,
yet they separate for want thereof. Whether they may not as well deny Baptism
to the Children, as the Eucharist to the Parents.

Why they separate not in all Ordinances, is an head that looks not directly
toward us, but respects their brethren of the separation, who have outrun and
gone beyond them, and stand at a distance as much further from them, as they
from us. For as when Apolles had drawn a fine small line, Protogenes cut that
in (...) another, and the former halfed that again; so when one sort have cut
(...) from communion with the rest of the Church, they divide themselves again,
and some of them think themselves not refined enough, and as the Chemists say
of sublimation, sapius repetenda est operatio, neque enim prima sublimotione
res mox satis depuratur; so one separation grows out of another, like the tunal
which Nieremberge speaks of, mira frondium facunditas, solium supernas^itur
solio, si decid^t aliquod radices rursus agit surgitque altera arbos. And so
though as sand contained in a vessel has one general figure in the whole
Mass, conformable to the continent, yet every grain is inechaerent with other;
so though they all come under one common notion of Separatists, yet they are as
much separate from (...) other, as from us, and as little agree among
themselves as with us, though when they come against us, like Themistocles and
Aristides going on Embassy, they lay down their enmities to be afterward
reassumed. And as Aristides said, It will never be well with Athens till both
the one and the other be shut up in the dungeon; so they intimate in the close
of this Section, that in such a condition they were most likely to close in a
mutual agreement, but their present quarrels with the other, occasion here the
diverting of their arms, which offers us a little truce, who might now stand a
loofe and behold the fight among themselves, whom that happily may befall,
which Tacitus relates of Apronjus soldiers, dum singuli pugnant, universi
vincuntur, and when they fall out, good men may come by the truth. Discordia in
malis tam bona, quam concordia in bonis; only we shall gather up some of those
arrows which they let fly at others, to shoot back upon themselves, and if any
of those shot at random seem to fall near us, we shall endeavor to repel or
avoid such, as we have not already broken.

They separate not in other Ordinances, because they are for Surgery, not
Butchery. It seems then they now somewhat odiously set their brethren in the
rank of cutthroats, who will shrewdly resent to be degraded into the company of
Butchers.

Secondly, How little conformity or resemblance their practice has with the
rules of Surgery, has been frequently instanced.

Thirdly, Surgeons neither use nor are able to cut off any one member from
an union with the rest in the influence and benefit of one vital faculty
only, but exscind altogether from the whole body; whereas they make exscision
of men only from a Communion in one Ordinance alone, not all.

Fourthly, Let this reason have the most favorable pass, yet it only can
argue absolutely, why they should separate not in all Ordinances, but in some
alone, not comparatively why in this Sacrament rather than in other.

Fifthly, It is a strange method of Physic or Surgery, to seek to preserve
life by witholding the means of life, and the medicine of life and immortality
(as the Fathers call the Sacrament;) and if all means must be sought to cure
before they cut down a Church, we think they have deserted their own
Aphorisms, for they have not sought to cure it by this medicine, yet they have
cut down their Church, not only by gathering another, but by a practical
judging of them to have no present interest in the body and blood of Christ,
nor worthy to have the truth of Gods promises in him to be sealed unto them.

The learned (and they quote Camero) distinguish of a twofold separation,
positive and negative, the first they condemn unless upon just and weighty
grounds, the second they are acting, in making a separation in their
Congregations, not separating from their Churches, but some corruptions in them
in order to reformation. De Eccles. p. 325.
Camero in that place disputes of Schism (whereof secession or separation may
be the genus,) and Schism he distinguishes into negative and positive; the
first, Schisma quod non exit in coetum, and societatem aliquam religiosam, quae
simpliciter secessio and subductio, cum non instituitur ecclesia facto
Schismate: Schisma positivum tum fit, cum instituitur ecclesia, hoc est, cum
fit consociatio quaedam, quae legibus ecclesiasticis and Dei verbo atque
sacramentorum administratione utitur separatim, quod quadam formula desumpta ex
Scriptura dicitur, str^ere altar contra altar: But as the men of Bengala are
so afraid of a Tiger that they dare not name him, through fear if they should
do so, they should be torn in pieces by him; so it seems the Apologists are so
conscious of Schism, or fearful to be blasted with it, that they decline the
mention of this, and passing over the description he makes of Schism, they
only barely and without any distinct explication tell us of a negative and
positive separation. Abstine epistolis quae sunt instar Edicti, says
Symmachus, facessat omne studium ex quo nascitur cura compendii. Me thinks they
should have been able to have understood Camero, had they looked into him
themselves, but whencesoever it results, there is an ignorant and wilful
mistake in alleging him, for they seem to quote him as if he determined that a
negative separation were absolutely and universally lawful, whereas he
affirming that a positive Schism is that which Antonomastice and (...) is
called Schism, he renders this reason, because often (he says not, always) a
negative secession is lawful, that justly and piously it may be free to depart
from some Churches, but it will not be so if it grow into a positive: As for
example, some may be cast out by the fault of the Church-Governors, and yet
without the Churches fault: If they then gather a Church apart, they shall be
guilty of Schism. He speaks here of a secession where a man is passive and cast
out, not where he goes off; when there is Anathematismus, excommunicatio
injusta and iniqua, certe qui excoetu aliquo ejecti secedunt and se subducunt,
secesserunt quidem illi, attamen non fecerunt schisma (as he speaks in the
former page) but a negative secession, wherein a man is active, he says is
Schism, (being not only a Decession but a Discission) if the cause be either
temerarious or unjust, and it is temerarious, if it be upon a light occasion,
and the occasion is light, unless there happen first an intolerable
persecution (for if it be tolerable the secession is unjust.)

Or secondly, Communion is not to be broken but for Fundamentals. Mead. p. 622.
tom. 3.
that congregation be infected with heresy (for if it be a tolerable error, if
the rite, though superstitious, be sufferable, there ought to be no separation.)

Or thirdly, be addicted to idolatry. Now then, seeing they confess they make a
negative separation, as Camero defines it, if they can prove and convict their
Congregations to be guilty of such persecution, heresy, or idolatry, they may
acquit themselves, but if they cannot (as they do not attempt or pretend to
accuse them thereof) they are then culpable of schism in the judgment of
Camero, to whom they refer, and their separation is not only temerarious,
but also unjust, ( and separatio injusta veluti extrema schismatis linea,
Camero ibid. a page 322. ad 327.
says he) having not so much as a light occasion by any tolerable persecution,
or error, or separation, and the scandals being few or none, which were they
more or greater, might perchance make the separation more just, but could not
excuse it from being temerarious.

Besides also, their separation is rather positive then negative, having
gathered and constituted a new Church, whereof there can be no just cause,
says Camero, but malum insanabile, lethale and contagiosum, reigning in that
Congregation which they desert, or res gravis and momentosa, quae si negligatur
tanta est, ut de salute and gloria Dei actum sit, -- neque enim quicquid verum
est, id ipsum continuo necessarium est, ut qui salubres cibi sunt, non sunt
continuo necessarii. And it is also a separati^n from their Churches, though in
them; not of notorious evil members from the body of the Church, but of a
Church in and yet from a remaining Church, which separation in a Church from
those who remain Church Members, and of the Church, is a principle only of
independent Divinity, and has no dependence upon Scripture, Reason, or
Camero's or any good authority.

And theirs is likewise a separation not only by secession in place, but from
persons who were never duly cast out by any judicial process for notorious
crimes, and therefore is not heterogeniarum partium discessio, sed
homogeniarum, and therefore a Schism (as Camero sentenceth) and they are
besides very few that separate; so as though the cause had some weight, L. 3.
contra Crescon. c. 36. Idem contra Parmen. l. 3. c. 21. tom. 7. p 11.
yet si pauci sunt, videtur nihil esse moliendum, sed expectandum patienter
tempus Domini (says he.) And whereas they say, they separate not from their
Churches but from some corruptions,

First, they might separate from their corruptions by keeping themselves pure,
Non enim qui se castam servat communicate peccatis alienis, says Augustine, and
elsewhere, Mixtus reis and obnoxiis nisi per conscientiae maculatam
consensionem nullus recte dici potest. They may and must separate from the
corruptions, but they do (which they ought not) farther separate from the
Assemblies with whom they will have no communion in the Sacraments, which are
Gods Ordinances and not corruptions: And corruption of manners also is no just
cause of separation, for (says Camero) wheresoever purity of doctrine
flourishes, God in that assembly must needs have a Church, though overwhelmed
with multitude of scandals, and therefore they that separate from such a
Congregation, doubtless depart from thence where God gathers a Church, and
therefore says Augustine, Vbi mihi licet in melius commutari, Contra Crescon.
l. 3. c. 36. Eiren. part. 1. p. 706. tom. 1.
non mihi opus est indeseparari. And Junius resolves, Non posso quenquam
Christianum bona fide renunciare communioni alterius, quem Christus aut
adjunxit sibi aut se adjuncturum spem facit, -- nam qui fratrem suum, servum
Dei, membrum Christi proterve abdicat -- is eo ipso facto Christum, authorem
communionis salutaris nestrae abdicat. And with these or like arguments have
their Pulpits sounded a retreat to those of their Town which have separated
from them to associate with such as have gone farther in their separation, as
if their sight were in this respect also extra mittendo, that they can see the
faults of others not their own, nor discern how the same weapons wherewith they
fight against others, may be turned back upon themselves.

And if they shall say, that the very communion in Sacraments with such
congregations is a corruption, besides that this is petitio principii, a
begging of the question, it is Donatisme without question.

And whereas Augustine after the precedent words, Non enim qui se castum ser
vat communicate peccatis alienis, adds, quamvis non eorum peccata, sed illa
quibus ad judicium sibi sumunt Dei sacrament acommunicet cum iis a quibus se
castum servando fecit alienum, might not Cresconius with as much truth and
reason (as they do) have replied, That the very communicating with such was
the contracting of their corruption and sin?

Our Savior (say they) lived in unity with the Jewish Church in necessary
ordinances, yet separated in regard of cerruptions. Let them then be followers
of Christ and we shall no farther pursue them, for the sacrament is a necessary
ordinance, and not a corruption, and there may be a nonconformity in a
corruption unto them, with whom there may yet be a communion in worship: The
Lord Jesus lived and died in communion with that corrupt Church says Mr. Ball,
and was so indulgent and graciously applicable to sinners, that the Pharisees
called him a companion of sinners, Ipse Dominus Jesus, Aug. contra Epist.
Parmen. l. 1. c. 17, Dub. Evang. part. 3. Dub. 41. p. 153.
nulla cogitatione malignitatis in Judaeorum gente pollutus est neque cum illa
prima sacramenta secundum perfectam humilitatis viam factus sub lege sus^epit,
neque cum postea discipulis electis cum suo tradito^e usque ad extremum osculum
vixit. And it has been elsewhere mentioned, that one reason why Christ would be
baptized among the common sort, is rendered by Spanheim to be this, Sic etiam
jugulatus and confutatus error eorum qui Catherorum, and Anabaptistarum
recentium imitatione, ad S. Domini coenam accedere detrectant, si eandem
flagitiosis sua opinione peccatoribus administrari videant.

But whereas in the score of these corruptions wherein Christ separated, they
set down washings and misobservation of the Passover,

First, they cannot but know, though perchance they could be content that
others were ignorant, that there is a vast disparity and unsuitableness between
superstitions or humane traditions, and divine Ordinances.

Secondly, when those that keep themselves pure, do partake of that sacrament
whereof they also participate that in some thing are corrupt, they do not
communicate with the evil men, but with the Altar and Sacraments of God, as
Augustine speaks.

Thirdly, that there may be a communion without uniformity, and
Church Fellowship without a social compliance in accidental Rites and
Circumstances.

Fourthly, that to differ in things speculative or practical, is not to
separate, as there may be variety in a garment yet no rent, In illa vest
varietas sit, scissura non sit.

Then secondly, for Christ his not washing, among other reasons rendered by
Interpreters, why he declined and omitted those lotions, these also are
recounted.

1. To show that things though decent, yet ought not to be imposed as
necessary, or holiness be constituted therein.

And 2. That no pollution could be contracted by a necessary converse with
those whom they supposed sinners, if there were no consortship in sin, (the
contrary superstitious conceit whereof was that which occasioned the Pharisees
often washing:) And as the former reason may excuse us for non-complying with
their institutions, which some of them may perhaps be conformed to without sin,
yet none of them ought to be enjoined of necessity; so the later may convince
them, that no communion with such as they are not convinced to be righteous,
can defile them, unless it be a society in unrighteousness.

3. But whereas they Magisterially and Dictator-like affirm, that Christ
observed not the Passover at the same time with the Jew^s, I see, Qui ad pauca
recipient de facili pronunciant.

When the Churches of Christendom, as the Greek and Latin, (for from this
difference about the time it comes to pass that the Greek Church celebrates in
leavened and the Roman in unleavened bread) and the best learned men in the
Churches both ancient and modern (for there were indeed some of the Fathers
that supposed Christ and the Jews did eat the Passover at different times,
though not upon that reason whereupon the later Writers do assert it, viz. the
translation of Feasts, Exer. 16. Sect. 13. p. 335.
whereof Paulus Burgensis was the first author, as Casaubon opineth, and he
flourished so lately as 1430. but upon this account that it was deferred by the
Jews through their solicitude and encumbrance about the crucifying of our
Lord:) When I say the Senate of the learned have divided themselves, and stand
at difference about it, and Casaubon (though himself be of the contrary
judgment) yet confesses it is the common opinion of the Roman Church, that
Christ and the Jews did keep the Passover the same day and hour; and three
Evangelists seem to minister arguments in favor of that opinion, and but one
that checks therewith, and that Enantiophany or seeming opposition between
them, is very plausibly to be reconciled without receding from this opinion,
and the arguments whereby it is supported (which on that and the other side
(whereunto he propends) are very hand somly dressed and trickt up by Maldonat)
are so considerable for weight and number, Hammond. annot. in Mark 14.12. And
Resolut. of ^. Quaries. p. 223.
that even those learned men who settle in the other scale, do it not without
some vacillation: And besides all this; some very learned me^ (as Grotius and
Hammond) supposing that Christ kept not at all the Passover by eating of the
Lamb which was to be slain, as they suppose, by the Levites, 2 Chronicles. 35.6. and
sacrificed in the Temple, Deuteronomy. 16.2, 6. but only a commemorative Passover,
(which they that were not able to come up to Jerusalem to sacrifice, were wont
to eat at home, as a memorial of the afflictions and deliverance out of Egypt,
such as was eaten in the time of the captivity of Babylon, being only
unleavened bread and bitter herbs, and nothing else, and eaten always at the
beginning of the Paschal (...), and which the other was to follow, and to be
eaten the next evening:) therefore I suppose it might have been a greater honor
to their modesty, than disparagement to their learning, to have less
confidently shot their bolt. Verum nihil securius est malo poeta. But Ludovicus
Vives relates of a Jew, that going over a dangerous bridge in the dark, next
day fell dead when he had light to see the hazard he was in; so when they have
better considered the knots and intricateness of the question, they will have
some resentment of their praecipitous determining it, and holding this forth as
a principle that needed no proof.

Omnes in admonendo sapimus, (said Euripides) sed cum ipsimet aberramus, haud
advertimus. The Apologists are like men in the dark, they can see nothing about
themselves, but discern what others do in the light: they have here good
principles, and they can apply them to conclude against others, but they are
not aware that in some measure they are applicable to condemn themselves.
Sciunt vera esse, sed furor cogit sequi
Pejora, vadit animus in praeceps sciens,
Remeatque.


They declaime against renouncing Congregations destreying and confusion of
Churches, scattering flocks, forsaking Assemblies, which God has not forsaken,
and they decry and protest against Schism and rigid separation, and say they
tremble at the destruction and confusion of tree Churches: But are they not
like that Hannonian faction at Carthage, which still complained of those
miseries which their only Counsels had brought upon the State? If they can
see a beam in the eyes of others, they should not be so blind as not to see a
rafter in their own; and though they are but little thieves upon the Bench (to
invert that proverb) yet they cannot with a just confidence condemn the
greater at the bar. They maintain the same principles of Schism from whence
all the particular conclusions are deduced, though some extract them in a
gresser thread and spin it out farther; they think mixed communions unlawful,
and make separations in the Church from those that are not cast out from it.
And whereas in their preface they tell us, [that they are deceived if ever
Church reformation and constitution prove comfortable and successful, unless
holding communion with other Churches come to be a matter of more weight]
nevertheless they deny to hold communion with their own Churches, yea they have
renounced their Congregations interpretatively, while they have gathered
another, which by appropriation they call their Church, and in part have
directly forsaken them, viz. in order to the administration of the Sacrament,
though they are not forsaken of God, for I hope they are in a capacity of
Salvation by the means, and of necessity God must have a Church, where the
purity of doctrine flourishes, although almost overgrown with scandals, (as
was mentioned out of Camero,) and though they have not wholly demolished their
Churches, they have pulled some stones from union with the rest, and
transferred them elsewhere, and left the rest he more instable and tottering;
and they destroy them negatively, and ut causae deficientes, while they edify
them not by the Sacrament, and though they lay the foundation and build the
walls by a communion in the word and prayers, yet they do set on the roof by
the Sacrament, which would keep the rest more firm together. It must needs be a
confusion of Churches, when they support not a distinction of parochial cures
and charges, and do fabricate one Church with pieces rent out of many; and they
scatter these of their own flock which they do not gather, and those of other
men's folds which they do gather. As there are potential parts of virtues,
Aquin. 2 2. q. 48.
which are Virtutes adjunctae, quae ordinantur ad aliquos actus secundarios vel
materias, quasi non habentes totam potentiam principalis virtutis; so we may
say analogically of their vice: and though it be not ripe and full grown
Schism, yet we have showed it has somewhat of Schism, seeing they separate
in somewhat, and that wherein the external communion of the Church does mainly
consist, the Sacrament. He that is departed from one City, and is advanced but
one mile, is gone off as well as he that is removed to the distance of ten; and
one drop of the Sea is water as well as the Ocean, and he that picks my pocket
but of sixpence is a Thief, as well as he that robs me of my whole stock, and
he that out of malice prepensed puts out a man's eyes, as well as he that takes
away his life, is a felon in the outward Court, and a murderer in the interior.

If Professors be visible Saints, (as they say here) then the exhibiting of the
Sacrament unto Professors, (as such are all Church members) is not prostituting
the privileges of the Saints; Sect. 5.
and there is no great harm done to make them Saints, by affording them the
Sacrament (as they would have it elsewhere) who are already Saints by being
professors, yet they will heerin seem insanire cum ratione, for they say,

All sorts are to be admitted to the word, because the Apostles were sent to
preach to the world; and it is wonderful that they did not observe in the words
following in that text, that they were as well sent to administer the Sacraments
as to preach the word, to baptize as to teach the nations: and as we have
showed that the ancient Church did immediately upon baptism admit men to the
Sacrament; so there is the same reason in relation to persons adult and
intelligent for the administration of the one Sacrament as the other, as St
Augustine fully declares in his book, de fide and operibus. Tom. 4. p. 13.
Besides, though the Apostles had a general rule to teach all Nations, yet it
was not without an exception, of not casting pearl before Swine, or giving
holy things to Dogs, and under that notion of pearl and holy things the word
is principally, and as it appears by the context, most properly understood; and
why then they should be eager in witholding the Sacrament, and so careless in
preserving the Word from those Swine and Dogs, they are still as mute in
giving any sound reason, as a Swine laid on his back, or a Dog bitten by a
Pard.

And to make them free partakers of their prayers they think they have warrant,
because Paul gave thanks in the presence of all the passengers: but as the
wheat which sometimes falls from the clouds, is good corn, but was not
naturally generated there; so though their conclusion be true, yet it does not
naturally flow from their premises. Paul they say gave thanks, that is, prayed
in the presence of them all, Acts 27.35. but it is not said that all did pray
together with Paul: to pray in the presence of them, and to conjoyn with them
in prayer, are different things: they allow others to be present at the
celebration, yet admit them not to partake of the Sacrament. The Author of the
imperfect work on Matthew, thinks because here is mention of breaking of bread
and giving of thanks, which in the Greek is (...), that Paul here administered
the Sacrament to his brethren in the faith, yet though all the rest were
present, yet that Author did not imagine they did participate.

That Elisha prayed with Gehazi is as irrationally collected from 2 Kings 4.33.
He went in therefore and shut the door upon them twain and prayed unto the
Lord, and therefore Gehazi it seems must needs be one of the twain; but by
common construction it ought to relate to him that was but last mentioned, and
that is the Child in the former verse, the child was dead and laid on the bed,
he went in therefore and shut the door upon them twain; super se and super
puerum, Schol. in locum.
says the vulgar translation, post utrunque, ita ut ipse and puer soli in
conclavi essent, adds Piscator, and consonantly the late Annotations. Besides,
how is it known to them that Gehazi was a wicked man? one or two sinful acts
could not so denominate him, at least at this time he had not lapsed into those
sins, which are recorded in the subsequent Chapter, and had he been leprous at
that time, the Law had not permitted Elisha such a commerce with him, and had
he been then notoriously wicked, the piety of Elisha could not have permitted
him that wrought deceit to dwell in his house, or him that told lies to remain
in his sight, In 2. Reg. c. 5. v. 27.
and though after his sin he be mentioned c. 8. v. 4. under the notion of the
servant of the man of God, non tamen cratoum Helisaeo (says Sanctius) and
capite sequenti minister Helisaei, non videtur fuisse Giezi, sed alius aetate
minor, quique non videbatur satis nosse quam a Deo Propheta virtutem
accepisset, but for the Kings talking with a Leper, In locum.
studium sciendi molestiam facile levavit, says Sanctius, and regem impium
legem illam neglexisse, adds Piscator; though others say the Law no way forbids
one that is clean to talk with a Leper. But if he after his sin and punishment
returned to the Prophet, (as Abulensis supposes,) it gives the stronger
persuasions of his repentance, and upon the sight of Gods displeasure (say the
late Annotators, English Annot. on the place.
) and judgment upon him for his sin, he might repent, and upon his repentance
have his judgment removed and he cleansed; this was an evidence of his good
disposition, that notwithstanding the punishment inflicted on him by his
master, he spoke honorably of him. But we may here as standing upon the
advantage ground, take a prospect, that any arguments, though beggarly and
vagrant, shall have their pass, yea and letters of recommendation, if they
carry but any hard face or weak color to serve their turn and interest; and we
may farther consider, whether they that are so flexible upon such arguments to
assent to a free reception to prayer, had they not been blinded by affection to
their interest, might not have found, or whether we have not prompted them with
far more convincing arguments in Scripture, to persuade them to a free
admission to the Sacrament.

But if Scripture lend them no stable foundation, they will buttresse it with
Reason, -- cognati semina coeli. They say we may pray for wicked men; but to
pray for is more than to pray with, and this is an arguing a majori ad minus
indeed, for they are fallen from a greater to a less forcible argument, for we
may pray for those with whom we do not pray, but we cannot pray with any, but
we must needs pray for them, and therefore the former comprehending the later,
this must be the greater and that the lesser, to pray with containing the other
to pray for, and aliquid amplius, for he that prays is the mouth of all the
rest, and the hearts of all ought to move with his lips, in a concurrence in
the same common petitions, and it is more specially vetified here what is
delivered by Ambrose, Dum singuli orant pro omnibus, sequitur ut omnes orent
pro singulis; so that we cannot pray with any but we must pray for them.

We ought to love all men, that have a capacity of eternal blessedness, which
is the formal reason of charity; to love is to will good to another, and this
consists much in wishing well to him, and a Christians wish is prayer, and upon
this account we must pray for all without question, but it is not universally
true that we may pray with all, without some exception. The ancient Church did
not admit persons excommunicate, nor all degrees of penitents to a
participation of all their prayers, and though such others as shall compose
themselves to reverence may be received, yet I think there will be a
combination of piety and prudence to exclude a scoffing Lucian, that shall
deride our petitions, or a profane Julian, that will blaspheme that holy name
which we invocate.

They remind us that Simon Magus was bid to pray, but as it follows not that
though he were prescribed to pray, that also others were enjoined to admit him
to a communion in their prayers, for he might pray alone; so they might have
remembered also that only upon the external profession of faith he was received
to Baptism, without any further trial or inspection. Baptizatus est (says
Cyril) sed non illuminatus, and corpus quidem lavit aqua, cor autem non
illustravit spiritu; and it is not improbable, that he might also partake of
the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, since it was then the practice, that
those who were baptized and continued in the Apostles doctrine, (which was in
hearing it preached by them continually, as Chrysostom, Piscator, and Sanctius,
and in professing thereof, as Diodate adds,) and fellowship, ( viz. of holy
Assemblies, as Diodate, and mutual conjunction, as Calvin) did also
continually, and perhaps daily, hold communion in breaking bread (the Lords
Supper being so called by a Synecdoche membri, a potiori ritu) and from this
Exemplar in the primitive ages, Baptism was but as it were a spiritual washing
before meat, for such as were adult, who forthwith were admitted to the Lords
Table: And we read of Simon that he continued with Philip, and he made an
outward profession of believing, as Diedate, and Piscator, and they judge not
right (says Calvin) who say he fained to believe, who believed as other
faithful did, as Sanctius affirms, and therefore in that time of his
countinuance with Philip, it is likely did partake the Eucharist, which was
then so frequently administ^ed.

Their presence at prayer can be no sin, (they say) while it is no more than
they are commanded to do, though their own evils at present make them unable to
do as they should. It seems there may be perverse judgment as well in an
acceptance of things as of persons, when the same judgment is not given of
things, of which there is the same reason, and in those which have no
difference between them; why else should not this be as applicable to the
Sacrament as to prayer, and the same reason be as apt and subservient to plead
for their admission to the one as the other^ The Apologists in the next
precedent Section tell us, the command of Christ (for receiving the Sacrament)
is peremptory and the duty incumbent on all Believers, which perchance they
will limit to sound Believers, yet we have (we trust) manifested, that as they
need not research, so they cannot discern who are true Believers, the soundness
of faith being only necessary to partake the fruit and virtue of the Sacrament,
Explicat. cateches part. 2. p. 221.
but the sound or profession of faith, (if not disproved by notorious sins) is
sufficient for admission to receive the Elements, and therefore Altingius as he
determines that of the Lords Supper, the subjectum recipiencs sunt omnefideles,
five Christiani adulti and finguli, (making Christians and faithful univocal;)
so elsewhere he defines, that though fides objective spectata, hoc est quatenus
in verbo praescribitur, and praecipitur, pertinet ad essentiam sacramenti,
tanquam conditio essentialis, yet nevertheless, fides subjective spectata, h^e
est quatenus est habitus vel actus credentis, non est sacramento essentialis,
-- sed est necessarium organum ac medium percipiendi rem sacramenti.

We have formerly produced out of Chrysostom that what indisposeth men and
renders them unfit for prayer, does no less for the Sacrament; and we have
seconded that testimony with the suffrage of Chamier, Andrews worship imaginat.
p. 36.
and what a third learned man says of those exceptions, which we commonly
allege to disturb our selves from that action, ( viz. communicating,) may
also be verified of those which others make for our disturbance, viz. that they
make us no less meet for prayers than for i^: there are dispositions and
qualifications required in him that prays as well as him that receives,
which no unregenerate man (in sensu composito) is capable of, 1 Timothy 2.8. James
1.6 2 Timothy 2.19. and without those conditions, there is a denunciation that
their prayers not only will not be heard, Psalm. 66.18. Isa. 1.15. but that
they shall be abominable, Prove. 28.9. as well as that when they eat or drink at
the Sacrament, it shall not only be to no fruit, but to condemnation; and they
lie unto God with their tongues when they pray, Psalm. 76.36. as well as others
(in their judgment) seem to lie or give false testimony when they give them the
Sacrament. And why those reasons then should be of weight to exclude from the
Sacrament, but not to debar from prayer, A Lapide in Levit. 19.36.
I know not where to lay the cause, but upon the diverse weights and diverse
measures, which the Hebrews say pollute the Land and profane the name of God,
and that more truly than they can prove the free admission can pollute or
profane the Sacrament, only when they are resolved to assume a power to keep
whom they please from some Ordinances, that they may better keep them in awe
and hold them in subjection. To exclude from prayer, is neither so specious to
attempt, (since as among the Heathens to what Deity soever the sacrifice were
intended, yet there was an invocation of Janus and Vesta also; so among the
Christians whatsoever be the Ordinance attended upon, it is seconded with that
of prayer and invocation of God, and this is the Salt that must season all
other sacrifices, disposing to and attending on them for improving their fruit
and effect, and therefore this species carries away the name of the genus from
the rest, and the Hebrew and Greek as well as the English call this by the name
of Service, not without warrant sealed by God himself, who calls his house, an
house of proyer, (denominating it from the chiefest service) but also to
withold them from prayer is less possible to effect, for men may pray without
concurrence of a Minister, but not receive the Sacrament without it be
consecrated by him.

But they have laid an obligation on the Church of England, Perpetuusque animae
debtor hujus erit, in undertaking to prove that some of the particular
Congregations are true Churches. Non tali auxilio nec defensoribus istis
Tempus eget,
we cannot allow them to be auditors of that sum, nor to cast it up with their
new Counters, who it seems suffering none to come to the Sacrament without
their Letpasse, would rise higher to permit none to pass for true Churches,
which have not their Communicatory letters, -- Seminibus jactis se sustulit
arbos,
Exiit in coelum ramis soelicibus;
but which are those that are true Churches, and what is that which is
constitutiv^ or destructive to either of them? As Adrian Turnebus used to hit
more right when he set down predictions of the weather clean contrary to the
Prognosticators; so perchance he may aim nearer to truh that denominates some
of those not true Churches which they so call, and some of them true whom they
name not such, but seeing they allow the Word and Sacraments for notes of a
visible Church, Field of the Church, l. 2. c. 2. p. 51.
(whereunto some of our great Divines have appended another, which admitted,
might also perchance disfranchise some of those that usurp and appropriate the
name of Churches) viz. an union and connection of men in this profession and use
of the Sacraments, under lawful Pastors and guides, appointed, authorized and
sanctified to direct and lead them, Contro. 4. de Eccles. l. 3. c. 2.
in consonancy wherewith Bellarmine himself defines the Church to be Caetus
hominum ejusdem Christianae fidei professione, and corundem Sacramentorum
communione ligatorum sub regimine legitimorum pastorum. But indeed the other
two being (as they grant) the Inseparable, absolutely proper, peculiar and
essential notes (for scire est per causas scire) and therefore being both the
formal cause of a Church, giving Being thereunto in constituting and
conserving it, while it is taught by the Word, and by the Word and Sacraments
is gathered together to God, and being the effect of the Church constituted,
while it teaches others, they cannot but demonstrate the Church a priori and a
posteriori, and therefore being adequate unto the Church, Gerhard loc. com tom.
5. de Eccles. c. 10. p. 306. 309.
and inseparable from it, it may firmly and immoveably be collected (says
Gerhard) that where the Word is preached and the Sacraments administered, there
is a Church, and reciprocally where there is a Church, there is the Word
preached, and the Sacraments administered: upon this ground therefore as the
Church of England was a true Church, so were also all the particular
congregations, being similar parts of that national Church, as that was of the
Catholic; and if in respect of that common nature found in them, they were
not Species of the Church in general, yet they were members thereof, as it is
an integrall body, for they had all of them the Word preached and professed
purely without any error in the foundation, which only nulls a Church, and the
Sacraments legitimously administered for matter and form: and had there been
some corruption in the doctrine and administration, (yet as totas Ecclesias non
esse aestimandas ex solis pastoribus, Whitak. Cont. 2. de Eccles. q. 5. c. 17.
p. 541. Iunius Eirenic. part 1. tom. 1. p. 715. 716. Animad. in Contro. 4.
Bellarm. l. 4. c. 2. p. 1132. Ibid. p. 1131.
( nec ex qui busdam paucis (as Whitaker and Gerhard;) so these corruptions had
only made a cease to be a pure Church, not to be a Church; so long as the
foundation had stood, it had been the house of God, though hay and stubble were
built thereupon, says Whitaker, (it had continued to be a Church until Deus
renunciaverat iis testificatione publica as Junius in the like case) the Word
and Sacraments simply and absolutely distinguished a Church from profane
Assemblies and the incorrupt preaching of the Word, and legitimate
administration of the Sacraments, from heretical congregations: though
properly (as Iunius observes) the preaching of the Word being actus hominum est
Index illius notae, non nota primaria, jam enim ante habuit notam Ecclesia Dei
veritatem and verbum veritatis a Deo quam praedicatio exstiterit, so as sure
our Congregations were lately all Churches. -- Fuimus Troes, and fuit Ilium and
ingens
Gloria Dardanidum


But since their brethren in principles sought to undermine our Churches, and
having made the match, and their zeal giving fire to the hidden mine, by a new
powder plot have blown up these Churches, and thereby not only rent and
dissipated them one from the other, but scorched and mortally wounded them with
fundamental errors, I think now it is not without due caution and
circumspection that they say, only some of our Congregations are true
Churches, for as Diogenes sought a man with a Lanthorn at noonday at Athens,
so amidst all the late new light, we have more need then ever of that lamp unto
our feet, to find a Church, and they do therefore ingenuously call themselves
of the Congregational way, for they are many of them out of the way of a true
Church. And though all that be of those principles are not vitiated with such
heresies, yet they are culpable in causa, as he that pulls down the Dam is
guilty of all the inundations and breach^s made by the flood.

But then seeing the administration of the Sacraments is a note of the Church,
Oportuit esse signa aliqua sacra quibus distinguerentur cives Jerusalem a
civitate Baby. Cit. ab Ames. Bell. Ener. tom. 2. c. 3. p. 63.
louis (says Alexander Hales) sicut videmus in aliis rebus, oves enim unius
gregis discernuntur ab ovibus alterius gregis proprio signo, and sacrae aedes a
non sacris proprio signo discernuntur, and civitas nobilis aliquo signo donari
consuevit, ut civitas Romana penula and dignitas militaris accinctione gladii,
and officium traditione virgae vel clavium, ex quibus omnibus colligitur quod
sacramenta homini sunt necessaria post lapsum, ad hoc ut discerneretur esse
civis spiritualis Jerusalem, and de^g ege Domini and de militia cius. Vbi supra.
And although (as Whitaker affirms) Sacramentorum usum non esse semper and
simpliciter necessarium, sed possead tempus intermitti -- sunt enim sigilla
tantum eorum bonorum quae nobis in verbo proponuntur, sigilli vero appositio ad
rem nihil addit, sed ad rei duntaxat modum, si sigillum deperdatur res non
continuo amittitur, non enim nobis est negotium cum callido aliquo mercatore,
ut fraudem motuamus, sed cum Deo qui sallere non potest, non est ergo quod de
salutis premissionibus nobis ab illo factis dubitemus eisi sigilla n^n h^bemus.
Yet notwithstanding as this seems only to comfort those that cannot have them,
not to excuse those that will not give them, and therefore he adds, Sin^llum
necessarium impedimentum fuerit -- nec esse ullo modo omittenda, yet I say, if
the Sacraments be notes of the Church, how can that be a Church to whom these
notes are supposed not to belong? How can these be Citizens of Jerusalem, sheep
of the Lords flock, Soldiers of his Militia, who not only have not, but are
affirmed not be in capacity of having the proper signs of such? Vbisupra. p.
1131.
And seeing, as Iunius asserts, those are notes of the Church, Professione Dei
and nostra Deitradentis Scriptura, professione, Sacramentis: nostra
profitentium recipere Scripturam, professionem, Sacramentaque ipsius; qua Deus
profitetur jam Ecclesia est; qua homines jam Deum Ecclesiamque profitentur, and
se Ecclesiae membra, tota haec professio not^ Ecclesiae est; sed prima illa
Ecclesiam constituit and notam essentialem ipsius in se, haec notam Ecclesiae
in membris ejus particularibus ostendit, how can they be yielded to be memb^rs,
that are not allowed this profession? And how can these be notes by their
profession in receiving whom they profess incapable to receive? and if as the
same famous learned man delivers, P. 1133.
the word Saltem vocatione communi facit divinae consortes naturae (ut ita
loquamur) omnes, quamvis non singulari internaque vocatione singu os, how can
they that are partakers of the divine nature, be unworthy to participate of the
signs of his body?

They fairly confess, That discipline enters not into the definition of a
Church, but only of a sound and healthy Church, and to put all or most on
this, is unwarrantable. In deed it is disliked by Whitaker in Beza and Danaeus,
that they make Discipline a note of the Church, Si per disciplinam, certam
quandam and perpetuam gubernationis Ecclesiae formam per Presbyteros and
excommunicationem intelligant, Vbi supra.
falli cos existimo; but we then assume, if it may be a Church without
discipline, and all or most is not to be put on this, Sect. 9.
how can they excuse those fellows of theirs in the separation who secede from
their proper congregations, through offense at the want of Discipline (as they
confess) and thereupon renounce their brotherhood? For as we alleged out of
Altingius to refuse to partake the Supper with them, is a tacit renunciation
of their fraternity; or how can these justify themselves that permit none to
be of their Church, that will not submit to their Discipline?

I doubt whether Divinity will not as little warrant that assertion as
accurate, That the form of a visible Church is the union of the body with
Christ, Polanus Syntag. l. 7. c. 2. Bucan. Instit. loc. 41. sect 15. Ames.
Medulla theol. c. 31. Altingius l c. com part 1. loc. 11. part. 181. aliiq.
Epist. ad Bezam.
which visibly is by living under Gospel Ordinances (for this is not properly
and immedi^tly vocation, and profession of faith, which is generally determined
to be the form of the Church,, and hence it is that the Word and Sacraments
which are appendages thereunto, being visible words, are the essential notes
of the Church) as Philosophy will own that saying, That the form of a man is
the union of the soul and body, for the soul is the form, though the union
thereof with the body, as the matter, make the man, but that the union of the
form with the matter should be the form, checks as much with good sense as
Philosophy.

As the Word and Prayer, so Baptism also, they think, to be more communicable,
and plead for the free admission of Infants, only the Lords Supper which
Christ instituted ad congregandam Ecclesiam, ad communionem societatemque must
be drawn (as Bullinger compl^^ins) ad Ecclesiam dispergendam, excommunionem (ut
sic dicam) and soparationem; but that most of the mediums which they use to
entrench the one Sacrament, will be subservient to reclude and restrain the
other, we have endeavored for merly to lay open.

They ask, Whether they can deny Baptis^^ to the child of any member how off
ensive soever, before the sentenceof cutting off poss upon him? Sic tu^sic
breviter, posita tibi Gorgone Pallas. You cannot justly make such denial, but
then we shall take leave to ask, Whether they can deny the Lords Supper to any
member before the sentence of cutting off pass upon him, or some notorious
crime done by him that may demerit that sentence? And (if they will cut off all
partial and prejudicious sentencing) they must be sensible that the same
reason will command them to give like answer as they receive, viz. that in
justice they cannot deny.

The children, they say, are not baptized in their own right, but in the
Churches; but what interest in the Churches rights have those infants which is
not rooted in their parents, and their relation to them? And the soederall
holiness which they speak of, is by the virtue of the promise made to the seed
of these parents that are in covenant with God. I know they take not the Church
Metonymically, for the Town or Country that contains it, for upon such an
account the children of Infidels born within that verge, might have right to
baptism. Neither do I understand how the right which the Church has to
baptize them is derived, but only from the Church membership of the parents,
or one of them. Now as our Laws tell us, that the derivative right cannot be
greater than the primitive; so the Laws of Philosophy assure us, Quod facit
tale debet esse magis tale, and therefore if the child be received unto one
Sacrament in the right of the Church, why in the same should not the parents be
admitted to the other, the right for the one and other being founded in the
Church Membership of the parents?

They look to see so much as may persuade them in charity to take a man's
profession to be serious, before they think him fit to come to the sealing and
distinguishing Ordinance. Not to reflect on what we hope we have formerly
demonstrated, that they only ought to look (unless they will look a-squint
upon their own ends and interest) upon their being Church Members, having a
Dogmatical faith, and not cut cut off by just sentence, nor meriting to be cast
out for notorious crimes, and that it is the proper duty of Charity to take
every man's profession for serious, whose life is not scandalous: I shall only
enquire into the reason why they appropriate the attribute of a sealing and
distinguishing ordinance to the Lords Supper, as if that notion distinguished it
from baptism, which were not capable of like denomination. Are not both the
Sacraments seals of Faith? Contra Parmen. l. 2, c. 13.
Are they not equally Signa sacra quibus distingucrentur cives Jerusalem etc.
as even now I alleged out of Halensis? Does not Augustine call them joynty
Characteres Ecclesiae, and the Fathers ordinarily t^sseras and signamilit, mis
Ec^lesiae? And therefore what argument they extract from their being sealing
and distinguishing ordinances, suits with, and may be accommodated to the one
Sacrament as well as the other; but if they fancy that both Sacraments equally
distinguish the Church from Infidel assemblies, but the one Sacrament only
makes a distinction in the Church of holy persons from those that are not
evidently such, we may perhaps for this find their dictates, but look long
enough for their arguments, Epist. ad Ionuil.
Nec a quoquam hactenus (says Gualth^r) idoneis and firmis argumentis
demonstratum fuisse vidimus exclusionis aut separationis symbolum ex ea sieri
debere qua Ecclesia colligi, and ejus unitas conservari atque foveri debet quo
nomine illam veteres (...) ^ixerunt.

A remote right may serve to bring in the child; but what is this remote right
in this case, is as remote from our understanding as from any clear explication
by them. If they mean a right derived from his parents profession of the faith,
then that which is a remote right in the child, is a near right in the parent;
and if the one may open a way to one Sacrament for the child, it may smooth the
way for the parents to the other. If they understand a possibility that the
child may hereafter be a serious professor; so may the parents, if at present
they be not, and if such a possibility may entitle to baptism, the child of a
Turk possibly may put in his claim thereto.

The Apologists might forbear more Essays of their Philosophy, unless they
were more lucky in venting them. I doubt they will have as little fruit and as
poor an Issue by Hagar as by Sara, and be as successlesse in c^urting the maid
as Penelope. They tell us a nearer right in actu primo, that is present and
visible, is necessary to a man's self.

It seems they fancy that the first must needs excel the second, and that
therefore Actus primus is a nobler and perfecter act then Secundus, but as the
first act is not so near as the second, (as principium quo is more remote than
principium quod) and the first act also cannot be known to be present and made
visible (as is their language) but by the second, for actus primus, (says
Scotus out of Aristotle) est facult as aut potentia rei antequam operetur
actualiter, res in habitu, secundus actus dicitur operatio ejus* so the second
act is more noble and perfect than the first, that being but as potentia in
respect of this, and upon this ground when the Neopelagians affirm, that prima
radix ex qua gratia vocatur effican in actu secundo, sumenda est ab eventu, seu
libera hominis cooperatione, Deo operante tantum posse convertere, sola
voluntate dante ipsum velle convertere; Ward gratia discriminans p. 314.
we thus argue to the contrary, that then potiores parts erunt voluntatis quam
gratiae, dei quam hominis, and to infer this we assert, that potiores sunt
ejus parts qui dat operari, quam ejus qui solum dat posse operari, est enim
actus secundus nobilior and perfectior quam actus primus vel habitus,
praesertim in spiritualibus and moralibus quae praxin recipient, cum habitus
tales sunt propter actus, and ordinentur ad actus tanquam finem. Besides, as an
Infant has reason in actu primo, though he cannot actually exercise it, so
even a baptized Infant has in actu primo a right to the Eucharist.

Their instance of a father sequestered whose ^on has the right of an heir, is
nothing opposite, for during the Fathers life the son has no actual right,
whose title begins when his fathers life ends, and then the sequestration also
I think determines, or else the heir must compound for enjoyment of his right;
I conceive a more apt and parallel resemblance in our controversy might be
taken from a father executed upon an attainder, Quaest. in V. T. q. 39. in Deuteronomy.
and then he has no heir, nor his son any thing inheritable, and hoc nunc agit
in Ecclesia excommunicatio quod tunc agebat interfectio, says Augustine,
though with this difference, non datur a morte regressus, at datur ab
excommunicatione.

It is a question, Whether formal excommunication it self, cut off the seed
from all Church privileges, and some think there is a dormant and virtual right
still: I suppose their is little question of a dormant or virtual right
(especially in order to those qui communionem interuam animo, fide and
resipiscextia retinent,) they are still in occulto membra, and jus manet
integrum, they being not east out, absolute, praecise, and finaliter, sed ad
tempus and sub condition, otherwise I think it would be requisite to rebaptize
them at their readmission: but what is all this to an actual right, which we
are disputing of, Ego postulabam rutra, sarcula hi negant, (according to the
Greek proverb:) for a virtual dormant right he may have, that yet cannot get
this possession, and a Child may have a virtual right thereunto without being
actually to be baptized, but when the parents are clearly ^ut off from all
actual outward communion, even those qui internam retinent, exclusi communionis
signo externo, Junius in con^ro. 7. Bell. l. 3. c. 6.
actu and usu, though they have a right, the use is provisionally taken away,
they are cut off materially, and excommunicatione signi secundum quid ordinata,
though not formaliter,, and absolutely by the definite sentence of God,
secundum ordinem ab hominibus, non secundum finem consilio Dei, Let him be to
thee an Heathen, to thee, modum externum homini praes^ribens, etsi internam
formam sibi and veritati reservans; so as though excommunication shut not out
from the mystical Church, nor clean from the visible, yet it does exclude from
fellowship with the visible in holy duties and privileges, and therefore when
this should be the case of the parents, it is very questionable whether the
Child should not be in the same condition with them, for the right and interest
which the Child has unto the privileges of external communion, are rooted in
the parents, and are traducted from them, and that also in the immediate
parents, Eccles. pol. l. 3. p. 87.
for else, (as Mr. Hooker observes,) many Children of Turks and Pagans might
have right to Baptism, whose mediate parents from whom after some descents
they issued, were Christians. And though not sins, yet the punishments as well as
privileges are traductive, as in Attainders.

And seeing they are rules of the Law, the one delivered by Ulpian, Nemo plus
juris ad alium transfer potest, quam ipse haberet, and another by Paulus, Non
debeo melioris conditionis esse quam auctor meus, a quo jus in mo transit;
wherewith also the rules of Logic and Philosophy are consonant, nihil dat quod
non habet, therefore unless one of the parents were a visible Churchmember,
(for in that case the matter would have some analogy with that mentioned 1 Cor.
7.14.) it may well be disputed, that if the parents be actually excluded from
the act and use of Ecclesiastical Communion, Godwin, Moses and Aaron, l. 5. c.
2. p. 223.
the Child also should be actually suspended from the privileges thereof, for
if they be as heathens, sure the Children of heathens have no right to
Baptism, and among the Jews (from whose pattern some would extract more
reverence to Church Censures) the male Children of those that were but under
Niddui were not circumcised.

Yet I am not ignorant that the ancient Church brought Infants to baptism,
August. Epist. 23. Chamiertom. 4. l. 5. c. 15. Sect 2.
which had been cruelly exposed by their parents unknown, as also a dominis
servuli offeruntur; which the French Churches have justified by a Canon before
remembered; but as it was to be presumed that those found within the pale of the
Church, were begotten of Christians; so the susceptors and sponsors undertook
and engaged for their education in the faith, were their parents as it were by
adoption, as the master was a father to his family. And I shall confess that
in this question concerning the baptizing of the Children of persons
excommunicate, there is no little reason, and much authority in that scale
which propends to the affirmative, but as the case seldom comes to be
discussed, seeing it rarely happens that both parents stand under such Censure;
so for my part (who desire to carry more conformity to the Spartan, in quibus
fidit vix aggrediens, than to the Athenian, audax supra vires,) I shall only
give in a special verdict, and leave the case to be argued by more learned
judges, for if I therein go beyond a sceptick, yet I advance not further than
an Academick, and in this Academy I had rather proceed than determine.

But in all these velitations against their dear brethren, surely the
Apologists have been pii inimici, they have not drawn much blood, non metuo ne
doleat quod tu ferias, they have only faced the enemy, and given a pop or two,
and raised a smoke, and then retreated without charging through, or engaging
any close fight, and indeed have resembled Caligula, who when he should have
cut the deep to the conquest of Britain, sounded his trumpets and gathered a
few cockle shells on the shore, and sent them abroad as the spoils of the
Country.

SECT. XXV.
Their great abuse and distortion of Scripture. With what a train of
consequences their arguments are far fetched. They are borrowed from the
Donatists, Papists, Brownists, Independents. None of them conclude the question
as themselves have stated it. The argument raised from 1 Cor. 14 40. examined.
Whether it be a glorious and comfortable practice, that none approach the Lords
Table, save holy persons. Whether their way be warranted by the Laws. The
moderating of Censures. Whether their way have like ground with the ancient
discipline in receiving in Penitents. Whether there be order and decency in
m^xt Communions. The lesser good to be omitted to acquire the greater. The
confusion and disorder of their way.

REs venit ad triarios, This is their third head, and their capital fortress,
viz. their pretended Scripture proofs, for pro divisione and discessione non
solum loquuntur ips, sed etiam divinos libros loqui persuadent, as Augustine,
but to this head which speaks Scripturas sine sensu, (as Hierom has it) we may
justly apply the motto which he set under the head whereby he represented the
world, Capu^ hellebore dignum, for it is stuffed with such wanton fancies and
erroneous wild notions, that Nescio an Antyciram ratio sibi destinet omnem.

First, They declaime much against polluting and profaning of the Sacrament,
but I wish they had had a more religious care not to have polluted and
profaned holy Scripture by such a lewd and abusive misapplication thereof, so
as to make us ashamed and abashed henceforth from upbraiding the Papists with
calling the sacred Scripture, a nose of wax, a leaden rule, a delphick sword, a
shoe fit for every foot etc. when those that pretend to be the great reformers
among us, are so guilty of that vitiosissimum dicendi genus (as Hierom calls
it,) De inven^or. rer. l. 4. c. 9.
depravare sententias, and in voluntatem suam Scripturam trahere repugnantem,
and as P^lidor Virgil speaks by occasion of a misinterpretation of Hostiensis,
detorquent sacras literas quo volunt, ac sutores sordidas solent dentibus
extendere pelles, for I do sadly profess to think, that scarce in that great
Martyrologue of Scripture, the Popes Decretals, shall you find it put to much
more torture, or set upon a more violent rack, then sometimes you may see it
here in this new body of Extravagants, (...).
so that an equal and unprejudiced Reader will be facil to imagine, that upon
some other motive they first pitched upon the opinion, and then set their wits
to work to find out arguments the best they could to maintain it, and so fell
upon that magna and usitata hominum peruersitas which Augustine complains of,
In Psalm. 48. coucio. 1. tom. 8. p. 93.
(eloquia divina) qui volunt ad sui cordis peruersitatem detorquere potius,
quam suum cor ad eorum rectitudinem corrigere -- and cum debent ipsi vivere
secundum voluntatem dei, deum volunt vivere secundum voluntatem suam, and cum
ipsi nolunt corrigi, illam volunt depravari, certum non arbitrantes quod ille
vult, sed quod illi volunt, but the doctrine must needs be of the generation of
vipers, that to be brought forth rents and tears the bowels of that which it
pretends to be its mother, and as Architects say a crack in the foundation of
the largeness of half a Barley corn, makes a huge cleft in the superstructure;
so when the foundation is so rent and broken, the fabric can have no strength
or stabillty.

Secondly, As Thrasyllus in his distemper at Athens thought every Ship that
arived in the harbor to be his; so what they find of Separation, or of trial,
or of eschewing evil company, they catch after it and appropriate it to be in
order to the Sacrament, and upon such account, I more wonder that their proofs
are no more, than that they are so many in number, especially while they are of
so little weight, that I think I may say without disparagement of some of them,
what Augustine says of the world, Mundi facies tanta rerum labe contrita est,
ut etiam speciem seductionis amiserit. As few, very few of their arguments have
any reference to the matter, ( viz. the Sacrament) which is neither mentioned
nor meant in almost any of the texts alleged; so some of them have no
agreement or conformity so much as in words or terms, not so much as the old
Priests paveant illi had to have the Chancel paved by the parish, or the late
Quakers, lay hands suddenly on no man, to forbid an arrest: that a man might be
tempted to doubt whether the Apologists were of the same mind with Joseph
Stephanus, who after his abuse of the Scripture for kissing the Popes feet,
concluded, gaudeo five per veritatem sive per occasionem Romanae Ecclesiae
digni atem extolli, or with the Author of the tumultuary Apology, who
professes in the case of Bernard, It is no fault to interpret Scriptures
bejond their meaning, as long as it is done to confirm (that which they
suppose) Godliness. And whereas they may suggest, that though the Sacrament be
not expressly mentioned or directly meant, yet by consequence it may be applied
thereunto; I shall answer, (besides the denial of the hypothesis, the falsehood
whereof shall be evidenced in examination of the particular texts) that when
the consequents are of so many links, and the difficulty such to discern how
they hitch and hang together, they cannot bind our understandings in any strong
chains, for if one link lip, nothing holds; and as in ancient pedigrees if in
any one descent the mother played false, the stream of succession is stopped or
turned, a vitiated blood enters the veins and channels, and that issue is not
of the first noble off spring; so if one consequence be not ge^uine but
spurious, it is not the issue of the first principle, nor descended from it,
but a bastard generation, and who will not say of this discipline of theirs
(which they pretend to be of divine institution, and press to be so necessary
to reformation) as Ames tells the Papists of their Sacrament of penance;
Magnum praejudi^ium ex co patitur sacramentum paenitentiae, Bell. enervat. tom.
4. p. 202.
quod paers ejus primaria (confesso) non potest Scripturae ullo testimonio
probari sine tam prolixa circuitione consequnetiarum, and ratiocinationum,
quarum vim si firma esset, ut vulgus fidelium perciperet, non esset tamen
expectandum.

Thirdly, They have forgotten that rule of Pythagoras, Ne gustes quibus nigra
est cauda, and with more blame remind not the example of the Prophet, not to
eat of the dainties of the workers of iniquity. They will have no communion in
the Sacrament with men that are not evidently good, but they will have
communion in arguments with those that are manifestly evil; if they cannot
flectere superos (and therefore they disparage and decline the Fathers) they
will Acheronta movere, and fetch auxiliar forces from the Donatists and
Papists, Brownists, and (though they will perhaps take no shame at that) the
Independents; and like Amazia will hire those Armies to go with them, which the
Lord is not with, so that Noscitur ex^comite, and we may guess for whom they
sow, and who will reap the harvest, by seeing whose heysers they plow withal:
and though I do not think that albeit they are symbolizantia elementa, that
therefore they are facile transmutabilia in respect of all those parties; yet
as he is in a desperate case that goes to Witches for help, so also -- timeo
Danaos et dona ferentes, 1. Aug. l. cont. Donatist. post coll. c. 20. and
alibi. 2. Contra ^^p. Parmen. l 3. c. 2.3. Ibid. l. 2. c. 21 and cont. lit.
Petil. l. 2. c. 106. 4. Brevio. collat. cum Donat. 3. diei. tom. 7. p. 118. 5.
Cont. Donat. post Coll. c. 8. and 20. 6. Apud Whitak Contro. 1. q. 2. c. 17. p.
308. and Chamier tom. 1 l. 10. c. 8. 7. Bellar. de Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 16.
Chamier. tom. 3. l. 2. c. 12. 8. Bellar. de poenitent. l. 3. c. 3. Lorinus in
locum. 9. Bayleis disswas. c 7. p. 172. Mr. Bal. answer to Can part 2. p. 67.
and as that splayfooted Grecian when he had lost his shoes, wished they might
be fit for his feet that found and detained them; so it cannot be doubted, that
it is no right foot which a crooked shoe will so well suit with.

First, That which is the substance of the Argument deduced from 2 These. 3.6.
viz. The necessity of a corporal withdrawing our selves from every brother that
walks inordinately.

Secondly, That of 1 Cor. 5.11. With such a one no not to eat.

Thirdly, The 1 Timothy 5.22. Neither be partaker of other men's sins.

Fourthly, That of Nahum. 1.15. The wicked shall no more pass through thee.

And Fifthly, That of Isa. Non adjiciet ultra per se transire incircumcisus and
immundus, (which is materially the same with those texts which they allege,
Joel 3.17. and Zachar. 14.21.) all those were used by the Donatists to confirm
their Schism, and separating themselves from those whom they supposed evil,
and were not cast out by excommunication: for though some of those portions of
Scripture, have been alleged by the Orthodox party, to prove that scandalous
and flagitious persons ought to be excommunicated, yet the producing of them to
assert a separation from those that are not duly so censured, and from others
for a culpable neglect, or prudential omission of such censures, upon pretense
of an else inevitable participation of sin, is a symptom of Donatisme and a
symbolizing therewith.

Sixthly, That of Matthew 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto Dogs, etc. is
upon like account alleged by the Papists to forbid men the reading of the
Scripture, as it is produced by them to exclude others from the Sacrament.

Seventhly, That of Heb. 13.17. Obey them that h^ve the rule over you, etc.
serves Bellarmine as suitably to prove the Pope may make Laws to bind the
conscience, and others to support a blind obedience as it can help them to, or
establish them in that power which they claim and exercise.

Eighthly, That of Leviticus 13.5. is brought forth by Bellarmine and Lorinus
upon account of the like reason, to justify auricular confession, as they
produce it to ratify their examination.

And Ninthly, That of 2 Chronicles. 13.19. is a protrite Argument among the
Brownists and Independents to enforce an exclusion from Church fellowship, at
it is used by them to evince a repulse from Sacramental communion. Therefore as
King Richard the first when he sent the armor of Philip the martial Bishop of
Beavoys to the Pope, (who demanded his son of the King when he had imprisoned
him,) said, This we found, see if it be thy sons coat or no; so I shall say,
those Arguments we found, see if they are proper to Orthodox Divines, or not.

Fourthly, they are so set upon suspensions and castings out, that they have
excommunicated their question, and will not touch or have any communion
therewith. They in the ninth Section stated the question in those terms;
Whether in the reforming of a long corrupted Church, it be necessary, that all
the members thereof do submit to some examination or trial of their knowledge,
before they be admitted to the Lords Table.] It seems the question is grown
suddenly a Leper, and therefore is shut out, and not to be touched. It has been
showed in answer to that Section, that this question is concluded in none of
their Syllogismes, That none of the texts from which they conclude, mentions or
intends examination or the Sacrament divisively, much less conjunctly
examination precedaneous to the Sacrament, (one excepted where the examination
is active, not passive, a man to examine himself, not to be examined by
another.) None prescribes a withdrawing from, a noting, a not eating with,
shutting up, or giving out, not casting pearls, giving holy things to men
ignorant, but scandalous, and all that can be with the strongest heat distilled
from those Texts, is only the casting out of notorious sinners, not the taking
in of any until upon probation they have demonstrated their true holiness.
Most of the texts forbid a familiar and sociall unnecessary conversation with
wicked men, not a communion in the Sacrament. Those which may seem to prohibit
their partaking of holy things, do deny them generally, and absolutely, there
is no limitation or restraint of the prohibition to the Lords Supper, and as
there is no restriction in relation to the matter, so neither any determination
or fixing of the time and special occasion, as that it must be done only in
the reforming of a long corrupted Church. Many of the commands are negative,
and whatsoever their obligation be, obligant semper and ad semper, not only in
times of reforming, and the affirmative commands are indefinite and absolute,
binding always upon all occasions, they are sure, and stand fast for ever and
ever. So the Apologists have herein dealt like the French, who when they have
pricked a tune, do not sing after it, and like the Ostrich, when they have laid
their eggs, they leave them in the earth, and only warm them with dust.

But as we have viewed the general affections of their arguments, so let us
take a survey of what agrees to them in special.

Of those Texts which contribute more or less to warrant their practice, (it
seems they are conscious that some pay in but a little contribution, and we are
confident that none do much) the first in their (no doubt but) decent order, is
1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in order. But if this be the
capital proof (as Iustine speaks of Epaminondas, slain at the battle of
Mantinaea, The head of the spear being taken off, the trunk would do little
hurt; so if this head of their argumentation be so blunt, and the edge thereof
so easily rebated, we may more boldly venture upon the residue: for sure this
proof might not only have been removed from the tribe, and been debarred its
sufferage, but it is not capable to be among the very Aerarii, it can pay no
contribution, it is so poor, only they will set it among the proletarii to
beget one argument the more in number.

First, I might rationally enough, if I would raise arguments ad hominem (only
art perire sua) retort their own words, that the Apostles scope is far from
the business in hand, for as is the judgment of Aquinas, Estius, Piscator,
Menochius; etc. all things here mentioned are only the things spoken of
before, Decency referring to the habit and silence of women, Order relating to
the use of spiritual gifts, and their speaking not together, but one after
another, first one then another for exercise of them, but I shall acknowledge
that general Rules are applicable to all particulars of the same kind and
nature, and whatsoever can be derived from any thing was contained in it.

Secondly, In locum.
itis well observed by Musculus, Non est universalis vocula trahenda ad omnia
quae temere sunt in Ecclesia introducta -- sed quae legitime and necessorie
gerenda sunt in Ecclesia, decenter and ordine competenti gerantur; So as first
they should have proved the matter to be lawful and necessary, and then suit
the manner of doing it to order and decency.

Thirdly, from this proposition, All things should be done decently and in
order, they can never extract any conclusion for them, but by an Assumption,
(which will be whipped away for begging the question) that their doings are
decent and orderly; the first is as cheerfully as necessarily conceded, the
later no less strongly denied by us than asserted by them: this is our
controversy, and the issue we have joined upon them, and the determination of
the question depends upon what has been produced on either side, and to give
in a verdict, there had need be a view of all the pleadings, and an examination
of all the evidence produced.

Fourthly, the Text alleged is but a remote and mediate principle for proof of
their practice, the order and decency thereof is to be the proximate and
immediate ground of its approbation; for the Scripture only says in general,
things ought to be done decently and in order, but that such a particular way
is orderly and decent, depends upon the considerations of rectified reason, and
godly prudence, and things have their chief dependence upon their nearest
causes and principles, and upon this reflection it is that they deny that those
humane laws do properly bind the conscience, which obliege not in respect of
the matter thereof, because they bind not primo and per se, sed secundario
atque mediate, and per accidens ab ordinatione Dci, not in their proper nature,
but in another, viz. that principle, Let every soul be subject, etc.

Fifthly, this is an itinerant Topic, and a common argument, and may be
impressed to serve me against them, and will muster among my Forces, who am as
certain to have made it evident, that their way is not decent nor orderly, as
they are confident to have proved it to be so. Eccles. l. 3. c 4.
And if order be as Iunius out of Augustine, Per quem aguntur omnia quae
constituit Deus, and the rules and directions which now or at other times had
or should be given by the Apostle, and the Rule of Decency be the custom of
the Church, (as Dr. Hammond notes,) (not the singularities or innovations of
private or particular men) then we are yet to seek of any such rule or direction
of Scripture, and by no search can we find, that the Churches of God had any
such custom.

Sixthly, if they had evidenced their way to be decent and orderly, yet that
could only rise to justify it self, not reach to condemn another, it might
warrant the setting up thereof, not condemn the pulling down of all beside,
another way might be as orderly and decent as that, for these have some
latitude, and consist not in a point, though unum and verum convertuntur, yet
one and orderly or decent are not so convertible, In locum.
and Ordo Ecclesiasticus aliis atque aliis locis non modo diversus sod saepe
contrarius ad aedificationem facere potest, says Paraeus. Every lawful or
good thingis not by and by necessary, as was before recited out of Camero, qui
salubres cibi sunt, non continuo necessarii, there is no necessity incumbent on
any man to eat all or any one determinate meat that is wholesome, especially
when he has no stomach to it, or is already satisfied with it.

Seventhly, when this text was produced by the Episcopal party, to warrant
some ceremonies, I know who denied the argument, T.C.
and asked why we should hang our judgment upon the Churches sleeve, and why in
matters of Order more than in matters of Doctrine? But however this be a rule
by which things belonging to the policy of the Church, are to be regulated in
Discipline and Rites, and things indifferent, not specially determined by
Scripture, yet the matters that fall under such regulation bind not the
conscience of themselves, and with such constitutions God is not worshipped,
says Paraeus, In locum ibid.
and they are left free and alterable to the will and pleasure of the Church to
constitute or abrogate; and that also which this power determines, is not de re
aut substantia, sed rei externa precuratione, Camero de verbo Dei. p. 463.
Contr. 4. de Eccles. q. 7. tom. 2. p. 715.
and the determination binds only quia oportet unumquemque stude epaci, and
they are to be observed, non ut his conscientia implicetur nisi propter
scandalum and contemptum legitimae authoritatis, alias res ipsas esse medii
generis, as Whitaker affirms. And therefore though they bravingly avow, That
this text well managed will justify against all the world such courses (as
have an excellent and holy use in the Church) (which use that their course
has, is a principle that needs no proof) for want of better managery, that
which they have setcht to fight for them, does convert its arms against them,
and surrenders up that strength which they set it to keep, for now their
Discipline which they held out for the express will of God, so great a part of
the kingdom of Christ, and so essential and necessary to reformation, and for
the introducing of this their order have put the Church so much out of order,
is yet become only a matter of Decency and Order, which owes its spring to the
Churches will, and may take its fall at her pleasure, -- sic transit gloria
mundi. And thus like the Dolphins in an eager pursuit of their prey, they dash
themselves upon the r^cks.

They conceive, and say it is confessed, That it were a glorious and
comfortable thing if none but holy persons did draw near to this holy table,
and they assume, A general Rule will bear up a glorious and comfortable
practice in the Church. And if that be the Proposition and this the Assumption,
what I beseech you is like to be, or what is likely they intend should be the
conclusion, which among so many terms we can upon no terms make out? This may
be some of Chrysippus his Logic, which the Gods would have used, but men were
too dull to understand the use thereof. If they intend that a glorious and
comfortable practice will be born up by this command, to do all things decently
and in order, I suppose it would be better supported by its proper strength,
formally as it is a glorious and comfortable practice, more than as decent and
orderly, but then what is this practice? viz. that only holy persons draw near
the holy table. Be it so, let that be a glorious and comfortable practice, as
they can take no glory, so neither can we any comsort, if they should thence
infer, therefore they may debar from coming all those of whose holiness they
are not convinced. We have elsewhere showed, they are several questions, and
of sundry latitudes, who should come, and who ought to be admitted; none may be
excluded but for crimes notorious, but it is enough that they are not
scandalous to make them capable to be received. And I hope we have sufficiently
demonstrated, that all that having a Dogmatical faith are members of the Church,
which is Christ's family, have a right to eat at his Table, and common sense
will show, that those that are not cut off from Ecclesiastical communion,
cannot be kept off from the main part thereof, communion in Sacraments. If then
none but holy persons shall draw to the holy table, all Church members must be
holy, really I mean, for relatively they are so, but all the whole visible
Church collectively shall be sincerely holy, when any the parts thereof
distributively are perfectly holy, and that shall be only when we come to eat
and drink at his table in his Kingdom. An holy and blameless Church without
spot or wrinkle is indeed glorious, but it is gloriae patriae, non viae, a
glory reserved for the triumph, not bestowed during the warfare, and it is now
so glorious only in the hope it shall be; here her falrness is but comparative
among Women, in respect of the rest of the world, inter animas terrenas, non
autem inter evangelicas beatitudines, says Bernard. The subject matter
therefore of glory and comfort bears resemblance with that of vows, things
possible, lawful, and acceptable to God; but to put all from communion in
Sacraments save the truly holy is neither possible, Boni nunquam soli sunt nisi
in caelo (says Gregory,) there will be tares still among the Wheat, even Vsq,
ad messem, and messores angeli, nor lawful, because contrary to the command,
sinite crescere, and says Augustine, Vsurpant sibi homines ante messem, quod
angeli in mess facturi sunt; nor acceptable to God, because it cannot be fine
eradicatione tritici, sine labe unitatis, sine corruptione vinculi pacis, and
periculo schismatis. Many things may seem glorious and comfortable, which yet
are not possible to be effected, nor may sometimes be lawfully attempted. It
were a glorious and comfortable thing that Philosophers were Kings, and Kings
Philosophers, yet it should be piacular to pull down Kings and set up
Philosophers. It were glorious and comfortable that every man which had a title
to an estate in the exterlour Court, had also a right in the interior, and
that dominion were founded in grace; yet it is not lawful to disseise or out
any man of his freehold, that holds not over by fealty of the high Lord of all.
It were a glorious and comfortable thing if there were an harmony of spirits
between a man and his wife, Nec male inaequales veniant ad aratra juvenci, but
if a man be unequally yoaked and shrewdly matched, yet I think the Apologists
(whatsoever their lot be) do not suppose it lawful to turn the wife to grass,
and plow with a tamer heifer. It were I should think, a glorious and
comfortable thing, if every one that assumes to be a wise man in print, could
justly pretend to much art, and that every one that serves in the Tabernacle
had not only bells of pure gold, but also jewels of Egypt, wherewith to
adorn and furnish it; but though the Apologists say they pretend not to much
art, yet they would have sensed it an injury to have been suspended from the
Press, and much more (and I confess more justly) resent the wrong to be
repelled from their office and Benefice.

Lastly, it were a glorious and comfortable thing, if all that were planted and
watered in the Church by baptism, were only the branches in Christ bearing
fruit, and themselves purged to bring forth more fruit; that all that hear did
receave the word with faith, and all that did pray did pray in faith, and
lifted up their hearts with their hands to God in the Heavens, but yet the
Apologists are not advanced to such a latitude of separation as to admit none
to these Ordinances, but such only whom they have tried to be thus conditioned
and qualified.

It is such another argument that is used by Tapper for merit, It is, says he,
glorious for the Saints to demand heaven as victors and triumphers, as a palm
due to their sweats. That diminutive of nothing, Man, will still rob God of his
glory, not only by want of people, in the multitude whereof is the Kings
honor, (as Augustine to this purpose applies that of Prove. 14.28.) Contra Ep.
Par. l. 2. c. 19.
but in undertaking to define what is glorious, better than the King of glory,
and as if a Noli altum sapere were not sufficient to restrain and bound their
presumption, they will be sapientiores Altissimo.

Is their way so glorious and comfortable, as that among them none but holy
persons draw near to the holy table? Si verum est, non invideo, atque utinam id
perfect fiat, as Augustine to his Donatists; but sure if they say that their
society is free from all vice, not only pride (as the same Father,) but
untruth will be greater vices. Is there no way so likely as theirs to cause
more persons, with more holiness to approach to that holy table? we suppose the
contrary, and that -- peragit tranquilla potestas
Quod violenta nequit.


It is (as they say is confessed) the Ministers misery that he must admit all;
he is then miser but not miserabilis, for he may in a regular way repel the
scandalous and obstinate: but if he will assume a power to exclude those which
are not such, he will translate the misery upon the people, yet if the tares
stand so thick that they cannot be eradicated without hazard of the Wheat,
without losing of the bands of unity, or breaking those of peace, Let him take
up my Cross (says Christ,) it is Crux Christi, non sua, imposed not
contracted, in such a case nihil aliud boni^ restat quam gemitus, says
Augustine, and Levius fi patientia
Quicquid corrigere est nefas.
As the Prophet Shemaiah told Reboboam, ye shall not go up nor fight against
your brethren, for that thing is of me; so the sinite crescere is from God
which binds them to peace; Non ergo quaerat quis separatos justos, Contra
Parmen. l. 3. c. 5. tom. 7. p. 15.
sed cum ipsis potius in malorum tem, orali commixtione concorditer gemat --
justi gemunt and moerent ob iniquitates quae sunt in medio little. And therefore
whereas they say, it could be no misery but as it is sin, they might have
reminded that they were remarkable good men which mourned for that, which
though they could not correct, yet it was another sin not their own, yet had
been their sin also if it had not been their sorrow, Ubi supra. l. 2. c. 3.
Quia eos corrigere non potuerunt, nec ab unitate dei se ullo modo separare
volebant, pro merito innocentissimae tolerantiae suae signari meruerunt, atque
in illorum perditorum vastatione atque interitu liberari. It Is true every evil
of sin in another, that becomes not an evil of pain to us, converts into a
sinful evil, but while there is a generation of unregenerate men in the world,
though they approach not to the holy table, yet we must go out of the world, or
else we shall eat among them the bread of tears, and drink tears, for the
dishonor done by them to God; and in the Church, why should it be a greater
misery to have fellowship in the Sacrament with men not really holy, than to
hold society with them in the Ordinances of the Word and Prayer, I am yet to
seek, and the Apologists to show the reason. Such as are not really holy are
the immediate Objects of the first grace, and of the Ordinances of Christ, the
conveyances of that grace, and if God will have them saved voluntate signi, and
hold forth the fruits of Christ's death unto them in the promises of grace and
salvation, which death is represented, and which promises are sealed, and which
graces promised are exhibited by the Sacraments as moral instruments, they (as
long as they are relatively holy, and in external Covenant with God, and
members of the visible Church,) how can they be thurst out from the
inheritance, that possibly may not be the sons of a strange Woman, or be denied
the seals, when they have the writings of that inheritance, unless only by
those whose eyes are evil because Gods are good, and such eyes as cannot abide
the son of righteousness to arise upon them, who are but as bad as once the
best of them were: Meminerint sane, De Civit. Dei, l 1. c 35. Luke 13.7, 8.
(says Augustine) in ipsis inimicis suos latere cives futuros. When the Master
of the Vineyard commanded the tree to be cut down that bare no fruit, the
servants interceded, that it might stand longer to be dug about and dunged,
but now when the Master would keep it under longer culture, the servants think
it cumbreth the ground, and Jonas is fierce when God is patient, and had rather
Ninivch were destroyed then his late sprung gourd should be blasted.

They are sollicious to legitimate their practice by a warrant from the Laws
which are in force, but as we dispute not now what bears the Test of the
Common Pleas of men, but the Vpper-bench of Heaven, and what has Commission
from him, that is Deus essentialiter, not them that are Dii nuncupative; so we
are assured, there is no established Law that was the Mother to bring forth, or
the Nurse to cherish this Discipline, which is the Son of a strange Woman,
which the Law will not allow to inherit, there being no good Law that has
begot this evil manner of proceeding: For as for the Ordinances which they say
authorize the keeping back of the ignorant and scandalous (which are not
dismounted (as they pretend) with those that made them) they do no more
fortify their works, nor desend their way, than the Law that commands to hang
a thief justly convicted upon a legal trial, warrants them to hang any one
without a judicial process that has not satisfied them with some evidence that
he is a true man. And therefore that the Phantasmes or judgments of any
particular men should become the Law of Order and Decency (as Hicrom says of
Origin, Ingenii sui acumina putat Ecclesiae esse Sacramenta) is neither orderly
nor decent, and for every man to do that which is right in his own eyes, is
rather the consequent of no Law in Israel; and anomiam habet omnis autonomia,
says Herodotus.

But they hope the higher powers howsoever will satisfy the just desires of
the godly herein; and so they do, and yet not comply with their desires which
are not just, nor are they the only godly. Perchance such hopes made them like
the Tamarynd, to look toward the Sun and disclose themselves, and like Lions to
be fierce in a warm Sun; but why should they forestal and outrun the Law which
is only in hope, not yet in being, unless they are like Diogenes, who at the
rise of the Macedonian Empire, would be buried with his face downward, for when
things should be turned up side-down, then should he lie right.

They will not undertake to speak the mind of the higher powers; nor dare we to
pry into, or re-search it; only we know that annucre is one thing, connivere
another: that voluntas signi and beneplaciti are things different; that when
men are taken up with chasing the wild Boar, though they have no vacancy, nor
can be distracted to hunt the little Foxes, yet hey do not allow them, and that
in the first clearing up and forming of things, though -- Congestaque codem,
Non been junctarum discordia seminarerum;
yet Hanc Deus and melior litem natura diremit. And then Et quae pressa diu
massa latuere sub ipsa,
Sydera caeperunt toto fulgescere coelo.


But let them have the power of excluding, yet are they sensible of no
considerations that may suspend or restrain the act and exercise thereof? --
Desaevit in omnes,
Dum se posseputat.
Not to mention the judgment of the wisest among the Romans, Cato, though not
altoge her impertinent to this concernment, Potentes parce sua potestate
utantur, fic diuturniores came habituros, and invidiam evasuros aut
restricturos; And what the Poet could say. Vtatur toto fulmine rara manus:
Saint Augustine had a different sense who has set up several boundaries, and
brought forth some fetters for the limi^ing and binding up the very power of
binding and loosing. Non eo usque progrediatur dementiae potius temeritas, De
fid. and operib. c. 27. tom. 4. p. 18.
quam severitas diligentiae, ut quasi bonos a malis per nefariaschismata
separare praesumat; and he warrants us, That ubi hoc facere pacis and
tranquillitatis gratia non permittimur, non tamen ideo Ecclesiam negligimus,
sed toleramus quae nolumus, ut perveniamus quo volumus, utentes cautela
praecepti dominici, ne cum voluerimus ante tempus colligere zizania, Contra.
Don post Collat. 20. In concord. Evang. c. 72. p. 457.
simul cradicemus and tritieum, utentes etiam exemplo and praecepto beati
Cypriani, qui Collegas suos saeneratores, fraudatores, raptores, pacis
contemplatione pertulit talis, nec little contagione factus est talis And what
Jansenius delivers concerning fraternal correption, I conceive to be applicable
to this way of correction, that it being an affirmative precept, Secundum
naturam and conditionem talium, non obligat pro omni tempore, sed pro eo solum
tempore and loco quo opportuna and utilis est ejus observatio and executio.

The ancients had no particular warrant from the word as to their orders of
paenitents and courses about them, besides this general rule of doing things in
Order and Decency. We are fully atoned with this opinion, which yet will not
advantage the Apologists. For

1. The Church had a power, founded in Divine Institution, to cast out of the
Church such as continued obstinate in Scandal, and to restore them upon their
repentance; but the Apologists usurp a power to shut out from the Sacrament
such as continue Members of the Church, and are not duly censured for any
notorious crimes.

2. When the action was thus warranted, the time of undergoing their penance,
the manner thereof, and the steps and degrees of their restitution, was but the
formality and circumstances of the Action, which lying without the
comprehension of Order and Decency, fell under the determination of the Church,
whose power regularly moves in three Spears only, 1. To publish the
Commandment of Christ. 2. By their Censures to punish Offenders against the
same. 3. In prescribing things that pertain to comeliness and order. Field of
the Church, l. 4. c. 31. p. 396, l. 2. obs. 22. p. 319.
Ecclesia (says Albaspinus) ut ligandihabet, and solvendi potestatem, dubitat
nemo quin rationem quoquo pacto solui posset inire prorsus suo jure potuerit --
quippe adjuncta haec sunt and circumstantiae, ipsa paenitentia non sunt; But
that which we dispute against in the Apologists, is not any formality or
circumstance, but the action it self, and which properly comes not within the
list or rank of things of order and decency unless perhaps in a general
acception, as whatsoever is agreeable to rule is orderly, and what is contrary
thereunto is out of order; Ordini contrariatur quicquid inordinate agitur, as
Tully long since said, Et quicquid peccatur, perturbatione ordinis peccatur,
accordingly Quod decet honestum est, et quod honestu^ est decet; justa omnja
decora sunt, injusta contra; but taking order and decency in this notion, the
Church has no power to make Laws in things of such concernment; but Order in
this place of the Apostle comprehends the circumstances of season, time, and
place; and comeliness includes that gravity and modesty in the performance of
the works of Gods service, which beseems actions of that nature, Field. Vbi
supra.
and such Rites as may cause respect unto the things performed, and thereby
excite men to greater devotion, or express such spiritual affections and
motions as are or should be in them, but the pretended order and course of the
Apologists is of a far different kind and nature.

3. The ancient church held not forth that manner and degrees of penance as a
Divine Institution, nor necessarily implicating the conscience, but as an act
of Discipline of a medious and indifferent nature (when abstracted from their
positive Constitution) and therefore it was transitory in respect of time, and
ambulatory in regard of place, not always nor every where observed. But as
their Discipline has no Ecclesiastical Constitution like a great sum to obtain
its freedom in the Church, so they pretend it was free born, and is of divine
not humane Establishment; and therefore they prevaricate and betray their Cause
when they compare it to that Model of Discipline for the Paeniten's, and do
interpretatively and virtually acknowledge it has only a like foundation with
that, which also they confess had no particular warrant from the Scripture,
save this general rule of doing things in order and decency, which was no
special or immediate command for the same, but only a Praecept, That the Church
should do what seemed orderly and decent, and in this very particular what
seemed so in one age and place, did not in another.

4. There is yet a greater difference between their Discipline and that of the
old Paenitents, this being only in a thing not specially determined by
Scripture, and theirs is against what the Scripture has determined, as we
conceave we have sufficiently evidenced.

They have now distilled the Spirits of this Argument into a Syllogism, and we
must taste the strength thereof. Where is no due order in Sacramental
Administrations there Gods Will is not observed; but where all are admitted,
there is no Order; Ergo.

If we grant the whole, we part with nothing, nor get they any thing; we shall
only make them a Magicians Feast, which costs nothing to prepare, nor will any
way strengthen them to take; for where are all admitted de facto (infants,
madmen, excommunicate etc.) or who says all are to be so de jur^? It is only
Church Members who have a Dogmatical Faith, which have neither torn the
Evidence of their Title, by being cut off, nor bloted it by any such scandal as
merits cutting off, whose admission we plead for The Minor (and their Arguments
are all minors) they prove; Where there is mixture, and confusion of good and
bad, fit and unfit, there is no Order: but where all are admitted is this
mixture. They do not well see what can be denied here; and least we should
disparage their eyesight, we shall deny nothing thereof, but they may put all
their gain in their eyes (according to the proverb) but least as bad eyes
infect one the other, so some others also be like Tychonius of whom Augustine
speaks, Statim quippe amore sententiae suae contra veritatem oculum claufit,
and may seem to see this Argument to be unanswerable also, as it looks with an
opposite aspect and adverse influence upon our Thesis, and that to admit all in
that qualified and restrained sense is in consistent also with order and
comeliness, therefore to undeceive them, advertant, ea quae oculos etiam caecos
seriant, intueantur.

^. Let them borrow the same Proposition, and advance it to a Major; Where
there is mixture and confusion of good and bad, there is no order, and then
yoke it with a Minor, where the subject only is changed, and render it thus,
Where all are admitted to Church Membership, to the Word and Prayer, there is
such mixture, etc. And then see what a conclusion it will draw after it, and if
they be not now as mute as a Fish, but have any piece of answer found in their
mouths, let them give it for me and them.

Let them remind what we have often mentioned out of Augustine, Mixtus reis and
obnoxiis nifi per conscientiae maculatam consensionem nullus recte dici potest,
and that bonus malis nullo modo misceripotest, so as then first here can be no
mixture of good and bad.

Thirdly, men may be said to be bad and unfit simply and absolutely, or
respectively, according to their sense and construction; if simply and
absolutely such as are guilty of gross palpable ignorance of the very
principles of the faith, or of notorious crimes, scandals obstinately persisted
in, though we should grant them their conclusion, we yield nothing of the
cause, but if they understand all those to be bad and unfit, who though
Church Members and Dogmaticall believers, have not approved by trial their
sound knowledge and sincere holiness unto them, we shall deny what they have
not proved, and we have now had proof that they cannot prove, hat such are bad
or unfit, or that where all in this accommodate sense are admitted, there is no
order, all such are relatively though not really holy and fit, (and many of
those to whom they give admission, are not really worthy.) If they are worthy
to partake of the prayers, Quoted before
they are not unworthy to communicate of the S^crament in the judgment of
Chrysostom And if they are not unworthy, says Chamier, of the peace of the
Church, they are not unworthy of the Sacrament, and if worthy to be reckoned to
be of the body of Christ, (that is members of his Church) they are not unworthy
to feed on him.

Besides, although simply the casting out, or non-admission of persons
criminous, may be consonant to order, yet resp^ctively to the procuring or
conserving a greater good, or avoiding a more mischievous evil, it may not be
orderly. Although we may not do evil that good may ensue, yet we may and must
pass over or omit a l^sser good to acquire a greater; And since malus bonum
vehementius excitat, movet, impellit voluntatem, therefore regularly non potest
voluntas inserius bonum eligere quia electio non est nisi ex consultatione
rationis, consultatio vero non fit nisi fact a collatione inte multa, ut
eligatur quod utilius exc^teris. and malum qua malum voluntas velle non potest,
at minus bonum cum majore collatum habet mali speciem and rationem. And we see
that not only in rational creatures, inferior reason which presents to the
mind of man some circumstances, may incline him to that, which superior reason,
that looks into things with all circumstances, diverts him from, and yet there
is only a diversity, no contrariety between the one and other, because they
are not in respect of the same circumstances, and only a subordination no
repugnancy, because the one yields to the other; so even in natural things we
find that particular natures deny themselves in obedience to the universal,
and parts renounce their proper interest for conservation of the whole, as we
see air to descend, and water to have an ascent to avoid a vacuum; so lest the
Church should suffer a vacuity by rooting up the wheat, among such a multitude
as are pretended to be pulled up for tares, August. cont. ep. Parmen. l. 1. c.
11. tom. 6 p. 9.
and to prevent Schism which may arise from the animosity of one part, and the
faction and singularities of the other; inferior order in things of lesser
concernment, must strike and vail to superior order in things of greater
consequence. But apparet facile non esse quicquam gravius sacrilegio
schismatis, quia praecidendae unitatis nulla est justa necessitas, cum sibi
nequicquam spiritualiter nocituros malos ideo tolerant boni, ne spiritualiter
sejungantur a bonis, cum disciplinae se veritatem consideratio custodiendae
pacis refraenat, aut differt.

And whose device it is under pretense of severity of Discipline to introduce
and foment divisions, Ibid l. 3. c. 1.
St. Augustine tells by occasion of that 2 Cor. 2.11. ut non possideamur a
Sathana, etc. says he, Ipse est qui per imaginem quasi justae severitatis
crudelem saevitiam perfundit, nihil aliud appetens venenosissima versutia sua,
nisi ut corrumpat atque dirumpat vinculum pacis and charitatis, quo conservato
inter Christianos vires ejus omnes invalidae fiunt ad nocendum, etc.

But that we may not be left, as Cicero says of himself in the quarrel
betwixt Caesar and Pompey, Nosse se quem fugere, ignorare quem sequi debeat, as
they have showed us the wrong way, so now they hold forth the right, and that
is their way, That course which does naturally and directly set up order and
holiness in the Church, is warrantable by this text, but their way does so
tend, Ergo. And the Minor is proved, Where only such are admitted, and all
such are admitted as can challenge right to the Sacrament by the word of Christ,
there due order and decen^y are observed: But so it is with them. Not to bring
them under shrift for the Peccadilloes of their Logic, as in the Major of the
first Syllogism, where they say, That which tends to set up order and
holiness, they should have properly said Decency, to have suited it with the
conclusion, and in the Major of the second Syllogism, when they tell us, There
due order is observed, if they would have concluded aright, it should have
been, That course naturally and directly tends to set up order etc. But because
the least prayer for pardon will expiate such venial sins, I answer

First, the Minor of the last Syllogism, though they have too much faith to
believe it will shift for its self, and carry its own pass, yet we think they
have somewhat of the Infidel that provide no better for their own, but leave it
to go a begging for the question.

Secondly, if we concede there is order and decency in their way, the Major of
their Syllogism pretends only to prove that it is thereby warrantable, but
not that it is necessary and obliging to the exclusion of all others, another
may be as warrantable as that, because different fashions may be orderly and
decent, one as well as another.

Thirdly, a course may be orderly and decent in some respects, and so be
regular relatively to order and decency, and yet not simply and absolutely
good: order may may sometime be in things that are evil, and Physicians tell
us, That order in evil pulses are worse then disorder in good, for bonum ex
integra causa; the argument may perchance hold negatively not affirmatively.

Fourthly it appears not to us, no nor to them, that all those whom they admit
are really holy, and it is too apparent that all which are relative holy they
admit not; howsoever seeming to themselves so pure, Contra Lit. Petiliani, l.
3. s. 81.
they justly fall under that Sarcasme of Augustine to his Donatists, Novum
genus arcae vos fecisse gloriamini, aut quae solum triticum habeat, autin qua
solum triticum appareat, cui non fit necessarius ventilator sed perscrutator,
and yet notwithstanding it is also as true of these, what the same Father said
of the other, Contra 2. Epist. Gaudentii, l. 2. c. 27.
Habetis res magnas quas inter justitias vestras ventiletis, divisionem
Christi, rescissionem sacramentorum Christi, desertionem pacis Christi, bellum
contra membra Christi, criminationes in conjugem Christi, negationem
promissionum. Christi.

Fifthly, But how intollerably and how many ways does their way (via devia)
check with order and decency? to gather a Church out of a Church, and to admit
into the Church those who were added to the Church already; to set up a Church
beyond a Church, (like a little England beyond Wales, as was said of part of
Pembrookshire) and a Church more then a Church, as if were like the fire at
Liege, which they say is hotter than fire; that some should be members in their
Church, and yet not be members of their Church; or if of their Church, yet not
of their Chancel; that they own themselves to be their Pastors, and yet they
are not their own particular flock, so destroying the nature of relatives to
bring in a confusion of parishes, and their Churches to have extension into and
penetration with other Churches; first pulling down the limits and hedge to
make all common, and then to set up a new enclosure, and thereinto draw others
flock, and build their Churches by such a confusion, doing by others what they
would not have done by others to them; and as the limits of Sparta were said to
be as far as their spears could reach, so the bounds of their Churches to be as
wide as their tongues can extend, and to make no less confusion of Ordinances,
while some have one ordinary Pastor for the Word, another for the Sacrament,
others have a Pastor for the Word, and none for the Sacraments, and they to
take the whole Fleece that minister not the whole food, contrary to the equity
of the Statute, which proportions Tithes according to the corporeal pasturage;
to be admitted to one and excluded from another Ordinance; not to be cut off
from communion, because not excommunicate, and yet to be denied to communicate
in the Sacrament, wherein Church communion mainly consists; to enter upon
their Churches as it were by conquest, and seize all men's right to the
Sacrament (when they have not forfeited it by scandal) and to admit none into
possession, that will not hold of them, and at their will, and without any
orderly proceeding or censuring men for special scandals obstinately continued
in after admonition; to shut out whole Churches because they have not merited
their approbation; to admit none but those that shall watch one over another,
while some of the Society live twenty, and perchance more miles asunder; to
forbid those to do their duty, who they suppose cannot do it so well as they
should, when the duty is essentially good and necessary, and the abuse but
accidental and doubtful, and the hope of good is founded in the certain
goodness of the thing, and the fear of evil raised in an uncertain suspicion
of the indisposition of the person which is evil, may be corrected by the good
he is to partake of: Saepe mihi ignota est humana conscientia, Aug. Contra Lit.
Petil. l, 1. c. 7.
sed certus sum de Christi misericordia; to dispense also with themselves in a
certain duty for an uncertain hazard, and to deny others a good thing for fear
it may do evil, upon which account all good things in the world may be
suppressed, those and a multitude of other inordinatenesses in their way we
have formerly showed as things came in order in our course, and it will not be
decent here to repeat, and to make this Section an Index of the whole Treatise.

SECT. XXVI.
Jeremy 15.19. Discussed and vindicated.

THe second proof is from Jeremy 15.19. If thou take forth the precious from
the vile, etc. but those res secundae, will not be the prosperity of their
cause; and if they would separate precious Arguments from the vise, they might
lessen and decrease the number of their proofs as they have done of their
Church. We may give them what they conclude out of the premises in this
Section, and yet it will be but (...) (according to the Greek proverb) A
giftlesse gift, and be worth them nothing. For after all their vapors what do
they lymbeck out of this Text, but this conclusion? More is their duty then a
doctrinall separation in applying the word And if this would keep them quiet,
they might have this without more crying, either as a duty or as a power. We
never have denied them all authority to separate men from the Church by
excommunication, as well as from the world by preaching the word, the question
is not of the act of Separation, but of the manner and the objects, who are
those vile, and how the separation must be made, but to infer, a separation
is warranted by Gods word, therefore their way of Separating is warrantable, is
an argument A genere ad specicm affirmative. Did they put none into the account
of vile, but such only as had given scandal by notorious crimes, and not
those also which had not by submission to their discipline, merited their
appobation, and become precious alone at the price of their freedom, and to
cease to be vile, must contract a kind of villenage servilly to hold at the
will of another; did they separate in a judicial way such particular persons
from the Congregations, and not whole Congregations by an arbitrary sentence,
or rather not separate themselves from the congregation, we should not
interrupt, nor check with them in their way, though it be not drawn out by any
line in this Text, and we should grant it were right Discipline, though not
rooted naturally in this Scripture, as it might be right Ivy that as
Nicremberge tells us, grew out of a Stagges horn, and a right blade of Corn
that sprung from a Woman's Nose, yet neither was naturalll to that place.

What they write therefore of Excommunication, is but as the shedding of ink
by the Sepia to escape discovery. It argues the deformity of their way that
they dare not show it in its own face, but with such paint, and under this
dilguise; for Excommunication is that which we neither oppose nor they contend
for, and for their part there is an observable testimony thereof in that they
produce very few of those Scripture proofs which are usually alleged for, and
do pregnantly assert it; but because those are not so aptly conducing to their
scope and purpose, they bring forth others little or nothing pertinent to that
matter, and from whence it cannot be otherwise deduced then as the Metaphysics
say, that by long circuit any truth may be derived from another, and perchance
they withhold those stronger Arguments least they might disparage theirs by
comparison, as the Painter that had grossly pourtraied a Cock, set a Boy by
the Tub to stave off all living Cocks that they might not discredit his rude
draught.

They enumerate sundry kinds or ways of Separation, but it had been as proper
to their undertaking, as suitable to the expectation of reason, to have
demonstrated how all of these were founded in this text, or supported thereby;
for when they simply and nakedly affirm them to be so, in magna sermenis
latitudine uno brevissimo verbo quod dicitur, proba, in arctissimas coarctaris
angustias, as Augustine to Petilian.

Though some streams turn another way (as Maldonat expounds the words thus, If
O people (to whom he thinks the Lord to speak) thou pick out and make choice of
the true Prophets from the salse; and others (whom A Lapide mentions)
interpret, If thou sever my precious Word from the vile Doctrines of the Jews,
Prcciosum a vili seperat qui verum and falsum bonum and malum non codem loco
habet. Quistorpius annot. in lec. Chrysostom. in Genesis c. 1. hom 3 tom. 1. p. 4. and
in Math. c. 25. h. 27. tom. 2. p. 169. Gregory l. 3. Moral. Willet in Levit. p.
363. Cateri in loc.
A verbis Judaeorum minacibus sed levibus, vilibus and infirmis, quia ipsi
invalidi sunt, and minas suas explere non poterant, si fortiter and animose
adhaeseris verbo meo, and contempseris Judaeorum minas, as Menochius; or Si
verbum meum divinum tanquam pretiosum thesaurum amplexus fucris and custodicris
prae vili acervo rationum humanarum ad pusillanimitatem te excitantium, as
Tirinus, from whom Sanctius much dissents not, Si discrimen aliquod agnoscas
statuasque inter ca quae vilia sunt, quaeque ludus and nugae existimari debent,
inter ludentium nimirum consilia and ludrica, and inter me meaque mandata; and
this Piscator says is a fit interpretation, and Diodate assents to it: yet the
main current of Interpreters runs toward a Separation of Persons rather then
Things; If thou shall separate or draw out of the vile world the precious
people of God, converting them by the Preaching of the Word; and into this
Channel flow the Expositions of Hierom, Chrysostom, Gregory, Theodoret, Hugo,
Thomas, Lyranus, Willet, do Castro, A Lapide, Sa, and Sanctius also; Piscator
and the English Annotations think this the more genuine Exposition which
Diodate also mentions, viz. If in thy teaching thou put a difference between
the godly and the wicked by confirming and comforting the one, and by sharply
reproving, convincing, and menacing the other: But this still is only a
Doctrinal Separation, and though of Persons, yet of them alone in reference to
the Word preached, and however some men may happily apply this text in an
accommodate and transumptive sense to a Separation from the Sacrament, yet that
this should be here properly meant, or ought literally so to be understood, or
especially that it should be so contracted and restrained, to command only a
Separation from the Sacrament, and from no other Ordinance, (which though it
might better suite with their Model, for otherwise as it might countenance
their Separating from one Ordinance, so it should condemn their not separating
from other; yet sorts not with their marginal quotations out of Mr. Stock who
speaks of excluding from Prayers also, so that they can make no Mercury for
themselves out of that Stock:) as for all or any of this they have produced
neither reason, nor the authority of any Interpreter (and if they will have
their interpretations imitate the Spiders Web, spun only out of their own
bowels (nulli debeo) they will also resemble it in this, that they will be soon
swept down, and in the mean time serve only to catch flies) so as well Reason
as Authority forbids this sense, for Separation from the Sacrament of persons
unfit, is the separating the vile from the precious, not the precious from the
vile, and to say they separate themselves from others, is in effect to say they
Excommunicate themselves, not others. Separate and Excommunicate being
anciently the same, and passing under one notion of (...), unless perhaps they
rather separate themselves as the Pharesees did, who indeed had their name from
Separation, and were also called by the Greeks (...) And therefore also whereas
telling us elsewhere of a Negative Separation in a Church, not from it (which
we have formerly showed is negatively separated from Reason and the Authority
pretended) they speak also here of a Church separating from scandalous Members
of her own Body, or separating such as are scandalous from her; the latter we
acknowledge may be rightly done, but know it not to be that which they do, but
that this and the former expression should be consonant in sense, or the former
consonant with sense, viz. That the Body should separate from the Members, the
whole from the parts, will be very strange for any sensible man to opine; but
indeed it suits not altogether amiss with their way, where they pretend to
separate into a new Church from the other Members of the Church, so as Hoc non
secundum veram sed secundum vestram seutentiam vobis rectissime dicitur, as
Augustine to Petilian.

If the text alleged allows only a Doctrinal Separation in Preaching and
denies any other, then Excommunication falls. Quae nondum data sunt stulte
negata putas? Must the text needs deny what it does not affirm? If
Excommunication be not here asserted, can it no where else be ratified? But
surely if Excommunication expect no other support, if it here find none, it
hangs by as frail a thread as Dionysius his Sword over Damocles his head. It
may be a Plant which the heavenly Father has planted, yet not grow out of this
ground, and it disparageth the strength thereof to suppose it has no better
root; and they give it no firmer fastening when they tell us That Church
Censures were under the Old Testament, and ask Who knows it not? But because we
are so ignorant as not to know it out of Scripture, they might have done
consultly if it were so obvious, to have brought forth their evidence, and to
have shamed our ignorance; Non semis in conflictu in quo veritas quaeritur, cum
probatio non sequitur, quam vana and inepta fit narratio? said Augustine to
Petilian. We hope we are not forgetful thereof through carnal liberty, but
rather think they have forgotten themselves to use such carnal liberty to
censure us, but till they reflect some of their new light upon us, we cannot
see any Precept or Example of Excommunication in the Old Testament, or of
Suspersion in the New, and we think it as likely that in this place Suspension
(which is their only way of process) was Prophesied of, and a Canon made for
regulating the administration of that one Sacrament, when it was not then
instituted, nor any other Sacrament expressed or employed in the context, as
that the Society of the Jesuits was (as some dream) foretold in that of 1 Cor.
1.9. God is faithful by whom ye were called into the fellowship of his Son
Jesus; 1. q. 32. art. 1. and q 46. art. 2.
And we shall commend to the Apologists a good rule of Aquinas, Cum quis ad
probandam fidem Christianam adducit rations quae non sunt cogentes, cedit in
irrisionem infidelium, credunt enim quod hujusmodi rationibus iunitamur, and
propter eas credimus; so as whereas they suppose we limit and straiten the text
for our own ends, we think upon such account it had been more subservient to
their ends to have forborne to insist upon such non-cogent Arguments, for some
might have been facil to believe that men so eager and confident in their way,
had better Arguments if they had not produced these, and they might so also
have redeemed themselves from that which Augustine calls Haereticorum cavend^
calliditas, De unit. Ec. l. c. 13.
volentium convertere Dei verba a veritate propter quam dicta sunt ad
perversitatem in qua ipsi sunt.

But lastly whereas they conclude That if some separation must be made, then
examination and such proper means must be also, these are not only ten times
sodden Coleworts, but grown so faetid and rancid that the very stirring of
them, though but to remove them, may offend, and therefore we shall refer the
Reader to what we said to correct them, when they were brought forth fresh.

SECT. XXVII.
2 Thessalonians. 3.2. and 6. opened, and redeemed from their misapplications. Whether
anciently the Commerce with any, not Excommunicated, were avoided. What Soc ety
Excommunication cuts off from. How Suspension might be used, and is abused.

AElian tells us of one Mizaldus that was so light, that they were constrained
to hang Lead at his heels least he should be blown away by every puff of wind.
As light verily is that Argument which appears in this maniple, drawn from 2 Thessalonians 3.2. which the least breath will easily fan and winnow, and suddenly
dissipate. Baptista Porta relates of Candles made after a certain Composition,
which will make things seem to be, that are not, and to appear otherwise than
they are: and sure it must be some such strange new light that can make it
apparent, that to be delivered from unreasonable and evil men, is to suspend
them from the Sacrament, as if deliverance could be no otherwise obtained but
by suspension: Can they produce any one Interpreter that ever thought this to
be the meaning of the Apostle, or sense of this place? Or is it consonant to
the phrase and idiom of Scripture, or indeed of common understanding, that to
be delivered from men is to separate them from the Communion? They are so set
upon Separation, that it seems they will be divided in their Expositions from
all Interpreters. Has not this somewhat of Bernard his Abelardus? Omnes sie,
Ego autem non sic; In Joh. 6.62.
or perchance as Maldonat confesses, though he had no Author for his
Exposition, yet he embraced it because it checked most with the sense of the
Calvinists; so they without any Authority take up this sense, because it will
serve to oppose against their Antagonists.

The Synod of learned Interpreters by unreasonable and evil men, Calvin.
Aquinas. Diodate. Slater. Estius. A Lapide. etc.
think the Apostle meant the contradicting and persecuting Jews, who were not
capable of being driven from the Communion, that were never received thereunto,
vagrant or vagabond Jews, (...) as in the word in the Original, that need not
be kept off, being still running about and no where settled, and Dr. Hammond
conceives the villainous Gnostics to be here understood, as others also do
Heretics in general, as Gagnaeus out of Chrysostom, and that to be delivered
from them, was to be rescued out of their malicious hands ( cripiamur, as the
Syriack, Beza, Piscator; defendamur, as Castalio; (it is not ut illi
cripiautur,) that his Preaching might be successful and prosperous, meeting
with no such obstacles as might hinder the progress thereof, and Calvin
supposes that the Apostle being now on his journey to Jerusalem, and having
been Prophetically admonished of the persecutions there attending him, desired
their Prayers for his deliverance, etc. This is the only proper collection from
the text, and therefore when they would impose upon us such irrational and
impertinent Arguments, we had need wish to be delivered from unreasonable men,
and evil Disputers.

But that which they lead up in the next rank may seem to be gravioris
armaturae, the proof taken from the 6, 14, and 15 verses of that Chapter, which
they say the best Divines expound of Church Censures. And I will not be
refractory to that Exposition then, nor shall it be said of me -- Direxit
brachia contra
Torrentem.
Notwithstanding there is a strong and deep current tending the other way, for
others think the 6. verse not pertinent to Church Censures, non ad publicam
excommunicationem pertinet, sed ad consuetudinem privatam, vetat enim ne quid
familiaritatis babeant, etc. says Calvin; and Chrysostom has a singular
conceit, that by subduction should be meant a withdrawing of Eleemosynary
relief from the lazy and idle, whereupon the subsequent verses reflect some
color: The 14 and 15. verses are by Sa and Menochius interpreted also only of
declining Commerce and Conversation with such as are evil; and Grotius (in
which sense many concur) supposes that to note is not immediately to censure,
but to depaint him out by his marks in an Epistle to be written to the Apostle;
and others interpret both verses to be only such a command to abstain from all
voluntary, open, and pleasing conversation and communication with scandalous
persons, as Aretius, A Lapide, Diodate, etc. And this interpretation is not
without some roots in the text, from whence it may spring; As

1. It is said, Withdraw your selves; but in Church Censures the innocent do
not withdraw themselves from the criminous, but drive out these from them.

2. The command is to have no company with him, which in propriety of the
phrase and immediately seems to resent a familiar conversation and consortship
in civil things, though I am mindful that such refraining of commerce also is
the consequent of the greater excommunication.

3. The Apologists themselves do not extend this Censure to a withdrawing of
themselves in all Communion from every one that walks disorderly and obeys
not, or having no company with him in any case, or noting him universally, for
they admit those whom they note for such, not only to a civil society, but to a
fellowship in the Word and Prayer, and that this with drawing, not companying,
and noting, should be restrained and appropriated only to the Lords Table, has
no color of ground in these Scriptures; and if this duty of withdrawing and
not companying and noting may be complied within any other possible lawful and
convenient way, it is not necessary that it should be only at the Sacrament by
Suspension.

Erastus himself allows privati convictus and commercii interdictionem, but
whereas amongst the Reasons rendered for this precept of withdrawing, not
companying and noting, one is expressed in the text, That he may be ashamed
(and thereupon amend,) and another rendered by interpreters, to avoid contagion:
For the first, Erastus supposes, that a brand inflicted by some punishment
from a civil Magistrate, would strike and impresse more shame than any note by
Church censure, which profligate persons will little reckon of, and that it
were a more prompt and effectual expedient in order to amendment, to impart
unto them the means of Grace, rather than to withold them. And for the
second, A man that will stand in an higher place, and signify more in their
account than Erastus, viz. Aretius interpreting those texts, affirms, That
private familarity corrupts the manners of those that converse together, but
the common use of the Sacraments does not so. -- I must eschew his familiarity,
whom I ought not to avoid at the Sacrament, for at the Sacrament he will not
corrupt me, that may do so at a private supper. And this opinion is fortified
with pregnant Reasons which we have elsewhere produced, In the diatribe
and which may be farther backed and seconded; for at the Sacrament evil men
take truce with all examples of evil influence, from whence others may contract
or suck in contagion; and Saul himself did prophecy whiles he was among the
Prophets, and there we converse (externally at least) and have to do with God,
not men, and we may choose and must discreetly make choice of our familiar
companions, but it is neither in our power nor of our duty to make such
discrimination of our company at the Sacrament, for we find only a command
that every man should examine himself, in order to communicating, but if we
were patible of any insection to be attracted, or pollution to be incurred at
the Sacrament, we should have been put under a command of examining every man
one another; but themselves do not think it an incumbency upon every man to try
another, but only that they or the Elders should make this trial of all: but as
when Brasidas was slain, his Mother said, That though he were a good man, yet
Sparta had many better; so if these texts were taken off from the support of
Church censures, yet other Scriptures would better bear up and confirm them;
and also though Hierom, Augustine, Castalio etc. read, signify that man by an
Epistle (which is the marginal reading of our Bibles) yet, since that
indication to be made to the Apostle, was only that he might thereupon inflict
the censure, and so would finally and in effect be the same thing with note him
in their sense, therefore let it be yielded that these texts are properly to be
understood of these censures.

And we grant (what they allege) that Augustine so interprets them, though
they mistake the place, as if they had not had inspection into the text, but as
he there approves only coertiones licitae and allowed (which we deny theirs to
be) so he also permits such censures salva unitatis pace in ecclesia, Cont.
Donatist. post. coll. c. 4. not lib. 4. as they cite in words at length
and there assures us that as the Church unto the end of the world is to have
good and bad, Ita nec mali bonis obesse possunt cum vel ignorantur, vel propace
and tranquilitate ecclesiae tolerantur, si eos prodi aut accusari non
oportuerit, aut aliis bonis non potuerit demonstrari. And so also he elsewhere
says, Long aliter vitiosa curanda and sananda est multitudo, ne forte dum
plebs separetur per scismatis nefas etiam triticum eradicetur; Ibid. c. 20.
and in such cases (which is clearly and evidently their case) we (says he)
understand the withdrawing to be only spiritual, and the Donatists (as do the
Apologists) take it for a corporal, the contact forbidden is Cordis non
corporis, De verbis dom. in Evang. Mat. sermon. 18. tem. 10. p. 18.
the separation enjoined is factis non locis, animo non templo, moribus non
altaribus, and thus men may be in uno permixti and separati, permixti quippe
corporali contactu, separati autem voluntatis abscessu.

Augustine also expressly in the place they allege affirms, That the text
respects Excommunication; and such is the judgment of many interpreters, the
School, the Casuists and Modern Divines, who have laid this as one stone in the
foundation of excommunication, even the greater; but because this current will
not run to their Mill, nor this stream make glad their City, they work out
another channel and turn the sense into another course; It cannot (they say) be
a casting out by Excommunication; For

1. That is too much at first, but what the text commands to be done, does it
enjoin to be done at first? Or may we not do, what we may not first do? Or have
they forgot that Canon of the Apostle which they so lately produced, That
things are to be done in order? Or do they not know, that excommunication may
not at all be inflicted until first admonition precede, and obstinacy in sin
follow after.

2. They say the excommunicate is to be accounted as an Heathen, not as a
Brother; but he may be both in sundry respects, as an heathen and yet a brother
too, a brother formally not materially, in secret not apparently, in right not
in possession; as an heathen because provisionally excluded from the sign,
external act and use of communion; but a brother because not absolutely,
precisely, simply and finally cut off, but only for a time and upon condition,
and secundum quid in some respect; and therefore says Ames, Cas. cons. l. 4.
c. 29. sect. 28.
Idcirco ex ordine (excommunicatio) singulari spe resipiscentiae adhibetur and
aliquam differentiam ponit inter excommunicatos and meros ethnicos; As an
heathen, he may be forbidden the Communion of Believers as heathens were among
the Jews, the consequent being here put for the antecedent, as Paraeus and
Camero observe, In 1 Cor. 5.10
habeto illum eo loco quod ad exteriorem conversationem pertinct, quo
Judaeihabent ethnicos and publicanos, as Estius, and yet a brother in respect
of that tender care we have of his good and salvation; Paraeus in loc.
and therefore says Camero, Eos velit haberi pro exofis sed non haberi exosos;
Valemia tells us, that Ecclesia erga ej smodi ethuicum ita solet se gerere,
Camero praelect in loc. p. 155. 3 Disput. 7 q. 17. punct. 1.
ut cum illi communicet bona quaedam spiritualia communium suffragiorum, neque
etiam came cum illo consuetudinem conversationis externae habeat; and Camero
affirms, Ita subductio est, ut non sit simpliciter subductio, nam hortatur nos
Apostolus ut eum moneamus cum quo non vult nos habere commercium, qui autem
monere possumus nisi adeamus hominem, and studeamus eum in viam revccare? and
therefore out of the proper signification of the words (...), he concludes only
too much familiarity is forbidden and all commerce, save when and where it
shall be necessary. And therefore says Chrysostom, the Apostle having said, In
Psalm. 100. p. 234. tom. 8.
Withdraw your selves, have no company, veritus ne hocipsum e fraternitate
illum excidat, he sub-joyns, yet hold him not as an enemy, etc And Augustine,
Nos quidem fraires propter correptionem aliquam tenemus, nos etiam a fratribus
nostris and nen cum iis convivamur ut corrigantur, and then he cites this of 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. they are brethren still whom we may not accompany or be familiar
with; In Psalm. 54. p. 111.
a quo indixit separationem, non praecidit dilectionem; and to the like effect
other interpreters, though they expound the text to be meant of excommunication.

It cannot be meant of leaving his society in civil things, that is too little,
and hardly to be done, such may be his relations. Those Censures being acts of
justice, and justice consisting in an equality, who can determinately conclude
a punishment to be too great or too little, but relatively to the special
offense for which it is inflicted? Yet I shall not be hasty to suffrage with
them, That Interdiction of all Commerce in civil things is a lesser punishment
than Suspension from the Lords Table.

A very learned man that contents not himself with the Dichotomy of
excommunication into the greater and lesser, Estius in loc.
adds a middle kind, viz. to be proscribed the company and commerce of the
faithful, which was less than a delivering over to Satan, by precision from
the body of the Church, their crimes being not so enormous to merit that, and
was greater than the lesser excommunication, which only removes from the
Sacraments, but not from the society of the faithful; and to this opinion
inclines Dr. Sclater, who is therefore here quoted by the Apologists, Fide
Independenti, In locum, p. 284, 285.
and to no other effect but to make us Independents upon their fidelity, when
they produce his authority to prove that this is meant of a withdrawing in
sacris, when he demands, Quid boc ad sacra? Epist. 64. tom. 4. p. 61.
Whether there were anciently such a kind of censure in the Church, and whether
such thus censured, were those with whom they might not eat bread, yet might
take the body of Christ with them, (as Augustine affirms of some) I shall not
dispute, and though Estius tell us that Chrysostom complains this censure was
antiquated in his time when the greater excomunication was in use, yet let the
learned advise if some such thing be not hinted at in Augustine to have been
practiced in his time, when he says, Contra Donat, epist. allat. c. 2.
Quos acrius corripimus etiamsi in little possessione sumus nihil ibi apud eos
contingimus, ut sentiant quan. um peccata little doleamus.

And whether it may not be confirmed by the first Council of Toledo (which if
it were held An. Dom. 402. 1 Tolet. Can. 7
(as Marianus affirms) was six years before Chrysos^oms death, for N^uclerus
tells us that be died An. Dom. 408. or if it were celebrated Anno 420. (as
Cassiodore and Prosper would have it, was twelve years after his decease) where
it was decreed, Vt si quorumeumque Clericorum uxores peccaverint (ne forte
licentiam peccandi plus habeant) accipiant mariti little hanc potestatem,
praeter necem, custodiendi ac ligandi in domo sua ad jejunia salutaria, non
mortifera eas cogentes. -- cum uxoribus autem ipsis quae peccaverint, nec cibos
sumant, nisi forte ad timorem Dei, acta poenitantia revertantur. And that this
was not always done by the public sentence of the Church, but sometimes upon
the pious discretion of private Christians, (as may seem to be insinuated by
Augustine, where speaking of the Apostles prohibition, not to ear with a
brother tha^ is called a fornicator, he says, Contra Epist. Parmen. l. 3. c. 2.
Quod multi boni Christiani faciunt, de iis de quibus familiarius curam gerunt,
ut a quorum confortio se potueriut separare, and afterward Nam in domibus suis
quique boni fideles ita disciplinam s^orum moderantur and regunt) I say
therefore this could not be accompanied always with suspension from the
Sacrament, which could not be inflicted but by public judgment of the Church,
and which does not debar commerce in civil things, and I do still profess
my self to seek of all evidence in antiquity, that any man was kept from the
Sacrament that had not been cut off from the body of the Church: for however
they might withdraw themselves from men that were evil, yet they did not
withdraw the Ordinances, whereby they might grow better, but what ever be the
sense of the Senate and people of learnings Commonwealth in this particular,
yet it shows it to be the judgment of learned Estius, That interdiction of
all civil lociety and conversation, is not a less punishment then suspension.

And whereas they say, That because of men's relations their society can hardly
be left in civil things, by the same reason it will be as hard to proceed to
the greater excommunication, Baldwin. Case Consc. l. 4. c. 10 p. 1131. Davenant
determinat. q. 48.
whereof the abrenunciation or desertion of civil commerce is a consequent.
But they might have understood, that as neither excommunication makes any
divorce of those whom God has conjoined, but only a separation from some
particular Church, nor cancels or loses from any bond of Divine, Natuturall,
or Civil Law, nor any Pollticall or Oeconomicall communnion founded upon
either of them, but prohibits only undue and voluntary commerce, and that also
alone by positive Law, and by general consent allows a mutual conversation in
those cases which are sum'd up in that verse mentioned almost in every
Schoolman and Canonist (who I wish had had commerce with some bettsr Poets, and
not to have given us, as Virgil said of Ennius, their gold in dung) Vtile, lex,
humile, res ignorata, uccesse; so though a contaglous person may be prudently
eschewed by the generality of the faithful, so as to have no open, voluntary
and familiar converse with him, yet this hinders not but that those which have
special relations may be conversant with him, and generally any one may be so
in things profitable and necessary.

But are the Apologists as light as the leaves they write upon? -- sententia
vobis
Versa retro, non sic incerto flamine Syrtes
Mutantur.


Just now they told us, this withdrawing, noting, not companying, was casting
out by excommunication, now presently they conclude, it must be excommunication
the greater or the lesser: or have they more than an omnipotent power to make
both parts of the contradiction true? for omnipotence it self cannot do this,
but the greater indeed it may be (and the Apostle here uses the same word
which he h^th, 1 Cor. 5.9 viz. (...)) And if there it be meant of
excommunication, it is probable it ought to be so understood here, and if not
so in the one, then in neither, but the lesser it cannot mean; for that does
not exclude from the company of the faithful, but only a sacris, and that is
contracted too, and it now deprives only of the Lords Supper. But if we should
bestow this alms upon them in their necessity, and concede that the lesser
excommunication is here intended, yet it will not suit with their intent, nor
contribute to their advantage, for this censure is an act of justice, and
therefore must proceed in a judicial way, Proculdubio men's Apostoli est, says
Estius speaking of this Text, and that of 1 Cor. 5.11, Id quod hie praecipit
agendum ordine judiciario, there must be some crime particularly charged,
Nominatim exprimendum, says Baldwin, and sufficiently proved, and the sentence
must come forth ex foro contentioso, as the Casuists speak, a man must plea for
himself as well as others against him, and particular persons distinctly, not
multitudes confusedly and indiscriminately are to be thus censured; and that
after admonition, after due knowledge is taken of them by the Church, and they
being admenished remain disobedient still, say the late English Annotations on
the text. And then the Apologists will get as much advantage by this as he does
wealth when he awakes that dreams of golden mountains, for their way and this
method do as much differ as a Bristoll stone and a perfect Diamond, and are no
more the same, than the suppositions Relics showed forth among the Papists,
are really the same things which they are held out for, for they suspend not
single persons, but a multitude, withdrawing not from a brother, but the
brotherhood, so frustrating the end of the Apostle, (that they may be ashamed)
while the number and quality of those that are expelled, defeats the shame of
expulsion, and not because they have forfeited their right, but because they
have not satisfied them in proof thereof; not those that walk disorderly, but
all that will not walk according to their new orders; not for not obeying the
Divine Word, but for not yielding obedience to their word as to a law, not in
any judicial order, but by an arbitrary sentence per saltum without admonition,
proof, or other due process, Et tamen ignorant quid distant era lupinis.

And therefore though we think Suspension to be no Cathartick prescribed by the
heavenly Physician, which Ames, though a severe assertor of Discipline, Cas
Conscient. l. 4 c. 20. Sect. 20.
confesses non ex singulari Christi-instituto (only he says in equality, and
in the nature of the thing it is to precede excommunication) yet if the
Apotheceries by well tempering the ingredients, had made a good medicine
thereof, and rightly proceeded according to the indication, we should not
prescribe it as Deleterious, but while these Empiricks only prove practices,
magisterially compound their Receipts as they please, purge-those that are not
peccant humors, and by continual purging, bring the body into a consumption,
and yet as Lewis the 11. his impostorous Physician assured him, that he could
not live one d^y without his Medicines; so they would persuade us, Serrarius ex
Nounis, and Plinio in l. 3. Reg. p. 266.
that all hopes of Reformation would dye without their applications, no wonder
then if we abhor the Physician, because we love health, and take no physic
because we would live, because Insoeli iter aegrotat cui plus est a medico
periculi quam a morbo, and now we find that it is not without reason that
Pharmaca among the Greeks, and Medi^amonta among the Latins, are sometimes
taken for poisons.

But the sting of the Be is in the tail, and perchance their acuteness may be
in the close, which is a Syllogism, Noting offending brethren, so as to shame
them, is holy and necessary; but such is our suspension of mis-living men,
Ergo. [Saepe mihi dubiam traxit sententia mentem;] Is the Major universal? if
they intend it so, we shall deny it, for the command of the Apostle will not
warrant or bear out all kinds of noting, but only such as he specially
intends; there may be a noting of men by some infliction upon their bodies,
estates or liberties, which may impress shame, since every punishment carries a
connotation of shame, Judge. 18.7. Acts 15.41. Heb. 12.2, etc. and yet be unjust
or unfit; some other may be lawful also, and yet not be holy and necessary,
such is the mulcting of offenders in Helvetia (where excommunication is not
Civitate donata, has no freedom to set up) by loss of some common civil
privileges, as Bullinger informs us, and such was the Nota censoria among the
Romans, where when a Senator was removed, a Knight had his horse taken off, or
a man was thrown out of his tribe among the Aerarii, he was said to be noted,
and to this usage Piscator thinks the Apostle here has reference or allusion.
If they mean it particularly, that some kind of nothing, etc. is holy and
necessary, they check with the law of Syllogismes, which ownes no particular
Major in the first Figure, and if some kind be holy and necessary, they are to
seek for proof that theirs is of that kind, some other may be so qualified as
theirs is not. If they shall dilate the proposition, and extend it to such an
accommodate universality, [All such noting as the Apostle prescribes is holyct
necessary] yet then the Assumption, that their way is such, will be only
Petitio priucipii, and so still they will show themselves noted Disputers.

SECT. XXVIII.
1 Cor. 5.11. Ventilated, and the chaff of their interpretation dispersed.
Whether we may have communion in sacred things with such as we may not have
society with in civil.

WE need here only glean and gather some few ears, having formerly cut down
the harvest, not only because elsewhere we have ventilated the argument drawn
from this Text, but because also the answer shaped to the argument of the
former Section, will sult in great part for a reply to this, as if it had been
cut out for it. If we should concede, that the eating, 1 Cor. 5.11. were of
that kind, which I confess it tastes and relisheth to be in many learned
palats, yet it will not give fat and strength to their cause, but will prove to
them like Zeuxes his painted grapes, which will do those high flying birds no
good.

Many judicious men indeed understand this of casting out of communion, and
avoiding the excommunicate, but the Apologists unjustly add a Byas to them, to
bring them to their mark, when they restrain and limit it to an exclusion from
the Sacraments, which the very Authors they cite (as the Centurists, Aqulnas,
etc.) do affirm of an expulsion from Ecclesiastical communion in general, and
some of them in terms expressly speak of excommunication.

But is the power of excommunication the subject matter of our controversy? or
are those whom they debar the Sacrament actually excommunicate, or so much as
formally suspended? Can they -- vitiis nigrum praefigere Theta? convince them
to merit to be inscribed into the black Roll of either of them? the Sword or
the Dagger (as Caligula called his mischievous Books?) are they all
fornicators, covetous, extortioners, idolaters? will themselves call them so?
-- atrisque lapillis
His damuare reos,
And not rather, -- niveis absolvere dignos? The only crime that the most of
them can be charged with, is somewhat like that of the Indians, who when as De
las Casas tells us, the Spaniards made proclamation, that they should come
quickly and do their homage, they came not under subjection, and therefore
only were they fallen upon. Why do they then lurk under the subtersuge of
excommunication, as if that were the thing controverted, which yet is neither
practiced by them, nor gainsaid by us? Quid obsecro quia incidisti in
defensionem temerariae falsitatis, nebulas manifestis rebus coneris offundere?
as Augustine to Cresconius; and from the lawfulness of that discipline to seek
to legitimate theirs, is as if because the Lord has created medicines of the
earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them, therefore immethodical and
ignorant Empyricks, Causifici and sanicidae may warrant their practice, qui per
mortes agunt experimenta.

There be also notwithstanding many learned palats that cannot relish such kind
of eating here, nor digest this sense, Calvin, Bullinger, Piscator, Musculus,
Paraus, Aretius, Hammond, Grotius, a Lapide, Menochius, Tirinus, etc. who
rather suppose, that by a Trope under the notion of not eating, De pudicitia,
c. 18. p. 738, 739. Ad uxor. l. 2. c. 3. p. 189. Edit. Rigaltii.
is signified the not having familiar conversation, or an intimate friendly
society. Tertullian when he writ against the Church, understands it in the
sense of the Apologists, non cibum, nedum Eucharistiam, but when his writing
was in the behalf of the Church, be interprets it Arcendos esse ab omni
communicatione fraternitatis, and clearly that it cannot be understood of
eating at the Lords Table, there are irrefragable reasons.

For first, This not eating is evidently consignificant with companying, v. 9.
and the beginning of this verse, is only a redoubling of the prohibition with
a kind of amplifying, Epanorthosis; not to company, no not so much as to eat,
Muscul. com. in locum.
though it might seem no great or long society. Non simpliciter dicit, says
Musculus, cum ejusmodicibum non esse sumendum, sed ne cibum quidem, innuens
omnem vitae consuetudinem illis denegandam esse, ita ut and id quod minus
videtur habere periculi illis imputetur, Grot. Annot. in locum.
and correspondently Grotius, Cum talibus (id est) adco vitiosis and
Christianorum nomen usurpantibus ne epulas habere communes, quod^minimum est
inter amicitiae signa.

Secondly, Because there is nothing in the context that may incline and
manuduce to such an interpretation, nor any such Scripture Ideom or parallel
place where eating simply does signify partaking of the Lords Supper, nor is
there any mention of the Sacrament, nor any thing relating thereunto in that
Chapter, for that to keep the feast, not with the old leaven, neither with the
leaven of malice and wickedness, should be meant (as some would have it) of
celebrating the Eucharist, without mixture of scandalous persons, our faith
has neither such an Ostrich dull appetite to swallow, or strong stomach to
digest. The Sacrament is there no more reflected upon, or intimated, than any
other act of a Christian lise, which only can be therein comprehended as
particuiars are in generals, but is not especially or directly, much less
primarily or chiefly respected. The Apostle had much shrunk and let fall very
low the influence and efficacy of that reason or motive, Christ our Passover
is sacrificed, if he had only inferred, therefore partake the Eucharist
without the society of persons scandalous. And though the purging out of the
old leaven, may consequently include the casting out of the incestuous person
(as some Interpreters consent) yet that is not it which was principally or
directly intended; for the purging out of such offenders could not make them a
new lump; but rather the cleansing themselves from the old man, and the
corruption thereof, Quicquid in iis superbiae de veteri homine remansisset,
says Augustine, and to the same effect Hierom, or, vitiosos naturae veteris
sen corruptae affectus, as Piscator, and whereof their fornication, being pust
up, glorying and not mourning, and relaxation of discipline was a part. That
incestuous person, however he might be as leaven, yet why the old leaven? And
as it would be a very harsh interpretation if by neither with malice and
wickedness, should be meant, not with society of wicked and malicious men, and
consequently to suit the Antithesis, the sweet bread of sincerity and truth,
should signify holy or worthy communicants; so also the feast may not be kept
as it ought, though the one were cast out, and the other only admitted, for
this alone comprehends not all that is here commanded, other sins might leaven
them, though this were reformed; and since the Apostle says, As ye are
unleavened, the purging out of the old leaven cannot be the casting out of the
incestuous person, for they had not begun to do that, they were in that respect
not in part unleavened, but they were blamed for altogether neglecting thereof:
but it suits well, and follows fitly according to our sense, purge out the
vitlous affections of your corrupt old nature, as you have begun to mortify
that old man, as Piscator expounds it. Beside, the leaven had but a little
influence if it had leavened them only by a mixed communion at the Lords Table,
and if the scandalous must be purged lest they corrupt others, it must be don
universally wheresoever that corruption may be diffusive, which is in other
kinds of communion and fellowship more than at the Sacrament. More rationally
therefore Martyr (and Bullinger also) teach us, A singulari causa persuadendae
excommunicationis orationem transfert ad generalem, qua omnes hortatur ad
innecentiam vitae, and abnegationem vitae prioris, and says Piscator, Ex
hypothesi deducit ad thesin, exspeciali exemplo admonitionem generalem, ut
fugiant peccata and studeant pietati: And to the same purpose Calvin, Because
Christ our Passover is sacrificed, let us keep the feast, says the Astle, that
is, be holy. Quantum superest temporis hujus vitae, says Martyr, not only at
certain times or occasions, omne tempus, epulationis esset tempus Christianis
propter collatorum beneficiorum excellentiam, says Chrysostom: and Musculus
tells us, Habet autem mystica ista festi celebratio primum ferias ab operibus
mortuis, deinde publicum gaudium, as the Jews abstain from leaven seven days,
so we must from sins, all our life; Est enim numerus septenarius perfectionis
symbolum, donec advenerit dies octavus, qui futurae quietis est, says
Musculus, to whom Hierom gave that hint, which also Alapide, Gagnaeus, Sa,
Tirinus follow, and this way indeed runs the current of Interpreters, and
Paraeus in terms delivers himself, Neque enim de sacra coena hic agitur, sed de
cultu morali seu vita Christiana; only some Papists, to whom our Antagonists,
it seems, will lay a foundation to build upon, will needs understand this feast
of the Eucharist, that some of them may thereby prove a proper sacrifice of
Christ in the Mass, and others the celebration with unleavened bread, and
certainly the expositions given by those that fight against us in this subject,
must needs scandalize, and confirm the Papists in their opinion of the
Scriptures obscurity, seeing the senses which they render, are involved under
such dark expressions, and so much beyond common apprehensions, and drawn forth
with so much hardness and difficulty; and doubtless they that can digest this
interpretation of a Feast here, are so hungry after Arguments, that like the
Prodigal they can think husks a Feast.

Thirdly, This is such an eating as the Apostle did not altogether forbid them
to participate in with the fornicators of the world, but he could not but have
prohibited them to partake of the Sacrament with those heathens of the world,
though they had not been fornicators, etc.

Fourthly, it is such an eating as if we should not have society in with the
men of the world that are without, we must go out of the world; but we nee^ not
go out of the world though we should have no fellowship with them in eating of
the Lords Supper, for no Christian in the world has such a society in eating,
since men of the world do not communicate therein.

Fifthly, If to company and to eat are here Identicall, then by an Argument ad
hominem, it cannot be eating at the holy Table, for they admit of their company
there, (they may be present and look on) but will not permit them to eat.

But they think it follows a minore ad majus, If we may not eat common bread
then much less sacred with them, and they produce the judgment of Par^us,
Quanto magis convictu sacro, Trial of grounds tending to Separation, c. 10. p.
200.
but we have over-balanced that testimony with the authority of others, and
among them of Augustine in the precedent Section, who directly assures us that
we may take the body of Christ with those with whom we are forbidden to eat
bread, and we have there and elsewhere laid weighty reasons, beside in that
scale to make it preponderate. There is not the same reason, says Mr. Ball, of
breaking off private familiarity with an offender, and separating from the
Lords Ordinances, if he be admitted, whether respect be had to the glory of
God, our own safety, the avoiding of offense, or the good of the party fallen.
For in coming to Gods Ordinance, we have communion with Christ principally, and
with the faithful, with the wicked we have no communion, save external and by
accident, because they are not, or cannot be cast out. Necesse est ut eam, non
ut vivam, it is necessary that I go to the Sacrament, not that I live in any
man's company; my communion with Christ and the faithful is not free and
voluntary, but necessary, with the wicked in the ordinances unwilling, suffered
and not affected, civil commerce with the wicked is lawful when necessary,
and much more external communion in those things of God which must not be
neglected.

Every man till he be justly cut off from the commuion, Calvin. advers. Anabapt.
has a title to that wherein Ecclesiastical communion mainly consists, but no
man can put in a claim to my familiar society. I may choose my friends but not
my fellows in that which God commands others as well as me. I am obliged to
eschew evil company, lest I become evil by the diffusions of their example
and insinuations, or be reputed evil by an argument taken from my consorts:
For even the Heathen (a Charondas) enacted by Law, That no man should converse
with wicked persons, lest they contracted a reproach, as if he were like them,
or delighted in them; but no obligation is incumbent on me to separate from
them in that which is good, and may help to make them better, and wherein they
discover no exemplary evil, whereby I may be made worse, and where I have a
command to examine with what heart I come, but none to make any examination
with what affections others approach. Epist. 164. tom. 2 p. 144.
Manifestum est (says Augustine) boc non affici hominom quod est malus
quisquam cum quo ad altar Christi acceditur, etiamsi non incognitus, si tan um
non approbetur and a bona conscientia displicendo separetur.

Secondly, this argument carried from forbidding society in civil, to denial
thereof in things sacred, is extensive to all sacred things, or some only: if
to all, then themselves comply not with the duty, who hold communion in all
holy things save the one Sacrament: if to some, where are they warranted to
distinguish in that which the Precept distinguishe^h not?

Thirdly, We conceive we have in the precedent Section made some discoveries
that the ancient Church had no fellowship with some in civil things, to whom
they denied not society in sacred, and that this was no strange or unusual
thing among the Jews, has some footsteps in the parable, where the Publican
prayed with the Pharisee in the Temple, yet the Pharisee would not eat with or
touch a Publican, and where conversation was forbidden in civil things, yet in
order to the good of the parties, or any spiritual end, a commerce was
allowed, as no man might come near the Leaper, yet the Priest might have
recourse to him, and when the Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 3.14 wills them not to have
company with him that obeyed not his word, yet verse 5, 15. he advises them to
admonish him as a brother, which could not be done without a society and
converse together in order to that end; yea, L. 2. Observe. 4 p. 241. Observe.
24: and 29,
though in the primitive Church excommunicate persons were avoided as polluted,
tanta cura tantoque studio ut ne quidem eos non dico alloqui, sed nec intueri
satis tutum and honest^m iis videretur says Albaspinus, yet he shows us, that
they might at some times enter the Church, and stood among or near the
Catechumeus, and might there hear some portions of the Word, and expositions
thereof, and make their prayers.

4. Though sometimes the same reason perhaps that may be a motive to their
exclusion from our familiar company, may become also an inductive to their
expulsion from Ecclesiastic communion, yet still they are thence duly
expelled, though we decline them in the one, we may not divide our selves in
the other, simul edimus, simul bibimus quia simul vivimus, says Augustine,
while we live together in the same house of God, we may eat together at the
same Table of the Lord, and also many emergent circumstances may sometimes
prohibit such a casting out. Augustine tells us, Cont. ep. Parm. l. 3. c. 2.
Cum mul os comperisset and immunda luxuria and fornicationibus inquinatos, ad
eosdem Corinthios in 2 Epistola scribons non itidem praecipit ut cum talibus
nec cibum sumerent, multi enim erant, says Augustine; And farther he asks,
Quemadmodum Cyprianus and caeteri similes implebant quod praecepit Apostolus,
Si qui frater nominatur, etc. Quando cum his avaris and rapacibus -- qui sundos
infidiosis fraudibus raperent, usuris multiplicantibus foenus augerent, panem
domini manducabant, and calicom bibebant? And he answers, Antiqui non poterant
ab iis corporaliter separari ne similiter eradicarent and triticum, sufficiebat
iis a talibus cord sejungi, vita moribusque distingui, propter compensationem
custodiendae pacis and unitatis, etc? In those cases when as the Physi^ian ut
curet spasmum procurat sebrim, so the Physicians of souls, to prevent a schism
suffer an offending multitude, or such as they cannot cast out without danger
of schism, to retain communion and to communicate at the Sacrament. Though
others may not without turning schismatics separate from their fellowship in
sacred duties, yet I think not only by the dictate of prudent counsel, but by
the force of a just precept, they ought to sever themselves from an
unnecessary, pleasing, and intimate familiarity There are many persons, says
Mr. Baxter, Saints everlasting rest. part 4. p. 106. De Eccles. p. 316.
whom we may not avoid or excommunicate out of the Church, no nor out of our
private society, judicially or by way of penalty to them, whom yet we must
exclude from our too much familiarity in way of prudence for preservation of
our selves. And Camero reminds us of another case also, Saepenumero accidit ut
illius consortio privatim abstinendum sit, cujus consortio in communione sacra
non erit abstinendum, nempe nos eorum fratris pecatorum aliquando conscii sumus
quorum Ec lesia n^n est conscia.

But they finally deny the hypothesis, that hereby is understood familiar and
intimate fellowship, and they will not swallow that opinion, or have company
with those of this judgment, and they reason for sacramental eating

1. From the Context, the whole Chapter concerns Church Censures, and begins
and ends therewith. Suppose it did so, yet it is not consequent, that the
eating forbidden can be only eating at the Lords Table, it may rather be a
prohibition of convict and commerce, which is a part or appendage of
excommunication: And though that also be a Church censure, yet seeing so great
a part of the Chapter concerns the delivering over the incestuous person to
Satan, if but one thing can be the subject of the Chapter, then sacramental
eating is not treated of formally and immediately, as sacramental eating, there
being a great disparity between that and tradition to Satan.

2. How usual is it with the Apostle, especially in the Epistles to the Romars
and the Hebrews, to enter upon a special subject, and then by a real kind of
hyperbaton to transfer his discourse to some other that occasionally emergeth,
and afterward to revert to his first matter, so oftentimes chequering his
writings, and especially when there is some affinity between the things though
not the same? And to abridge and confirm the research, we may find an instance
hereof in the 7. verse of this Chapter, where we have showed that from a
particular occasion, he passes to a general exhortation, etc. This, says
Paraeus, is illatio generalis ex superiori, hortatio in thefi ad puritatem
vitae; And Estius affirms, auforte malum ex vobis ipsis, diversum esse ab ea
quae paulo ante dixerat, Si quis, etc. cum ejusmodi nec cibum sumere: and the
abandoning the conversation of some offending brethren was prescribed by the
Apostle, and may be by the Church, though they judge it not expedient to cast
them out of communion, which makes it cohaerent and apposite enough to follow,
what have I to do to judge them that are without?

2. They pretend to prove it by the text, 1. If meant of common bread, they may
not then dine or sup at an Ordinary, if an ungodly man be present, and this
would be a snare to men's consciences. No more sure than that prohibition, 2 John 10. not to salute an heretic; neither did the ancient Councels intend to
twist snares out of their Canons, when they decreed not only, That none should
take meat or partake of banquets with Jews, as did the Council of Eliberis,
Elib. can. 50. Constant. 6. can. 11. Matiscon. can. 15. Ilerdens. can. 14. and
4. Estius in 1 Cor. 11.27. Grotius annot. in Joh. 13.18. Alii in loc. Alexand.
Dier. Genesis l. 3. c 5. L. Gyrald. Pythago. symb. tom. 2. p. 479. Mr. Balls trial
of grounds tending to separate c. 20. p. 200. De pastor, c. 15.
and the sixth Council of Constantinople, when reassembled by Justinian, and
also that of Matiscon; but also not to eat with any persons, rebaptized, or new
dipped, as now the phrase is, as did the Ilerden Council, and the same Synod,
forbidding to take meat with the incestuous, according to the Apostles command,
declares they took not eatiag here for not eating common bread, and not
sacramental. -- But we understand the words rather Tropically than literally,
and eating synechdochically, or symbolically, to signify a familiar, friendly
society, and indearment, the Table being a symbol of friendship (as Bullinger,
and Eplius) among the ancients, and a note of intimacy, as Paraeus, Etiam apud
genies sacrum amicitiae signum, says Grotius, and Alexander ab Alexandro
instances in very many Nations, whose leagues and covenants were concluded, and
ratified by the ceremony of eating together, and Lilius Gyraldus inteprets that
symbol of Pythagoras, break no bread, to intend break no friendship, for (says
he) our of Jamblicus and Diogenes) ad panem veteres amici coibant; and the
learned in the Hebrew tell us, that in that language a Covenant is derived from
a word that signifies to cat, which is also a token of love and friendship in
phrase of Scripture, adds Mr. Ball; as Psa 41.9. not to partake of, or to be
shut from the Table being a sign of familiarity broken off, and therefore those
esserae hospitales which were the pledges of friendship, gave those that had
them a right to comestion and entertainment, and fellows or associates had
their name among the Latins from eating together, Latina lingua sic dicti
sodales, quasi simul edales, quia simul edunt, says Augustine; but it they
were retrenched from sitting at an Ordinary with wicked men, yet they need not
borrow Novatus (they might have said Acesius the Novatian) his Ladder to go to
heaven alone, for the way to heaven does not lie by an Ordinary, but the Lords
Table is in the way, and there indeed they would take a ladder to go to heaven
alone, or else turn that table into a ladder whereby to mount up to some other
height above others. 3. He writes to the Church, and therefore intends Church
eating, (Quam arguto faciunt verba diserta sono?) Not withdrawing off civil
socie^y by particular persons in a private way; Videte quam multa dicunt non
habendo quod dicant. It seems then the Apostle writing this Epistle to the
Church, nothing thereof concerned any particular persons distributively but the
whole Church collectively, or else virtually, viz. the Elders, and in the 7.
and 8. verses of this very Chapter, when he dehorteth them from malice and
wickedness, and persuades them to sincerity and truth, this duty has no
reference to, or concernment with particular persons, by them to be done
privately, but only belongs to the Church in public.

4 The nature of the recited sins shows he intends scandals calling for
Discipline, and coming under like censure with incest. Whether covetousness
not pregnant with, or waited on by other sins for explering the desires
thereof, may merit either excommunication, the greater or the lesser I shall not
now discuss with any Arguments ad rem, but I shall propound one ad hominem,
that their Prolocutor has publicly determined that worldliness (which is
consignificant with covetousness) is one of the spots of Gods children, and
therefore cannot of it self deserve those censures. But, 2. Though all those
crimes might render obnoxious to such censure meritoriously, yet the persons
might not be effectively censured, the Church might have no public and
notorious knowledge thereof; yet many might have private notice, and if the
Church had such evidence, yet some obstacles from the number of the offenders,
or the danger of schism and the like, might send a prohibition to proceedings,
and yet in such cases the avoiding of voluntary familiar commerce with such may
be necessary or expedient. And whatever censure the offenses might merit, it
does not follow, that in this place the Apostle must needs lay down his command
for censuring the offenders, neither is it likely that incest (which the
Ecclesiastical Canons have censured with excommunication without hope of
absolution) was only sentenced by the Apostle unto suspension from the Lords
Table.

5. He had spoken of keeping company before; This last Argument is like the
topstone which children set on the Castles they build too high, whose weight
casts down all the pile, and it self falls with them; for if the Apostle spoke
of keeping company before, then the whole chapter does not concern Church
censures; This defeats the 1. Reason drawn from the context: 2 He then also
writes not only of what is to be done by the Church, but by particular persons
in a private way; this nu^lifies the second reason extracted from the text. And
yet as this Sampson pulls down the house upon the Philistims above, so it self
falls under the ruins also, and this Argument cannot stand: For, 1. If the
Apostle had formerly spoken of keeping company, may he not again second and
reenforce that exhortation? 2. Does he not in this very chapter prescribe the
taking away from among them the incestuous person, verse 2. and 4. (and in their
judgment also, verse 7) and yet ingeminates that command, verse. 13. put away
from you that wicked person? and might he not vary his phrase and deliver the
same matter under sundry forms, or explane what kind of company he meant; even
contubernium aut interiorem convictum (as Bullinger) whereof eating together
was a symbol, as was showed before?

SECT. XXIX. Matthew. 7.26.
The sense thereof enucleated and showed not to be subservient to their purpose
but odiously abused. Whether Ministers may act in Censures alone, and upon
their own knowledge.

WE have elsewhere taken off the sting of the Argument raised upon Matthew.
Indians take for fine things: such is that of their keeping pure the Ordinance
and not prostituting it, and of exclading the scandalous, etc. Which fallacies
of petitio princi ii, fallacia consequentis, and ignorantia clenchi, they
cannot part with, nor live asunder from, but are bewitched to dote upon, as much
as Charles the Great was upon his old Hagge.

We looked they should have demonstrated that the holy things and pearls here
spoken of, were meant of the Lords Supper, and that all those whom they admit
not to partake thereof, are dogs and swine, but here -- vox fa^cibus haesit,
we expected Rachel, and behold it is Leah, according to the Hebrew Proverb.

The Divines of our part, disputing against the Papists, argue that the eating
of the flesh of Christ, John 6. cannot be understood of Sacramental eating,
because the Sacrament was not then instituted, and by congruity of like reason,
the holy things and pearls here mentioned, cannot be meant of the Sacrament,
because it was not yet ordained, nor were the Disciples likely to be cautioned
to whom they should administer that, which was not yet in actual being (non
entis nulla sunt accidentia) neither had they ye^ been disciplined what was the
nature or end of the administration.

There is a Diapason among Interpreters striking harmoniously together in one
sound, that the doctrine of the Gospel is properly signified by these holy
things and pearls, the mysteries of the holy or Christian says or truth; so
Dionysius, Chrysostom, Euthymius, Eucherius of Lions, the Author of the
imperfect work on Matthew, De adult. conjun. c. 27. Estius in 4. Sentent. d. 9.
sect. 4. p. 123. Aug. de sermon. Dom in monte, l. 2. tem. 4. p. 259,
all cited by Barradius, so Aquinas and Estius also, so Hierom expounds it of
the pearls of the Gospel, and Paraus of the treasures of heavenly wisdom; and
because the Sacraments are also among such mysteries, and usually so
denominated, therefore Augustine contracts and limits it to the doctrine of the
Gospel, Euthymius specifies them to be pretiosa dogmatae, Estius and Janscuius
define it to be only the doctrine of the Gospel (exclusively to the
Sacraments.) The holy and precious truth (says Diodate) the excellent
unsearchable riches of Christ opened in the Gospel -- and those spoken (as the
English Annotations.) And Augustines reason of the Metaphor manifests it, that
he only understood the word by these mysteries, Margaritae, says he, quia in
abdito lateut tanquam de profundo eruuntur, and allegoriarum integumentis quasi
apertis conchis inveniuntur. Annot. in locum.
The learned Grotius informs us, Quod autemin universum de omnibus sapientiae
praeceptis dici solebat apud Hebraos, id Christus suae sapientiae praeceptis
praesertim interioribus applicavit, docens qua cautione ea aliis sine
impertienda.

And since Interpreters explain the sum of the command to be thus, hoc loco
vult ne prodige effundantur etiam infidelibus abstrusissima mysteria sed
pedetentim instillentur, ne mysteriorum sublimitate deterreantur, Quistorp.
annot. in locum.
Doctrinam divinam non evulgantes, as Augustine; de mysteriis sidei non
propalandis and ne pandite, ut occultentur, as Barradius out of the Fathers: if
the Sacraments be the holy things and pearls intended here, then neither they
comply with the command only by excluding men from partaking, for by
admittting them to see and hear at the administration, they publish and reveal
the mysteries, which clasheth with non evulgantes, non propalandis, ne pandite.

That this place appertains not to the administration of the Sacrament, but
only (or chiefly at least) to doctrine, and the dispensation of the word of
God, Jansenius says is apparent by that which precedes, Quoniam mox superius
docuit qui non debent alios judicare, corripere docere, hic etiam docet, qui
non debent ^orripi and doceri, and also by what follows, for there is
subjoyned, ne forte conversi disrumpant vos, but says he, non est periculum,
ne si petentibus peccatoribus dentur sacramenta, converst disrumpant
largitorem, sed contra potius periculum ne disrumpant negantem.

It cannot be denied nevertheless that many learned men have referred this to
the administration of the Sacrament in an accommodate sense, but none that I
know have denied that properly and principally it is meant of the dispensing of
the Word. Chrysostom who in other places takes in the Sacrament, yet in his
Homily upon the Text fixes only on the holy Doctrine. But because it may be
objected that the Genus includes all the Species, and quod particulariter
dictum est universaliter applicandum, and therefore if holy things are to be
kept so sacred, therefore also the holy Sacraments; I shall say howsoever, that
since as the Echo is more faint and remiss always than the first voice, so
while that which is properly and primarily intended in this text, may be
dispensed to the people without violating the command, why must that which is
not directly but secondarily and by consequence only reducible thereunto, be
withheld from them by force of this very precept? May they do that which is
immediately forbidden and not that which mediatly only is prohibited? If holy
things and pearls formally as pearls and holy things, are not to be given to
Dogs or cast before Swine, then since quod convenit per se convenit omni, See
before, Sect. 15.
no holy things, no pearls are so to be prostituted, therefore either the word
is no holy thing, no pearl, or some pearls, some holy things may be so
profaned. Are their people Dogs and Swine? Why are they admitted to the
word? Are they not? Why are they excluded from the Sacrament? If they are not
such Dogs and Swine, but that the word here properly and primarily forbidden
to be dealt to Dogs and Swine, may be dispensed to them, they are not then
such Dogs and Swine, but that the Sacrament, which comes in secondarily
only, and by participation of the like holy and precious nature with the word,
may be distributed to them. Nay, why are any admitted to the other Sacrament of
Baptism until trial whether they will prove Dogs and Swine, De fide and
operib. c 6. tom. 4. p. 13.
since says Augustine, utrum ad percipiendum baptismum sic admittendi sunt
homines ut nulla ibi vigilet diligentiane sanctum canibus detur. The Word is as
holy and precious as the Sacraments, and one Sacrament as the other; and what
Grotius notes upon the words ( sicut horum solorum, scil. canum and porcorum,
causa non vult proponi sacram doctrinam, ita nec illorum causa eam vult
reticeri) may be in some sort applicable to the Sacrament: though it were not
to be administered to such alone, so neither to be intermitted or withheld,
because there may be such mixed in the Congregation.

But though quid ad hoc dicis nisi non est sanctum, non est mundum nisi quod
voluero? August.
as Augustine tells Cresconius, yet they have somewhat to say (though multa
dicendo nil dicunt, aut nil dicendo potius multa dicunt) viz. That the reason
is not the same, because the word is necessary to conversion, to make Swine
become Sheep, and Dogs Lambs. But sepositing without farther reflection,
that we have not only elsewhere retrencht their retreat thereto, but also
demolisht this fortress by demonstrating the Sacrament to be a contrary
ordinance; since they pretend not to give Oracles, and we profess not to
receive their dictates, they should have showed forth some warrant, that such
holy things and pearls as may convert, may be exhibited to Dogs and Swine, but
such as conduce not to conversion, may not be so. The text prohibits all holy
things, and pearls to be made so obnoxious, and does not limit this cautell to
any one or more kinds, nor affords any countenance to this distinction.

If this be the formal reason of the giving thereof, viz. the capacity and
power to convert, then all such holy things and pearls as are effectual to
conversion, may be dispensed to all, though Dogs and Swine, and only such
and no other may be so dispensed. But they grant here, That some are so dogged
and swinish, as this text will warrant their silence toward them, therefore
all holy things and pearls, though subservient to conversion, are not to be
distributed to all: and they admit to a communion in prayer those who are
Dogs and Swine in order to the Sacrament, and those to Baptism who may prove
Dogs and Swine, and are the litter of such, but neither prayer nor baptism
in their judgments are instruments of conversion: therefore also some holy and
precious things which conduce not to conversion, are yet communicated to all.

2. Thirdly, if for this reason, because they are operative toward conversion,
some holy things and pearls may be imparted to Dogs and Swine, perchance some
other reasons may occur, and there may besome other rational motives, why
some other holy things may be also so dispensed, as if they do not perfectly
turn men to God, yet they may somewhat reclaim and make them less evil, and
if they exhaust or exsiccate not the fountain of sin, yet they may stop or
lessen the current, and if they serve not to introduce the form, may yet
nevertheless conduce to beget some subordinate and previous dispositions (as
adjumentall things do) unto regeneration. God does something also for for
greater conviction also as well as conversion, and Chrysostom tells us,
August. Cited by Aquinas in Caten. aur. in locum.
Frequenter etiam benedictionem damus peccatorum more viventibus Christianis,
non quod merentur accipere, sed neforte before scandalizati dispereant, and as
sometimes the word is preached even to those who are indeed Dogs and Swine,
non propter eos sed propter alios in quibus fructus aliquis merito speratur (as
Estius, or as Augustine, Chrysostom and Jansenius, propter electorum and
bonorum utilitatem, aut propter Dei gloriam, and then also they say, non
canibus and povcis sancta dantur sed potius Deo and electis ejus; so by
proportion of clearer reason, Estius in 4 d. 9. sect. 4. p. 123
may the Sacrament be promiscuously administered to those intelligent persons
who by a common faith are become members of the visible Church, though there be
no evidence of their special sound faith, which has incorporated them into the
visible Church; and if that of Augustine will hold out weight at the standard
of truth, Nos vero ad piam doctrinam pertinere arbitramur ex utrisque
testimoniis tutam sententiam moderari, De fide and operib. tom. 4. p. 13.
ut and canes in Ecclesia propter pacem Ecclesiae toleremus, and canibus
sanctum, ubi pax Ecclesiae tuta est, non detur, much more for peace and unity,
(which cannot but be infringed or disturbed by the excluding from the communion
near a hundred of their congregation to one whom they admit) should all those
have their way free and clear to the Lords Table, who yet are not only free
and clear from blaspheming and persecuting the truth (which are the proper
passions of those Dogs and Swine that are here described) but from being
convicted of any such notorious crimes whereby the Church might be scandalized.

For secondly, though we should surrender what they cannot win by force, That
the Sacrament not only falls within the notion of those holy things and
pearls, but was properly, and primarily understood thereby; yet it is farther
questionable who those Dogs and Swine are, and what constitutes and
denominates them such.

The main current of Interpreters runs strongly this way, and not to be
withstood, that hereby are intended such as blaspheme the truth, which is set
forth by trampling it under feet; and those that persecute it signified by
renting them that propound it. Chamier. tom. 1 l. 10. c. 8. caetcri in locum p.
187. Bullinger advers. Anabapt. l. 6. c. 9 p. 229.
Let Paraeus be as Plato in hearing whom you hear all the rest; he speaks
(says he) of the professed obstinate enemies of the Gospel, who being
convinced of the truth thereof, yet cease not either to blaspheme or violently
persecute the same; and the same way run Augustine, Chamier, Bullinger,
Perkins, Diodate Grotius, the English Annotations, Jansenius, Maldonate,
Barradius and Estius, who adds in his Annotations, Huic praecepto obtemperavit
Paulus Apostolus quando Judaeos videns insua perfidia obstinatos reliquit eos
and transivit ad genies. Art. 13.

Such obstinate professed and impure enemies of the Gospel, and the Ministers
thereof, persecuting them for their message, (as the late English Annotations
decipher them)) we cannot but consent (Idem omnes simul ardor babet) should be
kept not only from the the Sacrament, but out of the Church (at least if they
would yet be willing to enter) and we suppose it imports them in duty to have
no Dogs or Swine among their Flock, as well as it concerns them to have none
at the Lords Table, and that therefore and if it were possible there could be
any such within it which Vixisset cauis immundus, vel amica luto sus, that they
ought to be cast out of the Church, which like the air of Arakia is too sweet
to nourish any such swine, and which can give no admission to Dogs, which
were not suffered to enter heathen Temples, as Minerva's at Athens, and Diana's
at Delos, nor to be touched by the Flamen Dialis at Rome.

But as Junius applies the text to those that voluntary certaque malitia sunt
inimici veritatis, Eirenic. part. 1. p. 727. tom. 1
so he gives us two cautions, Ne tomere judicium feramus de ullo homine, quod
certa malt^ia and deliberata -- oppugnet Deum, and verit tem and Ecclesiam
ejus; al^^era est, si judieandum est, ne ex frustu uno aut altero putemus
arbores illas malas cegnoscere, sed potius ex fructibus plurimis and gravissimi
diseamus cognoscere quod satis est ad cautionem nostram, non autem ad istorum
condemnationem.

But then next, 1. Are those whom they admit not to the Sacrament, to be
stigmatized with those odious attributes, as being culpable of those desperate
affections and actions? Do they reproachfully despise and revile the Sacrament,
or not rather reverently prize it, and humbly desire it as precious, and the
worst of them has some devotion toward it, and qui possunt aliquam devotionem
hujus sacramenti habere, non est iis denegandum, in the judgment of Aquinas?
Part 3. q. 80. art. 9.
Is there any danger of their doing mischief to those that should exhibit it,
would they not rather thank and honor them for it? and is it not the rise of
the quarrel because they cannot have it, and the rent is made for not
distributing thereof, and they that should give, they turn away and rent those
that would gladly receave? we may therefore assume, what Whitaker says to the
Papists, who allege this text to justify their withdrawing the Scriptures
from the people, Controver. 1. q. 2. c. 17. p. 308.
as the Apologists do for withholding the Sacrament, Certe populus parum illis
se debere putet, de quo tam abjecte and parum honorifice sentiunt, ut eos canum
and porcorum loco habeant.

Secondly, is not this as odious a dishonor to the Churches of God, as a
disparagement to particular persons, that they should be made as kennels or
hogsties by having about ninety nine dogs or swine to one holy Christian? How
great a blasphemy is this says the great Chamier to the Papists, ubi supra.
(upon the same occasion with Whitaker,) that whom God calls his sons, any one
should name dogs and swine? to what end therefore do we believe the holy
Catholic Church, if the far greatest part thereof be dogs and swine? We
confess notwithstanding among Christians, not a few there are which lead a life
too much depraved, but we deny any of them that are to be reckoned of the
Church, to be in the number of those that are here signified by dogs and
swine, although they live wickedly. So he. This will be indeed music in Gath,
and a pleasant song in Askelon, and if the Apologists and their brethren, will
not with some animals cover their excrements, the Papists will find it out by
the strong scent, and cast it back in the face of our Church, and of the dung
that such black birds do drop, they will make birdlime to catch and ensnare
other birds.

But they plead, that sin and contempt of Gods ways make them deggs, the
Scripture interpreting this expression to signify men of a profane life; 2
Pet. 2.18, 19 20, 22. Prove ^6.^1. The very inspection into the text may check
their assertion, for in that of Proverbs it is said, that as a dog returns
to his vomit, so a fool returns to his folly, but may a man be denominated
from every thing whereunto he may in any respect be assimilated? or can a
likeness secundum quid warrant an appellation simpliciter? If so, then as the
Chemists fancy, that there is nothing in the great world, which is not
represented in the little, and there is really nothing within the clasp of the
universe, but man does in some regard resemble it, then as Adam, once gave
names to the creatures, so now they might denominate man, and man is all
things, and you may call him what you will.

That of Peter is but a rehearsal of that Proverb, with an enlargement
concerning the sow, and if I should concede that here wicked men were called
Dogs and Swine, yet let them recognize what those wicked men were, viz. Simon
Magus and his Gnostics, the dreggs and fink of mankind, Christians only in
name, So Estius, Justinian, Hammond, etc.
and baptized Pagans, who had the name of Borborites, from dung and dirt says
Augustine, they were so filthy and contaminate with impurities (beyond all that
ever the Sun discovered or darkness hid) which are like a dead carcass fitter
to be buried than stirred; such they may without offense to us call Dogs and
Swine, and spare not, but have they no warrant to give any such appellations to
those that appertain to the Church of God, the Dogs are without. But did they
only drive from men to have their dwelling with beasts, those that by vice
(the worst Circe) are transformed into beasts, we should not contest against
it; but when by such false lights as Pliny and Porta speak of, they show forth
men as beasts and monsters which are not such, (like the old persecutors
lapping Christians in beasts skins to be the sooner devoured,) this we cannot
tolerate, let them be justly convicted of flagitious crimes and be duly
sentenced unto punishment, and then -- men's omnibus una sequendi.

But they deny it as a shift, that because Government is unsettled, none may be
taken or looked on as Dogs or Swine, because in such unsettlemeut they are not
such actuvel potentia. Omnis homo ex se aestimat alterum, says Chrysostom.
Perchance they are not without reason to suspect, that those which have long
conversed in their writings may contract somewhat of their dross, whose whole
discourse is a shifting off the main matter in difference. But if they are not
Dogs and Swine in actu, being not censured in any way of settled discipline,
they may yet be such in potentia, because discipline may be settled, and upon
settlement they may be censured, and that is in potentia passiva, which never
may be reduced into act. St. Augustine was no shifter, Epist. 164. tom. 2. p.
144. Contra Donatist. post collat. c. 4.
and yet he affirmed cognitos m^los bonis non obesse in Ecclesia, si eos a
communione prohibendi aut potestas desit, aut ratio conservandae pacis
impediat, and in another place, Si eos prodi aut accusari non oportuerit, aut
aliis bonis non potuerit demonstrari; but howsoever, on whom will they shift
the non-settlement of discipline? why might it not have been established as well
in their proper Congregations, as in the Metropolitan Church of Pyworthie, by
the same men, and the like undertakings? was the air there such, as at Athens,
that men's wits were not elsewhere so acute and elevated? or were their genii
there more sublime and lively, as Anthonies was at distance from Augustus? but
whatever the mystery be, all their sidling cannot make that small town a great
city.

But secondly, why have not those few that have submissively tendered
themselves with desire of communion with them at Pyworthy, and yet were
arbitrarily rejected, been duly proceeded against there, where their discipline
is pretendly settled, and the rest of their Congregations from whom they have
separated, been called thither to purge and vindicate themselves (if they
could) from such exitious crimes as they could be charged with, who though they
had not appeared, yet by such a countenance of regular proceeding, the world
might not have been altogether unsatisfied, but that at lest they might lie
under suspicion of such bestialityes and brutish acts, as that holy things
might justly be denied them?

They believe that Ministers of the Gospel may act by virtue of their
Commission from Christ, upon their own knowledge or conscience as to censuring.
But as we shall ever deny, so they have formerly disclaimed that any such
commission was ever passed by the Keeper of the seals of heaven, (the holy
Ghost that made them Overseers of the Church of God) In the eighth Section they
renounce the censuring by the Minister alone, and in the fifteenth, they waive
that power which they (falsely) suppose the Schools allow them to censure upon
their proper judgment and knowledge, (notwithstanding we know this is that
power which they pretend to of right, and practice in fact) but though at first
they were like Pompey, occultior non melior; yet now at last they fear not to
put off the mask under which they first walked, so confident they are become it
seems in their command of Legions (of arguments) and like the humble Monk and
proud Abbot, they look higher when they think they have found the keys, and
now -- Paulo majora canamus, and like the Turks in the Divano, presuming to
carry on things by strong hand, openly debate of Arcana imperii: and as this
renders our fears not irrational, that as they are cherisht into more wramth,
so like the serpent in the fable, they will put forth their sting, which pincht
with cold they could not make use of; so it shows to what use and of what
influence their Elders are, only to as much as false windows and chimnyes
serve in edifices, alone for ornament and uniformity, and their Elders serve
but to make such things as childrens gunns, to shoot the pellets which they put
into them, and give a pop sometimes with that breath which they blow into them,
and that their Elders are but such wood as Martial's Priapus was, which if he
answered not expectation, Alioq^i and ipse lignum es, for they can do all alone.

Secondly, If the Minister alone should only put back such persons whose
crimes were notorious and scandalous to the whole Church by evidence of fact,
confession or sentence in any civil judicatory (where is no ecclesiastic) ubi
crimina ita manifestantur ut nulla possunt probabiliratione desendi, as
Augustine speaks; Cont. lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 37.
and quando crimen notum est omnibus, and omnibus execrabile apparet, (as other
times he expresses it) such a man being jure, in fieri, actu signato and
demeritorie excommunicate, as this might have been warranted both by the Canon
and Rubric in this Church, as it lately stood established, (and was then
indeed more warrantable, Can. 26.
because if any one sensed himself injured there lay an appeal to the Bishop
to whom the Minister was responsable, but now I know no such present way of
redress) yet h^ w^v^ ^others might fight against this course, and its day might
come to die, or it might descend to battle and perish, yet my hand shall not be
stretched out against it, but when they inflict a public censure upon private
knowledge, and for a crime not notorious, nay, not for special crimes, but for
non-manifestation of their worthiness, and of that worthiness they are the
only and arbitrary Judges, and so divest men of their right not only to a
good name, (a secundary patrimony, a depositum in other men's minds, whereunto
every man has a natural right till he forfeit it by offenses manifestly
proved) but also to the Sacraments, which the School told us before every man
has a right to demand, until he be by judicial order or evidence of his
delicts deprived thereof; this is not only repugnant to the common good and
convenient Government of the Church and Commonwealth, requiring that common
good thing and public benefits, which are to be distributed according to the
merit of particular persons, should not be dispensed according to the private
but public and notorious knowledge of the administer; but also contrary to a
principle of nature, which if it should not be observed would fill the world
with scandals, troubles and injuries, and leave an inordinate, arbitrary and
unlimited power in the Minister, subservient to exalt himself and trample upon
others, as has been fully demonstrated in the fifteenth Section, which I spare
farther to recapitulate, because semper abundamia contumeliosa in semetipsa,
and especially Si bis idem facimus, nimium tibi Stella videtur.

But though no Dogs were admitted into Diana's Temple, yet her image had
always a Dog chained by her, and so those whom they mark for Dogs may
perchance be admitted, most of them, if they would be bound in their chains;
but now they are Dogs because they bark at those that break the house; only at
shearingtimes they are not Dogs, unless perhaps such Dogs as are in Angola,
where they bear wool, and so when they shear those Hogs there is wool with this
great cry; Yet though they put the Dog on the people, it seems they keep the
teeth to themselves, the dentem caninam, and such odious calumnies have nothing
of the sweet influence of the Pleiades, but too much of the rage and malignity
of the Dogstar.

SECT. XXX.
1 Cor. 11.7. and sequent discussed. Of eating and drinking unworthily. Whether
there be a necessity of examining all because some cannot examine themselves.
Whether any irregenerate man can examine himself. Whether this tend not to
introduce auricular confession. Jude 3. opened.

THis Argument is dead born, having been elsewhere strangled and suffocated
before it was brought forth here, and though they produce it now as a sacrifice
to that Altar which they have erected against an Altar, yet in the diffection
and unbowelling thereof, we have discerned no auspicious signs of any victory
for them, but the contrary.

We shall not here repeat what has been formerly declared; to do the same
things so often, Seneca thinks were enough to make life wearisome, and
repetitions are more likely to make a Book disrellish, like meat twice sodden,
for -- sordet quicquid spectavimus olim; only Rara juvant, primis fit major
gratia pomis. Neither shall we enlarge or add unto what has been already
delivered, least -- obstat nostris sua turba libellis,
Lectoromque frequens l^ssat, and implet opus;
Yet as Amasa though wallowing in blood, as long as he lay in the way, caused
those to stand still that came near him; so though (we think) we have mortally
wounded the Argument, yet if it lie here unremoved, it may put some to a stand,
therefore we shall only digitum ad fontes intendere, and deal like the
Merchants about Smyrna who stive and press together their Cotton so close as
to enforce a Sack as big as a Wool-pack into a room at first too narrow for an
arm. Sands.


In that of 1 Cor. 11.27. the end of the Chapter, there is first a fiery danger
represented and detected in unworthy receiving. 1. There is no less peril in
unworthy partaking other Ordinances; an equal hazard challenges an equal
cautel, why then should not the ways of preventing thereof at other Ordinances
be as subservient to remedy it at this of the Sacrament, yea, this one
Sacrament? when as one tells us sicut qui manducat and bibit sanguinem domini
indigne, judicium sibi manducat and bibit, sic qui accipit indigne baptismum,
judicium accipit non salutem. Why then is not the Baptism of Infants suspended
until trial of their Graces, and why do they not pursue their principles as far
as those have carried them, from whom they borrowed them, viz. the Anabaptists?
but they practice no such previous examination before admission to other
Ordinances, why do they engage their prudence only in the one, not the other?
why should the danger be common and the defensative be special and appropriate?

2. He that eats us worthily, eats damnation to himself, sibi non aliis, as
Augustine sets the Emph^sis.

3. That unworthiness in not rightly esteeming of, and duly preparing for the
the Sacrament, would damn him if he eat not, and not eating would aggravate
the damnation, because he neglects all his duty, the matter to be done, as well
as the form and manner of doing; he that does the one, does part of his duty,
and shall prevent part of the punishment; a frigid accession (says
Chrysostom) is dangerous, but not to accede is death, and duties are not to be
dispenst with, because they cannot be don as they ought, and as in doubtful
things the safer part is to be chosen, so it is safer to do the duty where good
may ensue, than to omit it upon fear least evil may happen.

4. The unworthiness which the Apostle thus means, seems not to be
indignitas simpliciter sed indecenti^ specialis, an indignity opposed to worthy
receiving by way of contrariety, not of negation; not a personal unworthiness
in the receivers, but an actual unworthiness in receiving, not only through
lack of reverence and devotion, but a positive contempt of the Sacrament,
making no difference between eating at the holy Table and common refections,
and coming thither to drink the blood of Christ in their drunkenness, indigne
Domino edit vel bibit, qui in hoc actu curat quae sua sunt, non quae Domini,
says learned Grotius; and therefore Gagnaeus out of Theodorus and Theodoret,
interprets that of the Apostle, Let a man examine himself, unusquisque mentem
suam scrutetur, qualem nimirum de his mysteriis opinionem habeat, ita
participet and communicet, quod enim ait seipsum, positum est pro mentem and
sententiam, vult enim nos recte sentire de hujusmodi mysteriis, ne carnale
aliquid tantum suspicemur inesse. Such an unworthiness, I cannot believe that
any of our congregations are guilty of; where none approach the Table without
an impression of some reverence, and come not thither in the act of other sins,
howsoever they do in the habit, and they join in the confession of their sins
and vows of amendment, and though like the serpent they afterward resorbe their
poison, yet for the time they seem to lay it down when they come to drink of
this cup, and they renew and quicken some notions of the death of Christ for
the remission of sins, and however the heart answer not the face, and all this
be only in a form (and perchance no very lively form) of godliness without the
power thereof, yet as the Sacrament may be instrumental to enliven those that
have this name that they live and are dead, and this smoking flax (though it
have much darkness, and little warmth, and perchance no very good odor) by the
breath of Gods gracious spirit assisting his Ordinance, may be blown into a
flame, and may make those truly faithful whom it finds not such; so in the
interim, this outward reverential conformity, puts them into a capacity of the
signs, though alone it cannot give them interest in the things signified, and
though it will not be accepted by God, yet it should satisfy the Church, who
only may judge of what is scandalous, not take cognizance of what is secret, de
occultis non judicat Ecclesia.

5. Whatever this unworthiness were, yet the Apostle gives neither command nor
caution for any other save self-examination; he bids not the Ministers of
Corinth to examine, nor wills them to admit no more without examination, though
that Church were now corrupt, and he set about the reformation thereof, and
when (as Gualther says) there was great occasion for injoyning thereof, had it
been necessary, when professedly he discoursed of the right administration of
the Sacrament, to them who were polluted with numberless errors and vices,
and had profaned the Sacrament with horrible abuses.

But because men must examine themselves, therefore they must be examined,
since for lack of knowledge and grace, unconverted men neither can nor will
examine themselves, and that such ignorant and impenitent persons may be
excluded, therefore they ought to examine them, for upon this ground, infants,
fools, and madmen are not admitted, because unable to examine themselves; It Is
well those whom they exclude have gotten one stair higher to be ranked with
infants, fools, and madmen, for that is a degree above dogs and swine. But
infants, fools, and madmen, have a natural incapacity, whereby we know they are
not able to examine themselves, the rest we know may be able, and we are to
presume they have that ability, unless their converse and comportment manifest
the contrary, it being a rule among the Casuists, Quisque apud omnes debet esse
bonae existimationis quandocunque manifest malum de ipso non constat. But as
to discover fools and madmen, we do not bring all to a special examination, so
men's gresse ignorance and incapacity to discern the Lords Body may be detected
by their conversation, or at least violently suspected, and then only may be
reduced under examination.

But the Apologists are miraculous disputers ( pro miraculo crit ipsos audire
loquentes, as he said of Amalasunta) that can derive a conclusion from contrary
means, as from a command to examine himself, and so to eat, to infer a precept
that he must be ex^mined by another, and if not so, not to eat. This is a kind
of Antichristianisme to exalt their sense above Gods, turning the active into a
p^ssive, and himself into another. We find a command for a man to examine
himself, none that self examination must come under another examination,
though here had been the proper seat of that Doctrine; but there is not only a
silence thereof, but an expression of that which cannot consist therewith, for
liberty of communicating upon self-examination cannot stand with a necessity of
being examined by another.

Let a man examine himself and so let him eat; if any other examination were
requisite, then he that had examined himself could not so eat, this were not
enough, somewhat else must be done, which the Apostle thought not of.

An unconverted man cannot perform (they say) this duty of self examination;
and should we consent with them, yet so neither can he hear or pray as he
ought, nor take heed to his feet when he goes to the house of God about any
part of divine Worship, why then should they not by parity of reason research,
into men's abilities in order to the discharge of these duties, and the
excluding them from partaking thereof that are insufficient? But if unconverted
men cannot examine themselves, they are set under a perplexity that they can
neither approach nor refrain the Lords Table, nor come there, nor yet stay
away; for they may not refrain unless they find themselves unworthy, and they
cannot so conclude of themselves if they cannot examine themselves; neither can
they be warned to stay away upon want of Faith and Repentance, if they be under
an incapacity of discerning this want. Besides, all men lie under the command
to search and try their ways and turn to the Lord, Lament. 3.4. to prove their
own works, Gal. 6.4. to prove all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. unconverted men are
not more susceptible of this task that is requisite to repentance, which is a
grace necessary to qualify men for the Sacrament; may they not then upon the
like cogency of this reason reduce men under a necessity, not only of seeing
all with their eyes, and ballancing every thing by their weights, so as they
must in effect prove all things for them, and they shall hold fast only what
these shall think good, because themselves cannot sufficiently judge of it; but
also of unlocking their consciences to them, and to make confession of all
their ways as well as their faith, that they may make judgment of their
fitness for the Sacrament, and repel the unfit? Do not the Papists set the
necessity of auri^ular Confession upon this bottom? Does not that bitter water
of jealousy flow from the same fountain? However they may be startled or
enraged to hear it, those are but hidden seeds, which fomented by success and
quickened by any superior influence, will in the end bear such fruit. Did they
not do their own work in this, they would sense the proper duties of their
Ministry (that Ars artium and Scientia scientiarum, as Gregory calls it) of
such incumbency, as being scarce idoneous for them, they would not fetch in and
make perergaes and heterogeneal work to themselves. Suspension is a punishment
which ought not to be inflicted but in judicial ways; selfexamination is a
secret work of the heart: who authorized them to set up any judicatory there,
or to usurp that which the Church ever disclaimed to judge of. viz. occult
things? They are open scandals only which they ought to proceed upon, but
whereas they say, unconverted men have not knowledge to examine themselves, we
shall concede they have not, so as to approve themselves to God, but they may
have so much as to acquire an applause from men, and many truly regenerate
Christians also may sense that in the heart, which they cannot yet make out
plausibly through the mouth, as they say one kind of Cedars bears fruit but no
flowers, and another brings forth blossoms but no fruit, and some may be like
the Sentida which seems withered if you touch or come near it, and others like
that Plant at Sombrero which above ground is verdant, and the root but a
Serpent; and this may tend to set up the best talkers for the best Christians,
and put those out of countenance that are less bold and talkative.

For that of Jude the 23. Where (they say) is a duty toward them that are apt
to run into this danger; I suppose it cannot suit with any pertinency to their
purpose, unless to save with fear, were to be afraid that men should use the
means of salvation; to pull out of the fire, be to repel from the Sacrament;
and the garment sposted by the flesh, be those that are not compliable with a
submission to be examined; In good earnest do they think that the Apostle here
gave any command to exclude from the Sacrament those that might else receive
unworthily? Hammond P. Paraeus. Estius. Justinian, etc
The Apostle speaks of that perverse -- faex improbacoetus, which was --
seclere ante alios immanior omnes, the Gnostics, and though it be extensive to
all such atrocious and profligate offenders, whose crimes in the kind and
object of them, are abominable, yet it is not applicable to the withholding
men from doing that which is good, and their duty, though they do it not duly.
Such men are in Scripture only quickened to amend, but not forbidden to do the
duty; they are reprehended for their defects, but not willed to give over, and
told that in vain they do that work of whose fruit they shall be frustrate,
that they may strive to do it better.

And if this saving with fear be to affright men with the denunciation of Gods
formidable judgments, and especially of Hell fire (as interpreters expound it)
and this to be done with making a difference, P. Paraeus. Estius. J^stinian.
Gugnaeus.
those that were weak and infirm being gently to be reproved, but the
contumacious and refractory only to be more severely increpated, or this to be
done when they are judged, arguite judicatos, or arguite disputando, according
to the Greek copies; or disputatos, as Lorinus, that is disputationis
rationisque vi convictos; if this pulling out of the fire be the bringing off
from heresies, as Menochius; or the obscoenities of the Gnostics, as Justinian
and Tirinus; or if it be Hell fire (as the most interpret) from which men ought
to be hastily or forcibly rescued, as Lot was from the fire of Sodom, which
typed the everlasting flames: and this garment spotted by the flesh be the
manners, society, and filthy carnal conversation of the Gnostics (and
consequenly of such like Heretics and impure wretches) and whatsoever belongs
to them, whence contagion may be feared; (as we avoid not only men infected
with the plague but their vestments, or as they declined the touch of their
clothes that were legally impure because it defiled; or else be the external
show of holiness which they carried, which was to be divested as a garment
polluted with filth and impurities (as Justinian:) then this text can conduce
to no advantage of their purpose, who are not pleading for the necessity of
increpating and menacing sinners, by denouncing of Divine vengeance, nor do
make any difference (among such as they suspect or hold to be sinners) but cast
them all off, and neither duly judged nor charitably disputed with, and when
also they are undefiled with such odious errors or impurities, and through
Ecclesiastical censures may fall under the notion of redargution, yet ought
they to be inflicted only on the contumacious, when they have been duly
judged, and for the rest, to pull them out of the fire, is to take them off
from acts in their kind and object sinful, nor from those which are good in
their nature and matter of them, and which are men's duties to do, though they
do them defectively, especially when the frequent doing of them may help to
make the man better, and better able to peform the duty, and amend the defects:
and lastly, no contagion can be contracted by a communion with any in what is
good, and there where they render not any infectious examples, and when they
suspend the practice of any whatsoever evils may be in them.

SECT. XXXI.
1 Timothy 5.22. interpreted and answered. Of Principals and Acessories. 1 Timothy
3.10. considered, not like reasons to examine those that are to communicate,
and those that are to be ordained.

WE shall need to make no great defense against this argument also, not oney
because we have elsewhere grappled with it, but because it long since fell --
Aeneae magni dexira, St. Augustine giving it so many mortal wounds in his
disputations with the Donatists, who alleged that to partake of the Sacraments
with evil men was to be partaker of their sins, and contrary to this of 1 Timothy
5.22. so as this argument being long since killed by him, it is only its ghost
that walks in the Apologists, to make us know, that they in mere contrariety to
the text, pyrtake with the Donatists in their sin of schism.

And having already spoken so largely upon this Theme, perchance it will be
rather necess^ry to cut off much of what is there, than to add more here, and
therefore we shall with Tarquin only cut down some few heads of wha^ grows
copiously elsewhere, as well to further brevity as to prevent saciety, for as the
second draught of fancy in picture never takes like the first, so quod voles
gratum esse, rarum office, says Seneca.

We shall close in consonance with them, That bare reproving sins is not
alwayet sufficient; those that are culpable of such offenses as the Civilians
call Atrocitates sceleris et facinoris, wherewith the Church is scandalized by
the notoriousnesse thereo, it may perchance be expedient to suspend, and if
they continue contumacious, it is requisite to excommunicate. I shall fay in
the words of Augustine, Neque ideo hoc dixerim, ut negligatur Ecclesiastica
disciplina, and permittatur quisque facere quod volat, sine ulla corteptione
and quadam medicinali vindicta and ierribili lenitate and ch^ritatis severitate
-- non malum est correptionis poena, cum sit malum culpae, and shall confess,
Vbi fieri permittit ratio pacis and non fit, ipsa negligentia trabit, and in
periculo consentiendi est per desidiam corrigendi; But when the faults are not
atrocious, when they are a multitude that offend, when they cannot be separated
without the stain of peace and breach of unity, when their offenses are only
known to a few, not at all by public and notorious knowledge, when they are not
yet censured for crimes evident in the fact, or confessed, or verified by a
judicial sentence; to permit such to have access to the Lords Table, or to
come thither to participate with them, is not at all to partake of their sins.

To ratify this conclusion, we have not only the authority but the reasons of
Augustine, who was the Champion and prolocutor of the Church against the
Donatists. Contra Crese. l. c. 36.
Take a few rays of his light and sparks of that flame which elsewhere shines
more amply Nec causa cansa praejudicat, nec persona personae, unusquisque
portabitonus suum, liberet te ista sententia, Qui se purum servat non
communicate alienis peceatis, immundum non tangit qui ad peccatum nulli
consentit, and while men are non consentientes quibus haec placent, Contr.
Cresc. li. 3. cap. 36.
sed tolerantes quibus haec displicent, non operantes per morbidam cupiditatem,
sed tolerantes per pacificam charitatem, in communione sacramentorum, non
participatione operum; he affirms that communicant Altari Christi, non alienis
peccatis, non facta cum talibus sed Domini sacramenta communicant, and
confidently gives this Corollary, Manifestum non contaminari alienis peccatis
quando cum iis sacramenta communicant. Epist. 48. tom. 2. p. 36.
And as in answer to this text urged by Cresconius, he says, Vt ostenderet
quemadmodum quisque non commu^icaret alienis peccatis, ad hoc addidit, Te ipsum
castum serva, non enim qui se castum servat, communicate alienis peccatis,
quamvis non little peccata, sed illa quae ad judicium sumunt Dei sacramenta
communicet cum iis a quibus se castum servando facit alienum, alioquin etiam
Cyprianus (quod ^absit) peccatis raptorum and soeneratorum collegarum
communicabat cum quibus tamen in communione divinorum sacramentorum manebat. So
elsewhere he tells the Dona ists upon this occasion, Contra lit. Petil. l. 2. c.
22.
Non dixisse Dominum praesente Juda, nondum mundi estis, sed jam mundi estis,
addidit autem, non omnes, quia ibi erat qui mundus non erat, qui tamen si
praesentia sua caeteros pollueret, non iis diceretur, jam mundi estis, sed
diceretur (ut dixi) nondum mundi estis -- certe si putatis apud nos similes
esse Judae, haec verba nobis dieite, mundi estis sed non omnes, non autem hoc
dicitis sed dici^is, propter quosdam immundos, immundi estis omnes.

Whereas they say that as in Civil Judicatories there are Principals and
Accessories, so before God there will be too, non-examiners are accessories
before the fact. But the Law will supply them with as little aid as the Gospel,
for in Law he is only an accessory before the fact, that abets, precures,
consents to, or commands a felony or any evil act from whence a felony
proceeds; but first as the lowest offenses involve no accessories (as
trespasses;) so by proportion where the faults are not exitious or scandalous,
dalous, there should be no accessories by commuunion with such as are only so
faulty.

And secondly where the action is naturally good that is commanded, though in
pursuance thereof a Felony may be committed, the commander of the act is not
accessory to the Felony; so the receiving of the Sacrament being in its own
nature a good and necessary duty, he that consents or should enjoin them to
receive, who become unworthy receivers, is not accessory to the unworthy
reception

So thirdly, since participation of sin is only in those acts which are evil
in the kind and object thereof, not in those acts which are good, and the
deficiency is only in the well doing, and that defect neither caused or
consented to by another, they therefore that suffer those to come to the
Sacrament that partake unworthily, and participate with them but not in
unworthiness, neither abet, procure, consent to or command the unworthiness,
nor are accessory to the Ataxy but the act, not the formal but the natural
part thereof, and the physical not the moral action, as long as he that
administers or permits any to come to the administration, is not the cause of
their unworthy receiving, nor the unworthiness of the person known to him in
that way wherein it regularly ought to be, viz. (...) and notorious knowledge,
though it be evil of the part of the receiver, (...) ^he part of the giver,
nor is any fault to be imputed to him, who cannot be (...) another partakes
with an evil, Suarez as before.
what he distributes with a good intent and affection. And with the action of
receiving, there is not conjoined necessarily and of it self, the
unworthiness of receiving, for he may partake worthily if he will, so as there
is no cooperation in evil but a permission, which morally cannot be avoided,
the cooperation being only to the receiving, not unworthy reception, neither
does the administer do against his conscience in administering, for the Dictate
thereof is not to be regulated by his private and speculative knowledge, that
this man is unworthy, but by his practical knowledge, considering what he ought
to do for time and place in concurrence of such circumstances; of the man's
coming to demand the Sacrament, and his occult unworthiness, and the
administer does not dispense it in his own name, but according to order
established by God, forbidding any Churchmember to be denied his right to holy
things upon the private knowledge or will of the administer, who is to
distribute it not formally as to one worthy or unworthy, but to one undivided
from the Church, and to exhibit that which is the witness of Christian
profession, to them profess the Christian faith, the Sacraments being notes of
the true Church; and the receiving thereof an act of communion with the true
Church.

And if this can support and justify the dispensing of the Sacrament to such
as by private knowledge only are known to be unworthy, much more will it bear
out the dispensation thereof to those that are only suspected, or have only
not upon trial given demonstrative signs of heir being worthy. And seeing also
unconverted men can neither hear nor pray with faith, and consequently sin in
both, as well as when they partake of the Sacrament; it must consequently be
as much a partaking of their sins to admit them and communicate with them in the
one, as in the other.

What they tautologize, (and thereby constrain us like Mercury reasoning with
Battus, to conform to them because -- admisso sequimur vestigia p^ssu) of the
telling them that are unworthy, and yet are partakers, that they are ^aints
interessed in Gospel privileges and promises, and justified persons by giving
them the seals of the now Covenant, is neither pertinent to this subject of
partaking their sins, nor as (has been formerly manifested) is consonant to
truth or sound reason; it makes them relative Saints, and so are all Church
members, not effectively or meritoriously cut off. The Sacrament ^e^s not men
but the promises to them, and upon condition of believing, and that they may do
to those that believe not, and in the condi^ional promises all of the Church
have interest, which are the same promises in the word and in the Sacrament,
(though differently applied) and the one and the other hold forth justification
in the same way of believing, and upon such condition and not otherwise. They
are not assured that all those are justified to whom they impart the seals,
and why are any made saints interessed, in the promises, and justified more by
this Sacrament, if they should have it, than by the other which they have?

That non examiners are accessories before the fact, is one of their Dictates,
but none of their demonstrations. That those who are under violent suspicion of
gross ignorance shall come under examination, we deny not; that those who are
vehemently suspected of scandals may be examined, and witnesses may be so also
concerning them, we grant, but that they may examine of the sincerity of grace,
or soundness of conversion, such a power God never gave, nor can we suffer them
to usurp. As what have I to judge those that are without, so to judge that)
which is within, the Church judges only of scandal, not that which is secret
in the heart. Suspension is a penal act, and therefore not to be inflicted but
by judicial sentence, upon evidence of crime, nor for want of evidence of sound
grace. Every one (as is the rule of the Casuists) is to be esteemed good,
until some manifest evil appear of him. He that is a Church member, has a
right to holy things, and to admit him to partake them, it is enough not to
know the contrary. We need not seek positively to know his worthiness, they
must not set up their thrones of judgment in Gods peculiar, Contra Epist.
Parmen. l. 2. ^ 6. Contra lit. Petil. l. c. 23. Coutra Douat. post. Coll. c. 4.
the heart. Had the ancient Church sensed or practiced such a necessary duty,
Augustine needed not to have feared the eradication of the wheat with the
tares, upon a denial of communion of Sacraments with evil men, for such a
curious examination would have distinguished one from the other, and the one
might be pulled up and the other left standing, and there would scarce have been
place for those expresses, Bonis malinon oberunt qui ignorantur, and also
quandoquidem malos in unitate catholica vel non noverant, and likewise aut
aliis benis non potuerit demonstrari, for they and their condi^ion might well
then have been detected and manifested.

The Apostle speaks of Ordination of Ministers, wherein by not examining the
persons to be ordained, guilt is contracted, and when done without proving, as
1 Timothy 3.10. then it is sudden. That the words are to be understood of laying
on of hands in Ordination, I confess has better authority, but they seem to
have more reason, who take it for imposition of hands in absolving of
penitents, Abbispin. l. 2. obs. 31. p. 400 and obscr. 32. p. 412. See Dr.
Hammond Annot.
as do Tertullian and Cyprian among the ancients; to which sense the context
before and after is more suitable, and that part of the precept keep thy self
pure is by some of this judgment thus paraphrased, that by knowing what is
committed by other men, he be not corrupted or defiled and drawn into the like,
but remain pure and undefiled, (...) and (...) signifying to commit the sins,
not only to be blamable for others guilt. But let it be meant properly of
Ordination, If they could give us such another text, administer not or admit
not to the Lords Supper suddenly, they would as Scaliger says of Mamonides,
desinere nugari; but as there is no such like precept, so there is not like
reason for the one or other, or else the Apostle doubtless when he gave
directions concerning the administration would have held it forth.

First, There is no command generally obliging all intelligent Christians to
take Orders, Addit ad Aquinat. 3. q. 36. butt. 4. Nugnus ibid.
there is to take, eat, do this.

Secondly, No man has such a claim to Orders, but that it is not sufficient
that the Ordainer knows not the contrary, but he must positively know his
worthiness, but a Church member has such a right to the seals of that faith
which he professes, and to the notes of that Church wherein he is
incorporated, as to receive them unless he be publicly known to be unworthy,
the one requires special Charismataes, the other only common graces to entitle
to the signs (though special be requisite to obtain the things signified.)

Thirdly, Often the persons to be ordained are not known unto or familiarly
acquainted with the Ordainer, but the Pastor should be more conversant with his
flock then to be ignorant of their condition.

Fourthly, Filvicius Cas. tract. 9. c. 4. Sect 88. Part 1. did. 25. nullus
ordinetur.
No grace is now usually given by Ordination to meliorate the persons, but
grace is conferred by the Sacrament adjumental to their amendment.

Fifthly, Notwithstanding all this, those that are notoriously worthy the
Casuists say are not to be examined before Ordination, and the gloss on
Gratian tells us, Testimonium populi aequivalet examinationi, verum sufficit
quod clericus ordinandus habeat famam perse, and per hoc etiam patet, quod noti
non sunt examinandi, sed tantum ignoti; but they exempt none though of known
worthiness from examination before admission to communicate, which shows it is
not their worthiness they seek to be assured of, but to make sure of them.

Beside, the prohibition here to partake of other men's sins, in the judgment of
Calvin and others, is only this, Although others break forth into this
rashness (to ordain persons unworthy) do not thou follow, or have fellowship
with them in such acts, not those of the ordained but ordainers. And whereas
they allege 1 Timothy 3.10. That ordination was not to be made without examining
or proving; we grant a proving was there required, but it was a probation by
long experience, not by a personal examination, as Chrysostom expounds it,
Multo jam tempore explorati, as Bullinger; Probatio constantis fidei and vitae
inculpatae, as Estius; Praesertim quod Diaconis etiam dispensatio thesaurorum
Ec lesiae committeretur; and a Lapide to the like effect, Quorum virtus diu
spectata and probata; so as this arrow may be shot back against them to
demonstrate that knowledge and proof of men may be had without personal
examination, viz. by observing their coversation, and that therefore it is but
a paralogisme when they argue, The worthy must be admitted, and the unworthy
excluded, therefore all must be examined.

SECT. XXXII.
1 Pet. 3.15 Heb. 13.17. discussed. What obedience is due to Ministers, and
what power they have.

WE have formerly also defeated the force of their Arguments levied out of
those Texts, and we shall not actum agere, Diatribe sect. 3
since even the too frequent use of Cordials makes them less efficacious.
Concerning that of 1 Pet. 3.15. I have elsewhere showed, that this is to be
understood of a defense of the faith against despisers thereof, or disputers
against it, or a confession thereof under persecution, opposite to dissembling,
or as Grotius, Grot. Anno^. in locum.
of a preparedness causam reddere cur sitis Christiani: Sic (...) habemus,
Phil. 1.17. 2 Timothy 4.16. Acts 22.1. not so much to profess what, as wherefore
we believe (as Tirinus also concurreth;) neither is it an answer subsequent
unto, or drawn forth by any probatory examination, nor confined or contracted
to a disposing men for the Sacrament, nor any way respecting or appertaining
thereunto; it is so far from being to be done only there (as they obtrude it)
as that thereunto there is here no reference at all, much less is there any
command or warrant, that for neglect or refusing to do this, the Sacrament
should be denied, and this answer is to be given to every man, not only to the
Minister and Elders, and they are as much obliged to give as to take this
answer, and by force of this Scripture are no more empowered then any others to
examine, and are as much liable to be examined by every one, and Didymus
thought that the Pastors of the Church were those indeed that were principally
concerned to give this answer, as best qualified to defend the Christian faith,
and most engaged to do it.

Whereas they say, That if this were to be done before enemies, then much more
and easier to be made before friends, it follows not, because there is not the
like occasion to do it before the one as the other; there God calls us to be
Confessors, to own and bear witness to his truth, Aquinas 22. q. 3. art. 3.
Valentia, Sylvius.
First thereby to glorify his name, from whom some honor would be subtracted
by the erubescence of him that should be silent. 2. To instruct or confirm our
brethren, who by our tacitnesse might be scandalized, and either averted from
the faith, or retarded therein. And 3. to covince the unbelievers and repress
their Insultations. Here is neither call, nor need of such testimony, where we
and they do all make open and constant profession of the faith without
opposition; there not to give such answer, is (Interpretatively at least) to
deny and disclaim the truth of the Gospel, and disown our profession, as if we
had not faith, or the faith were not true and worth the suffering for or
defending, or an instable and uncertain faith, which we might at pleasure
profess or deny, and so to make our selves obnoxious to be denied by the Lord
Christ; here we only deny their usurped authority, Cas. Cons. l. 2. c. 1. Cas.
81. p. 13.
and disclaim subjection, and are out of any the former cases. When our faith
is otherwise well enough known, there needs no iterate confession, says
Baldwin, which if, as he says, it be vain boasting rather than a Christian
virtue in us to offer it, it can be no less than needless, imperious
usurpation in them to call as to it.

That which follows, Of their desires to be helpers of men's faith, not
upbraiders of their weakness, of their hope to show as much meekness and
gentleness as they expect submission, is but a Fistula dulce canit, and only
a -- mittit in hamo, some music to make the Camel go on with his burden, and a
clawing the horse the easier to mount into the Saddle. They have well helped
their faith, when one of an hundred scarce is fit for the Sacrament, and they
are like to cherish the weak that will not receive the strong, and do hold them
in the account of Fools and madmen, yea Dogs and swine, and when they cast
off an hundred for one they admit, their meekness and gentleness is somewhat
of kin to the lenity of the Duke of Alva, too much whereof had lost the
Low Countries, and this profession thereof was learned from Domitian, Qui
nunquam tristiorem sententiam sine praefatione clementiae pronunciavit; Non est
fides ubi contrarium vides; But let their temper and frame of spirit be such as
they would set it off, yet those are in a perilous condition that lie under an
exorbitant power, from which they have no security but the goodness of those
that exercise it, who are men neither immortal nor immutable

Concerning that of Hebrews 13.17. they first tell us, That they forget
themselves very much that construe this of the Magistrate (though Chrysostom
were one of those that here took a nap and forgot himself, -- bonus hic
dormitat Homerus:) but that we may not be thought to sleep also, we shall grant
that those that watch for souls, were the Pastors and Governors of the Church,
and consequently yield, that we must be ruled and governed by them in all due
obedience. Yet what we give them will prove like to the purse of Maravidis,
which the Biscainers present to the King of Spain, which he shall be never the
richer for.

For first, had the Bishops alleged (as they did) this text for support of
their Ordinances, let them contemplate what answer they would have rendered, and
we shall beseech them to lend it to us upon good security that it shall be
repaid them again with interest.

Secondly, If those which they say are offended with the grosnesse of the
administrations at home, and deserting a communion in the Sacrament with their
own Pastors, are gathered into an association with the Apologists, contrary to
the will of their proper Pastors, should be pressed with this text, and
admonished, or increpated that this suits not with the obedience they owe unto
them, that they being that portion of the Flock assigned to them, and which
they ought to rule in the words of Cyprian, I shall presume the Apologists
would appear to be their Advocates, and we shall desire to retain them also to
make the same plea for us, and if affection can make them cloquent in the one,
the cause may in the other.

Thirdly, this text does give no immediate or proper confirmation to their way
in it self, but only proves it in alio, and by a remote principle, but the
effect is attributed to the immediate cause which contributes or disposes to
that form which denominates, as we say, Sol and homo generant hominem, yet the
man is only said to be the father, though he be quickened to generation by the
Suns influence; so though Governors are animated with power by God to make
Laws that must be obeyed, yet those Laws cannot properly be said to be
commanded by God, but by men, only secundarily and by accident from God: and I
may as well say, that every statute law is to be proved by the word of God,
because it enjoins obedience to Magistrates, as they can confirm their
discipline by this text, because it commands submission to Pastors.

Fourthly, If by force of this Scripture they are to be obeyed simply,
absolutely, and without any condition (as the Papists say of the Pope) then
truly we may say farther of them as the Canonists do of him, That God and he
have but one Consistory, and we may not appeal from him unto God, and with Dr.
Stapleton that we ought only to look not what is spoken but who speaks, and
we must be enthralled to that servile faith prescribed by he old Rabbis who
because the Law commands not to decline from the word which they shall show
thee to the right hand or to the left, infer, that when they say of the right
hand, it is the lest, and of the left that it is the right, we must believe
them, or be modelled to that blind obedience of the Jesuits, sicut jumentum
obedit Domino, and si^ut baculus in manu senis and they may command what they
list, and this text will be a common Repertory to fit them with proofs for it,
as indeed it is such a Catholicon among them that usurp the name of
Catholics, being urged by Bellarmine to prove the Pope may make laws to bind
the conscience; by others, for blind obedience, and by some for the
infallibility of Councels; But the answer which Whitaker gives Bellarmine, may
suit well to be returned also to the Apologists, Obediendum esse prapositis (i)
Episcopis, quis dubitat? sed non proptere a sequetur licere illis sanctiunculas
nescio quas excogitare, Contro. 4. q. 7. tom. 2. p. 722.
and easdem nobis obtrudere tanquam divinas and ad salutem necessarias,
iisdemque conscientias nostras obligare: nequaquam obediendum ergo est, sed cum
cautione, fi praeeant illi in Domino, and nihil suum tradant.

That they may know what obedience to expect, we must tell them what power
only they can challenge. They are not Mandatores, sed Mandatarii, and must
first receive before they give the commands. Their power is not Imperii (nam
Domini non servi imperium est) sed legationis, and must as Ambassadors show
their Letters of Credence, and not go beyond their Commission, they have no
Dictator-like, Praetorian or legislative power, Junius ut ante Anton. de Dom.
de repub Eccles. l. 1. c. 2.
but Ministerial and executive only, jus dicere, and non dare, qualis est
doctoris non judicis, nec imperii sed consilii, and have only a declarative not
an effective sentence, and a directive not coactive, an accessory rather than
proper jurisdiction, and Ministerial not authoritative, even in excluding from
the Sacrament those that are scandalous, and therefore may not repel any
according to their judgment but according to the sentence of the Lord the
righteous Judge, they are therefore only to be obeyed as publishers and
interpreters of Gods word, and alone in what they speak according to that rule.
If they shall confess it, and say they pretend to no more than this, then they
might have spared to allege this text to prove they are to be obeyed, for we
deny not that proposition, but if they assume that the obedience which they
require in this particular is of that kind, we cannot by granting it give up
our liberties, which as Alexander answered Diogenes, is a talent too great to
be bestowed upon beggars (of principles.)

And we shall be bold farther to remind them, That though they have now raised
an inundation and an unlimited overflowing of their power, yet anciently it
was restrained within narrow banks, and ran so sparingly, that it might be
easily stopped or turned, and they that now renounce and cast off the Church,
were of old, Cyprian Epist. 68. p. 201.
subject to be rejected and cast out of the Church, a peccatore praeposito
separare se debent, says Cyprian, nec se ad sacrilegi sacerdotis sacrificia
miscere, quando ipsa maxim potestatem habeat vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes
vel indignos recusandi, and they that solely and arbitrarily drive away the
multitude from the Church of their choosing, it was then thought to have more of
righteousness and charity for them to go off from the Church at the command of
the multitude, De jure pleb. 2.24.
for so Blundel alleges Clemens speaking to the Pastors of Corinth, Quis
inter vos generosus, quis misericors, quis charitatis plenus? di^at, si propter
me seditio and contentio and schismata oriantur, excedo, abeo; quocunque
volueritis, quaecunque a multitudine praecepta sunt facio?

Neither can we concede what they conclude, That Ministers must do all beside
preaching and exhortation, which may conduce to the peoples salvation, unless
they restrain and limit it to that which ought to be done by Ministers, and for
which they are empowered, (for Magistrates, parents, etc. have somewhat to do
adjumentall to the salvation of others, which Ministers may not usurp or
intrude into) and when we have granted thsi Thesis so limited and restrained,
yet we shall deny the Hypothesis, that the course they thus plead for is
conductive to salvation; we shall notwithstanding yield what they infer, That
Ministers must give account of them which cannot be well done without taking
knowledge of their estates: But we cannot farther concede, that this they cannot
do by any other way without special examination antecedently to the Sacrament,
or that because they must give an account of them, that therefore they must
take a particular account from them, because they are to be accountable only
for their teaching, not our learning; of the undertaking, not the success, pro
cura non curatione, otherwise we should not at all wonder at that of
Chrysostom, Miror si quis Rectorum possit salvari. The civil Magistrate must
be also an accountant for the people under his government, yet though he may
call them to reckoning for the manifest breaches of his Laws, yet he neither
uses nor needs to take an account of them how perfectly they keep them. And
it will not much facilitate the Ministers account, nor help to perfect it to
take this account of men, once alone (for so they pretend to do) and at their
admission to the Sacrament, Whitaker contro. 2. c. 17. Gerhard. de Eceles. c.
10. sect. 126.
and to make trial how they are disposed for one ordinance only. Their
Cardinal duty is to preach the word, ours to hear and receive it with faith,
the Sacraments being but visible words and appendices of the word heard, and
not efficacious without it, the word being as the Sun to all other Stars,
which though they have proper special influences, yet all have their light
from that, or as some Philosophers think of the soul of the world, which
quickens and actuates all particular forms in their specificall operations.

Why then should they not take account how we are prepared for, or do attend
unto, or profit by hearing, (and so by proportion for praying) as well as for
Sacramental communicating? They shall not give account for us as we are only
at one time, viz. at our first admission to the holy Table, but for the
constant course of our lives, and not for our discharge of that one act only,
but for the whole series of our actions, and therefore by the like consequence
of this reason, they should examine and take account from us continually of all
our doings, and reduce us under a necessity of auricular confession, for which
all their principles are very pregnant with conclusions.

SECT. XXXIII.
Levit. 3.15. 2 Chronicles. 23 19. Joel 3.17. Nahum 1 15 Zechar. 14.21. brought off
from the rack whereon they have set them. The difference between Legal and
Moral uncleanness: what the former typed.

AS he at Atheus that hearing the various Disputes of the Philosophers about
Summum bonum, went to the Market and bought somewhat of all sorts he met there
in an expectation to find it in some one thing or other; so the Apologists have
collected and aggregated into one Argument sundry texts, in hope some among
them may fit their turn, and help to prove their way, Vi si non prosint singula
juncta juvent. But as he that bought a pound of Sugar to perfume his chamber,
if he had doubled the weight, could not have meliorated the scent, because
though Sugar was sweet, yet it was not proper for that sense, nor in that way
to be used; so their multiplied texts will bring no advantage to their cause,
because they are so extremely dissonant, and so infinitely wide from the
purpose, that even the Cloak which Paul left at Troas (had that text been
alleged) would have served as well to cover their nakedness, and it might
justly be said of them, O miseros! qua vos necessitas huc adegit?

That which first appears in this maniple is Levit. 13.5. but sure they might
have dealt with this multifarious argument, as was used to be done to the
Leper, even put a covering upon its lips (for it can speak nothing to the
purpose) and have set it without the camp, for it will not militate for them.

But they are either very forgetful, (Sccuros latices and longa oblivia potant)
or very immutable, Non ita Carpathiae variant Aquilonibus undae:) For in the
tenth Section they admonish us, That he that builds Arguments upon the Fathers
Allegories and Morals on Scripture, will come off weakly in his conclusions;
And therefore unless they think their own Allegories and Morals to be a more
stable foundation to build upon, then are those of the Fathers, or else have no
beam whereby to weigh things, but their interest, so that as with them Tempus
est mensura motus, and their motions are measured by the times; so also verum,
bonum, and finis convertuntur, and that only is true and good which suits with
their ends, I wonder they could now hope to raise any strong conclusions upon
the weak ground of Allegor^es and Morals.

But to answer ad rem as well as ad heminem; Rivet. in Psalm. 19. tom 2. p. 74
and in Hoseac 11. p. 742. Sal. Glass. Philolog. sacr. l. 2. p. 1. tract. 2
sect. 3. p. 192. Idem Gerhard loc. tom. 1. sect. 139. and in answer to this
very place alleged by Bellar. for confession, t. 3. sect. 113
First, Allegories which are not innate in Scripture, and there expressly
delivered, but i^late only, and raised and brought in by Interpreters, though
if seberly used, have their profitable use in moral doctrines (and they were
no otherwise made use of by me where the Apologists took up the exception)
tamen horum documenta non sunt necessi^atis, sed tantum contingentiae ita ue
delectare and illustrare in docendo possunt, probare autem minimum, says
Rivet, and are only like to pictures (as Glassius affirms) which only serve
for secundary ornaments to the house whose strength rises from litetall
expositions as from stone walls, and he commends a saying of Percrius, Sensus
allegoricus praeterquam quod non est ad decendum quippiam probandumque satis
idoncus. and firmus, est etiam varius, multiplex and incertus, tantaque in
varictate constitutus quanta est hominum ad eos sensus singendos solertia and
ubertas ingenii. And seeing a so it is a Maxim among Theologues, Theologia
symbolica non est argumentative, we shall say to them as Augustine to his
Donatists, Haec mystica sunt, operta sunt, figurata sunt, aliquid certum quod
interpret non eget, flagitamus,

But secondly, p^ssing over the Thesis, to consider the Hypothesis, they
infer from this text, That if the Priests were made Judges of the peoples
fimesse, as to legal qualification, then may Ministers try and discern of men's
sitnesse for spiritual communion. First, let them take that answer which
Gerhard gives the Papists producing this argument to warrant confession, Vbi
supra.
Epistola ad Hebraos Levitici Sacerd^tii typum diligenter exponit, nuspiam
autem ex eo ministris Novi Testamenti talem judiciariam potestatem assignat.

Secondly, Let them learn from Calvin what he delivers upon the same occasion,
Translato sacerdotio necesse est legis translationem fieri, omnia Sacerdotia ad
Christum translata sunt, Instit. l. 3. c. 4. sect. 4. p. 222. Willet. Synop.
contro. 14. q. 6. p. 733. and Tetrastyl. pap. p. 299. Piscator obs. in locum.
in eo implera and finita, ad eum igitur unum jus omne and honor sacerdotii
translatus est, and to the same effect may they hear Dr. Willet, Who knows
not, says he, that herein the Priesthood of the Law did decipher the
Priesthood of Christ by whom our spiritual leprosies are discerned and cured?
And both whose testimonies will be somewhat cleared and confirmed by Piscators
observation upon this Text, Quod judicium de lepra attributum fuit summo
sacerdoti, per^id videtur significatum fuisse Christum, qui per summum
sacerdotem praefiguratus fuit, de lepra nostra spirituali, id est, de nostris
peccatis recte cognoscere atque judicare, ita scilicet ut poenitentes quidem
mundos pronunciet, impoenitentes vero immundos ac proinde societate
poenitentium excludendos.

Thirdly, though the leprosy may signify grievous and notorious sins, as not
only Divines have applied it in Allegories, L. 58. c. 32.
but Pierius also has put it among his Hieroglyphics, and though the removing
of the Leper to dwell apart without the Camp, while they were in the
wilderness, and out of the City when they came to fix in Canaan, may
perchance type or shadow forth the excommunicating of the scandalous and
impenitent, yet what Analogy has the Leper with him that by submission to
their Disciplinarian trial has not approved to them his true grace or
worthiness? and what resemblance has the putting out of the camp (nay or
keeping out of the Temple) with suspension from the Sacrament only? To conform
their way to a similitude with thrusting out of the Lepers, they should shut
those whom they suspend not only out of the Church, but the town also. Dr.
Willet who puts this among the loose arguments of the Papists, (being produced
to assert Confession) in answer tells them, That the Priests might not take
knowledge of every infirmity or diseas, but of that which was notorious or
contagious And Calvin consonantly, Neque de morbo occulto voluit Deus
sacerdotes cognoscere, they had no commission to search or strip every one of
the people, to try if he were sound or leprous, as they would examine every man
to make trial of his fitness.

Leprosy as Fernolius tells us, Fernel. pathol. l. 6, c. 19. R. Riolan genesis
method. medendi, c. 9.
est morbus venenatus in terrena substantia totius corporis naturam immutans,
and as Riolan affirms, Cancer totius corporis proinde insanabilis, which is
called Elephantiasis, quia situt Elephas omnium animalium; sic Elephantia sis
omnium morborum maximus, and so infectious, that qui bibit in eodem vitro cum
Elephantiaco inquinabitur.

And therefore though the judging of, and exterminating the Leper may perhaps
in a more tolerable Allegory bear some proportion to the consuring and
excommunicating nefarious and notorious sinners, obstinately persisting in
impenitence, who do give scandal and may spread infection; yet what conformity
carries it to the suspending of those who have not satisfied them of their
fitness or worthiness, and who are innocent of such great transgressions.

The Priest was to take curions view and to make several inspections, not
arbitrarily and precipitously (as is their use) to pronounce men Lepers, and he
was to distinguish between a Scab and a Leprosy, verse 8. for a scab did not
shut out of the Camp, neither must small faults from the Church or Sacrament,
Si quis suspect^ sit infirmitatis (says Ambrose) indulge aliquantulum; medendi
periti cum vident notas aegritudines, non primo medicinam adhibent, Willot. in
locum, Doct. 2. and 5.
sed tempus expectant. And again, Diu tractatur putrida pars, si sanari potest
medicamentis, si non potest a bono medico abscinditur; sie Episcopi affectus
boni est, ut optet sanari infirmos, serpentia auferre ulcera, adducere aliqua,
non abseindere, postrumo quod sanari non potest cum dolor abscindere. But
while they use a contrary method, sure the plague of leprosy is among the
Priests, who have the signs thereof not in the rent of their clothes, but in
the rent of the Church,

The next Scripture is 2 Chronicles. 23.19. another Allegory (and therefore no
Argument) as Hierom says of Origin, Praefat. 10. Isai. ad Amabil. Episcop.
while he wanders in his free course of Allegories he makes his wit the
Churches Sacraments; so they make their Allegories the rule of their
distribution of the Sacraments in the Church: But if a clear and impartial
judgment had been the Porter, this Argument drawn from Jehosaphats Porters,
etc. had not been suffered to enter, not only because to reduce their practice
of Discipline to a resemblance and conformity to what was done to those that
were unclean under the law, they should not only debar those whom they think
impure from coming to the Sacrament, but from entering the Church; yea from
civil commerce, Instit. Moral. tom. 3. l. 10. p. 679.
for polluti praescripto legis arcebantur ab ingressu in templum and ab aliorum
convictu and consortio, says Azorius, comfortmably to Scripture, neither were
either of the legal Sacraments made or given in the Temple, (for if the Paschal
Lamb were there killed and sacrificed, yet it was eaten at home;) so that the
keeping out of the temple was not the keeping off from the Passover, however
that which did prohibit the entry at the one, might forbid the eating of the
other; and though Jehosophats Porters suffered none that were unclean in any
thing to enter the house of the Lord, yet this must be understood of evident
and apparent uncleanness, and of such as were notoriously known to be defiled;
for we do not find, nor can imagine that they searched any men or women, or
made trial of them by denuding them, and some kinds of uncleanness contracted
by contact were not discernible by any re-search.

But chiefly because neither the Porters can rationally be supposed to Type the
Church Officers, nor the Temple only to signify the Lords Table, nor indeed is
there any color or proportion for it (so as there can be no beauty in the
Allegory) that legal uncleanesse should be a figure of, or bear resemblance
with moral filthynesse contracted by sinful actions; Philo makes the Temple to
be an image of the world; some more probably a Type of Christ's natural body;
others of his mystical body, the Church: But if of the Church, yet whether of
the true Catholic or the Visible Church, or of the Militant or triumphant
Church, which, or whether of these is not clear and liquid, Mr. Ball. answ. to
Can, part 2. page 67. August. contra 2 Epist. Gaudentii l. 2. c. 25
without some divine light; for as it is only appertaining to God to design a
Type, so it is peculiar to him alone to expound and make known the
signification thereof, Homo vobis dixit an Deus? si Deus, legite hoc nobis ex
lege, Prophetis, Psalmis, Apostolicis and Euangelicis literis: -- so autem
homines dixerunt, ecce figmentum humanum, etc.

But certainly it is evident that the Temple did not Type the Table of the
Lord, no man ever fell upon that fancy, Tam vana nullum decepit imagine somnus:
And therefore however this Argument might seem subservient to prove the casting
out of the Church by Excemmunication, or might reflect a little superficial
gloss on the Independent way of admitting none into the Church but manifest
Saints, yet it bears no color to paint over their practice, who permit them to
be Members of the Church and partakers of other Ordinances, whom they exclude
from the Lords Supper: And if hereby the Church had been figured, and also that
no wicked person should enter therein, yet either the Church was thereby
described, as women were by Sophocles, only what they ought to be, not what
they were; or as they shall be in Heaven, that new Jerusalem, where no unclean
person shall enter; for otherwise it can be no true Church whereof any wicked
persons are Members.

So likewise legal uncleanness is clean wide from figuring or obumbrating
either scandalous sins, which may merit casting out; or irregeneration, for
which pretendedly they let not in. For

1. There might be legal uncleanness without any sin, as in some diseases of
men and women, and in some necessary or casual contacts; and there might be
odious sins without any legal uncleanesse: sins did not make legally upclean,
nor legal uncleanness always sinful, unless a man did wilfully neglect his
cleansing. A holy man might be unclean, and a wicked man clean.

2. All sin was forbidden by God, and no sin was necessary, but all
uncleanness was not prohibited, and some was of necessity to be contracted, as
that which grew from Burial of the dead, Numb. 19.11. or removing dead
Carcasses, Levit. 11.39. and making of the water of separation, Numb. 19. verse.
7.

3. No man could sin unwillingly, every sin is in some respect voluntary, but a
man might be unclean against his will, Leviticus 15.8. Numbers 19. verse. 14.

4. The least uncleanness shut out from the Tabernacle and Temple, but the
least sin excludes not from the Church or Sacrament, even our enemies being
judges.

5. Things as well as persons were liable to uncleanness, but only rational
creatures are capable of sinning.

6. He was clean that was most defiled, as he whose leprosy covered all his
skin from head to foot, Levit. 13.13, 14. but the Analogy holds not in the
most leprous sinners.

7. He that sprinkled the water of Separation upon another for his clensing,
as well as he that confected it, became unclean, Numb. 19.19. and then to
support the resemblance, they that by censure cast out the scandalous or
restore the penitent should contract some of the guilt and punishment.

8. He that was unclean was left to cleanse himself by absolution, there were no
tryers to make judgment how exactly he had performed it, and then for
correspondence, every man ought to be left to examine and judge himself.

9. He that in many cases was unclean might soon and easily wash himself, and
his uncleanness was but an Ephemeron, and lasted but till even, and he might
not dispense with, nor be prohibited eating the Passover, notwithstanding his
present uncleanness, he only ought to wash before he eat, Numb. 19.10. But as
we cannot suppose that sins are so easily absterst, so they will not grant,
that their censures are so facilly to be removed.

10. Bailey diswas. c. 7 p. 172.
There was no positive command to exclude the greatest sinners from the
tabernacle or Temple. It is a question, (says a learned Presbyterian) whether
very scandalous sins did keep men ceremonially clean from the Temple and
Sacrifices; but out of doubt the doubt of irregeneration alone was never a bar
to keep any from the most holy and solemn services, but it is put out of
question not only by Augustine, Illud Templum quod ab eo vocatur spelunca
latronum, certe and boni intrabant and mali, Contra Epist. Parm. l. 2 c. 17
and elsewhere unum templum fuit quo universi utebantur, nec quenquam
Prophetarum qui tanta dixerunt in malos, constituisse aliud templum,
sacrificia, sacerdotes; and again Prophetas sanctos cuminiquis in uno templo
sub iisdem sacerdotibus inter eadem sacramenta versatos, quia novcrunt inter
sanctum and immundum (non sicut isti sentiunt) corporaliter populum dividendo,
sed been judicando and been viven do discernere; Brevicul. collat. cum Donat.
3. Diei. p. 118. tom. 7.
but also this is made evident by clear evidence of Scripture, for we hear of
the Publican praying in the Temple, and there we find the Woman taken in
Adultery to be brought in, and though the Pharisees odiously condemned our
Savior for a false Prophet, a blasphemer, to have a Devil, and to work by him,
yet they never pretended to drive him out of the Temple, In lege olim, says
Gualther, eos qui peccaverant non a tabernaculo, a sacris communionibus
exclusos, sed potius jussos fuisse legimus, Epist. ad Bezam.
ut pro delicti retione sacrificia facerent, and cum ob legalem immunditiem
quae in corpore, haerebat, a sacrorum usu arcerentur, neminem tamen propter
delictum aliquod rejectum fuisse constat -- Prophetas quidem legimus graviter
eos corripuisse qui indigne sacris communicabant, at censores constitutos
fuisse ab illis qui sacrificaturos singulos vel public vel privatim probarent,
and prout ipsis videretur vel admitterent vel reji. erent, nuspiam me legisse
memini. And as those that had finned, were so far from being excluded from the
Temple, as that they were commanded to come thither to offer their Sacrifices
for sin, and that without any censors to try their worthiness, and to admit or
reject them as they judged fit, so that the Lords Supper succeeded those
Sacrifices in signification and effect, is confessed by Beza, and elsewhere
proved by ^s.

To argue that if those who were ceremonially unclean, were in fact kept cut,
that therefore much more those who were sinfully defiled ought of right to be
excluded, is a fallacious Argument, because it carries a transition a genere in
genus, and is as if I should reason, that because to keep my clothes from being
smootted by a Chimnie-sweeper, or defiled by a Scavenger, I shun all contact
with them, therefore I must also decline to touch any Drunkard or Adulterer
thereby to preserve my garments clean, because Drunkards and Adulterers are
more filthy than Scavengers and Chimnie-sweepers.

That which Philo and others suppose of legal uncleanness carries more
probability, that it figured and denoted the habitual pravity and corruption of
our nature (as qualities are better signified by qualities then acts) and this
uncleanness is always diffused and traducted, as legal uncleanness also was;
for when nature is corrupt, that which is generated is also corrupt; a sinful
man begets a sinful man, but actions are not so propagated, as a thief does not
always beget a thief, and this corruption of nature shuts us out of heaven, as
the other did out of the Temple (which in this respect was a Type, not of the
visible Church, but of that holy Jerusalem where in no wise enters any thing
that defiles) until (as others have improved the Allegory) it be washed by the
Blood of Jesus Christ.

Concerning those other Scriptures of Joel. 3.7. Nahum 1.15. Zach 14.21. we
suppose we are at the building of another Babel, and hear such tongues as we
cannot understand, for we know not in what language, or rather by what canting,
a stranger or a Canaanite does signify a person that has not satisfied
another of his worthiness, or will not conform to some men's way of Discipline,
or trial, or that Jerusalem, Judah, and the house of the Lord, Imports only the
Table of the Lord, and not to pass through, and not to be there, to be utterly
cut off, denotes the not coming to that Table.

He must have somewhat of Antiphoron in Aristotle, who by the distemper of the
Organ, seemed to see his own image wheresoever he did go, or does vainly
suppose that every thing suits with his inbred imaginations, that can surmise
that those Texts were Prophecies of the Sacrament, and that it was here
promised what persons should approach thereunto, and he must have an
imagination strongly fortified above all that magical helps can vainly pretend
to for elevation thereof, that can hope to bind others thoughts to fancy, that
the Stranger and the Canaanite who were not of the Church, much less were
partakers of Sacraments, could type those who were afterward to be excluded
from the Sacrament, and that they should be fitly said no more to do that,
which they never yet before were permitted to do, viz. partake of Sacraments.

That of Joel 3.17. Interpreters determine to signify, that strangers shall no
more destroy the Church of God, nor pollute or profane it, as formerly they
had done, when it was given up as a prey unto them, Lament. 1.10. as the
English Annotations deliver it, Quod extranei (1) (...) seu infideles and
ipsius hosts eam non proculcant pro animi libitu, sed cos ab illa arcet vel
abigit dum illam tuetur adversus vim and impetum little, as Danaeus: And so in
that of Isa. 52.1. There shall no more come unto thee the uncircumcised and the
unclean, which is consignificant with this of Joel, Cyril (as Bellarmine cites
him, Bell. de Eccles. l. 3. c. 9. (i.) Hostili exercitu simile loquendi genus
Isai. 52.2. Grotius Annot. in locum.
and from whom he says Hierom is not much discrepant) says, secundum
historicum sensum agi de temporali persecutione Iudaeorum, ut sensus sit, cum a
captivitate redieris, non adliciet ultra, id est in longum tempus aliquis
infidelis persecutor per terr as tuas eas vastando pertransire, secundum
mysticum sensum agi de Ecclesia, and praedicere Isaiam fore ut portae inferi
non praevaleant adversus eam; and though others understand this of Joel to be
meant of the purging of the Church from Hypocrites or profane people, yet they
think this to be the proper happiness of the Country, not the way, and the
peculiar felicity of the heavenly Jerusalem, and do adjourn the complement of
the Promise to the last judgment (as Augustine likewise does that of Isaiah)
and some discern some light thereof glimpsing from the precedent verses of the
Chapter, Cont. Donat. post coll. c. 8. and 20.
telling of the gathering of the Nations, and bringing them down into the
valley of Ichosaphat, where they imagine the last judgment shall be made, and
most do conceive that this Chapter is as a counter-part to that of Revel. 20.
and 21. where the blessed estate of the new and heavenly Jerusalem is
described, so Hierom, Piscator, Diodate, Montanus, Paulus de Palacio, Sanctius,
A Lapide, Sa, Menochius and Ribera, which later also tells us, that this is the
sense of Rupertus, the Gloss, and of the Hebrew Doctors, and Tirinus adds
likewise of Remigius, Haymo, Hugo, Lyranus, A Castro, and himself concurs with
them.

That of Nahum carries only a description of the Churches joy at the news of
the Assyrians ruin, (so the English Annotations) by means whereof she might in
peace, security and mirth attend upon Gods Service, and give him thanks, Nec
ultra ad te perveniet ille ciequam Assyrius qui Deum despexit. Grotius Annot.
in locum.
as Diodate enlarges the Exposition, and the consort is augmented by the
symphony of Hierom, Danaeus, Sanctius, Ribera, Sa, Menochius, Tirinus (who
increases the harmony by bringing in Hugo and Vatablus) and Paulus de Palacio,
though this man run discord concerning the person, and will have it be upon the
destruction of Darius not Senacherib, whose Reign happened before those times.
Piscator agrees in substance, but Montanus may well be praecentor chori, who by
occasion of the former part of the verse, behold upon the mountains the feet of
him that brings good tidings, etc. instructs us, that it was the use, what
they would have published to the people, to take care it should be proclaimed
on the mountains by the voice of a Crier, and of this the Magistrate took care,
and thus the Festivals, new Moons, and Fasts were promulged, and that here the
sense of the Prophet is this, celebra Judah festivitates tuas -- quas hactenus
hostium metu perterritus per pagos and per oppida celebrare non licuerat, nunc
publieos laetitiae dies cum summa hilaritate celebrare, etc. integrum erit,
read vota tua, quaecunque pro optata ex horum hostium metu liberatione tibi
fuerant nuncupata, illud autem indicendorum festorum and totius laetitiae
annunciatae elogium eodem praeconio exponendum erat, -- quia non adiiciet ultra
ut pert^ anseat in te Belial (quod nefastum quoddam vitiosum apud Hebraeos
nomen) universus interiit, Senacherebi impium and sacrilegum genus prorsus
entinguendum, nunquam amplius satrae Dei religioni insultaturum esse affirmat.

That of Zachary 14.21. the late English Annotations interpret to be a promise,
that though now in the sad estate and calamitous condition of all things, the
Samaritan, Canaanite, and other heathens were mixed among them, who scorned
them, and their religion, and opposed them, Ezra 4. and 5. chapt. and Nehem. 4.
and 6. chapt. yet God would in that day cleanse and purge his Church of them.
Others here take the Canaanite not properly but appellatively for a merchant,
so the Chaldee, the Vulgar, and Hicrom (following Aquila) and Estius, and they
render the sense thus, Sylvius 22. q. 77. art. 4. p. 551. Nemo qui vendant
sacerdotibus lebetes, phialas vinum, oleum, thus and similia omnia enim ista ab
advemis dono dabantur plusquam satis. Grotius annot. in locum.
There shall not be in the Temple merchants, or those that traffic, as in the
Temple at Jerusalem were some that sold Oxen, Sheep, Doves, and the like; so
this Scripture carries conformity to the fact of Christ, John 2. and Matt. 21.
thus a learned School-man interprets it, and so do many Expositors, Diodate,
Montanus, Sanctius, Ribera, Paulus de Palacio, etc. and the reason why there
should be no merchants there, is rendered by some, because major impendetur a
fidelibus templis honor, and ipsi ultro sine ullo precio vistimas impendent,
maxim cum unum fit pro omnibus sacrificium, Christus etc. so Sanctius, de
Palacio, etc. by others, because ingens euique sacrarum and spiritualium ad
divinas lauds celebrandas copia affluet, as Montanus, (and Grotius, Tirinus,
and Sa agreeably) and adorabitur Deus in spiritu and veritate -- nemo propter
inopiam offerre victimas desinet, as Ribera.

And whereas some by the Canaanite in a figurative sense understand a wicked
person, per synechochen speciei, as Piscator, or per metalepsin, the person
being taken for the quality, as Danaeus, and so expound the promise to be, that
no wicked person shall remain in the Church, (it is not, only not to approach
to the holy Table) yet they refer the complement thereof to the next life,
and the state of the Church in heaven; haec promissiopertinet tantum ad futuram
in coelis ipsis Ecclesiae statum, nam quandiu hic erit Ecclesia Dei, semper
habebit malos bonis permixtos, ne in bis terris Ecclesiam puram putam mere
Donatistarum, Circumcellionum, and Anabaptistarum frustra quaeramus, in the
words of Danaeus.

To fortify those feeble arguments they rivet and inlay them with a testimony
of Camero, That however in the old Testament such as were Jews outwardly,
though inwardly and really profane, were called Gods people, yet never in the
new is it so sound unless, as they add, by anticipation, Though I cannot upon
research meet with this in Camero, for of that edition in the 3 Tomes (which
they cite) neither of them has so many pages as they quote, and that in folio
has nothing in the page quoted, yet in answer.

First, To correspond with what they can here infer, they should permit none to
be of the Church but such as they were convince, to be really holy, and not
only admit no others save such only unto the Lords Table.

Secondly, Bailey, disswas. p. 157.
The Church in the days of Moses and the Prophets, was one and the same with
the Church in our days, (says a learned Divine,) the house of God, the body
of Christ, the elect and redeemed people, the holy Nation, the peculiar
treasure and spouse of the Lamb, and from thence he argues, what was not a
sufficient cause to separate in that time, is no sufficient cause of separation
in our days.

Thirdly, In the old Testament profane people were not distinctly in
themselves called Gods people, August. de doct; Christil. 3. c. 32.
but the Church and society wherein they were permix was so called, quando
Scriptura cum ad alios loquatur tanquam ad eosps^^ ad quos leque bat^r videtur
loqui, vel de ipsis cum de aliis jam loquatur: tanquam (...) propter temporalem
commixtionem and communionem sacramentorum, and in the same respect and notion
wicked men under the new Testament are also called the people of God, as the
Church of Corinth is called the Church of God; they that were incorporate
thereunto are said to be sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints,
(which are attributes equivalent to the people of God) and yet that body had
many rotten ulcers and odious excrements.

They with some complacency or confidence in their undertakings conclude, who
knows what all these lights will do being set up together? But we must tell
them, that their arguments have no other light than such as putrified wood
has, which only shines in darkness, and being brought into a clear light,
nothing appears but rottenness, but if any take them for lights, and will be
guided by them, they are like to do but what was done by the lights which
Nauplius hung out at Euboea, for the Greeks in their return from Troy, which
served only to draw them among the rocks thereby to suffer Shipwrak.

SECT. XXXIV, XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII.
Their repeated Fallacies. The complacency of their close, which is destructive
to their main discourse.

CRebrescunt optatae aurae, portusque patescit
Jam proprior.
I may now strike sail and cast anchor, not only because I may justly fear
lest the Reader will no longer fill my sails with a favorable breath, being
like to have been tired with so tedious a voyage; and even bonum and longum,
minus bonum, therefore much more longum and malum, duo mala; but also because
what occurres of concernment in the remaining Sections, are but the same forces
which we have proffigated in another field, and here they rally them together
again, either like some politic captains, who to set out the multitude of
their Armies, when they are to march through a City, cause them to enter at one
gate and go out at another, and then to pass round and come in again at the
first port; or as Francis the first thought that the style of King of France
alone, being often repeated, would balance all the numerous titles of Charles
the Emperor, so they think the same arguments reiterated may be instead of any
other, or more that might be expected, and that if they pierce not by their
force, yet they may by their continual dropping, -- non vi sed saepe cadendo;
or that if in one place or time they take not, they may in another, as
Astrologers say some things work not their effects unless they be applied under
such a constellation, and in such a juncture of time: and as the Jesuits tell
us that the same moral persuasion, that at sometimes is not, yet another is
efficacious in respect of ^^s annexed congrulty and due application: but upon
what account soever they bring the Arguments, they have been elsewhere broken,
and come here as Gonsalvo said of a Captain showing himself after the battle,
That it was St. Elmo that appeared after the storm was past.

But however the Apologists may suppose the things very fair, and that
therefore by the allowance of Plato they may be twice or thrice repeated, or to
be as the works of Aristotle were to Alpharabius, which he had read forty
times, and could as often read again without fastidiousness; yet we rather
suppose with Plutarch, Ubique unius tenoris cantilena satietatem affert, and
offendit, and are very sensible -- sunt talis quoque taedia vitae
Magna, Voluptates commendat rarior usus.
In the 34. Section are their arguments which they call Convincing (but sure if
the convincing signs they require of holiness in men need to be no more
forcible than their convincing arguments, we shall not much complain of their
rigor in trying, or their strictness in admitting) as that this Sacrament
belongs only to godly ones; That they which partake it without true grace,
have the seal set to a blank; The inference from Christ's first administering
only to his peculiar disciples; That an unregenerate person cannot examine
himself; The similitude of the Legacy bequeathed to the persons of such a
condition: That because the ignorant and scandalous are to be repelled,
therefore examination is requisite, as a means in order to that end: And in the
35. Section, their motives drawn from the eating and drinking of their own
damnation by the unworthy, from the abuse of Christ's blood by being too
prodigal thereof, from obstructing the reformation, crossing the desires of the
godly, and the actings of the State, from the degenerating from the primative
times and all true antiquity. And in the 36. Section, what they answer to the
objections of Schism (which constitutes) and troubles (that sollow) their way.
And in the 37. Section, among their Quaeries, whether Ministers contradict not
themselves in giving the seals of Salvation to those in the Sacrament, whom
hey have damned in the Word? Whether ary other way than theirs or like it, can
be walked in to answer the holy courses of the ancients? (But if any like it
may serve the turn, it seems they have no such faith in their way, but that
another may be as good, and therefore theirs not absolutely necessary, and
another in most things different may in somewhat be like theirs, seeing as
Synesius, In omnibus iis quae in se differunt, convenientia est and similitudo)
and what Ministers should do while government is unsettled? All this, and much
more of this sour and swelling leaven, is only like the trunks which Cardinal
Campeius his Mules carried, being stufft with old clothes, shoes, and rags,
for all has been formerly worn out, cast off and torn to pieces, as we met
with it heretofore very frequently in their discourse.

And if any rational and ingenious man shall prompt me to any thing among this
frippery, to which I cannot prompt him to find a sufficient answer, in what I
have delivered, I shall soon hoyse those sails I have stricken, and weight that
anchor I have cast out, and set to Sea again, seeing it is like to be no
difficult voyage, nor to be imperilled by any acute solid rocks, or very
quicksands: most of it I think could be only (in their intention) produced
for what they slight in others viz. Rhetoric, and for such it may pass, by a
favorable interpretation, Rhetoric in her old clothes and homely dress, being
in truth words of vanity, without any great swelling, and al populum but scarce
Phaleras.

But upon an Anclysis, and reduction to argument of what is packt up, we may
find them in conspiracy with almost the whole knot and pack of fallacles.

Upon ignoratio clenchi dasheth all their discourse concerning the power of
casting out of the scandalous, for this is not the thing in question, because
it is not their way or practice, who content not themselves only with removing
such, nor are any of those whom they exclude consured for scandal. As at
Delphos usurpatum, ut cultro quo diis immolabant, de nocentibus supplicium
sumerent; so it shall be an acceptable service to God when they offer this
spiritual sacrifice, by censure to exclude such as are scandalous, for
notorious sins obstinately persisted in, -- truncentur and artus,
Ut liceat reliquis securum vivere membris;
but yet we cannot patient those, qui per calumnias criminum alienorum
sacrilegium sui schismatis excusant, and therefore we inquire into the justice
of the censure and the mode thereof, and ask -- meruit quo nomine scrvus?
Quis testis adest, quis detulit? audi,
Nulla unquam de (hac) morte hominis cunctatio lovga est:
and we fear to grant that a visible unworthiness is a sufficient ground for
exclusion, when their eyes only (however the organ may be distempered) must
try that visiblenesse, and that alone must be unworthiness which they account
such, when perchance of the same counters one may stand for one and the other
for an hundred, according to the place wherein they shall please to set them;
or when the medium may be only rumors and reports, Cont lit. Petil. l. 3. c.
59.
for not only Quintilian warns us in rumore cujus probationes, cujus argumenta
non habes, calumniae genus est prim^m mcredere, but Augustine also admonishes,
neminem recte judicari puto nocentem, qui hominem non convict^m crediderit
innecentem, and we think he determined likewise with as much piety as prudence
concerning such power, in omnibus tenendus est modus, aptus humanitati congruus
charitati, ut nec totum quod potestis exeratur, mansuetudo monstretur, Contr.
Crescon, l 3. c. 5.1.
ubi vero nulla ex divinis humaxisque legibus po^estas con^editur, nihil
improbe atque impudenter audeatur.

And under this head we may incorporate what they suggest of the holiness and
purity that should be in the Church, which looks altogether beside their scope,
who dispute not for the holiness of the members of the Church (therein not
coming sully up to their Independent brethren) but for the purity of those that
communicare of the Sacrament, and retain those as Church members whom they
exclude from the holy Table, and to prove that such holiness ought to be, if
they argue from the holiness of the Camp, where was to be no unclean thing, I
suppose by proportion of this reason, they should conclude to eject out of the
town those also whom they repel from the Sacrament. And because Discipline is
necessary and profitable in the Church, therefore to conclude the necessity and
utility of theirs, and that because there is requisite some separation of the
scandalous from them by censure, therefore they may separate from such as are
not censured to be scandalous; and that because we have covenanted to endeavor
a reformation, and establishment of Discipline according to Gods word,
therefore we must submit unto, and cooperate in advancing their Ecclesiastic
Economy: All these are Paralogismes a genere ad speciem affirmative, and
fallacies a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, and also fallaciae
consequentis, and is as if because both the harlots had children, therefore the
dead child must be sentenced to be laid in the bosom of her that was mother of
the living, or the living to be given to her that had over-laid her son.

To non causa pro causa and petitio principii is reducible what they say of the
good effects which the excrecise of their discipline will produce, and the
evil consequences which the want thereof would introduce, and this concelt is
not only like that of the Siennois (which Laurentius speaks of) who supposed
his making water would save the town when it was on fire, but would have
drowned it if he should have shed it at another time, but also has somewhat in
it of Cambyses, who would have Praexaspes to commend his skill in Archery when
he shot his son at the heart; or like the daughter of Appius Caecus, who being
troubled with the crowd at the Theater, for her ease wished that her brother
were alive again to have carried them to be slaughtered at Sicily,

And under petitio principii also falls almost all those Harangues, That the
Sacrament only belongs to the godly (whom they call Real Souls as if the souls
of hypocrites were fictitious as well as their holiness) That free admission (of
such as are not scandalous and justly censured for such) is to be prodigal of
Christ's blood, and to cross the desires of the godly and actings of the State,
and to degenerate from the primitive pattern, Tha the troubles and contentions
attending upon their courses, are the effects of men's lusts only, not of their
actings, with the rest of that bold strain, and those brass stamps. And after
all their boasting of the clear prooss of their mode of discipline, and
specious pretenses to engage men to submit thereunto, yet so frequently to beg
the question, is to hazard the contracting of such a censure on their way, as
has been cast upon Chemistry, Principium est jactare, medium decipere, finis
mendicatumire.

There be some things wherein they answer for us, and therefore we must rather
second than contradict, Vereor ne quisquam in hoc opere nostro scriptorem
arbitretur orrasse, and illic fecisse, Petilianus dixit, ubi debuit facere,
Augustinus respondit, they say, the wicked eat papanem Domini, not panem
Dominum, But I think e^e^y man will see that they could not eat the bread of the
Lord, if they must not be suffered to approach at the Table.

They tell us, that Men upon good grounds to be admitted, are supposed godly in
the judgment of charity: and if upon such judgment of charity they are
admissible, why do they trouble us with their probations to get a judgment of
verity? Charity thinks no evil, believes all things, and presumes every
man to be good that is not manifestly wicked. But when they have dictated, that
to say bare profession without evidence of the seriousness thereof, is enough
to make the Church to own men for members, is in their conceit, not to speak
soundly. As their bare imagination without reason is not strong and mastering
enough to bind and impose upon ours, ( sequor te quo trahis, non quo ducis, as
Scaliger to Cardan;) so their practice answers for us against them, for upon
such profession they own many as members of the Church, and correspondently
baptize their infants, though they shut them out from the Sacrament, which is
appropriated only to those of their Church, not to others of the Church, for
those are different in their language, as if that of Plautus must hold in
mystical Shepherds and their Flocks, Etiam opilio qui poscit alienas oves
aliquam habet peculiarem qua spem soletur suam.

For their qualifications required in communicants, as it was said of Gregory's
commentaries upon Job, They were good things, but might have been written upon
any other book of Scripture as well as that, so these qualifications are as
needful to other duties as to the partaking of the Sacrament, and other
qualifications are as necessary to sacramental participation, as these.

But that which sounds with most complacency and makes the sweetest music is
the close, and therein we shall go in consort with them, for definit in
mulierem formosam, and as the Historian says, that Nerva having adopted Trajan
soon after expired, lest he should by any less glorious speeches disparage or
contaminate what he said upon that concernment; so they do very well to
conclude suddenly after they have told us, that they place not the life of
Religion in any outward way or more refined course of Gods worship, and so much
earnestness and confidence needs not in external fellowship, as to be members
of Christ, for unless men take care how they live, it is no great matter how
they worship. And this is in some degree to unravell Penelopes web, and is not
unlike Bellarmines Tutissimum est in the close of his books of Justification,
which frustrates all his former dispute; for if they are sensible and really
persuaded of this truth, how can they with any consistence herewith, lay down
this course of discipline as the only ground of reformation, and that without
which it cannot be carried on and advanced, as the way alone wherein holiness
and peace can meet together, and kiss each other (as in effect they affirm
Sect. 36.) and so earnestly and confidently drive on this way, as to separate
from all such as will not walk therein with them, which consequently is (as we
have showed in Sect. 24.) to conclude the want of this discipline of theirs to
be malum insanabile, lethale and contagiosum, and so interpretatively to place
much of the life of religion therein.

But notwithstanding this it is has been even the bane of peace and truth, and
the matter of most earthquakes that have shaken the Church of God, that
indifferent things have been with such animosity pressed as necessary, as well
as that things deletorious have been held forth for Alexipharmacous, and too
many like Augustus take on them to tax the world to pay tribute to their
opinions and institutions, and (according to what Mindanes the mother of Cyrus
dreamd) what is co^ceived in their womb must be a vine to spread all over Asia,
nay their very urine to over flow the Citle, like Pope Alexander they must rule
from Sea to Sea, though all they write like him be but in chips, and like
Charles Duke of Burgundy, they must fight it out to the hazard of all, though
but for the tribute of a load of Calves-skins, yea though the fruit of the
victory, if acquired, cannot be worth the Bits and stirrops of the armies they
engage.

And as Grotius in the like case observes, They call that peace when they have
made a solltude, Si Ecclesia una (as Junius complains) si plures in
circumstantiis, ritibus, ceremoniis non plane judicio nostro aut moribus
conformantur, plerique omnes clamant de pietate, de Christianitate actum, atque
ulinam clamarent solum, etsi hi clamores tot sunt infesta tela quibus
imperitorum mentes obsirmantur and labefactantur infirmorum, sed cum accedunt
contumeliae, proscriptiones, condemnationes and alia id genus, puidsne mi homo
illud institutum a Christo esse aut a Christiano sui compote probari posse? non
vides dum ordinem externum propugnas verbis, eundem ordinem a to ipso ante
omnes ^ppugnari, destrui, quod ais extruendum.

In going off from me, they justle with Mr. Teanes, that they may like Caetiana
in Tacitus, majoribus inimicitiis ineirescere, but it is never the esse with a
tender and gentle touch, reflecting happily on him (as Erasmas said of Luther)
as a man too great for them to deal with. Every help lesseneth and detracts
from him to whom it is contributed; so plenus extra quid cupiat? as therefore
Quintilian said of Tully, Ad laudandum Ciceronem Cicerone opus esse, so there
needs none to defend that learned man but himself.

But they fall on Mr. Humfryes with a full carrier, and because two are scarce
sufficient for such a Hercules, and Si vis celeri gloriari cursu,
Tigrim vince, levemque Passerinum,
Nulla est gloria praeterire ascllos;
Therefore since it is like to be of little honor to vanquish me vix nomi e
notum, they seek to improve their victories by incountring him Qui legitur toto
orb frequens, and dicitur hic est.

It concerns not me to undertake his defense which can be much better made by
himself. As the Vestal flame going out, was to be rekindled only by the like
sacred fire; so if they would have damped that fire which has reflected so
much light, it is only proper for himself to revive and foment it; but I am
apt to believe, that as Socrates being incited to vindicate himself from such
aspersions, said he had done it already by his former course of life; so Mr.
Humfryes will think himself superseded of his defense by the second book which
he set forth, which it had been more opportune and handsome for them to have
assaied to answer (Ecce tacent omnes, Naevole dic aliquid) then to be nibbling
at this, and thereby to deal with him as Robinet de Bourneville did with King
Henry the fifth after the battle of Agincourt, who when he durst not encounter
him in his full strength, fell upon the Camp which the King had left less
fortified, and formerly marched out of, to obtain a glorious victory against a
braver enemy. And therefore however their ambition may be observed, yet their
expectation may be frustrate of answer, Desperanda tibi est ingentis gloria
fati,
Non potes hec tenuis praeda sub host mori.
and even pity will withold the laying of any violent hands upon such a
faint and feeble object which will soon die of it self, and came forth into
life only to add more credit to Mr. Humfryes Tract, and may serve as a foil
to reflect more luster upon that Jewel

Though the Gentleman be known to me only by the image of his mind pourtraied
in his sheets, yet it is a due tribute of the mouth (like that of the fish,) to
say of that picture (his b^ok) what Apollodorus did of that which he drew,
facilius quis culpabit haec quam imitabitur, and however Catonem sua aetasnon
intel. exit, and after he has driven so well, his reward with many has been a
draught of wormwood, (which was upon another account given to those that won
the Goal in Chariot-running at Rome) yet as Phidia's's statues showed more
beautiful with age, so future time may lay up that honor for him which the
present envy, and perhaps be sensible, that as the Historian says, Sicut
Marcelli praelio ad Nolam populus Romanus primo se erexit, postea multae res
prosperae consecutae sunt, so from the setting up this truth by him (though in
some men's accounts a Samaritan) and his binding up its wounds, and taking care
thereof, which the Priest and Levite had left half dead, it may recover life,
and by some others, spending more beside his twopence upon it, acquire such
strength as to flourish and beat down all gainsayers, and be fruitful in
begetting more peace and union in the Church of God.

FINIS.

