THE DECLARATION OF Sir Charles Coot Knight and Baronet, Lord President of the
Province of CONNAVGHT: And the rest of the Council of Officers of the Army in
IRELAND Present at DUBLIN, Concerning the Readmission of the Secluded Members.

DUBLIN, Printed by William Bladen, by special Order, and reprinted at London
by J. Macock, 1659.

The Declaration of Sir Charles Coot Knight and Baronet, Lord President of
Connaught: and the rest of the Council of Officers of the Army in Ireland
present at Dublin, etc.
SInce the Authority of Parliament became openly violated, and that by their
own waged servants of the Army in England, by whom 41. of the Members of
Parliament were torn from the Parliament House in Dec. 1648. and imprisoned,
and 160 other Members denied entrance into the House, and about 50. more
voluntarily withdrew themselves to avoid violence, making in all of secluded
Members about 250. when the remaining Members charged the Army with the guilt
of that force, and sent to the then General of the Army for the restitution of
those excluded Members, which was denied them, how many and manifold have been
the the miseries and calamities under which these Nations have labored, and do
still labor, is evident to all equal minded men. The Godly Ministers of the
Gospel despised; The Ministry it self villified; Tithes, and other means of
their maintenance (particularly in Ireland) taken from them, and misapplyed;
the Protestant Religion shaken, and almost overturned; Anabaptists, Quakers,
and other Sectaries set up and countenanced; Heresies and Schisms increased;
The Fundamental Laws of the Land trampled upon, and an Arbitrary Government
endeavored to be introduced; The Civil Rights, Properties, and Liberties of
the people in their persons and Estates broken in pieces; Impositions and Taxes
on the people without example laid and increased in an excessive manner and
measure, whereby Thousands of Famalies have been ruined, and enforced to beg
their bread; Manufacture at home discouraged, Publiq^e Tr^de and Commerce
abroad interrupted; The Nations become deeply indebted, and generally
impoverished; the reformed Protestant Churches abroad exposed to great danger,
wanting the wonted support of England, which (under God) was the Bulwark and
chief strength of the Protestant Religion throughout all Christendom, and
finally the English Nation (which was always deservedly) in so high honor and
estimation at home and abroad, as it was a bridle and terror to their Enemies,
and a countenance and support to their friends and allies is now become, (we
tremble and grieve to have so just cause to speak it) a scorn and derision to
all Nations round about us; and all this brought to pass to satisfy the
Avarice, Ambition, Lusts, and fears of a few inconsiderable persons of
Anabaptistical and other Fanatique spirits, who have made it their business to
occasion still one trouble on the neck of another, so to embroil and continue
the Nations in Division, War, and bloody confusions, that sober men might not
have time or leisure (with maturity of judgment or Counsel) to look into the
inwards of their designs or actings; And after we had beheld all this with
bleeding hearts, and calling to mind that when in December 1648. the said force
was put upon the Parliament, the then remaining Members sent sundry times to
the General to know why he imprisoned their Members, and desired him to set
them at liberty, which was not done; and we gathering from all this, that if
the House were once freed from the force of an Army, and they again restored to
Freedom and Liberty of sitting, and acting, they would then upon the firmer
grounds (in conscience of their duties to God and their Country, and in
testimony of their high resentment of that breach of privileges of the
Parliament, have taken into the House those excluded Members, and filled vacant
places by due and orderly Elections of the people,) and after so many years
unhappy interruption unite again in a full and Free Parliament, and there
assert the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the people,
which from the very beginning of the War of England have been not the least
ground of their contest with the late King, and ever since, and join their
counsels and endeavors for restoring these Nations to peace and tranquillity.

And thence it was, That on the 14th day of December 1659. several Officers of
the Army here, on the behalf of themselves, and those under their Commands, by
their joint Declaration, Declared and Published their steadfast resolutions to
adhere to the Parliament in the defense of its Privileges, and the just Rights
and Liberties of the people of these Nations as Men and Christians; In which
Declaration afterward concurred the whole Army of Ireland, but now finding
much contrary to our expectations, that when the Members of Parliament now
assembled at Westminster, were in December. 1659. (by an extraordinary
providence) restored to their Freedom and liberty of sitting and acting as in
Parliament; and that diverse of those formerly excluded Members of Parliament on
the 27. of December 1659: (as they had formerly done in May 1659.) offered
themselves to discharge their Trusts for the several Counties and places for
which they were Elected, and formerly served, those their fellow Members
assembled at Westminster, did not only deny them admittance, but also voted
and ordered the utter exclusion of all the excluded Members with this further
addition, that none of them should be chosen in future Elections to sit in this
Parliament, whereby they have by a more unnatural violence taken away from
above the one half of the people of England, their Representatives in
Parliament, and limited and abridged in a high degree the Liberty and Freedom
of the people in further Elections, which denial and order of theirs in a time
when they were under no force, is so much the more strange, in regard that in
December 1648. when they were under a force, they transferred that guilt from
themselves to the Army, and pretended a willingness to re-admit those Members
if it were in their power, as is formerly mentioned

And whereas Lt. Genesis Ludlow had placed in Ireland several Officers who are
Anabaptists, and persons of the like fanatique spirits, (many of whom had been
very active in the late conspiracies and actings of the factious part of the
Army in England, even against those Members of Parliament now sitting at
Westminster; of which Officers so placed by Lt. Genesis Ludlow, it was found
necessary to purge the Army, and to put in their places persons more soberly
minded and well affected to the Parliament; yet after all that done, and after
Lt. Genesis Ludlow stood, justly and deservedly charged with High Treason, the
said Lt. Genesis Ludlow himself, and some others of the like principles with him,
were by a report from the Council of State proposed to be appointed to govern
not only the Army, but also the whole Nation of Ireland, to the astonishment
of the people and Army here, to the unsetling of those persons so well
deserving, to the hazard of the peace of the Nation and Army, (and which is
above all) to the endangering even of Religion it, self. And here it is
observable, that those Members now sitting at Westminster, by their Declaration
of 23. of January 1659. since their restitution to their present liberty of
sitting) have published that extravagant Councils and actions, have engaged the
Nations in a great debt and charge, which it seems necessitates their laying a
new increase of charge on the Nations; and yet so indulgent they are to those
persons, that in a high degree created that necessity of so unreasonably
charging the people; and whose Estates might well bear a great part of that
burden, as without so much as any suit made to them by those Delinquents, they
granted them indemnity for their persons and Estates, whereby it seems the
said Members now sitting at Westminster, hold it fit that those who are of
sober spirits, and offended not the Parliament, should out of their Estates pay
for those extravagant men's. Delinquency, rather then the Delinquents
themselves. And although the said Lt. Gen, Ludlow, and Miles Corbet Esquire
together with Col. John Jones, and Col. Mat. Thomlinson, stand impeached from
hence most justly of High Treason, and that charge against them, being known to
the House, and there remaining, yet they have admitted 2 of those persons,
namely the said Lt. Genesis Ludlow, and Miles Corbet actually to sit in the said
House.

And now the greatness of those miseries which have befaln these three Nations
in General, by such late actings in England, and those heightened with many
aggravations in the circumstances of them, (too many and too long to be
repeated) as it has begotten in us, and in all good men in the three Nations
deep impression of astonishment and horror, so it is evident, that if it be any
longer continued, it will perpetually nourish dishonor to God, grief to all
good men, and (we doubt and fear) utter infamy and destruction to the three
Nations.

In contemplation whereof, and considering how God has in his justice blasted
all attempts that since the year 1648. have been made for resetling of these
Nations in peace and tranquillity, and that after all the trials and various
changes of Government which we have in all that time with much-long-suffering
and patience endured, there is no way visible to us under Heaven whence
deliverance may be probably wrought or expected, but from the care and wisdom
of a Free, and full Parliament in England, which (by the experience of all
former ages has been found the best and only expedient for providing remedies
to be applied to so great and general mischiefs arising in Church or State. And
considering also that the marks of the true Reformed Religion according to the
Word of God, and of the Fundamental Laws of the Land, and of our now dying
Liberties and Freedom, are not yet so utterly razed and defaced, but that some
footsteps of them do yet remain, so as (by the wisdom of a full and Free
Parliament) they may be again renewed and firmly re-established; and
considering likewise that our hopes of having the said excluded Members
restored, and of new Elections to be made for vacant Places, whereby there
might be a full and Free Parliament, as there was on Dec. 5. 1648. and the
ancient and long contested for Liberties of the People might be asserted, are
much contrary to our expectations, and contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the
Land, and indeed contrary to all justice and reason become frustrated; and
considering further how unjust and unreasonable a thing it is, that of above
500 Members, whereof the Commons House of Parliament usually consisted, there
were but 44 or thereabouts, when that fatal Vote passed for the keeping out the
aforesaid excluded Members by the prevalency of a major part of the said 44
persons (not much exceeding those who voted then on the contrary side) which
assumes to it self the Supreme Authority, not only of England, but also of the
three Nations, without president or example of any former age, there being
above 250 which stand eleven years excluded, without so much as the least offer
of an Impeachment against them in all that time; which unexampled and
unparalled assumption in those men is not possible to continue but by the
force of an Army poisoned with Anabaptistical and corrupted principles, to the
continual grief and unsupportable burden and charge of the three Nations.

And besides that act of the aforesaid persons chasing away (for so it now
appears) about 250 Members, of above 500 chosen by all the several parts of
England, according to the known Laws of the Land, to represent the whole Nation
in Parliament; and after the forcible exclusion of so many, that the 44 persons
remaining (amongst whom we believe there are some worthy Patriots who are not
so fully concurring in the actings of the rest of their number, as violently
over-voted them, which is a further aggravation of the others guilt) should
dare to usurp to themselves as is formerly mentioned, contrary to all Laws, the
Supreme Power not only of England, but also of Ireland and Scotland, is a thing
which none but Conquerers or Tyrants would attempt, and in all circumstances is
so hideous and monstrous to be endured by a Free People, formerly famous to all
the world for wisdom and valor, as the English Nation have been, as it will
be incredible to all posterity.

And lastly considering, that as in all ages, and more particularly since the
beginning of the late horrid Rebellion in Ireland, our Brethren in England have
abundantly manifested a tender and compassionate sense of the condition in
Ireland, and were careful to relieve us in our lowest estate, as bone of their
bone, and flesh of their flesh; which we do, and shall ever acknowledge with
humble thankfulness, and (as a debt which we well know to be due from us to
them above all people in the world) shall be for ever as tender of their
happiness and welfare as of our own, which indeed is involved in theirs, and
without whom Ireland cannot be happy. We therefore remaining constant in the
reasons of our said Declaration of Dec. 14. 1659. for adhering to the
Parliament in defense of it is Privileges, and the just Rights and Liberties of
these Nations; all which we see now are apparently more and more violated by
the not admission of the said excluded Members, and by not filling the vacant
Places, whereby the House might be full; and being freed from force, might
interruptedly act according to their judgments and consciences toward
resettling the peace of these Nations, which otherwise in all humane
probability can never be restored to peace and tranquillity.

We do therefore declare for a full and free Parliament in England, consisting
not only of those that sat on Oct. 11. 1659. but al^o of all such of the
Members of Parliament imprisoned, excluded, or withdrawn in December 1648. as
are yet living, whom we desire may be restored to ^he f^^edom and l^be^ty of
^t^ing, and acting according to the Trust committed to them by the several
Counties and places which did choose them, that so they may be no longer
debarred from discharging their said Trust, and that vacant places may be
speedyly supplied by free and due Elections of the people, yet so as none of
the persons to be admitted or elected, be any of those who have been in Arms,
or otherwise ayding, ab^tting, or assisting the late King or his Son in the
late War against the Parliament, and that the House being so filled, may
proceed unanimously to consult the best means for resettling the Peace of the
Nations, the re-establishment of true Religion (the surest foundation, as of
all righteous Government, so of all the happiness of a Nation;) the fundamental
Laws of the Land (whereby all men's rights and properties are preserved) and the
liberties and freedom of the people which are supported by those Laws.

And for those ends, and in discharge of our duty to God, and to our Country,
We do resolve (by the blessing of Almighty God) to join with our Brethren in
England, Ireland and Scotland, who have or shall join with us for the ends
aforesaid; and do resolve for the maintenance and preservation thereof, to
hazard our Lives and Estates, and all that is dear to us: And we doubt not but
all our Brethren in the said Nations, who disdain to be made Slaves, will join
with us herein, as being with wisdom and reason desirous to deliver over to
their Posterity that Liberty and Freedom which was conveyed to them at so dear
a rate by our Ancestors. And then we trust, that by the great mercy of God,
will speedily follow a happy settlement of these yet miserable and distracted
Nations; and cnosequently that the true Protestant Religion, in the power and
purity thereof, may be established; the Godly, Learned, and Orthodox Ministers
of the Gospel maintained by their Tithes, and other their accustomed rights;
their persons supported and countenanced; the Universities and all other
Seminaries of Learning cherished; Heresies and Schisms suppressed, needless
Impositions and Taxes on the people removed; and no charge to be laid on any of
the Nations, without their own free consents, given by their Representatives,
in their several and respective Parliaments; Manufactures, and Public Trade
and Commerce, at home and abroad advanced; Justice in its due and wonted course
administered; the just debts of the Nation satisfied; the Treasure and Revenues
thereof preserved, and returned to their right and proper channels; the Arrears
of the Army and other public debts duly satisfied; the Armies and Forces
continued in due obedience to the Supreme Authority, and not presume as some
have done, to give Laws thereunto, which has been the root of a great part of
our miseries; the N^tions enriched, united, and strengthened; the R^^^^med
Protestant Churches abroad supported and count^nanced; the Honor of the
E^glish Nation restored, to the comfort of Friends, and te^rou^ of Enemies,
(...) of Ireland in the hands of Adventurers and Soldiers and (...) Advanced,
as a farther acce^sion of honor and greatn^s^ (...) so by the blessing of God,
all will shortly terminate in the g^ (...) ^^^c^ ^^d tranquillity of these
Nations, the strengthening of them against fo^^eign ^sion* and intestine
Rebellion, and the comfort, contentnent of all the good people in th^se
N^tions, Which the Lord of his Mercy grant.

Dated at Dublin, Febr. 16. 1659. Sir Charles Coote. William L Cawfield. Sir
Theo. Jones Sir Oliver St George. Sir Hen. Ingoldsby Sir John King Col. Chidley
Coote. Col. John Cole. Col. William Warden. Col. Richard Coote. Col. John
Georges. Col. Hen. Owen. Lt. Col Tho. Scot. Lt. Col. W. Purefoy. Lt. Col.
Oliver Jones. Maj. Tho. Barrington. Maj. Alex. Staples. Maj. Rich* Bingley.
Maj. George Pepper. Lt. Col. H. Smithwick. Capt. Henry Baker. Capt. Rob fitz
Gorald. Capt. Cha. Wenman. Capt. Adam Molineux. Col. Hum. Barrow. Capt. Sam.
Fol^y. Capt. John Salt. Capt. Simon Garstin. Col. Cha. Blunt. Col. Hen. Slade.
Capt. Ant. Stamp. Capt. Art. Purefoy. Capt. George St George. Capt. Peter
Purefoy. Capt. Thomas Curd. Capt. Tho. Newcomen. Capt. Tho. Newburgh. Capt.
Hen. Thrimpton. Lt. Hugh Clatworthy. Lt. Peter Flower. Lt. Her. Langrish. Lt.
Rich. Morrick. Lt. Brian Jaques. Lt. Richard Butler. Lt. John Ottway. Lt. Tho.
Evelin. Lt. Tho. Flint. Lt. Edw. Harrington. Cornet Art. Usher. Corn. Donw.
Prothers. Corn. W. Pinsent. Ensign John Hiad. Thom. Sheppard Mar. C^
Quartermaster W. El^. John Pain Comptr.



