A true and exact RELATION Of the great and heavy PRESSURES AND GRIEVANCES THE
Well-affected of the Northern bordering Counties lie under, by Sir Arthur
Haslerigs misgovernment, and placing in Authority there for Justices of the
Peace, Commissioners for the Militia, Ministry, and Sequestrations, Malignants,
and Men disaffected to the present Government, set forth in the Petition,
Articles, Letters and Remonstrance, humbly presented to the Council of State,
with his Apology to the Lord President, for publishing thereof.

By JOHN MUSGRAVE.

Vt jugulent homines Surgunt de nocte lationes:
Vt teipsum serves, nonne expergisceris?
Latet anguis inserba.
Quod verum atque deceus curo et rego, et omius in hoc sum.
London, Printed Anno Dom. 1650.

The Apology of John Musgrave, to the Right Honorable John Bradsham, for his
publishing his Petition and Charges against Sr: Arthur Haslerigge, and others
put in Authority by him; with several Letters, and his Remonstrance to the
Council of State.
My Lord,
KNowing my own weakness and imbecility, and the power and greatness of my
opposites, if I had looked only upon outward helps, I should wholly have been
deterred from entering the lists with those great ones, whom I have to deal
with, and no doubt but of many of my friends, I shall be blamed, and of others,
as much or more envied for undertaking this quarrel, as David was of his
Brethren, for leaving his Fathers Sheep and taking the Philistines challenge to
fight with him, whom the whole Host of Israel feared; and be accounted no less
proud, and foolish, then Eliab did his Brother David; But when they shall
behold this great Giant, and mighty Nimrod of the North, with his whole Host
and Militia, wherewith he is guarded, thrown down and broken without any other
Armory, but by the strength of truths discovery by me, one whom he so much
disesteemes, and see him and them as suddenly fall, as the great Philistine
did, when smitten with the stone cast out of David's sling. My Countrymen will
be then rather ashamed of their faint-heartedness, to have sat still and bin
only as idle spectators, while I for mine and their Countries liberty, did
contend with these Cedars, and Sons of Anack. And though for sundry years,
while I have thus strugled and contended, I have often found these Sons of
Zervia too hard for me; yet when I was as a Man without hopes, seeing no way of
escape, even then, God sent me an unexpected delivery, which makes me more
bold, and with less carefulness, to wait upon the good hand of Gods
providence, to carry me on in this business, whereon the welfare and safety of
so many thousands depends. I will not deny but in this very thing I have too
much consulted with flesh and blood, and rested more then I should upon the
rotten props of outward means; and by the deceitful blandishments of the
adversary, speaking fair, and promising peace, I was almost taken in the
Phylistines Trapp, and ready to be inchained up in their fetters, if by a
sudden Alarm of a new enemies approach, I had not been awaked out of my sleep
of security, wherewith I was very much overtaken; for after two years, hard and
cruel imprisonment in the Fleet, (committed to that Prison for no other cause,
as your Lordship well knows, then for the like discovery as this, and
prosecuting some powerful enemies, who then satt in the great Council of this
Nation, having under the false vizard of friends, got themselves into the
greatest places of Authority and trust in our parts; being restored to my
liberty, upon the Lord Generals taking notice of my wrongful imprisonment, I
was fully resolved not further to have busied my self with matters of State,
but wholly left the same to the care and ordering of those that sat at the
stern, and only applied my self to my home business, and lived retired: but in
this I was much deceived, for I was no sooner retired to my Country, but I
understood some men now in great favor, and now highly promoted, and
entrusted, by our Governor and Sejanus of the North, were upon a Clandestine
design, ready to be put in execution for bringing in the Scots to force the
Parliament, and seize upon us before we should mistrust, or be in any wise able
to prevent the same; So, as of a sudden being secure as we thought, we were
surrounded with our enemies on every side, and had been without recovery, if by
the valor and gallantry of the now victorious Genesis in the overthrow of the
great Duke of Scotland, we had not been rescued; and after taken under his
Excellencies protection; and though the General stayed but a very little time
amongst us, (for he gave himself no rest there, while the enemy had any
strength unbroken) yet by his presence, and countenance for the time he was
with us, we were much refreshed; but the L.G. Cromwell withdrawing, we thence
were left to the care and charge of Sir Arthur H. Governor of the bordering
Counties and Garrisons, a man in whom we had great hopes, and had promised great
matters, (sed Magistratus inditat virum;) he deceived our expectation, he takes
for his Friends, favorites Councillors, and bosom acquaintance, such as were
professed enemies to this Commonwealth; and preferrs none other; he slights,
derides, and keep under all the cordial, and well affected; and whom the now L.
Gen had preferred, and owned, Sir Arthur with disrespect lays aside, which
caused me, constrained by necessity, (for no other with us would or durst)
unwillingly (durum telum necessitas) once again to put my self forth by a
Remonstrance to the Council of State; for (by no hand could I have access to
the Parliament) and set forth the sad and lamentable condition of our Country,
and the great and heavy oppressions we lay under, by the disorder and
misgovernment of those placed in Authority, by Sir Arthur Haslerigs
procurement, and recommendation, in which Remonstrance I had that tender regard
and respect to Sir Arthur H. conceiving him to be abused and deceived in this
his complying with the malignant party, through their subtle insinuations, (he
being a stranger in that Country) as I did not so much as once mention his
name in my Remonstrance, though I had been many ways provoked thereunto; I
must ever with all thankfulness acknowledge your Lordships favor and
benignity; for by your only means I must confess, I had access unto, and
audience before that Honorable Council of State, (as I have had sundry times
since) who were pleased to take cognizance of my Remonstrance, and upon reading
the same, and hearing my self made their Declaration, promising relief, and
redress, as well of particular, as of public grievances therein complained of,
but by other greater business of State, has bin hindered in the proceed
thereof; so as contrary to their intention, (as I believe) we have not had any
fruit thereof. (My Lord) it is not to be believed what rejoicing this your
Declaration was to your Northern Friends, and how therewith their dying spirits
were revived, as if they had bin already delivered from under the hand of their
cruel Egyptian Taskmasters, who exacted their stinted number of brick without
allowance of any straw, and hoped their bondage should have ended in the first
year of Englands Freedom, but alas! their sun was soon overclouded, and an
unexpected storm of a sudden does arise, ready to over-whelm them in a Sea of
new ttoubles; when their Ship was ready to arrive at the Haven of their wished
desires. Mr. Howard, a most dangerous and notorious delinquent, in Arms against
the Parliament, both in the first and second War, a man of great wealth, and
very powerful in his Country, who in the last War, raised great Forces, and
mustered 8000 men for the enemy, who at his Muster declared for the late King,
and said he was to meet the Prince at Barwick, causing his Soldiers to shout,
a King a King, in holding up their naked swords in his house, has for his
Counselor one Followfield a Lawyer, a dangerous Papist, being but the other
day with the Rebels in Ireland, and for his Chaplain a Malignant-Priest, late
Preacher to the King at Oxford, in his Garrison there, I say that Mr. Howard, by
whose recommendation I know not, if not by Sir Arthur Haslerig, within two
months that I had presented my Remonstrance, as aforesaid, is made High
Sheriff of Cumberland, to the lifting up the Malignant spirits; I complain to
Sir Arthur H. of this, he slights it, or rather approves of it; few days after
Sir Arthur H. as of purpose to set up the enemy with high hand, presents to the
Council of State for Commissioners of the Militia for our Country, Mr. Howards
Vassalls and Creatures, known Delinquents, and men professedly enemies to the
present Government; openly and liberally I speak against Sir Arthur H. for so
doing, he procures an Order, and convents me before the Council of State, to
give in my exceptions, and the reasons of my exceptions to the men, thinking by
his greatness and power, to have born me down; but after long debate upon my
exceptions, he promised to the Council of State to lay these men aside, as
unworthy, that trust and employment, pleads misprision, and how he was abused
by Thomas Craystor, Major of Carlisle, whose Letters for these men he showed;
but upon our Noble, and ever to be honored Generals return from Ireland, and
his march for Scotland, Sir Arthur H. procures the before excepted men to be
Commissioners for our Militia, a boldness not to be paralleld, and a fault not
excusable, acting as if he were above Law, above the Parliament. After he
returns into the Country to Newcastle, he convents our Ministry before him:
the Engagement he mentions not, nay some are threatened with imprisonment, for
desiring the same to be tendered to some Scottish Malignant Priests which are
beneficed with us, he establishes in the Ministry, malignant, scandalous, and
such as be opposite to the Engagement, our honest Ministers and your friends he
discountenanceth, silenceth, and sequesters, putting in their places men
disaffected, and Mr. Nichols Sheriff Howards Chaplain, whom before I spoke of
upon the recommendation of Mr. Craystor, (as from a good hand is certefied me)
since I came thence, he has placed at Aicton; where before Mr. Lampit served
faithfully the cure. I pray your Lordship consider, whether if your enemy in
Arms were possessed of that Country, could do you this way more disservice
and more injure your friends; but why complain I alone? read these following
Letters, am I not blamed for my long silence, as either conniving at,
consenting, or at least concealing Sir Arthur H. exorbitancy and oppressions,
therefore least I should prove guilty herein, of betraying my own and Countries
Liberty, I have, as Esther did in the like case and extremity present her self
before the King, put all to hazard, and contrary to your Law and Order, come
thus into your presence, and rather then this grand impostor of State should
not be unmasked, I have cast my self upon your bounty, and if I perish, I
perish, pardon my Lord this my presumption, consider our condition, and speak
peace unto us, we are brought to the like exigency, and strait as the Lepers of
Samaria; if we now hold our peace, we dye, and if we put our selves out, our
condition cannot be worse; nay, I had rather be in your prison, then live as we
do, under Sir Arthur H. in liberty, which very thing and no other, is the
cause, that without an Imprimatur, I have thus published his illegal, irregular
actings, his breach of faith and trust, and what manner of men he imployes and
intrusts, and how they order things, and behave themselves in their public
Offices; but if any object and say, that I strengthen the enemy by thus
discovering breaches amongst our selves. I answer, the enemy within the Rib of
the Trojan Horse in one night, burned that great City which the Princes of
Greece in ten years War with all their powers, could never enter; and is not
Sir Arthur H. made Guardian and Keeper of your strong Holds and Cities,
bordering upon the perfidious Scot, your unreconciliable enemy; and by the
laying open the rottonness of these men, the enemy will be much frustrated of
their hopes, and prevented in their design, when they cannot have a party among
us longer undiscovered, to uphold their interest by the Sword of Authority, and
such hereafter as we shall entrust and employ, when they know they cannot
escape unpunished, if they should falsify their trust, will be more careful to
discharge their duty: And such have been Patriots of their Country, who have
minded the good of the Commonwealth, and not their own Wealth; as blessed be
God for it, many there be placed in several seats of your highest Judicatures,
will be encouraged to act with higher resolutions without fear, for the Honor
of the State there, the good and comfort of the People, and be to their own
verlasting praise. the causes of all the late tumultuous risings and
insurrections here, in Wales and the North, were occasioned by no other then
some of your bosom enemies; such have been the cause of these distractions, and
the continuance of this War thus long amongst us; and till justice be done
impartially, and your corrupt Ministers of State be brought to account, you can
expect no end of these troubles. Slight us not herein, it concerns your peace,
your security; for if such men as we complain of be kept in Authority by new
divisions through their misgovernment, will endanger (if this War were ended,
and all your enemies broken) to foment and raise new troubles, greater and more
dangerous combustions then any we have had, or yet undergon, premoniti
premuniti: Therefore my Lord, you being so concerned, and your interest so
great, and your welfare so much depending upon the States prosperity, besides
your love of Justice, your great courage, and your unparalleld actings, beyond
any other in Authority, tending thereunto, with the many favors and great
encouragements (to serve and suffer for my Country, and not to fear nor be
cast down with the greatness of person) which I have received from you many
years since, even when you were in a more private condition, and finding no
change in you, when thus eminently placed, yet no less then your worth and
virtue merit, are the inducements to present these my weak endeavors (which I
have undertaken without any sinister or byends, for the good of my poor
Country) only to your Lorship, craving your Lordships favor, and that you
will procure me protection and indemnity, while I prosecute the following
charges, and other great discoveries which will bring to the State ten thousand
pounds and more; some whereof, of considerable values upon my own charge and
travel, are already returned: if nothing else would speak for me in excuse, yet
the very relation (of the barbarous, unmanly, and inhumane cruelty of Thomas
Craystor Major of Carlisle, and Lieut. Col. Briggs used toward one Trefena
Carter, wife of one Christopher Ca^ter, then a Soldier in Carlisle Garrison, and
now a Lieutenant of Horse in the Army in Scotland, particularly for her
judgment, crossing Presbytery) would and will in some measure set forth the
inviterate malice this Craistor (who is Sir Arthurs Viceroy of Cumberland, for
all Officers, Justices of peace, and Cummissioners of the Militia Ministry, and
sequestrations Sir Arthur H. wholly leaves to his nomination: and none must
bear in any Office whom Craistor approves not) bears toward such as inclined
not to the Presbytery and comply not with this Scottish Interest.

This Trefina Carter this last summer living in Carlisle, went into a visited
house, the same being unknown to her then, Craystor then Maj: of Carlisle,
hearing of it, bearing a grudge to her for her judgment, Commanded her to
house, but not allowing any woman to be with her, being great with Child, and
near her account, she venturing forth for a pint of Wine, (another she had not
to send for it,) Lieut. Col. Briggs meets her, asked her, how she durst come
out of her doors, contrary to the Majors Order, she modestly replied, if the
Major would let some bring unto her what she needed, (for she had none with
her) she would not go out of her house, Briggs makes no answer, but draws his
Rapier, offering to run at her therewith, with many execrable Oaths, swearing
he would have her out of Town, for it was the Majors pleasure to have it so; he
sent her home with a file of Musketeers, and a Century is set at her door, to
hinder any to come at her, she falls in travel, the Midwife was sent for, there
being but one in the Town, who durst not go, till she knew the Majors pleasure,
he bids the Midwife go but tells her withal, if she did, she should be shut
up: the Woman is delivered after strong labor, without Woman's help, she
procured a Nurse to keep her and her Child: but the fifth day after her
delivery, the Major takes her Nurse from her the Child and she being very weak,
more likely to dye then live, and not any with her for none durst but her own
Nurse, fearing the Majors displeasure. In this extremity the poor Woman was
forced to rise out of her bed, and goes to the Majors house, desiring to know
why he took her Nurse from her; he answered for a Clenser, is that your
Conscierce said she? the Major replied, never stand questioning me, begone, we
know your judgment; and till some honest Officers of the Garrison, went to the
Major, hearing of this uncivil and unchristian usage, the Major would not
suffer any to come at her, though her house was never visited, and I hear the
Woman is undone therewith, and inall likelihood will never recover her former
health and strength: thus you see my Lord, we complain not without cause, when
Childbearing Women in their travel, and Infants new born, are thus extremely
and cruelly dealt with in those parts for no other cause then their judgments,
crossing Presbytery; if these men will not pity, nor spare Women and Children,
but so vehemently persecute them for their judgment, what can we expect from
them, or you imagine they would do to us, if the Lord General being so near us,
did not hinder, I hope I need not further apologize, nor need say more to move
you to pity our condition, and help to ease and bring these your, and our
enemies to account for the breach of their trust, and the great oppressions and
wrongs they have done to us and our Country, I will present to your view in
the first place, the Petition and charge against Sir Arthur H. with the
Articles exhibited against him, the Justices of peace, Commissioners of the
Militia, Ministry, and Sequestrations in Cumberland, with Letters of the
Congregated Church at Broughton, and other Letters to me, from some Ministers,
and other my suffering Friends, setting forth therein their misery and sad
condition, and after you have the Council of the States Declaration, with my
Remonstrance upon the Declaration. And in the last place, my Letter to Sir Tho:
Withrington, formerly printed, which relates to our former sufferings, and how
cunningly our Adversaries have long undermined us, abused your Friends, and
such as Parliament men as they thought favored us, they drew Mr. Lisle, now
one of the Lords Commissioners for the great Seal of ENGLAND, to make a report
against me, telling him I carried on a contrary Interest, and the Scottish
Design, and long it was before my Lord LISLE could be persuaded I was a Friend;
but upon better understanding, his prejudice against me was removed, and upon
his motion* in the House of COMMONS, after two years Imprisonment, I was set at
liberty; and now (my Lord,) not doubting your favorable acceptance hereof, and
your ready assistance in procuring me a fair hearing and trial herein, I
recommend my self and Cause to your Justice and Clemency, and remain,

Your Lordships obliged and humble Servant, JOHN MUSGRAVE.
9.12. month 1650.
TO THE Right Honorable the Council of State, sitting at White Hall. The
Humble Petition of John Musgrave, for, and in the behalf of Thomas Worsley
Esquire, John Worsley, Elizabeth Worsley, Captain Richard Crackenthorp, Mary
Blaythwaite, and the rest of the well-affected in the Counties of Cumberland,
Westmerland, Bishopric, and Northumberland.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner John Musgrave above a year since, Remonstrated his own,
and his Countries sad and distressed condition, and how the Enemies of this
Commonwealth in those parts do still with unwearied and undefatigable
endeavors labor to carry on their designs, in strengthening the hands of
Malignants', and weakening the hands of your friends, and the better to effect
wicked purposes got several incendiaries, and such as have born Arms, and
engaged against the Parliament in the first and second war, and still complies
with the Scottish interest, to be Justices of the peace, Sheriffs, etc. and to
have the whole authorities there in their hands, by which means they much
Tyrannize, and oppress your Petitioners, and the well-affected, and with less
difficulty may invite the Enemy into these parts.

That this Honorable Council upon reading the said Remonstrance declared, they
would provide for your Petitioners relief, and redress of their grievances,
and upon another Petition unto this Honorable Council your Petitioner by the
Articles thereto annexed, set forth how M. Charles Howard was made high
Sheriff of Cumberland, which Articles Sr. Arthur Haslerigge undertook to
examine, but wholly failed in the same. And the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge is so
far from providing for your Petitioners relief, and the Countries safety as he
has of late procured such as be Enemies to the Commonwealth to be Justices of
the Peace, Sheriffs, Commissioners for the Militia, Ministry and
Sequestrations; oppressing the well effected, and countenancing your Enemies,
as appears by the Articles annexed, and exercises an Arbitrary power without
rule of Law, or Act of Parliament.

That Sr. Willfrid Lawson, Henry Tolson, Thomas Curwen, Miles Halton Justices
of Peace, contrary to an Act of Parliament, at the last Sessions of the Peace
in the County of Cumberland fined one Lancelot Fearon 10. pounds for refusing
to swear upon a book, and the justices and Commissioners for the Militia there
much oppress the well affected, and threaten to commit them for their meetings
to prayer, and Divine Worship, boasting they have an order from Sr. Arthur
Haslerigge so to do.

Your Petitioner humbly prays this Honorable Council to take his long and
chargeable attendance into consideration, and put his former Remonstrance,
Petitions, Articles, with this Petition, and the Articles annexed against Sr.
Arthur Haslerigge, in a speedy way of examination, for relief and redress of
your Petitioners, and take a review of your own Declaration made upon your
Petitioners former Remonstrance. And humbly prays the benefit of presenting
of additional Articles as he shall see just cause, and that without delay or
procrastination for the good, and safety of this Nation.

That the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge, the chief cause of all the present
Northern miseries, may be sent for as a delinquent, to answer the several
matters laid to his charge in the Articles annexed, and that at his coming up,
he may not be admitted to sit as a Judge in his own cause, but stand in the
capacity of a Delinquent, till he has undergone his trial, your Petitioner
being ready at his uttermost peril to make good his charge, either before this
Honorable Council, or the high Court of Parliament.

That all the other charges against Sheriff Howard the Justices of the Peace,
Commissionters for the Ministry, and Militia in Cumberland, may be put into a
speedy way of examination, and such as shall be found unfit removed from their
places.

That Thomas Worsley, who is aged four-score years, may have his Petition read
and relieved, and that according to your Declaration upon your Petitioners
Remonstrance, your Petitioner, and such Petitions as you declared to recommend
to the Parliament may no longer be deferred, the Petioners being utterly undone
by attendance. And lastly, the Justices of Peace who contemned your Authority
in fyning men for refusing book-swearing contrary to the Act of Parliament made
in favor of tender consciences, may be sent for to answer their contempt, and
provision made in the future that none in the Northern Counties be admitted, to
execute civil Office in the administration of Justice, but such as are known to
be well affected to the present Government. And your Petioners shall pray as in
their former Petitions.

Articles exhibited by John Musgrave, Gentl. to the Council of State, against
Sr Arthur Haslerigge, Knight, and Barroner, Governor of New Castle, and the
Northren bordering Counties.
The exceptions were brought in upon an Order of the Council of State dated the
31. of June 1649
1. THat Sr. Arthur Haslerigge * contrary to his Engagement to the Council of
State, and Council of States Declarations upon the Petitioners exceptions,
procured lately such in the County of Cumberland, to be Justices of the Peace,
Commissioners for Sequestrations, Commissioners for the Ministry, and
Commissioners for the Militia there as were known Delinquents, and such as are
disaffected to the present Government, and complying with the Scottish
Interest, as by the charge against them hereunto annexed, and another charge
against them, formerly exhibited to the Council of State may appear.

2. That the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge being the chief, and leading
Commissioners for the Ministry at New Castle, approved of such Ministers in
Cumberland at New Castle as refused the Engagement, were scandalous, and
Delinquents; And such Ministers as were well affected, without any charge
removed from their Ministry, and put them out of their places, whereby he
discovers his dis-affection to the present Government, by upholding and
countenancing the Malignant party in Authority, and keeping under the
Parliaments friends, all which this Petioner is able to prove, and further
refers himself to the Copies of Letters hereunto annexed, the Originals being
in the Petitioners hands.

3. That Sr. Arthur Haslerigge undertook to the Council of State to examine the
Articles exhibited by the Petitioner to the Council of State, against M.
Charles Howard, high Sheriff of Cumberland, but neglected the same, and came
privately into the Country to Naward and there feasted with the said Sheriff,
who is a dangerous, and most notorious Delinquent, as appears by the charge
exhibited against him by the Petitioner to the Council of State.

Captain Howard is son to the Lord Howard, a Member of the Council of State, no
Soldier, and never did any service for his pay.
4. That the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge suffers Captain Howards Troop to lie
upon free Quarter upon the Country, for these four Months last past, and does
coutnenance one Dobson Captain Howards Lieutenant, who cheated the Troop of
1350. pound. And when complaint was made to Sr. Arthur Haslerigge, he never
punished him for the same.

5. That the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge gave Commission to Edward Brigs, to be
Lieutenant Colonel for Carelile Garrison, and made him a Commissioner for the
Militia and Ministry in West-merland, a man known disaffected to the present
Government, and lately cashered for his drunkenness and other miscarriages by
the now Lord General Cromwell. That the said Sr. Arthur gave Commissions to
Thomas Craystour, Cuthbert Studholme, Captain Brown, and others to be Captains,
and Lieutenants in Carelile Garrison, men known to be disaffected to the
present Government, professed Enemies to honest men, most of them having now laid
down their Commissions, when they were to march into Scotland, And the said Sr.
Arthur does countenance none in Cumberland, but such as are professed Enemies to
the honest party, and are for the Scottish Interest.

6. That by the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigges, intrusting the Authorities, and
Militia in the hands of Delinquents, and men for the Scottish Interest, the
well-affected in Cumberland and Bishopric ly under greater oppressions then
formerly under King and Prelates. And the said Sr. Arthur is a protector of
Papists, and Delinquents, forbidding the Subsequestratours, and Sollicitours
for Sequestration in Bishopric to Sequester Papists Ordered to be Sequestered,
of which the Papists and Delinquents do much boast, and honest men thereby are
much cast down.

7. That Sr. Arthur Haslerigge hinders, and obstructs the ordinary proceedings
of Law and Justice in favor of Papists, and did take out of the Sheriffs
custody Ralph Lampton a notorious Papist and Delinquent, being under arrest,
and formerly arraigned for poisening his wife, with which Lampton, the said Sr.
Arthur is very kind and familiar.

8. That the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge procured Ralph Delivall Esquire a
Delinquent in arms against the Parliament, and disaffected to the present
Government this last year, to be high Sheriff for Northumberland.

9. That the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge contrary to an Act of Parliament,
suffered Lieutenant Colonel John Jackson a notorious Delinquent, and in arms
against the Parliament, both in the first and second War, a great plunderer to
go and ride up and down the Country with his arms, and against law put the
said Jackson in possession of certain grounds and Colleries in Bishopric
belonging to men well-affected, whom the said Sr. Arthur by strong hand
dispossessed, thereof without Law, and the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge against
the fundamental Law of the Land, most arbitrarily, and Tyrannically did by his
power take from the now high Sheriff of Bishopric the said Jacksons goods
taken in Execution after Judgment, and restored the said goods to the said
Jackson, contrary to all the rules of the Law.

10. That the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge is very familiar, and keeps company
with Thomas Wray, a Papist, in arms against the Parliament, and upon search for
a Popish Priest there was lately found in the said Wrayes house Copes, and
other Popish Relickes, and much Gold and money, most whereof Sr. Arthur
Haslerigge caused to be returned back to M. Wrayes wife, a Papist. And the said
Sr. Arthur by his Soldiers put sundry Honest men out of possession of the
Colleries settled upon them by Law, under color the same belonged to the said
Wray* whose Debts Sr. Arthur Haslerigge undertook to pay, (as Wray confessed)
for the said Colleries, being worth 10. pounds per diem, as the said Sr. Arthur
gives forth to the utter undoing of the owners of the said Colleries.

11. That the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge does comply with, and countenance
Colonel John Hilton, a Delinquent in arms, both in the first and second War,
and assists the said Hilton to defraud the poor in sundry Parishes in
Bishopric, of great legacies given by the said Hiltons Elder Brother.

12. That Sr. Arthur Haslerigge brought Colonel Hacker into the Country, who
contrary to an Act of Parliament Quarters his Soldiers, and others under the
name of Soldiers who are none, upon the well affected in Bishopric, and would
but pay what they pleased, and in some places nothing, but upon complaint
Colonel Hacker gave the people no relief, but threatened them to have them
before Sr. Arthur Haslerigge for complaining, afterward Captain Thomas
Lilbourn brought the matter in question before a Council of War at Whitehall,
but by Sr. Arthurs power it could never be fully heard, which if it had, there
would have appeared many thousand pounds kept wrongfully from the Soldiers,
besides the great oppression of free Quarter, some Examinations whereof were
taken by Mr. Margets, which Sr. Arthur Haslerigge keeps hitherto from reading,
and the said Sr. Arthur sore threatened the said Captain, for appearing for the
Soldiery and Country against him, and Colonel Hacker.

13. That the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge to disable M. George Lilbourn to serve
his Country, and the more to discourage the well effected in Bishopric,
caused him to be put out of the Commission of Peace, Ministry, and Militia,
and much endeavors to Sequester the said M. George Lilbourn, who has
commonly been reputed the most active, stirring, and suffering man for the good
of this Nation, both before the Parliament began, and since of any that has
been, or is in the Country.

14. That Sr. Arthur Haslerigge has displaced all the well-affected men in
Bishopric that were of the Committee for Sequestrations there, and put in
their stead one Thomas Haslerigge his Kinsman, and a stranger, and does
continue one Colonel Frauncis Wren, who in the head of his Regiment upon his
first march into Scotland was disgracefully, and justly cashiered, by the now
Lord General Cromwell for plundering, and other gross, and foulmisde-meanours,
and one Thomas Dalaval, an arch Malignant, and disaffected to the present
Government, who lived in the Enemies quarters all the time the Earl of
New Castle had his Forces there.

15. That the said George Lilbourn being Surveyer of the Bishops Lands in
Bishopric with one Edward Colson, which said Colson joined with one Saunders,
and counterfeited M. Duncalfes hand without his privity for the abatement of a
thousand and odd pounds, merely to cofin the State thereof, which cheat, and
cousenage the said George Lalbourn discovered. But the said Sr. Arthur
Haslerigge much labored, and Solicited the said George Lilbourn to conceal
the said cheat, and forgery of the said Colson, and though the said Colson be a
man disaffected to the present Government, and married to a Papist, yet does
the said Sr. Arthur Haslerigge much countenance the said Colson, and made him a
Commissioner for the Ministry, and his Court-keeper.

16. That your Petitioner has been much Solicited by the well-affected in his
Country to present their grievances, and oppressions, and crave relief in
their behalf, as appears by their Letters, Copies whereof are hereunto annexed.

17. That your Petitioner has lately discovered sundry concealed and
unsequestred Delinquents of great Estates, which will bring in to the State,
10. thousand pounds and more, if the Commissioners for Sequestration made by
Sr. Arthur Haslerigge were honest, and faithful men, but in regard most of the
said Commissioners are Delinquents, and Sequestrable themselves, and all of
them disaffected to the present Government, they do what in them lies to
hinder your Petitioner in the prosecution thereof.

Articles Exhibited by John Musgrave, against the Justices of the Peace,
Commissioners for the Militia, Commissioners for the Ministry, and
Commissioners for Sequestrations in the County of Cumberland, at the desire and
Request of the well-affected there.
INprimis, Thomas Lamplongh now Justice of the peace, a Commissioner for the
Militia and Ministry, took the Oath for the Earl of New Castle against the
Parliament, subscribed the same set out Horse and arms for the Enemy,
Voluntarily contributed to the Enemy, and had his Estate protected by the
Enemy, a great persecutour of honest men, under the name of Independents, a
countenancer and protector of Papists, Delinquents, and Malignant Ministers,
and did justify the Enemies Colonels Orders were good orders, and ought to be
obeyed.

2. John Stoddert now a Commissioner for the Militia and Ministry, aman
Sequestrable, was a Lieutenant in Arms for the enemies against the Parliament,
under Captain Rolf a drunkard, a pleader for Delinquent and scandalous
Ministers, an Enemy to honest men, and the Parliaments suffering friends.

3. Robert Hutton now a Commissioner for the Militia and Ministry, a man
Sequestrable, took the Oath for the Earl of New Castle against the Parliament,
a countenancer and upholder of Malignant and scandalous Ministers, and such as
Act for the Scottish Interest, a common Ale-househaunter and a great drinker.

4. Cuthbert Studholme now Commissioner for the Militia, Ministry, and
Sequestrations, a private Captain in Carlisle Garrison, a Farmour of Sequestered
tithes at far undervalues, when other would have given and offered greater
sums, a countenancer and upholder of such ministers as oppose the Engagement,
and he is for the Scottish Interest against the Parliaments friends.

5. Thomas Craister now a Commissioner for Sequestrations for the Militia and
Ministry, a professed Enemy and persecutour of all the Parliaments suffering
friends there, under the name of Independants, an upholder and maintainer of
Malignant and such Ministers as refused the Engagement and are for the Scottish
faction, threatened those that informed against such, saying, they went in John
Musgraves way, he discountenanced witnesses produced against Thomas Millington
a Malignant Minister, who since the Act and Proclamations against King and
Kingship, prayed for all Kings and Princes, and especially for those that
pretended Title to this Nation, and for bad men to speak against the King, and
said the Kings Laws would yet be in force and Lawful, and that the Parliament
could not order England, he does still Church women and take money for Burials,
all this and much more was proved before the said M. Craister, M. Langhorn, M.
Lamplongh. M. Cholmeley, and Edward Winter, yet by M. Craister power, and
Countenance the said Minister is still Countenanced and continued in his
personage, being worth 100. l. per annum, and more.

6. That Thomas Craister refused to join with the said John Musgrave, to
receive discoveries against Delinquents, whereby the Commonwealth is hindered
10000. l. and Delinquents enabled to raise a second War.

7. That the Commissioners for the Militia in Cumberland suffer Delinquents to
ride with their arms, and to go from their homes at pleasure, some 10. some
20. some 60. miles, without Sequestring or questioning them for it, contrary to
the late Act of Parliament.

8. Thomas Cholmely now a Justice of Peace, a Commissioner for the Militia,
Ministry and Sequestrations, a man Sequestrable left the Parliament for his
delinquency in the first War, was in arms and joined with the Enemy against the
Parliament, and Voluntarily lent the Enemy fifty pounds, in the second War kept
Intelligence with the Scots, and sent a man and horse to the Enemy into
Scotland, took the Oath for the Earl of New Castle against the Parliament, a
great Enemy to the Parliaments friends and them them call Independants, joined
with M. Briscoe, Sr. Wilfride Lawson, M. Lamplongh, M. Henry Tolson, M. Thomas
Curwen, and M. John Barwis, in committing diverse honest men for not coming to
the Book of Common Prayer, since it was taken away and caused them to be
indicted at the quarter Sessions for the same, and a little before the Scots
received the last great overthrow by the now Lord General, the said M. Cholmley
said the Scots were his brethren in Covenant, and it was against his conscience
to fight against the Scots, he is a great upholder of such Ministers as are
against the Engament, and he complieth with the Malignant and Scottish party.

9. Edward Winter a man of a private condition, never appeared for the
Parliament where danger was, a countenancer and maintainer of Malignant
Ministers, and such as are against the Engagement, and procured by M. Craister,
and M. Langhorn, to be a Commissioner for the Militia and Ministry to vote with
them.

10. John Crosthwait a Commissioner for the Militia and Ministers, a man that
lived peaceably in the Enemies Quarters while they had power, never Acted nor
appeared for the Parliament where danger was, holds his Estate in Tenantbright,
under Sr. John Lowthernant, and was Bailiffe and receiver of his Rents, when
Sr. John was a Commissioner of Array, he is a fearful low-spirited man, and
procured by M. Craister, to be a Commissioner to vote and Act with him.

11. William Mawson now a Commissioner for the Militia and Ministry, never
Acted nor appeared for the Parliament where danger was, a great favourer and
protector of scandalous and Malignant Ministers, and procured by M. Craistor,
and M. Langhorn to vote with them, and uphold their Interest.

12. Thomas Langhorn, now a Commissioner for Sequestrations, the Militia and
Ministry; a Man sequestered took the Oath for the Earl of New castle, against
the Parliament: A great enemy to them, they call Independents, refused to join
with the said John Musgrave, in discovery of Delinquents, when presented unto
them, an upholder of Mr. Balwyne, a Minister that refuses the Engagement, to
preach on Thanksgiving-dayes, or preach for the Parliament or Army, disaffected
to the present Government, and joins with Mr. Craistor to keep under such as
favor the Parliament, and such as are called Independents.

13. Thomas Garth named Agent for Sequestrations, a man sequestrable, took Oath
for the Earl of Newcastle, was Cornet to Sir Henry Fletcher, and Quartermaster
to Sir Phylip Musgrave, a great favorer and protector of Malignants, while he
was Solicitor to the old Committee for Sequestrations.

14. Henry Robinson, employed as Agent for Sequestrations now by Mr. Craistor,
and Mr. Langhorne, voluntarily gave to the Enemy five pounds to buy a Horse,
and engaged he would never act for the Parliament, protesting what he did for
the Parliament, he did it for a livelihood; saying, alas, alas, he was for the
King in his heart.

15. Thomas Curwen, now a Justice of Peace, in the last War set out Man and
Horse for the Enemy, was protected in his Estate, by Baronet Curwen, and
continued at the said Baronet Curwens house, all the time of the last War,
and after the County was reduced to the Parliament, he protected the said
Baronet Curwens Estate, kept his Goods from being sequestring, and in a
threatening manner, told some whom he called Independents, that it was such as
they that caused the last War.

16. That all or most of the Delinquents there, enjoy their real Estates, and
most of their personal, and those that have compounded with Sir Arthur
Hazlerig, did not compound to the half value of their Estates.

17. Sir Wilfride Lawson, now a Commissioner for Ministers, and a Justice of
Peace, was a Commissioner of Array, and acted upon the same, took the Oath for
the Earl of Newcastle and was in Arms with the Enemy, against the Parliament,
has great sums of money of the County, not accounted for, a professed Enemy
to honest men, a favorer and Protector of Papists and Delinquents.

18. That the Commissioners for the Militia, are great favorers of Malignants
very unequally raising the Horse on the poorer sort; and the Parliaments
Friends, whose Estates are under ten pounds per Annum; and men of great
Estates, and charged by the Act, not charging them proportionably, and upon
^uch as have Estates, and did set out Horse and Arms for the Enemy, they impose
little, and of some such nothing at all.

19. That the Commissioners for Ministers have displaced such honest Ministers
as they call Independents, and such rectories they take into their hands, they
farm out to their own Agents and Servants, at far undervalues, and for far less
then others would have given and afford, when the same we let out, as one
instance for many, they let the Rectory of Graistock, which is worth 300 l. per
Annum, to their Agent Clerk for threescore and eleven pounds, when twice as
much was bid, and the Commissioners take the Tithes up to their own use, as can
be proved.

JOHN MUSGRAVE.
The Articles are subscribed, and will be attested by

John Nicholson, Mungo Rothew, John Nicholson, Francis Smith, Isaac Antrobus.




My exceptions to the Commissioners for the Militia, upon this following Order,
were approved by the Council of State, and Sir Arthur H. besides his Engagement
to the Council of State, promised me afterward, he would put none others but
honest men, in any place or Office; but has done far otherwise.

Die Jovis 31. January 1649. At the Council of State, at White Hall.
ORDERED,

THat Mr. John Musgrave be sent unto, to come to this Council, to morrow in the
afternoon, to give in his exceptions, and the reason of those exceptions which
he makes against the names of the Persons, given in by Sir Arthur Hazlerig,
oath Commissioners for the Militia, for the Northern Counties.

Yours, G. FROST, Secretary.

AFter Sir Arthur H. had consented to by aside, the Commissioners there for the
Militia, whom I excepted against, I return into my Country, and acquainted my
Friends what I had done, they much rejoiced, d^siring me in their names, humbly
to represent to the Lord Presidene Bradshaw, their thankful acknowledgement of
his former respects, which they and their Country had received from him, when
in Easter Term last, when being about some Laws concerning my self and my
poor Mother oppressed by a bad Husband: I came to London, I found our affairs
in a worser condition then I expected; upon the Lord Genesis March for Scotland,
the Militia of this Commonwealth, being to be settled for the more security
thereof, Sir Arthur H. procures a Commis. to the excepted persons to be
Commissioners for Cumberland, with which I was acquainted but few days before
I was constrained upon urgent occasions, to return home, whither being come,
this following letter is sent me from the Congregated Church at Broughton.

Kind Friend and Brother Musgrave.
UPon your return from London, in Hillary Term, we were much gladded the
Council of State was pleased to hear you upon your exceptions to the
Commissioners of the Militia, and for their Declaration to redress our
grievances complained of in your Remonstrance; but when we understood that Sir
Arthur Hazlerig had procured the same men whom you excepted against, not only
to be Commissioners for the Militia, but for the Ministry, we were cast down,
conceiving the Enemy to be very potent, and prevailing more on you, because of
your negligence, though formerly you have been very active and suffering for
your Country; yet in this we cannot but blame you, being confident, if the
Council of State had known what manner of men they were, how disaffected to the
present Government, either Cavaliers, or of the Scottish faction, not one of
them would have been approved of by the Council of State, unless the Governor
of Carlisle who in regard he is a stranger, is wholly guided by the other: as
for the Militia, they pursue not the Act, but take a disposing power of men's
Estates, setting some half a Horse, where his Estate is not equal to such they
impose but a third part. And for the Ministry they approve of few or none, but
such as are of the Scottish faction and raylors against Independents, or if
worse may be, such as are Malignants and Royalists; but for honest men, they
cannot abide, such they remove and put out of the Ministry, under the name of
Sectaries and Independents, as Mr. Lampit, Mr. Baggerley, and Mr. Wharton; if
any be for the Presbytery, though they deny the Engagement, are approved of,
and allowed: our Justices of Peace do impose book-swearing upon some of the
States friends, and for denying the same, do fine them in ten pounds,
threatening them, and scoffing them, and calling them as they think good. Mr.
Musgrave, be not weary of well doing, though you have no money or wages from
us, slight us not, it concerns you nearly: if the Enemy be thus holden up, you
can expect little ease, and less security; therefore as you tender your own
welfare, and your friends peace, be not sluggish or longer silent, but stand
for the cause of our God, and his People, be bold, it will be your Honor,
whatsoever the success be, trust God. Sir, howsoever be our condition, we will
not cease to trouble you, hoping you will take in good part what we have
written; and will not forsake your suffering friends, or in silence leave us
under our Enemies hands, let the God of power enable you to finish what you
have begun, for the good of his Church and People; to whose care and protection
we recommend you and our cause, this

13. of the 9. Month 1650. Your Brethren in affection, and signed by the
direction of the Church at Broughton, in particular, viz. John Robinson, Mungo
Rothero, Gawen Wheelwright, John Taffin, John Bow, John Scot, Fran: Smith, Tho:
Thompson, John

Mr. Lampit, the Minister of Aickton in Cumberland, hearing I was to take my
journey for London, writes unto me this following Letter, and after came to me
himself, desiring me to present his Petition to the Council of State, and
another for the Committee for plundered Ministers; the man being poor, and a
great sufferer, I undertook to do my endeavor, to accomplish his desire, but
not knowing what success I should have, therein I did not take one penny of his
money.

October 15, 1650. Worthy SIR,
HEaring of your exceeding care in promoting the glory of God, and of your
favorable countenance in encouraging honest men, in reference to the State,
and present Government of this Nation, strongly animates, and makes me, though
unacquainted, to present you in these lines, with a short Character of the
harsh, and unkind (if not unjust) dealings and proceedings of the Commissioners
for the Ministry against me at Newcastle, and their favor toward Malignants,
and scandalous Ministers. Sir, I was by some of the old Committee, and other
Officers in Carlisle, commended to Aicton Church as Minister, and (after the
decease of Mr. Halton, last incumbent) there elected and called by the People,
as appears by a testimony under their hands; but when Mr. Craystor had received
the like Commission, I was called at the first to Newcastle, and their rage was
so hot against me, in that I passed under the notion of an Independent, that
Mr. Craystor told me, I should not stay at Aicton upon any condition, and so by
his procurement, incensed Sir Arthur and the rest, that they ejected me,
sequestered the Rectory, and left the people ever since without a Preacher; they
having neither information, accusation, or other charge against me, save only
my judgment, crossing Presbytery and the Scottish Interests. But as for
others, whose names are subscribed, though Malignant, known Delinquents, and
very scandalous, the Commissioners approved, and settled in their place as
honest men, and others as yet never questioned. All which partial actings of
theirs, as yet strengthens theirs, and the hands of their enemies; so it
mightily disheartens the well affected, and will prejudice, as me in
particular, so the Commonwealths friends in general: Wherefore I pray you in
behalf of my self, and the honest party, use your endeavor for a speedy
redress, which I hope you will not neglect, and rest,

Your Friend to serve you, W. LAMPIT.
Mr. Bradshaw Minister at Westword, who had two wives at once, now living, this
they know.

Mr. Luggard, Minister at Workington, who was a Chancellor in Ireland, was
married to another man's Wife in her Husbands lifetime, and often drunk.

Mr. Jo. Mackmillian a Scot, who had an adulterous Bastard in the highest
degree, and was deposed for it in Scotland.

Mr. Johnston Minister at Distington, who had often complied with the enemy
under Duke Hamilton.

Mr. Grainger Minister at Bromfield, who is often drunk, an apparent Malignant,
and a Cavalerish Priest, even to this day.

Mr. Ratckleiffe of St. Bees, Mr. Sleddal of Cannanby, with many more whom they
know themselves, have been very active against the State, yet because they are
Presbyterians, they must be settled, and are established in their places, by
their power.

Mr Wheel-wright Chaplain to Barronet Curwen at Preston, lately in Arms against
the State, now Minister at Broughton.

Mr. Warwick late Chaplain to Sir Edward Musgrave, a great plunderer of honest
men.

Mr. Chambers at Allhallowes, tenderer of oath for the Lord Newcastle, a
Preacher for the Enemy, a Common Prayer Book man.

Mr. Welchman Minister at Stannix, an enemy in Carlisle Town, when the Leager
was against it, and many more.

And all the Sir John's and Readers yet never questioned by the Commissioners,
and that the Independents first questioned, and put out, I have always been in
the Parliaments Army and Garrison, and never declined the service, being 3.
times in prison, and 5. times plundered, and I am now going with the Governor
of Carlisle into Scotland

Yours, W. L.



To his much honored Friend, Mr. Musgrave, this deliver.
October the 16. 1650. Dear friend,
UPon after thoughts I am bold to acquaint you further with M. Craistours
dealing and my friends, I being at New Castle by order from the Commissioners
for the Ministry, and knowing M. Craistours resolution to out me, I delivered a
Letter that I received from Major Bird, Captain Cave, and other Officers, who
writ in my behalf to a friend of theirs and mine, Lieutenant Colonel Hobson by
name, which Letter when he read, and spoke with me, did go presently to M.
Craistour and others, and spoke in my behalf to him, who promised him to do for
me according to his desire, which was to establish me in the place I was placed
in by the Order you have to show, and I speaking with M. Craistour my self he
appeared very loving, and said I should that day be called, and he would be my
friend, my friends and my self believing him, conceived all to be as he
pretended, and did rest contented till that day was past, and at night he
meeting with Lieutenant Colonel Hobson told him he had accomplished his desire
in behalf of his friend, which was my self upon his word, the Lieutenant
Colonel sent a Letter to Major Bird and other Officers, that my fiend (says
he) and yours is established in his place. But all this appeared to be mere
dissembling, only to hinder my friends to speak for me, till he did get an
order to out me without any charge against me, and Sequestered the means,
whether this be just and righteous dealing I shall desire all un-by-assed to
Judge, and since, he and the rest have had the Retorie in their hands, there
has not a Sermon been preached by their appointment. And I would have preached
to the people though nothing I asked for my pains; yet M. Craistour said it was
not fit for me to preach, saying, I was a private man, because the hands of the
Presbytery were not laid on me, upon order I left the place, five weeks the
Clergy read to the people by the Commissioners appointment, as he says, but
after five weeks seeing their condition and hearing them complain to me, I have
preached to them these six weeks for nothing, but now I am going with the Army
into Scotland, M. Howldsworth an Enemy to the State, was endeavored to be put
in the place by Comissary Sewel, but the people would not accept of him. I
could acquaint you with much more of this, and the like, but I rest

Yours W. Lampit.
I have preached this 20. years, and was both Minister and Governor in Lunde
Island, and was never excepted against by the Army or real friends to it, or
the State.

W. L.



To his much respected friend, Mr. JOHN MUSGRAVE.
Mr. Bywater Chapline to the Governor of Carlisle, a man of good report writes
to me this following Letter in approbation of what Mr. Lampit had writ, and M.
Craisters unchristian dealing with him.

Noble Sir,
Mr. MAjor (meaning M. Craister,) quondam Captain, did (as I am in formed)
cheerfully bear Arms for the King in Carlisle, yea, bought Arms with his own
money, after this he faced about to the Parl. party, and being imprisoned by the
Royallists for it, by-and-by he recants the premises considered, for when Duke
Hamilton appeared before Carlisle, offering him release upon these terms, viz,
In case he would join with him and the Presbyterian party against England upon
the last invasion, it is reported that he manifested willingness to receive
freedom upon these terms, for since he has acted in that stream with a high
hand by countenancing such as are extreme enemies to this present power, *
speaking words of division in the Parliaments Garrison though he himself had
Commission there; Nay, As Mr. Baldwin who utte^ed in the fa^ of the Regiment,
strang^ expressions tending to strife and div^sion.
his whole current was for the Scottish Interest with the English Parliament,
for he kept his Commission there, and received the sweet of it, till he with
others were designed against Scotland, but then lays it down under this
specious pretense that he could not in conscience receive any more money from
the State, in that he could not, or had not done them any service, because of
his Majoralty, but all this while nothing said of making restitution, he was a
friend to the Scottish Minister of Cockermouth, who refused to take the
Engagement, he keeps in sundry Town-Officers that refuse the same, manifesting
by sundry other actions that what ever his pretention is, yet his intention is
not for the present power. My dear love to your self from him who is.

Your and the Commonwealths servant J. Bywater.
October. 15. 1650. I do well approve of this other relation concerning Mr.
Lampit, for Mr. Craister, manifested as much harshness as he could.



To his very good friend M. Musgrave.
ALl men may see by this Letter of L. Fearon the rage of the Justices made by
Sr. Arthur H. have against honest men, and that the poor Church of Broughton
complain not without cause what would not these Justices do, if Armed with Law
and countenance by the higher power, when they thus despise the Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament? for it is more then a year since the Act for liberty
to swear without layingh and on a Book was passed and published.

Mr. MUSGRAVE,
I Was sommoned to appear at the last Quarter Sessions of the Peace at
Cockermouth where I did appear, and being returned to be one of the Jury,
because I could not swear upon a book, Mr. Henry Pearson then Clerk of the
Peace, fined me 10. pounds, and would not suffer me to be of the Jury. I shall
desire you to help me, and other of our friends, who are troubled for the same,
that we may have the benefit of the Act of Parl. concerning Book-swearing, Mr.
Antrobus and Francis Smith are troubled for the like by Mr. William Tubman,
Steward to the Earl of Northumberland in Egremont-Court, the Justices that sat
upon the Bench the last Sessions when I was fined in 10. pounds are Sr.
Willfrid Lawson, Henry Tolson, Thomas Curwen, and Miles Halton. I pray you do
this for us; for the Parliaments suffering friends are much oppressed by their
Enemies, Sir, I am

Your loving friend Lancelot Fearen.
Lamplongh the 15. of October 1650.
For Mr. John Musgrave, Steward of the Honor of Peureth.
Mr. Appleby who writ this following Letter is a Cumberland Gentleman, and was
forced through the Malignancy of the Justices, and the Committee of his
Country, and withdrew into Yorkshire.

Worthy Sir,
AFter my kind love to you presented (though unacquainted) yet I conceive by my
wife and son, they have been much beholden to you, and if I had been intimate
with you, when you had Sr. Willfride Lawson in question at London, I could have
been a means to have accomplished your pursuit and desire, and if occasion
hereafter fall I will give you instructions, which I hope will yet work effect.
Sr. I conceive my wife preferred a Petition by your advice and furtherance unto
the Council of State, whereof she got no answer, so I heartily desire to know
the event thereof, and withal your advise and furtherance in the prosecution
of my causes, for I have sustained great losses and wrongs as any man in the
Country, not only from the Enemy; but from our Committee and Justices also, (
meaning in Cumberland) I will justify, and prove that great Delinquents and
Papists have had, and still have more favor from them then any real and
well-affected persons, who have adventured life and Estate for them in their
service. I intended to have been at London not long since, but the times have
been very bad and difficult with us, but upon any notice from you I will not
fail to be with you before this Term end, (God willing.) So (good Sir) let me
have your help, and upon receipt of your answer expect me with all speed.

Halton in Craven. October. the 18. 1650. Yours to serve you quantum in me.
LANCELOTH APPLEBY.

To his Honored friend M. John Musgrave, at London.
I Could not without ingratitude and doing wrong to the Council of State, who
has done so much for settling this Commonwealth in peace of security, but
publish this their Declaration made upon reading my Remonstrance.

Die Lune 27. August. 1649. At the Council of State at White Hall.
UPon reading the Remonstrance of John Musgrave on the behalf of himself, and
others well-affected in the Counties of Lancashire, Westmerland, and
Cumberland, particularly of Thomas VVorsley Esquire John VVorsley his son, and
Elizabeth VVorsley his daughter, Capt. Richard Crakanthrop, and Mary Blaithwait
widow; and upon hearing Mr. Musgrave himself consideration had of the matters
remonstrated and desired to be done.

It is ordered and declared, That care shall be had and taken of putting the
particulars specified into a way of examination and redress, and the Council
will endeavors, that a Reformation shall be had of the grievances complained
of; some of which, as that of putting the Militia into trusty hands, are
already under consideration; And this Council further declares, that they will
use their endeavors, that the particular Petitions of Mr. Musgrave, and the
rest, may be presented to the House, and there read and ordered: In respect of
the long attendance of the parties, as soon as with convenience the same may be
done, and as the public affairs of the House will permit.

Ex. Gualter Frost, Secr.

HEre (Reader) thou have my Remonstrance it self upon which the Council of
State made their Declaration.

To the Right Honorable the Lord President, and the Council of State sitting
at White Hall. The Remonstrance, and humble supplication of John Musgrave, for,
and on the behalf of himself, Thomas Worsley Esquire John VVorsley his son,
Elizabeth VVorsley his daughter, Captain Richard Crackanthorp, Mary Blaithwait
Widow, Thomas Gibson, and the rest of the well-affected in the Counties of
Lancaster, Westmerland and Cumberland.
IT is not to be doubted but as Justice, and treasure are the chief supporters
of all Commonwealths, and Kingdoms: so the neglect of the one by
maladministration, and unduely raising, and mispending the other, have ever
proved fatal to the present Governors and Ministers of States, as by woeful
experience the greatest Monarchs, and States often, but ever too late have
found. The mis-government of Eli, and Samuel sons made Israel change their
Government, as well as their Governors. Saul's misorder transferred the Kingdom
from his family to David, the great burdens, and many Taxes of Rehobeam caused
the defection of ten tribes which never returned again to the house of David,
and after few generations all Israel with their Kings, and Princes were
displanted, and carried away into captivity for their oppression, and
injustice, and for that sin the Scepter was taken from Judah, and they brought
tributary to the Roman Commonwealth, as the Prophets complained in Judahs
defection, and before their fall. Judgment was turned away backward, and
Justice stood then afar off, for truth was fallen in the street, and equity
could not enter, Is. 59.14.

Rome then kept faith with nations, executed Justice and judgment, for which
she was a long time famous, and thereby became Mrs over the whole world. But
when she began to oppress, her Senators corrupt and partial in judgment; Soon
followed the ruin of that long flourishing Empire.

The Rebellion of the Moors of Granado proceeded from the like, the cause
thereof being, no other then the contempt they were in with the natural
Spaniards whom they call old Christians, among whom the Moors lived in
continual vexation, especially by them of the Clergy, and the Offices of the
inquisition, and by the bad administration of justice, and the insolences of
the Ministers thereof; which war continued near two years, being both dangerous
and difficult, and if by the wisdom of a Goldsmiths which advised the King of
Spain to send them a general pardon (none excepted) which Honorable condition
the same then might have given an end to that Monarchy, as the Goldsmiths
Council gave an end to that war, the charge and loss was great, King Philip
sustained thereby he spent more; then 5. millions of Crowns, and the interest
of private men, and the spoil, and unpeopling of the Country was inestimable,
in which war above 30000. Christians lost their lives, as for the Moors that
were slain of all ages and Sexes, the number cannot be said. If these poor
Moors had been entreated with more mildness and humanity, without doubt the
Spaniards might easily have kept them in obedience.

But having said something of the Clergy, who have in all ages been the
bontifieu of States, I can not pass over them without the relation of a cruel
Edict, the Clergy of Spain procured against the poor Jews, the Kings Council
upon the reducing of the Kingdom of Granado to Spains subjection made an Edict
fair in show, but of pernicious consequence, whereby all the Jews that
inhabited Leon, and Castile were enjoined to turn to the Christian Religion,
and be baptized within 3 Months upon pain of confiscation of all their goods
and perpetual banishment, this decree was received, published, and executed by
the incitement and provocation (says my Author) of the Prelates, and
sloathfull Pastors, who contemned their charge of teaching good, and wholesome
Doctrine, and likewise by the Monks, and other seditious Churchmen; who
desired rather to destroy then to feed those miserable creatures, unto whom
they were in perpetual detestation, and scandal by reason of their wicked and
corrupt lives, whereby it came to pass that the name of God was profaned and
blasphemed amongst the Jews and Mahumetans, who would rather have retired a
thousand leagues then to draw near to receive any religious instructions from
so irreligious a people, whose piety was but childish ceremonies, and external
forms, their knowledge mere cunning, and deceit to maintain and increase their
riches, ease, and unruly appetites, and their aim and end Honors and worldly
glory, with a popular opinion of wisdom in the affairs of the world, the which
was plain, and evident to people of understanding amongst the Infidels.

Therefore it behoved (says my Author) such ill-affected persons, and no ways
disposed to amend as were the Prelates of those days to set forwards such
Councels, and to cause the King of Spain to practice courses fit, and pleasing
to the devil who is a murderer from the beginning, and Author of all ruin,
and desolation which has been since practiced in all places of Christendom
with very bad success.

For torments, death, confiscation of goods, and such other like cannot beget*
a grain of faith in the heart of man whose seed is the word of God, the
watering the holy works of unfeigned charity by the example of the heavenly
Father, and the increase thereof the spirit of the Lord, but they may well
bring forth Atheism, Hypocrisy, and despair in abundance which are the
offerings, the Enemy of Jesus Christ demands: thus far my Author.

From the like doings it seems that ancient custom grew amongst the Biscanes,
not to suffer any Bishop to come within their territories, the passage is very
remarkable.

King Ferdinand of Spain to whom the custom was unknown, riding with a Bishop
there, was advertised of their custom and constrained to send him back, the
Peasants, and poor Country people thinking the ground infected, whereupon the
Prelate and his Mule did tread, were busied for many days after, in scraping
together the dust of the high ways which they laid up in heaps, and threw it
after with curses and imprecations into the Sea. The which certainly was not
done without some mystery, those people being not void of Religion, but
Superstitiously devout, as the rest of the Spaniards were.

Even in those dark days for their cruelties, and oppressions, had the
Prelates and their Clergy contracted to themselves, such Odium of the people.

Here it will not be unseaonable to mention Don Pedro of Portugal, Son to Don
Alphonso the fourth, who for his prudence, and equity purchased the name of
Justicer. This Prince so ordered his house, and train, that his officers were
expressly forbid to molest his Subjects, especially purveyors not to take any
provision for his house before they had paid the price which the seller
demanded upon great penalties, yea, death in some cases. Hearing that Advocates
whom we call Lawyers, did multiply suits, as that of one, they often made many,
he discharged and banished them all out of his Realm, and imposed great
punishments upon Judges that should suffer themselves to be corrupted with
money or otherwise, yea, with loss of life and confiscation of goods. He made
many Laws for the shortning of fuits, appointing fir men for Judges, causing
his Ordinances, and Laws to be executed with rigor, he appointed great
punishments for light offenses; And if any told him he was too severe, he
answered it was the means to reform vice, and that it was pleasant unto God;
for if the wicked were not kept in awe with the fear of death, they would never
be restrained with lesser punishments, finally to have the good live in peace,
it was necessary to punish the bad severely. And as soon as the pleaders had
made their demands, and pertinent answers given, they were presently dispatched
if it might be. If by any tricks and devises matters were delaid, the offenders
were punished, that is, the poor by the whip, and the rich by fines, by reason
whereof his Realm flourisht in peace, and abundance of all things: and he was
Honored, and beloved of his Subjects as much as any prince living; he had
often the saying of the Emperor Titus in his mouth, that he held the day lost
wherein he had not done good to some one, he was more severe to his
houshold-servants then to any other; he caused a Secretary to be slain, having
taken money without the privity of his Treasurer.

But it happened far otherwise with wicked, and bad Princes, who not only
bring destruction upon themselves, and families, but causes the change and
alteration of the Government it self, as Rome did; who after they had banished
Tarquine, their last King for his Tyranny, conferred the Government of the
State upon Brutus and Collatine, but because the name of King was odious for
their wickedness in their ears, they changed the manner of Government from
perpetual to annual, and from a single Government to double; least perpetual,
or sole domination, might be motives to usurpation.

These we mention not that we conceive you are ignorant thereof. but that in
them we behold how our good God in all ages, and times has punished, and dealt
with Tyrants, and oppressors, and his merciful dispensations toward, and the
many favors and temporal blessings he has bestowed on good Princes, and
Governors though Infidels, and Aliens from the faith of our Lord Jesus.

And seeing the Lord of heaven and earth by your Councels has thrown down the
strong men of Babel, and removed those who by new Councels would again have set
up our old Taskmasters in a more specious, but far more dangerous, and
destructive way then the common Enemy ever projected, even to be done by a
Parliament.

This Nation having received so great benefit by your Councels, we are humbly
bold to make our addresses unto you for relief, having affayed all other known
ways and means.

We under God do repose the hope and remedy of our afflictions, and redress of
our grievances in the Justice and bounty of this Honorable Council; in which
respect, as well on the behalf of our poor Country as our selves, we beg,
and entreat you to cast your eyes of mercy upon our afflictions, to cure our
griefs, and redress our grievances, with timely, and seasonable remedies,
agreeable with your wisdom and Justice. We never were Refractory to your
Commands, we hold that belonging to our duty and fidelity which depends upon
your Authority, or respects your security. We beseech you let our tears, the
true demonstration of our sorrow induce you to defend us against the
oppressions of those who by Oath, and action joined with the Enemy, while he
had strength against you; and now in a more secret way labor to weaken you,
and again set up the Enemy by ruining your friends, and oppressing the Country.

We hope our necessities, and poverties will not make you less willing to hear
our complaints, and do us Justice: for he gives a grievous sentence against the
State of man's mortality, that denies compassion to men in misery, and your
Honor, and Justice makes us assured that you will not reject us, because that
we are men afflicted, it being not only piety, but good policy to minister
succors to men in neceslities, and to relieve such as suffer, and expect it:
your glory being more to relieve the oppressed then to conquer our Enemies;
for as the one is just, and necessary for your security, so the other is an
high Act of charity, and Justice, and thereby you become Masters of affections.

We will therefore with all humility present to your view a short Narrative of
our State and condition, and clearly demonstrate unto this Honorable Council,
how the Authorities of those Counties are put into the hands of the known and
professed Enemies of this State and Commonwealth, by whom we are as much
oppressed, and kept under as ever we were formerly under the Enemy.

In the beginning of this war, the Justices of the Peace, and Commissioners of
the Array in Cumberland and Westmerland, the more easily to deceive or affright
the people, caused all such as they suspected to favor the Parliament and
their proceedings, to be imprisoned, indicted or bound to the good behavior,
For not coming to Church and Common Prayer.
either upon the * statute 23. Eliz. or for refusing the Oath of Supremacy, the
Earl of New-Castles Oath, or for not taking up Arms with them. Of whom first
imprisoned were John Musgrave, and Captain Richard Crackenthorp; by whose
boldness and constancy in bonds, and sufferings, Mr. Osmotherley with 2000.
men in Cumberland declared against the Commissioners of Array, associated
themselves together, and for half a year could not be reduced under the
Commission of Array, till by the treachery of Sir Wilfrid Lawson, they were
delivered up into the Enemies hands, and then Lawson used great cruelty against
such as were for the Parliament there.

And that the Enemy might uphold their interest the better, in case the
Parliament prevailed, by agreement and combination, Sr. Wilfrid Lawson with the
new Committee seemed to disaffect the Kings party, for which they were confined
to their Chambers, but it was mere dissimulation, for after few days they were
the men in favor, and great promoters of men and money for the Enemy, and
cruel persecutours of the Parliaments friends.

Upon the reducement of Cumberland to obedience of Parliament, Sir Wilfrid
Lawson procured himself to be made Commander in chief over the Forces raised
there, by which he and the Committee protected the Delinquents, and more
oppressed the Country then ever the Enemy did, the better to color their
doings, the whole Committee, being Delinquents and of the Enemies faction
procured an Order from the Commissioners of Parliament, to suspend all
Sequestrations, which was done accordingly, in the mean time raising great sums
by way of Loan, without order or Ordinance of Parliament, besides all other
Taxes, whereby they made the commonalty like disaffected as themselves. And to
prevent any of the Parliaments friends from having any Authorities there, it
was upon private and serious debate resolved betwixt them and the Parliaments
Commissioners, that such as had acted, or suffered for the Parliament, being
called Independents, should not be any ways trusted or employed: two Months
after the County was reduced, and the Commissioners of Parliament gone thence,
the Committee underhand encouraged the Papists and the Country to take up Arms
to raise the siedge of Carlisle, and furnished the Enemy within Carlisle with all
manner of provision, and the Country people with shot and powder upon their
declaring against the Parliament. That all Officers under Sr. Wilfrid Lawson
were professed and sworn Enemies to the Parliament, and had been Officers and
Captains before for the Kings party, Sr. Wilfrid Lawson had from Sr. Philip
Musgrave 20. Horse to protect, which he returned to him again, a little before
Sr. Philip Musgrave did rise last against the Parliament. Of all which the well
affected complained to the Parliament, but their Agents through the countenance
of some in Parliament were cast into prison, whereupon the well-affected sent
their Petition to the Parliament, for releasing their Agents, and redress of
their grievances, but could never to this day get the same presented. The
Committee sent complains to the Parliament, how the number of Independents and
Sectaries increased thereby to make easier way for the Enemy and the Lord
Digbies coming into those parts, upon whose coming Lawson deserted the
Country, and made no resistance; After the Kings coming to New Castle into the
Scots Army, Lawson went to kiss the Kings hand, and then he and the Scots
confederated together (whom before he seemed to oppose, to suppress the Armies
friends, and indicted sixteen at one Sessions for not coming to the book of
Common Prayer, and others they fined for refusing to swear upon a book, and
others they committed.

That Sr. Wilfrid Lawson being summoned to appear before the Committee of
Indemnity to answer his Delinquency, his friends in the house of Commons
provided an Order to the contrary, and for his stay in the Country; which he
received ten days before he left the Country, and came to London under color
to answer his charge: but before he came away, he caused all the Arms of the
Country to be brought into his Isle upon the Counties charge, and made
Governor thereof one Bewley, a vain drunken man, and one that was disaffected
to the Parliament, who shortly after delivered up the same with the Arms
therein, to Sr. Edward Musgrave, and Richard Musgrave, Lawsons brother in Law,
and though Lawson raised great sums of money for maintenance of 30. men allowed
him for the Isle, he kept but 3. who upon the first summons delivered it up,
upon Sr. Philip Musgraves coming into the Country with 16. Horse at most: the
Committee gave him way to muster the Country without making any resistance,
and Carlisle was taken in by 17. men, which could never have been but by the
treachery of Lawson, and the Committee.

While Sr. Philip Musgrave thus raised men and money by the Committees
compliance, Lawson and Major Barwis he here at London, and under pretense of
their present going down, got orders for auditing their accounts, amounting to
many thousands, which they sold; whereas in truth they had raised double the
pay upon the Country, and then lay a long time in London privately, having
caused the Parliament to be made acquainted, they were gone into Cumberland,
while they were here in Town and whither they never went till after Preston
battle.

That though Sr. Wilfrid Lawson was not in Commission in his travel from
London, he with his Lady, and servants took free quarter, and Country men's
Horses from them in Bishopric. And after the surrender of Carlisle to Sr.
Arthur Haslerigge, he procured Captain Fenwicks Horse to raise him great sums
of money of the poor Country people for his pretended losses, having no Order
nor Act of Parliament for so doing, whereof one of the brethren of Mr. Serjant
Birket, came to the Parliament to complain, but the bad success others had
before in the like ease deterred him, and so he returned without relief or
redress.

That Sr. Wilfrid Lawson, and the Committee to keep the favor of Sr. Philip
Musgrave, suffered his Lady to enjoy her Husbands Estate under color of
farming the same, till Duke Hamleton came into Cumberland. Sr. Wilfrid Lawson
did for a long time take the profits of Rose-demesnes part of the Bishop lands
to his own use, whereof we came to the Parliament to complain: But the Knights,
and Burgesses who served for those Counties, were so far from assisting us to
get our grievances redressed as to this day not one of them would ever yet
present a Petition for us. All such as were Countrymen for their Delinquency
having since left the House; but when any Delinquents of the County came to
compound at Goldsmiths hall, they never wanted some of our Parliament men to
attend them thither, and Solicit for them.

The Earl of Northumberland who has had 10000. l. for his pretended losses,
procured Mr. Allen, a Gold smith of London to be elected Burgess of
Cockermouth in Cumberland, who though he professed better things would not
present a Petition for any of the Parliaments friends there. Mr. Allen has had
Widow Blaithwaits. Petition in his hands more then three years, yet
unpresented, who after she had attended above two years, returned home without
relief. M. Allen kept the Petition of Thomas Gibson in his hand near two years,
a man committed by the Commissioners of Array, and laid in irons for the
Parliaments cause, the poor man was glad to return home with nothing but empty
promises from Mr. Allen, to bear his changes near 300. Miles. Mr. Allen kept
the Petition of John Musgrave and Captain Crakanthorp so long as glad they were
to take it from him. Yet does the said Earl employ, or entrust not any there in
any Office, but such as are professed Enemies to the Parliament. And when the
Earl was desired to present some Petitions to the House or Lords for some
distressed in Cumberland, he refused to do the same, saying, the never
presented any such thing

By the Earls employing of the grand Enemies of the Commonwealth, and Mr.
Allen. neglect of his duty, the Parliaments friends there still lie under
greater oppressions then when the Enemy was possessed of the Country.

Sr. Wilfrid Lawson, and the Committee with the countenance of Mr. Howard, who
raised two Troops for the Enemy under Duke Hamleton, and resorted to the Enemy
in Carlisle, and sent them Venison, and other presents, by the Votes of
Malignants of Carlisle of late got the Lord Howard, Mr. Howards Father in Law
returned Burgess for Carlisle, and thereby they doubt not but to uphold their
interest still, knowing the Lord Howard will not present any thing to the
Parliament, whereby the oppressed Country, and distressed friends of the
Parliament may obtain any Justice from the Parliament, as we have found the
same too true by sad experience: for being solicited to present some Petitions
to the Parliament for some of the Parliaments suffering friends after several
days attendance he desired to be excused, for he would not present the same.

So that without the assistance of your good Lordship, and this Honorable
Council, the well-affected of those Counties are hopeless ever to come from
under the oppression of their Enemies; all Authorities there being in the hands
of the sworn and professed Enemies of the Commonwealth, some of the Committee
there now residing in this Town, being Justices of the Peace, and having other
great places, and Offices of trust, upon their coming thence, declared they
could not now Act with the Parliament, which was the cause of their leaving the
Country, as they have said to some of their friends here.

There is not a Committee-man in Cumberland, nor Justice of Peace in either
County, Cumberland or Westmer-land, saving one or two at the most, but many
ways have discovered his Malignancy and disaffection to the present
proceedings of this Parliament.

And without the same be prevented, it will be a means to draw an Enemy
thither, knowing they shall have no resistance; Lancashire the next adjacent
County who by their Petition to the Parliament against Sectaries subscribed
with 12000. hands, have manifested their disaffection, will be upon all
occasions likewise ready to entertain an enemy thence: not a Member of the
house there would ever yet present Mr. Worsley and his childrens Petition unto
the Parliament, who by the oppression of wicked Judges, and the Prelates
persecution are ruined in their Estates, and every year have their goods taken
away for their nonconformity to the book of Common prayer, as in the Prelates
days, and to add to their affliction, some Parliament men there, namely Mr.
Holcroft, have banished them the Country for Sectaries, and by his Soldiers
seized their rents there, for these five years, and still take up the same,
being demanded by what Authority they did take up the Rents there? Captain
Holcroft held out his Pistol, and said here is our Commission.

All which is fully and truly set forth in their Petition; which doings, and
the like oppressions have brought the wrath and judgments of God upon the
Parliament, even by breaking them twice with their own strength.

But the Lord hitherto has preserved the Nation from breaking, by his
righteous judgments upon the Parliament. We therefore humbly supplicate your
Honors, to whom we fly for refuge and help, as the last, and visible means
under God for our recovery, in this our lost and perishing condition, having
not only fruitlesly spent above five hundred pounds in attendance upon the
Parliament, but lie open to the merciless cruelties of our adversaries, and
every day in danger to be surprised by the common enemy.

If you neglect us, the same may likewise endanger your safety as our ruin,
and hasten the curse upon you which as a Millstone is fallen upon the late King,
his House, and Pears, and which you can no other way avoid, then by your equal,
and due administration of justice to the poor as to the rich, and which in all
probability will break factions, and recover unto you the lost affections of
the people, and raise again the drooping spirits of your oppressed distressed
friends, and prevent the adversary of his purpose.

Now the better to facilitate this great work, so long retarded by some corrupt
Members of Parliament, where, if not by your all delays, and obstructions of
Justice ought to be examined, and redressed.

It will not be amiss here to relate the expedient the wisdom of our Ancestors
found out to prevent the delay of Justice, and not to be left only to the will
of private and particular Members of Parliament, when, and how to bring in
Petitions as now is practiced, to the dishonor and great scandal of the
present Government, ruin not only of private families but of whole Countries,
and which has rendered the Parliament to be no other then upholders of
Injustice, and supporters of Tyranny and oppression, far contrary to our
exspectation and their promises and engagements; and which necessitated his
Excellency and Armies to advance to London twice against them.

The old and good way of bringing in Petitions into the Parliament for the
equal distribution of Justice to all Suitors, was not by the Speaker, or any
particular Member thereof, but by the Masters of the Chancery, who by their
place, and Office were to attend the Parliament for that very end and purpose,
as the Rolls, of most times witness, it being by the old mod. tenend.
Parliament and others accounted against reason, that Petitions should be taken,
and brought into the House by those that were to debate, and determine them,
for so might they at pleasure keep them out, or too happily press them on;
Therefore says the same Author, Petitions were filed in course, and so to be
debated as they were received; which were entrusted to the care of known and
sworn Officers of the Kingdom, who of old time were appointed for triers of
Petitions to enquire of the matter of fact expressed in the Petitions, that it
might be rightly stated before it came to be debated in the House.

By the disuser whereof Justice has been obstructed, and the same has brought
contempt upon the Parliament, and no means left us for making known our
grievances; and to complete our misery, the worst of men again creep into
Magistracy, by which they do the Parliament more disservice then when they
openly acted in the way of professed enmity; as by this ensuing story of a
cunning welsh Judge will appear.

A Gentleman suspecting the welsh Judge to have been the cause of putting
several of the Parliaments friends out of Commission of Peace, and others known
disaffected, and delinquents to be in their place, did entertain discourse with
a bosom friend of his, by way of complaining.

The Gentleman said the Judge was ever taken for a friend to Cavaliers, and it
was not well taken that he had put A. M. from his practice for A. M. was truly
the Kings friend: the other replied, and said if it were so, the Judge should
bring him again to his practice, for he loved the King, and never was man so
cast down as he and his Son were for the Kings death, both of them wept
bitterly when the King died; then said the Gentleman, but I fear the Roundheads
will complain of the Judge for putting them out of Commission, and the Kings
friends in their place, and so the Judge might come into trouble, and be less
able to serve his friends: the other answered, take no thought for that: as he
waited all opportunities to do good Offices for the King and his friends, so he
doubted not but to come fair off, if Roundheads did complain of him; for a
Parliament man (whom he then named) would own the thing as his own act, who was
able to deal with all that should oppose.

By all which your Lordship and this Honorable Council may clearly perceive
what imminent danger you are subject unto by these petty Tyrants of the time,
who as they oppress us, so they wait but for an opportunity to remove you from
your seats.

Now we leave it to your consideration, if delay of Justice be adenial of
Justice, or rather Injustice it self, how unjust men be these our Northern
Gentlemen of the House of Commons, who since the Parliament began would never
present a Petition for us? some of us having since the third day of the
Parliaments first sitting down attended, and solicited for that purpose,
therefore as you tender your own safety, regard you Honors, respect Justice,
love the Commonwealth, and are affected with any bowels of compassion toward
a distressed, afflicted, and oppressed people, take our Remonstrance into your
serious consideration, with these our humble requests.

1. That all Delinquents in the North according to Ordinance of Parliament may
be removed from all Offices Civil and Martial, and that under a penalty.

2. That the Moneys unduly leavied by Sr. Wilfrid Lawson or any others with us,
upon the Country without order, or Ordinance of Parliament, may be accounted
for, and satisfaction made to the parties wronged.

3. That Mr. Worsley and his childrens sufferings may be taken into
consideration, and relieved, and provision made that for their nonconformity
to the Book of Common Prayer, they be not further molested either in their
Persons, Lands, or goods, all charges charged, and issuing out of the Exchequer
against them for the same may be discharged, and nulled, and the burden of
Book-swearing taken away.

4. That John Musgrave, Captain Richard Crackanthorpe, Mary Blaithwaite, and
Thomas Gibson, who are wasted with a long and chargeable attendance, may have
fitting repairations for their losses, and sufferings, by the Commissioners of
Array, Justices of the Peace, and Committee Men of Cumberland.

5. That Mrs. Vaux Petition, with the House of Peers Order upon it, may be
taken into like consideration.

6. That John Musgrave for his discovery of concealed Delinquents in
Cumberland, and his attendance upon the Committee of Lords and Commons for
sequestrations may be taken into consideration.

7. That a way may be provided, that the grievances of our Northern Counties
and the oppressions of the Justices of peace and Committees there may be
removed, and such as have unjustly suffered by them may be repaired; to the
end, we may not be constrained after 300. miles travel hither, to consume the
little that is left us by the adversary, in a fruitless and chargeable
attendance for months and years, as for these 8. years and more we have done,
upon such men as will not, nor ever did present a Petition for us, themselves:
for the most part having by some irregular way, and undue election by the votes
of Malignants, or Letters of some petty Tyrants, or Lord, being returned
Knights and Burgesses for our Counties.

JOHN MVSGRAVE.

This following Letter I writ to my Lord President, who thereupon sent for me,
and shortly after procured me audience before the Conncel of State upon reading
my Remonstrance, which I at the request of some friends, have published as in
thankfulness to his Lordship, so to satisfy and inform friends, how and for
what Interest I have ever acted and suffered.

My Lord,
SInce my Letter to you by Mr. Rumsey, of the 18. of the first month, I did
forbear any ways to be troublesome unto you, neither would I now (if I could)
have found a door open unto me for justice, which hitherto as to me and my
suffering friends, has been altogether shut up.

And now I am constrained, as the most probable means to attain my wished
desires, to make my supplication to you, and though I could not in spirit go
along with you in your last actings toward the late King, by the reason of the
many oaths, and engagements made, and taken on his behalf; yet I have ever held
it my duty, to submit without resistance to such Powers and Authorities as the
Lord of Heaven in his ways shall set over us, accirding to the Apostles Rule,
Romans 13.1.2. Yet I cannot but put the Lords on earth in mind, how the same
Apostle says in the same place, that Rulers ought not to be a terror to good
works, but to the evil. But while oppression and injustice in any, is either
connived at, or past by upon complaint unpunished, the wicked grow bold by
their impunity, and the Magistracy becomes a terror, and the Law no other then
a snare to all honest men.

My Request to you now, is neither for place nor promotion, though these be due
to deserving men, as the rewards of virtue.

Therefore I shall never envy nor upbrayde any upon whom the same are conferred
by a State, or other; but give me leave to tell you, while the poor are
neglected, the oppressed unrelieved, and justice not done freely in your gates,
that is, openly and not in Chambers, security or comfort you cannot long have
in the enjoyment of them.

I have wearied and wasted my self ever since the Parl: first sat down, in
seeking to remove oppressors from their Seats, and gaining justice for poor
people, but never to this present day could I bring my purpose to pass; for
which I blame not the Parliament, but such as sit there in right of our
Country, who only mind themselves, and do their own work, regardless of us and
our Country.

For by fitting there, they become great, purchasers of Lands and Mannours,
fare Dives like, while we at home are spoiled of all, and here disreregarded
Lazarous-like, lies at their doors begging for justice, but never yet could
taste the least of their Crumbs, so as from them I am hopeless ever to obtain
any good.

If I had been a Solicitor or Agent for Cavaliers at Goldsmiths-Hall, to the
Committee of Sequestrations, or to the Parliament, I might have got Wealth, and
had the countenance of the great ones, and found ready dispatch of business. I
know one poor Solicitor that way has gained 2. or 3000 l. at the least.

But I agitating for a poor plundered People, could never gain the favor as
the reading of a Petition.

Mr. Allen has had poor Widow Blaythwaits Petition (one whom you sometimes
owned, and did good to) in his hand near 3. years, yet could never find
opportunity to present it, he held me in hand more then a year, he would
present mine, and Captain Crakanthorps Petition; but in the close, finding no
real dealing with him, glad I was to take it from him, by no hand could I get
access unto justice.

When I came the other day to present my Petition to the Council of State, I
desired A Member of the Council of State.
Mr. Scot to bring it in before you, he told me it was not proper for you,
before he read or knew the Contents of it. If I had told him some pretty story
of some hidden treasure, I should then have had ready admittance, and well
rewarded; but while he Dog-like snatched at the shadow, he lost the Gold in his
hand. Let all such covetous wretches be so served: I forbear to particularize,
it is a story fitter for Pasquile or Tarleton then your graviry.

I remember when the Earl of Strafford came first President to York, and for
sundry years after, the same being the usual Custom of the Kings learned
Council there, every day after dinner, for an hour and a half before he went
to Court, or entered upon any other business of state, suitors by turns were
called in, and their Petitions read, being before received from them of course
by the Clarke of the Petitions, there being two that attended every other week
for that purpose, who had their diet, and a constant salary; for that purpose,
so as the reference and attendance to the suitors was no way chargeable, none
being necessitated to wait for answer longer then two days at the most, a good
president for you and the Council of State to follow.

By which doings, for sundry years, he kept the North free from oppressions,
and mightily gained upon the affections of the people.

The which when he gave over, and begun to be proud, and covetous, his Table
became a snare to him, and his glory departed, and soon after followed the
downfall of him, and that Court; and how he was after prosecuted with the envy
of the people, his trial and death is enough to mention.

Upon his trial I was by the Lord Whitlock brought before the Lords in
Parliament, and presented to them, as a ruinated Gentleman by him: without me,
it was then said, they could not have made forth any considerable thing against
him, of his illegal, regal actings in the North: then I had the plaudite and
thanks, not only of that Committee, but of many other eminent Members of the
House with many and large, (though then undesired,) promises to procure me
justice, and do great matters; for which service I was committed by Justice
Dikes, (one of the Deputies Creatures) to Carlisle Castle; upon my return home,
after my attendance upon the Trial upon my own charge, but John Musgrave was
never after owned.

My prosecuting against our Malignant Committees, though I got a prison: yet
you gained both honor and friends thereby.

Upon your encouragement, I brought a list of the concealed Delinquents of our
Country, and proved the same before the Committee of Lords and Commons for
Sequestrations, which cost me in attendance near 100 l. I return you again your
Order.

I hope you will so order the business, for if you please I know you can do it,
that I may have some proportionable satisfaction for my former service, losses
and sufferings, and some right done to my suffering friends.

Sir Wilfrid Lawson, for his pretended losses by Hambelton, without either Law
or Act, Order, or Ordinance of Parliament, could raise 3000 l. for his losses
from the poor Country, that never did him wrong, the Country being then
delivered up to Hambleton by the Cowardice and treachery of Lawson, and his
Confederates there.

But the poor Widow Blaithwait cannot be heard, I desire you to peruse Mr.
Worsley, and my poor Mothers Petitions, with others I sent you, that I may
obtain so much favor, as to procure us common right, I may be thought in
remembering my former actings, to hunt after praise or reward; truly I had been
altogether silent, even as I was in my former troubles in the Fleet, and buried
the same in oblivion, if I and my suffering friends of the North, for whom I
agitate, had receeived any common right or justice from the Parliament, which
if you procure us, we shall with all thankfulness acknowledge the same; and you
will obliege me to be ever, as truly I am,

Your Lordships humble Servant. JOHN MVSGRAVE.
21. June, 1649.
For the Right Honorable, John Bradshaw, Lord President of the Council of
State, sitting at White Hall.
Here I though good to insert a letter written to Sr. Thomas VVitherington,
formerly printed, in regard it relates to our former and present grievances.

SIR,
I Expected ere this to have heard of your report to have been made to the
House, upon the vote passed for M. Cracanthorp and my self, for the great
losses that we have sustained by the Enemy, the Justices of the peace, and Com.
of Array in Cumberland and Westmerland; I here attended the last winter, 13.
weeks before I could get the Petition presented to the House, six months upon
the Committee I waited before I could get any vote passed upon the Petition,
since the vote of the Committee was made, which you are to report unto the
House, it is now nigh four months; yet nothing done, which makes me much fear
that little good is intended us, and that we shall be made more miserable in
seeking the recovery of what we have lost, then in losing the same, undergo
more hardship, and be brought to greater straits by waiting on you, then by
lying in the Enemies prisons for you. You know the deferring of Justice; in Law
is holden for denial of Justice. The Parliament put us to an oath to maintain
the lawful liberty of the Subject; the Enemy because I would not join with
them in the breach of it, and in betraying my Country, forced me into Exile,
and seized on that little Estate I had; now again upon the report of M. Lisle
(after his many differings and puttings off, even to the hazard of the loss of
our Country, and if Sir John Brown (as is well known) with his Scottish forces
(upon Cumberland forces deserting him) by his valor had not prevented it, the
Enemy by some of our seeming friends who joined with them, had without any
great difficulty, no opposition being made by Col. Lawson, effected their
designs in that Country.) Of my pretended refusal to answer, which I did not,
but only desired the Interrogatories to advise of, before I answered for
matter of Law, which contrary to Law he resused to grant me, though earnestly
desired, all which may fully appear by my answer and reasons given for not
answering then to the Interrogatories before the Committee, (and taken in
writing by M. Lisle himself, before the same Committee and some other members
of the House, and which was then read unto me) am I again cast into prison, and
condemned thereunto unheard, and my greatest fault (if any be) in this case, is
my Lawful maintenance of our common freedoms, and my doubting, and desire to
be resolved before I should act that, which seemed to me then, and now I know
to be not agreeable to Law; and here I lie in prison for this, while Traitors
and the grand Enemies to the State, are by this means suffered to walk London
streets, even they of whom I complain; for which I cannot but blame M. Lisle,
being thus injured by him, and my Country almost undone; For as Sr. Edward
Cook well observes, it is the greatest Injustice, when the Innocent is
oppressed under color of Justice; whereby we ought to be protected: I am
persuaded that if that Honorable House by whom I was committed were truly
acquainted with my suffering condition, and knew the ground thereof, they would
not suffer me to lie in prison one day longer; and if they rightly understood
the unsettled state of our Country, and what harm the neglect thereof has been
to both Kingdoms (this and Scotland) and what advantage to the Enemy, and also
what further evil may ensue thereupon; I believe we had not been so slighted as
we have been, neither our Country men have had such just cause to have
complained of delay and neglect, as they by their letters to me sent daily do,
neither had the adversary I suppose, been so born out.

As long as honest men are thus slighted, neglected, and kept under, their just
complaints thus delayed and suppressed, while Traitors. Papists, and
Delinquents be thus countenanced and protected, as those of whom we complain
have been and still are; while the greatest places of trust and command are
conferred on, and continued in the hands of Traitors, and the grand Enemies of
the State, as has been, and now is with us, and still they are kept up in
their Authorities; while the Parliaments and the Kingdoms faithful friends and
servants are thus molested, oppressed, and shut up in prisons for their good
affection, forwardness, and willingness to serve the State and their
Country: How can we expect the restoration of our ancient and long lost
Liberties? How can we look for an end of these our troubles? While things are
thus carried on, little peace can be hoped for this poor and distressed
Kingdom. Let us no more cherish the Serpent in our bosom, which having got
strength will again wound us, if not destroy us: I could wish that these
troublers and Enemies of our State, against whom only I inform, and with whom
I only contend, may no longer be suffered to escape, but may be brought to
condign punishment, according to the Law, and merit of their offenses, lest by
others faults the Parliament should suffer in their credit, lest that it should
be thought the Parliament were offended with as for seeking Justice, and
pressing forward our Countries just complaints and grievances, lest it should
be thought the Parliament should seem to justify (or connive) at these their
lawless practices and oppressions (which we are ready in a legal way to make
good according to our charge) by forbearance and sufferance of them: For it is
a maxim in Law, Qui non prohibet quod prohibere potest, assentiri videtur; [He
that suffers not that which he may let, is conceived and said in Law to
assent.] Let no such blot lie upon that Honorable House; let not the potency
of our adversaries overthrow the justness of our cause, neglect us no more,
lest (besides the blame and outcries for Justice) you bring ruin upon us and
your selves, by leaving us open to the Irish, which may the sooner invite
Ormond to invade us with his Popish and revolted Forces, having such an easy
entrance, if the same be not prevented.

As you tender the good and quiet of the State, timely provide for this, and
have respect to our poor Country; let all Delinquents, Traitors, and men
disaffected, all such as are tainted with covetousness, or cowardice, be
removed out of all Authorities, and the same put in the hands of confiding men,
fearing God, and hating covetousness, and all baseness; such as would not be
in the worst of times carried away, or corrupted through fear, or loss of
goods, or hope of preferment, to join with, or submit unto the Enemy, or act in
a neutrality, which is holden for most detestable: Neglect of those parts may
prove of dangerous consequence; There, and not well elsewhere in the North,
may the Irish land at their pleasure, and daily are expected there; from thence
Digby by connivance of some of our English Commanders there, (as is conceived)
had free and ready passage into the Isle of Man, and so for Ireland; from
thence the Earl of Antrum had like passage, and way into Ireland, with the
Royal Commissions for Cessation of Arms there, which produced such sad effects
in that Kingdom. Montrosse made his way for Scotland twice that way, to the
great loss of that Kingdom, he invaded Scotland and took Dumfrece, hence the
Earl of New Castle had his first rise of his Popish Army in the North, and
daily supplies of men and moneys, till the reducement thereof by the Scottish
Horse; hence since the reducement the Enemy in Dublin and the Isle of Man had
Cole and Victuals: Here the whole Gentry are Malignants, Delinquents, Papists,
Popish, or base Temporizers; Here not ten of the Gentry in both these Counties,
nay, I dare say, not so many have proved Cordial to the State, but have
submitted themselves, or acted to and with the Enemy; Here the Gentry have
revolted since the reducement thereof, more then once or twice. Here Will, and
Oppression, reigns more then in any Country now subjected to the State, so
long as the powers and Authorities reside in the hands of such Neutrals,
Temporizers, Self-seekers, Traitors and Delinquents, as now it is, the Enemy
(though peace for the present were concluded and settled) yet might upon new and
after discontents of a sudden, endanger the loss of the whole North, by the
help of that Popish faction in those parts, who have got in their hands the
chief places of trust and Command there, though you had no care nor regard of
us, yet for your own good, prevent this mischief, the which done may produce
(though little considered) the fruit which may prove to be a well grounded
peace to the whole Kingdom; Though neglect of us, could be no prejudice to the
public, which will be of no small concernment (as I have already shown) yet
the redress of our Countries grievances in common equity ought not to be so
lightly passed over, all which hitherto (but all in vain, for fourteen months
together) have been pressed on, but by one Committee or other still frustrated;
and in Justice you cannot deny us audience, and an equal trial either at the
Common Law, or in full Parliament, as in your wisdoms shall seem best for the
public, and our particular good, for that the Law is our common birthright;
which we may without offense (I hope) and do challenge and claim the benefit
thereof, and therefore we have no cause to doubt or be fearful in putting our
selves forth, considering how that general rule in Law is still in force: Quod
curia regis non debeat deficere conquerentibus in Justitia adhibenda; That the
Kings Court should never be failing (to such as complain) in the doing of
Justice. And of Courts Judicial, we acknowledge the Parliament Supreme, which
ever has been, and I hope still will be the great and faith full up-holder of
the Common Law, and of the rights and Privileges of all the loyal and
true-hearted Freeborn of the Kingdom; I pray you, good Sir, peruse these
papers and Copies of Letters, the Originals I have all, except two, which
Master Blaxston has, to whom they were sent and delivered; withal, I would
entreat you to present this my Petition to the House of Commons, M. Speaker
has seen it, and says he will speak to it; I could not press him further, in
respect he had formerly presented one for me: which was referred to the former
Committee, but by M. Lisle (who is the Chairman) suppressed; and I could never
hear more of it; the ground of this my Petition, I hope you will let me
understand what you will do here concerning the whole matter, by this bearer
Master Hobkins (the Warden of the Fleet) which has shown me kindness, in his
readiness to do me this favor, if by your means and the Justice of the house
I may obtain my liberty, and our Countries cause put in a way of trial without
further procrastination, I shall not be unthankful, but ever rest

From the Fleet prison this 25. of the 12. Month, 1645. Yours to serve and
honor you, JOHN MUSGRAVE.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Omitted to set forth, how Sir Arthur Hazlerig within these 2. or 3. years,
and since he became ruler of the North, has got an Estate in Lands there,
worth eight or ten thousand pounds per Annum, part by oppression; but the most
of it by buying the Commonwealths Lands at far undervalues; the Surveyors
being such, who durst not displease him, but made returns of the values as he
desired, which if reviewed, will appear to be true: His Man Pearson, who the
other day was worth little or nothing when his Master came to Newcastle, has
purchased as much Lands very near as his Master was worth when the Wars began:
Fitch the Governor of Carlisle under him, has likewise infinitely enriched
himself by overburdening the Country with free quarter, and excessive Taxes
and Leavies of Corn and money, which he has never accounted for,
notwithstanding he has received constant pay from the State for that Garrison;
not a people in England so oppressed as we, yet never to this day could procure
any that sit in Parl: in the right of our Country, to present a Petition for
us, which is the very cause I have thus set my self forth, having spent that
little the Enemy has left me in a fruitless attendance: All which I humbly
submit to the grave consideration of the Council of State, begging their
helping hand and liberty to prove what I here assert, before they judge it
scandals, as some have said it to be.

JOHN MUSGRVE.

Reader I pray amend the faults of the Printer with thy Pen.


