C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

The Earl of Manchesters SPEECH TO His Majesty, In the Name of the PEERS, At
His Arrival at White Hall, The 29th of May, 1660.

WITH His Majesty's GRACIOUS ANSWER Thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, and Francis Tyton, Printers to the House of
Lords, 1660. June 2

THE Earl of Manchester's SPEECH TO His Majesty.
THat this day may prove happy to Your Majesty, is the Hope, the Expectation,
and the earnest Desire of my Lords the Peers, whose Commands are upon me to
make this humble Tender to Your Majesty, of their Loyal Joy for Your Majesty's
safe Return to your native Kingdom, and for this happy Restoration of Your
Majesty to your Crown and Dignity, after so long, and so severe a Suppression
of Your just Right and Title.

I shall not reflect upon Your Majesty's Sufferings, which have been your
Peoples Miseries; yet I cannot omit to say, That as the Nation in general, so
the Peers with a more personal and particular sense have felt the stroke that
cut the Gordian Knot which fastened Your Majesty to your Kingdom, and Your
Kingdom to Your Majesty.

For since those strange and various Fluctuations and Discomposures in
Government, since those horrid and unparalleled Violations of all Order and
Justice, Strangers have ruled over us, even with a Rod of Iron: But now with
satisfaction of Heart, We own and see your Majesty Our Native King, a Son of
the Wise, a Son of the ancient Kings, whose hand holds forth a Golden Scepter.

Great King! Give me leave to speak the Confidence, as well as the Desires, of
the Peers of England: Be you the Powerful Defender of the True Protestant
Faith, the Just Assertor and Maintainer of the Laws and Liberties of Your
Subjects; so shall Judgment run down like a River, and Justice like a mighty
Stream; and God, the God of Your Mercy, who has so miraculously preserved You,
will establish Your Throne in Righteousness and in Peace.

Dread Sovereign! I offer no flattering Titles, but speak the Words of Truth:
You are the desire of three Kingdoms, the Strength and the Stay of the Tribes
of the People, for the moderating of Extremities, the reconciling of
Differences, the satisfying of all Interests, and for the restoring of the
collapsed Honor of these Nations. Their Eyes are toward Your Majesty, their
Tongues with loud Acclamations of Joy, speak the thoughts and Loyal intentions
of their Hearts; their Hands are lift up to heaven with Prayers and Praises:
and what Oral Triumph can equal this Your Pomp and Glory?

Long may your Majesty live and reign; a Support to Your Friends, a Terror to
your Enemies, an Honor to your Nation, and an Example to Kings, of Piety,
Justice, Prudence and Power; that this Prophetic Expression may be verified in
your Majesty, King Charles the second shall be greater then ever was the
greatest of that Name.

HIS MAJESTY'S Gracious Answer TO THE Earl of Manchesters SPEECH, Made in the
Name of the House of Peers, At the Arrival of His MAJESTY AT WHITE HALL, On the
29th of May, 1660.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Francis Tyton, Printers to the House of
Lords, 1660.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

decorative heading including a Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and
Tudor rose
His Majesty's Gracious Answer to the Earl of Manchester's Speech, Made in the
Name of the House of Peers, at the Arrival of His Majesty at Whitehall, on the
twenty ninth of May, 1660.
My Lord,
I Am so disordered by My Journey, and with the Noise still sounding in My Ears
(which I confess was pleasing to Me, because it Expressed the Affections of My
People) as I am unfit at the present to make such a Reply as I desire; Yet thus
much I shall say unto you, That I take no greater Satisfaction to My Self in
this My Change, then that I find My Heart Really set to endeavor by all means
for the Restoring of this Nation to their Freedom and Happiness, And I hope by
the Advice of my Parliament to effect it. Of this also you may be confident,
That next to the Honor of God, from whom principally I shall ever Own this
Restoration to My Crown, I shall study the Welfare of My People; And shall not
only be a True Defender of the Faith, But a Just Assertor of the Laws and
Liberties of My Subject.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms


