A CRY of BLOOD OF AN INNOCENT ABEL Against Two BLOODY CAINS BEING A Discovery
of two Cavalier and Malignant Brothers Conspiracy against another Brother of
the Parliament Party.

AND A short Relation of Justices of the Peace in Cumberland their Illegal
Proceedings against the Parliaments FRIENDS.

WITH A Complaint of some Corruptions and Delays in Law and Chancery
Proceedings.

LONDON: Printed 1654.

To the Honorable Major General Lambert, one of His Highness Council.
AFter so many various changes and alterations we seem to have at length
brought our weather beaten ship, almost overwhelmed with blustering storms, and
tossed to and fro with the raging waves of an angry sea, safe, in a fair calm,
into the long desired and expected port of Peace and security. But now the
implacable Adversary, what he could not effect by the sword of War, now
endeavors by fraud and treachery to recover, as the many desperate Plots and
Conspiracies, before, and now of late discovered, do clearly evidence. And the
enemy is no wise more animated to compass his design, then by making divisions
and breaches amongst our selves; like the guilefull Greeks, who being hopeless
after ten years long war, to become Masters of famous Troy, otherwise then by a
wile, bringing into the Town the fatal Horse, in whose bulk the enemy lay hid;
by which stratagem and devise, Troys glory and pride were in one night turned
into ashes, while the enemies within the Walls were not to be discerned from
friends, and friends taken for enemies. We are much in the same condition; our
enemies in the bowels of the Troyan Horse are brought by our selves within our
strongest Forts, Strengths, and Guards, I mean, into the highest places and
Offices of power, tr^^t and Judicature in this Commonwealth: How this comes to
^ass I understand not; I see our dearest, chiefest, choicest, and most
faithful friends and patriots laid aside, as not worthy (...) fit to be
trusted or employed, or to have the least share or portion of the price or
purchase of peace, gained with so much hazard, with such vast sums and expense
of treasure, and great effusion and floods of blood, with the loss of
thousands of precious Saints, and dearest friends and relations; yet all this
seems as a thing of nothing, forgotten, and not worthy of remembrance

If I alone were concerned, though, life, estate, honor, be already by the
enemy set at a price, and I as it were by my own, delivered up unto a Company
of bloody men; yet should I be silent and mourn in secret, for the
ungratefulness of those, from whom I have deserved better, but I am not a
sacrifice which will serve to appease the wrath and malice of the Adversary,
unless my friends and family to be made Copartners in the same calamity and
destruction with me; for whose sake more then my own, I have once more
adventured to come upon this public Theater. I have had many thoughts within
my self, to whom to make my address, and whilst I was thus unresolved,
Joshua's grateful remembrance of Rahab's kindness to his Spies, came in my
mind, which comparing with what my aged mother did for you and your Messengers
or Spies, in their passage through the enemies guards and quarters in our
country, the same does run in a parallel and adequate line with the other.
Joshua having sent his Spies to view Jericho, Rahab hid and secured them for
which Joshua upon taking and destroying Jericho, preserved Rahab and saved her
kindred and family, with all that was he^s, and they dwelled in peace with
Israel, as it is written. In your distress when the enemy was Master of our
Country, though she had a Naball to her husband, my mother she received,
harbored* and secured your Spies, and sent them safe into Cockermouth Cattle
to your party there, when you had no other garrison or str^ngth in all that
country; by her they returned safely and secretly to you again, and thereby
that Castle, when it was upon yielding to the enemy, held out against the
enemy, until your forces relieved the same, to the recovering of that whole
country; and often my aged mother, gave you timely notice of the enemies
motions and approaches, to the preventing the enemies designs against you and
your men, of all which you are not ignorant: But Pharaoh's Butler, when
restored to his place, remembered not Joseph horison; even so has my mother
been forgotten; for when your Jericho was taken by you, she was left neglected,
to be destroyed, not with the enemy, but by the enemy; upon whom you daily
confer honors and promotions: Your promises to her you cannot have forgot,
neither be so ungrateful, as, not when she puts forth the scarlet thread, the
signal of her kindness and faithfulness to you and yours, as not to secure her
from the rage and malice of the enemy. Her request to you is neither for gifts
or rewards for her self, or promotion for her son; she asks no other thing
then common right, Justice, and protection, and that she and hers may dwell in
peace with you, as Rahab did of old with Israel.

I cannot but remind you of your promises made to your suffering friends in
Cumberland, now under a Delinquent and Malignant Magistracy, worse, and more
corrupt then ever was under the late King: I need not tell how those poor
people, when the Enemy was in his height, might, and prosperity, neither by
threats nor prisons could he drawn to adhere to those you now promote, or from
you; I hope your Greatness will not make you forget your Goodness, or your
former love, neither cause you to neglect your friends, but will enquire how
their enemies and yours are again set up in Authority, whereby they are armed
to oppress more then they were under Kingly Prerogative; what is this less
then to deliver harmless sheep to the custody and charge of devouring and
hunger starved Wolves. This was the motive, and no other consideration, to you
first thus to make my application, in the least not distructing Providence for
preservation, though the enemy, as Haman, be again advanced, and gained a
Decree for destroying me with your most cordial friends with us; yet, we doubt
not, God will cause us once again to keep a thankful day of Remembrance for
our deliverance, ^s ^h^ Jews did their days of Purym; who knows wh^^he^ the
Lord has raised you up for this end.

In this ensuing Discourse, you have a N^^^^^ive of a Cain like brood; two
Brothers in Law, and a Sist^^^ ^^^m of a blood sucking family, taimed with
murder and perjury, who for many years have with much villainy and treachery
sundry ways attempted the death and downfall of an innocent brother, for no
other cause then his kindness showed to an aged Mother, by the other spoiled
in one day of all her means, where occasion is offered to set forth the malice
and conspiracy against me, of sundry Malignant Justices of the Peace in
Cumberland, for my opposing their injust^ce and oppression, and discovering
their Delinquency and treacherous Plots and practices against this
Commonwealth, and the manner of listing of some dangerous persons in the Lord
Protectors Lifeguard, such as for fear of discovery dare not own their own
names. Likewise I am constrained to declare some evil dilatory practices and
proceedings of Chancery, and Law proceedings, in relation to my self and some
friends, with the causes for publishing the same; which if you improve for
public good* as redress of private wrongs, I shall rejoice. However, my
confidence is in my God, and though he should slay me, yet will I trust in him;
for the devices of the wicked shall not prosper, and by their own Counsels they
shall be destroyed.

JOHN MVSGRAVE.

The Cry of ABELS Blood again from the Ground.
IT is not unknown to those who have read the History of England, that few in
the North for service done against the Scot; deserved better, or were greater
asserters of their countries liberty, then the family of the Musgrave's, men of
good estates, and large Revenues; of whom Speed in his Chronicle takes special
notice with this Character, The Ancient and Warlike Family of the Musgraves.

Sir Simon Musgrave my Grandfather, served Queen Elizabeth upon those Borders,
as Deputy Warden for many years; after his death the Queen was pleased to
honor my father with that employment, in which service he so behaved himself,
as he preserved the borders from the Inrodes of the Scots and Rapines of the
Outlaws of both Nations there, with whom that Country in those times were
infested; I purpose not at this time to particularize the known services, and
the great executions my father did upon some eminent Scots, enemies to our
Nation; for which he brought upon himself the envy of King James, and most of
the Scots Nobility, who after the old Queens death watched for an opportunity
to ruin my father and destroy his family, and how hard a matter it is to stand
before envy, or bear the wrath of a King, the prudent may consider. Now about
the 5th year of K. James's reign here in England, one Thomas Musgrave a
dissolute loose man, and one Puckering more deboist, drew into their company
Sir Thomas Musgrave, a young Gentleman, and the eldest son of Sir Richard
Musgrave my Grandfathers second son; these fell upon the Kings Receivers in
Westmerland, and robbed them, and the night after came to my fathers house in
Cumberland, and lodged there, my father being then at Ednell, ignorant both of
the fact done, and their being at his house, as another of the same name, who
suffered for that fact, at his death did solemnly declare.

Robinson then Bishop of Carlisle, knowing how pleasant a thing i^ would be to
the King, to bring my father within the compass of the Law, procures Puckering
a pardon to become an approver against my father to evidence that he was privy
of their being at his house after the fact done, more they could not have any
color for King James glad of this, does forthwith cause a special Gaol
Del^very to be called for trial of my father, and sent down as Commissioners
the Earl of Dunbar, with sund^y other Lords to carry on the design, he well
knowing that upon an equal trial my father would be in no jeopardy, and the
King a month before the Trial signs a Warrant for execution, to prevent all
Reprieval^, all which was with much celerity performed according to the Kings
direction; but the great signal Testimonies of my fathers innocence, and the
Countries dislike of those extraordinary proceedings, much disco^tented the
King, and the Court faction, my father left an estate settled upon my mother and
his children of 200 l. by year, held by lease for 3 lives, which King James
would have seized on, but upon Trial in the Exchequer, possession was
established with her.

Afterward my mother, by persuasion of friends, to her childrens undoing,
marries one Vaux, a Gent. of ancient, but most wicked bloody family, having no
estate at all: For Will. Vaux, his father, having in a most barbarous and
unheard of manner, murdered one Ridley, suffered for the same, and did
confiscate his whole estates And not long before, Rowland Vaux, father of
William, procured one Bell to personate two, and procured a forged Acquittance
for a debt of 100 l. Rowland owed to a Kinswoman; for which perju^y Bell lost
his ears, and for the forgery and subornation Vaux wore Paper, and rode
backward, my Grandfather being then High Sheriff at the time of the execution
of the sentence. I would have forborne thus to have untombed the dead, if I had
not by a wicked Sister been provoked thereto,

Now for twenty years together, Vaux in my fathers childrens right, held an
estate of 200 l. by year, for which we never had any account; in which time he
purchased the Reversion of the whole with our moneys: for which calling him to
account, I was with a 22 years consuming suits in Law, wested and spent, and
yet is not come to any issue, (...)

Vaux in the beginning of the difference, the more to disable me to prosecute
my Cause, beats my mother, would have killed her with an hatchet, put her out
of doors, and would have suborned witnesses to have sworn, That she and I would
have murdered him, as some of the witnesses yet living do confess.

The particular Process and proceedings betwixt us, I shall refer to another
discourse; and of old Coventries in justice, King Charles's Order in the Case,
being not the thing I desire now to ^rge or press. While I was in this private
contest, a Parliament is called, by which for a while I was as one raised from
the dead; but the Kings leaving his Parliament, was the cause of new Troubles
to me; for upon my coming from London, I was committed to Carlisle Castle, for
no other cause but that I said the Earl of Strafford was condemned for Treason.

But when the Commission of Array (...) set a foot in our County, then my
father Vaux doubted not but to bring me to ruin, knowing I was affected to,
and had declared for the Parliament, and the better to compass this end, he
procured one Richmond (whose son after married his daughter, and my sister) at
the Sessions of the Peace to put that illegal oath upon me, called the oath ex
Officio, which I refusing was committed to close Gaol, and then Richmond caused
me to be indicted for speaking blasphemous words against the book of Common
Prayer, viz. that it was Popish; but this having not color to take away my
life, the next Sessions I was called forth, and then Richmond commands me to
take the Oath of Supremacy, which I refusing twice, I was returned back to the
Gaol, committed for Treason; upon this Richmond conspires with Sir Richard
Graham, who had married his daughter to Sir Edward Musgrave's grandchild, who
wrongfully held an estate from my mother, being her birthright of 600 l. by
year, to procure a special Gaol Delivery, for the Trial of me and Captain
Crakanthorp, for the like offense; but knowing ^ow fatal Cumberland Gaol
Deliveries were to the innocent, with much difficulty we obtained a Writ of
Habeas Corpus cum causa, which we delivered to Sir Henry Fletcher, then high
Sheriff, and to whom we were prisoners, therewith he acquainted, Sir George
Dalstin, Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir William Musgrave Knights, Leonard Dikes,
William Briscoe, Esquire and other Justices of the Peace, who diswaded the Sheriff
from returning our bodies according to the tenor of the Writ, and sent to
London a Certificate, that the reason of disobeying the Writ of Habeas corpus,
was, for that we had committed Treason against the King, in refusing the Oath
of Supremacy: But the Court being not satisfied, granted us another Writ with a
penalty. Upon knowledge of this, the Justices complained to the King, being
then at York, how they had imprisoned us as dangerous persons, and enemies to
his Majesty, desiring his direction and Warrant to try us for Treason, the
Habeas corpus notwithstanding; but the King would not give any direction
therein. In the mean time the Assizes approached, so they could not fit the
G^al^d livery.

At the Assizes Sir Robert Heath delivered the Goal, and we being brought to
the Bar, Judge Heath declared, the Justices could not enforce us to the Oath of
Supremacy, without a special Commission under the Great Seal; yet gave
Judgment of Praemunire against us, to forfeit Lands and Goods, and imprisonment
during life, for no other cause then refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance
upon a Book; and gave the Sheriff direction, not to suffer any to come at us,
and close imprisonment. But upon the Treaty of a Peace betwixt the King and
Parliament, a little before Edgehil fight, the Sheriff took security of us, to
appear upon the Habeas corpus at the Upper Bench Bar; which we did accordingly,
and after was discharged by Order of the House of Commons. Upon our return
home, the war and difference betwixt King and Parliament growing great and
high, Sir Philip Musgrave gave order to apprehend us again; of which having
notice, I lest the Country, and in my way was taken prisoner by one Bennet,
servant to Sir John Lowther (a Commissioner of Array, and Colonel for the
King) and three other, charging me with a conspiracy and Treason against the
King and Sir John Lowther; from whom I made an escape, but lost my Horse,
Sword, and Cloak. In the time of my withdrawing, my Father Vaux offered 100 l.
to any that could discover and apprehend me. After, with much difficulty I got
into Sco^land, and there I was threatened by Thomas Craistour, for my
nonconformity to the Scottish Presbytery, that he would inform against me if I
did not withdraw.

While I was in Scotland, I discovered how John Barwis, and John Hod^son
pretenders for the Ba^liaments ^aisse, kept sto^es correspondency with Sir
Patricius Curwin, and Si^ Wilfride Lawson then Commissioners of Array, and in
Arms against the Parliament, and how Richard Barwis a Member of the House of
Commons kept correspondency with Sir Richard Graham, and Sir Edward Musgrave,
and other the known enemies of the Parliament: All which I after made known to
the Parliament; but by Barwis faction or party in the House of Commons, to
hinder my prosecution, I was committed by an Order of the House, to the Fleet,
for a pretended contempt, in refusing to answer Interogatories; where I was
kept close prisoner, without any charge or other crime laid against me, for the
most part of two years. Upon the difference betwixt the Parliament and the
Army, I refused no hazard to serve the Agitators, who then acknowledged the
service I did in promoting their Cause, was acceptable to them; and the Lord
General Fairfax with ^is Council of Officers, sent to the Parliament to set me
at liberty, and that he expected I should have fitting reparations for my
losses and imprisonment; whereupon I was enlarged, but never had any
satisfaction for my losses and imprisonment to this day.

After this, I made sundry discoveries of concealed Delinquents, and brought
into the public Treasury more then 2000 l. for the undervalue of Sir Henry
Bellingham's estate, whereof the fifth part was due to me, for which I have not
had one penny, my other discoveries amounting to above 10000 l. a great part
whereof was secured by the sub-Commissioners, who refused to certify the same
being required thereunto by the Commissioners for comp^unding, the other
alleging the Commissioners for Compounding never intended good to the
Commonwealth, and so they would certify no more to them, and thus I was
hindered from further prosecuting my discoveries till by the Act of Ob^ivion the
same were discharged: after this I began to apply my self to my own private
affairs, having unprofitably spent my time, wearied my self, and wasted my
means to do my country service; while others by their beneficial places
enriched themselves in the ruins of their country, and falsifying their faith
and trust.

In the mean time my father Vaux (having settled his estate and lands upon his
two sons in law, Richmond and Graham, while they were in actual rebellion
against the Parliament, to defraud me of my right, amounting to above 2000 l. I
being in my way from London) died; presently after Richmond applied himself to
my mother, blaming his father Vaux for his cruelty to her and her children;
professing all love and respect, desiring as he pretended to come to a
settlement, faithfu^ly promising if upon my return home, I disapproved what
should be agreed on, no advan^age should be taken on either side, but his
meaning was far otherwise, his intention being to circumvent her and strip her
out of all, as the sequel does prove, for the visible personal estate being
valued to about 200 l. he and Graham divided it betwixt them under a color
that there was a debt of 200 l due to Mr. Heron of Chipchase, which with great
oaths and many ass^verations he did aver to be true, and that Mr. Heron had
threatened to put the Bond in suit, all which was forged and a lie; for upon a
Bill of discovery in Cham^ery Mr. Heron has upon Oath confessed Vaux did ow
him no such sum nor other debt.

Then Richmond entreated my mother to let him and his wife have liberty to lie
in her house some time, which she not mistrusting his guile gave way to him*
soon after I returned home, to my mother, she tells me how her sons in law
and daughters in law had used her, and that the bond she gave Richmond and
Graham was delivered with caution, in case I disliked the agreement, the same
to be void; then I caused her to take the locks off her Chamber which Richmond
had set on, and made a legal and peaceable entry to them, for the widow has
her quarantine, which is the possession of the chief Mansion house for forty
days; and when the entry was made, we had sundry honest neighbors to take view
of what was in the room to avoid mis-reports, and the next day I went with my
mother to Graham house, the better to confirm my self of the truth of the
agreement, who told me the bond was delivered with the caution aforesaid, and
that upon consideration my mother would make void the agreement he would keep
her harmless, and upon request release the bond, and further declared, he did
believe Richmond intended to cheat both him and her.

Upon his further request, my mother consented to go the next day to one Dacres
of Vnthank, where Richmond was to meet him, and agreed, that if Richmond would
not yield my mother and Grahams Right, they would join together in securing the
goods: But upon our coming thither, Dacres after some private words with them,
came to my mother, desiring to be excused, for the Trunks her Husband had left
with him, by direction were not to be opened, till her sons in Law both agreed
to it, but she should not be present. Thus she was thrust out, and made a
stranger to her own; for by the Custom of the Province of York, the Widow is
to have half the personal Estate, if the children be preferred or married.
There it is said the two brothers found some Writings, purporting large sums
of moneys to be left by Vaux in Dacres hand; which at first Dacres denied; but
after some threats, Dacres acknowledged 60 l. and the 160 l. wherewith they
charged him more, Richmonds wife persuaded the other to remit, and they gave
George Sy^pson, Mr. Vaux sisters son, 100 l. of the moneys in Dacres hand,
being privy to their Counsel. All which, Richmonds wife has to sundry of her
friends and acquaintance privately told who have since discovered the same.

Upon this the two brothers in Law confederated together against the old woman,
and Richmond gave forth in speeches, that my mother and I had broken a chest up
in the chamber, and taken out Forty shillings, for which he would hang us
both; and said, his man did see him lay it and leave it there; who being asked
what he knew thereof, replied, he knew nothing thereof, neither did he believe
any such thing. As for the Trunk, upon our entry it was viewed, with all within
the same, by able and honest men, whereof not any thing lacked, the trunk being
open, and had been without Lock for 40 years and more.

Next day I went toward Manchester, and returned not for ten days. In the mean
time, Richmond thinking I was gone for London, goes to Mr. Howard, and procures
a Warrant from him to bring me and one Proctor before him, charging us with
Fe^ony: Upon his Warrant Proctor is carried as a Thief to Naward, some 16 or 18
miles, thence to Carlisle, being from Naward 10 miles, and back again to
Naward, where he gave security for his appearance: in all this much wickedness
and cruelty is discovered; for there were two Justices of the Peace living
within less then two miles of us, but we must be carried before none but
Howard.

The next passage that was attempted against my Mother, was this: Richmond and
his wife comes to my mothers house, thinking with railings and revilings to
have provoked her to passion; but their expectation failing, Richmonds wi^e
laid violent hands upon her own mother, b^ar her, and called her Whore: The old
woman being ready to faint, one present cried out, Fie Mabel, have son never
read the Fifth Commandment? the other answered in fury She knew not what the
Commandments were, so she had a father and mother that taught her neither the
fear of God nor Man.

Some two days after this, Richmond with some four or six more, in a forcible
and ^i^tous manner, takes away the Court gate, the Hall door, and carried them
away with him, thereby to fright her away, and reported Mr. Howard advised him
to do it; Wicked counsel.

No^ long after, I came home; and being in bed in this open house, I heard in
the Hall much people, whereupon I called to know the business; the Constable
came to me, and told me he had a Warrant to arrest me for Felony. I ^ose, and
find a poor lame Widow, that served my mother, under arrest likewise for
Felony, as the Constable said; most of Richmonds Tenants being there, to the
number of 20 or 30; I ask o them why so many? they answered, Richmond
commanded, and that the Const^ble would early in the morning take me, otherwise
I would fly, if notice were given me. With this Guard am I carried by the
Constable to Penreth, a market Town, on a Market day, before Mr. Halton* who
upon reading Mr. Howards warrant, would take no knowledge of me, so away I am
carried to Naward; Which manner of doing of theirs was much like the J^ws
carrying of Christ to Caiphas, who sent him to Pilate, Pilate Herod, and so
back again. When I came before Howard, he told me, Richmond bad sworn Felony
against me, and some witnesses were examined against me, who speaking ruth, he
refused to set down or testify the same, saying, that party spoke more for me
then Richmond, Yet brought before him by his Warrant: I enter Bond for my
appearance the next Assizes, paying my fees. The nex^ Sessions Richmond in my
absence prefers a Bill of Felony against me and Proctor, which the Jury not
finding, are called before the Justices, who threatened the Jury for not
finding the same; and one of the Quorum told the Jury, they must find the
Indictment, right or wrong: But most of the Jury being understanding men, would
not be persuaded or frighted to act contrary to a good Conselence, finds not
the Bill; notwithstanding, the Justices granted Richmond a Warrant of good
behavior against me, without Oath or Articles; against others they would not,
though indicted, which discovered their malice to me, and corruption. Upon a
Certiorari after in the Upper Bench, I was discharged, never any thing to this
day being objected against me.

My occasion soon after drew me to Lond^n; in my absence Richmond daily vexes
my aged mother with opprobrious railings, threatening her he would reduce her
to that poverty and want, as for flesh she should be constrained to boil a
Louse, and for malt to brew Sand; often staring in her face, after crying,
Mother, mother, Death is in thy face, thou will not live til Easter: the
Justices of the Peace much animating him in this course against my mother and
me, as he bragged, all the Justics of the Peace, Commissioners for
Sequestrations, Sir Arthur Haslerig and Captain Howard would all adhere to him
against me.

Upon my return from London, the Assizes approaches; Richmond now bestirs
himself, procures the Sheriff to return of the Grand Jury, 14 of 17, all
compounded Delinquents, and most Richmonds near relations, one being Grahams
father, another Grahams son in Law, most of the rest bitter spirited Cavaliers;
but one man reasoned all the rest out, and the Bil against me was not found:
the one of the Jury would have had it, protesting that he would find it against
the Roundhead, whether it was right or wrong.

I made my address to Justice Puliston, in a peti ionary way, that Richmond
might not disquiet my mother with his boisterous and uncivil carriage, but he
more like a party then a Judge, slighted my Petition, asked how it came to
p^sse I was not gone beyond seas with John Lilburn, to which I replied, I had
other business then to mind, and further said, when these Gentlemen by him,
meaning Captain Howard, and the other Justices by oaths and actions,
confederated to destroy the Parliament as Traitors, I at their Bar owned there
Authority; but Traitors are promoted and your friends slighted, yet God is
good. Richmond turns his Indictment of Felony, after not found, into an
indictment of Trespass, which the Juries finds, and being called, I traverse
it; upon Sergeant Parkers motion, all differences were referred to Sir John
Lowther and Mr. Halton, but when we meet, hen Richmond asked my mother why she
would busy her self for death was in her face, and G^aham his brother did
challenge me to sight with him on Penreth Fell, thinking to get some advantage
upon me by provoking me to passion or accepting the challenge; upon a common
Latitat Richmond brings the Sheriff in person, and arrested my mother, and
had carried her to Gaol, but an Attorney told the Sheriff he could not, for he
was an Attorney and would appear for her; but we could never have the Sheriff
to this day execute any Writ against Richmond.

To free my mother of Richmoxd disturbances, I brought her from Catterlen Hall,
being made unhabitable as aforesaid, and ever since she has dwelt with me.

The last Assiz s at Carlisle my mother had two trials for her Dowry, the one
against Graham, the other against Richmond, before my old friend Justice
Puliston; I appearing for my mother Justice Puliston began to check me, telling
me I never dealt but in bad causes, and that he met me at every Bar in
Westminster Hall, the Jury being to be sworn, one of the Panel would not swear
upon a book, whereupon the Judge bid set him aside, for that man was one of
Musgrave's faction, the man being a stranger to me; abou which a great contest
I had before he was admi ted to be sworn, Mr. Vaux dying seized was proved by
Richmond and Grahams answers to my mothers Bill of Discovery. Then Justice
Puliston asked me when Vaux died; to which I answered about the third of March
was a twelve month. Then said the Jugd, Are you sure M. Vaux died the third of
March? To which I answered, my Lord, I came out of London about the 13 or 18 of
March, and before I got home Mr Vaux was dead, so I cannot speak certainly to
the time, but I believe he died about the 3 4, or 5th of March; or thereabouts:
then said the Judge, Mr. Musgrave what would you say if he died in April? I
replied, my Lord, I cannot speak positively to any time, but sure I am he is
dead; all which will be proved by Gentlemen of quality well affected and
untainted in their reputations, which for the satisfaction of friends, some of
them have certified as much, which I have here inserted.

These are to certify, we whose names are here underwritten upon the 16 day
of August, 1653. were presented at the Trial had at Carlisle before Mr. Justice
Puliston, betwixt Isabel Vaux Widow Demandant, upon a Writ of Dowery against
William Graham Defendant, when and where we see John Musgrave of Miln^rig in
the County of Cumberland Gentleman, sworn a Witnesson the behalf of the said
Demandant Isabel Vaux in the said cause, and the said John Musgrave being asked
when the said John Vaux, late husband of the said Isabel died, the said John
Musgrave, said upon his oath that the said John Vaux died about the 3d of March
was a twelve month, then the said Justice Puliston said Mr. Musgrave, are you
sure Mr. Vaux died the 3d of March, to which the said Mr. Musgrave replied and
said, my Lord, I came out of London about the 13 or 18 of March (or words to
that purpose) and before I got home Mr. Vaux was dead, so I cannot speak
certainly to the very time of his death, but I believe he died about the 3, 4,
or 5 or thereabouts: then said the Judge Mr. Musgrave, what will you say if he
died in April, Mr. Musgrave replied and said, my Lord, I cannot speak
positively to any time (or words to that effect) but I Am sure he is dead, and
this is the whole sum of Mr. Musgraves Oath and Deposition, other then proving
some copies of Records; we being present in Court at the time of the said
Trial, from the swearing of the Jury till they gave up their Verdict, which we
shall be ready to testify when we shall be thereunto required. In witness
whereof, we have subscribed our hands the 10th day of October, 1653. This is
the great P^rjury I am charged with.

At Michaelmas Sessions held at Cockermouth, October. 5. 1653. in my absence
Richmond prefers a Bill of Perjury upon this against me, whereof Captain Hudson
now a Justice of Peace hearing, who was present at the Trial, repaired to the
Jury, wishing them well to consider what they did upon that indictment against
me in my absence, for there was more malice then matter in the prosecution; the
Jury told him, they had examined the matter and they could not find it, but the
Justices of the Bench being most of them my implacable enemies, called the Jury
before them, and would have the witnesses sworn in open Court, but the Sheriff
and Bailifs put back all those whom they suspected to favor me; Mr Lamplough
one of the Justices told the Court, there was an Order of Sessions, that no
indictment was to be admitted against any inhabitant, without notice first
given to them; which then they admitted to others, but denied in my case: Mr.
Howard has caused him since to be put out of the Commission of peace, for no
other cause as I believe but this, and suspecting him to be a man of too
public a spirit to comply with Howard and his popish faction; and others of
the most disaffected and known Deli^quents, he has procured to be Justices of
the Peace, refusing to put in some very honest and able men recomended to him.

One of the Jury told the Court M. Musgrave might mistake the month, and not
swear either corruptly or wilfully; to which M. Briscoe and Sheriff Lawson
said, there was some would have al to be mistakes so after Richmond was admitted
privately to tamper with some of the jury, the indictment was found, I being in
my way from London: The witnesses sworn to the indictment, were one Dacres
abovenamed, Thomas Ga^th an Attorney (how much conscience he makes of an oath,
after I shall discover) and one Orfear, and how qualified he is for such a
purpose here will appear; I will begin with the last.

Orfear was first a plundering Cavalier captain for the King, till the county
was reduced for the Parliament, then entertained by Lawson as captain under him
for the parliament; daily he resorted to the Enemies Garrison in Carlisle; drank
the Kings health, and being asked why he would serve the parliament? he said he
did the King better service then when he was of his party.

Lawson had a house pulled down by the Enemy in his Isle by Keswick, for which
he preferred after an indictment against sundry persons, some not being near
the place by twenty miles, which indictment was found upon Orfears evidence,
against sundry persons that were not there, and forced to compound with Lawson
upon his own terms; One of credit told me, he was first named in that
indictment, and how Lawson swore that he was the first put his hand to the
pulling the house down, whereas in truth the man was not near the place by ten
miles, and was forced to leave his habitation because he would not assist the
Enemy in that work, and so desired Lawson to consider his condition, but the
man not being able to traverse his indictment, the poor creature was
constrained for purchasing his peace, to give Lawson six or seven pound; this
he told me before sundry credible persons, all which I believe to be true. It
is credibly said that Orfear did take and subscribe that damnable Oath, called
the Earl of Newcastles Oath for destroying the Parliament as traitors; and
which Lawson did likewise, as is proved when he was Lieutenant Colonel under
Sir Patritius Curwin. But as the Fool makes a mock of sin, so these make as
light matter of Oaths, as all their practices demonstrate.

For Garth, he was Q^arte^m^^^ (...) to Sir Philip Musgrave; and then Cornet to
Col. Sir Henry Fletcher for the King, and did likewise swear and subscribe the
aforenamed O th for the E. of Newcastle; but upon reducing of that Country he
was made by Barwis Agent for sequestrations; in which employment if he had
dealt faithfully, he might have brought into the public treasury 20000 l.
which by his being Solicitor at the same time for Delinquents was lost; for
while he was Agent for sequestrations, Mr. Howard, Sir John Lowther, Mr.
Dalston, Richmond, and other great Delinquents, employed him as their Steward
to keep their Courts, their Attorney and Solicitor in suits of Law, and some
of them allowing him yearly stipends; so as little could be made of any
discovery or concealment, most of the Commissioners for sequestrations
themselves being likewise sequestrable and men disaffected.

In the like cases how officious he was to serve his friends, one of many may
suffice. My father Vaux being in contempt for not answering my Bill, and for
costs upon overruling of his Plea, I came to Garth being Deputy Sheriff, for
the return of the two Attachments against Vaux, he therewith had Orders and
moneys from Vaux to discharge the contempt, and sue out a Commission to answer
in the country, and for the costs by the next Post he should receive direction
from Vaux where to have money to pay me. I told him I could not trust him, and
would not forbear prosecution, unless he would go presently to the fix Clarks
Office and pay the contempt money for not answering, and give Commissioners
names to his Clark accordingly. Garth goes with me to Mr. Colburn in the fix
Clarks Office, to him Garth gave names for Commissioners, Christopher Richmond,
Henry Da^res, and others, before Mr. Colburn paid me the contempt money and I
joined in the Commission; and Garth in the presence of M. Golburn declared,
what he did was by Vaux direction: Garth sues out the Commission, but Vaux does
not execute, but comes to London, thinking to set his plea up again; the former
Commission is a bar to him, Garth must help or it cannot be, whereupon Garth
makes affidavit, that he had no direction to sue out a Commission or discharge
the contempt, and what he did was without the privity or direction of Vaux.
Upon this the Court referred it to the fix Clarks to examine whether the
Commission was regularly sued out, and upon hearing of Mr. Colburn, the fix
Clarks certified for me, and Garths wicked Oath was fruitless; the affidavit is
filed.

Henry Pearson told me, Garth made an affidavit in the Upper Bench in
Michaelmas Term last, which is upon the File; to which Pearson made another
contrary to it; so that one must be forsworn: Many others have complained to me
of Garths desperate swearing and affidavits. For Dacres he could swallow the
Earl of Newcastle's damnable Oath; and I can most bear with him, not only in
respect of his malignancy, but for that Richmond and his wife had given him 160
l. for doing such like services against my mother and me, as Richmonds wife
has in council told sundry of her bosom friends.

Now what advantage could my mother have by my Oath, as to the mistake of the
month; or what loss or disadvantage had or could Graham have by the same, or
how I can be brought within the compass of the statute of perjury, I am not
afraid to submit to the trial and judgment of the greatest of my enemies,
saving our Cumberland Justices of the peace and their Session juries, and if
the Gentlemen's certificate on my b^half be disproved, or either my mother or I
could have one halfpenny profit, or the other so much loss by my supposed
mistake, or that the same was wilful, knowingly, or corruptly done by m^, then
let me have the like censure as Vaux his Bell with two tongues received for his
most wicked, wilful, and corrupt perjury.

After my mother had recovered he Dowry, my business carried me to the Assizes
after held at Appleby in Westmerland, thither am I persued by these bloody men;
Being at Supper in my Inn, some there took occasion of discourse of the
Scottish King (so called) and of an expected change; which I opposing, one
Richard Graham my brother Grahams brother sitting at the lower end of the
table, used provoking words, whereat I seemed not to be moved; thereupon this
fellow called me rogue, traitor, and said that I was committed for treason
against the King, and all those that adhered to the Parliament were traitors,
and the King would have his right again, and we should be all punished as rogues
and traitors: Truly it was much I could forbear, but passed the same over with
other discourse, as neglecting him, After Supper I did go into the Town, which
Grahams brother having notice of, with one of his Comrades purposed to have
waylaid me, as after I understood, for while they were plotting against me,
for no other end, then as I conceive, privately to murder me, if I had gone
alone; my man overheard Grahams Comrade say to the other, Musgrave has his
man with him, and we shall not be able to deal with them both; thus the Lord
delivered me from those bloody conspirators: And the next morning I found this
Graham lying in the Kitchen Chimney amongst the ashes asleep, in a beastlike
manner overcome with drink, in all this I acknowledged the Lords goodness to me.

At the Westmerland Assizes justice Puliston, as at Carlisle, discountenanced
the honest justices there, and said openly upon the Bench, he could own none
for a justice but Col. Brigs, against whom the Lord did witness before night,
Brigs having overburthened himself with drink as he could not walk the streets
without reeling, and after some repose Brigs came to my lodging, where he spent
the whole night in swearing and excessive drinking among a company of
Cavaleers, but such things are no blemishes in our persecuting justices; but
when I come in particular to set down the malignancy and misgovernment of our
justices made upon M. Howards recommendation to the Lord Protector, I may have
farther occasion to speak of this Gentleman.

But before I will farther meddle with our Country Magistracy, I will finish my
discourse as to Richmond. This last Term, upon my removing the indictment of
perjury against me into the Upper Bench, for the very same thing, merely for
vexation, has he laid an information of perjury against me in the Capital
Office, for the man's malice has no bounds; to which I say no more, if I be
faulty in the least, let me suffer with the highest transgressour; but
Richmonds dealings is no better toward other poor widows His fathers widow
by a wile he turned out of doors, who being friendless was drawn to take a
small annuity, which he failing to pay broke the woman's heart, and she soon
died. This affidavit will discover his kindness to another widow, whose
petition I have to present to the Lord Protector, when a door shall be open to
me, together with Richmonds barbarous usage of one Halton the Minister of
Kurbythure, because a Roundhead; and how he carried the man to York by virtue of
his Commission of Array, and how the poor man was brought by him to his grave,
will require a more large discourse.

The Affidavit of John Wambye in the behalf of Mary Bearson Widow, plaintiff
Thomas Wilton and Henry Mes^s, Defendants.

WHereas there was a reference made by Justice Puliston, of the difference
betwixt the Plaintiff and the Defendant, upon the Defendants petition to
Christopher Richmond Esquire and Thom. Laton Esquire two delinquents compounded, which
said referrees about the 20 of September. last called the said parties before
them, and brought with them one Francis Sisson a Justice of peace in Westmerl.
Nephew to Edward Sisson who married Wiltons Aunt, and guardian to the said
Wilton, being an aged decrepit woman about 80 years old. Now this Deponent
deposes, that he was present at Broughan upon the meeting of the said
referrees and parties, and upon the said widow Pearsons seeming to decline the
said reference, the said Richmom began to give the said widow very high and
threatening language, telling her if she would not submit to the reference she
should never get any thing, nor should have never any benefit of the law; and
for this Deponent who went thither with the said Pearson, he threatened to have
his nose slit and his ears cut off, and threatened one John Gowling to undo him
because he was the widows friend and neighbor, and other bad language the
said Richmond gave then unto the said Gowling, so as he well durst not or would
not stay longer to be abused with the said Richmond; and presently after the
said Gowlings departure, the said widow Pearson was drawn by the threats and
menaces of the said Mr. Richmond, to submit to the order and award of the said
referrees, with the Vmperidge of the said Justice Sisson, who ordered her for
to take 25 shillings for her widdow-right and dower in a Tenement in Gulgath in
the County of Cumberland, and seal a release thereof; Whereas her third part
thereof was well worth twenty shillings by the year. And this Deponent knows
the said release was made by her through the threats and menaces of the said
Mr. Richmond. Sworn the 8 of November, 1653.

By John Wawbye.

John Page.

Therefore I will till a fitter opportunity forbear and proceed in order with
our Country Justices of the peace in Cumberland and Westmerland; And first with
Cumberland, whose names be, Sir Wilfride Lawson, Charles Howard, William
Briscoe, John Barwis, Henry Tolson, Thomas Cholmley, John Hudson, Thomas
Craister, Tho. Langhorn, Arthur Foster, Lancelot Fletcher, Captain Coulsey.

Sir Wilfride Lawson did take the treasonable Oath and Engagement called the E.
of Newcastles Oath, was a Lieuten. Colonel in arms for the King, caused one
widow Blaithwait to be carried in a Cart to Carlisle Goal, and there
imprisoned, and first stripped to her smock, urging to Sir Phil. Musgrave that
she came from the Parliament as a Spy. Committed to prison one George Fox to
close Goal, and procured an order from the Judges, that none of his friends
should visit him, for no other thing then being a Preacher, without ever laying
any charge against the man to this day.

After an Injunction serves for settling possession, Sir Wilfride Lawson some
three months since put two of Sir Patritius Curwins tenants out of the
possession of their houses and tenements, and thereby the men were forced to
submit to their Landlords will and pleasure, after much money spent in settling
their possession.

Sir Wilfride Lawson being Sheriff the last Summer Assizes at Carlisle, refused
to arrest Christoph. Richmond upon a Capias ut legate. at my mothers suit, the
warrant being delivered to him in Richmonds presence, and his Fee tendered.

Sir Wilf. Lawson and his under Sheriff, will not though required return
processes of Contempts, as attachments and proclamations, as for instance; 3
proclamations at my mothers suit, two attachments, one at my own suit, and
another of privilege, at Mr Nelsons suit, all returnable the last Term.

Charles Howard a notorious delinquent, though at Worcester he engaged against
the enemy, yet his brother (supposed not without his privity) betrayed a great
part of Mr Howards Troop to the Scots King, with whom his brother went away,
and before Mr Howard came up to the last Parliament, Sir Pat. Curwen and most
of his projecting Cavaliers was at his House all night, which the well-affected
are jealous was upon some design, for the next day again they had another
great meeting at Sir Patric-Curwens Castle, under color of a hunting. Mr
Howard used barbarous cruelty upon the body of the wife and daughter of Thom.
Milb. one of the witnesses examined to prove his delinquency, by causing a
Scottish Witch-finder, so termed in his presence, to strip the women, and
thrust great pins into sundry parts of their naked bodies, to the amazement of
the beholders, the women being of good repute, and never any charge brought
against them.

Since the last Plot against the Lord Protector was discovered, M. Howard has
listed one Berriswith to be one of the Lord Protectors Lifeguard, by the name
of Hunt, that he might not be known by the name of Berriswith, he and his
friends being so much declared enemies to the Parliament, as Captain Thorp a
man of credit, both by word and writing does testify; for other things I refer
you to my Letter to the Speaker of the last Parliament, my Petition, Articles,
and the proof of his Delinquency following: only I desire notice may be taken
of what manner of men he puts in Commission of Peace with us.

SIR,
IT is not unknown to you, that when you were a Member in the former
Parliament, I did not forbear for favor, kindred, greatness of Persons, or
other by-respects, but freely and plainly laid open such corrupt Members as sat
then in Parliament for our County, for which I underwent twenty months
imprisonment, until I was released upon Letters sent to the Parliament from the
Lord General Fairfax and his Council of Officers: to this day no
discouragements could hinder me in this way to discharge my duty, ever avoiding
sidings, and factions, and what else might tend to the disturbance of public
Authority. But this day having read the Declaration of this Honorable
Parliament, promising so many good things, and that without partiality or
respect of persons, your ultimate end and aim, next to the glory of God, to be
for the good and peace of this Commonwealth; I am encouraged to represent unto
the Parliament, the true and general state and condition of my poor Country by
this my Petition and Articles annexed, which otherwise I knew not how to make
known to the Parliament, then by your hand, and yet durst not be silent, lest I
be thought to be an Apostate, as others have proved: If you fail to present
this my Petition, the fault is yours and not mine, if your Honors suffer
thereby, and the enemy with us kept still up in Authority, to the much sadding
of the spirits of your suffering friends. However I am as I write,

Yours and the Commonwealths true Servant, John Musgrave.

Directed to M. Rous, the Speaker of the Parl. and written in July, 1653.
To the Right Honorable the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
The Humble Petition of John Musgrave of Milnerigg in the County of Cumberland.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner has undergone much trouble, affliction of imprisonment
for his affection to the Parliament and Army, and of discovering and
complaining of Delinquent Magistrates which oppressed the Parliament and Armies
Cordial friends in Cumberland.

That the Enemy of this Commonwealth while Delinquents are kept in Authority
in Cumberland, are encouraged to hope for a time of change, and so boast, and
if the happy successes of the Army had not prevented the same, would have
endangered insurrections, as often threatened in that Country.

Your Petitioner on the behalf of himself, and your distressed and afflicted
friends there, humby prays your Honors to take the Articles against Mr. Charles
Howard a Member of this honorable Parliament, into your consideration, and
that ye will be pleased to remove Delinquents out of authority, and free your
suffering friends from under the pressures they lie under, by corrupt and
Malignant Magistrates, all which in discharge of his duty, in affection to your
Honors, and for the good of this country, your Petitioner is humbly bold to
represent to your Honors, and what your Honors shall think meet to do,
therein he shall wholly acquiesse, and endeavor to pursue and observe your
Honors directions, And shall ever pray for your Honors.

Articles against Charles Howard Esquire, a Member of Parliament, by John
Musgrave.
IMprimis. The said Mr. Howard in the first war was in actual arms against the
Parliament, and after he was taken under the protection of the Parliament
falsified his engagement, as by the Articles of Delinquency proved, and
hereunto annexed may appear.

2. That the said Mr. Howard has and does employ Captain Coulsey, a notorious
Delinquent, a great plunderer, and oppressor of the well-affected, as his
afterward of all his Courts, and the Agent in most of his affairs; which
Coulsey imployeth one Thomas Jackson a sequestrep Delinquent as his Deputy
Steward, whereby the well-affected are much discouraged.

3. That the said Mr. Howard procured an Order from the Justices of the Peace
at the general Quarter Sessions, helden for Cumberland, in September last, for
levying 500 l. yearly of the Country, under pretense of the suppressing the
Mosse-Troopers, which he has raised; but keeps but about 20 of his own
Tenants men, disaffected to the present Government, and Moss-Troopers
themselves or so reputed, and most men of evil fame; whereas Mr. Howards
Tenants in Gilsland are by their Tenure of their lands to do Border service,
against the Moss-Troopers at their own charge.

4. That the said Mr. Howard at the general Quarter Sessions of the Peace,
holden us at Penreth upon the return of the grand Jury by the Sheriff, being
most of them compounded Delinquents, and so disabled from executing any Office
of Trust, by an Act of Parliament made in October before, declared openly that
it was his judgment that Delinquents were not by that Act, disabled to serve
as Jurors; but afterward in the beginning of February, 1642. privately
inquired of some Gentlemen, whether the said John Musgrave would complain of
the said Delinquent Jurors upon breach of the said Act, to which one of them
answered they knew not, the said Mr. Howard replied, the said Musgrave would do
it, but we must oppose him, and we have no other way, then by alleging that we
could not get otherwise able men to execute that employment (or words to that
effect) whereby it clearly appeared his judgment was, that the said Jurors
were incapable of that trust and employment, though he professed openly
otherwise in the said Sessions, and it is notoriously known, that the
well-affected there, are much oppressed by Malignant and Delinquent Jurors.

5. That the well-affected in the County of Cumberland are much discouraged in
regard none but a known Delinquent is summoned to sit in Parliament for this
Country, and little hopes they have of readressing their grievances, without
some that have been constant and faithful to the Parliament and Armies
Interest, be called to sit in Parliament, and Delinquents removed out of their
public employments there, most of the Justices of the Peace and Commissioners
of the Militia in Cumberland, being either sequestrable for their Delinquency,
or men disaffected to the Army. (...)

The Charge against Charles Howard Esquire, Penrith, Apr. 30. 1650.
High Sheriff of the County of Cumberland.
That the said Mr. Howard having a Commission to be a Colonel for the King in
the last War, which he did confess was as large as any man had, did by virtue
thereof send forth his Warrants to the several Constables of Gilesland, for
their several Masters, requiring all men above sixteen and under threescore, to
appear before him at Bramton, and the Constable to present their names upon
Thursday the tenth of August 1648. and the 14 and 16 day of the said month
following, at which several days the said Mr. Howard came to the abovesaid
place accompanied with many soldiers in Arms under his command, and did muster
the men who appeared, and appointed Officers, and listed many men under his
command; and gave order for free quarter for his soldiers, and that the
Constables should levy moneys to pay for the horses he took in every place.

Thom. Milburn. Tho. Bell of Farlam. Anthony Heviside of Tawkin.


Secondly, that the said Master Howard took ten horses for the said service in
Hayton Parish, and proportionably in other parishes within Gilesland, according
to the purvey.

Tho. Bell. Anth. Heviside.

Thirdly, that the said Mr. Howard did declare openly at the said Muster, that
the men and horse so levied was for the Kings service, and that he was to meet
the Prince at Berwick Saturday the 19 of August following.

Tho. Milburn. Tho. Bell.

Fourthly, the said Mr. Howard sent a letter to ten Cavaliers that had horse
and arms quartering upon Leonard Hodgson, Constable of Hartleburn in
Northumberland, that if they would ride in his Troup to Barwick, as
Reformadoes, they should have command as the places fell, and they should come
to Francis Grahams of the Stone-house in Gilsland, and thereabouts, and they
should have quarter till they marched to Barwick.

Leonard Hodgeshon.

Fifthly, the said Mr. Howard repaired several times to the enemies Guarrison
at Carlisle, and walked abroad with his arms.

Richard Hutton.]

Sixthly, at two several Musters by Warrant, the said Mr. Howard, in the first
Article mentioned, after the said M. Howard had made his Speeches to the
Country, his Soldiers drew their swords and cried a King, a King.

Thomas Addison.

This charge was presented us, and the several Witnesses to every Article
proved the same, and subscribed their names before us at Penrith the 1. of May
1650.

Thomas Craister. John Musgrave. Jo. Bristoe. Tho. Langhorn.


William Briscoe was a Committee man for the enemy, advised the other Justices
being most of them Commissioners for Array, to commit Captain Crakanthrop, and
me for not taking the oath of Supremacy, and advised the other Justices to
disobey our Habeas Corpus. When the Justices in open Sessions would have
released one Nicholson, committed by Col. Fletcher, for refusing to take up
Arms for the King against the Parliament, Mr. Briscoe advised the Court not to
do it without Colonel Fletchers directions; whereupon the poor man was held in
prison, till the siege of Carlisle was over. He is a great enemy to Sectaries,
so called, and in his charge in Sessions called them worse then Papists,
requiring the Jury to present them, and they would punish them.

That complaint being made to Mr. Briscoe against Edward Robinson a notorious
Delinquent and one who articled against William Musgrave for delivering
Iartlepool to the Parl. For forging a false Verdict against one Will. B^urbank,
and for levying moneys upon that Verdict and other forg^ries, Mr. Brisco would
not punish nor displace Robinson for it, but keeps him still to be Clark of the
honor of Penrith and Inglewood Forest Courts, Master Briscoe being learned
Steward of the same Honors and Courts.

Complaints being made to Mr. Brisco for redress of a wrongful amerciament set
upon Thomas Cason a tradesman, for selling goods in Penreth being no
Corporation, and of the said Robinson for taking Casons cloth of good value
from him, would neither give order to redress the amerciament, or Robinson to
restore Casons cloth, tending to the destroying of Casons trade and credit.

John Barwis to him I have little to say, then what is said already, only he
is known to be no friend to them they call Sectaries, and would destroy us.

Henry Tolson he has ever been a Neutral, but known a Cavalier has his heart,
and is no friend to the Parliament or Armies Friends.

Thomas Cholmley did take the Earl of Newcastles Oath, sent ou Horse and Arms
against the Parliament, and was in Arms him self for the late King, for his
delinquency and malignancy deserted the former Parliament being a Member
thereof. At the Lord Protectors first going into Scotland openly declared, it
was against his conscience to fight against the Scots, and committed sundry to
prison under the name of Sectaries and preachers.

Thom Craister a Commissioner for sequestrations got most of his estate by that
employment, and being a Captain in Carlisle Garrison, declared it was against
his conscience to fight against the Scots, and laid down his Commission, raised
near ten thousand pound of Delinquents by way of Fines, for which he never yet
accounted for, and without authority of parliament or the Lord General,
continues still a professed Enemy to all such as are called Sectaries or
Independents, and imprisoned sundry of them for their judgment.

Thomas Langhorn did take and subscribe the Earl of Newcastles Oath, a great
countenancer of Malignant Ministers, as Master Baldine of Penreth, who refused
to pray for parliament and Army while the Scots had an Army on foot; A petty
Shop keeper very unfit for a Justice of Peace.

John Hudson, against whom I have nothing to object, if others have they may,
but as he tells me he will rather undergo a fine then take the Oath with others
in Commission whom he cannot approve of.

Lancelot Fletcher is a stranger to me, I never knew or heard he was any ways
active or appeared for the parliament, but by his Cavalier friends lived
peaceably at home when the Enemy was in power.

Captain Coulsey what manner of man he is, I re^er to the Articles against
Howard.

Arthur Foster a Delinquent, and in Arms bo h in the first and and second War
against the parliament, arraigned for murder, and ^ued out his pardon by means
of Sir Richard Graham, to whose family he is a retainer.

For the Westmerland Justices I shall be brief, being not my business, and
should have been wholly silent, if the honest and suffering party there had not
been concerned therein.

Edward Briggs, noted for his malignancy to the Armies friends, and for his
life and conversation I shall forbear to speak, but very many ways unfit for
that employment, and ignorant of the Laws and Statutes of this Nation.

Roger Bateman was so disaffected to the change of Government from Kingly to
Parl. as for a long time he refused to be sworn a Justice, very passionate, and
Strafford never more cruelly persecuted the Puritans then he the Sectaries.

Thomas Burton, a notorious Delinquent, was a Trooper under Sir Thomas
Tildesly, expressing his malignancy by drinking the Kings health; the gross
misdemeanors in executing of his Office while he was Justice of Peace, the many
quarrelsome and troublesome suits, his oppressions, and unwarrantable and
illegal commitments, his daily frequenting ranting Cavaliers company, are all
proved before the Commissioners for compounding, and much more, for which be
was fined Fifty pounds, and disabled to be a Justice of Peace. And whereas it
is said, that his father was plundered by Sir Philip Musgrave, it is known that
his father was under Sir Philip Musgraves protection, and voluntary without
compulsion lent large sums of money to Sir Philip to carry on the War; and if
there was a more scandalous and malignant Priest in that Country, let me
receive blame and shame.

Francis Sisson, a man of a quiet spirit, but Prelatical, and no friend to the
Armies Interest.

Robert Skaife, a man no ways qualified for a Justice of Peace.

Sir John Lowther, a compounded Delinquent, a man of able parts, but known to
be of a Kingly spirit, and his son was in the last War, conceived not without
his fathers privity; A Gentleman he is of great Estate, nearly related to me in
kindred; but it stumbles all friends, that he shall now be thought fit to be a
Justice of Peace in this Country, where he is so powerful and known (though
his wisdom in this time teaches him moderation) to wait for a change. I am
afraid some of our Worthies are carried away with their Dalilah's, but let them
beware they receive not Sampsons portion. I could say more, but will forbear
for the present: Only I could wish it were enquired into, How John Thwaits,
who has knowledge to discharge his duty, not in a condition with power to
oppress his Country; and Gervase Benson, who has been thought fit to be
trusted with such high Commands, and great employments, while there was trouble
and danger, without any complaint, should now be laid aside. You that sit at
the Helm will have the loss, and thereby may unawares tacitly set up again
Charles Stuarts Interest.

I desire to draw to my journeys end; yet before I conclude, I must as Abraham
said to God, so say I, Let not my Earthly Lords be angry, and I will speak but
yet once; I have heard that his now Highness upon some discourse of Lawyers,
out of the sense he had of the common calamity his brethren had lain under,
should sometimes say, How sad, and to be lamented a thing it was, that these
men should raise so great and vast Estates out of the ruins of a miserable
afflicted people, seeking Justice and relief of wrongs, and the poor to be made
more wretched by complaining, and sustain more damage by their Advocates then
by their Adversaries who did the wrong? Is there no Balm in our Gilead? How
long shall we wait for the long promised and expected Reformation? the Law and
Chancery proceedings be now no less burden, terror, and oppression to the
people of this Land, then Thieves and Highway-men be to the poor travelers in
their journey; in every street I meet with sad complainings; a man may spend
his whole patrimony in Chancery; before he come to any issue, and then shall he
be dismissed again to Law: I have had in my poor mothers case against Richmond
in Chancery, some 16 several orders and reports yet have not obtained a perfect
answer: for 3 l. costs upon a second insufficient answer, I have spent above 12
l. besides traveling charges; and Richmond has had two London journeys bout
the same. O when shall we have an end of a Chancery suit? Shall a woman of 80
years of age be thus spent out, upon her Writs of Dower a Law? before we could
come to declare, a year and a half was spent with Essoy^es and adjornments,
mere delays and fopperies to wast poor people, spin out time, and spend money.

In Chancery what Order made there to day is again to morr^^ unmade; sometime
upon Petitions with false suggestions, more often in Court without hearing the
other side, so as the Court seems rather to be set to make work for the
Registers and Lawyers, by multiplying Orders* and differences, then to settle
differences, or determine causes, while the poor sui^ors have any money to
purchase Orders, or give fees to Lawyers. If I be called to account for this, I
shall be ready to give particular instances, in my own mothers, and many other
of my suffering friends: The wasted condition of my self does constrain me to
sigh out these my groans and complaints; which if the same be taken into
consideration, and receive timely redress and relief, as the same will much
conduce to the praise of those in power, security to our Country, and the good
of a poor afflicted people; so shall he with all thankfullness acknowledge the
same, who truly is as he writes,

A true Servant and Wel-wisher to his Country, JOHN MUSGRAVE.
6. 3. Mon. 1653.
Pulchrum est pro Patria mori.
FINIS.

