THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD KIMBOLTON HIS SPEECH In Parliament, Ian. 3. 1641:

Concerning the Articles of High Treason exhibited against him, Mr. Pym, Mr.
Hambden, Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigge Knight, and Mr. Strowde.

By the Kings Majesty.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Lord KIMBOLTON HIS SPEECH In Parliament, 3. Jan. 1641.
concerning the Articles of High Treason exhibited against his Lordship, Sir
Arthur Haslerigge, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Hollis, and Mr. Strowde by his
Majesty.
Mr. Speaker,
THere has already been so much spoken by the other Gentlemen concerning this
Accusation of High Treason, even sufficient as J conceive to clear us all that
are impeached, that J know not what to say more touching the same, only under
favor give me leave to speak what J conceive of the cause of the procuring of
this accusation of the authors that procured it, and of the effects which I
perceive will follow upon the same.

Mr. Speaker it is not long since this Honorable House accused of high Treason
the Twelve Bishops for their illegal and Traiterous attempt in their Petition
and Protestation against the King and Parliament, these Gentlemen with my self
and others having the persecution of that business and other charges of great
Crimes against them committed to our trust, did unanimously with one conseat
follow the same, bringing to a Period our debates and disputes concerning their
crimes what we conceive they were guilty of upon their several charges, and
what guilty for framing and preferring their Petition and Protestation to his
Majesty, that they were guilty of misprision of Treason upon their former
accusations, and guilty of high Treason upon this their last designs, and
these our Votes and conclusions grounded and warranted not only by the Common
laws of this land, but by diverse presidents and Acts of Parliament we present
to the whole house for consideration and confirmation of the same, by a
general Vote with whom we again agreed by our public Votes, and thereupon
they were impeached and committed, this J conceive provoked their malice
against us, and was the principal cause of this their plot, in drawing an
Accusation against us for the same crime of Treason, thereby to make us seem
as vile as themselves, and to take away our Votes at their trial. And thus J
have joined together both the cause and the Authors of this Accusation. The
effects J conceive will be dangerous and cause great troubles in these Respects.

I. Jn turning the Current of the Parliament proceedings against them upon us,
by which devise they may have further time to put in practice their plots, and
bring to perfection their purposes against the Parliament.

II. That being busily employed concerning this business in their disputes
about breach of Privilege of Parliament, in illegal accusing the Members
thereof, and drawing a Declaration to his Majesty concerning the same in
appeasing him by showing the fincerity and integrity of the Parliament toward
his Majesty and other things and pertinent, thereunto. This High Court may lay
aside these proceedings, and avert their purposes touching the Jrish affairs,
whereby the Rebellion there may increase, and foreign aid brought to them to
the utter loosing of that Kingdom.

III. Many fears and troubles will arise in the Citizens of LONDON concerning
this Accusation of desperate and hellish Stratagems in agitation, as well
against them as the Parliament by dissolate and disaffected persons to the
safety and security thereof, causing them to stand continually upon their guard
of the Trained Bands which will be to them a great charge and Molestation.

IV. It will encourage ill affected Cavaliers and Commanders about the Court,
to attempt any mischief against both Houses of Parliament or particular
Members thereof, upon the least opportunity that shall be offered them,
thinking thereby they shall do the King good service, which otherwise
perchance they dare not adventure to put in practice.

V. It will provoke and stir up a dislike of these designs in the hearts of
all his Majesty's subjects, and disaffection to his Sacred person, cause great
vproares and tumults of the Citizens; yea, and J fear a general insurrection
in this Kingdom, if not suddenly prevented, which God forbid.

And thus Mr. Speaker, having nothing more to say concerning these Articles, I
humbly crave of this honorable house, that I may have expodition in my trial
upon the same, and that all things done by this wise Council may tend to the
honor and glory of Almighty God, the peace and safety of his Sacred Majesty
and all his Kingdoms,

FINIS.

