Musgraves Musle broken, OR TRUTH pleading against FALSEHOOD; BEING A just
Defense and Answer to two Papers read by Sir ARTHUR HASLERIG: set forth in a
Letter written to Mr. Moyer, one of the Commissioners for Compounding.

WHEREIN Is discovered how the Commonwealth is abused by Sub-Cummissioners for
Sequestrations, and a Revenue of 13000 l. per Annum brought into the State,
upon the Discovery and Charge of John Musgrave.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1651.

Courteous Reader,
IT is not my intent to apologize here, only I present to thy view a short
Narrative of our Northern bordering State transactions, how subtly the
adversary holds up his declining Interest, and by Sir Ar. Haslerigs influence
upon the Parliament and Council of State, has got into their hands the whole
State Revenues there: justice is the honor of a Nation, but injustice the
shame thereof; a few of our old Kingly Monopolists and new State Apostates by
Sir Ar. Haslerig's means, have got all the Authorities into their hands: they
now more tyrannize, oppose and squeeze the Country, cozen the State, and
enrich themselves out of the ruins of poor plundered people, then any ever
did, or durst attempt under a King and Prelates. And for that it is
inconsistent with a free ingenious spirit, to be subservient to the injust and
injurious actings of our Northern Nimrod: none therefore there, but such as be
either Cavaliers, and so under his Rod, if they comply not, or his own vassals,
mercenary and dependant Creatures must be entrusted in any Authority there, as
here in part, and more large hereafter, I shall fully manifest in my answer to
two nameless Pamphlets, called Musgrave musled, etc. The occasion of writing
this following Letter to Mr. Moyer was this. By an Order of the Commissioners
for compounding the 2. of Jan. last, I was summoned to appear at
Haberdashers-Hall the same day, there when I came, Sir Ar. Haslerig caused a
Letter to be read from Sewel and Laughorn, two of his Sub-Commissioners, and a
note of my writing touching the pretended agreement betwixt Mr. Briscoe, Cap.
Crackenthorp and my self: I then desired that I might have a formal Charge
exhibited against me, and offered to answer immediately, and desired to have
Copies of the Letter, and a note read against me; but both denied, Sir Ar.
Haslerigs carrying them away with him: the forgery and falseness of both thou
may plainly see in this following Letter to Mr. Moyer, and as Sir Arthur read
the one openly, so I have caused my answer to the same in this letter, to be
published for the satisfaction of friends, and undeceiving of others that take
it for granted, Sir Arthur's only study and care is to advance the public,
and the men placed in Authority by him, be honest and faithful in their
employment: there is not any thing here asserted for truth; but if I may have
liberty, I shall make good the same, and what I have done here, is not out of
any discontent, emulation, or private grudge to Sir Arthur Haslerig, or any
other person; but for rescuing wronged truth, and right information of an
abused deceived State, by these worthless and mean men thus promoted and
protected by Sir Arthur Haslerig, who by his power and greatness keeps them
from giving account for their miscarriage and misgovernment: The poor North
groans for liberty, but hopeless to recover their native freedom, whiles Sir
Ar. Haslerig is Commander, and Lord peramount over them, only their hope is in
God, that he will shorten the days of his unrighteous reign, and put it into
the hearts of the Parliament to call him to account, not only for all the vast
sums received out of Goldsmiths Hall, Country sequestrations, fines,
freequarter, and other unwrrantable Levies and Sesments; but likewise for his
despising Parliament Authority, making his will and lust, not the Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament the rule and square of his actions, which if ever it
come to equal examination and trial, let me suffer death if he prove not more
peccant by far then I have rendered him in my Charge; whereof the Council of
State declared, (notwithstanding their Order intimates otherwise) that they had
no cognizance, he being a Parliament Man, and left me to the Parliament, to
promote my Charge there; but how to do it, or by whom, I know not: yet nothing
doubt but God ere long will bring him to answer for all his oppressions and
wrongs done us: This is the prayer and expectation of him who desires to live
no longer then he shall be true to the Interest of Englands Commonwealth, and
a faithful Servant to his Country.

JOHN MUSGRAVE.

A Letter written to Mr. Moyer, one of the Commissioners for compounding,
wherein is set forth the abuses of the Sub-commissioners for Sequestrations,
and how the State Revenue may be advanced without wrong to any honest Interest.
SIR,
THis other day a nameless Pamphlet came to my hand, called Musgrave musled, or
the mouth of iniquity stopped, wherein is printed a Letter from Thomas Sewell,
and Thomas Laughorn, two of your Commissioners for sequestrations in
Cumberland, and directed in haste to Thomas Craister Major of Carlisle at
Newcastle, with a paper said to be of my writing, with a Certificate from a
Minister one Nicholson, touching Cap. Crackenthrop, and mine agreement with
Lawyer Briscoe; both which Sir Arthur Haslerig read before you at Haberdashers
Hall, but carried the same away with him: so I could have no Copy of either of
them; otherwise before this, I would have given a satisfactory answer to both;
and herein I doubt not but both clearly to vindicate my own innocence and
integrity, and plainly to discover what this anonymus and libellor has writ,
is only to cast a mist before truth, that the baseness and treacherous dealing
of those men, of whom I complain, may escape in the fogge the better unespyed.
And for the honesty of M. Briscoe, his former actions and time truths best
discoverer will manifest: I will not trouble you further then with what was by
Sir Arthur Haslerig suggested and urged against me before you; when by your
Order I was convented before you, without any charge against me. The other part
of that book against me in Sir Arthur Haslerigs vindication, as this Detractor
is licensed thus to libel against me, I hope I shall not be bound up from
answering, nor denied legem talionis.

Sir, After the Commissioners for the Militia in Cumberland were laid aside,
upon my exceptions delivered to the Council of State: Mr. Can came to me,
telling me Sir Arthur Haslerig desired to speak with me: I went to Sir Arthur
Haslerigs Lodging: he seemed to be desirous of a right understanding betwixt
him and the honest party with us: and after some flourishing with King James
his sword, which he said he much valued, he told us how he was deceived in the
men named for our Militia; but after he would not recommend any other, (...)
honest men with us should fiest approve. He said, he had named me a
Commissioner for sequestraions in Cumberland: I wished him to forbear doing it,
I could not attend that employment by reason of my other private business and
troubles I was incombred with; but if I were a Commissioner, I should not
forbear his friends, Mr. Howard and Sir Wilfride Lawson, two great and
dangerous Delinquents. But when I understood I was joined with such as were
Delinquents themselves, and with whom I could not take the Oath prescribed
without perjury: I intended not to have acted with them. No seoner I returned
into the Country, but Graister and Laughorn writ to me to meet them at
Carlisle for letting out Delinquents Estates for that year; but fearing if I
should have refused, they should have laid the blame upon me, if they had let
them to the old sequestrators, and Sewel, who were formerly Farmers, at far
undervalues; and understanding that the Governor of Carlisle, and Craister
were then Farmers of sundry great Delinquents Estates at low and inconsider
able Rents, and how the Governor of Carlisle had made great waste, and cut
down a wood of Sir Thomas D^cres, as is said, worth 5 or 600 l. and whose
estate the Governor then farmed, conceiving few or no Countrymen would or
drust bid money for that, the Governor Craistor or Sewell should desire to
have, if we should meet there; upon that account I refused to go thither, and
writ to them, that in regard the Governor Craister and Sewell, who then
overawed the Country, and exercised tyranny, and an arbitrary Government over
the people, by laying the Soldiers upon free quarter, raising moneys, and
causing Countrymen to bring in their Corn into that Garrison, without money
for the same or for carriage, were Farmers of Delinquents Estates at far
undervalues: few I knew within their own jurisdiction, and that Garrison drust
contest with them: therefore I held that place not fitting to draw the Country
thither, desiring they would appoint a more convenient place, and I would
observe the time and place; at the first they said, I should come thither, or
no place; but upon asecond letter, Isent them that I would certify against
them: they appointed some two days after, to meet at Hescot by eleven of the
Clock; but came not till 3 in the afternoon, no intimation thereof being given
to the Country: when they came to Hescot, being but 6. miles from Carlisle,
they excused their long stay, in regard of the funeral Sermon made by one
Balwyne for Sewells wife, who dyed some three weeks before; but Balwyne was
fetched from Penreth, and the more intelligent conceived their meeting was
rather to cousult how to uphold the Scottish interest then for the Sermon by
Balwyne, who was and yet is a professed enemy to the Engagement and present
Government. Upon our sitting down, none of our Country appearing, Craystor and
Laughorn desired I would consent to let the Delinquents Estates to the old
Sequestrators and Farmers at the former Rents, which I desented from, in regard
I knew the old Sequestrators did only take the same for the Delinquents use and
benefit, for whom they were Agents. Upon this our meeting was adjourned to
Penreth for some 3. days longer, only upon Craister and Laughorns entreaty
and protestation, they knew the same to be worth no more. I consented to a
Lease of Sir Francis Howards Tithes for that year to Captain Briscoe for 30 l.
but at our next meeting I found the State cheated of 30 l. therein for Mr.
Pearson. The Sequestrator did offer 60 l. for the same, and said they were
better worth. In the mean time, I sent into Westmerland for some friends to
come to our meeting at Penreth, (at any other meeting I was never with them
after) fearing few or no Countrymen with us would appear in opposition to the
Governor, Crayster, and the old Sequestrators; and by my friends at that
meeting I advanced the sequestered Rents near 500 l: the worst service I ever
did you, and all the favor I showed any Delinquents. There were but two for
whom I was solicited to show some favor to, viz. my Uncle Sir William
Musgrave, and Mr. Pearson of Newton; for Sir William Musgrave I raised the
Rents of his Lands so high, for which I was after threatened, if ever the times
changed, to have the like returned. For Pearson, it is true, a bribe of 10 l.
was offered me for my good will, the other Commissioners being made sure for
him. The case was thus, Mr. Pearson the year before had taken of the old
Committee Newton-Tithes for 76 l. Sewell by the countenance of Craister,
pretends (and but a pretense) to have taken them for 50 l. requires bond of
Pearson for the whole 76 l. to his own use: Pearson refuses: then Sewell
procures Lieut. Col. Briggs, being Deputy Governor of Carlisle, to send a
party of Horse to force Pearson, and did force him to enter bond to Sewell for
the whole: Pearson complains to me how he was oppressed by Sewel and Briggs, and
how Sewel intended to cheat the State of 26 l. and put it in his own pocket;
but Pearson after is sent for to appear before the Governor of Carlisle, who
with Craister partly by threats, and partly through promises, Pearson should
have the Tithes the next year for 50 l. Pearson pays the whole 76 l. to Sewel.
but only 50 l. accounted to the State; if so much, to color and cover this
knavery and cheat, the Tithe is agreed on to be let for 50 l. Musgrave is the
only rub. The commissioners offered them for 50 l. I having knowledge of their
juggling, caused one beyond their expectation to bid freely for the Tithes, and
raised them to 79 l. 19 s. which Pearson seeing and not willing to part with
the Tithes, gave the other 12 d. for increase: so the Rent was that year 80 l.
If Anonymus in that dark could have struck me with any such Arrowe, he would
not have missed this mark; but I look upon this Pamphleter, hired with a price
by Sir Arthur Haslerig to murder my reputation, (which to an honest man, is
more dear then his life) least I should enter the list once again with him, and
by help of unconquered truth, unvale his hypocrisy, and lay open his
unfaithfulness to the State and present Government, with his tyranies and
oppressions yet not discovered, which in the strength of God, I fear not but to
do. But in answer, for Huddlestons pretended Estate, I am sure the
Commissioners cannot but acknowledge not any was more forward to promote their
Rent then I. But upon Mr. Skeltons showing the Exchequer Lease in right of his
Son, it is true, we said we could not discharge the Lands from under
sequestration; but the same were to be freed, either in the Exchequer, or by
the Commissioners for compounding above; and Skeleton showing an Order of the
Exchequer, made upon Mr. Fells motion, a Member of Parliament, in Skeltons
right for freeing those Lands of Huddlestons recusancy, and acquittances from
the several Sheriffs for the Rent paid by Skeleton to the very time of
sequestration, I did not them nor yet see how in soliciting for the infant
here, I did or could wrong the State, and what I did therein was with the
privity and approbation of the other Commissioners. For receiving 15 l. of
Huddleston, I deny it; but upon account it will appear I have spent 10 l. more
then I have received, having attended here and in the Country, ever since June
last, and never could bring the same to any issue, Skelcon and his Farmers
goods being lately driven for the Arrearages of the Rent due upon Skeltons
Lease, by the Sheriff of Cumberland, whereby appears the falsehood of that
Certificate in relation to me and Skeleton: but I would gladly you would examine
how it comes to pass, that after a years discovery and proof tendered against
Thompson of Broomfield, by one Raper of the same, the State is couzened of 400
l. per Annum; for Thompson injoyes his Estate, being worth 400 l. per Annum,
still unsequestred, though a notorious Delinquent. For my speaking for
Delinquents. I dare them to name one. What discoveries they have made since
they were first Commissioners, let them tell. By their refusing and sleighting
discoveries, I know they have lost the State 10000 l. But why have they been
thus long silent against me? Have I not before provoked them? Did I not tell
them at our first meeting, that I could not take the Oath with them without
perjury, in regard Laughorn was a Delinquent in Arms, and had taken the Oath
for the Earl of Newcastle, and that Craister had received 8 or 10000 l. of
Delinquents money unacconnted for, and so thereby incapable to be Treasurer as
they had made him, and desired that Mr. Briscoe might supply that place? But
they are very careful to advance the States Revenues, witness their refusal to
examine witnesses upon Oath against Mr. Howard, whose delinquency and perjury
is manifest, and attested by sundry witnesses under their hands, besides his
withdrawing in Arms to the enemy in Yorkshire, 5. or 6000 l. per Annum with
them is not considerable, Mr. Howards Estate amounts to no less. And so much
displeased was I at my being put out of Commission, as you know the last Summer
I solicited you so to do often times, telling you I could not act with them to
do you service, and if I might have the same in the Country by indifferent
Commissioners examined, and not hurried to Newcastle where none of my witnesses
dare appear against them, for Sir Arthurs pride and tyranny. I could, and would
prove that they have hindered and lost the State 10000 l. by hindering and
obstructing discoveries which your friends would have made and offered to do;
so they sure are not only in a clandestine way, but are professed enemies to
the interest of this Commonwealth. As for the stewardship of Penreth which
they say I am outed of, I never esteemed it nor made ought of it, further then
to advance the States service, and keep under Delinquents, causing such to find
pledges without any Fee for their good behavior as refused the Engagement,
whereat some of the now Commissioners were not well pleased: I never received
penny by it, only 29 s. the first Court, the Fee due for my service is yet to
take up, and which I never expect: undesired, unexpected that place was put
upon me by Sir Henry Mildmay. I can make it appear, I have spent in that
service near 20 l. the greatest profit I have had by it. If I would have
continued that place after that Honor was sold, I might, which was offered me
by Captain Dawson, one of the purchasers; but conceiving it a snare, or to
prevent me from prosecuting his Father in Law Cholmleys Delinquency I wholly
refused it. For Sewel (who thus upbraids me with my poverty) in the beginning
of this Parliament and war, was not worth a groat, Servant to the Postmaster
of Carlisle, ready to rub a Cavaliers Horse-heeles for a penny; but by cheating
the State, and farming Delinquents Lands at far undervalues, and trading with
the enemy in Scotland, of late has got great wealth. And for Craister, he has
improved his time while he has served the State, to his own, but not to the
States benefit, industriously ever promoting the Scots interest. It was not
indisposition of health, but out of disaffection to the present service, which
made him lay down his Commission when he was to march for Scotland, persuading
others from bearing Arms under the now Lord General against the Scots. But you
will say, while I complain of others, why do I take bribes, or gifts of others
to conceal or free them from delinquency? If to accuse were a conviction, who
should be innocent? I never saw the face of that man that durst exhibit any
such Charge against me before any Court of Justice, otherwise then as the
slanderous pen of this invective libeller has belcht out against me; which I
disregard, holding it my honor, to be evil spoken of by base men, and such as
are ashamed to own themselves and what they write; like a murderer in the
dark, killing the innocent unawares. Only as to that paper produced by Sir
Arthur Haslerig, touching Mr. Briscoe, which I owned before you to be my
writing; blessed be God, I was never yet reduced to that strait, as to deny any
thing I ever yet writ, or not able to give an account for my so doing. And more
in particular touching this paper.

Sir, After the King withdrawing to York from the Parliament, soon in every
County in the North with us did they list men, and raise Horse for the King,
and in no place with more readiness then in Cumberland. If any there were known
or suspected to favor the Parliament, his words or Religion, was quarrel
enough to throw him into prison.

The first imprisoned there was my self, for nonconforming to the Common
Prayer Book the Idol of that time; but after bailed. The next Sessions
appearing again, Cap. Crackenthorp being there, the Justices said we were
against their King, and that we boasted of the Parliament, and thereupon
ministered the Oath of supremacy to us, which we refusing committed us both
close prisoners; but after again bailed. Col. Rigby our good friend advised us
to appear, and (that if we were again committed) by Habeas Corpus to remove our
selves: for by Law they could not administer that Oath without special
Commission. I acquainted Mr. Briscoe therewith, being that Sessions to be sworn
Justice, desiring him not to intermeddle; but he in open Court told the
Justices they had power to minister that Oath, and committed us for high
Treason for refusing that Oath the second time, and procured a special
Commission for a Goale-delivery, intending and so giving out that we should die
as Traitors; but by the Habeas Corpus they were disabled to proceed against us,
though they would not obey it as to enlarge us

To tell you all the cruelty and bad usage toward us, upbraiding us ever with
the Parliament, would be a volum.

After many turnings, and the Country freed from under the enemies power; we
made our addresses to the Parliament: and the Lords upon reading our Petition,
sent it down to the House of Commons, who referred it to the Committee of
Complaints, with power to send for parties, Witnesses and Records. Upon serving
the Order upon Mr. Briscoe and other the Justices, Sir William Ermyne, (ever
accounted a friend to Cavaliers with us, by whose Votes his Son sits in
Parliament, as Knight of the shire for Cumberland) procures an Order of the
House of Commons, for respiting the Summons we had procured upon our great
charge and attendance, having spent in the prosecution of that Petition near
300 l. Cap. Crakenthorp was hereat much troubled, having suffered and spent so
much for the Parliament, to be so slighted; said he would make Mr. Briscoe
know other way what wrong he had done us, Col. Cholmley (being then a Member of
Parliament, but since left the House for his Delinquency) made his address to
us, and much solicited us to agree with Briscoe, telling us how if we were
friends, he would (by his friends here) be much useful to the Parliaments
friends in Cumberland; and with much confidence did aver that it was impossible
any Charge of Delinquency against Mr. Briscoe could be proved.

At Colonel Cholmleys and Captain Dawsons earnest entreaty (as Mr. Briscoe the
Merchant I know will acknowledge, if not, I am able to prove the truth of it
otherwise) more in regard that Mr. Briscoe would be a friend to honest men,
then for such an inconsiderable sum: as to our losses by that imprisonment,
we were content to take 35 l. of Mr. Briscoe, for the wrong done to us by him,
with this provisoe, that our discharge or release to him, should never be
produced in evidence for to debar us from recovering damages for our false
imprisonment of the other malignant Justices; but we could not agree of the
manner of the discharge: whereupon Mr. Briscoe the Merchant said, Conzen
Musgrave, write as I shall dictate to you, and when it is done, if you and the
Captain like it not, there shall no use be made of it; and thereupon I did
write the note or paper ask gave it in, of which this nameless Libeller so
much boasts. But did we upon reading it agree or subscribe to it? nay, did I
not often say to him while I was writing it, what he did dictate to me was
untruth, we had no charge of Delinquency against his Brother, and we would not
subscribe that paper: ask him if he did not solicit us to subscribe it, and
upon what account he carried it away with him: did he not premise to go that
night to the Council at Lincolns Inn with it, and if Council held it not good,
he would not require it, but would come to us the next day with it? and did we
not tell him what was written was untruth, and we could not ever own it? and
before he was suffered to carry it away, did he not promise (if Council held it
not warrantable) to return it us again the next morning? for any such agreement
or Engagement under our hands as the Cavalier Priest falsely in his Certificate
intimated, the paper produced (which you have seen) will testify the contrary:
where is now my covetousness, dishonesty, knavery, or unwarrantable action in
all this? let the Lybeller tell me; for his money we never expected, nor
desired it before the difference was settled by learned Council; but the next
day we heard not from him, for by this trick it seems a design was laid to
blast our reputation: but blessed be God, we are not afraid of such Bug-bears,
but warned to beware of men, and be more cautious and careful of our ways and
walking. We were men of private conditions; but Mr. Briscoe the Lawyer, a
Justice of peace and Committee-man. If you ask, I will tell you how he had or
was to have of S. Wilf. Lawson by the mediation of 2. grand Delinquents, 30 l.
for imprisoning him, by virtue of the Commission of Array, how it did agree
with his Oath to conceal S. Wilfrids Delinquency, and not sequester him, and
yet have reparations for himself, I know not; but surely, if this nameless
Balaamite and hireling for Sir Arthur Haslerig had any such thing against me,
he would not be silent I confess. As for Delinquency against Mr. Briscoe, I
could not to this day ever find sufficient matter to fixed charge upon him,
though I believe the Commonwealth has many better friends, and to honest men
be ever professed himself an enemy: the Character of the Gentleman, Baron Thorp
can better give then I; yet that he has acted with and for the enemy, against
the Parliament, I believe; for I have a warrant under his hand to that purpose;
but how to prove it legally I know not, though his Brother does believe the
subscription to be his hand writing, unless you will put him to the Oath ex
officio, which is against the Law of God and Man, as you did my cousen Wharton,
in my case without any charge exhibited against me; but if you had examined
Cap. Swain upon that Oath, who the other day pretended such zeal for the
Commonwealth before you, against Mr. Primate, he could have teld you what
money, and by whom was offered me in Michaelmas Term last, whether 60 l. more
or less, to forbear from prosecuting Sir Richard Grahams concealments and
undervalues upon Cap. Crackenthorps Discovery, and what Arguments were used to
induce me thereunto; how Sir Richard Graham would find better friends then I
before you, and why I should do it for a State that never did me good, right,
not justice: notwithstanding all my sufferings and high actings for them, it
stood neither with wisdom nor reason, when by giving it ever, I might not only
gain a potent friend; but have in hand a considerable sum to my own desire:
Cap. Swain, if examined upon the Oath ex officio, could tell you what moneys
this last term were offered me in the same case, and what Answer I returned.

But in case Sir Richard Graham had given us satisfaction for the wrong done us
before the discovery by us made; I quere, whether it had not been our liberty
if we had liked, and the other desired, if another had made the Discovery, to
have solicited for Sir Richard Graham, without wronging the State, as well as
Mr. Squibs Brother, who by soliciting for Delinquents before you is said to get
500 l. per Annum. and yet no bribery in him, I know you account it, neither do
I? I further quere, whether i^ no information or Discovery had been made by us,
it had not been our liberty to have agreed with him for our personal wrongs,
and forborne if we had pleased to have made the Discovery?

If you had put Mr Craister to the Oath ex officio, he could have told you how
he and Langhorn the last Summer refused to receive Discoveries against
Delinquents, in contempt of your Orders, and great prejudice to the State.

I you had put him and Langhorn to that Oath, they could have told you, how
they solicited me (upon my bringing in (before them) my Discoveries of the 17.
of October last) to have forborne to do it, saying, I should do my Country bad
service in it; for by that means the Discoveries would come to the State, and
they had an intent to get all the Concealments and Discoveries to themselves,
as Sir Arthur Haslerig has since done for them from the first of November
last. Now my Discoveries are the only let in their way, being before that time,
^nce Craister gave out in speeches (before he went out of Town, as my Cousen
Wharton can witness) that neither the State nor I should have any benefit by
those Discoveries, which I made the 17. of October last.

If you had put Mr. Craister and Mr. Sewell to the Oath ex officio, they could
have told you how they solicited me to withdraw my Charge of Delinquency
against Col. Cholmley and Thomas Langhorn, saying, I should undo them if I did
the same, and they could tell you how they labored with Cap. Crackenthorp to
diswade me therefrom.

If John Musgrave had done any such thing; how would this Tertullus, hired to
rail against me, have opened his throat to declame against me? what black
epithites would he have given me, you may easily imagine? But those be Sir
Arthur Haslerig's honest men; and no place, but at Newcastle, you think fit to
examine their misdemeanors. I had almost forgot to acquaint you, how upon my
coming last to London, Craister, Sewell, and Langhorn, the day before I came
out of the Country) did earnestly entreat me that I would be their Solicitor
at London; for they knew, I would be both honest and diligent in what I
undertook; and without some active man above, you would do nothing: so careless
were you of what they certified as you made not any return thereupon. Then they
could fawn, flatter and dissemble with me; professing, they knew I was glad to
be out of Commission with them, and how prejudicial the same was to my other
business; hoping thereby to have drawn me from prosecuting my Discoveries and
complaining of them: but now failing in their expectation, they throw their
dirt and filth in my face, to make me ugly, and the Readers believe, that it is
my natural complexion, and a leprosy growing from an inbred corruption. But
their and the Governor of Carlisle's Certificate of Craister's Judgment for a
Congregational way are a like truth; Craister being the Scottish Presbyters
great Champion there, and a professed enemy to ask such in that Country, is
favor Independency, as I can prove by a Cloud of Witnesses. Nay Craister has
threatened of late, that such as walk in a Congregational way, shall be debarred
to meet to prayer and worship; boasting to be armed with authority from Sir
Arthur Haslerig to effect it. Satan can transform himself into an Angel of
Light: but the hope of the Hypocrite shall perish; and God will unmask in his
due time, the unworthy dealing and dissembling of this jugler. For Mr.
Nicholson, if Sir Arthur had not read his certificate before you, I should not
further have troubled you with him, by what is said; which I am able to prove.
You see, upon what weak props and rotten pillars Sir Arthur Haslerig would
uphold his credit; and by a short and true character of the man, who calls
himself a Minister of the Gospel, you may conceive how by such men Sir Arthur
Haslerig propagates the Gospel in the North.

Nicholson, while the enemy had any power with us, complied with that interest,
after the Country was reduced to the obedience of Parliament, upon the
recommendation of some, whom the Commissioners of the great seal best know, got
the Rectory of Plumland under the great seal of England granted him; of which
he makes Merchandise, and sells the same to a Delinquent Priest, one
Eglesfield, for an hundred pounds. After upon Duke Hambleton's invading
England, withdraws himself to the enemies garrison in Carlisle; and there he
turns to his old vomit, the book of Common Prayer; and was preacher before Sir
Philip Musgrave and Sir Will. Leviston the Governor of Carlisle: of all which
Craister is not ignorant: By his friends, now in authority, he is placed at
Thursby; and of late upon the recommendation of Craister, confirmed in that
Rectory, by the Commissioners for the Ministry of Newcastle. And Eglesfield
(though a Cavalier and Delinquent) injoys his place likewise but who dares say,
that Craister is no honest man, or Sir Arthur is a friend to Cavaliers and
Malignants? I have often heard you say, you were under an oath. Deceive not
your selves: God will not be mocked. The Lords and Commons of Parliament (whose
seats you now possess) though high in power, and great in wealth, for their
double mindedness, dissembling, sleighting oaths, regarding persons, brother,
cousin, and friends; and despising men of mean and lew condition, God with
contempt has laid aside. If you tread in the same tract they did,
notwithstanding you set a fairer guilt and gloss upon your doings, God will
find you out; and you shall go off with as bad a savor as the snuff of a Candle
when put out. Your wisdoms, and all your windings shall not prevent it; and
that sooner then you dream of, if you despise Council. Now to carry witnesses
for the Commonwealth out of Carlisle to Newcastle, near a 100 miles remote from
their dwellings for to Browgham in Westmerland, not a mile out of Cumberland,
the Commissioners there being of your own naming, and upon Sir Arth. Haslerigs
recommendation as the other be, and whom you may arm and alike authorize them
to do it; be more equal, just, and for the more ease and lessening of the
charges of the witnesses, and for the further encouragement of the prosecutor
for the Commonwealth, God judge and let all honest and unbyassed men well
consider. To presix a peremptory day for a hearing within six weeks and before
the parties complained of have answered the charge, and so no issue joined, nay
before any formal summons granted against them for their appearance; and
parties and witnesses living remote hence near 300 miles, while you have made
the prosecutor attend two months, before be can have an order out, made
against a Delinquent; and yet he cannot procure it, be regular, just, and
honest: and if such difficulties, or rather impossibilities put upon the
prosecutor is not partial dealing, or agreeable with your oath let the more
judicious consider. One question more I would offer unto you, whether the high
Court of Parliament be not a Court of equity as law? If so, then whether the
Commissioners or Judges sitting at Haberdashers-Hall, from whom there be no
appeals to any other Court then the Parliament it self, in cases depending
before and determinable by them, be not Judges of the equitable part as the
legal? Which if denied; will it not unavoidably follow, that former Kings and
Tyrants of this Nation, have in their high Court of Chancery made better
provision for their vassals and slaves, to recover and regain their lost rights
and possessions, when without remedy in Common Law-Courts, their evidences
being lost then Englands Parliament has done for their plundered friends, and
the widows of the slain in their quarrels? Will not Englands freedom be now
worse and more destructive to us, then former Englands slavery under Kings and
Lordly power? Admit (as too true it is in many men's cases) the enemy for my
affection and adhering to the Parliament has not only imprisoned me; but
dispossessed me of lands, plundered me, taken from me all my writings and
evidences upon reducing the Country my land and estate is sequestered for the
Delinquency of the intruder or disseisor, the last Tenant in possossions the
disseasor confesses to have my evidences, I desire he may produce them; a
zealot stands up, and tells you, the State makes title under the disseisor: I am
to show the writings, if I expect the land we may not, we will not, says he,
nay we forbid the disseisor to speak the truth; or show any writings for him:
Is this right? is this Law? is this Parliamentary? Now admit all my evidences
and writings had been burnt by the enemy, or by casualty lost, how shall I
regain my possession? shall not Records, proofs and proceedings of other
Courts, discovering my right be read and allowed? were it not the height of
tyranny and injustice to deny it? Whosoever would persuade you to act thus
wickedly, as Sir Ar. Haslerig did in Mr. Primates case; suspect him for an
enemy: and whatever his pretense be, his intent and aim is to bring us into an
odium and dislike of the present Government; and cause the people to cry out
for another King, as through the misgovernment of Samuels Sons Israel did do,
draw the curses of the oppressed upon you, and bring the wrath of God upon your
Masters. Be wise, seek not deep to hide your Councels: remember there is a woe
written to them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness
which they have prescribed.

Sewel and Langhorn certify, that I sp^^ke so much in Delinquents behalf as
gave occasion to my fellow Commissioners to have some jealousies of my actings.
I pray consider, and let it be examined by indifferent men; whether my high
actings against Delinquents was not the very cause they desired me out, wherein
though not by them intended, they did me a courtesy? But how far they
promoted the States Revenue, the farming out the Tithes of the Rectory of
Graistock for 71 l. when 100 l. more was proffered, and which they knew to be
worth 300 l. with many other such actions of theirs will speak for them. For
the favor I showed Delinquents then, or since my then advancing the rents of
Delinquents Estates, and my discovery then and since will sufficiently answer
for me. I did the whole work, they received the whole wages and allowances. Mr.
Briscoe nor I had one penny since we were Commissioners. Let all the Recoras and
Returns of Haberdashers-Hall be viewed, if by them or their Discovery, 100 l.
per Annum be brought in to the State, either in Concealments or undervalues,
more then some few particulars of mine, and Mr. Cruckenthorps Discoveries, then
I am much mistaken. In prosecution of which Discoveries, before you, I have
spent 200 l. besides the neglect of my private affairs, and a long and wearisom
attendance upon you with such discouragement and disrespect from Mr. Winslow
and Mr. Barnard, as if I had been no friend to the Republic in what I did:
besides my Discoveries made to you in June last, which I could never get your
Commissioners in Cumberland to proceed to the examining of witnesses, though I
had much solicited them and which will bring in to the State 10000 l. per
annum. My poverty they object to me as a crime: to this day I have eaten mine
own bread: I am content with my portion, often have I refused, never did I seek
for place of profit or preferment, I have since this Parliament begun, often
ventured my life for them, spent in promoting the States service first and
last, more then 500 l. besides my losses and imprisonment for the Parliaments
cause: yet never had I any thing from the Parliament, either toward wages or
reparations for my losses. But for your boasting Commissioners, whatsoever they
have lost, I am able to prove. They have by their beneficial Offices, received
a pound for every penny lost: yet has S. Arthur H. procured the other day all
the concealed Delinquents estates and undervalues in Cumberland, from the first
of November last to be of their disposing: how they will order and bestow the
same, a little time will discover. For the Leases they have made of Delinquents
Estates, they might have improved them 1000 l. per Annum. And by good security,
I dare undertake to procure you Farmers, that will give 500 l. per Annum, more
then they account to you for. But least you should think I only word it, the
particulars ensuing of my Discoveries made before you the first of November
last, and in Cumberland follow.

l s d IMprimis, upon my discovery against Mr. Pennington of Muncaster, his
real Estate secured per Annum about Mr. William Pennington of Seaton, upon my
Discovery per Annum 400 0 0 Authony Latus of Beck, per Annum 150 0 0 John
Huddleston of Vlpha per Annum 60 0 0 John Rawbanke -- per Annum 60 0 0 Hugh
Askow -- per Annum 100 0 0 Cumberland Discoveries per Annum 2270 0 0

Cumberland Concealments and Undervalues upon my Discovery seized and secured.
l. s. d. IMprimis John Scenhouse his undervalue per Annum. 14 2 4 His
Concealments per Annum, 123 16 8 Thomas Patrik son of Stockholne his undervalue
per Annum 26 13 4 His Concealments per Annum 81 16 8 Robert Fisher of
Brakenthweat his Undervalue per Annum, 34 0 0 His Concealment per Annum, 28 0
0 Concealments upon my discovery before the 1. of November 1050. per annum, 308
9 0 Sir Henry Bellingham his Concealment and undervalue per annum upon my
discovery 400 5 0 Summatotalis of Discoveries and Concealements upon my
Discovery since the 17. of October. and before the 1. of November 1650. 3058 14.
0 Baronet Curwens Concealment and undervalue by Cap. Crackenthorps Discovery
17. October. 1651. 271 0 0 So Cap. Crackenthorp added to my Discovery before the
1. of November. 1650. All seized and secured, amounts per annum to 3329 14 0 And
upon my Discovery 17. of October, 1650. Mr. Pennington of Muncaster his personal
Estate seized and secured, 571 0 0 My other Discoveries of the 19. of June
1650. and 17. of October. 1650. not yet secured, will amount per annum, to 10000
0 0 Cap Crackenthorps Discovery upon Sir Richard Graham, concealed and
undervalued 600 0 0 Now if you would have examined witnesses for these latter
unsecured, the State had been in actual possession of the same, as well as of
the other; but in regard of private friendship, they wholly refused it, so that
what is secured, and this which is not yet secured by the only default of your
Commissioners does amount. per Annum, to 14490 14 0

If I had done the like service for any Prince in Europe, I should not have
been thus dis-regarded: yet notwithstanding all the disrespects I have had,
delays and puttings off: if hereafter I receive encouragement, and
misunderstanding be removed, I shall be ready to prosecute the Discoveries
before you. Therefore my humble request to you is, that according to your
former engagement, you will give order for allowance of the fifths of my
Discoveries, toward the defraying charges, loss of time and neglect of
private business, as of my own, so of others, and without which I shall be
disabled to finish what I have begun, whereby the State will lose a
considerable Revenue, if well improved.

1. That the Articles against your Commissioners in Cumberland, may be examined
in Cumberland or Westmerland, and not at Newcastle, upon such great inequality
and discouragement, both of the prosecutor and witnesses.

2. That your Commissioners may be required to make returns of such Discoveries
as they have secured, and give account why they have not done it before this
time.

3. For that it appears by affidavit, the miscarriage of your Commissioners in
not truly setting down depositions taken against Delinquents, you will appoint
an able and honest man whom I can approve of, to write the depositions, and not
leave it to Mr. Craisters man, who either ignorantly or wilfully leaves out the
most material things tending to prove the delinquency of the party discovered.

I know sundry in Bishopric, Yorkshire, Cumberland and Westmerland, would
before this have made out great and considerable discoveries, if by your flow
proceedings upon mine and Captain Crackenthorps they had not been hindered, who
wait to hear how the State will resent the good service I have done them
herein, and how they consider me for my great travel and expenses, I have
undergone about the same: all which I held it my duty to communicate unto you,
expecting your answer hereunto, hoping you will not spend me out with
unnecessary attendance, when one day will do all my business for the present
before you.

I take my leave and rest, Yours, JOHN MUSGRAVE.
26. 3. month, 1651.
For Sam. Moyer Esquire one of the Commissioners for compounding.
POSTSCRIPT.
THis Letter I had published before now, if my private business drawing me out
of Town had not hindered. Upon my return I find a Letter printed, written by
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn to John Price, the supposed Author of that
nameless and scurrilous Pamphlet, entitled, Musgrave musled, or the mouth of
iniquity stopped: In which Letter Mr. Lilburn much complains of Sir Arthur
Haslerig, for his cruel and harsh dealings, and causeless prosecution against
Mr. George Lilburn his Uncle, and Mr. Richard Lilburn his Father, whom with
their whole Family Sir Arthur Haslerig causelessy endeavors to destroy, as Mr.
Lilburn says in his Letter; a Family I know as well deserving from this
Commonwealth, for their faithfulness, activeness, and suffering for the good
thereof, as any one Family of their condition this day in England. I hear Sir
Arthur does sore threaten me: I am not afraid; but before he meddle with me, if
he have either Honor or honesty, he will clear himself of that high Charge
fixed upon him by Mr. Lilburn in that Letter: otherwise who will doubt that Sir
Arthur Haslerig relies more upon his power and greatness to protect him, then
by truth and justice to defend the bounty and goodness of his cause. Mr.
Lilburn the other day told me, that Sir Henry Mildmay asked him, what he
thought of Musgraves Charge against Sir Arthur Haslerig? and how he replied, he
knew Sir Arthur was guilty of most I had charged him with, as to Bishopric and
Northumberland; and that Shurir Art Haslerig had made one Dallivall, a
notorious Delinquent, High Sheriff of Northumberland the last year; and this
year one Shadforth a great Delinquent and Malignant, High Sheriff of Bishopric
yet neither of them sequestered, though Sir Arthur Haslerig knows them to be
such which makes me to remember what Justice Warburton said to me at Durham, at
his going thence the last A sizes the Judge called me to him, and said Mr.
Musgrave, the greatest and richest Delinquents in Newcastle are yet
unsequestred, take notice of it, and look to it. I told the Judge, I was a
stranger in those parts, but I would acquaint my Lord President with it, and
which I did by the next Post: so that it may truly be said of Sir Arthur
Haslerig, as sometimes it was of Romes Senate, in (...) and calling state, Dat
veniam corvis, vexat censura columbas.

JOHN MVSGRAVE.

FINIS.

