A true Representation of the State of the Bordering Customary Tenants in the
North, under an Oppressing Landlord; humbly tendered to His Highness the Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, by their Petitions following.
WHen the unhappy difference begun betwixt the late King and Parliament, one of
the great Grievances by the Parliament held forth, was, The heavy oppressure
which the Customary Tenants and Commons had lain under, by the unlimited,
arbitrary power which the great men of the North exercised over their Tenants;
and amongst all the oppressing Landlords there, none was so cruel and
hardhearted as the late Lord William Howard of the North; to set forth whose
Cruelty, Oppression, and Depopulation in particular, a whole volumn would not
suffice: But the Parliament having broken the Kings party, declined from what
they pretended, and had first engaged for, and began to look upon the People
with a supercelious brow, slighting their Petitions, laying heavier burdens on
them then any of the former Kings had ever attempted; by which the Parliament
was with ease laid aside, none lamenting for them. It was expected in the next
Change of Government, we should have had change of our Taskmasters; but yet we
groan under the old Oppressions: And though His Highness has for more ease
and expedition, appointed two Master of Requests to receive Petitions, yet
after the manner of former Committees, they pretend excuses, and refuse to
receive our Petitions. So having no other mean to have access unto his
Highness, I being the Tenants Agent and Solicitor, have published this
Petition, for no other end then that the same may be made known to his
Highness, and to prevent a more chargeable and fruitless attendance upon the
said Masters of Requests, who so little regard us, or the honor of their
Master. Other Oppressions and Grievances, and treacherous practices of our
bloody Canites, I shall present shortly to view. In the mean time, we desire
this Petition may come under examination; before we be constrained to lie our
selves more bare; being resolved rather with the Leppers, to perish by putting
our selves forth, then by longer silence to undo our selves; desiring that it
may not be forgotten, how it is written, He that rules over men ought to be
just.

JOHN MUSGRAVE.

To His Highness, OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging. The humble
Petition of Randal Muncaster, Robert Milburne, Thomas Moses, and John Bell, and
others, in the name, and on the behalf of themselves, and the rest of the
ancient Customary Tennants of and in the several Manors, Lordships; and Towns
of Leversdale, Cumrew, Castlecarrick, Talken, Irthington, Cumwhitton, Great
Askerton, Little Askerton, East Farlam, West Farlam, Tredermain, Hayton,
Fenton, How Faugh, Northskeugh, Walton-wood, Brampton, Felside, and
New-bygenn; The Petitioners being in number 186, all mithin the Barony of
Gilseland in the County of Cumberland.
HVMBLY SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners and all and every of the said several and respective
Tenants and their Ancestors, within the said several Manors, Lordships, and
Towns, time without memory of man, have and do hold their several and
respective Tenements, descendible from Ancestor to heir, as Customary Tenants
in Tenant-right estate of Charles Howard of Neward Esquire in the said County of
Cumberland Esquire Lord of the said Mann^rs Lordships, and Towns, under certain
yearly several Rents, and paying only two penny fine, or a three penny fine at
the most, and never more, that is to say, two years or three years ancient rent
of their Tenements, as the same fall due upon death of Lord, or upon change of
Tenant by death or Alienation, doing suit of Court, performing bordor service,
some on foot, some with horses at their proper costs, paying one boon or day
work in harvest unto the said Lord for the time being, or four pence for the
same, paying one penny called Grenehew penny, for liberty to cut and take wood
growing on their respectiv^ Tenements, and paying yearly four pence at
Michaelmas for land Sergeant Fee, and no other rents, moneys or services
whatsoever. And your Petitioners and all other the said customary Tenants
within the said several Manors, Lordships, and Towns of Hayton, Cumwhitton,
Talkon, Castlecarrick, East Farlam, and West Farlam, have had time without
memory of man several and certain boones, dayles, or day-works of Hayground,
within the Forest of Breirthwait in Gilsland aforesaid, belonging to their
several Tenements; to some Tenements ten dayls, or day-works, to others twenty,
to some Tenements more, and to others less, paying yearly for the same for
every dale, or day work three Pence: And your Petitioners who are Tenants
within the Manor of Askirton, and Tenants of diverse other Manors of Gilsland,
and their Ancestors, have anciently used and ought to scheal and common they
Cattle, from the first day of May, unto the first day of August, in a great
waste of Heath and Moor ground, called the North Moor, within Askirton
aforesaid, paying for the same the ancient yearly rent, 3 l. 10 s. viz. by the
Tenants of Askirton 1 l. 9 s. 4 d. the demesne lands 8 s. Tredermayne 17 s. 4
d. Walton-wood 4 s. Brampton 6 s. Irthington 6 s. And your Petitioners, and all
the rest of the Tenants aforesaid, ought to have of their said Lord,
Timber-wood for building and repairing of their houses belonging to their
respective Tenements, which said Customs, Tenures, and services, were ^ound
and certified upon an Inquisition by certain Commissioners authorized for that
purpose by the late Q^^en Elizabeth, the Attainder of Leonard Dacres Esquire ^hen
Lord of all the said Barony, as by the Record thereof remaining in the Court of
Exchequer, may appear.

Your Petitioners show, that notwithstanding William Lord Howard, who after
purchased all the said Manors, Lordships, and Towns from the Crown, and under
whom the said Charles Howard, claims the P^emises as his heir, at the time or
the purchase, was, knowing of your Petitioners said ^ight, and customary
Est^^es, and had in ^is purchase a very large and considerable allowance in
respect of ^our Petitioners said ancient Customary Estates, the said Lord
William Howard being a Papist, and a great Opp^^ssor of his Tenants, did
endeavor to break their said ancient customs, and to exact a^bi^rary
unreasonable fines, as they b came due, did by threats and menaces to turn them
out of doors, enforce sund^y of the said Tennants to pay him forty penny
fines, fi ty penny fines, and often more, and others refusing to pay such
fines, he enforced to leave their Lands and Tenements, and so depopulated a
great part of the said Barony, since whose death, the said Charles Howard having
been in actual Arms for the late King against the Parliament, as your
Petitioners are informed, and doubt not to prove, against whom, and such
Delinquent Landlords, the former Parliament declared to take care of such
Tenants as your Petitioners be. Though your Petitioners, and the rest of the
said Tenants have paid unto him already ten years Rent for their respective
Fines, for confirming their said Customs and estates, and the said, Charles
Howard promised them to repay what should appear thereof to be more or less
then by their Customs they ought to have paid, to the sight of indifferent
persons, does endeavor to break your Petitioners said Customs, threatens to
eject them out of their said Estates, does wast them with Suits in Law, because
they will not submit to pay unreasonabl^ fines, at his pleasure sur^ender up
their Lands disclaim their Customs and become Tenants at will or l^esses for
years at an improved rent, to the full yearly value of their lands, and do
other unreasonable services, as to carry Milstones to his Mils twenty miles,
carry his Corn and Malt to and from his Mils, carry and fetch Barrels of Fish
for him, and other carriages upon their own charge, from Carlisle and
elsewhere; whereas none of your Petitioners are b^und to help to carry Mill
stones, but the Tenants of Irthington, and that only to the Mill of
Irthington; and upon the Petitione s refusal to do such unreasonable and
uncustomed services, the said Charles Howard having called your Petitioners
before him, would not suffer them to go out of his house but kept them as close
prisoners in his house for some time, th^eat^ning not to let them go at liberty
without paying two twenty p^n^ fines, or 4 years Rent, and now vexes your
Petitioners with suits in the County Courts, where they cannot have any com^^on
ri ht; others of them by ejectment, he su^s at law for their T^nem^nts and with
hi D ^r and ga^^ which be keeps in excessive numb^ s, ^e dest^o^^s ^o^^
Petitioners (...) and corn to the Petitioners utter ruin and the said Charles
Howard has by strong hand taken from you Petitioners their aid bounds and
dales of Hay ground in the said Forest of B^eirthwait, and will not suffer
them to scheal or common their ca^tell in the said North moore at the
commonable times aforesaid and re^useth to admit your Petitioners Tenants in
his Courts, as of right he ought to do, and denies to allow your Petitioners
any timber wood for building or repairing their houses, and the said Mr. Howard
has entered unto some of your Petitioners customary estates without color or
title in Law, and the more to oppress and vex your Petitioners, the said Charles
Howard, does employ Captain Robert Coulsey, and Thomas Jackson, two notorious
Delinquents, having been in actual Arms against the Parliament, as his Steward
and Clark over all the said Barony and Courts within the same, who drives your
Petitioners goods, and Impounds them at their pleasure, for refusing to do the
said unreasonable services; and the said Coulsey has by force taken from your
Petitioner Randal Muncaster and others the Parishioners of Irthington
aforesaid, their ancient Seats belonging to their Tenements in Irthington
Church; and the said Charles Howard, will not suffer your Petitioners to keep a
gun for the safeguard of the houses in the night time against the
Mosse-Troopers or other enemies. Now for as much as the aforesaid matters, do
concern many hundreds of poor Tenants, and if the same should proceed at law
would be a cause of very many needless, endless, and vexatious suit at Law;
besides your Petitioners cannot expect any equal trial in regard of the great
potency and power of the said Charles Howard, and for the chancery they are
hopeless of relief there; other Tenants being under the like oppressions by
their Landlords after long and chargeable suits, and attendances in chancery,
for settling their customary estates against their Landlords upon hearing of
their causes in chancery, have had the same dismiss^d again to Law, where
commonly the Tenants are overthrown, m st of the Judges for the N rthern
circuits, being either great Landlords themselves, and some of them often of
councels against the Tenants, at the Bars of Justice in Westminster Hall, so
as your poor Petitioners without the Favor, Justice, and Assistance of your
Highness, are destitute of all means to free themselves of the said heavy and
great grievances they lie under, and must be forced to leave their lands and
habitations, to the will and pleasure of their said Landlord, as many of their
Ancestors and poor Tenants within the said Barony, have of latter years been
constrained to do.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray your Highness, to call the said Charles
Howard before your Highness, to answer the Premises aforesaid; for the love of
Justice to Commiserate your Petitioners disconsolate condition, with respect
had of your p or Petitioners wives and children, and in regard your
Petitioners, are by reason of their poverty, and great losses by the Scots in
the late Wars, and great taxes they are compelled to pay to the said Mr.
Howard, under color of suppressing Moss. Troopers, which others of the County
refuse to pay, are utterly unabled to contend with such a great person as their
Landlord in Suits at Law. Your Highness will be favorably pleased to examine
the truth of the Premises; and that your Petitioners may not be left to the
will of their said Landlord, seeking to destroy their ancient Customs. And
that your Highness will as you see cause, according to Justice, ascertain
their ^ines, and confirm their ancient Rights, and Customs, and free them of
the said unwarrantable Taxes, wherewith the said Mr Howard compels them to pay,
whereby they may be the better enabled to serve your Highness and the
Commonwealth, against the common enemy, as occasion shall be offered, and as
their Ancestors have upon those borders formerly done. And what your Highness
shall please to Order, upon hearing of the Cause, they will submit unto, and
bless God for your Highness. And ever pray, etc.

Published by John Musgrave.

FINIS.

