Musgrave Muzl'd: OR The mouth of Iniquity stoped.

BEING A true and Clear Vindication OF Sir Arthur Hazelrige FROM A false and
Scandalous Accusation of John Musgrave, In his late Pamphlet Entitled, A True
and exact Relation of the great and heavy pressurs and grievances the
well-affected of the Northern bordering Counties lie under by Sir A. H.
misgovernment.

With a True but not Exact Character of the said Musgraue in some discoveries
of him.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for L. Lloyd, and H. Cripps, and are to be
sold at their shop in Popes head Alley. 1651.

To the Reader.
READER,
A GOOD Name well got is the best of Riches and he that unjustly takes away
the same is the worst of Robbers, to conceal the worth of a man is
dis-ingenuity, to detract from true deserts is not equity: to charge guilt upon
innocence is inhumanity, but to call worthiness by the name of wickedness is
right down Devilism. I am no more Master Musgraves adversary then thine, and
that is not at all, for I know thee not, and yet I am both thine and his
adversary in all Malignity, against this Common. wealth and its chiefest
champions: Sir Arthur Hazilrige is no otherwise my Friend then thine, if thou
art a wel-wisher to this Republique; and I have as little dependence upon him,
and obliegment from him upon any personal interest as thy self whoever thou
art, I have always observed him (according to the best advantage of my
standing in all the turns of our turning times) a plain hearted man, an English
Oak, and not an Osier that will warp and wind with every wind; a Protector of
all good men of whatsoever judgment, in a good cause; an Assertor of just
liberty, an opposer of Tyranny and that not in prate but in practice, in
Councels* and Combats: For my part let the terror of a Tyrant be his reward,
that will plead his cause, but they are the subtil'st Sollicitors for dethroned
Tyrants, that decry their dethroners without a cause: it is too true honors do
alter manners, and high places without great watchfulness, do make high
spirits, but every bird is not taken in the snare of the Fowler: and it is as
true, that preferment in some begets envy in others, whose constant course is
to strive and endeavor to stain their integrity with notorious forgerie; I
take no pleasure in padling in other men's puddle, nor dabling my self with
other men's dirt; yet I judge it a service worthy my betters, to wash off that
filth and foam which the malicious stomachs of envious men do daily eject upon
the Names and Honors of our English Heroes: believe it (if I may speak it
without vanity) flattery is the very antipathy of my genius, and I bless my
God my foot is not taken in the snare of necessity to dissemble the same, by
the instigation whereof upon the first view of this For so it appears.
paltrie Pamphlet written by Master Musgrave, I had a strong resolution to make
a strict inquisition touching matters of Fact therein asserted; and (though I
had not faith to believe the tenths of those tales mentioned therein, mine own
personal knowledge rising up against some of them; yet considering that the
best of men are but men at best, and well knowing that a plain man would not be
offended at plain dealing) I applied my self to Sir Arthur himself for
satisfaction herein, who has given me that which I give unto thee, which, if
thou judge by the Law of impartiality, thou shall find such a complexion of
impudence and ignorance, scandal and slander, malice and mischief, pride and
passion, forgeries and falsities concentred in Mnsgrave, as if they were all
clothed in flesh and dwelt amongst us, but that the power of him whose design
it was in coming into the world to destroy the works of the Devil, would crush
the crowd, spoil the spawn, and confound the conventicle of those unclean
spirits in that unclean man, is my hearty desire. I expect a Respons, but
clearly perceiving a ranting, raving, and railing spirit stearing his pen and
praecipitating him to wright at randum, I judge him not worthy the honor of a
Reply, and therefore

Farewell.
A True and Clear Vindication* of Sir Arthur Hazelrige, from a false and
scandalous Accusation of John Musgrave, etc.
TO Justify the wicked and Condemn the Righteous it is hardly determinable
which is more abominable, and a pretended zeal for God and their Country do
hurry Hypocrites to the one and the other, whose vociferations of tongues and
pens, do beat the ears of City and Country with nothing more then loud lies in
hypocrisy; who being closely beleagured with pride and penury, impudence and
ignorance, and miserably infected with the itch of popularity, do palliate
their projects for their lusts and lucre, from the credulous crowd of the
Common People, with Come see our zeal for God and our Country, acting their
parts in the public view, Theatrico more, that they might procure a plebean
plaudite, for the most passionate Patriots of their indeared Country; when by a
very slight scrutinie of their particular practices, their pretended zeal
appears nothing more then intended malice against such men: who, for true worth
in the just account of God and good men are no more to be compared with such
proud boasters, then the dogs of Jobs flocks, with Job 30. 1.
those that did abuse him: It is very observeable that the most noxious enemies
of our present Authority and new Commonwealth, are the pretended lowdest
assertors thereof, who Herod-like, under the color of advancing the same, seek
to sacrifice it in its very infancy, and to introduce a most tyrannical
Anarchy under the color of the peoples liberty, hence sprung the malicious
ebullitions, ranchorous invectives and scurrilous slanders from those swelling
swagerors, and licentious levellers, in their lawless libels against the
present Parliament, the Council of State, the High Court of Justice, the
Government of the Army by Martial Laws, blown up and down the Nation like
empty clouds, and the greatest distempers that proceeded therefrom at Ware,
Burford, and elsewhere; from this spirit of mischief and malignity has the
world been infected with so many scandalous falls and unworthy aspertions cast
upon the chiefest Champions of our English Nation, as Cromwell, Bradshaw,
Ireton, Harrison, Vane junior, with several others, whom God has made their
Adversaries envy, and the Commonwealths safety; the savor of whose
conversation (humane frailties excepted) does please the Nostrils of God and
good men, whose peace and prosperity are the subject matter of the daily
prayers and praises of the truly Religious; whether it be not the same spirit
from beneath which makes wicked men like the troubled sea, that has possessed
Mr John Musgrave, when he did cast up that mire and dirt upon Sir Arthur
Haslerige (as formerly in Print though since washed off to his own glory and
his accusers shame, so again) in his late Pamphlet (wherein it is hard to say
whether are more sentences or calumnies, sayings or slanders, fars'd and stuffed
indeed with nothing more then fables and falsities) Entitled, A true and exact
Relation of the great and heavy pressures and grievances the well-affected of
the Northern bordering Countries, lie under by Sir A. H. Misgovernment, etc. is
offered to the consideration of judicious men from their due observation of the
notorious falsities therein specified, and the base miscarriages in several
instances of the said Mr Musgrave, rendering himself in truth according to his
Charge against another in falsehood.

That little acquaintance that I have with him has quit my desires of
increasing the same, whose distempered temper chollerique countenance,
troublesome tongue, and slanderous Pen do render him Solomon's froward man, with
whom we must not converse for fear of the infection of frowardness, and the
companion of fools shall be destroyed: The truth is, he has little in him
worthy emulation, and sufficient want of all things lovely for the exercise of
men's comiseration, did he not quench the Spirit thereof in all his acquaintance
by a violent voluntary precipitancy thereinto, he is not the object of my
hatred; for though he be intolerable, yet I hope recoverable; nor yet of my
envy, for he neither is or has any thing worthy thereof; I could love him and
pity him, had he but the least of either toward himself.

Sir Arthur Hasterig is more known unto me and to thousands, then I or they to
him; and although there is not the least obligement upon me by any dependence
upon him, the least particular courtesy or, favor received from him engaging
me unto this service* yet considering his courage and resolution, his constant
and faithful adhesion in all viciscitudes and turns of affairs to the honest
party, engaging himself at all times unto the highest degree against the
contrary party, though never so great and likely to prosper, and knowing also
in mine own present knowledge and experience the notorious falsities and
untruths of some things asserted in the said scandulous Pamphlet; I could not
withstand those impressions of spirit that were upon me to vindicate his
integrity unto the best of my ability.

How injuriously and irreparably Mr Musgrave has abused the said Sir A. H.
contrary indeed to the very A. B. C. and first Principles of Righteousness,
Justice and common Honesty, by publishing him abroad in print for a Deceiver,
an Oppressor, a Friend to the worst of Malignants, an Enemy to the
Wellaffected, a Promoter of the Scottish Interest against the English, a proud
covetous Oppressor, a Tyrant, a Traitor to God and his Country, and that after
the said Musgrave had applied himself unto the Council of State for audience
and reception of his Charge against the said Sir A. H. and had all due
encouragements that he should have a fair and regular hearing; how dishonestly
and wickedly he has thus accused, arraigned, condemned and executed the said
Sir A. H. in his name, honor and repute before the determination of those to
whom he complained, is most obvious to all his Readers; but it is no marvel;
for it is most common that such men who have outlived the credit and repute of
their own names, care not what wreck they make of the honor of others, with
whom they are not worthy to be named the same day: But it is a constant
character of such ranting Railers and flourishing Need-nots, to make loud
boasts in propatulo of their great zeal of Justice and Righteousness, Countries
Liberty, and common Honesty, and yet to act in such ways, as the dullest eye
may well perceive to stand in a perfect inconsistancy with their professed
Principles. Is not the plain English of these foul Fables thus printed and
published by this bold Boaster and busy Scribe, to dictate unto the people,
according to the daring Dialect of that scribbling Faction, such clamorous
calumnies and aspersions of Tyranny, Pride, Covetousness and Oppression in our
present Governors, the very repetition whereof is an offense to all but
Malignant ears, and all this managed under the vail of public Liberty and
common good? But O that we were Judges in the Land lies at the heart of these
pathetick Zelots; whereunto were they once advanced, the ignoble dispositions,
virulent tongues, furious spirits, and mean capacities of these men would
quickly reduce us to as much Peace and Happiness, Justice and Liberty, as
Saints may expect where Satan has his Throne, and his Viceroys bear Rule: For
if the green tree will burn, what will the dry? And they that will tyrannize
over the names, honor and repute of their Superiors, what would they do over
their inferiors? and woe be to that people whose Princes are peasants, a spice
of such spirits you may perceive in Mr Musgraves proceedings against Sir Arthur
Haslerig at the Council of State, which (though the just Judgment and Order of
the said Council may be a sufficient Vindication of the said Sir A. H. yet) for
better satisfaction, take the particulars, thus:

Upon the 23 Ian. 1650. the said Mr Musgrave did appear at the Council of State
according to appointment, and being examined touching a Book with his name unto
it, importing many and very great Charges against Sir A. H. being at first
demanded whether he would acknowledge that Book there presented to him to be his
Book, he did acknowledge the whole Book to be his, excepting the Errata's, which
he did proffer to amend with his pen, and that he would justify it; after a
full hearing of both parties; and this Musgrave (not being able to make good
his Charge) was commanded to withdraw; and being called in again, was desired to
take the Book, and to mend the said Errata's with his pen, but then he denied
to own the Book, but said he would stand to his Charge, and make that good, and
being withdrawn, and Sir A. H. also, he did after that publicly deny to own
the Book; whereupon the Council of State made this ensuing Order.

Saturday 25 January, 1650. At the Council of State at White Hall.
Ordered, etc. Upon information given to this Council by Sir Arthur Haslerig,
that one Mr John Musgrave had caused a Book to be printed and published, and
that in the Epistle and Charge the said John Musgrave did accuse him the said
Sir Arthur Haslerig of breach of promise and engagement to the Council, and for
acting contrary to the same, and contrary to the Council of States Declaration;
the said Mr John Musgrave being called before the Council, did acknowledge the
whole Book excepting only some Errata's of the Printer, which he offered to
amend with his pen, and said he would justify it, and offered to put in
security to make it good: Thereupon the said Mr Musgrave being fully heard, as
to the particulars of the Epistle and Charge in his Book against Sir Arthur
Haslerig for a supposed breach of trust and engagement by him to the Council,
and also for acting contrary to the Council Declarations, concerning the
examining the Charge of Mr Howard, late High Sheriff of Cumberland, for the not
displasing and putting in certain Commissioners of the Militia for Cumberland,
who were objected against by Mr Musgrave; the Council declares, That it does
not at all appear unto them, that Sir Arthur Haslerig has broken the Trust
reposed in him by the Council, or made any failer of promise or engagement to
them in any of those particulars: but do find that the imputations therein laid
as a Charge upon Sir Arthur Haslerig, are false and scandalous; and do
therefore touching the said scandals, leave Sir Arthur Haslerig for his due
vindication and reparation, to take such course as he shall think fit.

Gualter Frost, Secretary.

The first Article was this:

1. That Sir Arthur Haslerig, contrary to his Engagement to the Council of
State, and Councels of States Declarations upon the Petitioners Exceptions,
procured lately such in the County of Cumberland, to be Justices of the Peace,
Commissioners for Sequestrations, Commissioners for the Ministry, and
Commissioners for the Militia there as were known Delinquents, and such as are
disaffected to the present Government, and complying with the Scottish Interest,
as by the Charge against them hereunto annexed, and another Charge against
them, formerly exhibited to the Council of State, may appear.

The Charge in this Article you see is declared false and scandalous by the
Council of State, which is sufficient to stop the mouth of that calumny therein
vented against Sir Arthur Haslerig.

Artic. 2. That the said Sir Ar. Haslerig being the chief, and leading
Commissioners for the Ministry at Newcastle, approved of such Ministers in
Cumberland at Newcastle as refused the Engagement, were scandalous, and
Delinquents; and such Ministers as were well-affected, without any Charge
removed from their Ministry, and put them out of their places, whereby he
discovers his dis-affection to the present Government, by upholding and
countenancing the Malignant party in Authority, and keeping under the
Parliaments friends, all which this Petitioner is able to prove, and further
refers himself to the Copies of Letters hereunto annexed, the Originals being
in the Petitioners hands.

First, Sir A. H. never acted concerning placing or displacing Ministers but in
public, and that with the Commissioners of of the four Northern Counties, and
that upon their appointed days of public Meeting, and also with the
assistance of Doctor Jennison, Mr Wells, Mr Hammond, Mr Wolfred, Mr Durant,
with several other godly and well-affected Ministers.

Secondly, Sir A. verily believes that there was never any Minister approved
that publicly refused to take the Engagement; and he is very confident, that
there was not any Minister against whom proof was made of his Delinquency or
scandal, but was put out.

Thirdly, He does not know of any one well-affected person that was put out of
his living, except scandalous, ignorant or insufficient; as for the Copies of
the Letters, Sir A. H. conceives they neither concern him, nor prove any thing
against him.

Artic. 3. That Sir Arthur Haslerig undertook to the Council of State to
examine the Articles exhibited by the Petitioner to the Council of State
against Mr Charles Howard, High Sheriff of Cumberland, but neglected the same,
and came privately into the Country to Naward, and there feasted with the said
Sheriff, who is a dangerous and most notorious Delinquent, as appears by the
Charge exhibited against him by the Petitioner to the Council of State.

The Council has declared this also to be false and scandalous; and concerning
Sir A. H. going to feast with Mr Howard, about the latter end of Summer he
being commanded to take care of all the Forces that were for the preservation
of the Borders, and to enter into Scotland upon Carlisle side, Sir A. H. being
in those parts upon that occasion, and the City of Carlisle infected with the
sikness, Mr Howards house being next unto the Borders, was necessitated to be
two nights there, and this was his private going into the Country to feast with
Mr Howard: and if so be to have Articles exhibited against a man by such an
Article-maker or Forgerer be sufficient to evidence a man a dangerous and
notorious Delinquent, the Parliaments best Friends must beware of Musgraves.

Artic. 4. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerig suffers Captain Howards Troop to
lie upon free quarter upon the Country for these four Months last past, and
does conntenance one Dobson, Captain Howards Leiutenant, who cheated the Troop
of 1350 pound; and when complaint was made to Sir Arthur Haslerig, he never
punished him for the same.

Captain Howards Troop belongs to the Garrison of Carlisle, and Sir A. H. is
confident that the Governor thereof has not suffered them to live upon free
quarter; and you may guess by this at Musgraves tales: for whereas he charge
Sir A. H. for countenancing Dobson in cheating the Troop of 1350. li. and
says, when complaint was made to Sir Arthur, he never punished him for it; the
truth is this, about September last, Complaint being made by Captain Howard
against the said Dobson, his then Leiutenant, for detaining money from some of
his Troopers, Sir Arthur understanding discontents arising in the Troop, forth
with gave the said Captain a Warrant all written with his own hand to seize
upon his Lieutenants person, and all his horses, and then also put another able
and honest Lieutenant to be in his place; and upon further examination finding
that there was 39. l. 2. s. and no more due to the Soldiers, the Troop being
engaged upon the Border service, and the Captain, and Lieut. Dobson at
Newcastle with Sir A. H. the said Dobson was discarged his place, and was made
to enter into a Bond of 500. l. with one Robert Huntly Merchant in Newcastle,
an able and sufficient man bound with him, the Bond bearing date the 15 of
October last, that the said Dobson shall answer the same at a Council of War,
upon twenty days notice, the Troop being upon service, as aforesaid, and not
then at leisure immediately to prosecute; and you may the better unders^^^d the
truth of this by the Cirtificate following, written by the now Lieutenant of
the said Troop.

These may certify whom it may concern, That ever (...) came to be Lieutenant
to Capt. Cecil, Howards Troop, which began the 7 of October last, the Troop
has constantly paid their quarters, as soon as we received our pay from the
honorable Col. Thomas Fitch, Governor of Carlisle, which he was very careful to
pay to my Capt. Cecil Howard as soon as it came to his hands by order of the
Committee from the Army, or otherwise; and lest the Country should through want
of timely notice go without their money, it has been my care to cause notice
to be given to them as soon as the money was to be paid out; and I often told
the Country, that if any man did neglect to pay his quarters, my Capt. Howard
or my self would see them paid, if they did make it known to us: And to my
knowledge the said Troop has been upon constant duty by parties to York and
Newcastle for the service of the State, and fetching in of Sequestrations upon
contempt of Orders; or else we have been upon duty along the Borders near
Scotland: And I have understood since I came from his Excellency the Lord
General Cromwell, that in Lieut. Dobsons time, being Lieutenant of the Troop
before I came, the Soldiers paid their quarters; and the said Lieut. Dobson
having detained in his hands of the Soldiers money near forty pounds, the
honorable Sir Arthur Haslerig upon notice thereof did cause the said Lieut.
Colonel to enter into Bond with security to make good the said sum to those
Soldiers to whom it is owing; and when he had given good security, the said
Sir Arthur Haslerig did dismiss him from his Command. Dated at Carlisle, this 3
of Janua. 1650.

DANIEL FRIEND, Lieut. to Capt. Cecil Howard, and sometime Martial General to
his Excellency the L. G. Fairfax.

By all which you may see, if this famous slanderer had quite omitted that foul
untruth of Sir Arthurs countenancing and not p^^ishing this Dobson, and had
abated 1300. l. of his assertion and said he had cheated the Troopers of 50. l.
only, he had done service to the Prince of this world, and obeyed the (...) of
Liars after the rate of above twenty in the hundred, (...) had been a more
profitable servant unto him, then many of his children and servants are, though
the wages of such work (except he leaves it in time) will not be very
acceptable in the latter end.

Artic. 5. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerig gave Commission to Edward Brigs,
to be Lieutenant Colonel for Carlisle Garrison, and made him a Commissioner for
the Militia and Ministry in Westmerland, a man known disaffected to the present
Government, and lately cashered for his drunkenness and other miscarriages by
the now Lord General Cromwell: That the said Sir Arthur gave Commissions to
Thomas Craystour, Cuthbert Studholm, Captain Brown, and others, to be Captains
and Lieutenants in Carlisle Garrison, men known to be disaffected to the present
Government, professed Enemies to honest men; most of them having now laid down
their Commissions, when they were to march into Scotland; and the said Sir
Arthur does countenance none in Cumberland, but such as are professed Enemies to
the honest party, and are for the Scottish Interest.

1. This Brigs was the only man when Hamilton came into Westmerland, that did
raise a Regiment of Foot for the Parliament Service, and he has been always
faithful to the Parliament (when such as this Accuser have undermined their
Interest,) who having raised his Regement (as aforesaid) Sir A. H. with the
advice of the now Lord General ( Carlisle being then rendered by the Scots) did
put that Regiment into Carlisle, and made Col. Fitch the Colonel, and this Brigs
Lieut. Colonel of his own raised Regiment.

2. Sir A. H. did never hear the least complaint against Leiut. Col. Brigs
until of late, for which he was brought to a Council of War, and upon proof
made of his misdemeanor he was put out. As for the rest of this Article, it is
so notoriously false and scandalous, that it is worth no other Answer; only it
is wished, that this Master-slanderer of the North had the least tang and
savor of that Spirit of Piety and Religion as Mr Thomas Craystour has; if so,
men's ears had not been abused with such notorious untruths as these are.

Artic. 6. That by the said Sir Arthur Haslerigs intrusting the Authorities and
Militia in the hands of Delinquents, and men for the Scottish Interest, the
well-affected in Cumberland and Bishopric lie under greater Oppressions, then
formerly under King and Prelates. And the said Sir Arthur is a Protector of
Papists and Delinquents, forbidding the Subsequestrators, and Sollicitors for
Sequestration in Bishopric to Sequester Papists Ordered to be Sequestered, of
which the Papists and Delinquents do much boast, and honest men thereby are
much cast down.

This is general; containing whole clusters of the grapes of Sodom, as if
gathered from a Sodomite himself, having in its bowels as much spawn of malice,
scandal and falsities, as so few words are capable of.

Artic. 7. That Sir Arthur Haslerig hinders and obstructs the ordinary
proceedings of Law and Justice in favor of Papists, and did take out of the
Sheriffs custody Ralph Lampton a notorious Papist and Delinquent, being under
arrest, and formerly arraigned for poisoning his wife, with which Lampton, the
said Sir Arthur is very kind and familiar.

This Ralph Lampton came to the Committee to make complaint against Mr George
Lilburn, and Mr George Gray, for detaining a very great sum of moneys due to
the State, and desired a fifth part for his twelve poor Children, he being
sequestered as a Papist and Delinquent (which Case is returned up, and now lies
before the Commissioners at Goldsmiths Hall) the Committee appointed a day of
hearing the same: while this Mr Lampton was coming, according to Order, to the
Committee, he was arrested, and (as it was informed the Committee) by Mr
Lilburns procurement: hereupon the Committee, and not Sir Arthur Haslerig,
thought fit to secure him from Arrests, during his coming unto, continuing at,
and returning from the Committee, in prosecution of that complaint only; for
as much as it was the Service of the Commonwealth, and no more then the
Committee had Authority to do, and what is practiced in all Courts of Justice
and Committees of Parliament whatsoever: and this was all that the Committee
did upon that business, and who but a Musgrave would not judge it equitable?

Artic. 8. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerig procured Ralph Delival Esquire a
Delinquent in Arms against the Parliament, and disaffected to the present
Government, this last year, to be High Sheriff for Northumberland.

Sir A. H. never heard, neither was there ever complaint made unto him, that Mr
Ralph Delival was a Delinquent in Arms against the Parliament; and the truth
is, he was nominated by another, and not by Sir A. H. but if he had done it, he
would have justified it, for he conceives it would have been for the public
Service.

Artic. 9. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerig, contrary to an Act of Parliament,
suffered Lieutenant Colonel John Jackson a notorious Delinquent, and in Arms
against the Parliament both in the first and second War, a great Plunderer, to
go and ride up and down the Country with his Arms, and against Law put the said
Jackson in possession of certain Grounds and Colleries in Bishopric, belonging
to men well-affected, whom the said Sir Arthur by strong hand dispossessed
thereof, without Law: and the said Sir Arthur Haslerig, against the Fundamental
Law of the Land, most arbitrarily and tyarnnically, did by his power take from
the now High Sheriff of Bishopric the said Jacksons goods, taken in Execution
after Judgment, and restored the said goods to the said Jackson, contrary to
all the Rules of the Law.

As for this Article, wherein this black-mouthed man (in whose tongue and pen
the very Throne of Scandal and Calumny is established) does charge Sir A. H. to
have acted by a strong hand without Law, yea against the fundamental Law of
this Land, most arbitrarily and tyrannically take from the now Sheriff of the
Bishopprick, one Jacksons goods, taken in execution after judgment, and
restored the said goods, etc. Sir A. H. professes that this whole Article is
altogether false, that he never heard word or tittle of this Jacksons riding up
and down the Country in arms, etc. and as for this instance of goods taken from
the Sheriff, etc. it was as Heathen Greek unto him, he understood it not, nor
heard little or much of it, until he read it in this railing Pamphlet; since
the publication whereof, this ensuing Letter was sent unto him, from the then
Sheriff of the County of Durham touching this business.

Sir, Having lately seen a Pamphlet flying about the Country, and an aspersion
in it thrown upon your self, in that you should have taken some goods from the
Sheriff of this County after they were taken upon execution, I thought it
fitting to let you know, upon what ground these goods were delivered back,
which was thus: After the goods were driven, Mr Bruen sent a Letter to my
Undersheriff, to acquaint him that the goods taken were belonging to an
Officer in the Army, and not to Jackson, the party mentioned in the Execution;
upon which the Undersheriff returned the goods to Mr Bruen, having nothing to
do with those goods: This is the truth, and shall in point of Vindication to
your self be made good by him wheresoever you shall please to call: I shall
trouble you no further, but rest,

Your most affectione friend, James Clavering.
Durham, 23 Ian. 1650.

Whether the very unclean spirit of Impudence and slander has not possessed
this loose and licenscious Penman and his Contrivers, let all men judge.

Artic. 10. That the said Sir Ar. Haslerig is very familier, and keeps
company with Thomas Wray, a Papist, in arms against the Parliament; and upon
search for a Popish Priest, there was lately found in the said Wrays house
Copes, and other Popish Relics, and much gold and money, most whereof Sir
Arthur Haslerig caused to be returned back to Mr Wrays wife, a Papist: And the
said Sir Arthur by his Soldiers put sundry honest men out of possession of the
Colleries, settled upon them by Law, under color the same belonged to the said
Wray, whose debts Sir Ar. Haslerig undertook to pay (as Wray confessed) for the
said Colleries, being worth 10 pounds per diem, as the said sir Arthur gives
forth, to the utter undoing of the Owners of the said Colleries.

Sir A. H. professes he never had any thing to do with this Mr Wray, but when
he came unto him about Complaints against Mr George Lilburn and Mr George Gray
for deceiving the Commonwealth of very great sums of money when they were of
the Committee, and trusted for the Parliament, which business is sent up to the
Commissioners of Goldsmiths-Hall, and now lies before them; and he is resolved,
that whilst he has any power committed to him, that he will do every man right
to the best of his understanding, be he Papist, Delinquent, or any other
whatsoever, and he is a very hypocritical and feigned Pretender of
Righteousness and Justice that will be offended thereat, especially complaining
in the Commonwealths behalf. And concerning the Gold mentioned in the Article,
there was a girdle brought to the Committee sitting at Durham, which Mrs Wray
did usually were about her, wherein was quilted about 70. l. in gold, of which
there was 10. l. in old gold, which the said Mrs Wray affirmed was her mothers,
her grand-mothers, and great grand-mothers, and that she never intended to make
use of it; and further, with sore lamentations, complained to the Committee,
that twice before that Sequestration she had all her goods seized on, and taken
away for her Husbands Delinquency, and earnestly besought the Committee for her
fifth part, whereupon the Committee gave her back the old gold, and a fifth
part of the rest, and this was publicly done at the Committee, Sir A. H.
being then present, he not acting at any time single, but with the whole
Committee: And for the remaining part of the Article, concerning the
dispossessing of honest men of the Colleries, under color of Mr Wrays right
unto them, and Sir Arthurs undertaking to pay his debts, read this ensuing
Certificate under Wrays own hand and seal in the presence of Thomas Scot and
Col. George Fenwick.

Thomas Wray of Benish in the County of Durham Esquire, declares, That he was
formerly and is Owner of the Colleries at Harraton in the said County, and that
the said Colleries were sequestered for the Papisty and Delinquency of the said
Thomas Wray first by Sir William Armyn in the year 1644. and also by the
Committee of Durham 1645. of which Mr George Lilburn was then a Member, and
present; and that the said Mr George Lilburn in the year 1647. entered into the
possession of the said Colleries at Harraton, and converted the Profits to his
own use, for which wrong done both to the State and the said Wray, he the said
Wray complained to the Committee at Durham in the year 1649. and the Committee
thereupon ordered, upon full hearing of both parties, That the said Colleries
should be again taken into the possession of the State, and employed for the
use of the Commonwealth according to the first Sequestration, and so it now
remains: And the said Thomas Wray further declares, That Sir Arthur Haslerig,
neither by himself, nor any other from him, did ever treat with the said Wray
for the buying or dealing in the said Collery, or paying any of the debts of
the said Wray, neither did the said Wray ever say to any man, that Sir Art.
Haslerig undertook to pay any of the said Wrays debts, all which he will be
ready to testify upon Oath, as cause may require. In witness whereof he has
hereunto set his hand and seal, the 9 of January, 1650.

Signed and sealed in the presence of Tho. Scot. Geo. Fenwick.


Artic. 11. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerig does comply with, and countenance
Colonel John Hilton, a Delinquent in Arms, both in the first and second War,
and assists the said Hilton to defraud the poor in sundry Parishes in
Bishopprick, of great Legacies given by the said Hiltons elder brother.

Whatsoever Hiltons brother gave to the several Parishes, concerns not Sir A.
H. but what estate Col. Hilton had in possession when he was a Delinquent and
sequestered, it concerned Sir A. H. as trusted for the State, not to suffer such
an estate upon pretense of the poors right to be taken out of the States hands
by any of the States Agents, but in a legal way, or by the Command of those
that were entrusted by the Parliament to take off Sequestrations; and for Col.
Hilton himself, he did never speak in private with him in all his life: And
surely had not this Musgrave more familiarity with a lying Spirit from beneath,
then Sir A. H. has had with this Hilton, he had never been so countenanced and
assisted in framing so many false and scandalous untruths, as he has been.

Artic. 12. That Sir Arthur Haslerig brought Colonel Hacker into the Country,
who contrary to an Act of Parliament, quarters his Soldiers, and others under
the name of Soldiers, who are none, upon the well-affected in Bishopric, and
would but pay what they pleased, and in some places nothing, but upon complaint
Colonel Hacker gave them no relief, but threatened them to have them before Sir
Arthur Haslerig for complaining; afterward Captain Thomas Lilburn brought the
matter in question before a Council of War at Whitehall, but by Sir Arthurs
power it could never be fully heard, which if it had, there would have appeared
many thousand pounds kept wrongfully from the Soldiers, besides the great
Oppression of Free Quarter; some Examinations whereof were taken by Mr Margets,
which Sir Arthur Haslerig keeps hitherto from reading; and the said Sir Arthur
sore threatened the said Captain, for appearing for the Soldiery and Country
against him and Col. Hacker.

That Sir A. H. did bring Colonel Hacker into that Country, he does acknowledge
and justify the same; if he or his Soldiers have done any thing unworthy, he
is very sufficient to answer it, and is ready to give an account thereof at any
time: and it is notoriously known, that Sir A. H. did exceedingly press to have
the Complaints against his Soldiers to come to hearing; and he is fully
persuaded, that the aspersions laid upon Col. Hacker are very false, and the
proceedings in the Country against him were unjust.

Artic. 13. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerig, to disable M. George Lilburn to
serve his Country, and the more to discourage the well-affected in Bishopric,
caused him to be put out of the Commission of Peace, Ministry, and Militia, and
much endevoreth to Sequester the said M. George Lilburn, who has commonly been
reputed the most active, stirring, and suffering man for the good of this
Nation, both before the Parliament began, and since, of any that has been, or
is in the Country.

Concerning Sir A. H. leaving Mr George Lilburn out of Commission, he conceives
that he had done nothing but his duty, and doubts not but he can give
satisfaction to any honest and well-affected man to this present Government in
what he has done; and for his endeavors to Sequester the said George Lilburn,
it is notoriously known, that he was accused at the Committee, long before Sir
A. H. came into the Country, upon these three ensuing Articles.

First, That he had signed Warrants with his own Hand and Seal, with Sir
William Carnaby, Sir Tho: Riddal, and Sir Tho: Liddal, for carrying Arms and
Ammunition which came out of Holland into Newcastle, and were sent unto the
late King after he had set up his Standard, which were used against the
Parliaments Forces at Edghil Battle, two of which Warrants were produced.

Secondly, That he gave the late Kings Oath to several persons in the County of
Durham, when the Earl of Newcastle had the whole power of the County.

Thirdly, That he compelled his servant Thomas Chilton to serve in Col. Hiltons
Regiment against the Parliament, which Regiment being broken by the Parliament
Forces at Marston Moor, the said Chilton returned to his said Master George
Lilburns House.

Artic. 14. That Sir Arthur Haslerig has displaced all the well-affected men
in Bishopric, that were of the Committee for Sequestrations there, and put in
their stead one Thomas Haslerig his Kinsman, and a stranger; and does continue
one Colonel Francis Wren, who in the Head of his Regiment, upon his first march
into Scotland, was digracefully and justly cashiered, by the now Lord General
Cromwell, for plundering, and other gross and foul Misdemeanors; and one Thomas
Dalaval, an arch Malignant, and disaffected to the present Government, who
lived in the Enemies quarters all the time the Earl of Newcastle had his Forces.

It is well if those that were displaced appear well-affected to the Public,
and faithful to their Trust; surely that was no cause of their ejection: if
unfaithfulness was not their sin, it will never be their sorrow: as for Col.
Wren, he has ever been faithful to the Parliament, and in Arms for them from
the very beginning, and did ascend unto his Colonelship by degrees; and when
his Regiment went into Scotland after Hamiltons defeat, so soon as they came
into Scotland, they did conceive they might have plundered in Scotland as the
Scots had done in England immediately before, as supposing themselves legal
Executioners (and that without Commission) of the Law of Taliation, and that
they might act the Scotch-men in their own Countries, and thereupon they were
very unruly; the Lord General being very much offended thereat, desired the
Colonel to return back into his Country, but he was not cashiered, as is here
falsely asserted. As for Mr Haslerig, he has a very good Estate in the County
of Durham, and is very well known to be an able and well-affected man, and very
fit for the employment, and so is Mr Tho: Dalaval, and Sir A. believes Musgrave
can never prove him an arch Malignant, only his work is to slander, and he
loves to be doing.

Artic. 15. That the said George Lilburn, being Surveyor of the Bishops Lands
in Bishopric with one Edward Colson, which said Colson joined with one
Saunders, and counterfeited M. Duncalss hand without his privity, for the
abatement of a thousand and odd pounds, merely to cozen the State thereof,
which cheat and cozenage the said George Lilburn discovered. But the said Sir
Arthur Haslerig much labored and solicited the said George Lilburn to conceal
the said cheat and forgery of the said Colson, and though the said Colson be a
man disaffected to the present Government, and married to a Papist, yet does
the said Sir Arthur Haslerig much countenance the said Colson, and made him a
Commissioner for the Ministry, and his Court-Keeper.

This has been discovered and published in print by the said George Lilburn
about two years since, and then also answered by the said Saunders and Mr
Colson: and why did not Mr Lilburn then print Sir A. Haslerigs desire for his
concealment of that cheat and forgery? surely there was never such intimacy
between Sir A. H. and Mr Geo: Lilburn, as that Sir A. H. should commit such a
base secret unto him, and he abhors the practice of such baseness, he could
never Musgrave it after that manner; and as for Sir A. putting in Mr Colson to
keep his Courts, it is well known that he was appointed to keep those Courts by
the Committee when they were under Sequestration, before Sir A. H. bought the
Manors; that Colson is a Commissioner for the Ministry, it may be numbered
among the rest of Musgraves, it is utterly false.

Artic. 16. That Your Petitioner has been much solicited by the well-affected
in his Country, to present their Grievances and Oppression, and crave Relief in
their behalf, as appears by their Letters, Copies whereof are hereunto annexed.

Whereas this proud Boaster glories, that the well-affected in his Country did
become so many Sollicitors unto him, that he would be pleased to be their
Sollicitor-General to present their Grievances and Oppressions, etc. and in the
Title Page of his Book takes in the Northern bordering Counties, I thought fit
to let you see, how the County of Northumberland do throw the falsehood of it in
his face, as appears by this ensuing Letter from the grand Jury of that County,
occasioned by the sight of this scandalous Pamphlet, and sent up Post unto the
Council of State.

Right Honorable, We the Grand Jury for the County of Northumberland, at the
now Sessions of the Peace, having seen a Book published by one John Musgrave,
who therein pretends the great and heavy Pressures and Grievances the
well-affected of the Northern bordering Counties lie under, by Sir Arthur
Haslerigs Misgovernment, and placing in Authority men disaffected to the
present Government, and having perused the Book, and finding our selves therein
much concerned, as being the most Northern bordering County to Scotland, we
presume humbly to acquaint Your Lordships, That as the Author of the Book is
altogether unknown to us, so also all his Relations, Complaints, and Petitions,
without our consent. And we cannot but wonder that any man durst assume so much
boldness, as to present to this Honorable Council, in the name of the
well-affected in the four Northern Counties, such false and scandalous things.

We shall not trouble your Lordships with the particulars in his Book, few of
them concerning our County; but having diligently perused the Book, we find it
chiefly endeavors to make the world believe that Sir Arthur Haslerig is a
Countenancer of Delinquents, a Friend to the Scots, and an Enemy to honest men,
and the present Government: We hope we need not say any thing to wipe off those
seeming stains; Sir Arthur is well known to the Parliament, and his actions
have sufficiently testified his affections and faithfulness to the Public
Interest, and good of this Nation; yet we being his neighbors, and having seen
his just and equal dealings, and being partakers of exceeding much good by him,
cannot hold our peace: and we dare say, if all the four Counties may have leave
to speak their own words, they would tell your Lordships more then we can say
on his behalf. It is strange to us that Sir Arthur should be counted a Friend
to Delinquents; surely he is not so in these parts: We very well remember, that
long before the Parliament made an Act to restrain Papists and Delinquents, Sir
Arthur Haslerig caused those that had been in Arms against the Parliament in
our County, especially the Gentlemen, and those that had been Officers, to be
apprehended, and those that were active and dangerous he continued under strict
bond, not to go from their own houses, and others about a mile from home, none
above five; and none of them to keep Arms in their houses, nor to speak or do
any thing against the Authority of the Parliament; and diverse desperate men he
kept prisoners in Newcastle; and we suppose he took the same course in other
Counties: and for his being an Enemy to honest men, we must needs tell your
Lordships, those that fear the Lord bless God for him, and the mercies they
enjoy by him.

Those that love the Parliament amongst us, will acknowledge his care and
tenderness of them, and his unwearyed Endevors to preserve them, and the
Interest of the Parliament: and all the poor people will confess the happiness
and benefit they have received by his means; they are exceeding sensible of the
Miseries and Oppressions they long groaned under, and of the Ease and Freedom
they are now partakers of. And for those Gentlemen now entrusted by the
Parliament with the Power of this County, we know not how, nor by whom, they
were placed in Authority, whether by recommendation of Sir Arthur Haslerig, or
others; but we are sure they are those that have been most active in promoting
the Parliaments Interest, and have kept firm through all changes to the service
of their Country; and their righteous dealings in their Trust have made their
Names famous among the people; and we hope they are not afraid to give an
account of themselves when Authority shall require it: And for Sir Arthur
Haslerigs being a Friend to the Scots Faction, let his activity, care, and
industry, to raise men against them, speak for him: and after our Army was gone
into Scotland, his pains and labor to furnish them with Provisions and
Supplies, without which they had been forced to retreat, as we have heard.

My Lord, We could renumerate our late last Grievances, and our present
Mercies, and instance in many particulars, what benefits we have reaped by Sir
Arthur Haslerig, and those in Authority amongst us, but it would too much
trouble your Lordship; only we make bold to say, we exceedingly wonder, that
such scandalous Complaints should be suffered to pass in print, which though
they receive not much credit in our days, yet may lay a stain upon the
posterity of those, whose Names are precious, and deserve to be had in
perpetual remembrance. We doubt not of Your Lordships Justice in acquitting the
Just. We are, my Lord,

Your Lordships most faithful and humble Servants, Richard Hearon Robert
Pearson John Midford Rich: Dawson Thomas Pie William Lawson Thomas Watson
George Marshal Henry Lawson Robert Dalton Thomas Megison Cuthbert Fenwick John
Shafto Thomas Fenwick To: Megison George Hoslop George Wharton.

Morpeth in Northumberland, 16 January, 1650.
Arric. 17. That Your Petitioner has lately discovered sundry concealed and
sequestered Delinquents of great Estates, which will bring in to the State ten
thousand pounds and more, if the Commissioners for Sequestration made by Sir
Arthur Haslerig were honest and faithful men; but in regard most of the said
Commisioners are Delinquents, and Sequestrable themselves, and all of them
disaffected to the present Government, they do what in them lies to hinder Your
Petitioner in the prosecution thereof.

Whereas this Musgrave boasts of his discovery of Delinquents Estates, to the
value of 10000 l. if the Commissioners made by Sir A. H. had been honest and
faithful, the truth is, this Musgrave came with Mr Can to Sir A. H. his
Chamber, the last time he was in Town, which was about April last, and gave the
like Information, whereupon Sir A. H. conceiving, that if Musgrave had power he
would be the better enabled unto a through discovery, and bringing in unto the
State those great sums of Money, thought fit to move the Commissioners for
Compounding to make him one of their Commissioners for Sequestration for
Cumberland, which accordingly they did; and Sir A. confesses that he was
exceedingly mistaken in Mr Musgrave; and if there was any dishonest and
unfaithful, that he put in, or was an occasion of being put into Commission, it
was this Musgrave: And Sir A. does acknowledge, that he never suffered so much
disgrace by preferring any man to any place of Trust, as he has received by
him; for the Commissioners of Goldsmiths-Hall have most justly turned him out
of Commissions, for his corrupt and wicked actings; and that you may see a true
character of this John Musgrave, his great Zeal for this Commonwealth, and
against Papists-Delinquents, and who is the truer Friend unto Papists and
Malignants, and more faithful to their Trusts, Sir A. H. or this John Musgrave,
read this ensuing Letter from his Fellow Commissioners of that County.

For the Worshipful Tho: Craister, Esquire Major of the City of Carlisle, haste,
haste, in Newcastle.
SIR, About the 15 day of October, Mr Clement Skeleton brought in an Order from
the Commissioners for Compounding to the Commissioners for Sequestrations in
Cumberland, to examine the validity of a Deed produced to them, touching the
clearing of Andrew Huddleston's Estate, a Papist in Arms, worth 120 l. per
annum: The said Mr Skeleton, bringing the said Order before us, and the said
Deed, was demanded, wherefore he did not seek his Interest in that Estate
before that time, the same being under Sequestration for four or five years:
The said Mr Skeleton replied, He could never get a man for his purpose, until he
met with Mr John Musgrave: and being asked, How the said Order was got, He
answered, Mr Musgrave knew better then himself; whereupon Mr Musgrave was
called, and at his coming in, said, It Is true, he had 10 l. to solicit that
business: It being replied, He was not sent for to know what he had for so
doing, but what the Commissioners for Compounding said to the matter in
dispute, and what he thought of it himself; To the first he answered, That Mr
Winslow did engage to send the said Order; and that he conceived, if we could
not prove the said Skeleton to have made away the Estate to the said Huddleston,
the Deed was valid, and so it did behove us to certify: whereupon he withdrew.
The said Mr Skeleton being further asked, When he had the aforesaid Estate in
possession, and what Rent he had received of the said Mr Huddleston, He
thereupon was silent; whereupon we told the said Mr Skeleton, That if any man
went about to conceal a Delinquents Estate, that same Act made him liable to
Sequestration; and further, we produced before him the late Committee Book,
wherein it did appear the said Mr Skeleton had farmed the said Estate of the
late Committee, in the year 1647, and paid the Rent due for the same, without
claiming any Interest therein: whereupon the said Mr Skeleton withdrew, and
never since appeared to claim any Title therein: But since, the said Mr Andrew
Huddleston, paying in his Rent due for the same, confessed, that he had given
to Mr John Musgrave himself 10 l. and sent him up to London 5 l. more: and
about the day aforesaid, Mr Musgrave being asked, Why he would take 10 l. for
soliciting a business of that nature against the State and his Conscience, at
the very time when he was Commissioner for Sequestrations for the State,
contrary to his Trust and Oath, which he either had, or should have taken; He
replied, He was a Solicitor, as well as a Commissioner, and would not forego
his Soliciting for being a Commissioner.

It is to be noted, That about the 27 of April, 1650. the said Deed was
produced before Mr Craister, Tho: Langhorn, and Mr Musgrave, then Commissioners
for Sequestration: The said Commissioners returned the Deed with this Answer,
That it was to be cleared above; whereupon the said Mr Musgrave by his
expressions seemed to undertake that business, as it appears he did; and also
at that time spoke in other Delinquents behalf so much, as gave occasion to his
Fellow-Commissioners to have some Jealousies of his actings; and presently
after the said Tho: Langhorn saw the said Mr Musgrave receive a sum of Money
from the said Mr Huddleston, and the said Mr Musgrave went presently after to
London, and stayed there above three months, which caused Mr Craister and Tho:
Langhorn to desire the Commissioners for compounding, either to join with them
such as would act faithfully and fully for the Public, or else excuse them
from the service, the affairs of Sequestrations speedily requiring diligence
and action; upon which desire of theirs the said Musgrave was outed, and others
put in, before the said Mr Skeltons Order was examined: but Mr Musgrave took
his discharge so ill, that he did vehemently threaten that the said Tho:
Langhorn, and others, should have Lex Talionis; and further, that Sir Arthur
Haslerig, to stop his mouth, had made him a Commissioner, but now being outed,
his mouth was open: To which one replied, It seems a great place will stop your
mouth.

Also at that time he was outed of being Steward of the honor of Penrith: and
the said Mr Musgrave being poor, his Estate not being possible to be made
worse, we do verily believe put him upon printing his Book: notwithstanding, we
desire to forgive him, and the Lord to give him Repentance, which is all we can
offer to you at this time: The truth of what is said shall be sufficiently by
our selves and others proved. We desire you to finish that Letter to the
Commissioners above, whereof you took Instructions at Carlisle, with the tender
of our Service to all the honorable persons with you. We remain,

Your Friends and Servants, Tho: Langhorn Tho: Sewell.

Pearith, 6 Januar: 1650.

Thus have you the several Articles exhibited by this Northern Article-Maker
against Sir A. H. with particular Answers thereunto, and that you have complete
satisfaction touching Sir A. his innocence in respect unto them all, is my
perfect presumption: I had almost said, that a doubt herein (all things
considered) renders the doubtful, not so much a man, as a Musgrave.

And although it is beneath a man advanced but one degree, in ways of wisdom
and discretion, to waste his time in setting forth the vileness and baseness of
the principles and practices of so worthless a person, it being but actum
agere, he himself having been his own Limbner in this very Pamphlet which he
made against Sir A. H. where you may see, as in a glass, as many ill qualities,
as can likely crowd together in one man; yet if you can bear the savor, see him
anatomized in some few Instances.

First, Observe his covetousness, dishonesty, and (to speak it out) his plain
knavery in this Instance following, in a Certificate under the hand of a
Minister and an eyewitness thereof.

A Certificate from a Minister touching Mr Musgrave's base offering to compound
to desist prosecution of an honest man, by him accused for a certain sum of
Money.
About the beginning of February, 1648. Captain Crakanthorp and John Musgrave
procured an Order from the Committee for Complaints at Westminster, to summon
several Gentlemen within the County of Cumberland to appear before the said
Committee, to answer to a Charge laid against them by the said Captain
Crakanthorp and John Musgrave, who alleged, that they had sustained loss or
damage by those Gentlemen (being Justices of the Peace within the said County)
to the value of two thousand pounds and upwards; which Order the said Informers
showed to Captain Dowson and my self, then being at London. We friendly
demanded of them, What Injury they had received from William Brisco, Esquire now
High Sheriff of the said County, being one of those Gentlemen whom they
accused, and whom they had Order to summon: And finding, by their
unsatisfactory Answer, that a matter of money would pacify them, and prevent
this appearance, we acquainted Mr Edward Brisco, a Merchant in London, and
Brother to the said William Brisco, Esquire of their Intentions, so far as by their
discourse we could judge of them; Mr Edward Brisco was willing to promise a
considerable sum of money, though without his Brothers privity, hoping he might
thereby procure a discharge from the Complainers, and withal an engagement
under their hands to free his Brother from all future trouble, which
accordingly was effected, and the sum agreed upon, viz. 35 l. presented before
them, upon the sight and promise whereof, the Complainers engaged to acquit the
said William Brisco from all future troubles, assuring us that they would not
molest or accuse him directly or indirectly, by themselves or others, for any
injury or offense done, or pretended to have been done, by him, either in
particular against them, or IN GENERAL AGAINST THE STATE, OF WHICH THEY
PROTESTED THEY WERE ABLE, AND WOULD ACCVSE HIM, IF THEY RECEIVED NOT PRESENT
SATISFACTION. They on the other side required Bonds, besides the present
payment of the money, for assurance from the said Edward Brisco, Captain Dowson,
and my self, that we would not discover this their Act and Deed to any other,
least the report thereof should prejudice their proceedings against the rest of
the Gentlemen, of whom they hoped to receive like satisfaction: their
engagement for acquiting Mr Brisco, together with the money, which then lay upon
the Table in a bag, He the said Mr Edward Brisco immediately pocketed,
pretending that he desired to be advised by some Lawyers, whether this
Engagement of theirs was full and satisfactory, or not; and so leaving them
that had delivered their Engagement, and not received their money, he went home,
and that night showed the paper to Major Salloway, a Member of the House, who
assured him, that he would acquaint the House with it.

This I am willing to depose upon Oath, whenever I shall be called thereunto.

Jos: Nicholson, Minister of Gods Word at Thursby.

Mr Edward Brisco is now in the City, and ready to make Oath of what is
expressed in this Certificate.

Here follows the Release which this Musgrave writ with his own hand.

Whereas Mr Richard Crakanthorp and John Musgrave, Gentlemen, have exhibited
certain Complaints to the Parliament against William Brisco, Esquire as well for
certain wrongs done to us in particular, as also for public wrongs, or
dis-service to the Parliament, and their adherents, and have obtained Summons
against him; Now these presents are to satisfy all whom it may concern, That
Edward Brisco, Brother of the said William, has paid us thirty five pounds on
his Brothers behalf, for the wrongs done, in consideration whereof we do by
these presents promise, and covenant, to, and with, the said Edward Brisco,
that we shall not at any time hereafter prosecute the said William Brisco for
the causes aforesaid, or any other wrongs by the said William committed against
us, or other person or persons whatsoever.

He acknowledged this engagement and discharge to be his own handwriting
before the Commissioners at Goldsmiths-hall very lately.

Now judge Reader (if I may be a little pleasant with thee) whether here was not
a KNAVE and a KNAVECATCHER well met.

Take here another Instance, and that shall be of his Tyranny, cruelty, and
indeed Barbarism, set forth upon the best terms of concealment, and that by his
own hands, in an Apologetical Letter written to Col. Fitch, Governor of
Carlisle, who required an account of a Captain, and some Soldiers that were
assistant unto him in the execution thereof.

To his much honored Friend Colonel Fitch, Governor of Carlisle, these deliver.
SIR, This evening I received a Letter from Captain Place, wherein he
intimates, that he is commanded to bring two of his Soldiers before you to
Carlisle, upon my Father in Law Mr Vaux his complaint, that they took him forth
of his bed, and carried him a mile in his shirt, and that they took and
detained a Horse of his worth 10 l. the Captain was desirous that I should come
along with them to give account of the thing, so far as I knew, and the same
related to my Mother and me, which very willingly I would have done, if I had
not been constrained the Audite to morrow, by appointment from Mr Pollard, the
States Receiver, I (being the States Steward for the Honor of Penrith) might
neglect that Service, but to morrow night I shall be, God willing, with my
Brother Graham at Newbygin, and the next day at Newlathes, to hold the Leet for
my ancient Friend Captain Sikes, Purchaser of the Manor of John De Chapels,
whither if you send, upon notice I will wait on you, so be I may, according to
Law, be free from Arrests, which in that Corporation may causless be laid upon
me for vexation, as often heretofore has been done, I speak not this that I
know or fear any just cause, for I never concealed my self, and shall be ready
to appear gratis at Westminster to any action: in the mean time take a short
account of what I know there concerning; I doubt not but you have heard of the
difference betwixt me and Mr Vaux, and him and my Mother, and how, while the
late Kings party was Master of this County, wickedly he used her, and endeavored
to have starved her; for the Committee of this County ordered her 30 l. per
annum, till she could obtain relief in a legal way, which Order he never
observed, not to speak of his wilful contemning the present Authority, refusing
to answer any Process, or obey any Order therein, for which, at my Suit some
fourteen days since, he was proclaimed by the Sheriff, and upon an Order under
seal out of the High Court of Chancery for 20 l. 250 l. Arrearages, and forty
pounds per annum, upon an Attachment by a special Warrant from the Sheriff of
this County, to me and Thomas Graves and others directed, he was arrested: The
manner was thus, before any Soldier was quartered with my Mother, we went to
Kelbarrow, and his chamber door being open, and he in bed, we peaceably
entered, and desired him to rise, which he refused to do; then I told him, he
was a Prisoner; whose Prisoner (quoth he?) I said, my prisoner, wishing him to
rise and put on his clothes; I showed him the Warrant under seal, and read it
unto him; but he said, It was a counterfeit Warrant, and he would not obey it,
and if we had him, we should take him naked; so finding him obstinate, we took
him out of his bed, and brought him into the Hall, and set him in a chair,
wishing him to put on his dublet, which Thomas Grave brought out of the
chamber, but he would not, fearfully cursing me, and my Mother: I offered to
fetch his breeches, but he cried out, I went to rob him; so I forbear, wishing
his man there present to fetch his clothes, but he commanded the contrary: I
offered him, if he would give security to appear and answer the Court, I would
accept it; or if he would go to Mr Sandersons, or any other Friend, I would
carry him thither, desiring him still to put on his clothes, which after long
refusal, fearing his Tenants coming in to rescue him, as sometimes they had
done, we HORSED HIM, and cast a cloak about him even per force, and carried him
to Laths, not half a mile from his own house, where he was taken, and with much
entreaty got him to go to bed, he still refusing to put on clothes, which the
good-wife of the house brought him; and after Henry Dacre came to him, and
brought his clothes, he caused them to be sent away: I offered Dacres to accept
bond for his appearance without going further, but Dacres went to the
Undersheriff and brought a discharge, a copy whereof I send you. That night
late I went to Catterben to see how things were with my Mother, where I found
these two Soldiers quartered, as they said, by Orders; they were much
discontented with Diet and Lodging, wanting indeed all fit accommodation,
having neither fire, victuals, or bedding for them; some words passed betwixt
them and me: I told them, my Mother was a forsaken woman, had nothing but that
great empty house, her Husband not allowing her common necessaries, and
contempting all Orders made for her, desired them to go to him, and quarter
there, or cause him to bring in provision, and she would make it ready, and if
that would not serve, they must bring it with them, for they could not have it
where it was not: That night they laid upon hay with such coverings as she had,
dis-furnishing her self, and supped with Big-pottage, Fare coarse enough. The
next day I showed them Mr Vaux his man in the field, but he would not come near
us, though none intended him harm; the Soldiers finding the man so refractory,
horsed after him, and a while after brought the Horse, dear of six pounds,
being lame, into the Courting, which my Mother took from the Soldiers, and
which she sent away to be sold without the privity or consent of the Soldiers:
what she has done, she will maintain and justify, and when that money is
spent, as most of it be, she must fetch more from him; for four years she had
not any thing from him, whereby she contracted great debts, and if God had not
enabled me to travel for her, he had starved her long ere this; perhaps ere
long you may have a larger view of all his doings in print. Yesterday after I
came from keeping the Leet at Feverham for the State, I find two Soldiers more
quartered with my Mother; this morning I sent to the Constables who laid them
upon her, wishing them either to provide for them, or take them away; but they
said they durst not do any thing without Mr Vaux consent: Mr Vaux has
complained to a Council of War at Penrith, but they find no cause to interpose
amongst us in these civil differences: This day I acquainted Major Rippon with
my Mothers burdens and condition, and he took off that charge for the present,
as by the enclosed you may perceive. I desire you for the future that my Mother
may not be troubled with billeting any Soldiers, till there be a setlement
betwixt her and her husband, for avoiding the like disturbances as these: I
have been larger, then I intended, but you have nothing but truth; for Mr Vaux
his uncivilities to us are not worthy mentioning. I take leave and rest,

Yours, wherein I may serve you, John Musgrave.
Catterben-hall, 8. 10 month, 1650.

Judge again Reader, did thou ever see such Tyranny upon the dunghill in all
thy life before? What (think thou) would it advance unto, was it upon the
Throne? Look back upon the instance, tell the aggravations thereof: A poor old
man of seventy years of age, in time of peace, having his chamber door broken
open, taken out of his bed, in the Winter season, in the North of England, put
naked upon a horse, for neither felony nor Treason, by his wives own son (this
Musgrave) and so carried away toward this wretched man's house, and compelled
(for fear the old man should dye, or rather of the reward of a murderer) to
hasten him into a Milners house by the way, and put him into bed, hardly able
to keep life in him, and all for so small a matter as is here specified: Would
not a man think that the great Tormentor of mankind was mewed up in this
Musgrave, and that a few more of such Musgraves would render those places where
they were, as if Hell was broke loose, and the Inhabitants thereof had dwelt
therein?

I shall forbear any further digging in his own dunghill; for the truth is, I
loath the work, and it shall be pure necessity that shall re-compel my pains of
this nature, if ever I attempt it the second time: no more now but only this;
he pretends himself the grand Advocate for the godly Ministers in the Northern
Counties; if you may judge of his Clergy Clients by one or two of them, whose
cause he solicited very lately before the Committee of Plundered Ministers, you
may quickly ghess what Ministers they are: and for thy satisfaction herein,
read the Orders of the said Committee after full hearing of both of their
Causes.

At the Committee for Plundered Ministers, February 14. 1650.
Upon the complaint of Mr John Musgrave on the behalf of Mr Morland, ejected
out of the Rectory of Graystock in the County of Cumberland by Sir Arthur
Haslerig, and other the Commissioners, for propagating the Gospel in the four
Northern Counties, the said Mr Morland appealing against the Judgment of the
said Commissioners, and being now present with the said Mr John Musgrave, his
Solicitor, to make good the said Appeal, It is admitted on both sides, That the
cause of the said Mr Morland his Ejectment out of the said Rectory, was for
insufficiency for the Ministry; and that he appearing upon examination before
the said Commissioners (as is in behalf of the said Commissioners affirmed) to
be grossly ignorant, and therefore unable and unfit for the work of the
Ministry, they have adjudged him a scandalous Minister: but the said Mr Morland
standing upon his Justification, submits himself to a re-examination before
this Committee; and being now re-examined before this Committee in presence of
his said Solicitor Mr John Musgrave, and all parties concerned, it appears to
this Committee upon the public Examination of the said Mr Morland, that he is
notoriously ignorant even of the very Fundamentals of Christian Religion; and
the said Mr Morland having nothing more to say for himself, nor his said
Solicitor Mr Musgrave on his behalf, this Committee do upon full hearing
adjudg, that the said Mr Morland is a very scandalous Minister in regard of his
said ignorance, and do approve of the said Commissioners ejecting him out of
the said Rectory for the same, and do therefore order, That the Orders of the
said Commissioners for his said Ejectment shall stand, and the same are hereby
confirmed, and that the said Appeal be, and the same is, hereby dismissed.

Gilbert Millington.

At the Committee for Plundered Ministers, February 14. 1650.
Upon the complaint of Mr John Musgrave on the behalf of Mr Lampit against Sir
Arthur Haslerig, and the rest of the Commissioners for propagating the Gospel
in the four Northern Counties, the said Mr Lampit appealing against the
Judgment of the said Commissioners for removing him out of the Rectory of
Aiction in the County of Cumberland, and being now present with the said Mr
John Musgrave his Solicitor to make good the said Appeal; It appears upon
full hearing of what the said Mr Lampit and Mr Musgrave could say, that Mr
Lampit was not ejected out of the said Rectory by the said Commissioners, for
that the said Mr Lampit by his own showing and confession acknowledged that he
had no other title unto the said Church, but the Election and entertainment of
some of the said Parish thereunto, they having no Authority at all to present;
and that the said Commissioners taking notice of the vacancy of the said place
(the former Incumbent being lately dead) did, according to the Authority vested
in them by the Parliament, settle Mr Nichols, Minister of the said Church, an
able and painful Preacher, who is freely received and entertained by the said
Parish, and the pretended choice of the said Mr Lampit by them the said
Parishoners wholly retracted. Now therefore in regard the said Mr Lampit
claims only by Intrusion, as aforesaid, without any right, and the said
Commissioners having found it so before them, and thereupon otherwise disposed
of the said living according to Law: The said Mr Lampit and Mr Musgrave having
nothing more to say, this Committee finding that the said Mr Lampit or Mr
Musgrave had not the least just cause of complaint against the said Sir Arthur
Haslerig and Commissioners for putting the said Mr Lampit out of the said
Rectory of Aicton, do approve of the proceedings of the said Commissioners, and
confirm the Order by them made for disposing the said Rectory, and do dismiss
the said Appeal.

Gilbert Millington.

His POSTSCRIPT is as full of the same Spirit of Malice and Scandal as his
PRESCRIPT, belching out falsities and forgeries by thousands; affirming, That
Sir A. H. partly by oppression, but mostly by buying the Commonwealths Lands at
a far under-rate, has gotten an Estate worth 8 or 10 thousand pounds per
annum: A man would have thought he had spent his poison in the body of his
Pamphlet; but it seems he has a spring thereof in his bowels that can vent it
self without end: Sir Arthur is a man of Estate, Honor, and Conscience, and
therefore no probable friend to Levelling Principles; He has been a Purchaser
of Bishops Lands, and is not this a clear evidence of his dis-affection to the
Commonwealth, and a manifest Testimony of his Scottish Malignancy? All which he
has bought at a far under-value, the Surveyors returning the prizes as Sir
Arthur desired: What forsworn wretches were these Surveyors? what, all
Musgraves? not an honest man amongst them? Sir Arthurs man Pearson buys Lands
also: Who can endure to see such thriving? Is not this worthy of complaint to
the Council of State? Col: Fitch also wrongs the whole Country: This is most
apparent; for he would not suffer one of his Captains and Soldiers to abuse
Musgraves father in Law (as you lately read) but he calls them to account for
it: No man but Musgrave is sensible of his Countries misery under Sir A. H.
misgovernment, and his Malignant Justices, contrary to his Engagement to the
Council of State, all which is submitted to that Honorable Council, who has
declared it false and scandalous.

POSTSCRIPT.
JOhn Musgrave, one word of counsel (before we part) and then farewell: Let us
hear no more complaint of oppression from an Oppressor, nor of Tyranny from a
Tyrant; you know they are not always the honestest men that cry loudest Stop
Thief: If you love the Commonwealth, seek not to ruin her Common-worthies;
though you have quit the Scotch Interest, yet love your Scotch wife; you know
the meaning; there is more hope of a babe of grace of her, then of another: If
I should tell you of looseness in bonds, of liberty in prison, of a Fleet on the
dry ground, I presume you able to expound all these Aenigma's; if you cannot,
you may have an Interpreter, time enough.

Reader, It is very likely that thou had never been tempted to bestow thy
labor in perusing this Answer unto that inconsiderate, malicious, and indeed
self-confuting Pamphlet, written by Musgrave; for Sir A. H. inhibited the
publication hereof, resolving to let Shemei curse and rail, as presuming that
the Lord might send even a messenger of Satan to do him good, and that he would
have rebuked him in the hearts and consciences of all his Readers: But upon the
perusal of another Answer to the said Musgrave, printed at Newcastle, and sent
unto London, Sir A. H. being altogether ignorant thereof, and unconsulted
therein, and several things respecting matter of fact in Answer to Musgraves
Articles against Sir Arthur therein specified not so satisfying, it was thought
convenient to call out of its adjudged darkness, and to expose it unto the
public view.

Farewell.
FINIS.

