A Pair of SPECTACLES For this Purblinde NATION With which They may see the
ARMY and PARLIAMENT Like SIMEON and LEVI Brethren in Iniquity Walk hand in hand
together.

OR A PERSPECTIVE To take a view of the Army, and PARLIAMENTS Political
combination in betraying their Countries privileges.

By H. M. a true friend to this Nations Liberties.

Semper ego auditor tantum? nunquamne reponam.

LONDON: Printed in the year, 1659.

To the Mungrel new Athenian Republican Tyrants, or the pretended Parliament
(if it needs must be so called) at Westminster.
I Shall assume the boldness to speak a little unto you, (O you men of
Westminster) and I pray observe my words, if Providence shall please to bring
this my Paper unto your view. And first, let me desire of you not to be angry,
if I speak rather to profit then to please you, forbearing altogether those
false and clawing expressions which your Adorers use when they address
themselves to speak unto you: I dare not tell you of any humble tenders of my
small constant devotion to serve you in your way, for I am sure it is not the
way of Christ and God, nor can I acknowledge your spurious Good old Cause under
the pretense of Reformation and preservation of Church and Commonwealth; for I
know no such matter, but rather the direct contrary. This being premised, I do
now address my self unto you for the present in this manner. Tell us, O unhappy
men that have been the principal instruments of all our woes, and have given
life and motion to all our miseries.

1. With what impudence could you affirm that there was a necessity to dethrone
his late Highness, and to abolish the free choice and election of the people,
the Representatives: it has been observed that in all innovations and
rebellions (which ordinarily have their rise from pretenses of Religion or
reformation, or both,) the breach and neglect of Laws has been authorized by
that great Patroness of illegal actions Necessity. But let that great rule be
received, that no man can be necessitated to sin, our Divines generally damn an
officious lie, and the equity binds from any officious sin; it would soon cut
the nerves of the eighth Commandment, if necessities and urgencies, though
real, were propounded a sufficient excuse for stealing; but that (which you)
the Jesuitical powder-Traitors call necessity, is no more then necessity of
convenience, nor so much, except we interpret that convenience, may favor your
own ends, and so is convenient for your design; but you use necessity as the
old Philosophers did an occult quality, though to a different purpose; that was
their refuge for ignorance, this is your sanctuary for sin. It is a maxim that
you have out of Livy to maintain that, That war must needs be just that is
necessary, and those arms pious that are all our livelihood; I must confess it
was a thing very incongruous in the late interrupted Parliament, to desire that
those ungrateful men should leave their crutches, and to walk without them;
it is no less unnatural to invite these Gentlemen to quit their swords whose
lives and fortunes lean entirely upon them, and that this Juncto of Tyrants who
will admit of no rule to govern by, but their own wills; we know it was the
unhappy misery of Athens, when it suffered under the thirty Tyrants: You that
take to your selves the title of the Lords worthies, forsooth, but good names
do not always prove good men, titles without truth, serve but to enhance and
disexcuse damnation.

2. Tell me, you cursed Cannibals, was not his late Highness proclaimed as
Protector and Supreme Magistrate by the Commanders in chief of the Army, in the
greatest solemnity imaginable, first at the Exchange in London, Westminster,
and afterward through the three Nations, with the greatest testimonies of the
soldiers good will and liking, and of the peoples reception and entertainment
with a nemine contra dicente?

3. Have not the Officers and Soldiers of the Army afterward upon more
serious deliberation addressed themselves unto the Protector as a supreme
Magistrate, and so did further thereby oblige themselves, and by such a kind
of transaction subject themselves by way of the most solemn engagements unto
him as supreme Magistrate?

4. Did not our addle-brain'd Senators Fleetwood, Desborow, Lambert, cobling
Hewson, Cooper, thimbling Barkstead, Bury, and the rest of their Confederates,
swear to be true to him as Protector, and how hateful to God and men, yea, to
the very Heathen have such things been, Ezekiel. 17. 12, 13, 14, 15. speaking of
the faith which the Hebrew Kings had given to the Babilonian, Shall he prosper,
shall he escape that breaks the Covenant and be delivered, ver. 16, 18. As I
live says the Lord God, surely in the place where the King dwells that made
him King, whose oath he despised and whose Covenant he brake, even with him in
the midst of Babylon he shall die, seeing he despised the oath by breaking the
Covenant, and has done all these things, shall he not escape.

5. Tell us you Sear-soul'd men that will swear pro and con, tell me what an
oath is? is it not a Religious affirmation, a promise with Gods Seal, and
therefore it should concern Christians to be cautelous before swearing to swear
liquidly, and to observe conscionably, it is pity such slender evasions should
satisfy us as has been scorned by Heathen? sad experience tell us how that
you English Tigers, in propounding of oaths, requiring promises, and other
solemnities, have induced multitudes to bind themselves upon some secret,
loose and mental reservation, which you have framed to your selves as a salvo
in case of breach: But I see these Babylonian Sprats have advised more with
corrupt wit, then sound conscience: It Is an huge advantage that you (Delphick
Devils) have in this world that can easily say and swear to any thing, and yet
withal so palliate your falsifications and perjuries, as to hide them from the
connusance of most. I know conscionable Lenthal has already defended your
perjuries with this Axiom; that though you swore (says he) to a thing not
materially unlawful, if it impedes a moral good, it becomes void, and though
you have taken liberty to swear, yet in my judgment (says he) the person to
whom you swore was incapable of an oath; just as Cicero defends the breach of
an oath to a thief, from perjury; and Brutus to a Tyrant; as it is in Appion,
the Athenians esteem it an honest perjury to violate their faith with Tyrants.
I see it is not difficult for you to cast your desires into such soft glib
expressions, as will down with most of you; yea, with many that would
absolutely disavow the same thing in rough language. O Countrymen consider
whether this way wherein you have gone be not also contradictive to the law of
the land, and against common equity, to practice the taking away from any one
that which comes unto him by lawful inheritance, succession or just election?
whether you would not so judge it, if any should divest you of what was left
you by your parents? Indeed if men come to power and authority by fraud and
violence, as you our new Masters have done, and for yon to concur in oppressing
the supreme Magistrate, and in taking from him what belongs unto him, if
conscience be suffered to make report, it will be confessed to be the highest
injustice; for as to detract from the Standard which is the rule of measures,
is the greatest sin; so it is to detract from Carolus Rex, or Protector
Richard, who are the Standards of righteousness in this Kingdom; and for these
incarnate devils, to subject, dispose both King, Protector and People to their
own lawless Arbitrary Power and Government, which is but the product of a
rabble of vanished Libertinism, Quakers, monstrous Anabaptists, King-killers,
Covenant-breakers, Jesuits, Seminaries and Papists, old Gunpowder Traitors
contrived that Good old Cause, Treason beyond the Seas, and in private secret
Conventicles here, but now avowed in open general Councels of the Army, by
whose design it is and always has been to alter the whole frame of Monarchy
(both of Church and State) which is the best of Governments, Deuteronomy. 17. 14.
being that of God himself over the whole world, Psalm. 10. 16. and of Christ
himself in and over his Church, Psalm. 2. 6. O God brand these jesuitical,
popish, antichristian practices with the highest temporal punishment, eternal
torments and condemnation in this and another world.

6. Did the late Protector (for so it seems he must be called) ever give any
ground at all for you Gentlemen, to dethrone him and protest against him and
his Government. I could wish and many thousands more, the reasons might be
seen, for nothing has passed or bin observed by diligent observers, that might
render him unlovely or inacceptable to any person whatsoever: however if there
be any grounds or considerations that might induce the Army to such a grand
transaction as this: first to reject and slight him, and then to give reasons,
(if there be any) is to hang a man first, and to try him afterward, seeing
there can be no substantial grounds, as its presumed there none can be, even as
little as you may blame the Sun for running his course, so harmless has he
been: whether then there has been in any age more unfaithfulness, injustice,
greater covenant-breakers, persons so rebellious, men that have rendered the
blessed Gospel of Christ, and professors thereof, more uncomely, then this
adulterous generation has done, let the world judge; for indeed they have
already given their verdict in the case, which more is the pity.

That mammonistical Hypocrite, Hon. Vane, had the impudency to affirm to the
rest of his sociates, that they might without want of modesty and duty depose
him, and return to the discharge of their trust: is not this a transparent
figment! who trusted them, the people? but the people since have delivered
their trust elsewhere, for when his late Highness did send out Writs, the
people might have staid at home, there was none forced to choose* but freely
they have elected others, and if so be the free choice and election of the
people make a Parliament, and they are also free to choose, as often the
providence of God shall put opportunity into their hands, then its very
doubtful, whether this be any other thing then only a Parliament so called,
the people having freely declared otherwise: are these the only persons whom
God and the Law has trusted, and may they do what their own i^clination and
fury leads them to? can it be presumed that they were trusted with a power to
destroy and dissolve our Ancient settled Government by Kings, Lords, and
Commons, to a sneaking Oligarchial Tyranny, under the bare name of a bastard
Good old Cause, which is as changable as the addle heads that contrive it, and
to make themselves perpetual Dictators over the Protector and his People? what
do you intend that the Law it self shall be subject to your votes, and that
whatsoever you say or do should be lawful, because you declare it so? Seeing
that these hellish designs and actings of a malignant party of this Kingdom,
working to regard the progress, or subvert the being of the true Protestants,
and therein to bereave us of all our hopes of reformation, or future peace or
happiness to this Church and Kingdom; It shall be a piece of my daly
oraizons, that God would brand these Iesuitical Doctrins with the marks of
perpetual scorn and Indignation.

7ly. Are not these our new State-mongers or this Parliament (if it needs must
be so called) like to infringe the peoples rights, and give less satisfaction
than one single person with a Parliament? for my reason is, this Parliament of
40. or 50. or there abouts, and 70 more Senators besides, have every one of
them a long train, there is never a one but is a file-leader, that is, has at
least 16. or 20. in a family, to be provided one way or other, and all hungry
as Hawks, ready to catch at any thing, and nothing will serve but the blood of
the people, for they must be fed with something; a reason it is against the
standing rules of reason, the professed principles of the Army, for any power
or Authority to have the Militia and the Command of the Peoples purses which
these Cormorants has, which is both destructive and pernicious.

Though the command of the peoples purses was never desired or practiced by a
single person, and was not the Government settled by Parliament, under one head?

To Execute the Laws of the Government so made by Parliament, more pleasing and
rational, than to have a body consisting of so many Knaves, Drunkards, and
Whore-masters, which is monster like.

I desire all Christian people to consider also the condition of this factious
Generation, that have done more disgrace and wrong to Chrifts Gospel, than ever
was offered since Christ's time: never did any in so short a space ascend to
that zenith of villainy, as they have done, or pretend more Godliness, with the
practice of so much wickedness. I confess they promise fair, like those
Galathians whom St. Paul writes unto, they begin in the Spirit, with the
mention of Sin and Mercy; they have the faces of men, but observe them well, we
shall find they have the teeth of Lions, and the tail of Scorpions: my
endeavors shall be on purpose to detect their wiles, that men may avoid them,
and not be hurt by them, for they have got above board in these times, and
style themselves in their scandalous Pamphlets, the Army of God, Gods only good
Children; but in very deed their works speak them not to be of God. La^my may
their name and title properly be. We have two grand Impostors amongst us
Rogers, and Can, who are very zealous in their scurrulous pasquils for that
whorish Old Cause, which is only to revive that Tragedy which Mr. Hocker
relates of the Anabaptist in Germany; Who talking of nothing but Faith, and the
true fear of God, and that riches and honor were vanity, at first upon the
greater opinion of their Humility, Zeal, and Devotion, procured much Reverence
and estimation with the people: After finding how many persons they had
ensnared with their Hypoc^isie, they began to propose to themselves to reform
both the Ecclesiastical and Civil Government of State; then because possibly
they might meet with some opposition, they secretly entered into a League of
Association; and shortly after (finding the power they had got with the
credulous people) enriched themselves with all kind of spoil, and pillage, and
justified it upon our Saviors promise, The Meek shall inherit the Earth; and
declared their title was the same which the Righteous Israelites had unto the
goods of the wicked Egyptians. This story is worth the reading at large, and
needs no application. For the avoiding of this shadow of Religion, I shall add
an Antidote: External holiness invites awful regards: there is no mask that
becomes Rebellion, Innovation, so well as Religion; nothing that so much
conceals deformity, and pretends beauty. It Is an excellent thing so to
dissimulate piety, that when we act strongly against it, in that very artick of
wickedness the people Saint us. Herod would fain worship, when he means to
worry. This is that which leads the world in a string, that hallows the most
Hellish enterprises: for the Common people (which are the (...)) never see
behind the Curtain, a handsome gloss is with them as good as the Text: ('It Is
the Ethick of these Hypocrites) Let us enjoy the temporal advantages of
Religion, and let others take the eternal; Let us use it for a cloak or a
crutch, and let others expect from it a Crown. The River Atheneus is my
emblem, whose upper waters were sweet and grateful, but toward the bottom
brackish; But let all sober Christians know, that this shell of Religion (which
our new Masters do so hotly pursue) though it may be of external conducement,
that there is nothing that Gods pure and undeluded eye looks on with more
abhorrency: we may possibly deceive men, but it is in vain to put Ironies upon
God. A counterfeit Religion, shall find a real Hell, and it is pity that such a
sacred thing should be violenced, and made subservient to rebellious irregular
designs.

As for you gentlemen, who have conspired with the wrath of God in the
stupefaction of your conscierc^s, though you may for a time struggle with those
inward checks, yet there will be a day (if not in this life) when that
Witness, that Judge, that Jury, will not be bribed.

God has fixed it in the Soul, as an internal Register, as an impartial Diary,
as the Censor of the affections, and the pedagogue of the passions, and you
that have by an inveterate wickedness conquered the oppositions which God
seated in your hearts to sin, may possibly consult well with your present
advantage and greatness, but not at all with his future comforts, for besides
the loss of that intimate pleasure which waits upon innocence. There is
another wile that these Gibeonites have to seduce multitudes, and is so
prevalent with most people; Their success in all enterpises, as their Demi-God
Rogers, the forge and bellows of sedition, Infernal Emisarie, styles in his
Pamphlet against Mr. Prynne, the blessed and successful Parliament. Seeing it
is so great a Plea with these men, I will first show, that success is no
argument of a good cause; and then, that the wickedest men have most used it.
Concerning the first, David in the 73 Psalm, describing the outward estate of
evil men, says, they were successful in their affairs; insomuch that the
people thereupon came in apace unto them; yea, so prosperous they were in their
way, that in a manner, he was non-plus'd at the matter. And Jeremy the Prophet
argues with God about the same thing, Jerem. 12. why it should be so, That they
who dealt very treacherously, should be so very happy; whose conditions also in
another place he describes more fully in these words, Jeremy 5 chapt. 26, 27.
Among my people are found wicked men, who lie in wait, and set traps and snares
to catch their brethren, their houses are full of deceit and wrong, yea, they
do (in their Justice and cruelty) surpass wicked men: they take upon them to
be Judges, and yet judge not the cause, no not so much as the cause of the
fatherless, or the right of the needy; and yet they prosper, are become great,
grown rich, waxen fat, and shine. Here was prosperity we see, here was
success, but no honesty, no goodness. In the 11. of Daniel, 36. certain vile
persons (so entitled) are prophesied of, who should do much mischief against
the holy people, whom they should kill and destroy, and speak blasphemous
things against the God of Gods; they should honor only the god of forces, i.
e. they should trust only in their Militia, or strength of weapons, for safety
and protection: (all these it seems, are the conditions of vile persons, and
should prosper for an appointed time, until the indignation be accomplished
(says the Text) which was determined to be done.) We know that Cain prevailed
against Abel, yet Abel was the better man, and offered the better sacrifice:
nay the Pharisees (we know) prevailed against Christ himself for a season, had
their wills of him, got him Crucified by the common vote and consent of the
people, even according to the desires of their own hearts. And from hence it
was believed by a great many, that Christ was even such a man as his enemies
reported him, a deceiver, and a malefactor: and that it was the Judgment of
God upon him for his sins. He was despised, rejected of men, Esaias 53. 4. Hence
it is that some of his Disciples themselves were so staggered at the matter,
that even they made a question, whether he were the man whom they took him to
be, because of that success which his enemies had against him. Indeed it is
the humor of men to pass sentence upon others, from a view of their outward
conditions; if they prosper, then they conclude them good, and beloved of God;
if not, then wicked presently. When the viper was seen hanging on St. Paul's
hand, he was judged a murderer immediately, and the worst of men in all the
Company. Does not Scripture throughout, and daily experience both, inform us,
that the best men are usually the most afflicted? and thus we see that to argue
from success is but a weak kind of arguing. But I shall proceed to the next
place, that the worst men have always been wont to plead this Argument; one or
two examples amongst many shall be alleged to this purpose. The Scripture tells
of Rabshaketh, when he moved the people of Jerusalem (as these men do us) to
make a general revolt from good Hezekiah, he pretended that God had set him on
work, and had said, Go up against this Land, and destroy it, and his main
argument was, his Masters extraordinary great success, Isay. 36. 10, 19. to
which purpose he reckoned up (as our Tyrants do) a great many Cities and
Castles which he had taken, as Hamah, and Arphad, Sepharvaim, and Ivah. And so
the Turks to this day argue against the Christians, that their Religion excells
ours, because they have prospered better, and prevailed more than we have done.
Indeed there is no Argument more popular than success, because the bulk of men
is not able to distinguish the permission of God from his approbation: and
although it be in it self fallacions and feeble, yet the misery of the
conquered denies them the opportunity to dispute it; for the opposition of the
sword will never be confuted by the bare fist of Logic. I wonder that any
would be so importunate to preach Laws and Moral reasons to these men with
swords by their sides; who are like those in Livy; That all Laws are engraven
on the hilt of a victorious sword, to whose Mandamus all other Statutes must
submit. But our new Masters by quoting the success of their undertakings,
besides the plausiblenesse and insinuating nature of the proposition it self,
have the advantage of power to make us believe them; nor is this bait
contemptible; many of parts and prudence, yea and of Religion, have been
staggered by it. The Heathen could say, happy Piracy is a thing of unhappy
presidency; fortunate sins may prove dangerous temptations; But for these men
to say that God does signally attest the actions of their persons, or the
Justice of their cause, by permitting it to prosper and taper up in the World,
is such a deceit, as deserves our serious abhorrency. And now (Reader) let us
mix our prayers, that God would for ever banish this cur^^d policy out of
Europe, and the whole Christian World; and Damn it down to Hell, from whence
originally it came: and let such as delight to abuse others, think of that
self-cousenage, with which in the interim they abuse themselves. God permitting
the Devil to revenge the Imposture. And whilst we are busy with politic
Stratagems, and tortious arms to invade the rights of others, let us all
consider, that this is not the violence which takes Heaven. It is manifest that
we are fallen into the dregs of time, we live in the rust of the Iron age, and
must accordingly expect to feel the dotages of a decrepit World: what is
become of truth, sincerity, charity, humility, those Antiqui mores, whether are
they gone? did they attend Astraea, and have left such degenerous successors,
as cruelty, pride, fraud, envy, oppression, etc? O God be thou pleased to
magnify thy power, and thy mercy in converting these men, bring them upon
their Knees, (good Lord) before thee and before the Nation, and persuade their
proud and Rebellious Spirits, to beg pardon for all their evils done, and to
this end let them feel that Hell which is in their own bosoms, let the blood
which they have shed cry, and the evils they have committed roar within them;
Let them seriously think of those Devouring flames, of those everlasting
burnings, upon the worm that never dies, and upon the fire that never shall be
quenched.

FINIS.

