NEWS FROM SOUTHAMPTON, OR The copy of a letter to Captain Thomas Harrison in
London from Mr. Peter Murford, Sergeant Major to Colonel Norton, DISCOVERING A
late Plot of the Cavaleering Hoptonians against the said town of Southampton:
But by the mercy of God (and the fidelity of the said Major) prevented.

Also herein is related the distressed condition of that County as it now
stands.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton in Pope's Head Alley. 1644.

The Discovery of a new plot against the Town of Southampton by the CAVALIERS.
SIR,
YOur Letter is come to my hands, which I take kindly from you: I should desire
to exchange lines oftener with you; I thank you for your news. I had Letters
this day from my Lord Admiral for the Maria Pinace to ride before this Town.
We are yet in safety (blessed be God) but daily braved by the enemy, yet
hitherto they have not dared to fasten upon this Town: And I have observed,
that they have never come before this place, or near it, but we have still
worsted them, we have always taken prisoners, Horses, Arms, wounded or slain
some of them. On Thursday last we took six men and horse, whereof one was a
Cornet. On Saturday we took two men, Horses and Arms, shot a Captain, who lies
languishing at Ramsey, and wounded three men more. The Lord be still our
defense and refuge, and give us thankful hearts for his preservation over us.
This poor County of Hampshire having had its share of blood and misery in this
sad tragedy of our Nation, that there is hardly left any thing for man or
beast therein.

I perceive you have received knowledge of a treacherous practice for the
delivery of this Town, but least you should be misinformed therein, I will
give you a brief account thereof. Some few days before Christide last, the
Lord Hopton marched with his Army from Winchester, toward Southampton, with a
purpose to face it, (as we were informed,) but he came not within two Miles
thereof, to out face it, but marched to Redbridge, (the way into the new
forest) break it down to hinder us of provision from thence after so horible
an Act, he faced about and marched to his old quarters again, without
attempting any further achievement.

The next day here arived a letter from one Mr. Jasper Cornelius some times an
A^turney of this Town, but run away before my coming hither for Malignancy)
directed to Mr R. Mason, a merchant of this town, intimating that this
Cornelius was the day before with the Lord Hopton before this Town, and was the
means of divertin^ the Lord Hoptons intent of attempting this place, and ^ells
Mr. Mason he had made choice of him to deliver an enclosed letter to me with
all secrecy, which I received (yet the said Cornelius was an unknown man to
me,) by his Letter he insinuates that then was a fit time for me to do his
Majesty good service, and that I was not the man I was formerly, meaning (as I
conceived) that the government of this Town was imposed upon my honored
friend Colo ell Norton (which I long sued to be eased thereof) and by it he
thought I was a discontented person, and so fit to be wrought upon; but he was
deceived, I being never better pleased then to be eased of so great a burden,
which I had born long enough, (though it pleased his Excellency to requite my
service with a more suitable command to my disposition, made me Sergeant Major
to Colonel Norton, which pleases me far better) after the receipt of this
letter, I instantly acquainted my Colonel and Master Major therewith, we all
agreed I should show a seeming complying the better to bottom their design,
and to find out what malignant party they had made in this town. I forthwith
gave him a copy of a character to explain his mind more fully. To which he
replied, That by the command of his superiors, he did in the name of his
Majesty and his country, and two Lords (which he named) offer me a thousand
pounds in money, a present employment of more value and honor then at present
I had, his Majesty's pardon under the great Seal, and his favor, if I would be
a means to reduce the town of Hampton to his Majesty; I returned a seeming
complying answer, and demanded the 1000 l. in hand, or the moity thereof, and
assurance given me for the residue, the employment named, and the pardon sent
me; this performed, he should soon see what I would say to it. In the interim
my Colonel acquainted my L. General and Sir Will. Waller, with the offer made
by Cornelius; wherein I continued the treaty to gain time, until Sir W. Waller
had finished his business at Arundel, and drawn his Army this way, and then to
have drawn the enemy hither in hope of gaining this place, whilst Sir William
might have falen behind them in this place of advantage, and so to have
deceived such treacherous corrupters.

I continued the Treaty until I had his Majesty's Sign Manual for a pardon
sent me, and afterward the pardon it self; but I could get no money, but
strong engagements of honor to perform with me when the work desired was
effected. I whiled out a months time with them to the exchange of eight
letters, Mr. Robert Mason being still the man they employed to bring their and
receive my letters, whom they had bound to secrecy by an oath, before I knew
thereof, who brought me the copy thereof, hoping to have gained me to the
like, saying he had no engagement all this time on me, neither by protestation
nor promise, to perform with them; and which I still delayed (which put the
projectors to a jealousy that I was not real to them) yet to draw them still
on, I framed some offers, in the nature of Articles, for my self and this
Town (to which the Lord Hopton subscribed, that upon his honor he would
perform them:) but I still pressed for the money, but could not obtain it,
they fearing I would Craford them as Poole did; yet Mr. Mason offered me to
become bound for it, which I accepted of: but before he would perform, on
Friday last was sennight he earnestly pressed me to declare my reality in the
design. I saw the man in a distracted ecstasy, by his over zealousnesse and
rashness for them, having no assurance of me, my bowels pitied him, his wife
and many children, told him plainly I never intended to be a villain and
traitor, to betray a trust committed to me, and the lives and goods of so many
innocent people to be made a prey to cruelty, and told him I have revealed it
from the beginning to my Colonel.

Then he begged I would conceal his name; I told him I could not, but in
campassion of his condition gave him leave to go to his house (being but three
houses from mine,) in which time I went forthwith to acquaint my Colonel with
what had happened between Mr. Mason and my self, we concluded instantly to
sieze his person, and causcd all the gates to be secured; but yet he escaped
from us and could not be found, although we searched carefully for him, since
we here he is at Winchester, and shall be preferred, and employed in matter of
trust. In all the time of our treaty, I could not discover that he had any
confederates of any Townsmen with him, but had undertaken it, to carry it
alone. But I was greived that I was conceived by the adverse part, to be a fit
Instrument for them. But now they have tried me, I am confident, they will
never do the like, but to revenge themselves on me: But I will to all the
world declare and maintain my faithfulness to my Country and cause I have
undertaken, and clear my unfeigned reputation.

Thus much I thought good to say unto you, that you may give a satisfactory
testimony of that design in my behalf, if you here it falsely reported. And I
shall be ready to requite you in vindicating of truth, and acknowledge my
self.

Southampton Feb. 5. 1643. Your real friend, Pet. Murford.

FINIS.

