The true State of the business of Glass of all kinds, as it now stands
both in the price of Glass and Materials, how sold these fifteen years last
past, and how formerly, The price of Materials as they are now bought, and
what has been formerly paid, with a report of the condition of all kinds of
Glasses.
Ordinary Drinking-Glasses -- FOr Beer, sold formerly for 7s, 4d. and never
under 6s. per dozen are now, and have been for 15. years past sold by me, for
4s. per dozen.

Ordinary Drinking-Glasses -- For Wine, formerly sold for 4s. per dozen, have
been, and are now constantly sold by me for 2s. 6d. per dozen.

Mortar-Glasses -- Formerly sold for 2s. per dozen, and are now sold by me, for
1s. 4d. per dozen.

The Materials for the making of these several kinds of Glasses formerly
bought by me for 20l. per Tun, and many times under, do now, and have for
diverse years past cost, 25. 26. 27. and 30l. per Tun.
Cristall Beer-Glasses -- FOrmerly brought from Venice have anciently been sold
for 20. and 24s. per dozen without Covers, and are now sold by my Merchant for
10s. per dozen, and 11s. of extraordinary fashions.

Cristall Wine-Glasses -- Formerly made and imported from Venice, were sold for
18s. per dozen, and are now sold by my Merchant for 7s and 8s. per dozen.

Cristall Beer-Glasses -- Made by me (which never were before in this Kingdom)
and of all fashions that are desired and bespoken, were heretofore sold for 18s
the dozen, and are now sold for 9s the dearest.

Cristall Wine-Glasses -- Made by me, were formerly sold for 16s. per dozen,
and are now sold for 5s 6d per dozen, and the dearest being of extraordinary
fashions for 7s per dozen.

Looking-Glasses and Spectacle -- Glass Plates are likewise made by me here in
England, being undertaken and perfected by me with great charge and hazard,
and the expense of twenty years time, which work I did the rather undergo in
that I understood, the State of Venice had restrained the transportation of
that Commodity rough and unpollished upon pain of confiscation, and other
heavy punishments, in respect the grinding, graving, pollishing, and foyling
thereof does employ great numbers of poor people, and afford them maintenance,
which benefit does hereby redound to the Natives of this Kingdom.

Window-Glasse -- Is made of English Materials, as Ashes, etc. And though the
price of Ashes, is of late years raised from 6. 7. and 8d. the Bushel to 9.
10. and 11d. the Bushel: And although the measure of this sort of Glass
heretofore was ever uncertain, And that the number of feet formerly contained
in each Case of Glass, did greatly differ, As sometimes the Case contained 120
feet, sometimes 140 feet, and never above 160 feet; Now each Case in the
measure is reduced to a certainty, always containing 180 feet, And the price
also certain at 22s. 6d. per Case, at the Furnace door, which containing as
before, amounts but to threehalfpence the foot at the most. All Window Glass
in this Kingdom is sold for the price aforesaid except a small quantity made
by me at Woolwich, which work I erected to prevent any scarsety of Glass that
might happen in the Winter time, And notwithstanding I ever sold the Glass
made there to my great loss and hinderance.

Green-Glasses -- Of all sorts are made likewise of English Materials, which
works after I had sustained great loss, and undergone great vexation* (in the
disposing of them) I let to a Gentleman of known honesty, and of experience in
Glass, and a man every way responseable for any error that can be laid to his
Charge, And though I know his Materials, and Fuel are dearer then in former
times, yet I did never hear of any complaint of his carriage, nor of any price
raised by him of his Glass either in the City or Country, But that he sold
his Glass at the rates which were many years since set down by the agreement
of all the Glasse-sellers, and Glasse-makers.

THe whole Manufacture of Glass with Sea-coale, and Pit-coale has been
perfected and preserved in this Kingdom by me, with the expense of above
30000l. of my Fortune, whereby the great consumption of Timber and Wood is
prevented, Many thousands of the Natives of this Realm are employed and
maintained, who (if liberty of importation of foreign Glass should be
permitted) must of necessity be deprived of their means of livelihood, And many
others of the Natives are brought up and instructed in the Mystery of
Glasse-making, besides the great sums of money paid for wages in the several
branches of the Manufacture, are retained in the Kingdom. There are also many
other great benefits that accrue to the Commonwealth from these branches of
His Majesty's grants to me, All which particulars, received a full and
deliberate hearing, and examination in the Parliament held in Anno 21o. Jacobi
Regis. And His Majesty's said grant was then privileged by a special Proviso
in the Act of Parliament then made, with the general approbation of both
Houses, As by the said Act may appear.

From the consideration of all which reasons I have taken humble boldness to
tender my suite by way of Petition for a speedy hearing and examination of the
Premises which I beseech you, to further, when it shall be presented.


