THE CONFESSION OF Mr. HUMPHREY MARSTON,

And his Speech at the place of Execution in Aldersgate Street on Monday last,
being the 21 of August, 1654.

With a Narrative of the whole Transactions of the business, in relation to his
Trial, Charge, Conviction, and Condemnation.

The Name of him who betrayed him: And the manner how he disputed Canon house
near Windsor, with a great party of horse before he was taken.

Aug. 21 London, Printed for G. Horton, 1654.

An exact Relation of the Life and Death of Mr. Marston, who received the fatal
sentence at the Sessions in the Old Bayley, to be hanged by the neck til he was
dead, in Aldersgate street, on Monday the 21 of this instant August: Together
with his speech at the place of execution.
THere is a Maxim, That the Law delights in certainty, and it does abandon
incertainty, as the Mother of all debate and confusion; then which, there is
nothing more odious in Law; for God himself rules by Law, Eternal, Moral, and
Natural; they have certainty in them, and he rules not otherwise, or contrary
to them. And can it be imagined, that there is a Mortal living, that will think
it a diminution to his honor, if men choose the Law for their Sanctuary, rather
then their changeable Affections, and mutable Will and Pleasure?

But we shall not insist upon any thing by way of Circumstance; but rather
interwove his life and conversation, with his present sufferings, to wit, He
was a Gentleman of known and faithful integrity to the Weal-publike of this
Nation: Nothing too dear did he prize, to purchase his Countries liberty from
tyranny and slavery: No means was left unassayed for the recovering of the
Freeborn people of England from the Norman Yoke; And nothing did he esteem, or
hold in competition less, than the exposing of his life and fortunes, for the
regaining of his Native Countries Liberties. For, as he was a cordial and
precious Christian, free from the wicked and abominable Vices of swearing,
drinking, defrauding, etc. so was he soldier of a most magnanimous and
puissant spirit, never dreading the face of the (...) Enemy that ever durst
attempt a Charge ^t him; but always laying of himself forth (...) the
Common-cause of public freedom. And whereas some are pleased to give out, that
he was apprehended for Clipping and Coining, it appears evident to the
contrary, by the Sentence of Death pronounced against him at the Sessions in
the Old-bayley, where no such Bill of Indictment was exhibited against him; nor
no process in Law, but only upon the Account of killing the two Messengers in
Aldersgate Street; which he did in his own defense; as appears by the
subsequent matter in his speech following. And as it may seem strange to many,
how he came now to be apprehended, the Work being done about 4 years ago: The
truth on it is, it was revived and discovered by one Barefoot, who had incurred
the displeasure of Authority, and should (probably) have dyed for it; but only
a pardon was granted upon the revealing of this Gentleman: In pursuance
whereof, a pa ty of horse were sent to Canon house to apprehend him, (where
many blows past between them) and from thence brought up to Newgate, most amen
ably shot and mortified; and at the Sessions tried, convicted, and condemned,
to be hanged in Aldersgate Street, where he made this ensuing Speech.

The Speech.
Gentlemen,
I Am this day brough hither to my place of marriage, where (within the space
of few minutes) I doubt not but I shall be espoused and wedded to my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and there to sing Hallelujah with the Saints in Heaven,
who languish and mourn at the selfish and by-ends of the Creature here on
earth; for indeed Injustice discontents a people, and Discontents are the
ordinary foundations that Changes are laid upon: And as for my part, prosperity
I wish to this Commonwealth, and freely forgive all those who have been
Instrumental to make me an Actor of so strange a Tragidy, and Theater of Death;
However, I doubt not, but providence will enable, support, and assist me, to
act my part both as a Soldier and a Christian; for why should I fear that,
which I have often looked in the face: No Gentlemen (...) dread not, neither do
I fear what man can (...) ^nst me: But some there are who thirst after my
blood, and much good may it do them, the quantity will not be great. But alas!
to have it taken from me upon the score of Murder, I do here protest my
innocence; and that what I did upon that account, was in my own defense; as
appears thus Gentlemen: Upon the coming of those three parties to me, whom I
knew not, I demanded what they were, and from whence they came; but they denied
me a Resolve, and one of them on a sudden steps to me, and sets his pistol to
my breast, saying that I was his prisoner, and must go before the Council of
State: whereupon I lifted up my harm, mounted his pistol, and it immediately
fired over my should: which I perceiving forced my passage from them all; and
so escaped; But as for the committing of mulder wilfully and violently, it was
a thing I ever detested; for I do profess unto you Gentlemen, here in the
presence of Almighty God, that I never wronged man woman, or child, of a penny
in all my days; I never was guilty of the blood of any man, but in the public
Cause of this Nation, which was to preserve and maintain the fundamental Law of
the Land, the glory of the Gospel (...) Freedoms of the people; The which, with
hearts imploring, and hands listed up to the most high God, both I, and many
thousands in the Army, have vowed to maintain and keep inviolably; the Lord
forgive them that have acted to the contrary. And so farewell Gentlemen all.

Having ended his speech, he took his leave of his friends, and with a smiling
countenance embraced the Rope, being not in the least dauted or terrified at
Death; but cheerfully undergoing this great and transitory Change from a Guard
of Halberts, to a Guard of Angels.

And from this place of Execution, he was carried to the three Horse-shooes in
Goswel street; and from thence on Tuesday the 22 instant, to the new Church
yard of Bethel, being accompanied by diverse friends, to attend the Corpse.

THE END.

