READ AND CONSIDAR




THE PAPISTS DESIGN AGAINST THE PARLIAMENT and City of LONDON discovered, By
a Letter found near White Hall, sent from L. M. a Jesuit, to R. C. a Popish
Lord.

Which caused the Train Bands to guard and conduct the Parliament from London
to Westminster, Showing the great treachery of many Popish Recusants, who
intended to seize upon the Crty of London, and how their plot was disanulled.

And describing the cause of the City rising in Arms to defend themselves
from the Conspiracy of the Papists.

As also, With the cause of the Kings, Queens, and Princes departure to
Hampton Court, and of the great Guard that went with them, for fear any danger
should ensue.

Printed for H. F. in the year 1642.

The Papists desygnes against the Parliament and City of London, discovered.
POpery is the nurse of rebellion, and the mother of disastrous discords; yea
the very handmaid to distructon for where Popish superstitions, and Romish
innovations are embraced, there rebellion is commonly fomented: and where
rebellion finds nutriment, there is a necessary dependence of discords; and in
a Kingdom where discords flourish, destruction cannot be far off. The
treacheries which the Papists have oftentimes molded against this Realm, are
numerous, and the plots circumvented daily against the purity of our religion,
are so various, that it had been confounded and supplanted long since in an
absolute eradication of all sanctity, if so be diverse strong Pillars thereof
had not supported the ponderous stratagems intended against the same, by
prodigious conspiracies.

The resolution of the Papists have bin grounded oftentimes, and withal fully
resolved to subvert this kingdom: And the Jesuits have always diligently
labored with sedulity, to ruinate the Realm. But both have been plotting
always the subversion of the Parliament, if so be they could perfect their
minds in any wise. But (alas!) the sage judgments of the Parliament are so
pregnant, and the eye of their apprehentise intellect is to acute, that it can
easily dive into the hiddenest vault of their secretest plot and conspiracy.
For their heaven-guided minds are taught by the supreme Director of all
wisdom: therefore whatsoever is pretended against them, is like mists and
fogges, that when they arise, seem to obscure and oppose the Sun: but at its
first appearance it dissipate them all; Even so the plots which the Papists
pretend against our Parliament, are nullified as easily at the splendent and
glorious appearance of the irillustrious Councels.

But lest I should deviate from my purpose, I will in some manner relate the
intended treachery which the Papists had in tended against the Parliament.

Many of the Jesuits, and other Recusants, knowing that the Parliament was
tranferred into London, first at Guild Hall, and afterward at Grocers Hall,
did convocate their hell-nourished Councels together, striving to nurse and
foment some plot against them at their next return unto Westminster. Thus
having so opportune a time, they molded a conspiracy; but they could not get
the possession again of the Cellar: so that by this means they could not
equalize the Gunpowder Treason plot. But they were resolved to provide a
sudden Army, and great munition of Military affairs, that when as the
Parliament should return to Westminster Hal again, they would violently rush
in upon them.

This nefarious conspiracy of theirs was discovered by a Letter sent from L.
M. a Jesuit, to R. C. a Popish Lord, and was found by a Gentleman near
Whitehall. This Letter did contain many prodigious things included in it,
obscurely mentioning of some private treachery, which was intended against the
Parliament and City of London, and did give the Lord notice to be absent at
such a time; when the plot was to be delivered. But report hereof being
immediately sent to the Committee, great watch was appointed to attend on both
sides of the Parliament House, and careful search about the house, and the
Cellar thereof.

But (alas!) how all their determinated Councels were disanulled, and how all
their inventions were frustrated: for the Parliament themselves did suspect
some private treachery amongst the Papists, fomented against them: therefore
they desired the trained Bands to guard them to the House. The Watermen
proffred ten thousand of them in Arms to guard them down by water. And
hereupon having presented a Petition to both, it was accordingly granted. Thus
the Parliament was conducted with irresistible forces; and maugre all the
intents of the Romish Recusants resolutions, they returned to Westminster in
great pomp, sufety, peace and tranquillity to both houses, with the plausible
acclamations of the people.

But the Papists had not only intended their plot against the Parliament, but
also, against London: Whereupon the Citizens, having great suspicion thereof,
do watch day and night in defense of themselves.

They must have strong forces that are resolved to subvert a City so great,
and, so strong, and so well fortified as London is: for otherwise they will
seem but as a Boy to a Giant, or a Pigmy to Heroides. They may proceed in
their Conspiracies, but I believe to little effect: for there is a divine
providence that sees their wicked and nafarious machinations, who will never
permit his people that trust in him, to be subverted by such traiterous
designs. The Kings Majesty perceiving the City in such tumultuous discords,
and dissentions, went last Monday to Hampton Court, with the Queen, Prince, and
all his royal Offspring. Diverse causes did induce him thereunto: first being
opposed in his Majesty's pleasure by the House of Commons, concerning Master
Pym, and other Parliament men, who were impeached of High Treason: but it was
denied by the House, who delivered themselves as Responsall for those Members,
who were accused. The Kings Majesty having in his own royal Person once or
twice demanded them of the House, and being still frustrated, afterward
proclaimed them Traitors: but the House of Commons set out a Declaration to the
contrary. Thus His Majesty being crossed in his Princely intent, was somewhat
perplexed hereupon in his vexarious thoughts, which caused his just
indignation: and partly for this cause, and partly for the daily tumults, and
confusive nprores in the City, His Majesty departed from Westminster to
Hampton Court, with the Queen, Prince, and his Royal Progeny: having at the
least two or three hundred men guarding them, every man with a brace of
Pistolls. God grant that His Majesty may return again, to the preservation
of peace, and tranquillity in the Kingdom. Amen.

FINIS.

