THE SPEECH OF PATRICK Earl of Marchmont, etc. His Majesty's high Commissioner
to the PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND. On Monday the 22 of August School.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
YOU may remember, that his Majesty in his gracious Letter to you, takes
Notice, that the Fonds given in the former Sessions have fallen short of what
was expected, which has occasioned Arrears to be due to the Forces lately
disbanded; And that there is also a Debt upon the account of the Frigots, and
that the Forts and Garrisoned Places need Reparation: Therefore His Majesty
recommends to you to provide what may be sufficient for these Ends.

You have heard the Overture has been made of a Pole, to be imposed for the use
of the disbanded Forces, and I hope you will proceed to the Consideration of it.

As for the maintaining of the Frigots, His Majesty thinks, that the continuing
the Imposition of Tunnage upon ships will be one proper Fond for that purpose.

And I am commanded to represent to you, that the safety of the Kingdom does
require, that the Forts and Garrisoned places, particularly, that of Fort
William be sufficiently repaired, and that it is necessary the Magazines be
well furnished with Arms and Ammunition.

I have good Reason to be persuaded, that you will provide effectually for
these needful Purposes; And that as you hitherto have done, you will still
continue, to do what will be much to His Majesty's Satisfaction, and will
greatly tend to the safety of this Kingdom, and to your own Honor and
Reputation: Then will your Actings witness to the World, that you are alwise
thankfully mindful of the happy Deliverance you have had from the Dangers to
which your Religion and Liberties were formerly exposed.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. School.


