THE Reformed Gentleman: OR, THE Old English Morals Rescued From the
Immoralities of the Present Age. SHOWING How Inconsistent those Pretended
Genteel Accomplishments. Of Swearing, Drinking, Whoring and Sabbath-Breaking.
Are with the True Generosity of an English Man. Being Vices not only contrary
to the Law of God and the Constitutions of our Government both Ecclesiastical
and Civil, but such as cry loud for Vengeance without a speedy Reformation. To
which is added a Modest Advice to Ministers and Civil Magistrates, with an
Abridgement of the Laws relating thereto, the King's Proclamation and Queens
Letter to the Justices of Middlesex, with their several Orders thereupon. By A.
M. of the Church of England.

Nobilitas sola est atque Vnica Virtus. Juvenal Imprimatur.

Rob. Midgley.
July 28. 1692.


London, Printed for T. Salusbury at the King's Arms in Fleetstreet near St.
Dunstan's Church. 1693.

TO THE READER
Impartial Reader,
IF ever any Age needed a Boanerges, this Lethargick one of ours certainly
does; nothing but Thunderclaps, and Miraculous Judgments being able to raise
Mankind from their dead sleep of Sin, and to rouse than from their Carnal
Security and Impious Stupidity. 'Twas this lamentable Prospect of the
unconcernedness of the Nation we live in that set me upon the following
undertaking.

Never did any People commit such Enormities, and seemed so insensible whether
they had been guilty of them or no, as our English Vitiosoes at present: For if
you tell the Profane Wretch of his Swearing, tho the Oath i^ scarce out of his
Mouth; yet you shall hear him avouch by an Oath or two more that he did not
Swear. -- If you tax another of being Drunk; Pshaw, Pshaw! cries the Brute,
that is a small Fault; pray who is free from the Piccadilloes of the Bottle? --
If you charge a Third with Whoring; Who, replys the Lascivious Spark, can
forbear indulging the inviting Motions of Flesh and Blood? And what man but an
Anchorite or Hermit can resist the Impetuous Inclinations of his Youth? -- If
in the last place you advise any to be more Religiously Observant of the
Lord's Day; Why, who (says the Licentious Libertine) has required this at our
hands? Is it not enough to go twice a day to Church on the Sunday, but we must
be Puritans and Pharisees at home too?

This being the true Account of the desperate Case of our debauched Times; What
remains, but that some one should, tho I perhaps have not with Rigor and
Menaces, with Thundrings and Lightnings enough, made them sensible of their
Condition; lest soothing themselves up with the conceit of Gods Mercies, and
Christ's meritorious Death and Satisfaction for their Sins, they remain still
in the Suburbs of Hell, and dance so long about the Pit of Destruction, till
they irrecoverably fall into their Eternal Ruin? Do the Physicians use gentle
Applications, and only stroke their Apoplectic Patients? No certainly, they
find Rubbing and Chafing, Pinching and Wounding, Scarrifying and Cupping little
enough to make them recover of their Dead Fit. And shall the Soul in as deep an
Apoplexy as ever the Body felt, have soft things said to her? Shall the
Obdurate Conscience, and the Heart as hard as the nether Millstone be softly
anointed as it were with Oil, and bound up as if nothing ailed them? Certainly
those Balsamicks would do better, when the Wound is laid open and searched
thoroughly; when the Soul is touched to the quick, the Conscience pricked with
the Sense of its own Guilt; and the Heart brought down to a Melting, Bleeding
Temper. I am confident the Binding up the Sore before it be half Dressed, and
drawing a Skin over the unhealed Part is a ready way to cause a Grangreen. And
I am as confident, that speaking Peace to a People, when there is no Peace
belongs to them, and the gentle treatment of Vice is the great Cause of its
spreading the Contagion, and of making the Infected insensible of the Plague,
till such time as it has got such sure footing, that a Cure without a Miracle
is despaired of.

And since things are in such a desperate Case, what sober man can forbear
wishing that Impiety were reduced into some decree of Modesty; and that
Wickedness were but scared into Corners, that it may at least from henceforth
not dare to outface the Light, and boast of its numbers in the Eye of the
World? And any rational man would be forward to think this might easily be done
in a Country, where Christianity is professed in its Original Purity, and where
the Fundamental Laws and Institutions favor the Attempt. But alas! we find,
tho we have Statutes to that purpose made to our hands, tho the Great Wheels
have moved, and we might have expected the lesser Orbs would have followed the
Motion: yet most men stand still, and those, which do move, make but a very
tardy motion by reason of the Opposition of a Major Party; whose Clamours are
so great as to make the suppressing of Profaneness and Debauchery the Great
Grievance of the Nation. So that tho there should be a Scheme proposed by the
Best and Wisest of the Nation for accomplishing the Design, tho there were more
Laws made to back those already in force; yet when that is done it would be to
little Effect, unless there could be found Persons of that Courage, Generosity,
Conduct and Prudence, as might accordingly put the same in Execution. But where
to meet such as are Endowed with those Qualifications will be the harder Task,
if we consider that we live at present in a World which never yet was so happy,
as the Good made the Larger and the Rising Party.

As Reformed as this Age pretends to be, he knows very little of the World,
that sees not the great need this Corrupted Island has of a Speedy Reformation:
A Work of so great a Consequence, which not only Good Men ought to endeavor,
but the Bad ought to desire, and all ought one way or other to promote. But
what Rubs and Remora's, what Disappointments and unexpected Discouragements has
so Necessary a Work met with of late from some, who should have been by the
Obligation they lie under its forwardest Promoters and Encouragers? It would
seem too reflecting to insist hereon, and therefore I leave the persons
concerned to consider with themselves whether they have acted like Christians,
or so much as like Englishmen, in doing what in them lies to hinder so Glorious
a Design.

That we are a People that do need a Reformation: That we are not such white
and undefiled Creatures as we take our selves to be: That as long as we
continue in those Open and Crying Sins, under which our Land at present groans,
we cannot expect the Consummation of such Mercies, as are already begun for us,
but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and Fiery Indignation devouring
us from the face of the Earth: That all our Pretenses to Religion, and of our
being of this or that Church signify nothing without a Holy Life, and the
keeping our selves Pure from the Corruptions of the Age: That those, who are in
the Gall of Bitterness, and involved in the Labyrinths of Sin, may extricate
themselves and come out of the Midst of Sodom, and fly for Refuge to a
Spiritual Zoar, before the Destroying Angel overtake them with his Plagues; it
is the Design of the following Discourse to show, To which end I have not
spared to draw those Vices I have handled in their proper, lively, and real
Natural Colors: To lay the Plague, the Curse and the Judgment at the Right
Door: To call the Blasphemer, the Intemperate, the Unclean Person and the
Profane by their Proper Names: And to tell them of the Miseries, Calamities
Wants, Diseases and Death which are their Portion in this Life; and of the
never-dying Worm, the never-ceasing Pains, the never-ending Torments and the
Eternal Unquenchable Flames, which (without God's Mercy upon their Repentance)
will be their Lot in another World.

And truly I am so far from wishing any severe word in the Ensuing Treatise
unwritten, that I am afraid of nothing so much, as that (being infected with
the Epidemical Prudentials of the Times) I have treated Vice too gently, and
used the Vile Enormities too favorably. I could wish with all my Soul that
every word therein were as sharp as Arrows, and as keen as a two Edged Sword,
that they might stab the Sins (I have treated on) to the very Heart; and bring
the Offenders to such a Pass, that they might be necessitated to flee to Jesus
for the Sovereign Balsom of his Blood to heal their wounded Consciences, and
that being there they might see the necessity of living a Holy Life, lest they
set their own, as well as their Saviors Wounds a bleeding afresh.

I have but one Word more to add; which is, to advertise the Reader, that I had
an Intention of treating upon some other Malignant and Capital Vices; but
perceiving that thereby I should swell this Work to a larger Volumn, than I
designed this Manual should be; and considering, that, by advancing the Price
above the Vulgar Reach, I should rob the Inferior Rank of People of the
benefit thereof, and so lose the very end of publishing it for a General Good:
I confined my self to speak only of those sins, which seemed to bear the most
uncontrollable sway in this our Island. And truly I could not but think it most
proper to handle those Crimes, and lay them Open and Naked to the World which
are accounted by the Greater Party for Little, Venial and the Pecadilloes of
the Age, at which the Deity seemed little or not at all concerned, and in the
Commission of which they notwithstanding hoped for Heaven and Eternal
Happiness. How egregiously are mistaken, they will (if they have but the Hearts
to consider) find in the sequel.

And oh! that every one, who Reads this, were wise, that they understood those
things, and that they would consider their Latter End: That they would cease to
do Evil and learn to do Well: That they would choose Life and not Death, Light
and not Darkness. That every Soul may Depart from the Error of his Ways and be
reformed; that the Reformed may, as much as in them Lies, endeavor to reclaim
the whole; is the Earnest Desire, as well as the Endeavor of him, who is a
Well-wisher to the whole Israel of God, and especially to the Welfare of our
particular Son.

Farewell.
Advertisement.
A Book newly Published, entitled Ecclesia Reviviscens; A Poem, or a Short
Account of the Rise, Progress, and Present State of the New Reformation against
Vices and Debaucheries. Printed for Tho. Salusbury.

THE INTRODUCTION.
Man considered in his three states, of Innocence, Nature, and Regeneration. A
short view of the Church from the Primitive to out Times: A survey of the
Degeneracy of the present Age; and the little Reason the open Debauchees have
of styling themselves Church of England Men. The Guilt of this Nation in
general aggravated in that neither God's Mercies can Win it, nor his Judgments
Terrify it into a serious Reformation.

1. MAN, that Curious, The consideration of Man, First in his state of
Innocence.
Upright, stately Fabric of an Almighty Make, in his short Period of Innocence
attracted to himself the Admiration, Love and Obedience of all other Creatures,
which were subservient to him as their Lord and Denominator. To him, did all
the moving and creeping Animals of the Earth, the Winged Fowls of the Air, and
the Sealy Fish of the Deep become most willing Tributaries: To Him, did the
Firmaments above, those Orbs of Light, the Sun, Moon, and Stars afford their
milder Influence: To him, did all the Sweets of Paradise, and the Natural
Product of the Fertile Earth yield Delight and Satisfaction: To him, in a Word,
was all the Creation so Obedient, as if Man were the only Masterpiece of God
and Nature, and those other Created Beings but so many Ornaments to set him off
with the greater Luster. Add to this, (his Harmonious, and Symmetrical Body)
His being endued with a never dying, Godlike and reasonable Soul; Enlightened
by a clear Understanding; Guided by an Uncorrupted Will, Moved by pure and
Seraphick Affections, and placed in a Rank a little below the Angels.

2. Man considered in his state of Nature.
2. No sooner did he fall and transgress that one Commandment by eating the
Forbidden Fruit, but the Scene of Glory quickly changed to that of Ignominy and
Reproach: His Body became Distempered, Frail, and Miserable; His Soul lost the
Divine Impress, and became filthy and abominable; His Understanding was
darkened; His Will Corrupted and Depraved; His Affections Vitiated and
Debauched; and his whole Man out of Frame. He had neither Peace without, nor
Peace within; but all in a storm led an Unquiet, Disatisfied, and discontented
Life. All the Creatures now rose up in Actual Rebellion against their
transformed Lord, vindicating their Creators Honor upon one that had so
shamefully abused it. And the lashes of a Wounded Conscience upon a sense of
his Guilt were more afflictive to him by far, then his being whipped out of
Paradise ever was. What dismal Effects his Posterity met withal is apparent
from God's Justice in giving them up to a reprobate sense, to commit Iniquity
with greediness, and then plaguing them with sundry Diseases, and diverse kinds
of Deaths. For from the very moment of the Fall the Intellectual became subject
to the Sensitive Faculties; the Rational, nobler part of the Man was enslaved
to that ignoble part which he held in common with Brutes; and the Soul bowed
down, and was conformable to all the Lusts and impetuous Passions of the Body.

3. In this languid condition lay the greatest part of the Posterity of fallen
Adam for nigh four Thousand Years. In the height of that Impiety, which
proceeded from those Corrupted Principles, was it that the old World was
destroyed by a Universal Deluge of Waters: and the new One in its Nonage was
dispersed by a Jargon of Languages at the Confusion of Babel. Of all the
Kindreds of the Earth, which then began to increase, did not God choose any,
save faithful Abraham and his Seed, to place his Name among them. 'Twas Jacob
was his Chosen, and Israel the Lot of his Inheritance; 'twas in the Tents of
the Sanctified Tribes that the Glory of his Presence shone; and by his Servant
Moses he implanted the Rudiments of a Typified Religion which hereafter was to
be refined and confirmed by his Successor and Master, the LORD JESUS.

4. Thus the knowledge of the Divinity was as it were confined within the
Borders of Juda, and Palestine was more happy then her Neighbors: In Judah was
God known, and his Name was great in Israel; in Salem also was his Tabernacle,
and his dwelling place at Sion. Ps. 76.1, 2. Whilst the greatest part of the
World remained in Darkness, and sat under the shadow of Death; and groped
through their Ignorance at Noonday: Whilst they changed the truth of God into
a Lie, became vain in their Imaginations, and Worshipped the Creature more than
the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Romans 1. True it is, the Wiser sort of
Heathens, guided by their Natural Light, made some steps toward the raising
the Soul from the Bondage of the Body; and gave great Pulls to set fallen Man
once more upon his Legs. But alas! their Endeavors fell infinitely short of
that End: their glimmering Light proved but a false one to them; and their
Intricate Reasonings and dry Speculations were so far above the reach of Vulgar
heads, and so incapable of doing them any good, that they have oftimes
bewildred the Philosopher himself, who after all his search has been forced to
confess himself to be in the Dark. So that though those (...) made some Advances
toward the Civilizing the Barbarous Nations, and preached up Morality to their
Disciples; yet all the Religion they could ingraft in the World was but
Delusion, and the best of their Altars wore no other Inscription then to the
UNKNOWN GOD, (...). Acts, 17, 23.
whom ignorantly they Worshipped, and of whom they could have no certain
knowledge till the Sun of Righteousness arose with healing in his Wings, and
brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel; Becoming as Old
Simeon expresses himself) a Light to lighten the Gentiles, as well as the Glory
of his People Israel: Luke 2.32. Bringing the glad tidings of Salvation to the
Greek and the Barbarian, to the Bond and Free; and Preaching Repentance and
Remission of Sins among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Luke 24.47.

5. This Abstract of Mercy! This Overflowing Quintessence of Compassion! By a
mysterious Incarnation condescended to to take upon himself not the Nature of
Angels, 3. Man considered in his state of Regeneration.
but the Seed of Abraham. Hebr. 2.16. Who being in the form of God, thought it
no Robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no Reputation, and took
upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men: And being
sound in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death,
even the Death of the Cross. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. And by that Expiatory Sacrifice
of his he satisfied his Fathers Justice, offering himself up once for all. In
this hopeful way of Recovery did that Blessed one leave Mankind upon his
Departure hence; and entrusted the farther Cure to faithful hands, who were not
wanting to transmit the Sovereign Balsom, Christ Crucified, to Posterity.

6. And now began that Fevor and Warmness for Religion to appear in the World:
A short view of the Christian Church, from the Primitive to our times.
All Places Ecchoed with this New Doctrine, and every Mouth uttered the Gospel
and Glad Tidings of Peace. Innocence and sincerity began to be Visible in Men's
Lives and Manners; and those, who could not dispute, could die for their Pure
and Undefiled Religion. This was the Case of that Flourishing Palm Tree the
Primitive Church, which spread its Branches so far under the hottest
Persecutions, That most of the Dark Corners of the Civilized Nations were
enlightened with the Piercing and Resplendent Beams of the Truth: And the Earth
began to be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. Is.
chapter 11. ver. 9.

7. But alas! this was too good to last long. For no sooner had the Christian
World (so I might then call it) enjoyed a Requiem from the continual Harasses
of Pagan Tyranny and Persecution: No sooner was Christianity Universally
Embraced throughout the Roman Empire: No sooner had it the Protection of
Emperors, and the favor of Complaisant Courtiers (who, weary of the Pagan
Worship, became of the same Religion with their Princes;) No sooner was it
Established by the Edicts of Constantine, and confirmed by Theodosius and his
Successors in the Imperial Throne; But it became the Subject of its own fewds
and Animosities: So that what all the United force of Hell and Earth, had in
vain endeavored by open Violence to destroy, was Overwhelmed with its own
Ruins, and lay buried under its own Heaps. Heresy upon Heresy, Schism upon
Schism, Rent the Union of the Church on the one Hand; The Arrians, and
Donatists; the Pelagians and Nestorians (some Questioning the Divinity, others
the Humane Nature of Christ; some Quarrelling about the Procession, others
about the Divinity of the Holy Ghost,) set the Professors of Christianity
together by the Ears, and involved all in Flames for two or three Centuries
together. But then on the other hand Superstition, Blind Zeal, False Principles
and Interest, draw'd a veil quite over the Truth; and for many Ages after,
Believing as the Church believed; Outward Pomp and a Continual Round of
Mysterious splendid Ceremony was all the Religion the Indulgence of the Papal
Chair required at Men's hands. If they could with an Implicit Faith own
Infallibility, Purgatory, Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and a
hundred such like Whimsioal Notions of Human Inventions; were their Lives never
so Wicked, and their Manners never so Debauched; yet they might be assured of
Heaven and Eternal Happiness.

8. But though all these sad Afflictions happened to Christianity in the
successive Ages of the Church, A view of the degeneracy of the present Age.
yet it was free from that general inundation of Impiety, wherewith this l^st
and degenerate Age is at present so overwhelmed: wherein, even the dregs of Sin
and Pollution are as it were sunk and settled down to the very bottom. Was ever
Wickedness more open-faced? Wa^ it ever more immodest than in these worst of
times? And truly I cannot wonder that it is so, that it struts thus b^l l^
unm^sked, and fears no contradiction; since not only Pagans, but Christians;
not only Papists but Protestants, are its Abettors. Men nowadays, not only
practice but plead for their Vices, and maintain a Dispute for any beloved Lust
with as hot a Zeal, as the best of Christians would stand up for the cause of
Christ and his Religion; bearing so great a Love to Sin and the Author of it,
as though they were willing to live their Votaries, and to dye their Martyrs.
This is the sad, lamentable, and too true account of the present State of
Apostatizing Mankind. And how great a sh^re this our Island contributes to the
Universal Deluge of Debauchery, is too evident to need any further
Demonstration, than that of Ocular Inspection. We are all of us too apt upon
the Commission of a Sin, Adam-like, to lay the blame far enough from our own
Doors: to charge it upon the strength of the Temptation, upon the weakness of
our Constitution, upon the Custom of the Place wh^rein we live, upon our own
Ignorance, upon Surprise, and the like. But alas! none of all these Salvoes
will serve the Turn, but for all these things GOD will bring us into Judgment.

9. And who can choose but grieve to observe that most (I may say All) the open
Debauchees of the Age are of impudent as to profess themselves Church of
England men, The little reason wicked Men have, to pretend themselves of any,
much less of the Church of England, whose Canon, as well as Civil Laws are
against them.
hoping that under that pretense (for I can call it no otherwise) to escape the
Censures of Man here, and the Sentence of God hereafter? They cry as loud as
any, The Temple of the Lord! The Temple of the Lord! But all the while remain
in the outward Court, and will lose the privilege of being saved with th^se
which are within the inner Rail. For how unreasonable as well as unchristian is
it to think or expect so pure and undefiled a Church, should indulge any of her
Members in those horrid Debaucheries, which a sober Heathen would Blush to
committ? No for certain she does not; for all her Canons and Constitutions as
well as Doctrines tend to the Establishing of a Holy and Unblameable Life in
the World, and the Restraining of most of those reigning Vices of our Corrupted
Age. Nor is the Civil Magistrate less armed against them, having severeal Penal
Statutes to empower him to put a stop to their Exorbitancies; so that whoever
will continue in those open sins, is so far from being a Son of the Church of
England, or a Friend to any, much less to this Government, that he is the
greatest disturber of the One, and the most professed Enemy of the Other.

10. And what an Aggravation is it of the guilt of this Nation in general, that
it bates to be Reformed? The Guilt of this Land in general aggravated, in that,
neither the Mercies nor the Judgments of God have had any influence over it to
work a Reformation.
Which neither Judgments can terrify, nor Mercies allure to Repentance? For
what People have tasted more of the Divine displeasure? What Land has received
greater Favor from Heaven than this our Island within the short compass of
this last Century has? Was not the Reformation form Popish Errors and
Superstitious Tenets, matter of great Joy to this our Israel? Did not that
wonderful Deliverance from the Invincible Armada in Eighty Eight, make glad the
City of God? Did not God's Goodness Triumphantly manifest it self in the
discovery of the Horrid Powder Plot* Were not the Restoration of the Royal
Family after 12 years Banishment, and the re-establishing Monarchy, after so
long an Anarchy, marks of Divine Love? And (not to speak of the frustration of
many Plots in the late Reigns) Was not the late Revolution, and the Deliverance
we received from those dismal Apprehensions and Fears we lay under matter of
great Comfort and Satisfaction to all that were well-wishers to our Sion? But
what Returns have we made to God for all his Benefits? How have we embraced
those Invitations to be Good and Happy? Base, Ungrateful Wretches that we are!
We have turned the Grace of GOD into wantonness frustrated the very designs of
Gods Blessings, and turned them by our Abuses into Cursings. Our Debaucheries
are as many as ever, and our Animosities and Divisions as high on all sides, as
if there had been no opportunities for a Reconcilement.

11. And now let us look back, upon the Judgments God has inflicted upon the
Land, and observe whether they have prevailed any more than his Mercies. Did
not a long abused Peace at last involve Three Kingdoms in Civil War? Fill the
Nation with Devastations and Ruins? Turn our Waters into Blood? Cover every
place with the dead Bodies of the slain? Expose the best Religion in the World
naked to the Affronts and Contumelies of Sects and Parties? And provoke the
fury and madness of the People so far, as at last, ignominiously to Arraign,
unaccountably to Condemn, and barbarously to Murder the Noblest of Kings, though
the most unfortunate of Princes? And to come a little lower, how smartly has
this one London.
Metropolitan City suffered by Plague and Fire? How did the Pestilence triumph
within these Walls, killing her Thousands and Ten Thousands in our Streets? How
did the insulting Flames, like the sweeeping Rain carry all down before it? As
the Plague made no distinction between Sexes and Degrees, so neither did the
devouring Fire take any notice of Sacred or Profane Structures, but levelled
all alike to the ground, and buried them in one common beap of Ashes. To sum up
all, and come nigher home. What Dangers did our Fears suggest unto us from the
Insolency of the Romish Tyranny in the last Reign? How was the Liberty and
Property of the Subject, the Rights and Privileges of the Church ready to be
Sacrificed to the Will, and Pleasure of an Arbitrary Power? And if we look
abroad; How has God visited in his Wrath most of the Europ^an Churches, and put
a Cup of Trembling and A^tonishment into their hands? How deeply for three
years together has our Neighboring Island tasted of it? And how do we know but
the next Draught may be ours. One would think these ^fflictions we have felt,
and those we have just reason to fear are hanging over us, were enough in all
Reason to bring us nearer unto God, and to startle us into our Duty. But alas!
we are never the better, and have great reason to apply the Psalmist Words to
our selves, That though all these things [Sword, Pestilence, and Fire; Fears,
Dangers and Calamities] have befallen us, yet [are we still the same] we do
still forget God.

12. But shall not God visit for these things; shall be not be avenged on such
a Nation as this? Yes, doubtless he will: For though he seems to Wink and Connive
at these Enormities for the present, and may spare the Public a while for the
Righteous Man's sake; yet God's Spirit will not always strive with Man, but
taking the Good from the Wrath to come, he will rain down his Plagues of Fire
and Sword, of War and Pestilence; and root out the Wicked Doers from the Face
of the Earth. In this World the Unrighteous Communities shall suffer, there
being no Retribution of Public Societies beyond this and the Grave. But the
Impenitent Individuals will be reserved to receive their Portion in the last
Day; When that Dreadful and Irrevoc^ble Sentence shall be Pronounced, of Go ye
Cursed into Everlasting Burnings prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Mat.
25.41.

The Reformed Gentleman, etc.
Of profane Swearings, Blasphemy, Cursing, and Perjury. CHAP. I
The Sin of Profane Swearing considered from the Nature of a Lawful Oath:
Blasphemy, and Cursing considered: The unaccountable Folly thereof, in that
there is no Motive for it either in Atheism, Irreligion, or Reason; and in that
we abhor it in those we either Love or Honor. Four Pleas for this Sin
considered and Refuted. The Force of Evil Custom. Four Motives for the
forsaking thereof. The Guilt of such who, though they do not Swear themselves,
yet delight to hear Others Swear. Perjury Considered, whether in order to
Circumvent, or falsely Accuse others: The difficulty of dissuading Men
therefrom. Motives to forsake it drawn from the Greatness both of the Sin and
the Punishment.

1. THAT all those are Sins, and dreadful ones too, none that have the least
notion of Good and Evil will or can deny. But, how abominable they are, will
appear more by Considering, that all are the Profanation of that Sacred Name,
by whom the whole family of Heaven and Earth is named. I shall consider the
three first together, for that it is rare to have the Man, who makes nothing of
a Rash Oath, to make Conscience of Blaspheming God, or Cursing his Neighbor.
How sinful Profane Swearing is, First, The Sin of Profane Swearing considered,
from the Nature of a Lawful Oath
may be known by considering how Sacred and Solemn an Oath in its own Nature
is: Being nothing less than

2. The calling and Attesting the Ever-Blessed Trinity [the Searcher of all
Hearts, the tryer of the very Reins, and from whom nothing is hid,] in some
weighty Matter as a Witness of the Truth, and a Revenger of the Falsehood of
what shall be asserted by the person thus adjuring. Besides, the Divinity of an
Oath (as I may so term it) will be more manifest by Considering, 1. That none
are Admitted to take it but such as are grown up to years of Discretion,
excluding both the Mad and Perjured Person too. 2ly, That the matter thereof
should be grave, and not trivial or unlawful. 3ly, That the Form is most
Solemn, such as the lifting up of the hands among the Jews; the Laying the hand
upon the Altar, as did the Civilized Heathens, and upon the New Testament, as
is usual with us English Christians. 4ly, That the end is the Declaration of
Truth, the deciding of Controversies, the Manifestation of God's Glory, and the
Good of Humane Societies. 5ly, That the Object thereof is only God the Lord
Jehovah; the Omnipresent, Omniscient, and Omnipotent Being.

3. And is an Oath so Sacred in its own Nature? What a Folly and Madness as
well as Sin is it then, upon every turn to call upon the Ever-Glorious Majesty
of Heaven to come and Witness our Trifles, Untruths, and oftimes Sins; as if we
were willing to make him partake of our Impertinencies, Nonsense, and Crimes?
Would it not be a piece of Rudeness, Impudence, and Presumption, think ye, to
press into the Presence of but an Earthly Prince, and bid him leave the weighty
concerns of his Government, to come and Witness your Idle, Frivolous and
Unnecessary Discourse? Yet so bold do Men make with the King of Kings, as to
think him at leisure ever and anon to give an Ear to the Invocations, that are
made to him at every Table-Talk, Chess-Board, and Game at Loo.

4. Secondly, Blasphemy Considered.
Is the profane Invocation of God at every inconsiderate Trifle so great a Sin?
How Monstrous then must it needs be to fall soul un and Blaspheme the Being, by
whom we Live, Move and have our Being? True it is, Men must be arrived to a
great degree of Impiety, that shall Curse God to his very Face: Yet, though there
may be but a few Instances of such as in direct Terms shall vilify their
Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; God's Name may be Blasphemed many other
ways. He has his Tabernacle, his Sanctuary, his Word, his Day, his Ordinances,
and his Ministers, all bearing that Inscription [He that Honors you, Honors
me: But he that despises you, despises me.] These are the Apples of his Eyes,
his sensible parts, whereby he may be wounded, though the Sin never reach his
Inaccessible Essence. And how frequent is it to have the Wretch in his Farce
and Drolleries Romance upon the Sacred Scriptures? Buffoon the Holy Order?
Speak slightingly and profanely of the Lord's Day? And make a mock at our
Religious Assemblies? If this be not Blaspheming God among the Gentiles, I know
not what is: For this is all that the Monster can or dare do against the Holy
One of Israel: He can only stab him thus in Effigy, and would serve the
Original no better did it lie in his Power and cannot forbear dethroning God in
his Heart and saying, This Man shall no longer Reign over us.

5. And can we expect that out of the same Mouth should proceed Cursing and
Blessing? Thirdly, Cursing Considered.
That he, who makes nothing of Blaspheming his Neighbor, and himself? No, for
certain, he that can do the first, never stops at a Conscientious Scruple about
the other: For what more common then to have the Blustering Hector, not only in
his Passion to an Enemy, or a Stranger; but even in his sober familiar
Discourse, wish the Pox, the Plague, and Eternal Damnation to his Friend or
himself? And what is more amazing than to imprecate all this upon the Person he
pretends to love extremely at the same time, as though he Cursed him out of pure
kindness, and wished him damned out of Civility? But what shall we conclude of
those Men, but that they are Mad and Frantic beyond the Cure of Hellebore?

6. But though every Place, and Corner of this our Isle abound with such
profligate Wretches; The Unaccountable folly of Swearing rashly, since it has
no inducement from Atheism, or Reason.
though this part of the World Echoes with whole Volleys of Oaths and Cursing,
which continually are discharged, as it were, against Heaven; yet did I never
hear of one that could Allege any thing like an Excuse to extenuate the
Extravagancie of their Guilt. Such an unaccountable Folly is there inherent in
a Rash Oath, that nothing can be said as a Plea for the use of it; but Men
Swear because they will Swear. There is nothing of an Inducement, either in
Reason or Religion in Atheism or Irreligion, that can warrant the Commission of
so horrible a Crime.

7. An Oath in an Atheist's Mouth is Nonsense and Contradiction. For by
invoking a Being by him disowned, 1 No Motive for the Swearer in Atheism.
he manifestly gives himself the Lie; He thereby argues the weakness of his
Judgment, and stabs his own Notion to the very Heart. For who can believe he
is thoroughly persuaded that there is no God, when at every Sentence he speaks,
he Mutters out the very Name? O that he denies a Savior, when ever and anon he
uses Wounds and Blood to make his Discourse Emphatical! Or that he thinks there
is no Hell, or Devils, when in every turn of Passion, he calls upon the one to
take his fellow Creatures; and heartily wishes them in the Torments of the
other? Sure I am the Swearing Atheist confounds h^mself, overthrows his own
Principles, and demonstrates the impossibility of being thorowpaced in such
Opinions. If he would uphold Atheism, he should refrain from taking that
Sacred Name into his Mouth (the bare mention whereof is argument sufficient
against him) and he should invoke his Almighty Chance; and Swear by those All
powerful Atoms, which by their own Magnetic Force, jumbled themselves out of a
Chaos into this curious Globe; and he should adjure those Empty Nothings, to
which he imagines all material Beings will at last be reduced.

8. Nor is there any thing of reason in a profane Oath. Those Arguments the
Devil makes use of to work upon a rational Man, 2. Nothing in reason to induce
the Sin.
and to induce him to Sin, are in this quite laid aside. Pleasure, Profit, and
Fear, the common Byasses of the Will, and Corrupters of the Understanding,
there are none to be pleaded as a Temptation in this Sin, as it may in others.
Here the Devil has a cheap Bargain, and Men sell their Heaven for Nothing, and
their Souls they barter away, and take no Money for them.

10. But farther yet, the unreasonableness of this Vice appears in that, how
fond soever we are of it our selves, and are affronted when any Body reprove us
for it; The folly of this Sin, farther illustrated in that we love it not in
those whom we love or esteem.
yet, though we love the Treason, we hate the Traitors, and abhor a rash Oath in
those we either Love or Honor. If a Wife, a Child, a near Relation, or but a
Servant (whom we have a kindness for) Swear in our Presence, how apt are we to
check, and rebuke them? But should a Judge, a Bishop or a Prince Curse and
Blaspheme in our hearing, How would our Blood rise? And how unseemly,
ungenerous, and intolerable would it seem in them? And is not the offense as
unbecoming us, and as notorious, as if the best Friend or worthiest Nobleman of
them all were guilty thereof? It remains then that we charge the prevalency of
this Sin to Custom.

11. It Is Custom, that English Law, that English Tyrant, that Obstacle to a
Holy Life, That Custom is the chiefest Plea for it: all the rest proved to be
trivial.
which is the chiefest Plea Men do, or can use to palliate so great an Offense.
Those other excuses made for it, such as the being provoked to Anger: The
creating Belief thereby: its being an Ornament of the Speech: and a gentile
Accomplishment, are but thin and empty sounds. For,

11. Can any Man of Sense think, that the Commission of one unlawful Act can
excuse the falling into another? The First Plea Refuted.
Yet so absurd is he that imagines the being carried beyond his Reason, will
any thing at all lessen the Fault of transgressing his Duty. No certainly; it
is a great Aggravation thus to add Sin to Sin. For is it not enough (Vile
Criminal!) to incense thy God by falling into an unallowable Passion, and
frantic Fury, but thou must at the same time provoke him yet more, by taking
his most holy Name into thy profane, and unclean Lips? Thou had no Warrant
for thy mad Frenzy (let the Temptation thereto be never so strong) so as to
forget thy self, much less not to remember him, whose Wounds thou set to
bleed afresh by thy piercing Oaths, and abominable Cursings. Whatever thou
may imagine, yet the being guilty of one Sin, will not in the least alleviate
the Commission of another, though the latter be occasioned by the former; but as
thy Guilt, so will thy Condemnation, and Punishment be double too.

12. The Second Plea Refuted.
And no better a Refuge will the next Excuse be to the common Swearer. For will
any Man believe him the more for his dreadful Asseverations? No, certainly this
is a way of creating Belief so praeposterous, that it is the ready road to
raise up Diffidence, where there was none before. If thou art Honest, and
reputed a Man of thy Word, none will desire thy Oath for a small matter,
whatever they may do in a weighty concern: But if thou art known to be false or
untrue, all thy Imprecations and Execrations will avail thee nothing; for Men
will think (as we say) their own Thoughts. A Liar and Swearer are so near a
kin, having one common Father of them both, that whoever has a Swearing, has
(Ten to One) a Lying Vein too.

13. Then as to the next thing, which Men use to extenuate the guilt of rash
Oaths withal. The Third Plea Refuted.
Ask some, (I blush to say) of even the better rank of Men, why, they vent many
almost in one breath? And they will tell you, it sets off their Speech with a
boon Grace, and adorns their periods with a lovely Decorum. A strange and
unheard of Art of Rhetoric this! An Eloquence not much known in former Ages!
That Oaths should be so Elegant, that Cursings should be so Emphatical; and all
Discourses insipid and flat, that are not stuffed with them, is such a new
Notion, as makes me call it The Start-up Idiom of the English Tongue. I know
not how this blasphemous Bombast sounds in some Ears, but so far is this
disagreeing Harmony from affecting any sober Man, that he would (I presume)
prefer the Croaking of Toads, the Hollowing of Owls, and the Cries of Ravens
far before it. And I am apt to believe Pliny's Panegyricks, and Cicero's
Encomiums have more Oratorical strokes in them, than the Harangues of our
Modern Vitiosoes, with all their blustering Parenthesies (of Dam^'yees,
Sink'yees, By their Maker, and the like) can ever boast of. Let those Oaths be
never so graceful in the speaking, yet I am of opinion, that were they penned
down so that the Speaker himself might see them, though he might not blush at the
sight of his Sin, yet he would, no doubt, at that of his folly, in uttering
such unaccountably bombastical Nonsense. And as taking as it is with most, we
never heard of any that recommended himself or his Friend, to the Favor of any
Prince or Potentate by an Address of Oaths. Neither did we ever hear of any
Council, in a Trial at Bar, that ever carried the Cause by Swearing to the
purpose. Whatever the Lawyer may do in his Chambers, yet at Westminster Hall he
has the Manners, or at least the Prudence to bridle his Tongue from those
exorbitant Expressions. Thus have we taken a short account of this Chop-Logick,
this Swearing in Mood and Figure.

14. But to go on, there are not wanting such as declare without asking, the
rass^ Swearing to be Gentile and Fashionable. The Fourth Plea Refuted.
How fashionable they are I shall not here dispute, having reserved that for
another place: But as to the Gentility of an Oath, I can see nothing in it that
can deserve that peculiar Title. Is Swearing a mark of a Gentleman? Does that
blazon his Honor so as all other Accomplishments without it signify nothing?
Certainly, if Blots are Ornaments, if Inverting be the Advancing of a
Scutcheon, this Adorns and Advances it with a Witness. But alas! I doubt after
all, such hectoring Oaths, would better become the Mouths of the Beau-Garcons
and blustering Bullies of the Age, than any Inns of Court Gentleman whatsoever:
though I must needs say, they would sound bad enough from any. Be convinced then
at last (deluded Gentlemen!) of this your Folly, and think not that to be a
badge of your Honor, which is the greatest stain of your Reputation. Besides,
every Arrant Ass, Rake-kennel and Porter of the Town, may at this rate commence
Gentleman, when they pl^ase, and rank themselves with the best. For I do not
see but they Swear with as good an Air to the full, as the most accomplished
Spark ever did. And every Footman and Valet de Chamber, Swears as much like a
Lord, as his Master can ever pretend to.

15. And are not these excuses for the persevering in so horrid a Sin empty,
idle, vain, and insipid? Such as a rational Man, guided only by the light of
Nature, would blush to own as his, much less openly to stand out in them,
against the more prevalent Arguments of Reason and Religion. So that it
follows, nothing but a notorious evil Custom can be pleaded as a Defense for
those Profanations.

16. It Is Custom that has made this Plague so Epidemical. It Is that has
infected our Cities, The force of Custom considered and lamented.
and poisoned our Country Air too. So that wherever you go, you may hear those
Franticks vent out the sad Effects of their distempered Brains. Were it
possible that any of our Predecessors could arise, and take a survey of these
times, How would they bless themselves? And conclude a whole Legion of Devils
were let loose to lead Mankind to such a degree of Madness, till the whole
World were become at length, the Grand Bedlam for those Daemoniacks to reside
in? For now (with Grief of Heart may it be spoken) Kings of the Earth, and all
People, Princes, and all Judges of the Earth; Young Men and Maidens; Old Men
and Children (in the Psalm it is Praise, but in our daily Practice it is) Curse,
and Blaspheme the Name of the Lord. So Natural is this Wicked Custom grown,
that the Infant learns to Swear as soon as ever he comes to understand his
Mother Tongue; and can lisp out an Oath or a Curse before he can speak plain.

17. This is likewise the present, sad, and lamentable state of our poor
distempered Island; and What, When, and How the Crisis of this Acute Disease it
generally labors under will prove, and whether the Alteration will be for the
better or for the worse is too hard for any Humane Observation. 'Tho it is to be
feared a Cure without a Miracle is to be despaired of, it being reduced already
to such a Languishing as well as stupid Condition; which nothing but a sharp
Remedy (some severe Judgment, or another) will be able to Reform and Restore to
the full.

18. This indeed is a startling thought to any who are not as yet arrived to
the full height of this Impiety, and whose unseared Minds retain some Sense and
Remorse. A Dehortation to leave off this Sin.
I could wish with all my Soul, I could prevail only upon those to return from
whence they are fallen, and suffer the fashionable Many to be damned by
themselves. For shall we be so strongly infatuated by our own Inclinations, and
the Example of others, to renounce our God more heartily in our Practice, then
ever we did the Devil in our Baptism? Shall so Abominable a Custom Tyrannize
over the Reason and Religion of Men and Christians? Shall we follow a Multitude
to do Evil, and run Headlong into Hell for Company? What if the Stream run
strong that way, is it an Impossibility to bear up against it? No certainly, we
see it possible to have many Righteous Lots even in our Sodom; and many who
Bless, Praise, Magnify and Extol the King of Glory amidst this Blasphemous and
Profane Generation. Nor are there wanting Motives to excite even the Worst
(were they not Deficient to themselves) to a speedy Repentance. Motives for the
forsaking the Sin of Profane Swearing, etc.
For let the Examples of the more Civilized Heathen shame us: Let the
Conformity due to the Constitutions of this Kingdom in general, and to the
present Government in particular Win us: Let the Obedience we owe to our Mother
Church oblige us; and let the Terrors of the Lord in inflicting his Judgments
Temporal, as well as Eternal, Constrain us to forsake our Evil Customs.

19. Let (I say) the Practice of the more Civilized Heathens shame us to leave
off our so much pleaded for and Customary Oaths. First Motive drawn from the
Example of the Heathens.
Whoever among them should upon any Trivial Account invoke any of their Gods,
were branded as Infamous persons: so highly were the very Demons deified by
those poor deluded Pagans. And at present we hear nothing of the Turks taking
their great Prophet Mahomet's Name in Vain, or Blaspheming their Alcoran, or
Reviling their Mufti; but whenever they have occasion to make mention of
either, they do it with the greatest Adoration, and profoundest Respect
imaginable. And shall the Lord Jehovah (a Name so Sacred that the very Jews
thought it a Sin but to pronounce it) be so commonly abused, affronted and
defiled, by our unhallowed Lips? Shall Christians and a Reformed Nation too,
engross this Sin of Profane Swearing so much to themselves, as to make it their
own peculiar Vice?

20. Loyalty has been so Elevated a Subject not long ago, Second Motive drawn
from the Conformity due to English Government.
that Men would oftentimes shipwreck a good Conscience, so they might appear
but favorers of the Government they live in: But so far is the common Swearer
from being a Loyalist, that he Acts in Contradiction to all the Modern
Constitutions of the English Nation, and openly resists the unrepealed 21 Jac.
1. cap. 20. continued 3. Car. 1. cap. 4. made perpetual. 16. Car. 1. c. 4.
Statutes of the Land, made and provided in that Case. And let him boast of
being never so good and true a Subject, it avails nothing since he defies the
Laws, and by his practice Nulls those Institutes which are so strong in force
against him. Neither is he a Friend to this Present Government (let his
pretenses be never so specious) since his Actions are Diametrically contrary to
the Royal Will and Pleasure specified at first by his Majesty's Letter to the
Bishop of London, which was ordered to be Communicated to the rest of the
Clergy; and afterward signified to the Civil Magistrate By the Queens most
Gracious Message to the Justices of Middlesex; and Lastly, by a more forcing
Proclamation, in which they Recommended the suppressing Profane Swearing and
Cursing; as the first and chiefest of those Offenses which were accounted, more
especially to hasten and bring down God's Judgments upon this Unfortunate
Kingdom.

21 But, Thirdly, there are many of those Profligate Wretches, who dare own
themselves Churchmen; and if they pretend to any Religion, it is the Reformed,
Orthodox and Protestant Faith they are of: The third Motive drawn from the
Obedience due to the Church.
They appear openly in our Congregations, and show a bold Face in the most
solemn of our Assemblies, and intrude into the most Sacred of our Ordinances
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. But let those Profaners of all that is good
and sacred be assured, that the Church is not their Mother; that within her
Bosom there are cherished no such Vipers, that her Sanctuary is no Asylum for
such Vermin to have recourse to: For her Doctrine's drawn out of the Pure
fountain of God's Word, Article 39.
her Articles, Homily 7.
her Homilies and her whole Constitutions are directly Opposite to the Profane,
and gives no manner of Encouragement for him to persevere in his
Extravagancies. However the lewd World may esteem of things now, yet when the
Last Day comes, no Question but the Church will say to those her Hangers on, I
know you not, You would have none of my Counsel, but despised all my reproof,
therefore Eat ye of the Fruit of your own way, and be filled with your own
devices. If therefore any Man has any Zeal to stand up for her, and to promote
her Cause, and to enlarge her Borders; He cannot do it better than by a Sober
and Conscientious Conversation to let his Communication be Yea, Yea; and Nay,
Nay.

22. Come we now to consider the last Motive, The fourth Motive drawn from the
Judgments of God.
which if all the rest fail, may prove strong enough to work upon the most
obdurate and hardened Conscience, unless it be Judgment, Hell and
Damnation-proof. Men may be so brazen faced, as not to blush at their being
worse than Heathens; they may be so resractory, as not to be reduced by the
strictest Humane Laws: They may be so unchristian and so unnatural as to choose
to be disowned by their Mother the Church, rather than part with their
customary Vices: But I hope they are not so much in the power of Devil, as that
the terrors of the Lord against such Offenders, both in this Life and in
another, can make no impression upon them.

23. Let those Wretches be never so free from the Laws of the Kingdom, and the
Censures of the Church, 1. Judgments upon Swearers in this life.
yet the Hand of the Lord will find them out, and even on this side the Grave,
pay them home for their rash Oaths, and blasphemous Execrations. We have some,
(though not many fresh) Instances of God's signalizing his Vengeance on such
horrid Criminals. For what was the reason of the small company of the
Israelites, killing 100000 Aramites in one day, 1 Kings 20.20. If you consult
Holy Writ, you will find it was for Blaspheming God. And what was the cause of
Sennacherib's meeting with such an Unnatural and barbarous Death? Was it not
the Blaspheming the Lord Jehovah both by his General Rabshekab, and by his own
Handwriting in a Letter he sent to Hezekiah? And does not God in our times
take the Sinner at his word, and cut him off in an Instant, with the damnable
Execration in his Mouth? True it is, such Instances of God's immediate
Vengeance in this World are very rare, and few examples of this nature are upon
Record: But let us take a view of the impenitent Blasphemer lying upon his
Deathbed in his last Agonies, and ready to give up his polluted Breath at his
last gasp: Let us there examine him, what Fruitor Profit he has in those things
whereof he is now ashamed? Can you think his gentile Oaths, and accomplished
Execrations, will now do him any advantage in that Eternity, into which he is
just ready to Launch. No, I am persuaded, you will hear him tell you another
story, and if the Devil has not quite gagged his Conscience, you will hear him
in the bitterness of his Soul, utter out this, or some such complaint. Damned
Caitif that I am! In what an unavoidably miserable condition am I involved?
What a lamentable prospect of endless Woe have I now in my sight? What a
horrible Scene is just ready to open and deliver me up to the devouring Flames?
Ob cursed Tongue! How have thou been employed for thine own Ruin? Heaven thou
can not appeal to, for the power thereof thou have often defied: God thou
can not call upon, whose Name thou have often and shamefully profaned by
thine unclean Lips: Oh Heavens! Drop down upon me, and crush me into nothing:
Oh Mountains fall upon me, and cover me from the face of him that sits upon
the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb: Oh Earth! Let thy Bowels gape, and
hide me in thy dark Caverns. But alas! in vain do I vent my wishes to those who
cannot, will not help me. Come then, ye Infernal Furies! and hurry my accursed
Soul to its deserved Mansions. Come ye bewitching and infatuating Spirits, and
take your cheap Bargain home to your fiery Habitations. Thus raving and
despairing, railing and cursing himself, he ends his abominable, odious, and
sinful Life.

24. But if this is not melancholy enough to strike Horror into the Adamantine
Heart, 2. Eternal Judgments upon Swearers.
yet let him his prospect beyond this and the Grave. For admit he may escape
the thunderbolts of Divine Wrath, though the Lightning may not devour him, nor
the Arrows of the Lord take hold of him in this life: yet can he expect to
escape the Judgment of God for ever? Shall not Hell be his Portion? and
Eternal Misery his stipend for all his Blasphemies? Shall he not with Dives
lift up his Eyes in Hell, being in Torments, and roar out in vain, for one drop
of water to cool his inflamed Tongue; That Fire, that world of iniquity which
delighted in venting out its Curses and Oaths here on Earth? Will not the
punishment be adaequate and suitable to the Crime? And is it not fit that That
Member suffer most, which was chiefly instrumental in plucking down the misery
upon the whole? Consider this then ye that forget God, that forget your selves,
and forgo your own Interest, both Temporal and Eternal, for what vanishes like
Smoke into empty Air: consider ye that Glory in your Shame, that Triumph in
your wickedness, that Out-dare Heaven with your Impieties: Are you able with
the Salamander, to live in Fire? Can you dwell in everlasting Burnings? Do you
know what the Worm that never dies is? And can you tell what the Fire
unquenchable means? If these things be not fictitious and imaginary if you are
sensible that there is really a Heaven for the Good, and a Hell for the Bad;
and are desirous to escape the one, and be blessed in the other: Leave off then
pleading for your Vices and argue not the prevalency of any Temptation, or the
strength of Custom for your persevering in your Impieties. Be no longer fond of
your Disease, your Fetters, your Calamities: But shake off your shackles
wherewith you have been so long confined, and break off your Sins by
Repentance: Let that Mouth, which has Blasphemed, Blaspheme no more, but praise
and magnify the Name of the Lord for ever, for his Name only is excellent, and
his Glory above the Earth and the Heaven.

25. And here I cannot but take notice of the madness of those, who seem to be
fearful of taking God's Blessed Name in vain themselves, The guilt of such as
Swear not themselves but delight to hear others Swear.
and yet delight to hear others Swear, and Blaspheme. I blush to say that now-a
days it is the Gusto of company, to have one profane Wretch or other by his
horrid Imprecations and unaccountable Oaths to move the rest to a fit of
Laughter: And there is scarce any pleasant Harmony in Society, without fearful
sounding Execrations to fill up the Chorus. But know, Oh wretched Man whosoever
thou art, that make as it were a Conscience of not Swearing thy self; and yet
take pleasure in hearing others Blaspheme, that thou art under the same
Condemnation. For they all shall be damned that have pleasure in
unrighteousness. A bare Connivance and Misprision, (as I may so say) of this
horrid High Treason against Heaven, is enough to make thee a Traitor; How much
more then shall thy consenting to it in thy Will, and countenancing it openly
by thy complacency therein, add to thy Guilt and Condemnation too? Hate not
then thy Brother in thy Heart, by suffering and encouraging so great a Sin upon
him; but correct and hinder it if thou can: Or if it is out of thy Power to do
that, yet be not of that Devilish Society which makes that a matter of Sport,
which should be the Cause of their greatest Humiliation; and Rejoice, Triumph,
and Laugh at that which makes the Damned in Hell shed Rivers of Tears.

26. I proceed to the last Species of Profaning God's Name, 4ly, Perjury
considered, whether by Circumvention, or by Subornation.
viz. by that horrid Sin of Perjury. And now I could wish with all my Soul
there were no reason to cry aloud and exclaim mightily against this Wickedness.
I could wish none were guilty of it but Rash Swearers, but we find that how
much soever they may by a fatal Consequence slip into it, yet there are too
many who do it out of design, and have their ends to serve therein. It Is too
visible how common Circumventions and Over-reachings are; and those Ushered in
too frequently with the solemnity of an Oath: It Is a Mystery belonging to each
Man's trade to be upon the sharp; and though they Lie and Aequivocate, Swear and
Forswear themselves, yet they are paid well enough they think, can they get but
the least gains imaginable thereby: Nor is Profit the only Loadstone that draws
men to the committing this great Impiety, but the Gratifying the humors of
Malice and Revenge works upon them altogether as much. Hence do we often see
Subornations and False-witnesses, sinister Tricks and unlawful Quibbles so much
in use in those times. Can they but betray the Innocent to the severity of the
Laws, retaliate an Injury, and expose the object of their hatred to the
Censures of either church or State; can they but procure either Sequestration
or Excommunication against him: how do they triumph and rejoice in their
inhuman Proceedings, and proudly boast of their Malicious success. But let such
Impudent out-daring Knights of the Post know, that this stretching of their
Faith and Consciences, though it has cast a Mist before the Inferior Courts of
Justice, yet they cannot corrupt the Righteous Judge of all the World, who will
do right: He will unmask their false Evidences; Reverse the Decrees issued out
against the Innocent, and fix the Judgment where it should be, upon the
Perjurious Creatures head. He will laugh at their Calamity, and mock when their
fear Comes, when their fear comes, as a desolation, and their Destruction, as
a Whirlewind. Prove. 1.26, 27.

27. So common is this Wickedness, The Difficulty of persuading men to leave
this Sin of Perjury.
and so advantageous is it grown to carry on Men's Trades and Designs, that it is
almost morally impossible to dissuade them from it. You will seem to do them
the greatest Injury imaginable, should you be so impertinent to advise them to
be men of their Words, to speak the truth in sincerity, and to be conscientious
in their Calling. You would destroy the greatest Pillar of their Trade, take
away the very support of their Merchandising, should you go about to straitlace
their Conscience (as they call it;) and keep them off from an Advantageous
straining their Faiths, when occasion requires. The whole World are turned
Sharpers, and shall we (say they) be so scrupulous, as to be afraid of u^^ng
the same Methods of advancing our Interest as is genenerally used? Fallere
Fallentem non est Frans; To Deceive the Deceiver is too well known a Maxim, and
too often practiced by our Wicked Generation. But to reclaim if possible those
vile Exorbitancies I shall offer two Motives drawn 1. from the Consideration of
the very Nature of the Crime; and 2ly, also from the greatness of the
Punishment subsequent on the Guilt.

28. Of what a Crimson Dye, and Scarlet Grain this Sin is in its own Nature
will appear, First Motive to leave off this Sin, is drawn from the greatness of
it in its own Nature.
if we consider that the Offender incurs the guilt of breaking the whole Law,
and transgressing that general Duty he owes to God, his Neighbor, and Himself.
1. He offers the greatest affront possible to God, either in his ordinary
Calling, or (in a more solemn manner) when called to a Court of Judicature,
when he invokes the Father of Spirits, and a Being that cannot Lie to be a
Witness to his untruth and Malicious Falsehoods. 2. He commits a piece of
Injustice against the whole Community of Mankind, as well as deceives,
circumvents, or fasly accuses any Particular person. He not only injures the
Object of his Revenge, but perverts the Current, and turns the stream of the
Laws of Nations; Blinds the Jury, Corrupts the Judge, puts the trick upon the
whole Bench, and makes Justice stand as a Blank, or rather as a Mask to cover
his Knaves Face withal. 3. He is not his own Friend to be sure, for he not
only exposes himself to the Penalties of Human Laws if his Rnavery should be
found out, but imprecates upon himself all the Punishments and Curses which God
usually inflicts upon the Wretch even in this Life, and which (without
Repentance) will be his Portion in the next. And how great those Judgments are
is next to be considered.

The Second Motive from the Greatness of the punishment which is either Human
or Divine.
29. So far is the Profligate Criminal from escaping punishment, that all the
Laws, both Human and Divine, are ready to lay hold of him.

How strict our Constitutions are against this Impiety, if any one will consult
5 Eliz. Cap. 9. Made perpetual. 29. Eliz. Cap. 5.
those Statutes made, and Provided in this case, will be manifest. The Heathen
when willing to express a Religious Man, would Title him only (...) a Man of
his Word: And when they described a Wicked Man, did think him fully delineated
when they called him (...) Perjurious. No milder a Brand does the Wretch
receive from the Law according to our general Acceptance of the thing: For
besides Fines, Imprisonments and the Pillory; he has as Ignominious a Character
as a Heretic or Infidel; being as incapable as them of bearing any Office, of
assisting at any honorable Court, or giving his Evidence in any Cause.

30. But admit he may escape undiscerned by Mortal Eyes, Gods Judgments upon
the Perjurious in this Life.
or if found out, that he is so hardened in his Impiety that the ^asest stigma
cannot shame him; that Fines and Penalties, that the Prison and Pillory cannot
startle him to his Amendment; yet I trust he is not so past Cure that the
Judgments of the Lord cannot prevail upon him. And herein God glorifies and
signalizes his Justice in a Wonderful Manner: He does not, will not hold them
Guiltless that take his Name in Vain. He pays them home in their own Coin (as
the Common expression is) even in this Life. Instances of this truth there are
enough even within the Compass of a short review; and there is no need to run
over any other Annals but our own Experience and knowledge for satisfaction in
this point. How many (I will forbear mentioning particular Names) have there
been, whom God's hand has smitten in a more immediate manner, punishing the
Offense in the very Moment of its Commission? How many dreadful spectacles have
there been of those whom Divine Vengeance has not hurried away, but left
according to their Wishes standing Monuments of his Justice, to die by a
fearful and lingering Disease, by some plague or another which has consumed them
as it were piecemeal? How many others are there who carry in their own Breasts
their Hell upon Earth? And on those I cannot forbear bestowing a Melancholy
thought or two, and Commiserate their most miserable Condition. Whatsoever the
Heathens might relate of the Perjured's being visited by the Furies every fifth
day, (...).
according to that of Hesiod: Whatever Poets feign of Prometheus Vultur or
Ixions Wheel are even on this side the Stygian Lake verified with a Witness.
These poor Wretches are lashed with the Twinges of a self accusing Conscience,
whose strokes are more piercing then all the snaky Whips and pointed Scorpions
are: This Worm gnaws with a greater Appetite, and makes a Deeper Impression in
the Sinners Bosom, then the Devouring Fowl could ever upon the others Bowels:
And the continual round of endless Despair leaves him in such a Labyrinth, that
every step he advances toward the Ridding himself out of it, intricates him
the more therein. Nor does the punishment always terminate in the Person, but
his Posterity more or less feel the sad Effects of their Predecessors
perfidiousness. This is too Visible to need any farther Illustration, saving
from the Example of that Great Man who entailed a Curse to his Family for the
nonperformance of a Thing he had engaged himself by an Oath to have done. He
was (I presume) more a Christian then that we should doubt of his not repenting
of the thing himself; yet the Misfortunes of his Posterity loudly proclaim the
Almighties Displeasure at that Offense.

31. Thus far of the Miseries incident to the perjurious in this Life, God's
Judgments upon the Perjured in another Life.
but what will his Portion be in that Lake of Fire and Brimstone I am struck
with horror at the very thoughts thereof. Methinks I see him ranked there with
the most Black, Infernal Devils; howling and shrieking through the very anguish
of his Spirits. There is he Convinced, though too late, of God's Justice toward
such profane Wretches: There he is Sensible how damnable a false Heart, a
double Tongue, and unhallowed Lips are: There he would wish those torments were
but Notion, and the Fire were but Painted, and the flames but Visionary, (as he
often has thought while on Earth) but to his Cost he finds the Reality of them,
and will for ever acknowledge the Eternity of them too. In that Prison, that
Dungeon of Everlasting misery, he has a full view of the Black Calendar of
Criminals, and sees the Catalogue of offenses (of which Profane Swearing and
Cursing, Blasphemy and Perjury are not the Last nor least) not with Repenting,
but eternally despairing Eyes.

32. And are not these thoughts terrible enough in all Conscience to melt down
the most Adamantine Heart? Can it be imagined that men are so flinty and
Obdurate, as that neither a Sense of their Guilt, nor an Esteem they may have
for their Reputation, nor the fear of Human punishments, much more of God's
Temporal and Eternal Judgments can win upon them to repent of their Evil ways?
He is certainly possessed with a stupidity beyond that of Lethargy, who can
live and forswear himself with Hell Flames about his Ears, notwithstanding the
insupportable Wrath of a justly incensed and provoked Judge is ready to seize
him, and hale him before the Judgment Seat of that strict Tribunal, who will
leave no Sin unpunished, though never so much palliated and glossed over with the
thin Varnish of weak human Excuses and Evasions. Repent then oh Man whosoever
thou art! and perjure thy self no more: Let the time past suffice that thou
have broken thy Vows and Promises, and for the future make thy Vows unto the
Lord of an Amendment of thy Life, and be sure to see them performed.

Of Drunkenness. CHAP. II.
The Origin of this Sin traced: How, and wherein (...) Difficulty of exactly
defining it consists. Drunkenn^ described by its Effects, and the
reasonableness such a Description considered in four Particula^ The false Ends
of Drinking Answered. A Deb^tation drawn from the Effects of this Sin, which
(...) 1. The Breach of that Duty we owe to God, our Neig^bour and our selves.
2. The advancing Satan's Kin^dom thereby. 3. The cause of many other Sins: A^ 4.
The making us Obnoxious to the Woes in Holy W^ denounced against such
offenders. The Difficulty becoming Sober, and the safety of doing it beti^
fully considered.

The Sin of Drunkenness traced from the Origin of it down to our times.
1. COme we now in the ne^ place to take a view ^^ that generally prevailing
Vice ^^ Intemperance in Drinking: T^^ Origin of which Brutal Immorality we can
Tra^^ from beyond the Flood. For it is upon Record, th^^ in the Days of Noah
when the Floods came and destroyed the Earth, they were Eating and Drinking and
giving in Marriage: Which words cannot b^ thought literally to signify the
bare Acts of Eatin^ and Drinking, etc. but the Extravagant Use and the Abuse of
God's Creatures, by perverting them from their proper, genuine, and natural End
to Excess ^d Luxury. Nor was the Universal Deluge of force ^ough to purge away
the Corruptions of those ^uilts, with which the old Debauched World had ^ained,
polluted, and poisoned the then Inhabited ^arth: For we find Noah, though a good
Man and a ^reacher of Righteousness, accidentally overtaken ^ith the Effects of
an unacquainted intoxicating Li^uor, which not only Exposed his Nakedness to
the ^iew of an Unnatural Ham, but gave occasion for ^ch of his Posterity, as
followed the steps of an ac^ursed Canaan to improve their Fathers weakness and
Infirmity to a Sin and Trade.

2. Hence was it that we hear of the Bacchanalian ^rews, whose Looseness and
Extravagancy in Drink^ng entitled them the Votaries of that swinish Deity. But
yet the allowed Intemperance in excessive Drinking among the Heathens, was only
to be ^een among the more Licentious Admirers of Bacchus, whilst the more Sober
and Considerative ^ere perfect Abhorrers of, and Enemies to such Riots and
Enormities. That Universal Sin of Drunkenness has but of late years crept into
the Christian Church, and but very lately dared to show its head openly in the
World, for those that were Drunken, as the Apostle testifies, were drunken in
the Night, 1 These. 5.7. But now all Vices in general, as well as that in
particular, have lost their former Modesty; and nothing more Common then to
hear the Wretch glory in his shame: as if it were a piece of his Prowess to be
mighty to Drink Wine, and of strength to mingle strong Drink. How incredibly
this notable Trade of high-Drinking has been improved within these few years,
since the Importation of Wines and Other Foreign Liquors has been the Staple
Merchandise of the Nation; is too apparent. Old King Edgar's temperate wooden
Cups and moderating Pins that were stuck into them for marks, Sp. Chron.
are now quite forgotten, and now there must be no limitation, no restraint in
a Bumper. It has been (I am glad there is little reason to say it is now) a
necessary Adjunct for a Loyalist to be a great Drinker; Carousing and taking
off full Glasses, giving great supplies to that spungy Branch of the Royal
Revenue of Excize; the which is heartily to be wished were exchanged for a more
Honorable Subsidy: and especially, since the main Objection against the
suppressing such Beastly Immoralities is so prevalent upon that account.

3. But though this Brutal Contagion is so Universal, and all Ages, Sexes, and
Degrees are more or less infected therewrth; Drunkenness, what it is, very
difficult to define.
yet it is one of the most difficult things in the world to define exactly what
Drunkenness is, and when Men may be said to be guilty thereof. There are so
many tricks and evasions used by the Offenders, to wipe off such a scandalous
disreputation from them, that unless we can meet with Instances of Dead Drunk
Sots, they will make us believe that we fall short of convicting any person of
the Offense. Though of late days there are not wanting too many Instances of this
kind, nothing being more common than to find the Epicuraecan at the Devil,
drowning his Cares for the World, as well as his concern for Eternal Welfare in
some plentiful and luxurious Debauch; and having settled his Brains with the
intoxcating Glass to see him in a reeling March retire to his Lodgings, where
he, like his fellow Brutes, lays himself down on his careless Pillow, and rises
in the Morning with the like unconcernedness upon him, as before.

4. Upon the account of Men's different Constitutions (some being more able to
bear a Gallon than others are a Quart) and the different occasions of the same
Man at one time more than another, Wherein the difficulty consists.
and the like, arises the difficulty of prescribing such and such a quantity of
Drink, beyond which is excess. But thus have most declared, that to drink more
than to satisfy our Thirst (of which our Nature, not our Appetite should be
Judge): To exceed the bounds of exhilaration and cheating up the fainting
Spirits when occasion requires either: and to transgress the end, for which
this action of Drinking was first ordained, viz. The preservation of Health, is
such a degree of Intemperance, as falls under the notion of a Sin; and which
must be seriously repented of. And the reason that the least degree of
Inmmoderate Drinking is a crime, is (I humbly conceive) because of the
Prolifick Nature of the Sin, which is too apt, having fled out past the
Barriers of Moderation not to stop there, but headlong to be carried on to the
very worst Extremes. There are, as I may so say, such secret Enchantments in
the bewitching Wine, that when Circes has got but the opportunity of giving Man
a Taste; though at first he may suck in the Philtrated Potion with caution, yet
he cannot forbear returning so often to the Trough, till at last he is
transformed into as natural a Swine as any Hog of them all, and can tumble in
his Mire with the same delight as others of the same species, and wash himself
with the rest, and return with them to wallow again.

5. It is no hard matter for Men, if they would deal ingenuously with
themselves, Drunkenness described by its Effects, and the reasonableness of
such a description considered in some particulars.
to know when they are guilty or not of transgressing the bounds of Prudence
and Moderation: but Confess and be Hanged is so nigh their Thoughts, that they
had rather sooth themselves up with a supposed Innocence, than fall foul upon
and censure their dearly beloved Selves. But yet so far one may venture to
convict another of Intemperance in Drinking, as the Effects consequent thereon
shall be more or less sinful. That this is the exactest measure, and most
reasonable method for the rightly apprehending the different degrees of this
Vice is past dispute, if we consider it in some Instances.

6. As first, if a Man of a choleric Constitution, inclinable to Passion, and
prone to take occasion to be angry; apt to kindle into a flame at every
accidental spark, The first particular considered.
and obnoxious to prosecute his Revenge with the utmost malice; but in his
sober Mood is careful to curb the violence of his Passions, and to watch
against the prevalency of Temptations; if such a Man, I say, shall upon
Drinking and Carowsing, give the Reins to his Masterless exorbitancies, and fly
out into unwarrantable fury; if he shall fling or throw about him, beat and
abuse all he meets, Curse and Blaspheme Heaven, Rail against his fellow
Creatures, and play the frantic hectoring Madman; He may then be said, let the
quantity be little or much, to have drunk too deep, and consequently to be
guilty of Excess, and in the sense of the Law may be punished for Tippling, though
not Drunkenness.

7. On the other hand, if one of a meek and pleasant dsposition, The Second
Paricular considered.
very gentle and easy to be entreated; Or a sweet affable and courteous
behavior; hard to be provoked, one that does pass by Injuries, and the like;
shall upon his taking a Glass or two too much, find himself transformed and
carried beyond his former Self, to commit any thing imprudently, rashly or
passionately, which at another time he would have been ashamed to have done: if
he shall perceive himself Testy, censorious or Quarrelsome, he may then
conclude he has drank too much, and need not be offended if another should say
so too.

8. Again, if a Man of a Sanguine Complexion, propense enough to Acts of
Uncleanness and Sensuality, A Third Particular considered.
apt to indulge himself in the pleasures of the Sixth Sense, and forward
enough to give himself up to all manner of Lust (even when he has his Wits,
Reason, and Judgment about him, which are little enough to restrain his
Debaucheries): If I say such a Man shall add Fuel to his Fire, and Oil to the
Flames by rich and strong Wines: If he shall then (having Hood-winked his
Reason, blinded his Judgment, and bid adieu to all Modesty) be beyond all
measure carried out to satisfy his Youthful Desires by unchaste Embraces, and
quench his scorching Heats at the next (though never so impure) a stream: Be
induced to defile his Neighbors Bed, to commit Incest, or deflour Virgins; none
need question whether he is guilty of excessive Drinking or no, though perhaps he
may not see the Beast so far intoxicated, as to be unable to move Hand or Foot,
or to keep himself from tumbling in his own filth.

9. On the other side, If one of more chaste Thoughts, very watchful over his
Words, A Fourth Particular considered.
more careful over his Actions; diligent to suppress the very first Motion to
Impurity, and sedulous on all occasions to avoid the Snares and Baits, laid to
entrap and seduce heedless Youth; Shall accidentally take a Cup more than
usual, and thereby perceive his former Modesty to vanish: Be induced to talk
loosely or obscenely, moved to wanton and lascivious Actions, and inflamed to
Concupiscence and inordinate Desires: He may then assuredly judge himself to be
overtaken in a great degree of Intemperance, though the quantity he drank, exceed
but a very little his usual allowance.

10. In a word, when ever a Man has so far unmanned himself by Drink (be the
quantity more or less) so as to act, speak or think otherwise, than he would
have done, said or thought at any other time when he had his Intelligent and
Volent Faculties of his Soul free about him, he may then be said to be
Intemperate, so as to need Repentance. For it is the many sinful Actions
consequent upon the Sin, which makes it to be more or less sinful; A
Complication of Crimes, being far more Offensive to the Supreme Being, than one
single Act, though never so maliciously designed, can be thought to be. Thus He,
who is dead Drunk and deprived of all Sense and Motion, and so rendered
incapable of doing any other mischief than what he has done to himself, may be
said to be guilty of a less Offense than that Man who having not perhaps drank
half the quantity, adds to his Sin of Intemperance, that of Anger, Rage and
Fury. So likewise there are decrees of those mad Drunkards; and he who throws
the Glasses over his Head, dashes the Bottles in pieces, and pays for those his
Extravagancies, is more excusable, than those who in their Frolicks break
Windows, Bilk Coaches, Fight the Watch, and fall foul upon all they meet; Nor
are these last so heinous as those who proceed to Murder, Rape and
Incontinence: Nor are they again (though arrived to the highest Branch of
Wickedness) so bad as that Inhumane, Unnatural, and Unparalleled Monster, who
to gratify the Devil for some piece or service done, was in complaisance to
the Infernal Desire over-taken with Drink, and in that Brutal condition
Murdered his Father, and committed Incest upon his Mother, the very Thoughts
whereof he in his sober Fit rejected, abhorred and abominated.

11. And now, from what I have already said upon this Subject, I might take
occasion to answer those false ends of Drinking alleged by the Intemperate as
a palliation for the Offense. Some of them the Sun. 8. s. 3, 4, etc. to the
10th.
Author of the Whole Duty of Man has already mentioned such as are [1.
Good-Fellowship: (2.) Preserving of Kindness: (3) Cheering of Spirits: (4)
Putting away Cares, (5) Passing away time: (6) Preventing Reproach: (7)
Pleasure of the Drink: (8) Bargaining.] confuted long ago: And therefore I
shall say nothing after so ingenious a Pen, but confine my self to speak only
of those which he did not take notice of, either as such whereof no mention was
made in his time; or such as he thought thin, Futile, and not worthy to be
answered by the Judicious, which would fall to nothing of themselves.

12. I wave saying any thing in Refutation of the Gentility of this Sin; and
forbear a needless dispute with those who maintain Drunkenness as a necessary
Accomplishment of a Gentleman: Since if the very sound of the Word, if the
brutal Nature of the Vice are not of force enough to make the Spark ashamed,
yet when I have exposed it naked, I question not, but if he has any Generosity
in his Heart, or Modesty in his Countenance, he cannot without blushing assert,
That High-Drinking is a mark of his Breeding. I shall therefore only answer the
Objections which are usually made by the Wits, the Worldlings, and the
Hectoring Bravoes of the Age.

13. Nothing more usual than to hear the first sort cry out in some such
Language as this: 1. The Objection made be the Wits of our Times.
Dull Fool! Leave off thy Lessons of severe Morality, and impracticable
Temperance, Go Preach to Monks and Anchorites, to Old Men and Children, of
Sobriety and the excellent Qualities of Small Beer and Water. We know better
things, and are not to be put upon by thy insipid Cant. Experientia docet, we
are experienced Blades, and can tell thee no Wit, no Learning, no Parts, no
Ingenuity like to that which Impregnating, Exalting, Elevating Wine gives Life
and vigor to. Where did hear of a Poet worth the hanging, unless he had
first dipped himself over head and Ears in Aganippes Fountain, and got the smack
of the Bottle so, as to return often to recruit his Flagged Fancy with Nectar
and Ambrosia? Did ever read of any that arrived to Parnassus's Top without
the Cordial of Helicon to support and transport his Spirits in the Elevation?
The Noble strains and Losty Flights, the curious Vein and pregnant Fancy, the
pleasant, facetious Air, and all the sacred Raptures of a Poet, are all owing
to the Influence of the great God of Wine: For we pay our Adoration to him
first in full Glasses, and he returns the Duty again in assisting our Genius,
and sharpening our Conceptions.

14. To all which I answer, The Objection answered.
that this method of Drunken Versifying is certainly what most of the Wits of
the present Age make use of to render themselves and their Writings infamously
famous to these times and Posterity. And hence it is that we see so many
Obscene, and Offensive Brats of Poetry ever and anon peep out into the World;
which in former days would never have born the light. But these vile
Dithyrambicks, the Product of Inebriated Brains are fitter to be Dedicated to
Priapus, Bacchus, or any other Bawdy Drunken Deity, then to be offered at the
shrine of the more Chaste and Temperate Apollo. It seems very unreasonable to
think that Intemperance which dulls and he betares should quicken and inspire
the Fancy; that what too often clouds, should inlighten the Understanding; that
the very thing which drowns should heighten our Conceptions. But admit those
Absurdities, yet these kinds of Whettings will quickly Wear the Edge to the
Back, quickly destroy the Reason though not the Man, and convert all his high
Raptures into N. L. an Instance of this.
Frenzy and Delirium. I know not who are Lawreats now, nor what Qualifications
are requisite to make one such: But (believe me) they are not worthy of that
Divine Name of Poet, if they are so ill-stocked that they are forced to take up
supplies from the very dregs of a Nasty gut full of Wine. I cannot, will not
but own that the famous Ingenioso's of past times have highly applauded the
Virtues of Wine, and declared the Noble Effects it has had in clearing their
apprehension, and refining the Spirits: but then, it is not (I presume) produced
by those Empyreumatick Fumes which our Modern Poetical Chemists draw off by
praecipitant, hasty, burning and surfeiting Excess; but the nobler Extracts of
Temperance all Sobriety drawed gently off in a Moderate Balneo Maria. And he
that was an Ingenious was a Sober Man too, though now it is so contrary, that if
you describe a Poet, you must add Vine Leaves to his Laurel, put other Colors
into the Mixture, and delineate him a Sot at the same time.

15. The second sort are such whose Plea commonly runs in some such strain as
this. 2ly, The Objection made by the Worldly Wise.
Is no Excess at all to be allowed? Why, then farewell all Opportunities for
Trade and Commerce; Farewell Law and Physic too. As there is no better Vinculum
Societatis, so there is no greater Support to maintain the Mechanic Practick
Part of the Republic, then the Innocent cracking a Pot, and smoking a Pipe
together. We may traverse the Streets, walk round and round the Change, make
frequent Visits to Westminster Hall, and stare in every Face we meet, but
return home like Fools as we went, never a Customer never a Client the more,
and never a Farthing the heavier in our Pockets: But spend we an hour or so in
a Tavern or Alehouse, over the drinking of a harmless Glass or two with an
Honest Friend or so, we insinuate so prettily into each others Acquaintance,
that immediately, as the Glass so out several Vocations go round: And by mutual
Loving Healths we furnish each others needs, and get more by the Company at one
sitting, than we spend in it for half a Year.

16. The second Objection answered.
This is a pleasant Account of the success of Sir John Barley; a plea too
common in the Mouths of many who think themselves very wise notwithstanding.
It Is too true, this stratagem of managing business in Public Houses, is what
the Evil one has very subtily insinuated as a means to carry on his own
designs; and this is the method Men take now a days to increase their Trade and
gain Customers. But let me tell them (under the Role) it is a Knavish, sly and
ignoble way of Merchandising. If a Glass or two were all, as they pretend,
there were little harm done: but when they are in for it, they seldom come off
without a sound Wetting. There Is no gain to be had by playing upon the Square,
it is safest drinking a Man down and then pick his Pocket after. Were he in his
right Wits they know he would not have been imposed upon so, but it is no hard
matter to cheat him to his Face when his Senses are Sophisticated and Lost. So
in like manner as to the Law, it is a Contradiction (I should think were it not
so Customary) for a Man to gain Practice by being a great Drinker; I know not
what his addle Brains might do in winning upon Coxcombs of the same Kidney, but
I believe a Considerative Man would be far from making him of his Council,
lest the sight of the Brief the next Morning might confound his Addlepate,
which was so deeply Soused in Claret or Nottingham the foregoing Night; and
make his giddy Head run Counter in the Cause, rather then speak any whit to the
purpose. The same might be said (Mutatis Mutandis) of sottish and inconsiderate
Sollicitors and Attorneys, who mar their Clients Cause more by far than all
the Exceptions, Bills of Error, Demurrers, and reversing of Decrees could do.
So likewise in Physic, what Man would be so mad in his sober Senses to make
him his Physician, who helped him to the Distemper by joining with him in the
Debauch? Certainly he must needs be very Extravagant of both, who will
prostitute his Life to the Discretion of one that perhaps was the Principal
Cause of Vitiating his Health not long before. For my part I should be afraid
lest he who before was for my Excess in Sack, might be as much (unadvisedly if
not wittingly) Immoderate in administering his Cordials, and so make it his
pleasure to send me as merrily out of the World, as before he had seen me Reel
out of a Tavern.

17. Advance we now in the next place to consider the third and last sort of
Men I shall here have occasion to take notice of, 3. The Objections made by the
Hectors of the Age.
as palliating the Crime of Intemperance by a false Gloss and a thin
transparent Varnish which instead of hiding, exposes the Monster in worse, though
more natural and proper Colors. Is all Excess (may some say) forbidden? Is
Drunkenness in all its Species and Degrees. Unlawful? What then shall those
poor Souls do, who venture their Lives and Fortunes for their King and Country?
It Is well known nothing Encourages and Enspirits them more than a dram or two
of the Bottle. The Life of a Soldier is in his Mornings draught: Who is able to
endure the hard Marches, wet Trenches, and the continual Fatigues of a
Campaign, that is not well warmed within? What Man of a thousand would stand
out a Field Battle who had not drank largely before? For none fight stouter and
stand longer the brunt of the Battle then the half-drunk Cavalier.

18. To all which I Answer, The third Objection Answered.
that if any Excess was warrantable, it would be doubtless in this; but Man,
that boundless headstrong Creature, having passed the limits of Reason and
Moderation knows not (as I hinted before) where nor when to stop. Hence we
perceive the mad Disorders and Mismanagements even of most disciplined Armies
in an Engagement commonly to arise, which perhaps at a general Rendezvous were
as well ranged as the best; but Drunkenness being the Preparative to the Battle
put all out of Frame, makes the Soldier giddy and hot, spurs him to rash and
mad Attempts, and engages his Intoxicated Headpiece in such dangers, which none
but his Hair-brained self would run into. In this Confusion Right and Left are
both alike; to your Leader, and all such useful words of Command are of no
Effect; and helter skelter every Man is his own Officer. From this disorder in
the Camp was it that Benhadad and his Army of Syrians were defeated by a band
of Young Israelites: Plutarch.
from this it was that the Gauls who Besieged the Roman Capitol were by
Camillus put to the Sword. And, believe me, it is a sad Circumstance to die in
such a Condition for let them harbor never such good hopes of being saved if
they can but cry, the Lord have mercy upon my Soul, it is too common the last
breath they draw is with a G -- damme in their Mouths. But admit the Wretches
be Victors in the Field, and become Masters of Bag and Baggage too, yet in this
hot Blood what Barbarities will they not commit? What Outrages will they not
offer? They Will put all to the Sword, deflour Virgins, abuse Widows, depopulate
Cities, and burn down Palaces; and the Officers Charge is no more regarded
after, than it was before the Victory. That this is true, which I here assert,
is Evident from those who have already been abroad and are here and there
Quartered and Garrisoned amongst us: When the Liquor is in, what Regard have
they to Civil or Military, to Canon or Common Law? They abuse all they meet,
and if they can fasten upon none else, like Savages in their drunken fits they
fall foul upon each other. But how degenerate is this Valor from the true
Conduct and Valor which a sober Consideration of the justness of their ^ause
did formerly beget? The ancient Fulminant ^egions which gained the Roman
Generals so many ^onquests were of another Make, and vanquished ^^eir Barbarian
Enemies not by being Pot-Valiant, ^ut by their Prayers, which the being in a
drunken ^audlin Humor, is a very ill Circumstance to per^^rm.

19. Thus have I done considering the Ends which ^re falsely assigned for
Drinking; to wind up all and ^raw toward a Conclusion, Let ^^e Exhort all to
the Necessary ^uty of Temperance, A Dehortation to fly the Odious sin of
Drunkenness, drawn from the ill Effects thereof.
and Dis^ade them from the odious Sin ^f Drunkenness: which can be ^one no
better then by consi^ering the dismal Effects it produces. The Princi^al of
which will appear by considering First, How ^ar it makes a Breach of that Duty,
we owe to God, ^ur Neighbors, and our selves: Secondly, How much ^e advance
Satan's Kingdom thereby. Thirdly, How ^navoidably we incur the falling into
diverse other Sins: And Lastly, the Woes against Intemperance mentioned and
denounced in the plain and revealed Word of God.

20. As to the first of these, it has that dismal Effect to make us Guilty of
breaking the whole Law. The first ill Effect is the Breach of the whole Law.
Hence has one ingeniously observed, that there was no reason for God to forbid
it in any Particular precept of the Decalogue, since in Effect it was the
violation of both Tables -- For hereby first we offend G^ the Father in the
Extravagant (...) and abuse of those Creatures (...) has ordained to be
received wi^^ Moderation and Thanksgiving: Drunkenness is the Violation of our
Duty toward God.
We affront God t^ Son by perverting the end for which he came in^^ the World,
which was that the Grace of God reveal^ by him in his Gospel might through him
bring Salvation and appear unto all Men, that denying all Vngodlines^ and
Wordly Lusts they might live Soberly (as well a^ Righteously and Godly in this
World. Tit. 2.11, 1^ We provoke God the Holy Ghost to forsake these o^
Intemperate Bodies as filthy Habitations, and t^ seek out for more wholesome
and cleanly Mansions (...) we defile his Temple, and Eject him by our
Imp^^rities, and quench his Motions by our Sensualities In a Word, we injure
the whole Trinity, by walking contrary to those Rules of Temperance and
Sobriety, which are implanted in our Natures by the mere light of Reason; or
taught us by the written and revealed Word of God; By defacing th^^ Image of
the Deity, and putting out that Light o^ a Reasonable Soul, which the Divine
Rays ha^ kindled within us; by transforming our Godlike Nature and Upright
Forms into the Shape and Deformities of Downright Brutes.

Drunkenness the breach of our Duty to our Neighbors.
Nor are we less Guilty of the Breach of our Duty to our Neighbors, whether it
relate to the Public Good of Communities or the Private Welfare of Families;
Drunken Magistrates no Friends to the Public.
to the Acts of Justice or those of Charity. He cannot be looked upon as a
Friend to the Public, whether we consider him as a Magistrate, or as a Subject
thereof. If a Magistrate, what more common than to have the Laws perverted, our
Courts of Judicature turned Revengers of private Animosities, and the like?
Hence is it that so many partial Hearings, and praeter-judicious Proceedings
have been not long since in our Courts of Justice, whilst the intoxicated
Gentleman of the Long Robe has taken upon him to give his Verdict from what he
has heard of the Beginning and end of the Cause, without any regard to the
substance of the Pleading which he has fairly slept away: Hence it is (from
Epicurean Ministers of Justice I mean) that the Orphan, the Poor and the Widow
are put by their Right; Hence it is that a Land mourns, and the Public
Grievances of any Nation do arise. This makes the Wise Man so pathetically to
urge; It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink Wine, nor for
Princes strong drink, lest they drink and forget the Law, and pervert the
Judgment of any of the Afflicted, Prove. 31.4, 5. From this Consideration was
it, that in the famous Cities of Lacedemon, Crete and Carthage Wine was totally
forbidden to Magistrates; Alex ab Alex.
and whoever came into their Senate House overcharged with Excess, were turned
out and degraded from that Dignity with Ignominy and Reproach: And from this
was it that the Prudential Solon made it a Law at Athens, That Drunkenness in
one bearing Authority should be punished with Death. It were to be wished some
such Law were made in another Constitution, and then there would not be wanting
such Magistrates as would punish the Excess in an Inferior, having no such
thing as a Consciousness of being guilty of the same to put them out of
Countenance, or to check the Proceeding. Nor can the Drunken Subject be said to
be a Friend to any, much less to our English Constitution; since besides the
Riots and Routs, the many Immoralities and Tumults he is commonly the Author
of, The Drunken Subject an Enemy to the Public.
he violates and acts in downright Contradiction to the several 4 Jac. 1. Cap.
5. 21 Jac. 1. Cap. 7.
Statutes of the Realm, in that Case made and Provided. And by the way he is a
profound Loyalist, who shall, under a pretense to inhance the Royal Income,
make bold to affront the Law by the manifest and notorious breach thereof. But
look we at home and behold the intemperate Wretch in his own Family, and we
shall find him a Tyrannical Master, A Drunkard an Enemy to his own House.
an Unnatural Father, as well as an abusive Husband: He is so far from being a
Friend to his own House, that he is the greatest Enemy it has. For waving those
many unmanly Actions he is guilty of there, to wit, his beating and kicking his
Servants, his Unrelenting and Unconcernedness at his Childrens Cries, the
intolerable Heart-breakings he gives to the pensive Wife of his Bosom, and the
like, He undermines and ruins his own Walls by his extravagant Expenses; and
brings himself and His to Poverty and Rags. For has he a pl^ntiful Estate
descended from frugal Ancestors, it is no wonder to hear he lives beyond it; and
by his frequent prodigal Excesses to run it into such Encumbrances, and Drown
it with so many Mortgages, that the next Heir is seldom the better for it: But
if he is one of an inferior capacity, how usual is it to have the indigent Wife
and Children feed upon Bread and Water; and turned over at last to be a Charge
to the Parish, which might have been prevented, had the thrifty Husband gone
less to the Alehouse or Tavern. Neither in the last place can the Drunkard be
said to be his own Friend, for thereby he injures both his Baser and his Nobler
Self, separately and conjunctly too. He injures his Body by the many manifest
Mortal distempers which Excess and Surfeitings naturally produce: The Drunkard
a Self-hater, injuring his Body and Soul separately and conjunctly.
and though his Constitution may be never so strong, yet insensibly it impairs
his Vitals by degrees, and at length destroys his whole Frame. The Body feels
immediate discomposures at the very time of the debauch, as is evident from the
gripes and vomitings, the yawning and reachings, the giddiness of the Head, and
the Rawness of the Stomach which attend it: But manifold are the Maladies that
follow a long contracted course of irregular, intemperate Drinking. Of all the
Diseases we find in our Weekly Bills of Mortality, none swell the number of the
Deceased more than those occasioned by Luxury and Excess. It Is Intemperance
shortens our days, and cuts the Thread before it be spun out to half the length
of our long-lived Fathers: and from thence our youth are cropped in the flower of
their Age, hurried away oftimes in the midst of a Debauch, and like Lamps, are
extinguished before they are half spent, by reason of the superfluous Humors
poured in, which drown that which maintains the vital Flame.

And as he endangers the Destruction of his Body, by indulging the Transient
pleasure of Taste, so by his continual Swinish Immoralities, he degrades that
Noble Heaven-born Being, his Immortal Soul I mean; The Intellectual, as well as
the Animal Faculties whereof are hereby clouded: The Understanding, the Will,
the Affections whereof are corrupted and depraved, infatuated and ensnared. Nor
are these Considerations of such moment, as that in the last place he injures
both Soul and Body Conjunctly, in making them obnoxious to Hell flames: For the
Apostle assures us among the rest of the Damning Sins, that neither shall
Drunkards inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor, 6.10. And where else their
Inheritance will be, is no hard matter for those to guess, who know no Medium,
no Purgatory between Heaven and Hell: which is a sad Thought, that for the
fulfilling of one Lust, and the gratifying one Sense, Men should hazard the
irrecoverable Loss of their Immortal Souls. I know not what they think that are
guilty of this Impiety, but it is a startling Consideration to any sober Man,
that the Wine they are thus enamoured with, should cost them so dear, not only
the expense of their Estates and Time, the decay and overthrow of whole
Families, the impairing and debilitating their Bodies, but also what is the
greatest Expense, viz. The price of an Immortal Soul.

21. But to stir up Men, if possible, to their Wits and Senses, let them
consider in the next place, The Second ill effect of I^^n de^ate drinking, is
the ad^^n^^^g of S^tans Kingdom thereby.
whose Friends and Servants they have hitherto been. They are of their Father
the Devil and his Works, not their own do they execute; they can please him in
nothing more than by this Brutal Immorrality: Be Drunk, and you give him all he
can ask or desire. When Satan has steeped Men in Liquor, he moulds them like
soft Clay, to what Form he pleases; and it is no hard matter to make them his
Instruments to do just even what he would have them. If he has a Rape to
commit, none fitter for the Amor than the Drunkard: If he has a Life to take
away, no weapon like a Drunken Fury and inebriated Passion: If he would rail
against Heaven, or Blaspheme him that is Higher than the Highest, the Wine
inflamed Wretch will Belch out Oaths and Curses, Blasphemies and Execrations as
fast as he can desire. So that if to humor the Devil and please him, if to be
his Friend and Servant be what you desire, rather than the pleasing of God, the
being kind to your Neighbors and your Selves, you can invent no properer a
Method, than by being a most accomplished, refined, and complaisant Drunkard.

22. Which brings me to the next Consideration, the fatality, as it were, of
falling into more sins at the same time. The Third ill Effect of Drunkenness,
that it is the cause of many other Sins.
You must, as I said before, if you are the Devils Friend, give him a Testimony
by some Overt Action that you are so. Sins as well as Miseries seldom come
unattended; and of all others this of Intemperance has the largest Retinue:
Fornication and Uncleanness, Adultery and Incest, Swearing and Blaspheming,
Murder and Revenge, Violence and Rapine, Theft and Oppression are all of its
black Train; It Is but a Provocation that is wanting for the Drunkard to put
One, or more, or all these into execution together. And if he does neither,
it is not because he was wanting therein, but because the opportunity, the
circumstance, the company did not suit; nor was it the Devils Royal Will and
Pleasure at that time to tempt him to the performance of that which he knows he
may probably have a fitter season for.

23. I proceed now in the last place to take notice of those woes denounced in
Holy Scripture against such scandalous Offenses; The 4th ill Effect of this
Sin, is, that it makes a Man liable to the Woes denounced in Holy Scripture
against this Impiety.
and here before I do that, I should give some account of those dreadful
Examples of the Judgments which God inflicts upon the Epicures, and by what
unheard of and various Methods they come to their untimely ends; by breaking
their Necks, by Drowning themselves, by having their Brains dashed out, and by
many other accidents: But every Annal, every History has Instances enough to
convince any that will make the application home, how frequently the drunken
Man catches harm, and what a horrible thing it is to fall into the hands of an
angry God. Therefore I shall confine my self to mention the principal places in
Holy Writ, which seem chiefly to level at the Intemperate. The first which I
shall mention, is, what the Wise man does imply in that passionate
expostulation he makes [ Prove. 23.29.] Who has Woe? Who has Sorrow? Who has
Redness of Eyes? Who has Contentions? Who has Wounds without Cause? He tells
you in the next Verse; they that tar -- ry long at the Wine, they that go to
seek mixed Wine. Here you see a large accumulation of Miseries, Grief, Strifes,
Violence and Wrong, which follow the Drunkard at the very heels: For the Wine
may look delicately, sparkle finely, and move it self aright in the Glass, but
at the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. The next Woe
we find is, that which the Prophet Isaiah denounces in these plain terms [
Chap. 5, 11.12.] Woe to them that rise up early in the Morning, that they may
follow strong Drink, that continue until night, till Wine inflame them, and the
Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe are in their Feasts; but they regard not
the work of the Lord, nor consider the operation of his hands. As if he should
have said, Woe to those Greedy, Lusty Drinkers, who to prevent the want of
time, wherein to satiate their Lust, rise early with the Morning Sun, and suck
their Wine like the Morning Dew: Who are not contented when a Temptation
offers, to embrace it, but seek out for one, go about from this Companion to
that: Woe to those who sit whole days in Tipling-houses, and protract their
Clubs till after night: Who sit up 2 or 3 Nights together, and (as the Vulgar
have it) Sing Old Rose, and go to Supper twice, Rant and Carouse, Damn and
Drink all in a breath: A Health to this, and a Confusion to that Man and all
his Adherents; who in the midst of all their jollity forget the God of
Moderation, and with Belshazzar, praise their gods of Gold and Silver, of
Luxury and Excess, Who consider not the Lord, nor regard the operation of his
hands; How he often is unseen at these Banquets, and will call them to an
account, and put a Cup of Trembling and Astonishment in their hands; how he
often meets the Dead-drunk Tipler, and sends him to Hell in the very Debauch;
how he often breaks the Arms of one, the Legs of another, robs this Man of his
Senses, and fills the other with Despair. These things are little regarded, but
it is the Lord that does this, and they are (let men observe them or no) the
Wonderful Operations of his hands. The same Prophet denounces a Woe in the same
Chapter, [ Verse. 22.] in Words very near the former. Woe to them that are
mighty to drink Wine, and Men of strength to mingle strong Drink: Which seems
to intimate thus much; that let Men be never so well able to bear strong Drink,
and have Constitutions as strong as the Oak, and Heads as hard as Brass; be
they never so sound of Body, and capable to swill down as many Gallons as their
Companions can do Pints, and neither prejudice their Healths, nor drown their
Memory, nor weaken their Understanding, yet notwithstanding all this, there
does a Woe belong to them, and a Dreadful one too: and that because they make
use of this their strength to the weakening their Brother, and the Drinking him
down, as they are please to call it.

24. This Naturally leads me to consider that Gradation and Climax of Woes
which another Prophet has denounced against, and appropriated to, the degrees
of such Strong and Mighty Drinkers; The Words are these: Woe to him that gives
his Neighbor Drink. Habb. 2.15. [Not to supply his Natural Necessity (that
being a piece of Charity, and no way deserving reproof) but as an Occasion to
that Excess, which either his own Inclinations, or the pleasantness of the
Liquor, would prompt him to.] Woe to him that puts his Bottle to his
Neighbor, [That is; that not only lays the Temptation before his Guest, but
(as is too frequent in our Modern Entertainings) compells, urges, and presses
him to that Excess: that Provokes him either by his Command, or his Example, or
(which is worse) by Menaces and Threatenings to take unwillingly the almost
nauseous Dose.] Woe to him that makes his Neighbor Drunk, that not only gives
an Occasion, that presses, that compells him to Drink, but that also urges that
Excess to such a degree, that no less price than his Neighbors Reason must
satisfy for the wast of his Liquor; that delights in that Sin himself, and
takes pleasure in those who do the same things; that makes the Inebriating of
his Guests the ultimate end of his Revels, and is pleased to see the Antic
Postures of his Drunken Neighbor; a Wickedness which the Spartans would do
only to their Slaves, and that upon no such end as the making sport at those
twice Captivated Wretches, but only thereby to have an Occasion of Exposing the
Monstrous folly of Intemperance, so as to scare their Children from such a
Beastly Vice.] Woe, in the last place, to him that makes him Drunk that he may
look upon his Nakedness, [whose design is to bring the Deluded Soul into the
Snare, and then expose him to the Mercy of his own or others craft, revenge, or
sport; who binds the Soul first in Drunkenness, and then throws him into the
Chambers of Death; that inflames heedless Youth with Wine and then sends him a
Temptation to prey upon his Chastity; that robs a Man of his Senses, and then
takes an Advantage either of Exposing, or of making gain of his Infirmities;
that takes the Bridle from his Tongue, and the Reins from his Passion, and then
leaves him to be carried headlong by the Unruliness of the One, and torn in
pieces through the headstrong Impetuosity of the other.] That such Profligate
Offenders deserve a Curse, and a Woe with a Vengeance none will doubt: and the
Curse, the Woe, is cut out for them in the next Verse. Thou art filled with
shame, for Glory: drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered; the Cup
of the Lords Right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful Spewing shall
be on thy Glory.

25. To sum up all, Let me advise all who have been guilty of the least Degree
of Intemperance, to lay these things seriously to heart. If you have been
hitherto carried away with your Carnal Appetites to obey them in fulfilling the
Lust thereof, be so no more. Consider whether the Sin in its own Nature, or in
its Effects, be so Charming as to deserve your further Pursuit or Love. Survey
it well, and see whether it has any such lovely Features as to Captivate a
Generous Mind. Think with your selves, whether God must be thus affronted, (for
Religion is always forgotten where Reason is lost) your Neighbor in all the
Relations thus Abused, and your selves in all Respects thus injured, and that
only for the sake of gratifying one single Sense, and indulging one beastly
desire. Be not so Mad, be not so Desperate as to humor the Devil, by laying
your selves open to all his Snares, and Inticements; and by exposing your
selves to all the Woes, Miseries, and Calamities incident to Intemperance in
this Life, and to the Wrath of God in an Eternity of Torments hereafter. 'Tho
you may not value your Health, your Estates, and your Worldly Concern, yet
remember you have Souls which must be either Eternally happy, or Eternal^y
miserable. It Is not a Disease or two that will wreck you; nor Want, Poverty or
Distress that will grind you, nor all the Adversity you meet with here, can
torment you so much, as one moments pain in the World to come, will afflict you.

26. 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober therefore, be vigilant, for your Adversary the Devil,
goes about seeking whom he may devour. Romans 13.13, 14. Walk honestly as in the
day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying: but put you on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof: To these of the Apostles,
take also that advice our Savior gives. Luke 21.24. Take heed to your selves,
lest a^ any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness,
and so that day (that great and notable day of his appearing) come upon you
unawares, and seize upon you in that unprovided beastly condition. A condition
which few would care to appear in before an earthly Magistrate, how much less
before the Tribunal of that just Judge, whose Eyes cannot behold any thing
impure or unclean. Let me prevail upon you, especially you, who bear any
Authority in your Persons, as you are either Magistrates or Ministers, as you
are either Fathers or Masters, to abstain altogether from this Swinish
Immorality: For you are answerable, not only for the excess you fall into your
selves, but are sharers in the offense, which others by your example (more
prevalent than your Persuasions and Advice to the contrary) do commit, and are
encouraged to be guilty of.

27. If you would know when you should set abo^ this regular course of Life;
Enter upon it this very m^ment, Better and easier it is to do it to day than to
morrow: Defer it not off till this Club or that Societ^ shall be laid down;
perhaps you must be summone^ hence, long before that, and your very next
meeting may be your last. I know, when you think but of a change, the Devil has
more than one thing to suggest; The difficulty of becoming sober, and the
safety of returning betimes considered.
He has solicitations from your old companions to inveigle you; He has their
Reproaches and Revilings, ready (if you deny the former) to force you; He has
the remembrance of the former pleasures you took in those Debauches, whereby to
allure you, and a long Custom and contracted evil Habit to inchant you; He has
the variety and deliciousness of Liquors to charm you to return to your old
beloved Vice. But if you shake off all these Fetters, and bind your selves with
Resolutions of Temperance and Sobriety: If you can, by the assistance of God's
Grace (to which in all your Trials you must have recourse) but hold out against
the first shock of your Temptations, and resist the Onset with Courage and a
resolved Denial at the beginning of the Siege, you will find all the Assailants
desert their Batteries, quit their Intrenchments, and despairing of success,
retreat with a Curse or two at your obstinate Refusal. The Devil, perhaps, may
now and then send out his Scouts to allarm you; but finding all the Passes
safe, and a careful Watch kept at every Sense, and vigorous Sallies made
against his Incursions He himself will fly from you; and leave you to the
Tutelage of Sobriety and Temperance, Innocence and Peace, Sedateness of Mind
and Health of Body: and to reap all the satisfactions of an unclouded Reason,
an unmasked Understanding, an unerring Will, and uncorrupted Affections; an as
the Result of all to enjoy the unspeakable Pleasures of an uncondemning
Conscience here, and to drink of those inexhaustible Rivers of Pleasure
prepared for the Sober, Temperate, and Faithful Soul in the Paradise of the
Blessed hereafter.

CHAP. III. Of Uncleanness.
The Universality of this Sin considered and lamented: The Danger of Treating
upon it: The particular kinds thereof: The miserable Effects of Fornication,
Adultery, Incest and Rape, separately considered: A Caution to the Chaste, with
an Advice to the Unchaste: Nine Rules whereby to attain to, and preserve that
admirable Virtue of Chastity.

1. AND now let us survey that vast Ocean of Impiety, which with no small
success has spread it self for some years over the face of this Island, The
Universality of this Sin considered, and lamented.
and see if we can ken one point or corner of the Land which is not overwhelmed
with this dreadful Inundation: Let us try if we can find one spot of ground
which we cannot call Sodom; or one single City which is not worse by far than
Gomorrab. Should the destroying Angel come among us (which no Man knows how
soon he may) he would have a large Field of Tares to cut down, and a plentiful
crop of Uncleanness to employ his Sickle. We can cry out against the tolerated
Stews of Italy, and the Tributary Whores of Venice; We can rail against the
Lasciviousness of Spain, and wonder at the notorious Courtezans of Paris: But
did we look Home, we should see cause of greater Lamentation, and our very
Streets could give Parallel, if not transcending Instances of Impudence and
Debauchery, which outface the Light, and out-dare both God's and Humane Laws.
Formerly All (even Secret) Acts of Impurity were condemned, and the name of
Whoremaster was the worst Reproach that could be affixed on any Man: But now
(oh Prodigy!) the Brand is an Ensign of Honor, and if you would Compliment or
Flatter the Spark, you can do it in no properer a phrase, than by calling him a
complete Beau and Gallant of the Town.

2. So generally spreading is this Vice, that it cannot but make any sober
Man's Heart to bleed that considers it: But as General as it is, so few are the
Judgments of God upon the immediate Acts of this Sin, that we cannot but be
filled with Wonder and Amazement, at the long-suffering Patience, of that
Immaculate undefiled Being. But vile wretches that they are, the very Motive
for their forsaking do they make the chiefest Reason for their persevering in
this Sin: And the forbearing Mercy of God, which should lead them to, keeps
them off from Repentance. A sad Thought this, that Men should persist in
affronting and sinning against God, purely because he is merciful, but every
Day and Hours experience witnesses the truth hereof, and renders it without
Dispute.

3. I had here designed to have enlarged upon the many pollutions of the Age,
we now live in; but I foresee that many mischiefs may arise by too closely and
pertinently handling this subject. It is such a Sin, that to speak against it
in proper terms is by consequence to defend it; and to explain the Nature of it
in its proper Characters, will require the making use of such Expressions as
may sully the Reputation of a Modest discourse, offend a pure and clean heart,
and perhaps be a means of promoting the Vice, even while it is declaimed
against. This is no Paradox in times wherein all Advice and Counsel to reform
the Impure and Unclean is too often thrown away. For there are not wanting such
Monsters in the World as wrest the very Scriptures to their own destruction,
and make the Sacred Oracles of God to preach up, and plead for their
Debaucheries. No wonder then (if they can thus pervert the Dictates of the
Divine Spirit) that they should catch at all opportunities of making even those
discourses which are designed against them, to speak, at least implicitly, in
their behalf. But Good God! To what a head will these Enormities grow? And how
necessarily must the Contagion still prevail, since the wholesomest of
Medicines are converted by the Infected into Poison? Some smart Satyr, one
would think, might do a little good, such a one as might lash the Wretch stark
naked, and put him upon the Rack in the midst of his Impurities: but alas! we
find God's Judgments themselves (though frequently sent down upon the
Incorrigible, yet) lightly esteemed by the hardened World, who make a mock of
the Punishment as well as the Crime. I shall therefore take what care I can,
not to make the debauched Worse, and with all Prudence manage my discourse on
this nice point, so as I may not in the least give Encouragement to the Sin,
which I am so willing to decry. I hope at least it may prove a Caution and a
Sea-mark to the Unpolluted Soul, to keep it from being polluted and ruined with
the rest; and if it accidentally prove a means of Reforming one debauched
Person from the Error of his Ways, I shall think my labor well bestowed.

The Particulars of Uncleanness.
4. But to proceed and particularize all the sorts of this Sin; I shall wave
speaking of the Uncleanness, and will only content my self with showing the
Heinousness and the Mischiefs of the grosser Acts of Fornication, Adultery,
Incest and Rape; and with telling you that besides these, there are other
things which will fall under the Notion of Uncleanness, as being the Preludes
to the rest, such as Lustful Views, Obscene Discourse, and Lascivious Contacts,
all which betray the unguarded Soul into its own Sin and Misery. To unfold all
the Intrigues which the Whoremonger and Adulterer use, to accomplish their
designs, out-passes the Brains of a Matchiavel to dive into or apprehend; But
where their Pleasures end is too lamentable a Consideration for them to admit
the thoughts of. What running and going, what Sweating and Labor do they
undergo, in order to bring about their Wickedness? Strange indeed! that they
should take such pains to be miserable, and be so industrious for their own
Destruction; whereas they think it much to spend a poor thought about their
real and Eternal Happiness. What Fornication and Adultery and all the other
species of Uncleanness are, is no such hard matter to define or describe to an
Age so knowing in all the Black Arts of Wickedness. They are too common in
Practice to need much Demonstration in the Theory, and therefore I shall think
my self the less obliged to trouble my head about such unnecessary speculations.

5. Suffice it then that I give you some short Account of those Miseries that
attend the Unclean Person, both the Fornicator, the Adulterer, the Incestuous
Person, and the Ravisher: which that they may be more plain I will lay down
separately. And Oh! would to God that others, seeing the Misfortunes and
Calamities of the Debauched, would beware of being guilty of such Enormities,
lest those or worse Evils fall upon them.

6. The Effects of Fornication in general.
And First to speak a word of the sad Effects of Fornication Little do any of
you all consider what the end of those Transient Pleasures will prove: Do you
think the number of you will cloud you from the Wrath of God? Can you Expect,
because you herd with the Multitude, and so Overpower, and Overawe Human
Laws; that you shall escape the Sentence of the Righteous Judge? No certainly,
though as yet we have no Express Statute to punish your Offenses, according to
the Merits of them, yet within and without, on this side and on that, you find
Executioners enough of the Divine Wrath, if you had but the Grace to lay it
seriously to Heart. You feel trouble your selves, and behold daily Examples of
the Afflictions of others under the same Guilt, yet to a wonder are you
Hardened, that not the feeling of present can put you in mind of a future
Misery. It Is not the hard Usage you may meet with here that will serve the
Turn: Bridewell, a Carting and Whipping are but triffling praeludes of misery
to what Follows. The shedding Innocent blood, as is too common in this Age,
requires something more at your hands, and Tyburn must end that Infamous Life
which knew not where, nor when to put a stop to its Impurities. Nor does the
Partner of her pleasure come off Scotfree; as he was concerned in the Getting,
so too frequently he proves an Instrument in destroying the Illegitimate Issue,
and bears her Company like a Good-natured Sinner into another World.

7. But admit all things go fair with the Naughty Couple here, and the Woman
prove Barren (as is frequent with common Prostitutes) or if she has Children,
can yet convey them out of the World without any Noise: yet there are other
Effects mischievous enough, The Particular Mischiefs of Fornication. First, of
those which happen upon the Body either by exposing it to Diseases or Duels.
which follow the Criminal at the Heels, and might be of force enough to
convince any man that has but the least reason left, to fly from such unlawful
Pleasures with a total detestation and Abhorence.

8. St Paul does Positively declare that whoever commits Fornication sins
against his own Body, 1 Cor. 6.18. This was his sentiment, who had no such
Reason (that we know of) for to say so as we now have. That Disease, so common
among us, and in just Judgment as it were appropriated to that Offense, was
wholly unknown (or at least not regarded) in the Apostles days, so that little
or nothing could be then said on that Topic; But now we see this tormenting
Disease that does so afflict both Sexes, in the most Sensible and Tender parts
is the effect of only Impure Embraces; and one would think this an argument
sufficient to scare Men from the eager pursuit of such unlawful Game. But alas
we find the Wretch as proud of his Malady, as before he was of his Uncleanness,
brags of his Distemper, and despises it so long, till at last the whole Mass of
Blood is infected, and it enters into his very Bones and Marrow. Then what
Racks and Tortures, what Agonies and Pains does he undergo? Salivation upon
Salivation, and all the Art of Galen and Hypocrates is little enough to raise
him up to his old Debaucheries again: For to them most surely and nothing else
he will return, let his promises of Amendment and Repentance be never so many.
It Is true, he made such Vows but it was upon the Melancholy Thoughts that he
should never be able to serve his Sins more. For he cannot forbear returning to
his former Impurities, and never leaves till the next Clap seize him in good
Earnest, and send him out of the World for good and all.

9. Add to this Consideration, the danger to which the Amorous Gallant exposes
his Life, in the many Quarrels he is Engaged in his Mistresses Cause; it being
frequent to have the Carpet-Rivals end their dispute in a Field of Blood. Hence
comes it to pass, that of the many Murders committed daily in our Kingdom, we
find a Whore at the Beginning or End of the Fray: And a Homicide seldom appears
at the Bar without One of them at his Heels; or if not there, yet at Tyburn he
openly confesses the Strumpet to have been the first tempter to, or occasion of
the Fatal Tragedy.

10. Nor is the Letcher's Body the only sufferer here, he has an Estate which
is Squandered away upon Riotous Living, 2ly, The Mischiefs which happen upon
the Fornicator's Estate.
whilst his Relations are brought to Indigency and Poverty, and himself (as the
Wiseman observes) by means of a Whorish Woman to a Morsel of Bread. Prove. 6.26.
So Vast is the Expense, and so great are the Extravagancies of most Modish
Jilts, that it is Cheaper by far to maintain Ten thrifty Wives, then one
Luxurious Wastful Whore. She delights in nothing more than to exhaust him out
of all his Store, and never leaves craving till his Pocket be in as deep a
Consumption, as his drained Body: Collation upon Collation, this Treat on that,
one Present upon another, are little enough to satisfy her boundless Desires,
and if the Fond Fool should chance to deny her but one little Toy of Twenty,
she presently Storms, and sets on the four Countenance, and will not be
reconciled till some Peacemaking Pearl or Diamond from the Indies becomes the
Mediator.

11. But when the Poor Squire is plucked bare and robbed of all his Plumes, and
dismantled of all his gay Trappings, when his Estate is Mortgaged, and his
Credit Bankrupted, when all Securities are gone, and Pawns redeemless, then
it is time for Her to pack off the Indigent Fop, and to be weary of his Visits;
Nothing being more common then for those Mercenary Jilts to hate from their
heart a poor Gallant, though they themselves made him so. And glad they are to
cast off their troublesome Money-less Guest, though a Catchpole or Sergeant
should be waiting for him, and the King's Bench, or Fleet should be his last
Lodging. But if ever he should, either upon some Act of Grace, or pleading
himself within the Statute of Pauper's be redeemed from those his Mansions;
though he knows himself Cashiered by his Mistress, and left to the wide World:
yet he has not the Grace with the Prodigal to return to himself, and consider
that it is high time to betake himself to his Heavenly Father and acknowledge
his Offense; and think on some other Course of Life then hitherto he has
Embraced; but is hardened in his Impiety, and contrives a thousand ways how to
Re-inestate himself once more in his Mistrisses favor. In order thereunto he
becomes either a Knight-Arrant, and so brings of his spoils, and offers them at
his Minions feet; or else turns Rook, and so from Gaming-house to Gaming-house,
gathers up enough to make his peace with the Female Adversary; or else to the
Disgrace of Humanity becomes himself a Mercenary Pimp and Pandar, Bully and
Procurer: And so spends the Remainder of his inglorious Days in obscure
Brothels, and Houses of Evil Fame. From these sources also arises the ruin of
most young Tradesmen, who are either in pay with a Bawd themselves, or have
loose Servants and Apprentices, whose Extravagancies are such that they Exhaust
the Cash to maintain their Strumpets, and insensibly blow up their Masters
before the least Warning-Piece is given from whence their Misfortunes came. To
such Evil Practices are owing the Ebb of most Estates; and let men Complain of
Taxes, and the great Charge of Church and Poor-money never so much, yet they
have a piece for a Whore: But did they give less to to her, they would not find
it so hard and grating to bestow Liberally on the others.

12. But beside the Body and Estates; 3ly, The Injury Fornication offers to the
Minds of Men.
the Fornicator injures all the Faculties of his Mind, renders them Captive to
his Lust, and turns out the Man in order to receive and entertain the Beast. He
makes the Temple of the Holy Spirit a Cage for unclean and impure thoughts to
reside in. He Vitiates his Understanding; claps a false Bias upon his Will;
and exposes himself to the Impetuosity of every Passion: He loses the Divine
Image, divests himself of all that is Generous, Good, and Brave, and becomes
not only weak in Body, but sneaking, low, and feeble in Mind. Hence comes it to
pass that the Magnanimity and Courage of the English has of late degenerated
into Softness and Effeminacy. And the Nation, which before was a Terror to her
Neighbors, is now by those bewitching Dalilahs robbed of its former Vigor, and
become almost as weak and Pusillanimous as the rest. So fond have we been of
imitating the French in all their Vices, Fashions and Accomplishments of late;
that we have followed them to a hair in all things, even their Cowardice, their
tricks and poor sneaking Stratagems not excepted.

13. It would be a tolerable Bargain did the Wretch come off with no worse then
the Miseries incident to Sensuality in this life; 4ly. The last effect of
Fornication is (withiut Repentance) Death Eternal.
but alas! he has an after-reckoning to pay beyond the Valley of the shadow of
Death: It Is not his Mind, Body or Estate; His Reason, Life or Fortune, but the
Loss of his Soul which must quit the score of that Guilt, contracted by the
pursuits of these Uncleannesses which he has not repented of. Ephesians. 5.5. For no
whoremonger has any Inheritance in the kingdom of Heaven, but will be judged by
God the Righteous Judge, and by his irrevocable Sentence, consigned over to
have his Portion in that Abyss of Fire, and Brimstone, which burns for ever and
ever, Rev. 21.18. In this Burning Tophet he will then struggle though in vain,
and in the anguish of those Torments, he will, in all probability, wish, though
it be too late, that he had never given way to his corrupt Nature, that he had
never harkned to the flattering Motions of Flesh and Blood, that he had never
yielded to the prevalence of his Inclinations. How then will he execrate
himself, and curse his merry Companions that allured him to, and Taught him
this Diabolical Art? How will he then wish that his Eyes had been plucked out,
and his Eye-strings had cracked before they had gazed upon Vanity, and betrayed
him into a snare? How will he wish then that his Arms had fallen from his
Shoulder Blade, before they had been defiled with unclean Embraces: That his
Tongue had cleaved to the roof of his Mouth, before he had uttered such
immodest Discourse: That his Ears had been stopped with a perpetual Deafness,
before he had listened to the filthy Communication of others: That he had been
thrown into the Fiery Furnace, before he had leaped into the Bed and Arms of an
Harlot? But why should I enlarge upon those things, since Hell is little
regarded by the generality of Mankind, and the Torments of the Damned are
looked upon as fictitious Bugbears to frighten deluded Man from his Paradise of
Voluptuousness, and the Accounts of Holy Writers concerning a future State, are
generally dis-believed? And if they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, nor
believe Jesus and his followers, How can we expect they should give credit,
though one of their old Companions arose from the dead?

15. I come now in the next place to consider the mischiefs of that Branch of
Uncleanness, Adultery, and the Effects thereof.
Adultery; where one or both the Parties concerned are in the State of
Matrimony, and which is not only condemned, as being Sensual and opposite to a
direct Command in the Decalogue, but also as it is unjust, injurious and
inconvenient to the Public Society, of which we are Members. This Sin has not
only the Brutality of the two former, but is acted with all the Malice
imaginable, against both God and Man. I know not by what kind of Fascination
this Vice has prevailed within these few years; but so common is it grown, that
it is matter of sport and pastime to have the Ingenuity to defile ones neighbors
Bed: And it is reckoned a small business to pay Quid pro Quo, and a Jest to Horn
the Horter. But as common as it is, yet the Crime loses not one grain of its
real Estimate; Let the Adul^erer and Adulteress please themselves with never so
merry Thoughts of the contrary. For they thereby incur the Guilt of breaking
the whole Law, Affront God, The effects of Adultery further illustrated in its
being a Breach of our Duty to God, our neighbor, and our selves.
Injure Others; and Act as Enemies against themselves: As by considering the
following ill Effects thereof, will easily and manifestly appear.

16. God certainly is displeased at it, being diametrically contrary to a
Command which he delivered with Thundering and Lightning at Mount Sinai in these
express words: 1st. Adultery is a sin against God.
Thou shall not commit Adultery. His Edicts are not to be despised, neither are
his Commandments to be cast behind our back. Who are we that shall make bold
with our Maker, and trample his Institutes under foot, and reckon his
Ordinances not worthy our Observance? Can we dispute the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of his Orders? Or shall we act in opposition to an Almighty's
Decrees?

17. But farther, you break not only the Commands of a Just Jehovah, 2ly.
Adultery a sin against others; and first against the Public.
but maliciously strike at the Root, and aim at the destruction of that Society
to which you belong. Our English Community allows no such promiscuous
Copulations, and therefore has carefully provided, that every Man shall be the
Husband of one Wife. He therefore that climbs up into his neighbors Bed to
defile it, does what in him lies to put an end to all the Decorums and
Observances which the strictness of a well constituted Christian Government
requires at our hands. Adultery is a Sin which no Nation or People, though never
so barbarous has maintained. By the Levitical Law it was punished with the
immediate death of both Parties, Lev. 20.10. Deuteronomy. 22.22. The Alchoran of
Mahomet not only forbids a Lascivious Eye, but punishes the Adulteress,
convicted by four of the same Sex, with perpetual Imprisonment. The Pagan
Indians at Dominica, Cuina, Bantam and Japan, punish the Adulterers with loss
of Life. Scotch History.
The barbarous Chinese have the same sense of the guilt, and inflict no less a
punishment upon the Delinquent. At the City of Pequin the Jointures and Dowries
of Adulteresses are bestowed upon the Hospitals of Female Orphans. In Patame, a
Province joining to China, they have a Custom, If any Persons of quality become
guilty of this Offense, that by Choice they shall be strangled by their next of
Kin. At Brasil the Crime seemed of so black a Dye, that the enraged Husband had
Power and Authority at Will to be the Judge, Jury and Executioner of his own
Adulterous Wife. But at Angola a City in Aethiopia, the Penalty was more
moderate, and the Offender only lost his Nose by the Bargain. These and the
like Punishments were inflicted by the very Heathens, which sufficiently let us
see what Constructions they made upon the odious and detestable Sin of
Adultery; and enough to shame us into a better Consideration of the nature of
such a Beastiality. Our own Laws both Civil and Canon are very strict against
the Offender, but we are grown so lawless, that no Injunction Ecclesiastical or
Civil, Moral or Divine, is any whit regarded by us

18. But look we nigher home, and we shall find Calamities enough infesting,
and unavoidably pursuing the Adulterer and Adulteress. The second wrong we do
to others, is done to the Family of the Adulterer or Adultress.
The First of which Domestic Mischiefs I reckon to be that unavoidable
corruption of Families, incident to abused Beds. By this means the Alien is
Naturalized, an Ishmael incroaches upon, and often supplants the True-born Isaac
Heir; and a Halfe-Blood-Illegitimate Offspring goes away with a share of the
Inheritance and Patrimony, which of Right belongs only to the Whole-Blood Line.
This has been so often boasted to be true, that it may be feared there has too
often Fire as well as Smoke to build such vaunting upon. And I should think
this alone were an Inconvenience sufficient to make the Sin a grievance to any
State in which it is, were there none else at the heels of it.

19. But it is well known, that Messenger of ill Tidings has another ready to
enter in upon him: The 3d. wrong to others is the breach of the Matrimonial Vow
which I call the Breach of the Matrimonial Vow. In all Ages, and among all
Nations, Vows have been looked upon as Sacred and Inviolable, but of all, that
of a Christian Marriage-Contract has been esteemed the greatest Tie any Man can
be obliged withal. So Divine a Ceremony among the Romanists, that it is ranked
among their Sacraments; nor no less Sacred with Us, though not admitted to so
great and unwarrantable an Honor. For besides the many Vows and Protestations,
the formal Engagements and the Mutual enterchanging of Hearts which frequently
pass between the Parties in their Courtship, and which usher in the greater
Solemnity; they do afterward openly in the eye of the World, and more
immediate Presence of God, Consummate the Nuptials; in which, in the most
solemn and serious manner imaginable, they plight to each other their Troth,
and interchangeably promise each other the performance of the respective
Duties, they in that state of Life are mutually obliged to perform; and both
M^n and Woman in the same manner protest to live with each other, forsaking all
Corrivals of their Love, till Death shall make one or the other free. But how
can that Man be said to keep to his First Betrothed, who shall forsake the Wife
of his Bosom, and leaving her in Discontent, Disquietude and Solitude, shall
bestow his Love upon a Harlot; and give away that treacherous Heart to a
Second, or Third, or more Rivals, which not long since was so solemnly allotted
and made over to the Deserts of a more Worthy Person? Base perfidious Wretch!
What Injustice and Ingratitude, What Cruelty and Treachery, What Barbarity and
Inhumanity art thou guilty of? Is it nothing to wound her Soul with the Sense
of thy Unkindness; who is so Tender and Loving, so Dutiful and Careful to thee
and thine? Is it nothing to raise in her innocent Breast Perturbations, and
Heart-breakings, Jealousy and Discontent? Is it nothing to put that Dove-like
Mind, which for some time bore with thy Unkindness, and could not tell how to
turn the Stream of her Affections from thee, upon desperate Attempts, and
extorted Thoughts of revenging thee in thy own kind? Will not her Folly and Sin
be owing wholly to thy slightings and dis-respect? And though she her self will
not escape the Judgment of God, yet do thou think thy Condemnation and
Punishment will not be the greater, because thou, as a principal cause, by
thine example, stirred her up to that unchristian Revenge? The same may be said
(Mutatis Mutandis) concerning an Unfaithful and Treacherous Wife, who shall be
so daring as to break into forbidden Embraces, through all the Bonds of a
Ritual and Sacred Ordinance. And what the sad and horrible effects of a
violated Matrimonial Vow are, will appear by Considering.

20. The next evil consequence of Adultery, is Murder. This is the unavoidable
subsequent of the Former, The Fourth wrong to others is Murder. And herein
Adultery begins to prove a sin against. 3ly. A Man's self.
whenever the unlawful Amor should chance to be discovered by the injured
Party. I have traced this sin of Adultery through all its Labyrinths, and find
all its Avenues, all its Chambers, and all its Retirements, besmeared with
Blood. Murder begins, Murder confirms, and Murder ends the Intrigue. The
naughty Couple must remove all Obstacles in order to attain their freedom in
Lust. And if any prying Servant, or curious Attendant be known to observe the
Motion, His Mouth must be stopped, and His Tongue tied, if not by Gold, then by
a Stab or Poison: If the Husband is too watchful, and so a Remora to their
designs, a Bonyard or Pistol must send him on a long Journey, and remove the
Vriah out of the way. So on the other hand, if this Argus of a Husband should
but suspect himself to be abused; how Frantic and Mad, how Jealous and
Revengeful is he? And should he be sensible of his own Metamorphosis, nothing
can stop his Fury, till he meets with an opportunity of revenging himself upon
the Gallant, the Mistress, the Confident and all. Thus every party acts in this
Tragedy, and the Injured Husband, or Jealous Wife, the Amorous Gallant, and the
Designing Adultress are all dipped in the Red Sea of Blood. I have wondered to see
the many recorded Bloody Monuments of Adultery; and that notwithstanding all
the examples of untimely Deaths, yet the Sin continues still in fashion all the
World over: As if every Kingdom and Metropolis thereof, were nothing else but
the common Nurseries of these Lusts and Debaucheries. But I lose that Wonder
when I see the next fatal Consequent to this Sin, is as little regarded as any
of the former, which is

21. That wrath of God which the Impenitent Continuance in this Impiety,
commonly pulls down upon the Offenders Head. The Second Mischief Adultery
brings to a Man's self, is the Judgments of God.
That Being which does not afflict willingly, and grieves not the Children of
Men, without extraordinary occasion, makes bare his Arm of Justice against no
Crime more than against that of Adultery. In the last Mischief of Murder, though
to an unthinking Mind it may appear to be the result of Passion, and the
satisfying a private Revenge upon an opportunity offered; yet to one who looks
farther than second Causes, it is manifest the Finger of God brings all those
things to pass. It Is he that lays the Train, and spreads the Net, and trapans
the Lustful Lovers, and exposes them to the mercy of a jealous and incensed
Person; who notwithstanding has no power to strike, till the Almighty Arm
permits the Blow. It Is well known that the Miseries and Calamities, the Shame
and Confusion, the Diseases and Death, and all the other misfortunes the
Adulterer either feels in common with the Fornicator, or else endures as
peculiarly appropriated to his Species of Uncleanness, are all sent and come
down from above. But these are easy Penalties to what are laid up for the
Incontinent, Impenitent Wretch, in that vast Storehouse of Eternity. There
Pains and Aches, Poverty and Want, Prisons and Dungeons, the Stake and Gibbet,
and the King of Terrors himself (though dressed up in the most for-formidable
Colors Rome or the Inquisition can invent) would be eligible and vastly to be
preferred before what the Adulterer and Adulteress shall then feel. The
Almighty threatened and he would be a swift witness against the Adulterers, Mal.
3.5. and so he is even in this life, overtaking them with a Judgment at their
heels: But in the other World, he follows them close, and vexes them with all
his Storms, torments them in good earnest, and adds Fuel of Flames to their
lustful Souls, Be not deceived (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 6.9. Neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor effeminate persons shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. And we are assured that Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will [in a more especial manner] Judge, Heb. 13.3. What mean the exclusion
from that Kingdom, and the falling under the Censures of so severe a Judge, is
too plain to need any Exposition. I could wish the Soul, who is guilty of the
Sin, were but half so Considerative upon, as it is (in it is sober fits at
least) sensible of, the Punishment, and I question not but it would go a great
way toward palling the Desire, and retarding the eager Pursuit after such
lascivious Amors, which are opposite to all these Engagements we lie under,
both to God and Man.

22. But before I proceed, it will not be amiss to answer an Objection, which
too many are apt to make use of in this case. An Objection made by the
Adulterer.
And is Adultery such a damning sin (may some say) How came it to pass then
that Abraham the Patriarch, and other Holy Men of old indulged themselves
therein? The Scriptures testify of them that they walked with God, How then
could they allow themselves in that, which is (as you affirm) so displeasing to
that B^ing, whom they so strictly served? Had not Jacob his Bilhah, and Zilpah
as well as his Rachel and Leah? Did not David, a man after God's own heart,
keep his Wives, and increase the number of his Concubines, and Murder Vriab as
well abuse Bathshebah? And had not his Son Solomon in his youthful days, his
700 Wives and 300 Concubines? Do you think those went quick into Hell? Or if
you admit they did repent, may not the Greatest do the same? And will it not be
time enough to write Vanity on all Worldly Pleasures, when we have gone through
every Scene of them, and tasted every Flower in Paradise?

23. To all which I Answer. What Dispensation, had the Fathers of old, before
Moses, I know not; but this am I very well assured of, by a Mouth that cannot
Lie, The Objection Answered.
that, from the beginning it was not so. He that Created Male and Female at
first, instituted that Holy Rite of Matrimony, and ordained, that they twain
should be one flesh. Whatever the Followers of Lamech did think of the Sacred
Tie, yet it is well known by the Mosaic Law, that Adultery was by the express
words of the Injunction to be punished with death: thereby reducing Marriage
into its old Channel again, wherein it ran at first in Eden. And as to David,
who lived many years after the Jewish Law was published, and so cannot be
thought to be ignorant thereof, I shall not go about to extenuate his Crime by
pleading (what many unreasonably have) the Privilege he had by being a King;
as it the Royal Prerogative were a sufficient Protection for the Commission of
any extravagancy, which his own wild Will and Pleasure could prompt him to. No
certainly; though he was accountable to no Humane Judge, yet there was one Higher
then the Highest, to whom he must Answer for all. He was but Man (the most that
can be said for him) and was accordingly obnoxious to all the Infirmities of
unguarded Flesh and Blood: But yet his Adultery was followed with Judgments
enough, and appropriate to his Crime, to leave no room for doubt upon what
account they were sent. The poor Man sell from one sin to another, and to hide
his Adultery, runs into the Guilt of shedding Innocent ^ood: The Death of his
Adul^rous (...). The Incesto^s Rape of his Daughter; The Murde^ of his Son
Amnon, and his Rebellious Absalom's driving him out of House and City, and
seizing upon his Wives and Concubines, were all such marks of Divine Wrath, so
perpendicularly dropped down upon his Guilt of Adultery, that a burblind
Spectator must needs know the Cause from its so Natural Effects. And hence it
was that we find him so often in his Penitentials, so frequent in his Miserere
Mei's: Hence was it that his Bed did Swim, and his Couch was watered with
Tears; and hence it was that ever and anon he did cry out in the Bitterness of
his Soul, for Mercy, Mercy! and beg God to Purge and Cleanse him, to heal and
renew a right Spirit within him; complaining of his Bones and Loins, of his
wounded Conscience, troubled Spirit, and broken Heart. And the Successor of his
Throne succeeded him in his Sin and Misery too. For he did (to use his own
Words) prove his Heart with Mirth, and enjoyed Abundance of Pleasure; He had
his Moabites and Ammonites, Edomites, Sidonians and Hittites, and all the Train
of Pomp and Luxury; and drank his Water out of many Cisterns; Yet after all he
concludes that there was nothing under the Sun but Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit, and what he accounted his Wisdom, was reckoned at last to be but
Madness and Folly.

24. As to the Hopes and Probability of repenting like Solomon or his Father,
in their old Age, they who object this would do well to consider, whether they
are sure of imitating them in their Repentance, as they are resolute of
following them in their Sins? Is Regeneration (Deluded Souls!) in your own
Power? And Repentance at your Beck to come when called for? Are you sure of
passing through all the Scenes of Pleasure, and of knowing when you have so
done, and of having Hearts, after all that, so loosned from the Vanities to the
which you were so closely United, as to be converted in a Moment to God? Can a
Habit of so long wearing be shook off so easily, and the Soul be invested in
white Robes on a sudden? Do You think a Sob or two at your last Gasp (for then do
some imagine it time enough to repent) will serve the Turn? Or that a Groan in
the Last Agony, or a Dying Accent or two of your departing Souls will be good
Contrition, and win upon your so long affronted Creator, so as to obtain his
Pardon and Atonement for what is past, and to make up the Breach by reconciling
you to your Offended God? Doubtless you who are now Guilty of this Sin, and
fool your selves up with the Hopes of repenting Hereafter, are out in your
Measures, and are in the ways that tend and lead to the Chambers of Death, when
it will perhaps prove too late when one foot is got into the Grave.

25. Now to speak a word or two of the next kind of Uncleanness, Fourthly, Of
Incest, and the effects thereof.
wherein the parties concerned fall within that Degree of Kindred which does
forbid all Carnal knowledge, though in the state of Matrimony; and this
Uncovering of a Relations Nakedness, Married or Single, we call Incest. The
little Noise that is made about it within this Northren World, would make one
think there was no such Fornication amongst us: But among the many Unlawful, it
would not be hard to find some Unnatural Embraces, were they not so commonly
hushed up by the Inglorious Criminals, and concealed by the rest of the
Relations to avoid the disgracing their Families thereby. From the want of due
Conviction thereof is it that they go Unpunished, and escape the Censure of a
Spiritual Court, and the Sentence of an Earthly Tribunal, but the just Judge
will overtake, and his Hand will find them out. What the Consequence of this
Sin is (over and above the Common Miseries, which if together with Fornication
and Adultery may be said to endure) appears from the Examples of those, who
have met with Divine Vengeance in or presently after the Act. Lot's Daughters
got nothing by uncovering their Fathers Nakedness, but Shame to themselves, and
an intailed Curse to their Miserable Posterity. Reuben, though the first born,
fell short of his Portion in the Old Man's Benedicat, because he went up and
defiled his Fathers Bed. Amnon met with sour Sauce after the Rape and Incest
he committed upon his Sister: And Absalom's untimely Death may be assigned to
his having layn with his Fathers Concubines as the Chiefest, though not the only
Cause thereof. Profane Writers are not wanting in Instances of this kind, too
long and many to be ennumerated in a Discourse of so small a Bulk. Nor are our
own Annals, and the present times unfurnished; which, because it would seem
Invidious to rip open the faults of such as lie in the Dust, and too reflecting
upon many now alive, I shall forbear to particularize: Else such could be named
which tasted deeply of the Cup of God's W^ath even in this Life for this Crime,
and what their Portion is in the other World, my C^arity will not admit me to
judge.

26. The Last and Highest Degree of Uncleanness is that of Rape; Fifthly, Of
Rape, and the Consequence thereof.
wherein the Ravisher bears no regard to any thing but his Lust, for whomsoever
that prompts him to enjoy, his Violence constrains to yield to his Embrace:
Virgin or Widow, Sister or Mother, Married or Single are all alike to him. One
would think from the Multitude of Common Prostitutes in and about the World
there would be no such thing as Violence used: But if you Visit the Courts of
Judicature you shall find many of those Guilty Wretches holding up their Hands
at the Bar. So Offensive have these Constraints been to most Nations, that we
find, by the Laws thereof, that they are punished with immediate Death. No less
Punishment does the Statute Laws of our Land inflict upon the Offender, and not
only the Principal but the Abettors of the Crime have tasted of the same
Ignominious Punishment. And how the Fortune-stealer (for so our Gentile
Ravisher is now adays called) will answer his Rape at the Last Day, I am struck
with Horror to imagine. His Miseries are the same with other Letchers, but
aggravated, by being not only his Better self-Hater, but the Common Nuisance,
Pest, and Disturber of Civilized Societies

27. Thus have I at length winded my self out of that Labarynth of Lust, A word
of Advice to the Chaste, and the Unchaste.
and passed through all its Chambers; and proved them to be the direct Road to
Want, Misery, Diseases, and Death; to the Wrath of God and Eternal Flames. And
if there is so great a Train of Mischiefs attending in the outward Apartments
of Uncleanness such as are obvious to every View, and which I have only treated
on: What and How many must needs be the Evils which are admitted into her
closer Retirements, and into her Unseen and Unobserved Secresies? It remains
now that I should give a Word of Advice to such as have not as yet been
infected with this Epidemical Distemper, as well as to those that at present do
Labor under it: And so the Precautions and Antidotes I prescribe to the One,
may prove Effectual Remedies to heal the other.

28. To the first I have the Apostles Words ready to say; Keep your selves
Pure: Let not Sin reign in your Mortal Bodies that you should obey it in the
Lusts thereof: Neither yield your Members as Instruments of Unrighteousness to
Sin; But yield your selves unto God as those that are alive from the Dead, and
your Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto God: Your Bodies are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost which is in you; Flee Fornication therefore, and
every Sin that defiles that Sacred Place. For you are not your own, you are
bought with a Price, Glorify therefore God in the Chastity of your Bodies, (as
well as in the Purity of your Spirits) which are Gods. 1 Cor. 19.20. And over
and above the avoiding the Evil Consequents of Uncleanness, which are in
themselves Motives sufficient to deter Men from the pursuit thereof, you have
stronger inducements thereto. For thereby you ensure to your selves the Peace
and Tranquillity of an Undefiled Conscience, and all the Comforts flowing from
a Chaste and Humble Conversation: You imitate the Inspirer of your Souls in
being Pure as he is Pure; and in a Word by this Angelick Virtue you prepare and
fit your selves for the Beatific Vision; for so Blessed are the Pure in Heart
pronounced by our Savior that they, and only they shall see God. Mat. 5.

29. To the Poor Infected Wretch I shall add to what I have already said:
Repent of thy Uncleannesses which thou have Committed, and Mortify thy Members
which are upon the Earth: Suffice it that thou have hitherto yielded thy
Members servants to Unrighteousness, now return and yield them Servants unto
God, unto Holiness. Be not carried away with thy Lusts any longer, moderate the
Impetuous Heat of thy Youth; Be no longer the Vassal to Impurity; Let not an
Idle Exchange Girl, or Common Actress captivate thy Soul. Hearken not any
longer to the Allurements of those Minions, and suffer not Solomon's Wanton to
lead thee as an Ox to the Slaughter, or as a Fool to the Correction of the
Stocks. Be no longer fond of those thy dear bought Pleasures, and hunt not
after what will cost thee the wasting of thy Estate, the Misery of thy
Relations, the Impairing of thy Health, the Hastening of thy Death, and what is
more than all, the Price of thine Unvaluable precious and Immortal Soul. Thy
Soul which has a Being beyond all the Existences of Material Beings, which
cannot, must not die; which must shortly appear before the Judgment Seat of
God. Oh! Consider before thou go to the next Debauch, whether thou art able
to endure the Agonies and Torments, the Flames and Pains which the Damned feel.
Do thou imagine that God will Extinguish that Everlasting Fire to indulge thy
Carnal Desires? Or that He will put an End to Hell out of tenderness to thy
Lusts and Concupiscence? No certainly, he will not abate one tittle of thy
Punishment. Be wise then and forsake thy Impurities before the day of Grace be
past, and there remain no Sacrifice, no Atonement for thy Sin.

28. As a means to attain to and maintain that Admirable Virtue of Chastity, I
shall touch upon those common Practical Rules, adapted to every Capacity, and
obvious to every Understanding.

Nine Practical Rules to be observed by such as would avoid the Odious Sin of
Uncleanness.
First, Resist the Temptation at the Beginning. What though you carry about you
the Seeds of Corruption, Principiis Obsta. Venionti Occurito Morbo. Pers.
and have your Naturals, Composed of the same Flesh and Blood with others? What
though you are Children of Originally corrupted Parents, were shapen in Iniquity
and in Sin your Mothers conceived you? What though the dire Contagion was handed
down to you by your Ancestors? Is it not your Care and Duty to keep this Law of
your Members (which is always Warring against the Law of your Minds) from
getting the Mastery over you? If you had no Temptations nor Inclinations to
Lust, where is your Virtue in being Continent? Marc^t sine Adversario Virtus.
Senec.
It Is a trial of your Graces that must make you experienced Champions, and the
Victory over your Lusts that must make you More than Conquerors. Can you fight
without Enemies, or overcome without Opposition, or expect the Crown without
the Victory? The Devil allures and the Flesh may prompt you to yield, bur
neither of them can force you if you will be true to your selves, and keep the
Reins in your own Hands. To this end, suppress the very first Motions to
Impurity, Crush the Cock^trice in his Egg, and make a vigorous Repulse at ^he
very first Onset of a Temptation. As for Example, Think whether you would
commit the Sin ^f you were to die the next Moment, and whether you would be
contented to appear at the Tribunal of Heaven in the Embraces of a Harlot, or
in the Arms of an Adulteress. Consider also whether you can find any Retirement
so Private, any Apartment so Obscure where God cannot see you, or where his
hand cannot find you out,

2ly, Avoid Idleness: Have always something to do, and give not an Advantage to
the Tempter to break in upon you whilst you are unguarded. The Perching Soul
becomes an easy Prey to the Infernal Fowler; whilst the Winged Spirit is out of
Danger. Beware then of administering to your Youthful Flames by Sloth and Ease,
by Entertaining your Thoughts with Unchaste Imaginations, which increase by
nothing so much as your Idle Hours. If you have Employs be diligent therein,
Eating the Bread of Carefulness, for so he gives his Beloved rest: If you are
above the toyls of a Laboring Life, you cannot want business wherein to spend
your vacant Hours, if you consider the great Concern of your Souls that lies
upon your hands, and requires more time than you have in your own power. A Holy
Life has many ways to dispose of the long and tedious days, and were you intent
upon the Duties thereof, you would have no reason to complain of the Idle time
which lies upon you, nor would you give the Tempter or any Lust an Opportunity
to rob you o^ your Innocence, or to Prey upon your Chastity.

3ly, In the next place Keep a Constant Watchov^^ your Eyes; those doors of the
Soul, those Casement^ to Imagination, and those Inlets to Vice. The Wiseman has
always one Eye at Home while the other is employed abroad in Speculation: But
her^ it is safe to keep both your doors shut, unless yo^ could stare the Vanity
Dead, the Beauty into a Monster, and the Temptation into a Virtue. Bu^ it is
dangerous to run the risque of such an Adventure, and an Attempt too bold for
most to undertake, Your strength is but weakness at best, and your
Clear-sightedness oftimes in this Nature becomes your Blind-side, where the
Lust has an Advantage to break in upon you. If you are Wise keep out of
Eye-shot, and come not a near the fair Enemy; for there is much in a Painted
Face, in a loose Garb, in Wanton Gestures, and in Naked Breasts to work upon
the unguarded Eye, and render the Heart prisoner. Nor is it enough to turn your
Eyes from beholding Vanity, when Accidentally offered to their View, but you
should avoi^ as much as in you lies, all Occasions which may lead them astray.
You would do well to abstain from all public Balls, Shows and Stage Plays, and
all other places of great Appearance, which may be apt to administer Fuel to
your Fire. For if at Church, where the Awe of God and the Reverence due to his
Immediate presence, should have some Influence over you, if there (I say) you
can with much ado keep your Eyes from gazing and wandering after Beautiful
Objects, and from conceiving Lustful thoughts thereon: How much more difficult
will it be to do so there, where your design of going is principally to be
Spectators of Folly and Lightness, not to say worse; or where is the Common
Mart or Forum for the Gallant to pick up his Mistress and carry her off
Incognito. Nor is it only dangerous to behold those Charms to Lust in the
Original in Living Instances, but also in Effigy. For these dumb obscene
Pictures with a tacit whisper captivate the Eye, move the Imagination, and fire
the Heart.

4ly, Avoid all Frothy and Idle Discourse; Be neither the Speakers, Hearers, or
Readers of such Language; Keep a Watch over your Tongues, stop your Ears, as
well as turn away your Eyes from all that looks like Obscenity. Evil
Communication (says the Apostle) Corrupts good Manners, 1 Cor. 15. Therefore
(as he says in another place) let no Corrupt Communication proceed out of your
Mouth. Ephesians. 4. A loose Tongue and Obscene Lips insensibly betray the Soul into
the snare of Uncleanness. Therefore as you value your Chastity, and desire to
keep your selves pure, Think it not matter of Jest to talk wittilly Obscene,
but be assured you are not only to answer for the Words you speak, but also for
all the Mischief they may produce upon either your selves or others.

5ly, In the next place, Beware what Company you keep. It Is an Italian Proverb,
tell me with what Company you go, and I Will tell you where you go; tell me with
whom you Converse and I Will tell you what you are. The Society whereof you are,
has a great Prevalence over you to make you of the same Mould with the whole:
If that he good, you cannot but in Complaisance be or seem to be so too; if
That be Evil, it would he no false Logic to conclude the Parts to be of the
same Mark with the whole. This is too evident to need Demonstration, and were
it to be doubted in other Vices, yet in this of Uncleanness, the Influence
which one Debauched Companion has upon another to render him so too, proves the
Consequence to be too true. A Loose, Libertine, and Licentious Conversation,
does easily incline a man to Join with the Multitude in one Common way of
Lewdness and Debauchery: Familiarity and Example, Fear and Shame, private
Obligations and public Engagements are as great Inducements to depraved Nature
to comply with those to whom one stands Obliged in any of the former Respects.
And here I cannot choose but blame such as out of a Frolic to see the Tricks of
the Town, and to experience the truth of what they Hear, associate themselves
with Lewd and Profligate persons, running from Bandy-House to Baudy House, from
one Brothel to another, 'till at last they carry the Coals of Fire so long that
they are inflamed by Lust in good earnest.

6ly, To employ your Eyes and Thoughts, and to help you to better Company, I
shall advise you in the next place to be frequent in reading and Meditating the
Holy Scriptures: for wherewithal shall a Young Man cleanse his way (says the
Royal Psalmist) but by taking Heed thereto according to thy Word. Herein you
will see Life and Death, Blessings and Cursings, Promises and Threatenings,
Mercies and Judgments: The one a Royal Privilege appropriated to the Upright
and Clean, the other as a Punishment to the Man of Unclean Lips and a Lewd
Conversation: Herein you will see a Generously Chaste and Continent Joseph
exalted from a Dungeon to a Throne, whilst the Incestuous Reuben is put by his
Fathers Blessing: Herein you will read of 24000 Israelites being killed in one
day amidst their Whoredoms, Numb. 5.
whilst Phineas for his Zeal, in punishing the Delinquents, atones for the
Rest, and obtains for himself a Covenant of Peace, the Covenant of an
Everlasting Priesthood: Herein you will see the Cause of the Massacre of
Schechem and his People, who were for Dinab's Rape cut off Root and Branch in
one day: Herein you will have a view of the Untimely ends of Hophni and
Phineas, of Amnon and Absalom, of Incontinent Jezebel, and and many others who
by their Whoredoms, Adulteries, and Incestuous Embraces provoked the Merciful
God to plague them with sundry Diseases, and diverse kind of Deaths.

7ly, When you have done your utmost to resist, and find notwithstanding the
Carnal part to be predominant, Mortify, as St. Paul advises, your Members which
are upon the Earth: Keep under your unruly Body, and bring it into Subjection
that you do not become Cast-aways. As Drunkenness and Gluttony increase, so do
Temperance and Sobriety take away, the Oil from the Flames: To feed low, and
abstain from rich and delicious fare, to Eat and Drink only to satisfy Nature,
without endeavoring to humor your Palats, or satiate your Appetite, will by
degrees moderate your Lusts. Fasting for whole Days, and then to return to a
full Table and Excess, is not the way to cast out this Devil; for it is (as a
Worthy Bishop Tailor.
Prelate of our Church observes) a Flatulent airy Spirit which an Empty Windy
Stomach gives Life and Motion to. It must be a constant Abstinence in the
moderate use of coarse and homely Fare, such as will not be prejudicial to your
Health, that will be of greatest Force to subdue your Corrupt Natures, and to
beat down those Insurrections which ever and anon arise, and raise a Civil War
between your outward and your inward Man.

8ly, To that of Fasting, and all the other forementioned Helps, add that of
Frequent Prayer: All the rest without this are but as dead Letters: Herein the
Soul owns its weakness, and acknowledges that it is not in Man to direct his
ways; sensible whereof it sends up this winged Messenger of Prayer to crave for
Assistance from above, and never leaves entreating till some such Answer as
this be given, My Grace is sufficient for thee. Be you instant therefore in
imploring for the Spirit of Purity, for Chaste Thoughts, and Temperate Reins:
Make such as these your daily and hourly requests, Create in us a Clean Heart,
O Lord! and renew a right Spirit within us; wash us thoroughly from our
Wickedness, and cleanse us from our Sin; Purge us with Hysop and we shall be
clean, wash us and we shall be whiter than Snow; Purify our Hearts, and search
thoroughly if there be any Wickedness in us. And since your Prayers have no
express promises of a success, unless your own Endeavors back them, take up
Holy Job's Resolution of making a Covenant with your Eyes, that you will not
look upon a Maid: And with David keep your Mouth as with a Bridle, that you
offend not with your Tongue: Let your Hearts be filled with Chaste desires, and
your Minds employed in Contemplating on the Goodness and the Mercy of the Lord
which should lead you to repentance: Let your hands be pure, and so lift them
up to the Throne of Grace; and turn your Feet into the ways of Righteousness.
Ephesians. 6.13, 14, 15, 16.17.
Thus being Armed with the whole Armor of God, your Loins girded about with
the Truth, and having the Breastplate of Righteousness; being shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace, and taking above all things the Shield of
Faith (whereby you will be able to withstand the fiery Darts of the Devil) and
the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit; you will be the better
able to grapple against your Lusts, and be guarded against a Relapse, which often
proves more dangerous and desperate than the disease.

9thly, The Last Antidote commonly prescribed against Uncleanness is Marriage.
By this holy Ordinance God has taken off all reason of Complaint, and the
Oppression, Tyranny, Injustice, and all other Invectives cast upon the Deity
for implanting in Man such Naturals which must be satisfied, and for
prohibiting the fullfilling of these by Express Laws, are quite wiped away; the
Murmurings and Imputations of Cruelty, Severity, and the like are here
silenced: And if the Letcher after such a Liberty granted, shall continue in
his Unlawful Amors; if he shall forsake his own to Climb up into an Adulterous
Bed; He has no plea drawn from the strength of Inclination, the bent of his
Constitution, or the like, to excuse himself withal, not can he Charge the Sin
any where but upon his own Corrupted and Vitiated Will. St. Paul seems to
intimate as much, and declares this Honorable Institute was appointed to avoid
Fornication. Not is it enough to forbear all unlawful and forbidden Embraces,
nor even to abstain from what is Physically, as well as Morally, Evil; but Even
our allowed and warrantable Enjoyments must (like Physic) be taken moderately
and with caution, lest our Remedy prove our Poison. He that thinks because he
is in lawful Circumstances, he may give his Lusts their full Swing, deceives
himself; for that in Marriage a Man may be guilty of Sensuality is past
dispute. It Is unquestionably true, that whoever transgresses the Principal end
of Marriage, viz. of Glorifying God, and subservient thereto those of
Propagating our kind, of maintaining Mutual Society; and avoiding of Unlawful
Lusts, has passed the boundaries of Nature, Reason and Religion all at once.

In the entering upon such a Sacred Rite, there are many things to be observed,
and seriously considered, both by the betrothed Parties and their Friends, in
order to have the Marriage successful and made in Heaven first, before the
striking, of Hands, and the Plighting of Troths here on Earth: and for want of
the due Consideration whereof arises so many Unhappy Matches, Family
Disturbances, and Civil Broils; so frequent Separations from, and Pollutions of
the Conjugal Bed, which every day happen afresh in the World. I shall but just
touch upon these Necessary Precautions, and so conclude this particular of
Uncleanness.

As for you who have Adult Children of your own, or else are Guardians to such;
Beware of debarring them from entering into the state of Matrimony, when either
their Years, their Inclinations, their Affections, and their other
Circumstances require the same: Consult your Pupils in all respects, and be not
(more than prudently) urgent in dissuading them from their own, or in
persuading them into an Approbation of your Choice: In disposing of them, have
an Eye more upon their Temporal Happiness, and their Eternal Good, than upon
the Flattering Prospect of their being Noble, Rich, or Great: Covet not to
Marry your Sons or Daughters, or any other Relations committed to your Trust,
into Families of a Higher Rank than your selves, and despise not to Match them
with those of a Degree lower than you, especially where the Virtue and
Generosity of the person can toss your lighter Scale of Birth and Fortune up to
the Beam.

As for the Young parties, I desire they would not take ill the following
Advice, before they put on the Wedding Suit, which will not cost them so much,
and perhaps do them more Service. Be sure then to avoid all Hasty, sudden, and
Unpremeditated fits of Passion: Love not for Lusts sake, and Idolize none for
their Beauty, Wit, Strength and Fortune, lest your Affection be no more than
Skin-deep; call in Wiser Heads to advise in so Weighty a Cause, and if your
Modesty or any other reason will not admit you to ask your Friends advice
therein, yet be pleased to think God worthy to be of your Council: In a word
let no Object Charm you but what has the Lineaments of Virtue, and the
Endowments of a Noble Mind, which with, or without the outward Qualifications,
are of force only to Captivate our Souls. Hence it is that we perceive the
Love, grounded upon these External Objects only, to be short-lived and
Transient, soon Hot, and soon Cold; lasting no longer than the Object appears
to be Beautiful, Strong, Witty and Wealthy, and growing Nauseous when
Impotency, Withered Age, or Poverty over-takes them, and often before: whilst
the more substantial Love, founded upon and raised by the inward Ornament of
the Mind, gives Life to the Love of outward, and maintains its own Flame
within, when all the Fuel administered from without is taken away. This Noble
Intellectual Love Unites and Consolidates the Parties though in Rags and Poverty,
though in Gray-Hairs and Wrinkles, and breaths after a Union beyond this and the
Grave. This is that Love, we should be all inflamed with, and desire to
Contract with each other, not because we have Painted Faces, and a handsomer
piece of Clay for our Share than others are Molded into, or because we have
more of Giddy Fortunes Favors; but because of those inward Ornaments of Piety
and Devotion, of Sobriety and Temperance, of Modesty and Humility, of Chastity
and Charity, of Meekness and Affability, which set off the subject in which
they are inherent with such invincible and irresistible Charms, as no being
above a Brute can forbear to be inamoured with.

Of the Profanation of the Lord's Day. CHAP. IV.
The Reasons of keeping Holy the first Day of the Week instead of the Seventh.
The Lord's Day, How and by whom profaned, viz. I. By neglecting the Public
Ordinances of the Church. II. The Private Duties of the Family. III. By
Exercising our ordinary Callings thereon, whether by our selves, our Servants,
or our Beasts. IV. By publicly Exposing to Sale. An Objection answered, and
what Works are Lawful to be done. V. By works of the Flesh, such as (1.)
Tippling, (2.) Feasting, (3.) Gaming, (4.) Dancing and Singing, (5.) Country
Revellings and Riots. And earnest Expostulation and Exhortation for Celebrating
the Lord's Day: Rules for it, viz. 1. Preparation on the Eve. 2. Frequenting
the Public Ordinances of the Church. 3. Family Duties. Motives thereto drawn
from the benefits of observing it; and the Mischiefs of Profaning it both to
Private Persons, and to the Public.

THat to serve the Invisible God (by whom we Live, Move, and have our Being) in
the whole course of our Lives is a main End for which we were Created: That
every Day and Hour should be Holy unto the Lord; that we should have the Fear
of Him always before our Eyes: That every Moment of our time is truly His, is
indisputable. But forasmuch as we are but Men, in a little lower degree then
those Blessed Spirits whose task and Happiness it is to be employed continually
in Contemplating, Adoring and Praising their great Creator; and whereas since
the Fall we are placed in such circumstances as require the sweat of our Brows,
and the Expense of a great part of our time in the procuring the Necessaries of
this Life; we cannot so readily bestow all our hours on Religious Exercises.
Nor does God require we should, but dispenses with the greatest part of our
Lives, and only appoints a seventh part of the whole for the more Solemn and
Immediate Acts of Divine Worship; and is pleased so to Order it that every
Action in our Ordinary Callings may be such as may Glorify our Father which is
in Heaven: Our Fields and Gardens, Our Shops and Studies, Our Dining-Rooms and
Closets may be all Sanctified by a Religious and Holy Life: Sobriety and
Modesty, Temperance, and Moderation may make our very Diversions and
Recreations Holy. But then we are not to stick here, our walking with God in
the Private Duties of our several stations, Exempts us not from the Public
Adoration of Him in the Congregation of the Faithful. For as the Lord of Hosts
has been nearly conce^ned in appointing the Persons by Whom, the Manner How,
and the Place Where, so has he showed no less Regard in assigning the Time
When, he will be more peculiarly Worshipped. This He did at the very first
Creation, sanctify the Seventh Day resting thereon from all His Works which he
had made; and to the Jews he appointed a Seventh Day to be kept Holy. So great
a Veneration was (...) b^ the M^sai^ Law bestowed on that Mystical (...), that
every Seventh Year was appointed for a Sabbath of rest; and every Seventh of
these Sababaths of Rest was a Jubilee unto the People o Israel.

2. The Reasons for keeping the First Day of the Week Holy, instead of the
Seventh, considered.
I shall not here run into needless Disputes about the Changing of the Sabbath
from the Seventh to the First day of the Week, Reasons for it in a Christian
Nation are superfluous; and it is to be observed none cavil so much about it as
those, that would be glad, if there were no time at all allotted for those
Sacred Solemnities. It Is true, there was some Scuffle in the Primitive Times in
the Eastern and Western Churches about this Matter, One keeping the Jewish on
the Seventh Day of the Week, the Others observing the Christian Sabbath on the
Lord's Day, the first of the Week: but the general Assent that was given by all
the Church soon after, showed the Celebration of the Lord's Day to be of
Apostolical Institution, and not ordained by Human Tradition. For a scrupulous
Conscience (if any such there be in this Profane Age) it may be sufficient to
consider, that the very Jews did not observe the precise Numerical Seventh Day
from the Creation, but a Seventh, counting from the Day of their Deliverance
from the Land of Egypt: Nor could they be so strict in Sanctifying precisely
their own Seventh Day, since after the Commandment was written, the Sun stood
still for the space of a whole Day on Gibeon, and went back 10 Degrees in the
time of Hezekiah: But besides the uncertainty the Jews were in themselves, of
keeping their Sabbath on a precise Day, there is another Consideration which
renders it impossible for all Nations to keep the same Sabbath all the World
over at one instant of Time, and that is the Diversity of Meridians, and the
inequality of the Rising and Setting of the Sun, which causes the Days in one
place to vary from what they are in another, in some 6, in others 12 Hours
difference. The reasonableness of Translating the Sabbath from one Day to
another will appear more, if we consider the many Memorable Passages of the Old
Testament which shadow out this Change unto us, as well as those Remarkable
Instances of the New, which all happened on this first day of the Week. On this
Day God began the work of Creation, to build the curious Fabric of the World,
and to Form all Beings out of that Chaos in which they were at first involved;
and it is very probable he designed as much Honor should be paid to the Memory
of this great Day, as of That in which he had finished all: On this Day (as a
Hebrew Author Observes) the Cloud of God's Glorious Majesty sat first upon his
People, then did Aaron and his Children first enter upon and Execute their
Priesthood; and thereon did God first solemnly Bless his People Israel. This is
the Day (as David Prophesying of the Resurrection of Christ testifies) which
the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad therein. And how great, wondrous
and astonishing things were done on this Day under the Gospel dispensation? It
was on This day that Christ finished the Glorious Work of our Redemption, and
rose again from the Dead for our Justification. On this first Day of the Week
did He appear after his Resurrection to his Disciples several times; On this
Day fell the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles as they were assembled together; and
at the same time upon St. Peter's Sermon were there added no less than three
thousand Souls to the Church; On this Day was it that the Disciples afterward
met frequently together to break Bread, and to lay up their Charitable
Contributions for the use of the Poor.

3. The Lord's day How and by whom Profaned.
These things being premised, I proceed to consider how Shamefully and Odiously
the Solemnities of this Day are slighted, derided, and Profaned by this our
Corrupt and Dissolute Age. And herein I could wish the Openly Debauched and
Licentious person were the only Delinquent. But alas! if we deal Impartially,
we shall find many of those, who seem to look Wisely, and would be angry if you
called them by any other Name than that of Christian, to be deficient enough in
this respect. They tell you Judaism only required so strict an Observation of
the Sabbath; that Christ the Lord of the Sabbath has remitted that rigor with
which the Mosaic Law obliged its followers; That it is Puritanical,
Enthusiastic Zeal which spurs on some to be so Religiously given on this Day.
This is no invented Account grounded upon a mere Hypothesis, but what is to be
seen by every Days Experience: And if none else can bear me Witness of the
truth hereof, yet I might appeal to some Judicious Men's Opinions, who have
declared the Suppressing of the Profanation of the Lord's Day to be triffling,
Nugatory, and little less than a Grievance to the Subject. So little is the
Concern which Men now adays have for God and Religion; and such slighting
thoughts do they bear to the Divinity of the Lord's Day. I know not what Church
allows so much Licentiousness thereon, sure I am the Church of England is far
from it in her Doctrines and Discipline, let her pretended Followers use their
Christian Liberty for a Cloak of Wickedness as long as they please.

4. Who can forbear lamenting the sad Degeneracy and Apostasy of the Age,
wherein to reform from Superstition is to run upon the other Extreme and be
Profane, wherein the Cure of Pharisaical Hypocrisy consists in being openly
loose and Debauched, wherein to plead for the Keeping holy the Lord's Day is
Malepertness in the Minister; Cant, Impertinencie and Presbyterianism in a
Private Person? But notwithstanding all this I shall pursue my design in
tracing the Profane and Irreligious in all His Bypath and transgressions, to
lay open the several Ways by which he Violates this Holy Institution, and drive
him or shame him if possible into the Power, as well as the Form of Godliness.

5. One would think in Complaisance to the fashion, and in Conformity to the
Custom of the Country wherein they Live, The Lord's Day is profaned. First by
neglecting to come to the public Ordinances of the Church.
there should be none but what went to one Assembly or another, but we have too
many who neither go to Church, nor to any other place of Divine Worship
tolerated by Law on that Day. Cannot God, (say they) be served as well at Home,
as in the Public Congregation? Will not our Reading a good Book profit as well
in our own Houses, as the Hearing of a Sermon in the more frequented Oratories?
Will the Churches contain the confluence of Auditors? Will our Absence or
Presence lessen or augment the number of the Faithful? Had not we better tarry
away than go with unprepared Hearts, to fleep or stare away the time? Such as
these are the Evasions made now adays by many: but, (Poor Creatures!) little
do they consider who it is that suggests those Idle Reasonings into them, else
they would see clearly that it is Gods Command that we, by keeping Holy this His
blessed Day, might meditate on his Glorious Works of our Creation and
Redemption, and learn how to know and to keep all the rest of his Holy Laws and
Commandments. This is the Market Day of our Souls, and where should we go to
buy the Food of Angels and the Waters of Life, the Wine of the Sacrament, and
the Milk of the Word of God to feed our drooping Souls, but at those Ordinances
where they are to be had without Money, and without Price? Where should we
receive the precious Eye Salve to Unscale our benighted Eyes, and heal our
Spiritual Blindness, but from those Spiritual Physicians? How can our wounded
Consciences, and troubled Spirits, and broken Hearts be cured of their
Maladies, unless we come there where the Balm of Gilead drops from the Lips of
the Preacher? Besides in this public Ordinance of the Church we own God to be
not only the Lord and Maker of every Individual person, but to be the Head of
the Mystical Body, to be the Sovereign over the Universal World.

6. There are others who are constant in the Public Congregation, Secondly, By
neglecting the Private Duties of the Family.
make as it were a Conscience of going Morning and Evening to Church; but then
this is all they think is required at their Hands. If you should tell them of
Repetition, Meditation, Family Duties, Catechizing, Exhorting, etc. They must
beg your Pardon there. They do not design to make the Lord's Day a Burden to
them. They will not turn their Houses into Conventicles, They will not be
Righteous over much, they must be excused from being singular: And they will
not differ from their Neighbors. This and the like Language you shall be sure
to find from most. For (God knows) to the shame of Christianity, Men are so
stupid and cold; so Lukewarm and indifferent in their Great Concern, that it
is well if a Prayer be said in a Private Family Once a Week: And what is more
to be lamented, That is wanting also in most Houses. And when the Master of the
House is so remiss, no wonder if the Servants and Children trifle away the
Remainder of the Day; and after His Example, grow as unconcerned in their
Private and Closet Duties, as he was in the more public Ones of His Family.
Nay more; it is to be feared he himself is as seldom in Secret, as he cares to
be Openly Good and Pious. I would not be thought Uncharitable, and therefore
leave the Judging of their retired Thoughts to Him whose only Jurisdiction it
is to know and discern the Secrets of all Hearts; and pass on to the
Consideration of the next way, by which men may be said to profane this Holy
Day, viz.

7. By following the Works of their Ordinary callings either by themselves,
their Servants, Thirdly, The Lord's Day profaned by following our Ordinary
Callings by Our selves, Servants, or Beasts.
or their Beasts. If the neglect of Sanctifying the Lord's Day by our Public
and Private Duties be a Profanation thereof, How much more then is it profane
to violate it by any servile Labor or forbidden vocation? It is the Express
Letter of the Command, that on this Day we should do no manner of Work, neither
we, nor our Sons, nor our Daughters, nor our Menservants, nor our
Maidservants, nor our Cattle, nor the Stranger that is within our Gates. How
then shall they Answer the Outfacing of so strict a Command, who shall presume
contrary to both God's and Humane Laws to follow their Ordinary Employment
thereon, whether by Themselves, their Servants, or their Beasts? And with these
I must beg leave to Expostulate a while. Are not six Days enough to bestow on
this World, and the Concerns thereof? Cannot you spare one day in Seven to
cease from your Labors? Will you be so cruel as to give your selves no respite
from the fatigues of Toil and Business? Shall the Ten Commandments, and the
Constitutions of a Christian Government be kinder to your Nature, and more
Compassionate thereto than you your selves? And is it not enough to afflict
your own Bodies and rob your own Souls of that Spiritual Nourishment, but you
must lay burdens upon your Servants, and deprive them of that Advantage which
they might reap by the Religious Observation of this Day. It Is sad to reflect
upon the many Unfortunate Servants who are Articled under such Pagan-Christian
Masters, and I cannot forbear bestowing a Sigh and a Tear or two at their
unalterable Calamity. For this our Metropolitan City, without looking further,
can furnish us with many Hundreds (I wish I could not say Thousands) of those
Unsanctified Wretches, who having not the fear of God before their Own Eyes,
care not how little those that do belong to them are instructed in the Points
of Religion. And as they are for cutting off all other Opportunities of their
growing in Grace, so are they careful to debar them of This season of
improving themselves therein by Sanctifying the Lords Day. Thus is the
Miserable Young Man, by a Seven Years irreligious Course of Life, become at
last as Stupid and Profane a Person as his Master before him: And when out of
his Time it is seldom that ever he recollects himself, but deals as hardly with
his own Apprentice. And can we expect the Profane Wretch would be more merciful
to his Beasts? No certainly, He would use them as hardly as his Servants, were
not the Laws of our Land strict in the restraining of such unaccountable
Cruelties. And truly it is as much as the Magistrate can do, to keep the
Traveller from his unnecessary Journeys, and to debar the Hackney-Coaches from
plying in our very Streets on the Lord's Day.

8. And Here I cannot but wish the Gentry would forbear their visiting the
Churches in State, and contrive a better way of going thither then in their
Ceremonial Chariots. It Is true, their Beasts may not be put to hard Service,
but then their Coachmen, who have Souls as precious in the Eyes of the Lord as
any others, lose the Privilege of the Public Ordinances by being forced to
attend and look to their Coach and Horses at the Church doors. I speak not this
to affront any, but only to put them in mind of contriving ways (if they must
be Coached to Church) so to dispose of their Coach and Horses, that their
Servants as well as Themselves may have the Benefit of serving their Common and
Great Master

9. But to return, there is (besides this of Labor) another way by which the
Lord's Day is profaned, Fourthly, The Lords-D^y profaned by publicly Exposing
to sale.
and that is by publicly Exposing Goods to sale thereon. This is that which
Righteous Nehemiah could not endure, when he contended with the Rulers of
Israel, and would not suffer the Carriers nor the Merchants of the Land to
bring up their Wares to Jerusalem on the Sabbath Day, Neh. 13. And how small a
Matter soever it may seem to some in our times, yet by Him it was reckoned the
cause for which God plagued Israel, and suffered them to be led Captive intO a
strange Land. And without doubt our Legislators of the Last Age, and the
Beginning Statute 29. Car. 2.
of this, were of Opinion that the suffering the least Ware to be sold off on
the Lord's Day would prove an Introduction to a greater Profaneness: which made
them prohibit the Exposing of any Commodity to sale thereon, upon the
Forfeiture of all so Exposed (be it of never so great a value) which was to be
sold, and the Money converted to the use of the Poor. And truly they who now
take it ill, should they for the selling of a Trifle be forced to pay the
Penalty which the Statutes of our Land require, will hereafter think that
Punishment easy and Light to what they shall then feel from the great
Lawgiver, when they shall give up their Last accounts.

10. And here some one may say; An Objection Answered, and what Works may
Lawfully be done on the Lord's Day.
Sure this must be some Puritan; How strict he is? What will be allow nothing
to be done this Day? Must we do no manner of Work thereon? Does God require we
should be tied up from all Motion and Action, but that of the Soul and Spirit?
Is it not better to Work than Sin on this Day? To which I reply, Ex Confesso it
must be granted that there are three sorts of Works which the strictest
Christian may on this Day perform, viz. Works of absolute Necessity, not fained
or which might have been done the Day before, or may be done the Day after:
Works of Charity; and lastly, Works of Piety. Beyond these, none may lawfully
use his Christian Liberty; Nor did our Savior relax any thing of the
strictness save in these respects. As to that, whether it is not better to Work
than to Sin on this Day; True it is, Saint In tit. Ps. 91.
Austin's Opinion is so, affirming that it is better to Plough than to Dance on
the Lord's Day. But then it is not thence to be concluded, that the Greater
destroys the Less, or that the Guilt of Profaning this Holy and Blessed Day by
our Ordinary calling is less in its own Nature, because it can be Violated by a
more Horrid and aggravated Sin.

11. But to proceed, if the doing that upon this Day, Fifthly, The Lord's Day
profaned by the Works of the Flesh, such as are, first, Tippling thereon.
which at another time is both Lawful and Necessary to be done, be so great an
Offense (as certainly it is;) How extremely must the Crime be aggravated when
we do that thereon, which is Unlawful, or at least Unnecessary to be done at
any other Time? Such as the Works of the Flesh, to wit; Carousing, Feasting,
Dancing, Singing, Gaming, Rioting, and the like. Though the Naming of these is
abominable to any serious Man, yet the Practice of them is so Universal and
Common, that there is a Necessity, as it were, of insisting some time upon each
of them.

12. It Is strange methinks that Men should be so absurd as to imagine the small
service they pay to God by an Hour or two upon a Sunday, should tolerate them
in serving of Sin and Satan all the Day and all the Week after. Yet it is too
true to need any Demonstration, that most, especially of the Inferior Rank of
Men, are no sooner out of a Church, but strait you find them in an Alehouse or
a Tavern; where they do not, as they pretend, go only to satisfy their
Natures, but to spend, on that their Idle Day, all the Profit and Gain of the
foregoing Week. An Intolerable thing this! And a Profanation not to be endured
in any Civil much less in a Christian Society, notwithstanding the Cry of all
the Ale-House-keepers and Vintners to the Contrary: Who will give out (where
their Complaints can be admitted the Hearing) that the Suppressing of Tippling
on the Lord's Day would tend Immediately to their Ruin and Destruction. But
better it is they should Murmur, than that the whole Land Mourn; better they
should lose the taking of Pounds, than so many Wives and Children should be
undone and Perish by reason of the Extravagancie of the Man. Will those
Innkeepers and Vintners supply the wants of the Indigent Wife and Children,
when they are by their means reduced to beggary? Will the Host or Hostess
exchange their draughts of cold Water for a Cup of small Beer? No, it is
certain the Man himself shall not be welcome without Money in his Pocket, though
he has spent his All to Enrich them, and Mortgaged his Estate to the Tap and
Tankard.

13. Another sort of Profanation of this Holy Ordinance is by Luxurious
Feastings, A second Work of the F^esh, is Feasting on the Lords Day.
and Voluptuous Entertainments, too common on this Day. It is true this Day is
a Festival, but such a One as ought not to be Dedicated to any but to the
Memory of a Crucified Redeemer. A Festival indeed it is, in which the Soul (not
the Body) should be Glutted with good things: in which we should strive not for
the Meat which perishes, but for that which endures to Everlasting Life; in
which we should thirst after the Living Water, and Hunger after the Bread of
Life which is able to make us Live for ever. The sincere Milk of the Word, the
Flesh, and Blood of a Dying Savior are indeed Dainties and Repasts, which
every faithful Soul is satisfied with, and Breaths after. But Gluttony and
Gormandizing, Pampering and High-feeding, are but pitiful subsequents of a
Morning Sermon, and worse Preparatives for an Afternoons Lecture. Were
Hospitality and feeding the Poor at the Bottom of those Feasts, there might be
something said in Excuse thereof. But forasmuch as the Cost and Luxury of the
Treats is but barely to keep up Mutual Correspondence, and to return former
Entertainments, they might be very well let alone till some more seasonable
Time. All that I can conceive may be alleged in favor hereof is, that the
Sanctity of the Day may have some Influence upon the Guests to keep them within
the Bounds of Sobriety and Temperance. But alas! there is no such Notice
taken, nor has it any Influence to withold the Epicure from his Excess, as is
evident enough to any who have been at those Luxurious Tables. And what is the
mind, after such Repletions, good for? Can the full fraught Stomach forbear
sending up its fumes into the Drouzie Head, which cannot hold from sleeping one
single Hour? No certainly we find the Unhappy Creature, though he has so much
grace left to come to Church after his Epicurean Dinner, yet overtaken with
sleep before Prayers be half said, and in his Slumbers before the Minister has
named his Text twice over. And can we think God is well pleased with such a
Man's Sacrifice? Can the most Charitable Christian now living allow such a
stupid Soul to have Sanctified the Lord's Day aright?

14. But to prevent this, Others are so cautious as not to go to Church at all;
A Third work of the flesh is Gaming on this Day.
and the Cloth removed, they betake themselves (to what they then are most fit
for) to Softness and Effeminacy, to Gaming and Dancing, to Singing and telling
of Idle Stories. It Is very well known how many (I wish I could not say of the
Higher Rank of) Men spend the Close, if not the greatest part of the Lord's Day:
Not in Reading and Meditating, not in Instructing and Praying with their
Families, but at Chess or Tables, at Cards or Dice. I would very willingly know
whether their Time is so much Employed on other Days, that they are so forward
to set this Day apart too for their Sports and Pastimes. Shall the Devil not
only Engross the Weekdays, but have the Sunday spent in his Service too?
Strange and Horrible this! That Men should be so Insatuated and Enslaved; so
Bewitched and Inveigled to their Idle Pleasures, as to bestow all their time
both secular and sacred upon them.

15. But this is not all, to fill up the measure of Iniquity they must have
their Anticks and their Merry strains on this Holy Day. A fourth Work of the
Flesh is Dancing and Profane Singing on this Day.
They cannot go to Bed without a Song or a Dance to refresh their drooping
Spirits. Poor Hearts! They have been fatigued with the long and tedious Duties
of the Day, have with patience undergone the Burden thereof; and attended
(till they were weary) to Mr. Parsons Discourse of an Hour long: And must they
be debarred from a harmless Diversion, which hurts no body, and is an Offense
to none but meddling Fools, and unaccountably-scrupulous Puritans? Perhaps this
might be tolerable, were it not attended (as is most commonly) with
Masqueradings and Balls of half a Nights Continuance. But shall such Farce and
Sonnetting go down? Shall such Fooleries and Apishness make up the Conclusion
of the Sunday? Shall Singing of Divine Anthems, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, so
much recommended by St. James, and so much in use among the truly merry-hearted
Primitive Christians be abused, ridiculed, and laid aside by most? And shall
the Melodious Harmony of the Saints, and the Consort we may hold with the
Heavenly Host be Converted into Obscene Modern Songs, which would not take at
any other time, were it not for the Pandarism of a Musical Composure?

16. But as yet we have seen but the best part, the foulest is still behind,
what I have said of the two last ways by which the Lord's Day is profaned, to
wit, The last way w^ereby the Lord's Day is profaned, viz. By Country Revellings
and Riots.
by Singing and Dancing, is what the Civilized Citizens and more Gentile
Courtiers are guilty of: But if you step into the Country, you will see
Franticks as well as Anticks on this Sacred Day. No sooner is the
Evening-service over, but you would think Hell it self were broke loose, and
that every Parish and Village were a Universal Bedlam. They are Sober indeed
who keep House, and pass away the time in some idle Romantic Discourse, and
are not seen with the more Licentious Multitude. But good God! What Routs and
Disorders, what Cudgel-playing, and Wrest-ling, what Races and Football
Matches are set on foot in their open Fields on this Great Solemnity? Dancings
and R^vellings, May-games and Wakes are so Customary that if you offer to
suppress them, you incroach upon the Privilege to the Subject. Nor is this
their Practice only on a Licentious Carnival, or a Jovial Whitsuntide, but on
every Sunday in the Year. Not is it the Custom of any peculiar Place, but
almost of every Village, Division, Hundred and County in the whole Kingdom.
This Pest reigns in every Air, this Plague is Predominant in every Clyme, and
this Profane Infection has taken hold of every Quarter and Corner of the Nation.

17. But Brutes that you are! How unreasonably do you style your selves
Christians, An earnest Expostulation and Exhortation for the duly Celebrating
the Lords Day.
when as you do that on the Lord's Day which a Modest Heathen would blush to do
at any time? Are there any Pagans in Nature worse than your selves in Practice?
What is it you think of? Are your Sports and Pastimes, your Routs and
Revellings all the Evening Sacrifice God is like to have at your Hands? Will
those be an Incense of a sweet savor unto his Nostrils? Is God the Master of
your time, and are you accountable to him for All, and must the more precious
Minutes thereof be Squandered away at this Rate? Can you find no leisure Hours
from your Business to recreate your Bodies, but the day which the Lord has set
apart for himself? Must that be your Vacation, your Play-day? Ungrateful
Wretches that you are! Had God desired some Great thing at your Hands, could
you have denied him, since your Breath, your Lives, your All, are of and from
him? And can you, when he only bids you remember the Seventh Day to keep it
Holy, find tricks and ways how to rob him of his right in that too? Monsters of
Ingratitude! Where is your Love, where is your Du^y, where is your
Thankfulness, and where is your Obedience to that Being by whose Permission
alone it is that you breath out of Hell one Moment? What hinders but you may be
Zealous in Observing this Sacred Day? Are you afraid the Church will disown you
for being righteous overmuch? Are there any stronger Encouragements to be
Zealous unto good Works, than what are to be found within her Bosom? Is it a
disgrace for a Church of England-Man to be strict in obeying God's Commands? Is
the Name of Precisian, Singular, or Puritan so powerful to frighten you from
walking according to the Precepts of our Blessed Savior? Are you afraid or
ashamed to be His followers? Why than do you affix His Name before yours? And
take it as an affront if you are called by any other Name than that of
Christian? Be persuaded than to be Christians indeed, to bear a Reverential
Zeal and Fear to all that belongs to God, to his Attributes, to his Name, to
his Word, to his Works, and to his Day. For the Celebration of the Last of
which, take these following Rules.

18. Some Rules laid down for the right Observation of the Sabbath. First,
Preparation on the Eve.
Prepare thy Heart for this Great Solemnity. If there was so much Devotion and
Decorum, so much Preparation and Cleansing requisite for the Receiving the Law,
the Approaching the Ark, and the Entering into the Tabernacle, and they were
punished with Death who were rash and Unprepared in their Approaches; How much
more should we provide our selves for the partaking of the Holy Mysteries under
the Gospel Dispensation? And how dangerously Guilty are those who heedlesly and
rashly run into those Holy Ordinances? Keep thy foot when thou go into the
House of the Lord, is Solomon's advice; and it was not the not Washing of the
Hands, but the unclean, unpurified Heart that our Savior condemned in the
Pharisees. He that so uses the world as though he used it not, and has God always
before his Eyes, is a continual Sacrifice, and needs not much blowing to raise
up his Soul into a Flame. But the Carking Worlding, who all the Week is fastened
to this Earth, should take some time to disintangle his thoughts, and make them
ready for Spiritual Objects. He would do well to leave off his Business as
early as conveniently he can on the Eve of every Lord's Day: to call himself to
account, and see how cases stand betwixt God and his own Soul. He would do well
to retire into his Chamber, to commune with his own Heart, to search it
thoroughly, and to examine whether he be sensible of that Majesty before whom he
must on the Morrow appear. It Is for want of this Premeditation that the Heart
relishes Spirituals so ill on the Day they are offered to it; that it is so
soon cloyed and glutted with sacred things, which had the Mind been prepared
would have lain well upon, and been easily digested by the Soul.

19. Having thus provided for the Approaching Solemnity, and made His Addresses
in His Closet to the God who hears in Secret, Secondly, Frequenting the Public
Ordinances of the Church.
He will find it no such Difficult matter to be present at, and demean himself
decently and devoutly in the Public Ordinances of the Church; and to stay them
out were they something longer than they are. And here the Devout Soul needs
not to be admonished, though the Lazy, unprepared and unsanctified Hearts should
be put in Mind, to consider in whose presence it is that they then appear: that
they may be struck with an awful Reverence, and an humble Fear of that Majesty
with whom they then and there more immediately converse. It is the Assembly of
the Saints, the Congregation of the Faithful, the Confluence of God's Elect, a
Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Peculiar People, a Holy Nation, that
they then and there represent, to show forth the Praises of him who has called
them out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. 1 Pet. 2.9. Oh how should such
thoughts inflame them to lift up pure Hands, to cast up pure Eyes, to dart up
pure Affections, to lift up a clean Heart, and to pour out Holy Prayers before
the Throne of Grace! How should such thoughts make them join with the Minister
in that admirable Form of Morning and Evening Prayer the Church in her Liturgy
has prepared to their Hands; the Excellency of which appears to none more than
to the truly Pious, Fixed, Warm, and attentive Soul! How should they be
inflamed with Love, and not only offer up their Prayers, but their Praises also
to that Being who gives them the Cause, the Power, and the Faculty to Praise!
How should they run out to meet God in his Ordinances; to Hearken to his
Messengers shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace! How would they be
Enamoured with the Mercies, supported by the Promises, and forewarned by the
Judgments and Threatenings of the most High! How will their Instructed Minds,
and Informed Wills breath after a Spiritual Participation of the Bread of Life,
and the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant! And in this Mysterious Solemnity a
Devout Communicant would not come to offer but to receive his Crucified Master,
he would sacrifice his Sins, and offer up himself a Living sacrifice Holy, and
Acceptable unto God, which is his reasonable service. He would offer up his
Understanding, his Will, his Affections, his Passions, his All to be directed,
governed and guided by the Royal Will and Pleasure of Heaven.

20. Were every Christian that goes to Church thus affected (as in some degree
all must be that will sanctify the Lord's Day aright) He would not find it so
difficult to consecrate the Remainder thereof at Home, Thirdly, By Family
Duties.
and in his Closet. He would not then think it Puritanical or a business
Indifferent, but absolutely necessary and indispensable to take care that He
and his House serve the Lord, not only in the public Solemnities of the
Church, but in the more retired Duties of the Family. He would not then be
ashamed, nor esteem it tedious and irksom, to spend the Close in Reading,
Exhorting, Meditating, and Contemplating, in Praying to and Praising of the
Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity: But would think it his Happiness, his Joy,
and his Delight. For this inward, Spiritual and Caelestial Pleasure I appeal to
those who have tasted what a Sweet and Pleasant thing it is to be thankful,
Holy and Zealously Religious on this Day.

Motives for the keeping of the Lord's Day Ho^y, ^rawn from the the
Consideration of the Benefits of Observing it, and the Mischiefs of Profaning
it both to priv^te Persons and to the Public.
21. And if the Charms of this Festivity rightly observed, be not of force
enough to prevail with the Profane to come in and join with the strictly Pious,
yet the Consideration of the Benefits that Redound from a Due observation of
the Lord's Day, and the Mischiefs of Profaning it that Infest every individual
Person as well as the Public will I hope persuade him to think it his Interest
as well as Duty to be strict and exact in remembering a Seventh Day to keep it
Holy.

22. The first Benefit that naturally flows from the due Observance of the
Lord's Day is the upholding a sense of Religion in the Person that thus Observes
it. The first Benefit of sanctifying the Lord's Day is the upholding a sense of
Religion in us.
It is on this Day that we are taught our particular Duties of Living Soberly,
Righteously and Godly in this present World. It is then Grace is administered to
the Hearers; Grace to assist them in performing what is commanded, and Grace to
resist and avoid the Temptations of doing Evil. Then are we told of a Heaven
and the joys thereof laid up in store for all such as truly Love, Fear, Obey,
and Believe in God; and are acquainted with a Hell that is prepared for the
Unbelievers and Profane. There we have the faculties of our Souls enlightened,
our Understandings cleared, our Wills rectified, our passions subjected to our
Reasons, and our Outward in all things made subservient to our Inward Man. It
is then we have our Faith, Hope, and Charity, Our Love, Patience, Meekness and
Humility, Our Sobriety, Temperance and Chastity, and all the other Virtues of a
Christian and Holy Life revived, renewed, enlarged, regulated and appropriated
to their propet Objects. Then (in a Word) we Learn to Glorify God the Father
who has Created us, to adore God the Son who has Redeemed us, to Reverence
God the Holy Ghost who has Sanctified us, and to Bless and Magnify the
Trinity in the Unity, who by such mysterious Works of Mercy has brought such
mighty things to pass. And it is then we are exhorted to be Merciful as our
Heavenly Father is Merciful, and to Love him because he first Loved us; to
imitate the Holy Jesus, to be like him, and to be conformable to his
Sufferings, to be Meek, Pure, and Humble as he was.

23. But should we look on the other side we shall find the D^shonouring God in
his Day to be the ready Road to the not honoring him in any thing else. The
first Mischief of Profaning the Lord's Day.
It being the Opinion and Observation of the Best and Wisest of Men, that were
the Sanctification of the Lord's Day laid aside, in less than an Age the
Christian World would turn Pagans and Infidels. And I am afraid half that time
would do the business effectually. For if we can dispense with so strict a
Command, what other is it that we can boggle at? The violation of this Precept
is manifestly the I^let to all the Immoralities Humane Nature is capable of. If
we once lose our Zeal and Fervor for Religion in any one part, we quickly grow
Lukewarm in the whole, and at last we become quite Cold and Dead, and
irrecoverably stupid in a continual course of Profaness and Impiety. Nemo
repent fuit Turpissimus (says the Juvenal.
Poet) but the Wretch never attains to the Height of Wickedness so soon, as
when he makes the Profanation of the Lord's Day the first step thereunto. It is
by our Absence from Holy Duties in Public that we come to leave off those in
Private too; that we lose our true Notions of the Godhead; that we have but
Glimmering Apprehensions of the Joys and Torments of another World, being taken
up only with such as are present and affect our Sense; that we think all the
Virtues of an Holy Life to be but Sham and Invention; that we esteem Vices
Natural, and to have nothing condemnable in them; that our Hearts become
hardened, and our Consciences seared, our Reason blinded, our Understandings
darkened, our Wills depraved, and our Passions Headstrong. And to conclude, it
is from this that our Souls lose more and more their Original Purity, forget
their own Divine Nature, and dishonor themselves by stooping with the Body to
low, base, and unbecoming Enjoyments. And no wonder when the Master-Beam is
removed, and the chief Pillar of the Fabric gone, but the Superstructure soon
follows and falls to the Ground. Nor is it strange the Man should not be able
to withstand the Torrent of Vice, when with his own hand he opens the Sluice,
and lets the Impetuous stream break in upon him.

24. The next Benefit of Sanctifying the Lord's Day is that it weans us from the
eager pursuit of Worldly Things; A second Benefit is the weaning us from this
World.
This solemn Sequestration of our thoughts from Earthly, carries them out to
Heavenly subjects: and by contemplating on the Joys and Glories of another
World we lose our Veneration and Esteem for this; and by being raised above
this Worlds Enjoyments we have an opportunity of seeing what a Point it is we
are too apt to dote on, and what mighty Nothings they are which so often
captivate our Souls and lead them on to their own Destruction. By Contemplating
of the Crowns and Diadems of the Heavenly Jerusalem, we moderate our Desires as
to the Conveniences as well as pleasures of this Life: By Meditating on the
Eternity which is just ready to Succeed, we are informed of the Inconstancy and
Swiftness of this Moment, this Span of time we New enjoy. By Contemplating the
Durableness of all Caelestial Fruitions we come to know that this World
vanishes away, and the Fashion thereof is every day upon its Alteration. By
Considering the Immortality of our better Parts we are instructed how Frail,
Mortal, and Short-lived our Earthly Tabernacles are. To conclude, by being
Fixed and Spiritualized, by conceiving right Notions of God, and surveying the
Charms and Endearments of those Mansions prepared for us above, we arrive to
that height of Admiration, Love, and Esteem, as to account all things but Dung
and Dross that we may gain Christ; to breath earnestly to be dissolved, that we
may be settled there, where true Joys are to be found.

25. But then on the other hand, we shall find those who slight God's Worship,
so tied down to this World, A second Mischief is that it makes us do ^t upon
the things of this World.
doting upon, admiring, adoring, and eagerly pursuing after the things
thereof: That they cannot so much as lift up a thought toward Heaven, their
Mind is so busy and fixed upon this Earth. The Plummets of Care hang so heavy
upon them, that they are always grovelling here below; and tho they may cast up
an Eye accidentally toward a Celestial Canaan, yet their desires are still to
remain on this side Jordan. Nay, such a one is so ravished with the Delights
and Pleasures of this Life which affect his sense, and are present with him,
that he has but faint, if any desires after those which are only Notional and
affect the Intellectual Man, being the Substance of things Hoped for, and the
Evidence of things not seen. Hence it is that he cries it is good for me to be
here, and is so loath to leave the World when the Messenger of Death knocks at
his Door. Hence is it that he makes him friends of the Mannon of
Unrighteousness, and thinks of nothing but of building up Barns and enlarging
his Stores, till the Embassy comes to him, of Thou fool this night shall thy
Soul be required of thee. Luke 12.

26. Another Benefit arising from the Performance of this our Duty, is that it
gives a Blessing to our Ordinary Callings. A third benefit is, that it blesses
our Ordinary Labors.
We are so far from losing one day in seven, that we gain (if I may so phrase
it) six days in one. The sincere Observer hereof will tell you the Truth of
what I here assert by his own Experience; and can witness with Joy, that he has
not only found a serenity and calmness of Mind, but a prosperous success in all
his Affairs of the following Week. And who would not serve God one day for his
assisting him six days in return? What Worldling, if he knew his own Interest
aright, but would sanctify the Lord's Day, since he may be sure he shall not
serve God for Naught? That Work must certainly succeed which is begun,
furthered and ended with the Blessing of God. His Hand will undoubtedly fill
our Industry with Good Things, and His Bounty will not send our Holy Labors
empty away. He will be ready to support us in our Toil, and bear a part with us
in our Burdens, and bring all our Endeavors to Good Effect. He will be with
us in our going out, and our coming in, and will take care of our down-sitting
and up-rising, and will surround us in all our ways. And then who can forbear
crying out Happy is the man who is in such a Case, Yea blessed is he who has
the Lord for his God.

27. But as for the Ungodly and Profane it is not so with them. They may be
more eager in the pursuit of the profit of this Life, A Third Mischief is, that
it causes a C^rse on our Private C^^cerns.
but then if they attain it, it is a Curse to them, and in the midst of their
Plenty they find no Satisfaction* with the Horse-leech they crave more, more,
more, and so on ad infinitum. They cannot Enjoy, tho they may possess large
Inheritances. They may plant Vineyards, but others shall eat of the Fruit
thereof; they may rise up early, and sit up late and eat the Bread of
Carefulness, but it is but lost labor, it is but vain, since God does not
Pronouce a Blessing upon their Works And can they expect he will prosper their
Labor, who will not so as much throw up, with the Congregation, a Sundays
Prayer for his Blessing upon them? Are his Benefits so cheap and inconsiderable
that they must be bestowed, without a seeking for, and that upon the Sinner? No
certainly, the Almighty is truly Propitious only to those who Reverence and
Honor him in his Name, Word and Day: and tho the Wicked should increase his
Estate, yet his Profaneness is that Canker in the Heart, that Worm in the Root
which will quickly destroy and undermine all.

28. Lastly, The Devout Soul, who truly celebrates this festival, entitles her
self to that which surpasses all that this World can afford. A fourth benefit
is, that it fits us for, and Entitles us to Eternal Happiness.
She enjoys a Heaven upon Earth, and is every day made better and better and
makes nearer advances to the State and Perfection of Angels, till at last being
arrived to that mature degree of Holiness and Purity, she may be let loose from
this Prison of Earth, and suffered to satiate her self with Celestial Joys for
evermore. There her holy breathings and prayers shall be swallowed up with
Praises and Eternal Hallelujahs. There shall she enjoy an Everlasting Sabbath
of Rest, and Drink of the Living Waters, not as she does here below, at the too
often disturbed streams, but at the Crystal Fountainhead. There shall we see
the perfect beauty of holiness, and behold God no longer darkly in a Glass, but
as he is, face to face. There Contemplation, Admiration and Desire will be lost
in the fruition of that Good, the Vision of that Blessedness, and the Adoration
of that Perfection, which she before contemplated, admired and desired.

29. But can the Profane Libertine expect he should be invested with that Glory
for which he prepares not himself, The fourth mischief of the neglect is, that
it consigns the profane over to eternal miseries.
nor so much as thinks of? Can he imagine Heaven will be the rewards of his
Impiety? And that an Incorruptible Crown will be put upon his dishonorable
Head? Whatever his thoughts are, I know not; but this am I assured of, that the
Heart of such a one is a very unfit receptacle for the Holy Ghost here, and how
much more unfit must he needs be to be partaker of the Fruition of the Blessed
Trinity hereafter? He grovels here below, and suffers the things of this World
to engross all his thoughts, and thinks of nothing beyond this and the Grave.
He is fixed to this Earth, till at last he convert to Earth and Worm^-meat
himself, and drop into the Infernal Lake before he be well aware whereabout he
is: And how severely he there pays for his Irreligion, his Scoffings, and his
Profaness, I cannot without horror and trembling conceive.

30. Thus far of Individuals and the Body Natural, I come now to consider the
Advantages as well as Inconveniences that attend the Body Politic, The
benefits and mischiefs which flow to the Public from the Observation or
Propha^^tion of the Lord's Day, are two.

First Benefit. It conduces to the maintaining the Public Peace.


viz. these Communities wherein the Lord's Day is either duly celebrated, or
shamefully abused and profaned. It is to be lamented there is no Nation so
strict therein as they ought, yet the Blessings even the Sinner enjoys in a
Kingdom where the Worshippers of God are but the lesser party, plainly indicate
that greater would be our happiness, if our strictness in this respect were but
greater too. For, [First] The Solemn sanctifying of this Blessed Day, conduces
much to the preserving the general peace of Societies. This may very properly
be called the Ligament by which the whole frame of a civilized Constitution is
bound up and kept from falling to Pieces. It is on this Day that the
Madding-world, if ever has its fits of Sobriety. It is then we may be taught to
be just and honest, obliging and affable, bountiful and charitable to all, as
occasion shall require, knowing that we all serve one common Master, who is
more than all these to us. Then we come to understand how to behave our selves
in all our Relations; to be respectful, submissive and obedient to our
Superiors; to be loving, kind and courteous to our Equals; to be condescending,
tenderhearted and compassionate to our Inferiors. Then the Magistrate is put
in mind to be just and merciful, impartial and unprejudiced to all; to condemn
and punish the bad and guilty, and to discharge the good and innocent man; and
then the Subject is instructed to be observant of, dutyful and obedient to
those in Authority. Thus is the Community maintained in an uninterrupted peace
and quiet, and the whole knit together by indissoluble bonds of concord.

31. But on the other side, How many are the disorders that follow the
profanation of this Day? The first Mischief of this Neglect, is disturbing the
Public Peace.
How easy do the Irreligious Crowd fall together by the Ears? and set the
whole Country in Flames by their Animosities? If we can make a slight of God,
and can venture to break his Statutes, no wonder if they have little esteem for
the Laws of Men, but run out with a Non Obstante to all the irregularities and
disorders imaginable. Insurrections and Rebellions are naturally the product of
a loose licentious Kingdom. They have lost all their modesty and fear they had
for God, and it is not strange they should cast off the Reins of an Earthly
Government when it lies uneasy upon them. The giddy and profane Multitude
turn every thing topsie turvy, and what Outrages will they not commit, what
Routs and Riots will they not be guilty of, when once they lose their sense of
Religion, which will soon happen when they once slight that which is the great
Support and Pillar thereof? There is no need to go far for Demonstration, the
quarrels and frequent disturbances which happen among the Profane
Sabbath Breakers (and commonly on this very day) declare, how great the
Combustion would be, were the Kingdom swallowed up in Irreligion, and become
thereby its own Incendiary.

32. To wind up all and draw to a Conclusion, the celebration of the Lord's Day,
The second Benefit and Mischief considered together.
as it entitles the particular Observers thereof to the more peculiar Eye and
favor of God, so it puts the whole Community of People that call upon his
Name, nuder his more immediate Care and Providence. The Ark of God where-e're
it came was sacred; and brought to a Religious 2 Samuel vi. 11.
Obed-Edom and his godly family Blessings, Plenty and Success; and to the
Sacrilegious, Idolatrous and Profane 1 Samuel v.
Philistines it sent the plague of Emerods and sores: The inquisitive prying
Chap. vi.
Bethshemites were smitten for looking thereinto, and the rude unsanctified 2 Samuel vi.
Vzzah for his familiar touching the Seat of Gods Holiness was punished with
immediate death. The Parallel will hold good in the consideration of the
Keeping or not Keeping Holy the Lord's Day. The Lord of Hosts has in all ages of
the World been jealous for his Honor, and has declared that them that Honor
him he will Honor, but those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed: 1 Samuel ii. 30.
But in nothing is he abused at this time more than in his Name and Day What
the result of the first is I have already showed, and what the Effect of the
Last is, the Jews, to look no further, will sufficiently demonstrate. As long
as they received God's Ordinances, and hallowed his Sabbaths, and obeyed the
Voice of the Lord their God, and hearkened to his Precepts to do them: He was
their God, and they were his People, He went out with them and fought their
Battles, He delivered them from the Hands of their Enemies and Oppressors, and
settled them at length in a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey, and became a
Wall and a Hedge of Defense on the Right Hand and on the Left, to keep them
from them that lived round about them; Psalm. xci. 5, 6.
That they might not be afraid for the terror by Night, nor for the Arrow that
sleeth by Day: Nor for the Pestilence that walks Darkness, nor for the
Destruction that wastes at Noon Day. But no sooner did they go a Whoring after
their own Inventions, serving strange Gods: No sooner did they violate the
Statutes of the Lord and defile his Sanctuary, and pollute his Sabbaths, but he
left them to dye in the Wilderness, to be led away into Captivity, and at the
last in his Wrath cut them off from being a People. Cap. xx. 13.
Ezekiel testifies that because the House of Israel in the Wilderness rebelled
against the Lord their God, and walked not in his Statutes, and despised his
Judgments, and greatly polluted his Sabbaths, therefore he poured out his fury
in the Wilderdness to consume them. And tho they were settled in the Promised
Land, yet because they were a backsliding People, apt to abuse their Great God
in his Worship and Day, he leaves Cnnaanites in the Land to prove them as
Thorns in their Flesh, and Goads in their Sides. For ever and anon upon their
Revolt from the Holy One of Israel, he leaves them to be oppressed by the Kings
of Mesopotamia, by the Moabites, Canaanites, Midianites, Philistines and
Ammonites; to the Incursions of the Amalekites, Syrians, Egyptians and
Edomites; to be carried away at last into Captivity the Ten Tribes by
Shalmanaser into Assyria (where we lose the very Memory of them) and Juda by
Nebuchadnezzar into Babylon. That the Profanation of the Sabbath was a
Principal Cause of all this their Calamity, none will doubt that believes what
Nehemiah says. Chap. xiii. 17, 18.
What e^il thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath? Did not your
Fathers thus, and did not God bring all this evil upon us and upon our City!
Yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath. And it is more
than probable that for this very sin, as well as for many others, God rejected
the Remnant of Juda, and permitted them to be dispersed by the Romans, and
suffered their Sanctum Santorum and their Holy City to be laid level to the
Dust, and not one Stone left upon another.

33. What remains then but that we take warning hence to be more Religiously
Observant of this Sacred Day, that we may like the Obedient Israelites be the
Darlings and Favorites of Heaven; that we may attract the Divine
Overshadowing, and win God himself to be our Shield, our Buckler, our Refuge,
our Defense and our Invincible Rock on every side of us? But if we should
(which God forbid) persist in our Impieties, and continue in profaning the
Lord's Day, can we expect to escape better than the beloved people of God did?
Can we expect he will be more favorable to the Ingrafted than to the Natural
Branches? They were his chosen People, his pecu iar Flock, and the Lot of his
Inheritance; and did he write such bitter things against them, and can we
imagine He will be partial to Us? No certainly, our Crimes are Equal and so
will our Punishments be too. He will add greater Plagues to what we have
already felt, and make our Punishment as Universal and General as is our Guilt.
This Land has already met with particular Judgments, which have reigned in
those Places where the Lords Day has been most profaned: The Plague, the Fire
and the Sword have already been our Portion, Divisions and Schisms, Factions
and Rebellions have already been the Whips and Scorpions wherewith we have been
scourged and wounded. What remains but that for our Obstinate Perseverance in
this as given as in other Crying Sins our Goodly Land be given over as a Prey
unto our Enemies; that our Heritage as it is defiled, become also full of
Devastations; that our Candlestick should be removed that our Churches should
be thrown down; and that we should be forced in a Strange Land to wander from
Sea to Sea, Amos viii. 12.
and from the North even to the East to seek the Word of God, and shall not
find it. Oh let the terror of these thoughts afrighten us to our Duty, and if
we have any regard for our selves, and are not concerned whether we are saved
or damned, whether we prosper or go backward in our Affairs, whether our Minds
are spiritualized or no, whether the sense of Religion be upheld or lost in us:
Yet as we regard the Welfare, Peace and Tranquillity of the Society wherein we
live, as we would not have that involved in a Common Heap of Ruin and
Destruction, as we would not willingly be the Cause of our Posterities
Misfortune, nor expose our innocent Babes to the rage of the Adversary; let us
run into God's House, embrace his Mercy, embrace his Ordinances, honor his
Holy Name and his Word, obey his Commands, fulfill all Righteousness, and
sanctify his most Holy Day. Let us break off our Sins by Repentance, and stop
those Judgments which threaten us; who knows but the Lord will have Mercy, and
will repent him of the Evil that he has designed against us? that he will
dispel the Clouds, and make the Sun of Peace and Righteousness to break out
upon us, making us rejoice for the time wherein we have suffered Adversity.

To this End it would not be amiss to cry out, From Hardness of Heart, from
Contempt of thy Holy Word and Commandments, from Fornication and all other
Deadly Sin, from Intemperance and Profaning of thy most holy Day, from all the
Judgments which we have most righteously deserved, from Lightning and Tempest,
from Plague, Pestilence and Famine, from Battle and Murder, and from sudden
Death, Good Lord Deliver us! And O Blessed, Adorable and Glorious Trinity,
Remember not our Offenses, nor the Offenses of our Fathers, neither take thou
Vengance of our sins, but Spare us Good Lord! Spare thy People, whom thou have
redeemed with thy most precious Blood, and be not angry with us for ever. Have
mercy upon us, Have mercy upon us, Have Mercy upon us most Merciful Father!
Save and Deliver us from all our Sins; Confirm and Strengthen us in all
Goodness, and bring us at length to Life Eternal. Amen, Amen!

A Modest Advice to the Ministers and Civil Magistrates.
TO make the preceding Discourse the more Effectual, it might perhaps be
expected that I should add something to the Ministers and Civil Magistrates of
this Church and Kingdom; and that I should show how far both of them are
obliged in their several Stations (the one by the Sword of the spirit, the
other by that of Justice) to do what in them lies to suppress the Reigning
Immoralities of the present Age: Of which the Vices spoken against in the
foregoing Treatise are not the least in Reality, tho they may be so in all
outward appearance, by reason of that little notice the unthinking World takes
of them.

To the Ministers of our Church there is a very little need to say any thing
For besides those Worthy and Reverend Prelates, whom ( God's Providence, and
the Care and Piety of our Princes has placed at the Helm) there is a Clergy
under them, that for Learning, Virtue and Sincere, not merely formal Devotion,
we may dare all the Churches in Christendom to show its equal. Our whole
Nation, and especially the Metropolis thereof, has many of those pious Souls,
whose Lives and Doctrines go hand in hand to stem that torrent of Atheism and
Profaneness which has of late years been so Impetuously breaking in upon us.
Their Practical Preaching, and Moral but withal most Excellent Discourse^ now
in Print (concerning the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion, the
Loveliness of all that is Good and Virtuous, and the Deformity of all that is
Bad and Vicious, with the like) is sufficient proof of their Zeal for the
Honor of God and the Good of His Church: so that we should wrong them if we
thought they stood in need of Instructions to Direct them, or of Motives to
Incite them to do a Duty which is so Incumbent upon them, as to press home for
a Reformation of this Degenerate Kingdom, when the Glory of their Great Master
is so nearly Concerned therein.

But amidst these Excellent Persons, there are (it must be Confessed) some
others that give too open a Scandal to our Holy Religion by their Vile
Principles and their Viler Practices. Some of these are notoriously Bad, and
live in Direct Opposition to what they are bound to Preach to others: Whilst
Others spend their time in dry Notions and insipid Controversies, which profit
their Congregations but very little, if any thing at all.

As for the first, if the Common Obligations they lie under as Men endued with
Reasonable Souls, if the ordinary Ties of Christianity they are, bound with in
their Baptism, or if the extraordinary Ones they are obliged with in their
Ordination are not of force to put them upon mending these their
Irregularities; yet it is hoped the Example of the more Strict and Conscientious
will shame them to some degree of fervor, and cause them to put on the Form at
least, if they will hot the Power of Godliness. But if that will do no good
upon them, yet it is presumed the Worthy Fathers of the Church will by their
Care and Inspection either remove those that are a Public Shame unto it; or
else prevent the Like Mischief for the future, by admitting none into Holy
Orders but such as they have sufficient Testimony of, that they will not by
their unsanctified Lives give cause for the contempt of the Clergy. I say it is
presumed the Bishops will in their several Diocesses take care of those things,
which Confidence I ground upon those many excellent Charges which have of late
been given in many Visitations. After all this I cannot but wonder how any one
can so far offer violence to his Reason and Conscience, as to live in the
Wilful Breach of any known Duty, when he has so many upbraidings from all
hands to check him, and stare his sins out of Countenance. What a dreadful
Account they must give of their Cure, and that Charge of Souls which is
committed to them Sacred Writ will sufficiently inform them; and what a weight
lies upon their shoulders tho at present so little regarded by them, Bishop
Burnets Pastoral Care, lately published, will put them in mind of, if they can
give themselves but time to read it over, and calmly to consider thereon.

As for those who busy themselves about unprofitable Speculations and matters
merely Controvertal, 'twere to be wished they would leave off their Heats and
Animosities, throw aside all Prejudice and Faction for this Sect or that Party,
and give over Quarreling and Disputing about Modes and Figures, about (...) of
Religion, the Knowledge or Ignorance of which would neither promote nor hinder
our Great Concern. 'Twere to be wished, I say, that they would lay aside all
such Curious Niceties, and Disputable Points, fit for none but Schoolmen and
wrangling Sophisters to employ their parts upon; and that they would reason of
Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come, Preach up with the Primitive
Christians the necessity and usefulness of a Holy Life, lashing Vice and
protecting Virtue where e're they find it, tho their very Patrons were guilty
of the one, and their greatest Enemies Masters of the other. Such profitable
Rules of Morality would better become the Gravity of the Preacher, as well as
suit with the Capacity and Regulate the Lives and Practices of the Audience;
than an unintilligible Discourse of an Hour or two long about the Particular
Tenets of Calvin, Arminius, or some other Learned Sophister of the Church,
which can neither Inform our Judgment, nor Influence our Manners, but only help
us to call Names, and to cast Dirt into one another Faces. How much better
would it be for all sides to forbear those Opprobrious Titles of Calvinist and
Arminian, of Antinomian and Antisidian and the like, and endeavor to do that
which might make us worthy of that one, Glorious Name of Christian. Could I but
see that Spirit of Unity and Concord maintained in the Bond of Peace, could I
but see the Primitive Golden days return once more upou the Stage, I should
with a Cheerful Heart (like Old Simeon) sing my nunc Dimittis too.

One that knows what Laws we have against Profane Swearing and Cursing,
against Drunkenness and Profanation of the Lord's Day, made with such Care by
the Legislators of former Ages, and Commanded to be put in Execution by the
Zealous Princes of This, would wonder that the Civil Magistrate should need one
Word more to put him in Mind of Discharging his Duty. But notwithstanding they
have Statutes made to their very hands, and have had as much Incitements from
Above, as Injunctions and a Royal Command comes to, yet we find matters at the
same stand they were in, when we had no such Opportunities put into our Hands.
To think any Justice of Peace ignorant of his Duty, would be to charge him with
want of Common Prudence, an affront I would not lay at any Man's Door: But I am
more inclined to think that it is want of Zeal which makes so many remiss and
negligent in the Discharge of that Trust, which the Higher Power has Committed
to them. To such therefore as are Backward in their Offfice I shall beg leave
to offer some few Considerations, which perhaps may prove Motives to stir them
up to a Vigorous Execution of the Laws now in force against that horrid
Profaneness and Debauchery which has overspread this unhappy Church and Nation.

And first consider what it is God and Religion requires at your Hands. He that
raises up whom he will, and casts them down again at his pleasure, has not
placed you in those Posts to make a great Figure of you, and for nothing else.
He requires you should be as much concerned for the Advancing of his Glory, as
you are for your own private Interests. It Is as much your Duty to punish an
Offense against God, as to punish a Crime against the Public, and yet we see
the one Connived at, whilst the other is prosecuted with the utmost R^gor. But
is it not a burning shame that the daily Affronts and Blasphemies offered
against Heaven should be passed by with silence, when at the same time a
Lessening Expression against a Prince, a single Calumny against your selves, or
a Scurrilous Reflection cast upon a Private Person shall meet with all the
Severity the Law in its Largest Extent will allow of?

But Secondly, Consider what it is you owe your Princes from whence you derive
your Authority. The Commission they have given you extends to the offenses
mentioned in the foregoing Treatise, as well as to any other whatsoever. And as
if that were not sufficient, how car^ful have they been by Letters and
Proclamations to put you in mind of your Duty in this Particular. And can you
Affront their Authority by slighting and contemning their Orders and
Injunctions? Think what a base reflection you cast upon them, and how uncivil
(to say no worse) you have been by your Connivance and Neglect.

Thirdly, Consider what it is your Country requires of you. She expects you
should not stand as Ciphers, nor bear the Sword of Justice in Vain, but that
you should administer it to the punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and to the
maintenance of true Religion and Virtue. Those who among the Romans Rescued the
Commonwealth from Tyranny and Oppression were justly styled Fathers of their
Country; our Kingdom is at present overawed with the Tyranny of Profaneness and
Debauchery, and none but God knows what the fatal consequences of it may prove;
Now if you would (Gentlemen) undertake an Enterprise worthy English Men and
Christians, if you desire the Peace and Tranquillity of your Country, and would
do something that might render your Memories famous to succeeding Generations,
you can do nothing better than in your several Stations to Redeem the Nation
from the Thraldom of those Pernicious Vices under which it lies, and so Divert
those Judgments we have just cause to fear will fall upon us, if we continue
Obstinate and Rebellious.

But Lastly, (that it may not be too long) Consider what it is your Oaths taken
with all the Solemnity Imaginable oblige you to. I shall not here repeat at
length all that a Justice of Peace is bound to do; it may suffice to take
notice that he is engaged to Convict all Offenders against the known Statutes
of the Realm, of which he shall have any Cognizance: and not to refuse upon Due
and Lawful Information to bring any Offender to Condign Punishment out of Fear,
Partiality, Prejudice or Interest. I hope there is scarce a Gentleman in the
Commission of the Peace but will lay these things to heart; and will not, when
he Considers seriously what it is, that God, their Majesty's, his Country, and
his own Conscience exacts from him, be any more negligent in the Discharge of
that Trust which is reposed in him.

I have been warm in this point, but withal as short and as modest as
possible: I hope the Gentlemen will pardon the little sallies of a well
grounded and well-intended Zeal; since my Design was not to affront any, but
purely to excite those who have been hitherto Remiss to be more vigorous in
Executing the Laws against Profaneness and Debauchery for the future. So that
not one Tittle of this Discourse is directed to such Worthy Persons who (tho
too few in number) are in the Commission of the Peace all over the Kingdom, and
have given sufficient Testimony of their Prudence and Zeal by those excellent
Orders of Sessions which here and there have been issued out in those Places,
where the Good have been the Prevailing Party.

But how can the Justices of Peace suppress those Immoralities, since let them
be never so forward, it is impossible for them to know of every offense unless
the under Officers, whose Duty it is to make enquiry after the Breach of the
Laws, give in their Informations; And that tho they may issue out their
Warrants, yet if the Constable, or Overseer, or any other Officer be negligent
in executing them, what will their Care signify? To which I answer, that it is
too notorious how Careless and Remiss all under Officers are as well in giving
in their Informations, as in executing the Warrants and Levying the Penalties
accordingly; and it is no wonder they should be so, since they are like to get
nothing by their Office, but hard Words and a few Curses, which is but a small
Encouragement to those little hearted Creatures, who for the most part know not
what the Pleasure or Profit of a Good Conscience resulting from an Honest
discharge of Duty means. However this their Neglect excuses not the Justice,
but rather reflects upon his Conduct, who will not, when it is in his Power,
make those Instruments of Justice more Careful and Diligent in their Respective
Offices. For there are Laws whereby he may correct their Negligence, as well as
any other Crime whatsoever.

That these Inferior Officers may not pretend Ignorance, I have hereunto
subjoyned an Abridgment of those Statutes which are now in force against the
daring Wickedness of these times; which may not only be of some use to them to
inform them of part of their Duty, but also may be serviceable to others who
either have not money enough to buy, or not time enough to run over the
Voluminous Statute Book. I have likewise added the Queens Letter to the
Justices of Middlesex, their Order thereupon, and their Majesty's Proclamation
since, to show what Encouragement we have from them to set about a Speedy
Reformation.

Against Profane Swearing and Cursing. 21 Jac. 1. Cap. 20.
FOrasmuch as all Profane Swearing and Cursing is forbidden by the Word of
God, Be it Enacted, etc. That no Person shall profanely Swear or Curse, and
that it any person shall be convicted of the said Offense in the hearing of any
Justice of the ^eace, Mayor, Bailiff or Head-Officer of any City or Town
Corporate; or by the Oaths of two Witnesses, or by the Confession of the
Offender before any Justice of Peace, Mayor, etc. Then the Party for every such
Offense of which he is Lawfully Convicted as aforesaid, shall forfeit the sum
of twelve pence to the use of the Poor of the Parish, where the Offense shall
be committed: which sum the Constable, Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor
of that Parish shall Levy by Distress and Sale of Goods, rendering the Overplus
to the Offender. And in Default of such Distress the Offender, if above the Age
of twelve years, shall stand in the Stocks for every such Offense the space of
three hours; if under the age of twelve years then the Party shall be whipped
by the Constable, or by the Parent or Master in his Presence.

That if any Officer be sued for Levying the Penalty, or for Whipping or
setting in the Stocks, then the said Officer shall plead the General Issue, and
if it is found against the Plaintiff, then the Officer as Defendant shall be
allowed Costs.

Provided, That the Offense be Complained of within twenty days after it be
Committed.

Be it further enacted, That this Statute be read twice every year in every
Parish Church by the Minister after Evening Prayer. 3. Car. 1. Cap. 4. this
Statute was continued. And 17. Car. 1. Cap. 4. Made perpetual.

Against Perjury. 2 Eliz. Cap. 9.
BE it Enacted, that whosoever shall suborn or procure any Witnesses by any
sinister and unlawful means to give any Evidence or to Testify In perpetuam
rei memoriam, before any Court of Record, shall for the said offense upon
Lawful Conviction thereof, forfeit the Sum of Forty Pounds, and in Defect of
such Forfeiture, shall suffer Imprisonment for the space of six Months without
Bail or Mainprise, and stand in the Pillory for the space of one whole Hour:
That no such Offender be thenceforward Received as a Witness before any Court
of Justice, till such Judgment given against him be reversed.

That whoever shall Commit any Wilful Perjury by his Depositions in any Court
of Record aforesaid, being examined Ad perpetuam Rei Memoriam, shall being
Lawfully Convicted of such Offense forfeit the Sum of twenty Pounds, and suffer
Imprisonment for six Months without Bail or Mainprise, and be disabled for ever
after from being a Witness till the Judgment against him be Reversed.

That in defect of suth Forfeiture of twenty Pounds every such Offender shall
stand in the Pillory, and have both his Ears nailed.

That the one Moiety of the Forfeiture aforesaid go to the Crown, the other
Moiety to the Person or Persons that shall be wronged by such Offense, and who
will sue for the same.

That the Judge of such Courts where the Offense is committed, the Justices of
Assize and Goal Delivery in their several Circuits, and the Justices of Peace
in every County shall have Authority to determine the Offenses aforesaid.

That the Justices of Assize of every Circuit shall make open Proclamation of
this Statute twice a year, viz. in the time of their Sittings, so that none may
plead Ignorance of the same.

Provided that this Statute extend not to any Court Ecclesiastical, nor to the
Restraining the Power given by Act of Parliament made in the time of King Henry
the seventh to the Lord Chancellor of England and others of the Kings Council.
29 Eliz. 5. made perpetual. 1 Jac. 1. Cap. 5. Continued. And 21 Jac. 1. 28.

Against Drunkenness and Tippling. 4 Jac. 1. Cap. 5.
FOrasmuch as Drunkenness is the Root and Foundation of all other Enormous
Sins, as Murder, Fornication, Adul^^ry, and the like: Be it Enacted that
whosoever shall be Convicted thereof by the Oath of one or more Lawful
Witnesses, shall for the said Offense forfeit the sum of five shillings within
one week next after the Offense to the use of the Poor of the same parish;
which penalty if the Offender re^use or neglect to pay, then Distress to be
made upon his Goods, and in Default of such Distress he shall stand in the
Stocks the space of six hours.

That if any Constable or other Inferior Officer of the Parish where the
Offense is committed shall negl^ct the due correction of such Offender, then
every Officer so offending shall forfeit the sum of ten shillings to the use of
the Poor aforesaid, to be levied by Distress by any other person having a
Justices or any other Head-Officers Warrant.

That every one who shall be convicted of Tippling in any Inn, Victualing House,
or Alehouse being in the same City, Town, Village or Hamlet of which they are
Inhabitants, saving in the cases provided and limited by one Act of Parliament
made in the first Session of this present Parliament, shall for every such
Offense forfeit the sum of three shillings and four pence to the use of the
Poor of that parish where the Offense shall be committed, and in Default of
such Forfeiture the Offender shall stand in the Stocks the spacr of four hours.

That all such Offenses be diligently enquired into and presented before the
Justices in their several Circuits, the Justices of Peace in their Quarter, or
Petty-Sessions, the Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Head-Officers, by all
Constables, Church Wardens, Headborroughs, Tithingmen, Ale-Conners and Sidesmen
according to their Charge in their Oaths.

That for their second Offense of Drunkenness the party be bound over to his
Good Behavior.

Provided that this Statute extend not to restrain the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, nor to prejudice the Liberties of the two Universities.

Prov^ded also that no man be punished twice for the same Offense, and that
none be punished but what are convicted within the space of six months after
the Offense is committed. This Statute made perpetual 21 Jac. 1. Cap. 7.

Against the Profanation of the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday. 29 Car. 2.
ALL Laws in force concerning the Observation of the Lord's Day, are to be put
in execution: This day is by every one, 1 Will. and Mary.
to be sanctified and kept holy; and all Persons must be careful herein to
exercise themselves in the Duties of Piety, and true Religion publicly; and
every one on this day (not having a reasonable Excuse) must diligently resort
to some public place where the service of God is exercised, or must be present
at some other place (allowed of by Law) in the Practice of some Religious Duty,
either of Prayer, Preaching Reading or Expounding of the Scriptures, or
Conference upon the same, as also privately.

Such as repair not to Church, etc. on Sundays and Holy Days, one Witness.
Twelve Pence for every default, to be levied by destress, or to be committed to
some Prison, until the same be paid. 1 Eliz. 23 Eliz. 3 Jac. Cap. 1. 19 Eliz.
Cap. 1.

Absenting for a Month, If a twelve month, or more, twenty pounds per month,
and forfeiture of two parts in three of their Estates.

If any come not to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper once a year. Their Names
and Surnames to be presented: Forty Shillings reward to such as present them. 3
Jac. Cap. 4.

None shall speak or do any thing in Contempt of the most Holy Sacrament. By
Oath of two lawful Witnesses, by three Justices Quorum un. to be bound over and
prosecuted in Sessions. 1 Ed. 6. Cap. 1.

Whosoever shall disturb any Preacher allowed, in his open Sermon or Collation,
or be procuring or abetting thereunto, or shall rescue, etc. any Offender, etc.
Accusation must by two Witnesses, or Confession, To be committed by any Justice
of the County to safe Custody, and within six days the said committing Justice,
with one other Justice (if the Offender upon examination shall be found Guilty)
shall commit him to Goal without Bail, etc. for three Months, and farther to
the next Quarter Sessions, 1 M. Cap. 3.

Such as meet or assemble out of their own Parish upon the Lord's Day, for any
Sports or Pastimes whatsoever, or such as shall use any unlawful Exercise or
Pastime in their own Parish upon the Lord's day, three shillings and four pence
to the Poor, where, etc. to be levied by distress and sale, restoring the
Overplus, etc. and for want of distress, to be sent to the Stocks for three
hours, but they must be questioned within a month. 1 Car. Cap. 1. 3 Car. Cap. 4.

If any Carrier, Waggoner, etc. with Horse, Wain or Cart, or Drover with Cattle
shall travel upon the Lord's Day by themselves, or any other for them, twenty
shillings for every offense, to be levied by distress and sale to the use of
the poor. 3 Car. Cap. 1.

If any Butcher, or any other for him, shall kill or sell any Victuals upon the
Sunday, one Witness view or Confession, He shall forfeit six shillings and
eight pence, if questioned within six months, to be levied, etc. or may be sued
for in Sessions, etc. 3 Car. Cap. 1.

If any Shoemaker shall go with intent to sell any Boots, Shoes, etc. on the
Sunday, He shall forfeit such Goods, and three shillings and four pence for
every pair. 1 Jac. Cap. 22.

If any person of the age of fourteen shall on the Lord's Day, or any part
thereof, do any worldly labor, etc. except works of Nececessity and Charity,
shall forfeit five shillings for every offense. 29 Car 2. Cap. 7.

If any person shall cry, show forth, or put to sale any Wares, Fruit, Goods,
etc. except Milk only, before the hours of nine in the morning, and after four
in the afternoon He shall forfeit the said Wares, Fruit, Goods, etc. to the
use of the poor. 29 Car. 2. Cap. 7.

No Drover, Horse-courser, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, or any of their servants,
shall travel or come to their Inns on the Lord's Day, shall forfeit twenty
shillings for every offense. 29 Car. 2. Cap. 6.

No person shall use to travel upon the Lord's Day with any Horse, Boat,
Wherry, etc. except allowed by one Justice of Peace so to do, by View,
Confession, or one witness, the fofeitvre is five shillings for every offense:
The Conviction upon this Statute, must be before any Justice of the County,
etc. who shall give warrant to the Constables, etc. to seize the Goods showed,
etc. and to levy the Forfeitures by distress, and for want of distress, to put
the Offender in the Stocks for two hours: the Justices, etc. may reward the
Informer out of the Forfeitures, not exceeding the third part. 29 Car. 2. Cap.
7.

This Act extends not to dressing of Meat inn Cooks Shops, Inns or
Victualing-Houses.

The Queens Letter.
TRusty and Well-beloved, We Greet you well. Considering the great and
indispensible Duty incumbent upon us, and to promote and encourage a
Reformation of the Manners of all our Subjects, that so the Service of God may
be advanced, and those Blessings be procured to these Nations, which always
attend a Conscientious Discharge of our respective Duties, according to our
several Relations. We think it necessary, in order to the obtaining of this
Public Good, to recommend unto you the putting in Execution, with all Fidelity
and Impartiality, those Laws, which have been made, and are still in force
against the Profanation of the Lord's Day, Profane Swearing and Cursing,
Drunkenness, and all other lewd, enormous and disorderly Practices, which by a
long conntinued Neglect and Connivance of the Magistrates and Officers
concerned, have universally spread themselves, to the Dishonor of God and the
Scandal of our Holy Religion; whereby it is now become the more necessary for
all Persons in Authority, to apply themselves with all possible Care and
Diligence to the suppressing of the same. We do therefore hereby charge and
require you to take the most effectual Methods for putting the Laws in
Execution, against the Crimes above-menioned, and all other Sins and Vices,
particularly those which are most prevailing in this Realm; and that especially
in such cases where any Officers of Justice shall be guilty of any of those
Offenses, or refuse or neglect to discharge the Duty of his place for the
suppressing them, that so such Officer by his Punishment may serve for an
Example to others. And to this end we would have you be careful and diligent in
encouraging all Constables, Churchwardens, Headborroughs, and all other
Officers and Persons whatsoever, to do their part in their several Stations, by
timely and impartial Informations and Prosecutions against all such Offenders,
for preventing those Judgments, which are solemnly denounced against the Sins
abovementioned. We cannot doubt of your performance hereof, since it is a Duty
to which you are obliged by Oath, and are likewise engaged to the discharge of
it, as you tender the Honor of Almighty God, the flourishing condition of his
Church in this Kingdom, the continuance of his Holy Religion among us, and the
Prosperity of the Country.

And so we bid you farewell. Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 9th. day of
July, in the Third Year of our Reign. By Her Majesty's Command. Nottingham.

To our Trusty and Well-beloved the Justices of the Peace for our County of
Middlesex at Hick's Hall.
The Late Order of the Justices of Middlesex, for suppressing Profaneness and
Debauchery.
WHereas their Majesty's, both by their several Letters and Proclamations, have
from time to time been graciously pleased to declare their earnest desire, That
all the Laws against Vice and Profaneness be duly Executed, and have expressly
Commanded us Tneir Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County, to take the
most effectual Care for the due Execution thereof: And whereas this Court in
persuance of Their Majesty's Commands, have by their Order, bearing date the
Tenth Day of July last, Commanded all High Constables, Petty Constables,
Headburroughs, Churchwardens and other Officers within this County, to Use
their utmost Diligence, for bringing to condign Punishment all the Offenders
against the said Laws, which upon the Oaths of diverse credible Winesses (as we
are informed) has through the diligence of the Offcers, in diverse parts of
this County had this good effect, that many Houses of disorderly Tippling,
Debauchery and Gaming have been suppressed, and very great Numbers of Bawds,
Whores, and other Lewd Persons, profane Swearers, Cursers Drunkards and
Prophaners of the Lords day, have been Convicted and Punished according to Law;
Yet notwithstanding in some other parts of this County, through the Negligence,
Connivance and Evil Practices of the Constables, Headburroughs, Church Wardens
and other inferior Officers of such Places; the Offenses aforesaid have
received great encouragement, and such Lewd Offenders as had been so
suppressed, have been yet received and permitted there to continue such their
Lewd Practices. This COURT therefore taking the same into their serious
consideration, and being steadfast in their Resolutions effectually to carry on
a Reformation of manners by the due punishment of the several Offenses
aforesaid, in all parts of this County, the same being a Work acceptable to
Almighty God; and so earnestly and piously recommended by Their Majesty's, Does
Order and strictly Require, all High Constables, Petty Constables,
Headburoughs, Churchwardens, and all other Officers, to be diligent in making
more frequent searches after such as keep Houses of disorderly Tippling,
Debauchery and Gaming, and such as haunt the same, and of the said Offenders,
and of all profane Swearers, Cursers, Drunkards, and Prophaners of the Lords
Day, and to give due information thereof from time to time, to some One of
Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County, That no Partiality.
Connivance or underhand Practices, by Private Notice to Offenders, of any other
ways, by such Officers, may prevent the conviction, or Detection of them, but
that the several Offenders may be punished, according to Law; And whereas the
public Sports, and playing of Boys, and others, on the Lords Day, in
Churchyards and else where, is a great Contempt to the Worship of God, and
tends to the Corruption of Youth; The said Officers are therefore hereby
Ordered, and Required to take notice on the said days, of such disorders, and
to disperse such Prophaners of the Lords day, or to apprehend them, and to
bring them before One of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for ^his County;
that they may be proceeded against according to Law; And we being resolved to
proceed with all due strictnes^ against all such Officers as shall be found
faulty in the due observance of this our Order do recommend it to all persons
who shall at any time hereafter have Knowledge of any of the Offenses
aforesaid, or of any neglect or undue Practice of any Officers aforesaid,
whereby the Conviction or Punishment of any of the said Offenses shall be
hindered, or avoided, that they will give timely Information thereof, to some
One of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County, from whom they
shall re^eive all due Encouragement; And whereas the keeping of Music Houses
of late practiced in several public Taverns and Alehouses within this County,
to which there is a great Resort of Idle and Dissolute Persons, is of ver^ ill
Consequence, and tend^ to the Debauching and Ruin especially of the younger
sort of people, of both Sexes, and does also occasion many Quarrels and Riots,
to the great dist^rbance of the public Peace. It is hereby further Ordered
that the several Officers aforesaid, do make a due Return to some Justice of
the P^ace in their respective Division of the Christian Name, Surname and
Place of abode, of all Persons keeping the said Music Houses, and of such as
frequent the same, to the end they may be prosecuted according to Law; And it
is further Ordered by this Court, that the Clerk of the Peace for this County
do forthwith cause this Order to be Printed and Affixed upon the great Gates of
Hick's-Hall, the Church Doors, and all other public Places of each P^rish
within this County, and distributed to the several High-Constables within this
County, who are Ordered by this Court forthwith to send the same to the several
Petty Constables, Churchwardens and Head-buroughs within their several
Divisions, to the end Public Notice may be taken thereof.

By the King and Queen, a Proclamation against Vicious, Debauched and Profane
Persons
AS we cannot but be deeply sensible of the great goodness and mercy of
Almighty God (by whom Kings Reign) in giving so happy s^ccess to our endeavors
for the rescuing these Kingdoms from Popish Tyranny and Superstition, and in
preserving our Royal Persons, supporting our Government, and uniting the Arms
of most of the ^rinces and States in Christendom against our Common Enemy (so
we are not less touched with a Resentment, that (notwithstanding the these
great Deliverances) Impiety and Vice do still abound in this our Kingdom: And
that the Execution of many good Laws, which have been made for suppressing and
punishing thereof, have been grossly neglected, to the great dishonor of God
and our Holy Religion: Wherefore, and for that we cannot expect increase or
continuance of the Blessings we and our subjects enjoy, without providing
Remedies to prevent the like Evils for the future, we judge our selves bound by
the duty we owe to God, and the care we have of the people committed to our
Charge, to proceed in taking some effectual Course therein: And being thereunto
moved by the pious Address of our Arch Bishops, we have thought fit, by the
advice of our Privy Council, to issue this our our Royal Proclamation, and to
declare our princely intention and resolution, to discountenance all manner of
Vice and Immorality in all persons from the highest to the lowest degree in
this our Realm. And we do hereby for that purpose straightly Require, Charge
and Command all and singular our Judges, Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace, and all other Officers Ecclesiastical and Civil, in their respective
stations, to execute the Laws against Blasphemy, profane Swearing and Cursing.
Drunkenness, Lewdness, profanation of the Lord's Day, or any other dissolute,
immoral or disorderly practices as they will answer it to Almighty God, and
upon pain of our highest Displeasure. And for the more effectual proceedings
herein, we do hereby Direct and Command our Judges of Assizes, and Justices of
the Peace to give strict Charges at the respective Assizes and Sessions, for
the due prosecution and punishment of all persons that shall presume to offend
in any the kinds aforesaid; And also of all persons that contrary to their Duty
shall be Remiss or Negligent in putting the said Laws in Execution.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some New Books, the three first never Published before this
Michalmas Term. 1692. and most of the others published but a little before in
the same year; all Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Salusbury, at the King's Arms
next St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet.
THE Reformed Gentleman, or the Old English Morals rescued from the
Immoralities of the present Age; showing how inconsistent those pretended
Genteel Accomplishments of Swearing, Drinking, Whoring and Sabbath breaking are
with the true Generosity of an Englishman. With an account of the proceedings
of the Government for the Reformation of Manners. By A. M. of the Church of
England, Bound in 8o. price 1 s 6 d.

2. An Essay against Unequal Marriages, in four Chapters, 1. The Introduction.
2. Against Old Persons Marrying with Young. 3 Against Persons Marrying without
Parents or Friends Consent. 4. Ag inst Persons Marrying without their own
Consent. By S. Bufford, Gent, in 12o. bound price 1 s.

3. The Parsons Vade Mecum: or, A Treatise containing Choice Observations about
the accounts of the year, Moveable Feasts, Emberweeks, Ecclesiastical Censures,
the memorable Things in the three first Centuries, and some after Ages,
Archbishops and Bishoprics, their Election, Consecration, Installment, etc.
Patronag^^, Institution, Induction, Non residence, Dispensations, Pluralities,
Deprivation, Dilapidation, Privileges of Clergymen, Tithes and Simony; very
fit for all Clergymen and Gentlemen in 12o. bound, price 1 s.

4. The Measurers Guide, or the whole Art of Measuring made short, plain and
easy, showing how to measure any plain Superficies, all sorts of Regular
Solids, Artificers Works, viz. Carpenters, Joyners, Plaisterers, Painters,
Paviers, Glaziers, Bricklayers, Tylers, etc. with the Art of Gauging, of
singular Use to all Gentlemen Artificers and others. By J. Barker in 12o.
bound, price 1 s.

5. Taxilla, or Love preferred before Duty; a Novel. By D.W. Gent. 12o. bound,
price 1 s.

6. Eachards Gazetteers, or Newsmans Interpreters, being a Geographical Index
of all Cities, Towns, etc. in Europe, with their distances from each other, and
to what Prince they are now subject to; very necessary for the right
understanding of all Foreign and Domestic News Letters and Gazetts. 12o.
bound, price 2 s.

7. -- A most Complete ^ompendium of Geography, General and Special, describing
all the Empire, Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole World, collected according
to the latest Discoverys, and agreeing with the choicest and newest Maps, 12o.
bound, price 1 s. 6 d.

8. -- Exact Description of Ireland, Survey^ng all its Provinces and County;
showing the exact state of that Kingdom, and all the principal. Thin^s that are
necessary to be known; Illustrated with five Maps, one of the whole Kingdom,
the others of each particular Province, 12o. bound, price 1 s. 6 d.

9. -- Flanders or the Spanish Netherlands, most accurately described, showing
the several Provinces, their Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers, Riches and Strength;
with an exact description of the Cities, and who they are at present subject
to; very necessary for the understanding the Wars in those Countries, 12o.
bound, price 1 s.

10. -- The Duke of Savoy's Dominions most accurately described, with some
adjacent parts; showing all that is necessary to be known, and very useful for
the understanding of the pre^ent War in those parts, price 3 d. The five last
all done by Laurance Eachard, A. B. of Christ's College in Cambridge.

11. Nomo AEXIKON, A Law-Dictionary, interpreting such difficult and obscure
Words and Terms as are found either in our Common or Statute, Ancient or Modern
Laws, with References to the several Statutes, Records, Registers, Law Books,
Charters, Ancient Deeds and Manuscripts wherein the words are used, being the
very best extant, the Second Edition. By Tho. Blunt of the Inner Temple, Esquire;
in Folio bound, price 10 s.

A Treatise of Civil Bonds and Contracts, and the Nature, Causes, and Effects
of Suretiships, with Cautions against it. By R.A Gent. 8o. bound, price 1 s. 6
d.

13. Tryon's New Art of Brewing, Beer, Al^^ and other sorts of Liquors, so as
to render them more healthful to the body, and agreeable to Nature, with less
Trouble and Charge than generally practiced; with the Art of making Malt. The
third Edition, 12o. bound, price 1 s.

14. -- Wisdom Dictates, or Rules Physical and Moral, for preserving the health
of the Body and the peace of the Mind; fit to be regarded by all that would
enjoy the blessings of this world: To which is added a Bill of Fare of 75 Noble
Dishes of excellent Food, without either Fish or Flesh, 12o. bound, price 1 s.

15. -- Pythagoras's Mystic Philosophy revived, or the Mystery of Dreams and
Visions unfolded; wherein the Causes, Natures and Uses of Nocturnal
Representations. and the Communications of good and evil Angels are
Theosophically unfolded, 8o. bound, price 1 s. 6 d.

16. A New Art of making above 20 sorts of English Wines, Brandy and other
Spirits more pleasant and agreeable than those of France; illustrated by the
Doctrine of Fermentation and Distillation, by Curious Examples on the growth
and product of this Island, 12o. bound price 1 s. 6 d.

17. Chymicus Rationalis, or the Fundamental Grounds of the Chemical Art,
rationally stated, and demonstrated by various Examples in Distillation,
Rectification and Exaltation of Wines, Spirits, Tinctures, Oils, Salts, Powers
and Oleosmus, in such a Method, as to retain the Specific Virtues of Concreets
in the greatest power and force, 8o. bound, 2 s.

18. Jacob Behmens Theosophick Philosophy, unfolded in diverse Considerations
and Demonstrations; showing the Verity and Utility of the several Doctrines
contained in the writings of that Author; with an Abridgment of his Works. ^y
E. Tailor. 4o. bound, price 6 s.

19. Arithmetical Rules Digested and Contracted, made plain and easy for the
help and benefit of the Memory, very necessary for all Gentlemen and Tradsmen,
as for Youth and Aprent ces in Merchantile Affairs, 12o. bound, price 1 s.

20. The Safety of France is Monsieur the Dauphin, or the Secret History of the
French King, proving that there is no other way to secure France from
approaching ruin, but by deposing his Father for a Tyrant and Destroyer of his
People. Done out of French. 12o. bound, price 1 s.

21. The History of the late great Revolution in England and Scotland, with the
Causes and Means by which it was accomplished, with a particular account of the
Extraordinary Occurrences which happened thereupon, as likewise the settlement of
both the Kingdoms under their most serene Majesty's King William and Queen
Mary, with a List of the Convention. 8o. bound, price 5 s.

22. Remarks on the Dream of the late Abdicated Queen of England, and upon that
of Madam the Duchess of Lavalee^, late Mistress to the French King, wherein is
plainly showed the late successes of King William in Ireland, as likewise his
future successes in France, with the miserable end of the French King,
translated out of French. 4o. price, 6 d.

23. A Collection of the Famous Mr. George Whither's Wonderful Prophesies,
relating to the English Nation and Government, many of which not yet fulfilled.
4o. 6 d.

24. Ecclesia Reviviscens. A Poem, or a short account of the Rise, Progress and
Present State of the New Reformation of Manners. B^ a late Gentleman of the
Temple. 4. 6 d.

25. Gilbert R^les's President of the Scots Assemblies, his Vindication of the
Church of Scotland from the Aspertions and Calumnies of the Jacobites and
Grumbleronians. 4. 6 d.

26. Miscellany Poems, viz. Rem^r^s on the Death of King Charles, and the
succession of King James the Second, upon Faith, upon Patience, upon Ambition,
to the University of Oxford: The Soul to a Good Conscience, the Soul to a Bad
Conscience. By J. Whitchall. 4. 6 d.

27. Bragadoci^. A Comedy, by a Person of Quality. 4. 1 s.

28. The Vadois Declaration to all Christian Princes and States, of the Reasons
of their taking up Arms, and putting themselves under the Protection of King
William. 4. 2 d.

FINIS.

