Amicus Reipublicae.

THE COMMONWEALTHS FRIEND.

OR An Exact and Speedy Course to JUSTICE and RIGHT, and for Preventing and
Determining of Tedious Lawsuits.

With many other things very considerable for the good of the Public.

All which are fully Controverted and Debated in LAW.

By JOHN MARCH of Grayes-Inne, Barister.

Interest Reipublicae ut sit finis Litium* LONDON, Printed by WILL. BENTLEY,
for Francis Eglesfield, at the Marygold in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

To the Right Honorable JOHN BRADSHAW Serjant at Law, Lord President of the
Council of STATE.
Right Honorable,
WHen I had considered the meaness and weakness of this poor endeavor of mine,
and your Lordships depth of Judgment and understanding; I was extremely
disheartened and even ashamed to present it to your Lordships view and
consideration; much more to beg your Lordships patronage for it. But when I
had likewise considered, what a sweet Harmony of Justice, Honor, and integrity
resides in your Lordships breast, and how much you prefer the common good and
welfare, before all private interests and relations whatsoever, and not
doubting but your Lordship might find somewhat in it corresponding with that
noble, and truly generous public spirit of yours; I was then again imboldened
to prostitute it before your Lordships feet, humbly begging your Patronage and
protection for it; and I the rather presumed upon it, because I know it will
meet with Enemies enough in these times; such as love not changes or
alterations, though for the better, and such I shall not need to care for, or
fear; so your Lordship will deign to accept of it, and receive it into your
favor; which if your Lordship shall be pleased to do, and to pardon the
imperfections of it, it will be a great honor and encouragement to him, who
desires nothing more, than to subscribe himself (what indeed he is)

Your Lordships, and the Commonwealths most humble Servant. JO. MARCH.

To the Reader.
REader, when I considered long with my self, what happy times it had pleased
God to let us enjoy; I mean these happy times of Reformation; in which men have
liberty to discover truths, and to reason what may most tend to the good of the
Commonwealth; And in which we have so many Patrons, Protectors, and advancers
of Justice, that, which is the only supporter of all Commonwealths and
Governments whatsoever. And when I had further considered, that somewhat, nay I
may say, as much as the present extremities will permit, had been done by our
Parliament for correction, and amendment, or total expunging of some ill Laws;
and much more endeavored, which I doubt not will be accomplished in due time.
I thought it my duty to cast my mite into this Treasury; and to declare and set
forth somethings of our Law worthy of serious consideration, and (if I mistake
not) of reformation too.

That which I offer is against some ancient practices or proceedings, and
against some principles of our Law; And here I know it will be said to me, that
Contra negantem Principia non est disputandum; they are of so high a nature
they ought not to be discussed; especially having been ancient received
uncontrolled Laws in all ages.

To this first I say, that a common error cannot make a Law, no more than
custom against reason; there is no building of a Law where reason is not the
foundation. And therefore I hope, that if all, or any of those things which I
have offered to consideration, shall be found light in that balance, that they
will find no allowance or approbation.

But here some will say to me, as my Lord Cook says upon the like occasion,
Qui rationem in omnibus quaerit, rationem confundit.

To whom I say, that this may hold well in some things, and in some Arts and
sciences; but, under favor, it ought not to be so in Law; Law, if it be just
and reasonable, binds men to obedience and submission thereunto, but it is
unjust and Tyrannical, and obliges not to submission, if it be unreasonable;
and that Law must needs be suspected to be such, the reason whereof must not be
inquired into.

And Littleton fol. 89. says, that per rations pervenitur ad legitimam
rationem, reasoning is the way to find out the legal reason: and so likewise
it is to discover the unjustness or opposition of any Law to the common good.

We have one rule in Law, that the public good and welfare is to be preferred
before the private, and certainly that Law that crosses that rule, is a very
unjust and unequal Law.

All Laws ought to have this for their Basis, and their only end and aim, the
common good and safety. And that Law is most rational, which looks most that
way.

And therefore certainly it is no confounding of reason* but rather the
advanceing of it to its perfection, to lay the Law to this line, to put it to
this Trial; whether such or such a Law, be most for the public good and
welfare, or not? if it be, to continue it, if not, to abrogate and null it.

We have another rule, that Interest Reipublicae ut sit finis litium. And I am
certain, that you will find some of those things, which I have offered to
consideration, (that, as it much concerns the Commonwealth, that strifes and
controversies be ended, that peace and unity may be preserved:) much tending to
that end, and agreeable with that rule. And certainly that Law, which most
avoids and provides against contentious Suits, and most endeavors the support
of peace and quiet in a Commonwealth, is the best and most reasonable Law.

And now to conclude, Reader, I know that by this small work I shall contract
the odium and ill will of many of my profession, who will cast in my Teeth,
that this is a bewraying of my own nest; and a slinging dirt into the faces of
our great and learned Sages of the Law; or rather into my Mothers face, whose
milk I have sucked, and by whom I have been educated, and brought up to some
small understanding thereof.

To such I shall say; that none more honors the Law than my self, which I take
in the general, to be as just and as perfect as any humane Law in the World,
yet I cannot Judge it so absolutely perfect, as to have no fault or blemish in
it, for that were to attribute absolute and infallible perfection in judgment
to the makers; which we know is not to be found on earth in any humane race.
You know what the Apostle says, the first of the Cor. 13. 9. for we know in
part, etc.

And if we know but it part, certainly our actions must needs be full of
imperfection.

And I hope none will judge me to love my Studdy the less, because I desire to
keep it clean; Gold is the purer for being refined: And the Tree grows the
better for pruning, and cutting off the exuberant and unnecessary branches,
which suck the sap from the body, and are useless for any thing, but the fire
themselves.

If we have any hard and unreasonable branches of Law, it is just to take them
away, to lop them off, the body of the Commonwealth will thrive the better;
and if that flourish, certainly Lawyers must thrive too, and be in as great
reputation as ever. For no living without Law, and no better or more just Law
in the general in the World, than the Municipal Law of England; he approves
the use, that labors to take away the abuse.

Nor am I single or alone in this endeavor of mine; some have gone before me,
and I doubt not others will follow, in a work of so great consequence, and
tending so much to the common good.

But not to hold you too long in an Epistle, where the work is but short, if
any notwithstanding what I have said, shall be offended with me; it shall not
much trouble me* for I am resolved to be a friend to the common good, while
those men seek their own good only. I shall say no more but this;

Amicus Plato, Amicus Socrates, sed magis amica Respublica; only I shall
subscribe my self

The faithful friend and Servant of the Commonwealth of England. J. MARCH.

A TABLE of the several QUESTIONS.
1. WHether it be reasonable, that he, who is seized of Lands in Fee-simple, to
him and his Heirs by descent, or gift, should have the absolute disposing power
of the whole, and to disinherit his Heirs? Page 2. 2. Tenant in tail, with
remainders over, suffers a common Recoverie, whether this in Law, or
Conscience, ought to bind the Issue in tail, and the remainders over? page 7.
3. Whether it be consonant to Reason, Conscience, or for the good of the
Commonwealth, to Arrest men's Persons, and to detain them in Prison for Debt?
page 35. 4. Whether the High Court of Chancerie, as the practice is there, be
not a very great Grievance, and Burden to the Commonwealth? page 55. 5.
Whether Collateral Warrantie stands with Reason and Conscience or no. page 68.
6. Whether it be consonant to Reason or Conscience, that any man's Plea should
be adjudged naught, and avoided at any time for any matter of Form, false
Latin, double Plea, Departure, or any other defect whatsoever, the case and
matter it self sufficiently appearing upon the Record, for which the Action is
brought? page 74. 7. Whether the many sorts of Tedious and long Conveyances now
in use, stand with Reason, and the good of the Commonwealth or not? page 85.
8. Whether it be a Just and Reasonable Law, that a Child, born before Marriage,
and shortly after Marriage happening, should be a Bastard or not? page 92. 9.
Whether Trial by Jurie, as it is now in use, be agreeable to reason, and for
the good of the Public or not? page 99. 10. Whether it be consonant to the
Word of God, or Reason, that a man should lose his Life for Theft, and should
incur so great a forfeiture and penalty, as loss of all his Estate, and
corruption of his Blood. page 105. 11. Whether it be a Just and Reasonable Law
that Infants, under the age of twenty one Years, shall not be charged with
their Debts? page 112. 12. Whether Clergy be agreeable to Reason and Justice
or no? page 117. 13. Whether the Law, that a Man shall not suffe Death for
Manslaughter, be not against the Word of God? page 122. 14. Whether it be a
reasonable Law, that a man shall not have Counsel upon an Indictment of Treason
or Felony? page 126. 15. Whether actions for Slanderous Words, being mere
Contentious suits, ought in Reason or Conscience to be so much countenanced as
they are? page 129. 16. Whether it be a Reasonable Law, that Actions personal
should die with the Person? page 134. 17. Whether the Law of Judgment of
Penance, or Pain fort and dure, against a Man who is indicted of Felony, and
stands Mute, be agreeable to Reason and Conscience or not? page 137. 18.
Whether the Law of Forfeiture of Goods VVrecked at Sea, be a Reasonable Law or
not? page 150. 19. Good advise in case of making last Wills and Testaments.
page 155.
Amicus Rei-publicae. The Commonwealths FRIEND.
THe First thing that I have purposed to discisse or treat of, is touching him
that is seized of Lands in Fee-simple, and his disposing thereof; and therein I
shall only propound this short Question, that is;

Whether it be reasonable, that he who is seized of Lands in Fee-simple, to him
and his Heirs, by descent, or gift, should have the absolute disposing power of
the whole, and to disinherit his Heirs.
I Do acknowledge the Law to be, that he may dispose of the whole at his
pleasure, and that a condition annexed to restrain him from it, is naught. For
it is against the absolute purity of a Fee-simple, that he should not have
power to alien it. Litt. Sect. 360. for if such condition should be good says
Litt. then it ousts him of all the power which the Law gave him, which should
be against reason, and therefore the condition is void. But if the condition
were such, that the Feoffee shall not alien to such a one, naming his name, or
to any of his Heirs, or of the issues of such a one, etc. or the like, which
conditions do not take away all the power of alienation, such condition is good.
Another reason that such condition is naught, is, because that he, who has
departed with all his Estate to another, and has no hopes of reverter, may not
in reason annex such a condition to restrain the Feoffee or alienee from such
alienation.

This I allow to be the Law; yet I beseech you give but leave to examine these
things according to right reason, and judge according to that which may make
most for the good of the Commonwealth, and then I conceive it will be thought
very hard, that any man should have an absolute disposing power of the whole,
and disinherit his Heirs.

I intend this only of a Fee-simple descended from an Ancestor to another, or
of a gift to a man and his Heirs; for in case where a man, through his own
labor and industry, has purchased such an inheritance, it seems more
reasonable for him to have the absolute disposal of it as he shall think fit;
for I know no reason, but that he who bought, may sell; but where Land
descended to me, or was given to me and my Heirs, in such case, for me to rob
my Heir of all that I never labored for, and to give it to a stranger, seems
to me unreasonable.

I say, that he should have an absolute disposing power of the whole, seems
unreasonable, but that he should have power to dispose 2 parts seems to stand
with reason, so he leave the third part to descend; for otherwise he shall be
utterly unable to make a joyncture for his wife, to advance his children in
marriage, or to pay his debts; all which, a man is bound in conscience to do:
therefore it were very unreasonable that he should be so fettered and bound in
his Estate, that he were not able to perform them.

I am not ignorant, that when I give Lands to a man and his Heirs, the Law
says, that the word [Heirs] is by way of limitation, not of purchase; yet when
an Estate so descends, or is given as aforesaid, the Heir by the intention of
the Ancestor, and the donor, ought to have an Estate in point of interest, as
also in conscience, after the death of his Father. For if a man should demand
of such a one who intends to leave his Lands to descend to an Heir, or of the
donor, whether he intended that his Heir, or the donor should sell or give away
the Estate so descended or come, through their goodness, care, and providence,
to a stranger, I know their answer would be, that they intended not a
disinherison of the Heir, but that the Estate should descend and go to their
Heirs* with the same freedom it descended or came to them; but I would not
be-mistaken, for I intend only a third part to descend, for the reason
aforesaid.

But now let us examine the reason of the Law aforesaid; and where the
inconvenience lies. The reason is, that it is against the purity and
absoluteness of a Fee-simple, not to have such disposing power; where lies the
inconvenience, that it is against a Maxim of Law; nothing of prejudice either
to the public, or to any private or particular person.

And then examine the reason of the other side, why such a Tenant in Fee-simple
should have power only to dispose of two parts, and leave the third to descend
to his Heir: because, it would agree with the intention of the Ancestor, and
likewise prevent the beggering of the Heir, a thing too common with profuse and
prodigal Ancestors in these days. So that I conceive it is evident to you,
that the inconvenience lies on this side, and whether it is better to continue
a Maxim without reason; or to alter it upon good grounds, I leave to the
consideration of our Sages; and of this only thus much; the next thing I have
to treat of is, common Recoveries; concerning which I shall propound this short
case and question.

Tenant in tail, with remainders over, suffers a common Recovery, whether this
in Law, or conscience, ought to bind the issue in tail, and theremainders over?
IT is true, that through custom and long continuance, this is now become the
common assurance of the Land; and I am not ignorant that this point received a
full resolution by the other Judges in Marie Portingtons case, in my Lord Cooks
tenth Book, that such Recovery was good and binding, not only to the issue in
tail, but those in remainder likewise. Yet I hope a man may now with freedom
dispute it, since all conscionable honest men, that ever I met with, oppose it;
and I dare say, that policy and private interest first made this conveyance
Lawful, or at least to seem so. And being that in the discourse of this case,
it will be necessary to know what the Law was before the Stat. of 13. E. 1. of
intails, and the mischief of that Law, which caused the making of that Stat.
for a remedy; it will not be amiss if I cite the Stat. wherein we shall find
both the one and the other; the mischief, and the remedy; and then it will be
easy to judge whether the mischief against which the Act of 13. E. 1. was
provided, does not still continue by common Recoveries, notwithstanding the
remedy.

But before I cite the Stat. I cannot but put you in mind, that it has been
desired and proposed by some in Print (who either never read the said Stat. or
did not well understand it) that the said Stat. might be taken away; the
mischief at the common Law revived, and the remedy suppressed. All that I shall
say to such, is, that that Law (if we will believe our Judges and Sages of the
Law) was made by very Sage and wise men; and therefore we ought to judge it to
be made upon very good grounds and reasons, and so not to be repealed without
better reason; but I need say no more, for I doubt not you will find upon the
reading of it, that it was made upon solid and profound reason, and so not to
be altered upon any Clarks or Attorneys motion.

13. E. 1. Cap. 1. In gifts in tail the donors Will shall be observed.
FIrst concerning Lands, that many times are given upon condition, that is to
wit, where any gives his Land to any Man and his Wife, and to the Heirs
begotten of the bodies of the same Man and his Wife, with such condition
expressed, that if the same Man and his wife die without Heirs of their bodies
between them begotten, the Land so given should revert to the giver or his
Heir. In case also where one gives Lands in free marriage, which gift has a
condition annexed, though it be not expressed in the deed of gift, which is
this, That if the Husband and Wife die without Heir of their bodies begotten,
the Land so given shall revert to the giver or his Heir. In case also where one
gives Land to another, and the Heirs of his body issuing, it seemed very hard,
and yet seems to the givers and their Heirs, that their Will being expressed
in the gift, was not heretofore, nor yet is observed.

In all the cases aforesaid, after issue begotten and born between them (to
whom the Lands were given under such condition) heretofore such Feoffees had
power to alien the Land so given, and to disherit their issue of the Land,
contrary to the minds of the givers, and contrary to the form expressed in the
gift. And further, when the issue of such Feoffee is failing, the Land so
given, ought to return to the giver, or his Heir, by force of the gift
expressed in the deed, though the issue (if any were) had died: yet by the deed
and Feoffement of them (to whom Land was so given upon condition) the donors
have heretofore been barred of their reversion, which was directly repugnant to
the form of the gift.

Wherefore our Lord the King, perceiving how necessary and expedient it should
be to provide remedy in the foresaid cases, has ordained, That the will of the
giver, according to the form in the deed of gift manifestly expressed, shall be
from henceforth observed: So that they, to whom the land was given under such
condition, shall have no power to alien the land so given, but that it shall
remain unto the issue of them to whom it was given after their death, or shall
revert unto the giver, or his Heirs, if issue fail (whereas there is no issue
at all) or if any issue be, and fail by death, or Heir of the body of such
issue failing, etc.

And if a Fine be levied hereafter upon such Lands, it shall be void in the
Law, and no claim needs, etc.

Here I have faithfully cited you the Stat. word for word; and what the common
Law was before the making of this Stat. is apparent. Estates now by force of
that Stat. called intails were at the common Law Fee-simple conditional. So
that a man having such an Estate before this Stat. had power after issue had,
to alien, and by that to bar the issue, and likewise him in reversion, and
this is said by the Stat. expressly to be contrary to the minds of the givers,
and contrary to the form expressed in the gift, and this was the great mischief
at the common Law.

Then comes this Stat. and provides against the said mischief, that the Will of
the donor shall be observed, and that such donees in tail shall have no power
to alien to bar their issues, or him in reversion.

Now certainly the best way of Argument is upon the Law it self, and that is
pregnant and plain, that the donee after this Stat. had no power to alien to
bar his issue, or him in reversion.

Now I beseech you to what end was this Stat. if notwithstanding a donee in
tail might by a Recovery bar his issue and him in reversion; certainly had
any such thing been known then, as a Recovery, it would have been provided
against as well as a fine, or otherwise a man might well question the wisdom of
the makers of the Law, notwithstanding they have received so great an applause
by our Sages of the Law.

The Law hates vain and unprofitable things; and had Recoveries been known
then, and not provided against, certainly no Law could be more vain and
unprofitable.

But now to come to Marie Portingtons case in Cooks tenth Book, where this case
is largely debated; there you shall find the Original of these common
Recoveries. There by those that argued against them, it is said that 't was not
invented till 12. E. 4. Taltarum's case, that such Recoveries should bind the
Estate tail upon a pretense of a fained recompense.

To which it was said by the Court upon judgment given, that judgment given
against Tenant in tail, with voucher and recompense in value, shall bind the
Estate tail, notwithstanding the said Act of 13. E. 1. be the Recovery upon
good Title, or not; and that the judgment given in such case for the Tenant in
tail to have in value binds the Estate tail, though that no recompense be had.

And this they say was Law in E. 3. time, for which they cite these Books (but
here observe by the way, that those Recoveries were not invented before that
time, as themselves do agree, and of what validity such new invention can be
against a Stat. expressly against any alienation in such case, let any rational
man judge.) but for the cases they have cited, 15. E. 3. Tit. brief. 324. by
Recovery in value by Tenant in tail, the Estate tail is barred, and he shall
have a Formdon of the Land so recovered in value, with which agrees 42. E. 3.
53. and 44. E. 3. 21, 22. Octavian Lumbards case, Tenant in tail grants a rent
charge to one who has right to the Land in tail for a release, it shall bind
the issue, 48. E. 3. 11. b. Jeffrey Benchers case recovery in value by Tenant
in tail, shall bind the tail, and a Formdon lies of the Land recovered in
value, with which agrees. 1. E. 4. fol. 5. 5. E. 4. 2. 6.

For these Books thus cited, that such recovery shall bind the issue in tail;
they are to be understood of a recovery upon good Title, and of a real, not a
fained recompense, for they all agree, that a Form-don will lie of the Land
recovered in value; So that it cannot be intended of a fained and pretensed
recompense. I would fain know of any man, whether ever he heard of any Action
brought upon such recovery in value, as recoveries are now used? are they not
become the common course, and common way of conveyance for to bar Estates in
tail, and to cut off all remainders, without any possibility or expectance of
recompense in value? and do not the Judges say before that it shall bind be it
upon good Title, or not, and though that no recompense be had? so that a
pretensed recompense by them must carry away a clear Title, and defeat the
Stat. and the intention of the donor? So that I do conceive, notwithstanding
those Books, that such recoveries should bind the Estate tail upon a pretense
of a fained recompense, was not till 12. E. 4. Taltarums case.

And the case of Octavian Lumbard, before cited agrees with this difference,
between a real, and a fained recompense; for I do agree, that a recovery upon
good Title, and a real recompense will bar the Estate tail. The case of
Lumbard, that a grant of a Rent by Tenant in tail to one that claims a right to
the Land intailed, shall bar the issue, is, without question, good Law, for
this is to preserve the Estate tail, and this is no fained but a real
recompense; not so in our case.

Besides, suppose those Books should be intended (as I conceive they cannot) of
a fained recompense; can any man say that any use or custom is good against a
Stat. had such fained recoveries been in use at the time of the making of the
Stat. of 13. E. 1. which no man does, or can say, somewhat more might have been
said for them; but being invented after, it cannot be with reason that they
should be of force to frustrate, yea, and null, upon the matter, the Stat. made
before: and certainly (as I have said before) the makers of that Law would have
provided against this mischief as well as Fines, had such recoveries been then
in being, for otherwise vain and fruitless was that Law, as indeed it is at
this day.

Again, by those that argued against common recoveries in Marie Portingtons
case; it is said, that such recoveries are by diverse Acts of Parliament marked
and branded with the blemish of fiction and falsity; as in the Stat. of 34. H.
8. cap. 20. they are styled fained and untrue recoveries; and so in the Stat.
of 11. H. 7. cap. 20. 32. H. 8. cap. 31. and 14. El. cap. 8. they are named
covenous, and had by collusion; and therefore it stands with Law and reason to
provide for the preservation of reversions and remainders, against such fained
and false and covenous recoveries.

To this objection, and these Stat. this answer is given; and first it is said,
that common recoveries is one of the main pillars, which supports the Estates
and inheritances in the State; That is, Reader: they must unjustly, (because
contrary to the Stat. and the Form of the gift) take away one man's
inheritance, and establish or settle it in another, and this is called one of
the main pillars of inheritances.

But to the Statutes; for that of 34. H. 8. it is of gifts in tail by the King
to his Servants and Subjects, for to encourage others and their issues, and
therefore recoveries suffered by such Tenants in tail, are well taxed by
Parliament to be fained and untrue, because they did take away the intention of
the King.

To which I answer, that they are so termed by that Stat. not in relation only
to the defeating of the Kings intention, but because they are so in themselves
fained and untrue. Besides are they so termed, because the intention of the
King was thereby defeated; why? where there is the same reason, there ought to
be the same Law; and in this case, is not the apparent intention of the donor
in his gift defeated by such recovery contrary to the Stat. which says, that
the will of the donor shall be observed.

But it is further said in that case, that confirmat usum qui tollit abusum;
and that it was a bar in that case before that Act of 34. H. 8. made to the
contrary; certainly if it were an abuse in the Kings case, it is no other in a
common persons, and it were very happy if an Act were likewise made against
them in our case; that we might not have them known for the future.

For the Stat. of 11. H. 7. when a Woman advanced by the Husband with a
competent joyncture in tail suffers a recovery to bar the issues, this may
well be said to be by covin.

Now I beseech you weigh the cases in the balance of reason, and then judge
whether they differ or no. Is it not as much covenous for any Tenant in tail
who takes such Estate to him and his issues to disherit his issues by such
recovery, contrary to the said Stat.

For the Stat. of 32. H. 8. and 34. El. of a common recovery against Tenant for
life; it may well be termed covenous and by collusion. To this I shall say no
more but this, that certainly in our case there is as much of injustice, covin
and collusion by suffering such common recoveries, as in any of the former.

Further it was said by those that argued against these recoveries; That that
opinion, that a common recovery could not be restrained by condition or
limitation, was new and of late invention, and never heard before Sir Anthony
Mildmayes case 6. Rep. fol. 40. for it was admitted to be restrained in the
case of the Earl of Arundell 17. El. Dyer, fol. 342. 343. and in the argument
of Scholasticas case, 12. E. Com. 403. the said point of restraint of a common
recovery was never moved: here observe, Reader, another new invention, that
these recoveries cannot be restrained by any condition or limitation; so that
there must be such a power given to support these recoveries, though against
the Letter of the Stat. and the Will of the donor, that no humane invention can
prevent.

As to the Earl of Arundels case, it is said that nothing is spoken to it by
those who argued the case, and so no Authority. To this I say, that certainly
had the Law been conceived to be such, that such recovery could not be
restrained by condition, it would have been then urged, which rather concludes
on this part.

As to Scholasticas case, all that my Lord Cook says, is this, he much
respects the reporter, and attributes due honor and reverence to the Judges,
but amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas. Though that it was
not then thought on by the learned men of that time, yet my Lord Cook will have
it to be Law, and prefers his opinion, which he calls truth, which truth so
called appears to be only a new invention, before the contrary supposed Law
of that time.

And it is further said in Portingtons case, that none ought to be heard to
dispute against the legal pillars of common assurances of Lands, and
inheritances of the Subjects. And it is likewise said, that at a Parliament
holden in the reign of Q. E. in Vernon and Herberts case debated before the
Lords of Parliament, Hoord Counsel with Vernon invaied against these
recoveries; who was then reproved by Dyer, Chapter Just. of the common pleas, who
said, that he was not worthy to be of the profession of the Law, who durst
speak against common recoveries, which were the sinews of the assurances of
inheritances, and founded upon great reason and Authority; sed non omnis capit
hoc verbum*

By this you may easily judge what most supported this assurance: for if
Lawyers must be silenced, it is no wonder if common recoveries pass for Law. I
know I shall not pass uncensured, as I have said before, Hoords case will be
mine, with advantage: but it shall not at all disturb my rest; for having truth
of my side, I care not who is against me: and certainly that Councellor that is
a Councellor of the Law deserves the sharpest reproof; and since non omnis
capit hoc verbum, as is said before, let me not be rebuked without reason; and
if any one can convince me in that, I shall with all humility submit to his
judgment.

Lastly, it is said that D. 8. lib. 1. cap. 26. approves common recoveries, to
bind as well in conscience, as in Law.

For my part I conceive that the better opinion there is against them; and so I
believe any man will judge that shall read the Chapter, I shall faithfully
recite the disputes and leave it to judgment, and therein first the manner and
practice of suffering such recoveries; The Demandant shall suppose in his Writ
and Declaration, that the Tenant in tail has no Entry but by such a stranger,
where neither the Demandant nor the said stranger never had possession of the
Land, whereupon the Tenant in tail shall appear, and by assent of the parties
shall vouch the common Vouchee, whom he knows to have nothing to yield in
value (now Reader judge whether this be not a mere fiction of a recompense in
value,) and the Vouchee shall appear, and the Demandant shall declare against
him, whereupon he shall take day to imparle in the same Term, and at the day by
the assent of the parties he shall make default, upon which because it is a
default in despite of the Court, the Demandant shall have judgment to recover
against the Tenant in tail, and he over in value against the Vouchee: And this
judgment and recovery in value is taken for a bar of the tail for ever by
reason of the recompense; for by presumption the Vouchee may purchase Lands.
Thus you have the practice of a common recovery, which is nothing else but an
invention to cut off intails, which has been the ruin of many a family.

But it is reasoned, that although such recoveries, in respect of the multitude
of them, be spared, that they stand not with conscience: for by the Stat. of
13. E. 1. when the Ancestor is dead, intailed Lands o^ right belong to the
Heir, for that he is Heir according to the gift. If the^ thou be commanded not
to covet, (...) Fortiori, that thou do not withhold thy neighbors house, etc.
And although it may be objected, that tha^ which is ordained by the Law, may be
adnulled by the Law, there is not here like Authority for the one, as for the
other, for the tail is created by Authority of Parliament the most High Court
in the Realm, and the disanulling thereof is by a covenous recovery upon false
supposals, (here you have truth clothed in plain Language.)

Then as to another objection, viz. Communis error facit jus, that is to be
understood that a custom used against the Law of Man in some Country shall be
taken for a Law, if the inhabitants be suffered so to continue it; but these
recoveries, although they have been long used, have always been spoken against
(Reader, observe that, who ever thou art; and then I am sure I cannot justly be
blamed: nor need I care to write against that, which has been always spoken
against.) Also this custom could have no Lawful beginning, and an evil custom
is to be abolished: Also a prescription against a Stat. is void: And it is also
moved, that in as much as there is no executed recompense that the Law has
been taken, that the Heir in tail is not barred of his Formdon, and although
the Vouchee may purchase after the issue has recontinued his own Land, that
herein is no inconvenience; for that the issue shall be barred of the
recompense in value, in that he has recontinued his own land again, and so
shall not have both.

I dare not go so far as to allow a Formdon for the issue in such case (though
enough has been said to make that good too) by reason of the many
inconveniences that must of necessity fall thereupon, but it were happy (as I
have said before) if such covenous and fained recoveries were taken away by Act
of Parliament.

But it may be objected; that you would have Tenant in Fee-simple to have power
to dispose two parts, for the reasons and intents aforesaid; and why may not
Tenant in tail have the same power?

To which I give this short answer, that it is agreeable with the nature of a
Fee-simple to be alienable; not so in case of an Estate tail, for that is
contrary to the Form of the gift, as the Stat. is expressly; and there is no
power given by that Stat. to the Donee in tail to dispose of the Estate in any
case whatsoever; and therefore he may not for the advancement of his relations,
or satisfaction of his debts, defeat his issue, or in default of issue, those
in the remainder, by alienation, contrary to the Form of the gift, and the
intention of the donor.

And now I shall conclude this dispute with a rule or two in Law, and first the
Stat. said that the Will of the donor must be observed in his gift, which
stands with the reason and rule of the Law, for Cujus est dare ejus est
disponere; a man must take the gift with those qualifications, conditions, or
limitations, that the donor is pleased to annex to it, and cannot alter it, if
so, what becomes of common recoveries? or how in Law or reason can the donee in
tail disherit his issues; Note, much less strangers in remainder: as if land be
given to A. in tail, the remainder to B. in tail, etc. if A. suffers a
recovery, this not only binds his issue, but him in remainder likewise, which
is extreme hard and unreasonable, that the Law contrary to the rules of Law it
self, should allow a stranger to do an Act to my prejudice, for the rule is,
that Res inter alios actae alteri nocere non debent, other men's actions ought
not to prejudiee a third person, how then can that stand with this rule of Law,
that Tenant in tail should have power to bar him in remainder by a recovery.
Another rule is, Quod nostrum est sine facto vel defectu nostro amitti, seu ad
alium transferri non potest, we cannot lose what is ours, nor can it be given
from us without our own Act or default, how then can it stand with this rule,
that he in remainder should be barred by such recoverie as aforesaid? I shall
say no more, but wait the Parliaments leisure* and I doubt not, but this will
in due time be altered.

The next thing I am to treat of, is concerning the imprisonment of men's
persons for debt, and in that I shall propose this short question.

Whether it be consonant to reason, conscience, or for the good of the
Commonwealth to Arrest men's Persons, and to detain them in Prison for Debt?
I Know this is a case in which many men have vented their judgments in
public, and it has not been without a solemn debate too in the Parliament; so
that there is the less for me to do, and therefore I shall be but short in it.

What reasons induced the Parliament to continue this Law, I know not, nor is
it for me to examine; however, I beseech you, let it not be taken amiss that I
offer my reasons in it, and leave them to better judgments.

In the first place I shall examine what the old Law was, and when, and how
this Law of imprisonment of persons for debt crept in; for it has not been
always used in England, and I may say in few other places of the World; and
where it is in use, there is care taken that they do not perish in prison for
want of necessary sustenance, but they and their families to be maintained out
of their own Estates; and if they have none, the perverse and cruel Creditor is
to maintain them out of his proper Estate; and not to suffer them to perish for
want of food, as they do commonly in England.

The body of the Defendant was not liable to execution for debt at Common Law,
for which see 13. H. 4. 1. But his Goods, Chattels, and Corn, etc. by Fieri
facias, or Levari facias within the year, and by the Stat. of W. 2. by Scire
facias after the year, and by W. 2. cap. 18. an Elegit was given of the moiety
of the Land; which was the first Act which subjected Land to the execution of a
judgment.

But the Common Law which is the preserver of the Common Peace of the Land,
abhorres all force, as the capital Enemy to it, and therefore against those who
committed any force, the Common Law subjected their bodies to imprisonment,
which is the highest execution, by which they lose their Liberty, till they had
made an agreement with the party, and Fine to the King.

And therefore it is a rule in Law, that in all actions Quare vi and armis, a
Capias lies, and where a Capias lies in process, there after judgment, a
Capias ad satisfaciendum lies; and there the King shall have a Capias pro fine.

Then by the Stat. of Marlebridge 23. and W. 2. cap. 11. Capias was given in an
account, for at common Law, the process in an account was distress infinite,
and after by the Stat. of 25. E. 3. cap. 7. the like process was given in debt,
as in account, for before this Stat. the body of the Defendant was not liable
to execution, for the reason and cause aforesaid, all which you shall find in
my Lord Cooks 3. Book, Sir William Harberts case.

Here you see the Original of the arresting of men's bodies, and taking of them
in execution for debt; which was by force of those few but ruinous distructive
words in 25. E. 3. like process in debt as in account; these few words have
ruined many, and almost numberless persons and Families; who, had they not been
cloysterd up in Prisons, might have lived to have got Estates, and to have been
able to discharge a good conscience in satisfaction of their debts, and
providing for their Families.

For the process by way of Capias, or attaching of the person for debt, I know
it will be said to me, if you will have that course taken away, what other will
you provide convenient for gaining of our debts? To this I answer, that that
which I conceive most convenient in reason, and which has been already
proposed to the Parliament, is by way of Summons, as the Original in the common
Pleas is; and upon that* if no appearance be, to have liberty to proceed with
all vigor, and to have a judgment against the Defendant for not appearing, as
if he had appeared, and judgment had been thereupon obtained against him.
Only this I must observe, that it is of necessity, that the service of the
Summons be sworn to, (as it is in case of a Subpoena in the Chancery,) before
there be any further proceeding, otherwise, any man living may be abused, and
extremely suffer by the seizure of his Estate upon execution, he having had no
notice by way of Summons of the said action. And this great advantage to the
Commonwealth there will be by the way of Summons, that it will destroy all
privileged places, for a Summons may be served, where there durst not be an
arrest; So that then there will be no protection of men against their
Creditours, but that such as have Estates, shall, as in conscience they are
bound, pay their debts, and not consume them in a corner, under the guard of
any privilege.

The next thing, after the process, and judgment, that is to be considered of
is, what execution is most just and reasonable, and most agreeable to
conscience, and the good of the Commonwealth in such case? In this we must
consider what the scope, aim or end of the Law is in such execution; and that
is, the satisfaction of the debt. Then the next question is, which is the most
just and probable way to attain to this end? whether the taking of the body, or
the Estate? To this I answer, that certainly the nearest, best, and most
conscionable and rational way to attain to that end, yea and most equal too, is
by seizing of the Estate.

The most equal it is certainly, and our Law much delights in equalities; for
it is not equal justice that the body (which is said in Law to be the highest
execution, and so without doubt it is, and much more to be valued then all
Worldly goods) should be captivated and imprisoned, for any Worldly pelf, or
engagement whatsoever, body for body, and Estate for Estate, is the most equal
way of justice in the World.

And it is the most rational, the readiest and best way for to get a
satisfaction of the debt, and it is that which must pay it at last, if ever it
be paid; for this is but a slender satisfaction of the debt. And this great
inconvenience he lies under that takes the body in execution, that he cannot,
after he has determined his Election by this way of execution, during his
life, take hold of his Estate too. And heretofore it was a great question,
whether if the party died in execution, it were not a satisfaction of the debt;
and though there were much variety of opinion in it, yet certainly the best
was, that it was a satisfaction, so that the plaintiff could not resort
afterward to, or take out execution upon the Estate; and for my part, I think
it was the most just Law, that he, whom nothing but the body could satisfy,
should have no other satisfaction, this occasioned the making of the Stat. of
21. of King James; which provides remedy against the Estate, notwithstanding
the persons dying in execution.

But I say, having thus determined his Election by taking the body in
execution, he is upon this great disadvantage that the debtors Estate is free,
and that which he would not take to satisfy his debt, happens for the most
part to be wasted and consumed in prison. It Is frequent, that a wilful
creditor finds as stubborn a debtor; and since nothing will satisfy him but
the body, he must take that for satisfaction; so that it is apparently
contrary to reason and common policy.

It Is likewise under correction, the most conscionable way too; and the
contrary, which is the taking of the person, the most unconscionable,
especially as it has been practiced in England, for either the debtor has an
Estate, or he has none, if he has an Estate, it is all the Justice in the
World that that should be responsible for his debts; if he has none, what can
be more unconscionable or unjust, than to keep his body in prison. Lex non
cogit ad impossibilia, the Law requires not impossibilities at any man's hands,
why then should one man so exact upon another? Besides, this renders a man
utterly incapable of ever giving satisfaction, for by this he is wholly
deprived of all possible means of discharging his engagements. Whereas had he
his liberty, he may through Gods blessing upon his honest endeavor, gain
sufficient, not only to satisfy his debts, but to raise a fortune for his
posterity.

But this will not digest well with such, whose principle is, that if they have
it not they will make dice of their bones, (a saying that has been ever too
common in this place) that is, they shall starve and perish in prison: and
whether this be not mere and pure malice in such men, let all the World judge;
and if death shall thereupon follow, as too too often God knows it does, I
shall be bold to say, that such a creditor is as absolute a murderer, as if he
had killed him with his own hand. For what makes murder, but malice prepensed
to kill: and what else can that man have in his thoughts, who resolves his
debtor shall rot and die in prison, though he knows he has not wherewithal to
satisfy. To such unmercifull, pittiless, cruel creditors, (yea, and therein
most cruel to themselves too, had they grace to consider it) I shall say no
more but this, that they cannot keep their poor creditors always in prison,
death will at the length take pity of them, bring a discharge and open the
doors and let them out; and there (through their affliction, working them to
true and unfeigned repentance and amendment of life) I doubt not, ends their
captivity: but let these take heed, that they be not one day cast into that
black, dismal and infernal Lake, from whence there is no redemption.

But I know that it will be objected to me that debtors may conceal, or
secretly convey over their Estates to cosen their creditours, which cannot be
discovered; so that if their persons may not be imprisoned, creditors shall be
wholly without remedy.

To this first I say, that it is a rule in Law, that Nullum iniquum est in lege
praesumendum, presumptions of fraud or deceit are not permitted in Law, that
is so just, that it conceives all men to be just likewise, till there appear
something to the contrary: and why should our thoughts be otherwse? but it is
so, men of corrupt lives, judge all others like themselves.

I answer further, that such as are resolved to be dishonest, it is not
imprisonment will make them otherwise; and in such case if you take their
persons, you are further from gaining of your debt than before, for you cannot
then fasten upon their Estates; and let not the innocent suffer with the
nocent, the willing and unable, with those that are able and unwilling.

Besides, how often is imprisonment made a mere cheat, even by the prisoners
themselves to defraud their creditors, they willingly submitting themselves to
a prison, to preserve their Estates.

But it is further objected, that if imprisonment of men's persons for debt
should be taken away, it would be a great hinderance to trading, which is, as
it were, the soul of every Commonwealth, for then men would not dare to trust
one another.

To this I answer, trading driven upon credit seldom thrives; And I may safely
say, that many men, who are now beggars, had been rich men, had they had less
trust and confidence, little profit without, is more than great with hazard and
danger. I know no reason that any man should be trusted who has not
wherewithal to pay; and certainly men in general, then thrive best, when they
trust least; and for my part, I judge that man worthy to lose his debt, who
trusts to the security of a man's person only.

Again, Lex respicit finem, the Law has an eye to the end of all actions; and
as this is not the next way to get men's debts by the imprisonment of their
creditors persons, (as I have said, and proved before,) So I beseech you to
consider, who it is that gains by it? it is certain the creditor, seldom, if
ever, gains his debt the sooner.

Why, the only gainers are, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Serjants, Goalers and Keepers
of prisons, etc. these are they that grind the faces of the poor, that add
affliction to affliction, and live upon the ruins of others; these are the mala
necessaria, the bloudsuckers, the leeches of the Commonwealth; evils they are,
and great ones too, I am sure of it; but did I say they were necessary? I must
recall that word, otherwise, I must of necessity approve of the Devil and his
cursed instruments; and Hell and a prison have no small resemblance, only
there is more hopes of getting out of the one, than the other. A silver key, so
long as a man has it, will unlock the prison doors, and set him at liberty;
but if he shall make default in payment of his rents, or other extortions
exacted of him, by the keeper, and his bloud-hounds, he shall quickly be hunted
after, and fetched in again, and there remain until he has satisfied them;
that being done, he shall be restored to his former liberty; but if his purss
be not of considerable magnitude, it will soon be emptied; and then, no longer
pipe no longer dance; the creditor shall be sure then to find him, and now
nothing remains but the body, which the creditor so unwisely made choice of,
for satisfaction of his debt. This I know to be the constant course of many
Keepers of prisons; and the conditions of their prisoners; and whether this be
the way for creditors to get their debts or no, let any sensible understanding
man judge.

But lastly, it has been said by some, that it does indeed stand with reason
and conscience, that where a man becomes unable, through the Act, or hand of
God, without any Debauchery or default of his own, to satisfy his debts, that
in such case he should not be detained in prison; but if through his own
default, in such case he deserves no mercy.

To this I say, under favor, that though he be so impoverished through his own
default, it is very hard, and to me unreasonable, that he should so suffer;
First, because that this is not Gods Method or way of dealing with poor sinful
man, for if God should inflict the severity of his Justice upon us, but for one
of a thousand sins that we commit against his Divine Majesty, no flesh living
could be saved, why should we then so exact one upon another, as not to forgive
one fault or transgression of our Brother; are we not required to be merciful
as our heavenly Father is merciful? and do we not daily pray that God would
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them their Trespass against us? how
then dare we harbor malice in our heart against our Brothers; since except we
truly forgive, we are not to expect forgiveness? consider with thy self how
much thou art indebted to God, and if he (as in Justice he might) should
require that great debt at thy hands, nay, but one of a Million, thou must
inevitably go to prison, I, to that prison (to which all earthly sufferings and
torments are as nothing) from which there is no redemption to all eternity; and
therefore forgive, as thou do expect to be forgiven.

Again, this is not the way to satisfy the debt (which is the end of the Law
in such executions) but to ruin the party; who, had he is Liberty, might leave
his former vanities and ill courses, and live to be able to make satisfaction
of his debts; God happily waits for thy reformation all thy life, do thou (as
in duty thou art bound) deal so likewise with thy Brother. I shall conclude all
with this one word, let us consider those that are in bonds, as if we were in
bonds together with them.

The next I have considered to treat of, is the Chancery and its power, and
therein I shall propose this short question.

Whether the High Court of Chancery, as the practice is there, be not a very
great grievance, and burden to the Commonwealth?
IT is not my purpose, or the scope of my endeavor, to speak or write against
a Court of Chancery, I know there is an absolute necessity of it. Equity said
D. 8. lib. 1. cap. 16. is a right wiseness that considers all the particular
circumstances of the dead, the which also is tempered with mercy, and such an
Equity must be observed in every general rule of the Laws of man, for Summum
jus, summa injuria, viz. If thou take all that the word of the Law gives thee,
thou shall sometimes do against the Law. And therefore said D. 8. cap. 18. very
well; If it were ordained by Statute that there should be no remedy upon Equity
in Chancery, nor elsewhere, such a Statute were against reason and conscience,
and certainly so it were. He approves the use of any thing, that labors to
take away the abuse.

I am not ignorant, that the Kings of this Nation have ever had their Court of
Chancery, and their Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; nor am I
wholly unknowing of the power and Authority of that Court. In the Chancery,
says my Lord Cook in his Jurisdiction of Courts, there are two Courts, one
ordinary, Coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria, in which the Lord Chancellor or
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal proceeds according to the right line of the Laws
and Stat. of the Realm, Secundum legem and consuetudinem Angliae, and with this
Court, I purpose not to meddle, as being not within the limits and bounds of my
present discourse. But the other Court, that is extraordinary, according to the
rule of Equity, secundum aequum and bonum; and that is my work to treat of, and
that you may see the necessity of this Court, it is Officina Justitiae, out of
which all Original Writs and all Commissions, which pass under the great Seal
go forth, which great Seal is Clavis Reipublicae, and for these ends this Court
is always open. And in this, the Chancellor or Keeper was sole Judge, but he
had power, if he pleased, to assist himself with the Judges.

And now I shall take freedom to let you know what the ancient rule was for
this Court of Equity, which is very good. Three things are to be adjudged in a
court of conscience: Covin, Accident, and breach of Confidence.

All Covins, frauds, and deceits, for which there is no remedy by the ordinary
course of Law.

Accident, as when a servant of an Obliger, Morgager, etc. is sent to pay the
Moneys upon the day, and he is robbed, etc. remedy is to be had in this Court,
against the forfeiture, and so in the like case.

The third is breach of trust and Confidence, of which you have plentiful
Authorities in our Books: but of this, this taste only shall suffice; and now
to come to that which I intend, which is the present practice there, and
therein I shall not meddle with the many great Officers and their fees; which
is a very great burden to the Commonwealth, because that I do believe, that
they are in a way of redress.

But the first thing that I shall touch upon, is the multitude of Suits that
are there pending, so that it is impossible (without the Commissioners were
more than men) for them to receive a convenient dispatched. I do acknowledge
their great and indefatigable pains in that high and extraordinary Judicature,
for which the Commonwealth stands very much obliged to them: yet I know as
men, they cannot exceed their strength and ability.

This Court has received a great addition, not of Jurisdiction, but of
practice, by taking away of the Court of Wards, that great and oppressive
Court; as likewise, by the fall of that unnecessarie Court of Requests. So that
the business of this Court is so great, and does so much increase daily, that
the Commonwealth will in a short time very much suffer through inevitable, not
to be prevented, delay of Justice.

Besides; it is not unknown, that many Suits are commenced there upon a
suggestion of Equity, merely false, on purpose only to hinder or delay the
execution of Justice at the Common Law; this likewise much advances the
p^^ctice there, and is a very great prejudice to the Commonwealth, by reason
of such unjust and causless vexation. I hope no man will be so unreasonable as
to misapprehend me here, or to judge, that in any thing I have said, I should
lay the least imputation of fault upon the Commissioners, no, I do not, I
cannot, I know that all men who have to do in that Court, do plentifully
partake of their Justice, yet I must say, as before, that it is impossible for
them, through the infinite multiplicity of business there, to give a convenient
dispatch to all.

Again, it seems to me, to be a great grievance and burden to the
Commonwealth, to have a resort in matter of Equity from a Court of Law, to
Chancery. We say in Law, frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora,
it is vain and idle for a man to go about, when he may find a nearer way home.
The Law loves not circuity of action, why then should men be forced to a Court
of Equity, when the case is pending before the Judges at Law? and why may not
the matter of Equity (if any) be determined by them without such further
trouble or wheeling about, which is no small charge and expense to the people?
I know not but that they are in such case, the most proper Chancellors; and
this will prevent a very great mischief and vexation to the people, which I
have shown before, and that is, of resorting to the Chancery upon pretense of
Equity, whereas in truth, it is only to delay Justice: a thing, then which,
nothing more frequent and usual.

Besides, it is no strange thing for the Judges to make themselves Chancellors
too, for I have known this case frequently in practice, that the Judges, in
debt upon a penal Bond, have, upon a motion, forced the plantiffe to accept of
the principal with costs and damages, and I am sure, the penalty in strictness
of Law being forfeited, this is judging and determining according to Equity;
and why they may not do it as well in other cases, I understand not further, as
I have said before: The Chancellor may call the Judges to his assistance, and
peradventure he will call those (as is most proper) before whom the case was
pending at Law: is not this then a strange circuitie of action? why might not
the matter of Equity have been as well determined by the Judges, and so this
great vexation have been prevented?

But to this it will be said, that this would be a total destruction of the
Court of Chancery, and a gross confounding of Law and Equity, to make the
Judges judge of both.

To this I answer, that we are wholly to respect the good of the Commonwealth,
and what tends most that way, certainly is most just and reasonable; other
relations ought to be subservient to that; that is equal and good ought only
to be looked upon. But further, though this will much abridge the practice
there, yet, it will not take it away; and I am certain, the practice there
needs some abateme^t; or at last there will be an extreme failer of Justice.

Not destroy it, for there be many cases, which are so merely and absolutely
equitable, that they have not the least relation to Law, nor can any action in
such case be brought at Law, as in all your cases of discovery, and the like.

So that where the Suit is only proper there, and is not, nor cannot be
brought in question at Law, in such case it is reason that Court should have a
determining power in the matter of Equity: and such cases only, I am
confident, will find work enough for the Commissioners, and this will be a very
great ease and benefit to the people.

For the scruple of confusion, I know no reason, but that Judges of Law may as
well judge of Equity; as Judges of Equity judge of Law. Nay more, are they not
all Lawyers? I know it is no strange thing, for others to have been
Chancellors; yea, it has been common for Bishops to exercise that great place
of Judicature; how proper it was for them, in relation to their functions, as
also to the place of Judicature it self, I shall not dispute here, as not
proper to that I intend; but certain I am, none more proper Judges of Equity,
then Judges of Law, nor can he be a competent Judge of Equity, that understands
not the Law: for Equity is no other but an exception of the Law of God, or of
the Law of reason, from the general rules of the Law of man; which exception is
secretly understood in every general rule of every positive Law; therefore he
that understands not the one, cannot well Judge of the other.

Give me leave to urge one thing more, which I am sure would very much abate,
and lessen vexatious and troublesome Suits in Chancery, and that is, that no
plaintiffs should prefer a Bill, but that he may swear it, as well as the
Defendant his answer, that such untruths as are now (to the shame and scandal
of our profession) alleged and preferred in all, or most Bills exhibited, may
be prevented, that men may not lie (pray pardon the coursness of the Term,
since the truth is so) by toleration.

To this I know it will be said, that some Bills are merely for discovery and
the like, and so not to be sworn to; To this I answer, that there is no Bill
but has something positively alleged in it, and that me thinks seems reason,
that every Plaintiff should swear to, the rather, for the Honor of this High
Court, that men may not dare to forge falsities, and to present them to the
Commissioners for specious truths.

I have one thing more to say, and with which I shall conclude; and that is,
that it seems very hard to me, that men should not have costs of Suit, in some
reason answerable to what they have necessarily expended in this Court, as well
as at Law; so that often the remedy proves as bad, if not worse, then the
disease, and sure this cannot be agreeable to Equity, it is not aequum, nor
bonum; neither good for the Court, nor equal to the party. And this to my
knowledge has deterred many a man from prosecution in this Court. I shall say
no more but this, judge me according to Equity, and then I know I shall not be
condemned.

The next thing I have resolved to treat of is, Collateral Warranties, and in
that I shall propound this short question:

Whether Collateral Warranty stands with reason and conscience, or no?
ANd first I shall let you know what a collateral Warranty is; that you may the
better understand the reason of this question. A collateral Warranty is thus;
where a collateral Ancestor; as an Uncle, releases to the discontinuee or
disseisor of Lands in tail, with Warranty and and dies, this bars the Heir in
tail, because the Warranty descended upon him, who cannot derive any title from
the Uncle; and though the Warranty descends lineally; yet it is said to be
collateral, because the Ancestor is collateral to the title.

But to make the case more plain, I shall put one case out of Littleton. Sect.
709. If Tenant in tail discontinues the tail, and has issue and dies, and the
Uncle of the issue releases to the discontinuee with Warranty, etc. and dies
without issue, this is a collateral Warranty to the issue in tail, because that
the Warranty descended upon the issue, who cannot convey himself to the tail by
means of his Uncle. And you must know, that this Warranty is a bar without
any assets, or Estate descended from him that made the Warranty, which is the
great extremity of the case.

The reason that my Lord Cook gives, why the Warranty of the Uncle, having no
right to the Land intailed, shall bar the issue in tail is, because that it
is presumed that the Uncle would not unnaturally disherit his Lawful Heir
being of his own blood, of that right which the Uncle never had, but came to
the Heir by another mean, except that he would leave him greater advancement.
Nemo praesumitur alienam posteritatem suae praetulisse. No man is presumed to
prefer another posterity before his own. And in this case he further says,
that the Law will admit no proof against that which the Law presumes. And so of
all other collateral Warranties, for no man is presumed to do any thing against
nature. It is well that my Lord Cook will offer some reason for it; it is more
than I find in D. S. lib. 1. cap. 32. for he says, it is a bar in Law and
conscience, because that it is a Maxim.

But now let us examine the reason of my Lord Cook, and see whether it does
stand with conscience, reason, and the good of the Commonwealth; for my part,
I judge not that to be Law, nor worthy so to be considered, that is
unreasonable, unconscionable, and against the common good.

It is an unreasonable and unconscionable Law, that a collateral Ancestor who
cannot claim any right to the Land, should have power to bar me that am the
Heir to it by his release, and this is a case much more extreme then that of
recoveries, in some sense, because the Uncle is a mere stranger, as to the
Estate, and this is against the rule of Law, that Acts done by strangers should
prejudice a third person.

Yes, but says my Lord Cook it is presumed, that the Uncle would not disherit
his Heir of that, which he had nothing to do with, nor could not pretend any
right to, except that he would leave him a greater advancement, and no proof
must be against this presumption.

A very strange presumption, How many Uncles might a man find in this age, who
for a small sum of money, would not care to disherit twenty Heirs, if possibly
so many could be, without the least scruple of conscience; who neither have,
nor consider of any other advancement to leave them.

But there is a strong block in the way; for against that presumption there
must be no proof; so that if he leave no Estate or other advancement, it is all
one as if he did, it is presumed he will, though happily it is known, he
neither does, nor can; and that is sufficient to disherit his Heir.

Yet the rule of Law is, Stabitur praesumptioni donec probetur in contrarium,
the presumption is to be allowed, till the contrary be preved, but no longer:
and certainly if ever there were an unreasonable exception to any rule, this
may pass for one.

My Lord Cook says, that it has been attempted in Parliament, that a Statute
might be made, that no man should be barred by a collateral Warranty, but where
assets descend from the same Ancestor, but it never took effect, because says
he, that it would weaken common assurances, Rot. Parliament. 50. E. 3. Number. 77.

This is a reason urged in defense of common recoveries likewise, the English
of it is but this, I may bar another man of his just and Lawful right, to
fortify a wrongful title; otherwise it would weaken common assurances; I know
no reason, but men's rights should be as much favored as common assurances; an
Heir as much as a purchasor. To conclude, I wish a second attempt were made in
this present Parliament, against these collateral Warranties; and then I should
not despair of redress of so unreasonable a Law, The next thing I am to treat
of, is, Pleadings, and therein I shall propound this question.

Whether it be consonant to reason or conscience, that any man's Plea should be
adjudged naught, and avoided at any time for any matter of form, false Latin,
double Plea, Departure, or any other defect whatsoever, the case and matter it
self sufficiently appearing upon the Record, for which the Action is brought*
FIrst, that I may clear the question of some things doubtful in it, I have
added to it, at any time, because in some cases and sometimes such defective
Pleas are already helped by Stat. as you will find after.

I shall not need to inform you what matter of Form is, the word it self
sufficiently speaks it. Double Plea is, when a man in pleading alleges several
things; the one not necessarily depending upon the other, etc. Departure is
when a man goes from his former plea, and pleads some new matter, these will
vitiate pleadings; and put a man to a new action.

But to the case it self; M. Littleton, I remember, says, that pleading is one
of the most Honorable and profitable things in our Law, and therefore advises
his Son to bend his endeavor to the gaining of the knowledge of it. I believe
it indeed to be one of the most profitable things, (I mean to the Lawyer) but
the Commonwealth suffers in it. For the matter of Honor, I know not where it
lies, except it be in this; that such a one is said to be a subtle Lawyer, a
pick-lock of the Law, one, who can discover a flaw or defect in any plea
presently, if it be to be found: and this is the Honor I believe, to be able
to vex and trouble and undo people by various Suits; if this be the Honor
(though I hope no man will therefore count me wholly ignorant of this
knowledge, because I speak against it) let who will take it for me.

Cook upon Litt. fol. 303. 304. observes, that many a good cause is daily lost
for want of orderly and good pleading; the more the pity. And after he says,
when I diligently consider the course of our Books of Years, and Terms from the
beginning of the Reign of E. 3. I observe that more jangling and questions grew
upon the manner of pleading, and exceptions to form, then upon the matter it
self, and infinite causes lost or delayed for want of good pleading, what a
gross shame, and most unconscionable thing is this, that form should be
insisted upon more than matter; and the Clyent should lose his case, or have it
delayed, for formalities. The Clyent sues not at Law for to make cases or
questions, or to occasion scruples about nice formalities, but to have Justice
done according to the truth of his case; and this is the end of all Law, to put
an end to controversies, in doing right to the parties, without delay, or
regarding any thing but the truth of the case it self. Interest Reipublicae ut
sit finis litium, it very much concerns the Commonwealth, that strifes be
ended; and not that one dispute or controversy should occasion another; much
less that contention should be about words, the matter laid aside, and the
party depart, not as he came, but in a worse condition, his money fruitlesly
expended, and his right, if not lost, suspended.

My Lord Cook says again, that it is worthy of observation, and so indeed it
is, That in the Reigns of E. 2. E. 1. and upwards, the pleadings were plain and
sensible, but nothing curious, evermore having chief respect to matter not to
forms of words; I am sure we cannot say so of these latter times; for I am
confident, they were never more nice and captious than of late.

Then he said, that in the Reign of E. 3. pleadings grew to perfection, both
without lameness and curiousity. And that in the time of H. 6. the Judges gave
a quicker ear to exceptions to pleadings, than either their predecessors did,
or the Judges in the Reign of E. 4. or since that time have done, giving no way
to nice exceptions, so long as the substance of the matter were sufficiently
showed.

I attribute much of Honor and respect to my Lord Cook; yet I shall crave that
freedom, to deliver what is truth, and that is, as I have said before, that
pleadings were never more curious and subtle than of late; and never more nice
exceptions given way to.

I shall not here meddle with the order of pleading, as first to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, Secondly to the Person, etc. which must be observed
in their due course, or you lose the benefit of the former. Nor yet with my
Lord Cooks rules of pleading in his institutes, in which he is very large: I go
not about to teach or inform you of the forms and subtleties of our pleas;
though they are worth the knowing, yea, and observing too, so that the Clyent
may not be prejudiced for want or defect of such forms.

For the double plea, I cannot understand any just reason why it should not be
allowed; that reason which the Law gives, is, that the Court and Jury may be
invegled by such pleas; I have inquired exactly into this reason, but cannot
find how, or which way; and I do profess my self one of my Lord Cooks
non-intelligents too; for he said the Law in this point, is by them that
understand not the reason thereof, misliked; and I do acknowledge my self of
their minds who say. Nemo prohibetur pluribus defensionibus uti; no man is
prohibited to use several defenses.

And so likewise for the departure, I know no reason that any man should be
barred or concluded from offering any other or new matter, but that any man,
may at any time make the best of his own case; certainly, Judges ought to have
principal regard to the truth of every ma^s case, that that may be discovered,
thereby the better to enable them to give righteous and true judgment; not to
forms or words; these are but apices Legis, the meerbark, outside, and
inconsiderable part of the Law; and indeed non sunt Jura, they are not Law.

The rule that we have in pleading, that Parols font plea; that is, whatsoever
the truth of his case is, that is his case, and that he must stand to, as he
has pleaded: and the other rule, that a man's plea shall be taken most strongly
against himself, where it is doubtful, these seem to me very hard and
unreasonable; it is strange to conclude any man, where there is a mistake in
words, from laying open the truth of his case; this, if any thing, is to
invegle the Court, and make them give an unjust judgment, and if they be
informed of the mistake, and yet judge according to that, I doubt whether a
rule of Law, will another day be a good plea for them.

Besides, if a man shall but truly reason this case, he must needs judge it
very unjust, that a man should suffer through another default, which is
contrary to the rule of Law, for that says, Nemo debet puniri pro alieno
delicto. Now pray who is it that draws these pleas? why the Clerk or Lawyer,
according to the information he receives from his Clyent; can it then be
agreeable to reason or conscience, that the mispleadings, or formal mistakes of
these, whom I entrust, as being wholly ignorant thereof my self, should
prejudice me; again, is it not frequent, for the most learned men of the Law,
to err, or at least, to differ in judgment, from the Judges? and yet not to
be blamed neither, why then should I suffer for other men's faults, or defects
in judgment?

By diverse Statutes made in the reign of H. 8. E. 6. Q. El. and King James, it
is provided, that after issue tried, after verdict, after demurrer (except
where the matter of form is specially demurred to) that the Judges do give
judgment according to the right of the cause, and matter in Law, and no matter
of form, false Latin, or variance, etc. to hinder it.

These are good laws so far as they have gone, and I hope none that considers
these will blame me; for without doubt, the same or the like considerations,
caused the making of them; that justice or right might be advanced above all
punctilioes or nice formalities. And since those are defective in many things,
as common experience teaches; and the same reason that caused the making of
them, may, and ought to persuade our great Parliament to a total extirpation of
such immaterial nicities; I doubt not, in good time, we shall have an Act made,
which will fully answer our desires therein; which will be much for the good
and ease of the people, and no less beneficial to Lawyers. The next thing that
I shall treat of, is Conveyances, and therein propound this short question;

Whether the many sorts of tedious and long Conveyances now in use, stand with
reason, and the good of the Commonwealth or not?
THere are many sorts of Conveyances in our Law, and I doubt too many, to be
for the good of the people; as Feoffements, Fines, Recoveries, Bargains, and
Sales, Covenants to stand seized to uses, etc. most of which, are so swelled
and enlarged with many unnecessary covenants, and vain and idle repetitions and
tautologies, which together with advise and counsel, are an intolerable charge
and expense to the people. So that he that purchases but a small thing (as
happily not being able to go further) he had as good, almost, be without it,
and keep his money, as under-go the great charge and trouble in the assuring of
it.

I put a Feoffement in the first place, as deserving the pre-eminence and
prioritie of place, being the most ancient and best conveyance. O the
innocence of former ages, when a Feoffement only of some few lines was
sufficient, and served to convey over the greatest estates.

Yet I am not in this case, to lay all the blame, if any, upon Lawyers; for as
the innocence of those times required not so many covenants and assurances to
oblige men to the performance, and making good of their faith and engagements
one to another: So the wickedness and corruption of these latter ages, are
such, that men must be tied and bound, shackled, and fettered like wild and
untamed cattle; so that it even puzzels Lawyers to find words enough to meet
with the subtle devises, and overreaching policies of most men; and all little
enough to keep them within the bounds and limits of justice and honesty.

But to return to that I broke off from; Cook upon Litt. fol.. 9. says, that a
Feoffement is the most ancient and necessary Conveyance; (Note that Reader)
both for that it is solemn and public, and therefore best remembered and
proved, and also for that it clears all Disseisins, Abatements, Intrusions,
and other wrongful and defeasible estates, where the entry of the Feoffor is
lawful, which neither Fine, Recoverie, nor Bargain and Sale by Deedindented
and enrolled does.

And that this kind of Assurance may find the better esteem and approbation, I
shall first inform you what it is, and then show you the venerable Antiquity
of it; Feoffement is derived of the ancient word Fe^dum, quia est donatio
feodi; because it is a giving of the Fee; for the ancient writers of the Law,
called a Feoffement Donatio, of the Verb do, or dedi; which is the aptest word
of Feoffement.

And now you shall have the antiquity of it, out of no other Author, but Holy
Writ; for says my Lord Cook, that word Ephron used, when he infeoffed Abraham,
saying, I give thee the field of Machpelah over against Mamre, and the Cave
therein I give thee, and all the trees in the field, and the Borders round
about; all which were made sure unto Abraham for a possession in the presence
of many witnesses, Genesis, cap. 23. verse. 11. And when the kins-man of
Elimelech gave unto Boas the parcel of Land that was Elimelechs, he took off
his shoe, and gave it unto Boas in the name of seisin of the Land, (after the
manner in Israel) in the presence and with the testimony of many witnesses,
Ruth; cap. 4. ver. 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 25. 9, 10. Thus you have the antiquity likewise
of a Feoffement; now this being the best, and most ancient conveyance, I know
no reason it should not be most in use. Cook upon Litt. fol. 6. a. says, that
there are eight formal or orderly parts of a deed of Feoffement, as the
premises, the habendum, etc. and yet he says, all those parts were contained
in very few and significant words; Haec fuit candida illius aetatis fides and
simplicitas, quae pauculis lineis, omnia fidei firmamenta posuerunt. And a
Feoffement is good, without these formal parts, fol. 7. a. for if a man by his
deed gives Land to another and his Heirs, without more saying, this is good, if
he put his Seal to the deed, deliver it, and makes livery accordingly.

I have been the larger upon this conveyance, by way of Feoffement, because I
would have men in love with it; and certain I am, it would be best for all men
(except Lawyers, who I hope will be contented to abate something of their
profit, to serve the common interest) best in point of security, and in profit.
Only add this to it, that a Law be made, that it shall be a bar (as a Fine
with Proclamations,) if it be enrolled, and five years pass with non-claim
after the inrolment, and then it will be a great ease and advantage to the
public.

But if it shall not be thought fit to alter the Law in point of conveyencing,
as it is now settled, why then I shall humbly beg this one boon of the
Parliament, in behalf of the public? and that is, that they would be pleased
to make a Law, that no Scrivener, or other person whatsoever, other then
Lawyers, shall for the future make or draw any conveyance or assurance in Law
whatsoever, which shall after happen to be sealed and delivered, without the
advice of Counsel thereupon had, either before, or after the assurance drawn
and made, under a good pain or penalty, if they shall do the contrary: and
this will be a means to prevent, many contentious Suits, which daily arise upon
scruples and questions out of such conveyances drawn according to their formal
ignorance.

The next thing I shall dispute, is the Law of Bastardy; wherein I shall set
down this short doubt.

Whether it be a just and reasonable Law, that a Child born before marriage;
and shortly after marriage happening, should be a Bastard, or not?
THis is a case, in which the Common Law differs from the Civil and
Cannon-Laws; the Common Law says, that such a Child is a Bastard, the other
Laws, that it is Legitimate. I shall give you the reasons of both sides, and
then you may judge which is most reasonable. This very case is debated by
Fortescue, cap. 39. The Civilians say, that maritagium subsequens tollit
peccatum precedens; that is, that by means thereof, the State of Matrimony
coming in place, extinguisheth the former sin, whereby else the Souls of two
persons should have perished; And it is to be presumed, say they, that they
were at their first copulation so minded, as the marriage after declares.

The Canonists also say, that Matrimonium subsequens legitimos facit quod
sacerdotium.

Say we, the sin by the inter-marriage is somewhat abated; not purged, or taken
away; and besides this would be a great increase of that sin, and an
encouragement to it, if such Children should be legitimate, and the parties
would be less penitent, because so favored.

And Fortescue being much for our Law in this point, puts this case; says he,
If a woman should have two Children of two Fornicators, and the one marries
her, whether of these two children should be by this Marriage Legitimate?

For my part, I do conceive, under correction of better judgments, that the
Cannon and Civil Laws are most reasonable in this point; though I do not
conceive, that the sin is purged, or taken away by the inter-marriage, for that
cannot be otherwise, than by true repentance for the sin committed: for which,
this seems to me to be a great sign, otherwise I doubt whether they would have
married or no. And I do conceive it ought to be intended, that they resolved
upon marriage before, or otherwise it is not to be presumed that they would
have married after: men usually hate those women they have carnally known,
being pricked in conscience for the sin committed and therefore not likely to
marry such, unless there were some former tie or obligation upon them, which
mitigates the offense, and makes them perform their engagement: and if it were
not so, who in such case would so marry, knowing his issue to be Bastard by the
common Law.

To that that is said, that it would be an increase and encouragement to commit
that sin, if the Law should be so taken, that the issue should in such case be
legitimate.

To this I answer, that I rather conceive the contrary, that it would very
much lessen and abate the committing of that sin; for it will make them the
rather eschew it, and take up resolutions of marriage; for, as I have said, men
seldom marry that woman they have carnally known, especially having issue
before hand, being the more frightened from it, by this hard Law of Bastardy.

For that objection, that if such issue should be legitimate, the parties would
be less penitent, because so favored.

To that I answer, that certainly it would make them much more penitent, when
they shall live together in the state of Matrimony; and put them more in mind
of their former offense, which certainly they would less think of were they
divided; and I think a greater sign of penitence cannot be, than the subsequent
Matrimony.

Besides, by legitimating of such issue, this great convenience would follow,
that it would much abate and take off the scandal and reproach of the World, and
encourage men in such case to Matrimony; whereas otherwise they usually add
sin to sin, one Bastard begets more, so that once having under-gone the reproach
and shame, they never consider the sin, but are more hardened in it.

For the case put by Fortescue, of two Fornicators having got several Children
by one Woman, and the one after marrying her, which shall be legitimate. This I
conceive may receive a very short answer; for if the party that got the Child
be known, we may easily judge which shall be legitimate.

My Lord Cook upon Litt. says, fol. 244. that if the issue be born within a
Month or a day after marriage, between parties of full Lawful age, the Child
is legitimate; by which we may conclude, that if it be born so short a time
after marriage, that it is legitimate, for certainly the same reason for both.

Now I say this, that if we may go so near Bastardy, and yet be legitimate, I
know no reason; that coming so near legitimation, it should be a bastard, and
this in favor of legitimation.

But besides, the sins are equal, and therefore I know no reason but the
punishment should be so too, a day does not aggravate the sin, why then should
a day bastardise the issue.

Cook upon Littleton, fol. 245. Matrimonium subsequens legitimos facit quoad
sacerdotium, non quoad successionem, propter consue^udinem regni quod se habet
in contrarium.

And therefore at a Parliament holden, 20. H. 3. for that to certify upon the
Kings Writ, that the Son born before marriage is a Bastard, was contra commanem
formam Ecclesiae, rogaverunt omnes Episcopi; Magnates, ut consentirent, quod
nati ante Matrimonium essent legitimi, sicut illi, qui nati sunt post
Matrimonium, quoad successionem haereditariam, quia Ecclesia tales habet
prolegitima: Et omnes Comites and Barons una voce responderant, quod nolune
leges Angliae mutare, quae haec usque usitat^e sunt and approbatae.

And I do confess that the Statute of Merton 20. H. 3. cap. 9. confirms this
opinion. Had there been a reason given in this Statute* or by the Lords, to
make good the use and approbation; it had been somewhat to convince a man of
the Justice of this Law, but since there is none, I hope that a nolunt mutare,
shall not make the Law one whit the more reasonable: it is not what we will not
do, but what ought to be done that ought to poize in judgment. Nevertheless, I
submit all to graver judgments. The next thing that I question, is;

Whether trial by Jury, as it is now in use, be agreeable to reason, and for
the good of the public, or not?
WHen I had seriously considered with my self, how great a burden lies upon
such men's shoulders, who are of a Jury; and of what great importance this way
of Trial is to all men of this Commonwealth; the lives and fortunes of all men
being subject, and liable to their verdict and judgment.

And when I had further thought with my self, that although this be the most
exact and equal way of Trial in the World, for men to be judged by their Peers;
and that not by one or two only, but by 12 men of the Neighborhood.

And therefore says my Lord Cook upon Litt. 1. a Jurer ought to be dwelling
most near to the place where the question is moved; and such are presumed to be
best conusant of the matter of fact.

2. He ought to be most sufficient both for understanding that his ignorance
may not mislead him;) and competency of Estate (that he may not be corrupted
through poverty, or necessity.)

3. He ought to be least suspicious, that is, to be indifferent, as he stands
unsworn, and then he is accounted in Law, Liber and legalis homo; otherwise he
may be challenged, or excepted against, and not suffered to be sworn.

The most usual way of trial (says he) is by twelve such men (it were well if
they were) for ad quaestionem facti non respondent Judices. And matters in Law
the Judges ought to decide, for ad quaestionem juris non respondent Juratores:
and certainly this is the most equal and just way of Trial.

For the Institution and right use of this trial by twelve men, and wherefore
other Countries have them not, and how this trial excels others; see Fortescue
at large, cap. 25 and 29.

Again, the Law has taken such care for equality and right in such trials;
that the Law has inflicted a most heavy doom and judgment in case they give
a false verdict, by way of Attaint against the Jurie: for which you may see
Cook upon Litt. fol. ^94. and Fortescue, cap. 26.

Yet for all this, when I again consider what weak and ignorant Juries are for
the most part returned, I cannot sufficiently wonder and lament, that men's
lives and fortunes should depend upon such men's verdicts. That such men (as
many of them are) who have not had so much good literature, as to be able to
read, should be Judges and disposers (as upon the matter they are) of other
men's lives and estates.

But here it may be objected by some, that the trials are before the learned
Judges of the Law, who may direct them, and satisfy them in their doubts; and
therefore there is no such fear of injustice, as is supposed.

This I conceive is sufficiently answered before, in that the Law is, that the
Jury are the only Judges of matters of fact, and in that, they may judge
according to their own conscience; and are not bound in such case, to ask
advise of the Judges, or if they do, they are not tied to follow it: nor, in
truth, ought the Judges in such case to direct them, (though in matter of Law,
of which they indeed are the proper Judges, they may and ought to do it) their
work is only truly and faithfully to repeat the evidence on both sides, and so
to leave it to the Jurie.

My Lord Cook says, that in ancient time they were twelve Knights: and
Fortescue says, that the Juries are very often made, specially in great matters
of Knights, Esquires, etc. cap. 29. fol. 67.

Though this be of as high consequence and concernment to the public, as may
be, yet I shall not desire, that there should be twelve Knights, or twelve
Esquires to every Jurie; for so in defect of them, there would be often a
failer of justice; and besides, some cases are so small and inconsiderable in
themselves, that a mean and ordinary Jurie, may be sufficient for that purpose.

But this I shall humbly desire, that in all cases which touch a man's life, or
his estate, to any considerable value, there may be twelve able understanding
Gentlemen returned of the Jurie, such as are known in their Country to be men
of competent worth for so great an employment. This would very much advance
right, and determine disputes and controversies; which now frequently are again
revived, by reason of the verdicts of weak and unable Juries. And it were
happy for the public, if an Act were made to that purpose. The next thing I
shall discuss, is the loss of life in case of Theft, and the forfeiture
thereupon. In which the question is,

Whether it be consonant to the word of God, or reason, that a man should lose
his life for Theft, and should incur so great a forfeiture and penalty as loss
of all his estate, and corruption of his blood?
IT is true, there is a commandment against it, Thou shall not steal: but there
is no penalty inflicted upon those that do. But by the Judicial Law, Exodus 22.
verse. 1. If a man steal an Ox or a Sheep, and kill it, or sell it, he shall
restore five Oxen for the Ox, and four Sheep for the Sheep: and verse. 4. If the
theft be found with him alive (whether it be Ox or Ass, or Sheep) he shall
restore the double. So that by that Law, there ought to be a restitution, but
no life was then in danger. But to this it will be said, that that Law was
given to the Jews only to observe, and does not extend to us. To this I say,
that had it been an equal and just Law to suffer death in such case, without
doubt it had been imposed upon them to observe; for in the Chapter before,
Murder is made Death; life for life, that is equal punishment: but life for any
wordly or temporal substance whatsoever, holds not the least equality of
proportion; for one man's life is of greater value and esteem, than all the
treasure upon the earth.

Man is the image of God, and therefore certainly we ought to deal tenderly
with his image. And if God who has the sole absolute power and dominion over
all his creatures, thought not fit to give the Magistrate, who is his
Vicegerent here upon earth, such power over the lives of men, but has reserved
it to himself (except in case of murder) how dare then any power or authority
what soever usurp it?

The Civil Law (if we may believe Fortescue) is more agreeable to the Word of
God, for he says, cap. 49. that the Civil Laws do judge open Theft to be
satisfied by the recompense of four fold, and private Theft by the recompense
of double: so not to suffer death by their Law.

I do not write this to encourage men in this heinous crime (which is too too
common in these times) no, far be it from me so to do; for I know if there be
not a severe Law against it, there will be no enjoying any thing that a man
has; the Law of property will be of little force; But that there may be some
other way of punishment, as by Banishment, slavery, or the like, which may be
as effectual to terrify men, and keep them from it; so that we do not take
away the life of man, over which there is no jurisdiction given in such case by
God; we having no precept, rule, or warrant for it.

And now to me, the forfeiture and penalty in such case, is no less
unreasonable, is it not too much to lose the life? and yet will not that
satisfy; but thereby also his blood be corrupted; and all his estate
forfeited; so that his issue is not inheritable to him; nor to any other
ancestor; nor can this corruption of blood (it is so high) be restored
otherwise, than by Act of Parliament. And if he were Noble or Gentle before, he
and all his children and posterity, are by this made base and ignoble, in
respect of any Nobility or Gentry which they had by their birth.

For my part, I think there cannot be a more rigid and tyrannical Law in the
world, that the children should thus extremely suffer for the crime and
wickedness of the Father; the innocent for the nocent.

It is true, that as the Apostle says Romans 5. that by one man sin entered into
the World, and death by sin; but he goes further, and so death went over all
men, in whom all men have sinned. We all sinned in Adam, therefore no wonder if
death fall upon all.

God has the supreme Sovereign power over all his creatures, and so may
inflict what punishment he pleases upon them for their sins, and who dares
question it, or say it is unjust? and yet God deals not thus severely with man;
for in the 18. of Ezekiel. he reproves the Israelites for using this Proverb.

The Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on
edge;and says, they shall use it no more: for that Soul that sins, it shall
die;and after verse the 20. The same Soul that sins, shall die; the Son
shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, etc. Thus you may see the great
mercy of God, whose greatest severity were but Justice.

Does not this extremely condemn the injustice of that Law* which so severely
punishes the Children for the transgression of the Father, a wicked Father may
have a good Child, and shall such a one be ruined through the wickedness of the
Father: his Estate wholly lost, and not only disinherited through his
corruption of blood, as to his Fathers Estate, but also made incapable of
taking any thing by descent from any other Ancestor? a more rigorous Law
certainly was never made.

But I know it will be said, that the reason of the severity of this Law, is
the more to deter and affrighten men from this sin, which is so frequent
amongst us; ut metus ad ^mnes, paena ad paucos, etc.

To this I answer, that it is not Lawful nor warrantable, for men to make
unjust and tyrannical Laws to keep men from sinning; and to put them in
execution: punish the offending Father, but not the innocent Children.

The custom of Gavel-kind is more reasonable, for though the Father be hanged,
the Son shall inherit; for the Custom is, the Father to the bough, the Son to
the plough. I shall conclude it with this, that I hope one day to see this
Custom become the Common Law of England: the next thing I have in
consideration, is, touching the debts of Infants under the age of 21 years; and
therein I propose this question.

Whether it be a just and reasonable Law, that Infants under the age of 21
years, shall not be charged with their debts?
FIrst, we are to know what the age of discretion is for Man or Woman? What
full age? The age of discretion for a woman in judgment of our Law is 12. for
a man 14. full age is 21. and under that age they are said to be Infants in
Law, and under that age they have not power to dispose of their Estates, not
are they liable to pay their own debts; It is true, that for necessaries, as
Clothes, Diet, Schooling, and the like, they are liable, but for those neither
they cannot give a penal bond, a Bill they may, and it shall bind them. In
general, an Infant may better his condition, he can not make it worse; this I
confess to be Law, yet it seems very hard to me, that an Infant should not be
liable to pay such debts, as he shall ow for any thing had, or received after
the age of discretion; especially, when I consider what the Law is in other
cases of Infancy.

By custom, he may make a lease at his age of 15. and it shall bind him. Cook
upon Littleton fol. 45. b. Nay further, by custom he may make a Feoffement at
15. years, 5. H. 7. 41. 11. H. 4. 33. Now no custom is Lawful, that is not
reasonable.

And yet further, an Infant of the age of discretion, nay under, may suffer
death for Murder, or Theft, nothing more common. 3. H. 7. 12. an Infant betwixt
10. and 12. gave a man several wounds till he died, and then he drew the body
into the Corn; forwhich he was convicted? but it is true, that judgment in
that case was respited for his tender age, but many Justices that he was worthy
of death.

Note, an Infant of 9. years killed another, and it was adjudged, that he
should be hanged, quia malitia supplet aetatem. But execution was respited to
have pardon; see the Assizes.

A Woman Infant within age killed her Mistress, and was burnt for it, see
likewise the Assizes.

Again, an Infant shall not avoid a marriage at the age of discretion, made,
and contracted by him. Cook upon Litt. fol. 79.

Now I argue thus; if an Infant may do the greater, why is it not reason that
he should do the less? If he may be chargeable for things of a much higher
nature, why not for those that are of a lower? By custom he may sell his
Estate; By Law, he may suffer death for Felony: and may contract Matrimony;
things of much greater consequence to himself: why then in reason should he not
be liable to the payment of his debts? my Lord Gook says, that argumentum a
majori ad minus, an argument from the greater to the less, is a good argument
in Law.

Besides, he is as much obliged in reason and conscience, to pay his debts, as
a man of full age, why then the Law should not tie him to it, I know no reason:
I mean for debts contracted after the age of discretion: and if the Law then
judges him to be discreet, why should it not make him just and honest. Men of
themselves naturally are too prone to injustice and unrighteous dealing one
with another, therefore very unfit that they should receive the least
encouragement to it.

How frequent a thing is it for men in such case, to take the advantage of
infancy; and most unjustly to cosen their creditors of their just debts, which
in conscience they are bound to satisfy.

But here it will be objected, that it is the creditours fault to trust such a
one who is under age, and therefore if he suffer, he may thank himself.

To this I answer, that though the ignorance of Law will not excuse a man, the
ignorance of fact will, and how a man should know such a one to be an Infant,
since many, nay most men may, and do deceive their Judges by their looks; I
cannot think or imagine. And he that shall inquire his customers age, may sit
still in his shop and blow his fingers, for any thing else that he shall have
to do. I shall say no more but this, that certainly, that Law is most just,
that gives the least Liberty or advantage of fraud or deceit to men. The next
thing I shall speak of, and in that I shall be very short, is, Clergy, and in
that I shall propound this short question.

Whether Clergy be agreeable to reason, and Justice, or no?
CLergy is, when a man is convicted of Manslaughter, or any other crime or
offense, for which he may have his Book, and thereupon prays his Clergy, that
is, that he may have his Book, which being granted, the Ordinary, being a
Clergy man, and heretofore in stead of the Bishop who is the Ordinary, opens
the Book, and turns him to a place to read, and reading, the Court demands
whether he reads as a Clerk, if the ordinary says that he does, he saves his
life by it, and is only burnt in the hand.

We must know, that the Original of this use of Clergy, was at that time when
the World was in its Minority; I mean this little World, and there were but few
Clerks, or learned men; and then in favor, and for encouragement of learning,
as also for supply of places which were destitute of men of such abilities,
this Law or Privilege of Clergy was invented and approved of for saving of
such men's lives in some cases, for the reasons aforesaid; and this was the
reason that Women could not have their Book, because they could not be Clerks.

Now I would fain know of any one, whether the cause, or reason of the making
of this Law holds to this day or not? if it does not, what reason can there be
to continue it? for the rule of Law is, Cessante causa, cessat effectus, the
cause ceasing, the effect likewise cease. And that it does not, nothing more
evident, for certainly (God be thanked for it) England never more abounded with
learned men, than it does now: and therefore no want of such Clerks as they are.

That this Law stands not with reason, I shall offer these things to
consideration; first, the slightness and inconsiderableness (especially as the
case stands now) of the thing it self, that reading of a line or two should
save a man's life; by which the crime is no way answered or satisfied for.
Secondly, it may prove very unjust, for if several men be convicted of one and
the same offense, one may happily read, the other not, so that the one shall
thereby save his life, and the other suffer; which cannot stand with Justice.
But where they are both equally guilty, and so have deserved death; yet to
pardon one may be just, for that the one may have been a more notorious
offender than the other, and so not deserving the least favor, but for one to
have power to save himself, and not the other, that I judge very hard and
unreasonable. Lastly, (if there were reason in the thing it self) the
difficulty of the Tongue, and in many places, the Character being an old
Letter too, and so hard to be read, makes it very unreasonable. So that I may
safely say, were it not through the favor of the Court, not one of twenty
could save their lives by reading.

Since therefore there is no ground for the continuance of this Law (as there
is not for any that wants reason for the support of it) I think it were better
in such cases, where Clergy is allowable, that they should be only burnt in
the hand, as women are, and so set at Liberty; which nevertheless I submit to
graver judgments. The next I shall write of is the distinction in Law, betwixt
Murder and Manslaughter; and therein put this short question.

Whether the Law, that a man shall not suffer death for Manslaughter be not
against the word of God?
THe distinction in Law betwixt Murder and Manslaughter, is thus; Murder is,
when one is slain with a man's will, and with malice prepensed or forethought:
as where two falling out one day, appoint the field the next day, and then meet
according, and one of them is slain, this is Murder in the other; being done
premeditatedly and upon cool blood; and for this a man shall not have his
Clergy, but shall suffer death.

Homicide, or Manslaughter, as it is legally taken, is when one is slain with
a man's will, but not with malice prepensed; as where two being together fall
out, and both draw upon each other, and one kills the other, this being done
upon hot blood, is but Manslaughter, for which he shall have his Clergy, and
save his life.

Now, how this distinction stands with the word of God, that we are to
consider, by the Judicial Law; Exodus 21. 12. He that smites a man, and he die,
shall die the death. And Numb. 35. verse. 16. And if one smite another with an
instrument of iron (or with a stone, or other instrument, as is said in the
verses following) that he die, he is a Murderer, and the Murderer shall die
the death, says the Marginal Notes, wittingly and willingly; and certainly in
the case of Manslaughter, the man is wittingly and willingly killed. I could
cite many other places to the same purpose, but these are sufficient.

Now in these places it is said, that he that kills another shall die the death;
here is no such qualification, or distinction, as Murder and Manslaughter.

It is true that where a man kills another unawares, per infortunium, as we say
in Law, which we call Chancemeddly; in such case, because it was not done with
his will, it pleased God in mercy, to provide sanctuaries, or Cities of refuge,
for such offenders, to flee unto to save their lives; and the only punishment
was, that they were to continue there unto the death of the High Priest.

So in our law where one is slain casually and by misadventure, without the
will of him that does the Act, he shall not die for it, but instead of the
Cities of refuge aforesaid, (that he may not go altogether unpunished, who was
the cause of another death,) he forfeits all his goods and Chattels for it.

It is plain and evident therefore by the word of God, that he that wilfully
kills another, shall suffer death for it, whether it were in hot, or cool
blood, it differs not: How then can that Law be just (be it upon what politic
principles soever) that saves the life of such an offender? other satisfaction
can be none, and if God requires that, how dare we do the contrary? He that
kills a man in heat of blood, deserves to be hanged when it is cool.

And it is a sad and doleful thing to consider, how many thousands of lives
this Law has taken away; by encouraging others to commit the same offense,
considering their lives were not in danger. I shall conclude it, with that in
the Numb. cap. 35. verse. 33. blood defiles the land: and the land cannot be
cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed
it. The next thing that comes in consideration, is concerning Counsel in
Treason or Felony; and in that I shall propound this short question.

Whether it be a reasonable Law, that a man shall not have Counsel upon an
Indictment of Treason or Felony?
THat the Law is such, it is admitted, and without dispute; and the reason that
is given for it, is, that the Indictment being heretofore at the Suit of the
King, the King intended nothing but Justice with favor; and therefore he would
be contented that the Justices should help forth the parties as far as reason
and Justice may suffer; and that in all things that pertain to the form of
pleading, the Judges shall so instruct the parties, that they incur no damage
thereby.

This reason at the first aspect, seems very plausible; but better dived into,
I doubt it will not appear so. Do not we know, that though the Judges were
sworn to do right between the King and his people; that yet they were the more
immediate Counsel of the King? and though a poor man might happily find
Justice, as having nothing but a life to lose, I doubt, it did not always fare
so with the rich? And therefore, heretofore, when any Gentleman had committed
any crime for which his life was in danger, it was usual to inquire in the
first place, what Estate he had, and if it was answered, a good Estate, it was
thereupon replied, that is enough to hang him. Then he had no sooner committed
the offense, but his Estate was begged of the King by some great Courtier, and
what relation there was then between the Judges and the Court, we very well
know, but to say no more but this, suppose it shall so fall out, that the Judge
be a weak ignorant man himself, before whom the Trial is, (as we have not been
wanting of the like experience in our age) who then shall advise the Prisoner?
is not this then a case of great extremity and injustice?

To conclude, in the most petty, ordinary, and inconsiderable action that is,
the Law allows a man counsel; why then should it be denied him in a case of
the highest concernment to him that can be, his life? If he shall have Counsel
in lesser things, why not in greater, where there is most need of it? we say,
that life is one of the Laws Favorites, but it is not so dealt withal in this
case; but now the Court is gone, I hope this Law will in time be altered. The
next thing to be considered is, actions for Slanderous words, in which I make
this question;

Whether actions for Slanderous words, being mere contentious Suits, ought in
reason or conscience to be so much countenanced, as they are?
NEver did these actions more abound, to the great and intolerable vexation of
the people than they do now. And it were to be wished (and certainly never in a
better time than now) that the greatest part of them were suppressed, that
words only of brangle, heat, and choler, might not be so much as mentioned in
those High and Honorable Courts of Justice. For I profess for my part, I judge
of them as a great dishonor to the Law, and the Professors thereof; especially
when I consider, that they are used only to promote the malice, and vent the
spleen of private jarres, and discontents amongst men.

Yet I do not condemn all actions for words neither, for it is just and equal,
that where a man's life, livelihood, or reputation (which is dearer and nearer
to him than the former) is much prejudiced and endangered by such scandals,
that in such case the Offender should be enforced by action to make
compensation. But that a man should flee to the Law out of malice, and make the
Courts of Justice maintainers of every small and vain brabble, this seems to me
utterly unlawful and intolerable amongst Christians.

I cannot but take notice of that which Wray, Chief Justice said in Cooks 4.
Book, That though slanders and false imputations are to be repressed, because
that oftentimes a verbis ad verbera perventum est, men fall from words to
blows. Yet he says, that the Judges have resolved, that actions for scandals
should not be maintained, by any strained construction or argument, nor any
favor extended for supportation of them; And he adds the reason of it, because
they do abound more in these days, than in times past, and the intemperance
and malice of men increases; Et malitiis hominum est obviandum; and further
adds, that in our old books, actions for scandals are very rare, and such as
are brought, are for words of eminent slander, and of great ^^portance.

This must needs be acknowledged to be a most exact and true observation; for,
if I miscount not I find but nine reported cases for words from E. 3. time, (in
which they began) to Q. Elis. and then they extremely multiplied, and so have
done ever since, to the great shame and dishonor of the Law.

And certainly these are very much against religion and peaceable conversation
amongst men.

And how much does S. Paul in all of his Epistles decry, and labor to depress
as much as possibly may be, all vain brabbles, strifes, debates, and
contentions, which tend to the disturbance of the Common-peace? and I am
confident nothing more tending that way, than such idle, frivolous actions as
these are; and to those that go to Law for scandalous words (except in
extra^^^inarie cases) a man may justly use the words of the Apostle, that it is
so, that there is not a wise man among them.

And it were to be wished, that men would be more careful of the management of
this little, yet unruly member, in which is seated either heaven or hell; this
is that which often proves the greatest good, or the greatest evil to most men:
which causes dissentions amongst men in Families, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths;
wherefore I could wish, that every man would take up the saying of the Prophet
David, and carefully observe it; I will take heed to my ways, that I offend
not with my tongue; I will keep my mouth as with a bridle.

But now I beseech you, give me leave, and I shall in a word inform you how
these frivolous contentious actions may be very much abated, if not wholly
taken away: Let no words be actionable, which do appear to have been spoken in
choler and passion; or if actionable, yet let the Plaintiff recover no more in
damage, than he can upon Oath make appear, that he was really and actually
damnified by the speaking of them, and if this were provided by Act of
Parliament, these actions would be as strange, and as rarely brought for time
to come, as they were in former ages; for nothing incourages the bringing of
them more, than the intolerable, unjust, and excessive damages usually
recovered by them. I shall conclude with this; Though the tongues of men be set
on fire, I know no reason wherefore the Law should be used as bellows to blow
the coals. The next thing that I am to consider, is concerning actions that die
with the person; and therein the question is in short but this.

Whether it be a reasonable Law that actions should die with the person?
THe rule is Actio moritur cum persona; now what those actions are that shall
die with the person is the thing to be inquired into, and first negatively,
Quicquid oritur ex contractu vel conventione non moritur cum persona,
whatsoever arises by way of Covenant or contract does not die with the person.
Affirmatively all actions that are said in Law to be merely personal, as
Trespass, debts upon simple contract, Battery, Words, Debts upon an escape
against a Keeper of a prison, etc. and such in Law die with the person, and no
action can be brought against the Executors.

This seems to me to be a very hard Law, and a failer of Justice, that I should
suffer against Law, and that the death of him that does the wrong, there being
no Act or default in me, should take away my remedy.

It is true that the Law in case of a Bond, Covenant, or the like, binds the
Executor, though he be not named; and what is the reason? because the Executor
represents the person of the Testator; why then, upon the same reason, should
not a personal tort of the Testators, as well bind the Executor?

Besides, it is a rule in Law, that the Act of God, (as it is here in case of
death) shall prejudice no man; why then in such case should it take away my
action?

Again, there is another rule in Law, that Lex non debet deficere
conquerentibus in Justitia exhibenda; the Law ought not to be defective in
exhibiting Justice to complainants. But in this case, the Law is defective in
justice, if the inevitable fate of death shall take away my action.

There is likewise another rule in Law, that Lex nulli facit injuriam, the Law
injures no man; but I say in this case, it injures me, if it deprives me of my
action by the death of the person. In Fine, where ever there is a damage, there
ought, in reason, to be a satisfaction for it, which ought not to be taken away
or otherwise discharged, but by my Act that am damnified, which I submit to
judgment. The next thing that I shall debate, is concerning Pain fort and
dure, and in that propound this question.

Whether the Law or Judgment of penance, or pain fort and dure, against a man,
who is indicted of Felony, and stands Mute, be agreeable to reason and
conscience, or not?
THis Law or Judgment of penance, or pain fort and dure; is that which we
commonly call pressing to death; which is used in such case, where a man is
indicted of Felony, upon matter evident and proveable (for in case of an
Appeal, this Judgment cannot be given nor does it hold in case of Treason, or
petit Larceny) and thereupon stands Mute; in such case, says the Statut^ of
Westminst. 1. cap. 12. solent mises en la prison fort and dure* etc. that is
they shall have strong and hard imprisonment.

By the way I shall here observe, that the words of this Law do not extent to
pain, but only to fort and dure, to hard and strong imprisonment, and
therefore since that Law, I cannot understand the ground or reason of that
cruel and heavy judgment which is given in such cases; hard and strong
imprisonment may be inflicted upon such an offender (according to that Law)
without pressing, and starving to death by famine and cold; nor can I conceive
those words to extend to death* but admitring the Law were such.

I shall, (that all may understand the reason of the Law,) before I go any
further, let you know, what it is to stand Mute* and in what case a man may be
said to stand Mute; and what the Judgment thereupon is.

My Lord Cook in his 2 part of his Institutes, fol. 177. upon the foresaid
Statute, says, that a man may stand Mute two manner of ways; First, when he
stands Mute without speaking of any thing, and then it shall be inquired,
whether he stood Mute of malice, or by the Act of God, if it be found by the
Act of God, then to proceed, and the Judges to make inquiry and to allow him
all pleas, as if he had not stood Mute.

And the words (of malice) are remarkable, for it may be, the prisoner in truth
cannot speak, and yet being not Mute by the Act of God, he shall be forthwith
put to his penance; as if the Delinquent cut out his own Tongue, and thereby
become Mute.

Another kind of Mute is, when the prisoner can speak, and perhaps pleads Not
guilty, or pleads a plea in Law, and will not conclude to the enquest,
according to the foresaid Act, or speaks much, but does not directly answer,
etc. to be short, when in the end he will not put himself upon the enquest,
that is, De bono and malo, to be tried by God and the Country; then the
foresaid Act is sufficient warrant, if the cause be evident, or probable, to
put him to his penance; but if he demurre in Law, and it be adjudged against
him, he shall have judgment to be hanged; so if he challenge above the number
of 36. he shall be hanged, and not have Pain fort and dure.

I shall not inquire what the Common Law was before the making the said
Statute, whether the prisoner then stading Mute should be hanged, as some held,
and as at this day it is, in case of high Treason, and, as they say, in case of
appeal; or whether then in favor of life he should neither have Pain fort and
dure, nor have judgment to be hanged, but to be remanded to prison, until he
would answer, according to others.

But the first thing I shall consider, is, what the judgment, which the
foresaid Act calls fort and dure, is, and then what the reason should be,
that so severe a judgment is given in that case; and then we may easily judge,
whether it be consonant to reason and conscience?

The judgment is, that the Man or Woman shall be remanded to the prison, and
laid there in some low and dark house, where they shall lie naked on the bare
earth without any litter, rushes, or other clothing, and without any garment
about them, but something to cover their privy parts, and that they shall lie
upon their backs, their heads uncovered and their feet, and one arm shall be
drawn to one quarter of the house with a cord, and the other arm to another
quarter, and in the same manner shall be done with their legs, and there shall
be laid upon their bodies iron and stone, so much as they may bear, and more,
and the next day following, they shall have three morsels of Barley bread,
without any drink, and the second day they shall drink thrice of the water that
is next to the house of the prison (except running water) without any bread,
and this, shall be their diet until they be dead.

Well might my Lord Cook style it (as he does after) a strange and stupendous
punishment, for when I first read it, I was even amazed and astonished at it,
that such a Law should be tolerated amongst Christians, much more amongst
Protestants, strict professors of Christianity, putting to death with such
aggravations of torture and misery, is rarely to be heard or read of, except
amongst Heathens, Turks, and Infidels.

Here is a dying three manner of ways, (though all but one death, which will
at last nonplus Tyranny, and put a period to all such like tortures) Onere,
fame, and frigore, by weight, famine, and cold; and therefore, says my Lord
Cook, this punishment (if it were executed according to the severity of the
Law) should be of all other the most grievous and fearful.

I confess I have not been an eyewitnes, nor would I for all the world, of any
man's suffering in that kind, though it be every years experience of some men's
undergoing that death, and I do believe according to the severity of the Law
too, for it lies not in the power of the Judge, much less of the executioner,
any way to lessen or mitigate it, after judgment past.

But now for the reason of this heavy and terrible judgment, which is;
according to the foresaid Act, because he refuses to stand to the Common Law
of the Land, that is, Lawful and due trial according to Law, and therefore his
punishment for this contumacy, without comparison is more severe, lasting, and
grievous, than it should have been for the offense of Felony it self, and for
the Felony it self, it cannot be adjudged without answer.

A very strange thing, that a man should suffer ten fold more for his wilful
obstinacy in refusing to put himself upon a legal trial, than he should for his
crime or offense, which is a hundredfold greater; more for the lesser, than the
greater offense, more for contumacy, than murder. The punishment ought to
agree, and to hold proportion with the offense, and not to exceed it. The rule
of Law is, that a man ought to be punished according to his offense; and the
Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 14. is, that a man shall be punished secundum
modum delicti, according to the manner of his offense, but certainly here is
not the least equality or proportion between the offense and the punishment.
Contumacy the offense, pressing and starving to death, the punishment.

It is true, that God having Genes. 9. 6. commanded the Murderers blood to be
shed by man (the Murderers not the Thiefs) and thereby enstated the power of
the sword on the Supreme Magistrate, not only permits him, and makes it
Lawful for him so to punish such malefactors, but commands and requires him so
to do, as his Minister to execute wrath; for he ought not to bear the sword in
vain; but this Commission is not given to him absolutely, and arbitrarily, to
use as he list, though he may take away the Murderers life, yet he has no
rule nor Warrant to take it away by cruel and exquisite tortures and torments;
that is praeter mandatum, beside the command.

Mercy is one of Gods attributes; and even the very sum and body of the
Scripture: therefore Tyranny must needs be against the mind and will of God,
religion and Christianity. Taking away men's lives by cruel tortures is
Diabolical and Heathenish; it is the Divils part to torture and torment, and it
is no strange thing for wild beasts to be cruel, but that homo homini demon,
one man should Act the part of the Divil with another; or that Christians
should be cruel; this is contrary to our education and profession.

The Magistrate, for prevention of sin and wickedness, may severely punish and
correct, yea, and in some case take away the life too; but not Tyrannically.
Barbarity and inhumanity Suits not with Magistracy. The Prophet David calls
Magistrates Gods; and certainly they approach then nearest to the deity, when
they show mercy. Questionless it was a high and great aggravation of the sin
of the Jews in torturing of our blessed Savior by that most cruel death of the
Cross. But to this it will be said, that that was wholly unjust in the Jews,
not so here; because it is an execution of Justice. To this I say, that it is
in no case just, to take away man's life by lingering and cruel tortures; this
turns the execution of Justice into sin, and makes the Law it self unlawful.

But it may be objected, that it is the parties own fault that he stands Mute,
and will not plead to be tried; and volenti non fit injuria; seeing he will so
suffer, there is no injury done him; and therefore not to be pitied.

To this I say, let him suffer death for this his obstinacy, as he should if
he had been tried, and found guilty; and as the Law was, if we believe some,
before the foresaid Statute, which is a satisfaction equal to the highest crime
or offense whatsoever against man; but let this cruel and barbarous Law of
Pain fort and dure be taken away, and expunged out of our Books, never to be
revived. Silence may contract guilt, but ought not so to aggravate punishment;
and certainly a man's folly or obstinacy, will not excuse or extenuate the
Magistrates cruelty.

But to conclude, I cannot pass by that gracious and merciful Act of this
present Parliament, which has taken away that barbarous and tyrannical Law of
quartering of men in case of treason; and doubtless, this Law, if strictly
examined, will be found as Tyrannical, if not more than the other, and if it
shall appear that there is as much reason to take away this, as that, I hope it
will not continue long after it. I shall say no more but this; gracious and
merciful Laws concludes the Governors to be men; but Tyrannical, Beasts. The
last thing I shall debate is concerning Wreck of Sea; and in that propound this
question.

Whether the Law of forfeiture of goods wrecked at Sea, be a reasonable Law, or
not?
I Am not here to meddle with Flotsam, that is, where goods float upon the Sea;
nor with Jetsam, where goods are cast into the Sea to prevent Shipwreck, nor
yet with Lagan, where they are fastened to any thing that they may be
discovered; for of these I may say (in regard it is uncertain upon what Coast
they may be cast, or whether driven) Capiat qui capere potest; ketch that ketch
can, but with wreck of Sea, and that is such goods only, which upon a
Shipwreck, are cast or left upon the Land by the Sea, and this only is Wreck.

The ground of this Wreck of Sea, was, as it is said, that goods being so
wrecked, the property was in no man, and therefore the Law gave them to the
King, who was Lord of the narrow Seas, who was bound to scowr the Seas of
Pirates and petty Robbers, toward the charge of the same, this was the
foundation of this Law.

And now it is fit to know, what the Common Law was before the Statute of 3. E.
1. D. S. says, that by the Common Law goods wrecked upon the Sea were
immediately forfeited to the King, but I rather believe Bracton lib. 3. 33.
135. that there shall be no wreck where the owner comes and avows the goods to
be his; observe there that that is indefinite at any time, and that were a
reasonable Law. And Cook lib. 5. Sr. Henry Constables case, it is said, that
the Statute of 3. E. 1. was but a confirmation of the Common Law, then
certainly the Law was the same before, as it is now by that Statute.

And by that Statute of 3. E. 1. cap. 4. concerning wrecks of the Sea, it is
agreed, that where a man, a dog, or a cat, escape quick out of the Ship, that
such Ship nor Barge, nor any thing within them, shall be adjudged Wreck, but to
be saved and kept by the Sheriff, etc. so that if any sue for, and prove the
goods his, within a year and a day, they shall be restored, otherwise to remain
to the King, etc.

So that the Law is, that if but a Dog or Cat escape alive out of the Ship,
then not to be adjudged Wreck, otherwise it is. Now to me this seems a very
hard Law, that a man should lose his estate there being no act, or default in
him, which is contrary to the rule of Law: and as I have said before, there is
another rule in Law, that the act of God shall prejudice no man; and for my
part, I cannot judge an Act of Parliament made against this rule, to stand with
reason. This is afflictionem afflictis addere, to add affliction to affliction,
and to throw him quite down that is a falling: certainly there cannot be any
thing more against reason and Religion, than for to add burden to burden,
sorrow to sorrow: when the afflicting hand of God is upon a man, it is sad and
miserable to meet with such as Jobs friends. For a man in an impetuous
dreadful storm and tempest, to be tossed to and fro at Sea, by the raging and
swelling billows thereof, every moment expecting nothing but destruction; and
at the last, to be Ship-wrecked and swallowed up in the merciless deep, and
after all, to have this further aggravation of misery, that if nothing escape
alive, the goods to be forfeited, or if any thing escape alive, if not a man,
to be confined to a year and a day to prove the property, when that it is
almost an impossible thing for friends to be informed of the sad misfortune,
the men being all cast away; this seems to me a very hard and strange Law.

But to this it may be said, that the goods may be bona peritura, and if
liberty should not be given to dispose of them, after such time no claim being
made, they may perish, and so nobodie be advantaged thereby.

To this I say, it is true, it may be so; Therefore I conceive it just, as in
case of Estrays, so in this case, that a Law should be made, by which it should
be provided, that notice should be given of such a Shipwreck and such goods
taken up, by way of Proclamation, in all the Port-Towns and other chief Cities
of Merchandise* and then if claim be not made within the same time, the
forfeiture may be more reasonable. And we ought to be invited to this the
rather, considering it was the hand of God which brought this affliction, and
therefore let us not add forfeiture of estate to loss of life, if possibly it
may be prevented. The next and last thing I shall discourse of, is Wills, and
of that only by way of advise.

Good advise in case of making last Wills and Testaments.
THe only advise that I shall give to men in this case, is, that they would
make their last Wills and Testaments in their health, with the advice of
Lawyers, not of Parsons or Scriveners, who know nothing but mere matter of
form, and like Carriers horses keep their rode; judging their forms to serve
all cases; by which they raise infinite disputes and controversies, and often
undo many men.

Nor is it a prejudice for any man to make his Will; since that in Law he may
revoke it when he pleases; for voluntas est ambulatoria usque ad mortem.

I confess in the case of Wills, the favor of the Law to be very great, for
that they are conceived generally to be made in extremis; for it is a Maxim of
the Common Law, Quod ultima voluntas testatoris est perimplenda secundum veram
intentionem suam, and Reipublicae interest suprema hominum testamenta rata
haberi. that is, that the last will of the Testator is to be fulfilled,
according to his true intention: and it concerns the Commonwealth, that men's
last Wills and Testaments be ratified and confirmed. The Law is to be thanked
for this care, not themselves, and let not this encourage men in the neglect of
that which often causes so much debate and dissension (even to an
irreconcilableness) amongst a man's Children and kindred; and without doubt it
is a duty required at every man's hands, whom God has blessed with a fortune,
that he avoid that as much as possibly may be.

And here I shall give you my Lord Cooks directions concerning making of Wills,
(which indeed is very excellent) in his third book fol. 36. Buttler and Bakers
case; where he says, touching Wills, of which you have many good matters in
the said case, my advice is to all that have Lands, that you would, by the
advice of learned Counsel, by act executed, make assurances of your Land,
according to your true intent, in full health and memory, to which assurances,
you may add such conditions or provisoes of revocation as you please; for I
find great doubts and controversies from day to day to arise, upon devises made
by last Wills, sometimes in respect of the tenures of the Land (which now
thanks be to God is taken away) sometimes by pretenses of revocations, which
may be made easily by word, also in respect of obscure and insensible words,
and repugnant sentences, the Will being made in haste, and sometimes pretending
that the Testator, in respect of extreamitie of pain, was not of sane memory,
and diverse others scruples and questions are moved upon Wills; But if it
pleases you to devise Lands by Will;

1. Make it by good advise in your full memory, and inform your Counsel truly
of the estates and tenures of your lands, and by the grace of God, the
resolutions of the Justices in this case will be good direction to Counsel
learned, to make your Will according to Law, and by this to prevent questions
and controversies.

2. It Is good if your Will concern inheritance, to make it indented, and to
leave one part with a Friend, lest after death your Will be suppressed.

3. At the time of publication of the Will; take credible witnesses, who may
subscribe their names to it.

4. If it may be, let all the Will be written with one and the same hand, and
one and the same parchment and paper, for doubt of alteration, addition, or
diminution.

5. Let the hand and seal of the devisor be put to it.

6. If it be in several parts, let his hand and seal be put, and the names of
the witnesses subscribed to every part.

7. If there be any interlining, or rasure in the Will, let there be made a
Memorandum of it.

8. If you make any revocation of your Will, or of any part of it, do it by
writing, by good advise; for upon revocations by Wills, ensue controversies,
some of the Witnesses affirming of it in one manner, and others in another
manner. Reader, you may observe, that the scope of my labor herein, is to
avoid as much as may be, all unnecessarie strifes and debates whatsoever, which
made me add likewise these directions concerning making of Wills; which if well
observed and followed, will prevent many contentious suits, and debates in Law,
and much tend to the peace and good of this Commonwealth.

FINIS.

