A General EPISTLE to Friends, and Professors of the Truth.
DEAR FRIENDS,
WHo with the morning light of the eternal day have been visited, and by the
Heavenly Voice of Christ Jesus called out of the world: I am to say unto You in
my Fathers Council, see that all your minds be gathered down unto the feeling
of, and cleaving unto the Immortal, Incorruptible Seed which bruiseth the
Serpents head; of which Seed all must be born, or they cannot see the Kingdom
of God, which is excellent in Celestial brightness and sweetness, full of
Glory, Immortality, Peace, Joy and eternal life.

Oh Friends, every where in the Bowels of Christ Jesus, even in the earning of
the Fathers love: I beseech you read and feel in the deep what you do know of
this Blessed Work in which the happiness of the Immortal Soul comes; For there
may be a coming out of Egypt, and to the Law which was added because of Trans
gression until the seed should come, yea, to the Prophets, who saw, and
Prophesied of his coming, in which states there may be openings, and heavenly
tastes, etc.

But the earnest welfare of the Soul is inwardly to experience through the
working of the Divine hand of Him who is the good Husbandman, a cutting off
from the wild Olive, and planting into the Vine of life, translating out of the
nature and Kingdom of darkness, into the divine nature and kingdom: All that
come here are born of the quickening spirit of the second man ADAM, the Lord
from Heaven; here is the state which truly avails, even a new creature which in
Christ Jesus has right to enjoy the favor and presence of God the Father for
ever, and for evermore.

Now Friends, all Professions of Religion under Heaven, under what name or
denomination soever, without this work in some measure experienced, will do the
Souls of mankind no good.

Wherefore, all Friends, and Professors of Truth every where in the fear, dread
and awe of the most high God, lie low before him, that so where this
inexpressible precious work is not experienced, there might be a true waiting,
and travailing in Spirit, in which a living cry and supplication will arise to
the living God to accomplish it. And now unto all such that feel true longings,
living breathings, and ardent desires in their Souls this blessed work to know;
I say unto You in the name and power of the Lord in earning bowels of love, bow
down in true tenderness of heart, and sincerity of Spirit to this seed of the
Kingdom; if but little in appearance, even as a grain of Mustard Seed, be in
love with it, and love its inward discoveries of the seed of the Serpent, its
workings, and bringings forth; suffer with it, sorrow and mourn with it, give
up not only to its discoveries, but also to it Judgment, that both the nature
and works of the seed of the serpent may be destroyed, and the heart
sanctified, for the Soul can never come into oneness with the seed Immortal
(nor be born of it) in which all the Promises are Yea, and Amen; but through
the wasting, working under, and dectroying of the nature and work of the seed
of the serpent which have been as a separating or partition wall between the
Soul and Christ Jesus; So, through becoming passive, and subject to the power
of the working of this Immortal seed in the least and lowest appearance, it
will bring evere one that is acquainted therewith, very low and tender in
Spirit, possessing the heart and soul with the fear, dread and awe of the most
high, and truly careful, and inwardly diligent to attend its tender secret
motions, and sweet powerful workings in the Soul. Now tender People that come
here, diligently and constantly cleave with your souls unto it, and you shall
see and feel (as your Faith stands in it,) the working of it as leaven to
leaven you into the divine nature; So be not weary of bearing the Cross, or
continuing here in the deep expression of spirit, but persevere daily in the
love of this immortal seed; so then coming to be born again, and brought forth
by the power of its workings in the Soul, ye shall be tenderly nursed by the
sincere milk of the word, which lives and abides for ever, of which you were
begotten, and so grow up thereby to the day of Espousals in the
Marriage-chamber of divine love and life, where the Soul is safe in the
enjoyment of the unutterable Joy of the Lord God, and the lamb for ever.

God Almighty arise in in his great Power and bright Glory every where for the
bringing forth the Birth of the morning of his sweet day, and laying waste
every false Birth, and the works of it, to the magnifying and renowning his
Blessed Name for ever, which is the breathing and travail of Your Tribulated
Brother,

CHAPTER MARSHALL.
POSTSCRIPT.
Dear Friends;
Every where, feel that Divine Hand, and Mighty Arm and your Subjection
thereunto, that gathers out of the rollings and tossings of the Nations and
People into the goodly Tents of Jacob, and sweet safe Habitation of Israel,
where you may dwell alone out of the Defilements of the Nations, wbere the
hidingplace will be known, until the word of the Lord be fulfilled, and his
Indignation pass over to accomplish his own determination in the Earth, which
he will hasten for his Elects sake, and for the Honor of his Great and Mighty
Name, who is over all Heaven and Earth, God Almighty, Blessed for ever. Amen.

Tetherton in the County of Wilts, the 9th. of the 6th. Month, 1680. Let this
be carefully Read in the Meetings and Families of the Lords People in the
Feeling Sense of Gods Presence and Tendering Powers.




