AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS Coming forth in the Beginning of a TESTIMONY: And of the
Snares of the Enemy therein.
Dearly beloved Friends,
WHO in your Meetings and Assemblies sometimes feel the Beginning of a
Testimony for the Lord, spring and move in your Hearts; keep your Watch in the
Light, that so none stay behind, neither run before, but let all who open their
Mouths in the Assemblies of the Lord's People, do it as the Oracles of God, in
the Arising of the eternal pure Power; for nothing can beget to God, but what
comes from the immortal Word of Life, that lives and abides for ever; and
nothing can refresh, strengthen or comfort that which is begotten by the
immortal Word of Life, but what springs from the same. And therefore, dear
Friends, whom this concerns, wait diligently, not only to know and savor every
Motion, but also to know the appointed Time and Season when the same Motion
should be brought forth; so shall what is ministered, if it be but few Words,
reach to the Witness, and do its Service. For this I have learned, That though
there may be a true Motion of the Power of the Lord, and a true Operation
thereof, yet where there is not a true waiting for the perfecting of what is to
be brought forth, but instead thereof, it coming forth before the Time, that
which is brought forth seems an untimely Birth; which is hurt as to the Vessel
through which it comes, and the Hearers thereof are burdened, and the Life
which first moved comes to be oppressed; and here is the Ground of that
untimely Birth that never saw the Sun, that has, does, or shall come forth:
And as long as any are found walking in this By-path, although they may find
the true Power of God moving in them, yet they never come to be skilful, nor to
divide the Word of God aright; and such do not truly grow, but sometimes bring
forth a Mixture, sowing the Field with two Sorts of Grain, and wearing a Linen
and Woollen Garment.

So, Friends, this lies upon my Spirit to all who feel the Beginning of a
Testimony spring in your Hearts; Wait diligently in that Light, low, in the
pure Stilness and Passiveness of your Spirits; and as you here wait, you will
come to feel the Counsel of the Lord sealed unto your Understandings, and see
the Time when to speak, and when to be silent; and here will be a right and
true Increase of your Testimonies: And when that which is thus sealed to the
Understanding is offered, retire inward, and sink down into the pure Stilness,
and keep in the Valley; and let all know, that no Ministration, save that which
comes from Life itself, from the fresh Arisings of the pure Power of the Lord,
avails any Thing; and all Ministrings out of this will come to an End, and
fade, and vanish in the approaching Day of Trial.

And, dear Friends, as the Mind and Will of the Lord is made manifest, yield
sincere Obedience thereunto, if the Requirings be but a few Words; for I have
seen it a dangerous Thing to resist and rebel against the Motions of God's
Power, and have known many Hours of Sorrow for so rebelling. And in the Day of
a beginning of a Testimony for the Lord, even in the upright Heart, great will
be the Opposition of the Enemy every Way, where he cannot lead out before, for
to bring forth an untimely Birth; there he will endeavor to shut up the Heart
in Disobedience, or Rebellion, or raise up so many Fears, Doubts and
Amazements, if possible to bewilder the Soul: And here I had perished, if it
had not been for the dear Love and tender Mercy of the Lord. And so, dear
Friends, for whose Sake I am moved thus to write, when a Motion is felt, and
Openings are in the Heart, and the Power of the Lord is prevailing, then sink
down in that in which no vain Thought can be hid, and stand single and passive;
and the more still, humble and passive thou art, who art thus exercised, the
Motion of Life will the more live and show itself, and the Power will arise and
clear thy Understanding; and then, in the Power which warmeth thy Heart, and
moves on thy Spirit, enter into thy Service; and when that is done, add not,
but sit in the still Habitation, and in that Humility and Passiveness thou wast
in before, and then the Reward of Obedience thou will feel, and grow in
Experience and Knowledge, and be more and more furnished to every good Word and
Work.

And in this even Path, in which all will feel a being strengthened with Might
in the inward Man, and furnished to serve the Lord, God Almighty preserve all
that are thus exercised.

And, Friends, when any through want of Experience err, in running before the
Power, be very tender; and although there may be a Savor and Judgment in
yourselves, and you may be burdened, yet beware how you speak to ease
yourselves, but wait on the Lord therein, to be guided by his Counsel; for some
having such a Sense, as aforesaid, and not having a Discerning wherein the
Miscarriage lay, have run forth in Judgment, and so have sometimes hurt, and
even destroyed, or at least have become a Stumbling Block to such an exercised
Friend, and have also much hurt themselves; so that they not having a true
Discerning, between the first moving Cause, which is the Power, and that which
led forth before the Power, have judged both, and so have brought a Hurt over
their own Souls, through judging the Power of the Lord; and this sometimes may
extend to hurt others: Out of which Snare God Almighty preserve all, that so
one may be a Strength to another, taking one another by the Hand, saying one to
another, Let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of
Jacob, who will teach us more and more of his Ways; and here, in all God's holy
Mountain, is neither hurting nor destroying.

Given forth in the Moving of God's eternal Spirit, through your dear Brother,
CHARLES MARSHALL.


