CERTAIN INFORMATION FROM DEVON AND DORSET: CONCERNING THE COMMISSION OF ARRAY.

August, 27. printed for H. Blunden. 1642..

LOving Brother, I desire to relate unto you something from hence. The last
week Master Ashford came to Town with Master Culme the Sheriff, and by all
probability to read the Commission of Array, for they brought it with them,
and produced it, and made Warrants to send abroad, for the stopping of our
Mustering this week, and sent for our Constable to publish them, and they had
some clause of the Array in them, very strange ones they were, as ever were
known* But our Constable, Walter Challis, would not read them: yet after many
jeares, and proud and peremptory words of theirs, especially from Master
Ashford, he took one of them, and by advise, sealed it up, and sent it to
Lieutenant Bamfield. We expected an hot day, for here was present also Master
Ickland of Culme-John, of the same party, and Master Willoughby of Pey-Hemby,
but Master Willoughby would not set his hand to the Warrants by no means, but
went away before them. And Master Saint-Hill sent hither his Son in Law,
Master Hankcock, a young man that lives in house with him, we suppose to carry
back news of what was done, for he did the like at Exon Assizes the week
before, he sent this Gentleman out to meet the Lord of Bathe when he came to
Exon with his Commission. Besides, we the more suspect Master Saint-Hill, for
that he would have had in all the Arms of his Parish into his own custody,
being their Captain: And has in his house at this present, three Ladies come
to his house the last week, with some two or four Cart loades of Provision,
some say Munition too, besides much Cattle, they came out by Sherborne, and we
suppose Master Coventry is at this house, for he sent privately to Master
Sanders to be there, but he would not entertain him because of his Children,
and we suppose him therefore either at Bradmuch, or at Master Chanons. We
fearfully expected the Lord of Bathe here, with the Cavaliers, to second this
project of Master Ashfords, and the Sheriff: wherefore we had extraordinary
Warding, and our Towns men showed a great deal of undaunted courage, and
opposed them very much, both in word and deed: and Master Prowse showed
excellent valor and wisdom herein, and is made Captain, and incites the
whole Parish mightily, and takes care for the fencing of the Town with Walls,
and Chains, and Ordnance: Thomas Sumpter also is a very great instrument of
good. Hunnington men, and Arotry are exercised to day, and so are to pass away
for Sherborne* Taunton men are gone already, and our men are to be mustered on
Thursday next, Baronet Prideaux is our Colonel, we are likely to have many
Volunteeres out of this Parish. We are very sorrowful Marquess Hartford is so
great an enemy to us, my Brother can inform you of that at Sherborne better
then my self, and of Sommerset I believe you have heard, and I fear we may
have too much to inform you of here, for this Town is envyed very much, both
by Master Ashford now, the Sheriff, and the confederate Papists thereabout
them, we believe, but especially by a strangers lodging here at Henry Skinners
this quarter of this year for shelter, he answered the Justices, that he is a
Darby Shire man, and Thornecombe he named himself* but (now I think on it)
you know him* by all probabilities he should be a Jesuit, a Rebel of Ireland,
or a discontented Cavaliere, for he has showed himself so, and the whole
Town and Parish do think so of him now* for the best affected at length
questioning him, he began to be very ^ffe, and told some at his going away,
(which was at the beginning of the rising in the North) that he would remember
them, when they did think he was dead and gone, and his own brother was in the
head of the Rebels there, and indeed we doubt him to be chief of the Troops
hereabouts. Hemb-fort has been watched day and night, fearing they should take
that place, the whole Country by turn have done it: And Sir Tho: Drew is very
much against this Array, grounding on that wise man's speech in Parliament
against it, and says it is altogether illegal, and will die upon it, and when
occasion serves, we believe he will show it, as about the Hill he has declared
his mind already, and he has much Armor in his house, enough for 30. men at
least.

Master Saint-Hill says these Ladies are come for shelter, because of the
troubles at Sherborne, but we doubt him, because of the Arms which the Parish
boldly oppugn him in, and resolved to set a Watch about his house when these
came.

Your very loving Brother, T. M.
Collomptonii, Aug. 22. 1642.
Dorset, August 22. 1642.
THE Marquess would feign remove to the King, but fears his intercepting,
therefore offers the Country to remove if they will afford him a Guard for his
safe convoy, but it will not be granted by the Counties; they have been much
pressed unto it by the Justices and Gentry, for the most part of our Gentry are
for the King: Wherefore the Marquess has given out his Warrants this day to
the Justices to bring in the Train bands to him, or to have them in readiness
to keep the peace, he standing upon his Guard in the Castle, where he makes
great provision, being in fear that he may be soon set upon by the Earl of
Bedford, and he has but two pieces of Ordnance in the Castle, and about 400.
very good Horse, and not above 100. Foot as yet come to him: I wish the
Marquess go not from thence, for that there is very great and hasty provision
made and intended against him. We have 6. pieces of Ordnance in our Town,
besides 2. Mortar pieces, and three small brass pieces, and to morrow is
expected 2. great pieces more from Lyme, many Horse sent in hither, and a
thousand men expected from Devonshire; and its thought that the Earl of
Bedford will shortly be at Sherborne with near 20000. the Marquess is said to
expect the King very speedily for his assistance. Lime, Waine, and Poole do
fortify themselves against the Cavalieres.

Your very loving Brother. H. L.

FINIS.

