The Women's Advocate: Or, FIFTEEN Real COMFORTS OF Matrimony. BEING In requital
of the late Fifteen SHAM-COMFORTS. WITH Satirical Reflections on Whoring, And
the Debauchery of this Age.

Written by a Person of QUALITY of the FEMALE SEX.

The Second Edition.

LONDON; Printed for Benjamin Alsop, at the Angel and Bible; and Thomas
Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultry. 1683.

TO THE Injured LADIES.
NO, upon my word, Ladies; -- 'twas neither Favor nor Affection, nor Flattery,
nor Fear, but something, I know not what. -- You may if you please call it
Conscience, and something of Gratitude for favors formerly received amongst
you, as being one of the same Sex. And these two things would not let me be at
quiet, hearing ye so odly abused and scandalized, and daily reproached, by
those that were ten times worse than your selves, that is to say, Men. For
these Men have got a trick to lay all the weight and burden of their fears,
jealousies, discontents, disquiets, their running in Debt, their Breaking, all
upon the women's backs; and Matrimony too must be arraigned for their sakes. But
when we came to bring both to the Bar of Reason, and weighed the Miscarriages
of both, the one against the other, the Men's Scale was so heavy, you could
hardly lift it: The Women's so light, that you could hardly feel it. And
therefore for these Manichaeans to bespatter Matrimony for the Women's sake, is
such a folly of Men, that the Women too severely labor under it. Now then I
would have the Men be so ingenuous, for reparation of injuries so long done the
Female Sex, as to resign the Government of the World for a while to the Women;
considering that we are not without examples of Heroesses, that have governed
Empires and Kingdoms with that Fame and Renown, which has made 'em live to this
present Age. For example, there was Semiramis that did wonders, and not only
preserved, but enlarged her Husbands Dominions. Zenobia Queen of Assyria,
famous in her generation. Thomyris, that not only defeated, but cut off Cyrus's
Head. To these we may add the Queen of Sheba, Penthesilea, Amalasuntha, Queen
of the Ostrogoths. And of latter times, the great Mogul had a Mistress, who
having wrought her self into the affections of the Emperor; besought him to
let her have her will so far, that he would lay aside his own Imperial Dignity
for four and twenty hours, and suffer her to exercise his own absolute Dominion
for that time. To which the Emperor condescending, she made such good use of
her short season, that the story says, she did more good in that four and
twenty hours, than the Emperor had done in all his Reign before. So that it is
plain, that Women can do strange things if they were let alone. And truly one
would think the Men could never have a better opportunity to put their Project
in practice than now, while women resemble 'em so much in their Habits, in
their Swashes, their Justicoars and Wastcoats, their short Hair and Perriwigs,
which in a short time will easily bring 'em to Breeches and Coats, which is the
only thing they want.

However, Ladies, you must be very cautious in bringing this affair about. For
Men are nowadays grown such splitters of hairs, that at downright Swearing
they will be too hard for ye. Nor would I have you take for your Example the
Sicilian Vespers: I would not have you Massacre them all in one night; but you
may if you please bind 'um all one night, and then seize upon their Maces and
their Caps of Maintenance; make sure of the Bankers their Fur Gowns and their
Trapt Horses; but above all, their Shops: which the better to bring about, you
must endeavor to Libel 'em, and put the world out of conceit with 'em; nay, to
make them jealous one of another, and to lay 'em as open as they have laid you.
And that is the work of this Treatise, which you are to con and get
without-book, that you may be able to pay your murmuring, repining,
complaining, ill-natured Husbands, your domineering spendthrifts, and
by-hole-hunters, in their own coyns. And who knows what a benefit this may be
to the world? For certainly a general peace must ensue: all Quarrels about
Religion shall be at an end. Taverns shall go down, and cease to plague us with
their intoxicating Bruages. Gunsmiths and Powder-men may go hang themselves.
And then for Bawdyhouses, there would not be one left in the Nation. And would
not this be a blessed Reformation? Well, Ladies, go on and prosper; and when
you come into your Kingdom, remember

Vostre Bonne Aim, and Tres-humble Servante.

THE First Real Comfort OF Matrimony.
MAtrimony is like a good hedge about a piece of Pasture; it keeps a Man from
treading over my ground. Or if any Swash-buckler will be so eager after his
game, as to break my Quick-set, and ride over my Corn, a pedibus ambulando
presently lays him by the heels for his daring presumption.

Then again, a Woman is like a House; the Law gives a man a Lease of her; and
he that takes a Lease of a House, is bound to keep the Tenement in repair. If
she happen to be with Child, she is like a Ship, and then she never looks so
handsome as when she is completely rigged and trimmed.

He that Courts a young Lady neat and fashionable in her habit, does ill if he
intend not to maintain her afterward in the same Garb. He must be no other
than one of those pitiful muck-worms that go all day with their Collars
unbutton'd, that lowres at the finer and more curious Dress of his Wife, as if
neatness and cleanliness belonged only to Maids, and slattern carelessness to
Wives: whereas neat, and trim, and tite, are the Mark of good-Huswifery; loose
and tawdrie, the sign of a Curtesan.

All the while a man is woing he loves to see every thing in print; every thing
proper and well adjusted about his Mistress; but when they have got 'em once
home, and the Portion is paid, then let the straws and the feathers stick upon
their Gowns, it is not a pin matter.

Nothing more delights the eye than Beauty; but let a handsome draggle-tail
come in sight, and they cry, Fair and sluttish. What a pleasant comfort a man
has of a wife that wallows about the house in her slip-shooes, and her Linen
smelling like sour Milk! Therefore it is a woman's love to her Husband, that she
is so earnest with him for fine Clothes, that she may be the more grateful
acceptable to his sight: And what can be a greater comfort of Wedlock, than the
Love of a Wife? A thing that they who want would purchase at any rate. Diamonds
never show their Value, but when they are apparelled in Gold, and then they are
admired by all. Proper attire, and becoming dress, are the life of Beauty.

And more than this, every one knows, it is not every man's luck to have a
handsome, beautiful Wife; some are pretty well, some are but so so, and some by
my truly so homely, that as for their beauty you can hardly give 'em a good
word. However, Art helps Nature; and every one would by art correct the defects
of Nature. Nay, it is their prudence to be earnest with their Husbands for
those Assistances, which Art requires to polish Nature, that they may keep
themselves from the inconveniences of Contempt. For it is a hard matter for a
woman to recover those unkindnesses which proceed from an eye that once begins
to nauseate. Hence it follows, that one of the chief comforts of Marriage must
be a wife well dressed, for by that means she reconciles the eye that was perhaps
offended and disgusted beholding her but just before unpeady.

Dress and Carriage strangely bewitch There is a charm in the very noise and
rusling of their Petticoats -- I have known, when a Lady, at what time, which
is not long ago, that women wore flaps to their shoes, when the noise of a
Lady, perhaps not altogether so handsome as Venus, coming out of her Chamber,
and Gracefully beating the stairs as she descended step by step with her
musical slap, slaps, has kindled new fires in the Husband below, though he had
not been up above an hour before. To which the rusling of the Satin Petticoat,
is like the Base to the Treble, which produces such a charming harmony, that
the Eye is in a manner overperswaded by the Ear, and believes that to be a new
face, which before seemed not so pleasing; and by an officious flattery of the
fancy, still improving the discovery, till it beget new flames and fresh
desires. Which renewing of love being a happiness, and the aim of succeeding
pleasure to both parties, produced by the delightful charm of Garb and Dress,
plainly evinces that the outward Ornaments of a Wife must be a great comfort to
a Married Man. And no man can blame the importunity of a Wife in that respect,
when he finds it so conducing to his satisfaction.

Then steps in that Moral Adage to engage him deeper in his opinions; Fine
feathers make fine birds. And who will not endure the horrid noise of a Parrot,
or the chattering of a Jay, for the sake of their curious feathers? which being
so frequently experienced, certainly one would think a rational man should much
sooner endure a little more than ordinary clamor from a Wife, for that which
in the end brings him the greatest comfort of Matrimony that can be, content of
Mind; and removes all those nusances, which otherwise a satiated eye might
apprehend.

Juno, the chiefest of all the Goddesses, is said to have chosen the Peacock
for her peculiar Bird; and why? because of all other birds, that bird is the
most sumptuously clad. And she is said of all the Goddesses to be most gorgeous
her self in her Apparel, as one that picked and culled the colors of her Knots
and Ribbons, in imitation of Natures variety bestowed upon that Bird. For which
reason the Poets generally apparel her in a Mantle embroidered with the gaudy
eyes of Peacocks tails. And all this to draw the wandering affections of Jove
home to her self. Neither did Jupiter ever contradict her, though she were
shrewish enough too. But that was not all, he let her have her humor, as
finding it renewed his affection to her, after all the change of other Women.

Every new Gown causes a new wedding day; for Women furnish themselves with new
smiles and new caresses against that time. Pleasure it self grows irksome, when
it continues still the same. The ebbings and flowings of Affection, enhance the
price of it. Should men be always happy, they would never know they were so.
It Is the same with rain and sunshine, winter and summer. Those Countries are
most pleasant, where the temper of the seasons, and the varieties of hot and
cold, foul and fair, are most kindly intermixed: and we find that foul weather
is many times more desired and more acceptable than a serene sky, as being
much more beneficial.

In like manner, if the Quarrel of a Wife be for the advantage of a Husband, if
she murmur sometimes for the want of those things which may render her self to
her Husband more gay and debonaire in her humor, and her person more graceful
and alluring to his eye, a storm may now and then be born with, that produ^^^ ^

And this, by way of Doctrine and Use, may serve the more justly and severely
to condemn those that run gadding to seek for change abroad, when he has so
much variety at home. For most certainly, as the humor varies, the pleasure
must be different. Female Insinuation having always had a knack to proportion
the activity of their affection according to the nature of the gift which they
receive; and it is as common a thing to caper and dance out of content and
satisfaction, as to leap for joy.

But what shall we say of those that regret the opening of their Purse-strings
to legal Matrimony, yet never grudge the bottom of their Bags to an imperious
and lavish Mistress? As if it were not better to suffer a little under the
severity, though somewhat more than ordinary expensive, of a lawful Wife, than
to suffer the Martyrdom of an Estate, and to he hectored out of their Gold by a
prodigal Strumpet? unjust to their Wives, and sottishly bewitched, to deny that
to a lawful Wife, which they part withal with so much profuseness to the frowns
of their Illegitimate Miss. And fools to themselves, to purchase forbidden Lust
at the dire expense of Reputation and over-late Repentance. Yet such there are,
that fret and fume, cry they cannot live a quiet hour at home, and bewail the
sadness of their Condition, for a little Petticoat-importunity of their Wives,
but patiently brook the reproaches of a tawdry Queen; and when she expostulates
the case, and gives him a Bill of her profuse demands, and cries, Dam her, sink
her, does he think she will live with such a dog-rogue-Pimp as he, for ten pound a
week; creeps and cringes, and makes loud Protestations and Vows of advancing
her Fortune, to appease her Counterfeit wrath. With which when she is a little
mollified, though not vouchfaf'd the favor which he came for, away he trudges
to this Shop and the other Shop, and in a short time sends her in a whole Caravan
of Silks and toys to consummate the atonement. And do you think that person was
not most severely and unmercifully u'sd by a Daughter of Joy, that when he had
bargained with her for a nights dalliance for twenty pound, coming to tell the
money, and finding thirteen-pence-halfpenny wanting (for it was Maltsters Cash)
forced him after he was half unstript, to put on his Clothes again, and go half
a mile to borrow half a crown, to make up the sum, and when he had given it her
for change, kept that too? Was not this an Inhumane piece of Tyranny? and yet
the poor Inamorato took it as patient as a lamb, when perhaps he would have
lamented the parting with forty shillings to the importunity of his wife, and
thought himself undone to purchase a new Nuptial night from her at the expense
of a single pair of Stays. Such men infinitely degrade themselves, as having
lost the more noble Appellation of Whoremasters, and exchanged it for the
ignomious title of Whore-sons Slaves. Some are such haughty Roxelana's, that
upon the least disgust at a Tavern, they will throw the Quartpot, Wine and all,
at the submissive Mammamuchi's pate; nay, and call him Son of a Whore to boot,
as if they had both tumbled in one belly: Yet he goes home and lies with her
all that night, and takes no more notice of his washed Cravat, than only, Why
were thou so nangry, Molly?

Another sort there are, that rather than see their Wives go garbate and trim,
can endure to live in the midst of stench and sluttery. However, they are
contented, because the woman does not worry him, as he calls it, for fine
Clothes. Perhaps because she was never so well bred as to know how to wear 'em:
'twere ten thousand times better she did. For now she lives only to convince
the world, by its contrary, how great the comfort is which Wedlock receives
from the love of Gallantry, and cleanly spruceness. However, something she
would have, but knows not what; it is not her stirring about her house and
moyling drudgerie, that keeps her tattered and Cinder-Woman like. She keeps
close in her stie, pouts and lowres, and sends this body and the other body to
the Devil, and will be neither sick nor well. Coming into her Chamber, the
first glance of your eye gives you a prospect of her Close-stool open, and her
Chamberpot full-charged; as if she had that high Opinion of her self, that she
were some Civet-Cat; or that all which came from her were nothing but Myrrh and
Essence of Orange Flowers. Draw the Curtains, and you behold her lying in a
heap, like a Sea-coall-dunghill, but somewhat blacker; and it is a hard question
to resolve, whether she durtied the sheets, or the sheets durtied her, for they
are all alike, smock, headgeer and all, of the same complexion with a
Staffordshire Forgers leather Apron. She looks so like a Witch, that you would
almost think her the Walnut-colour'd Gypsy that murmured out the Oracles of
Delphos. No body can dress her but Hercules because she is first to be
cleans'd; and no body can cleanse her, but he that cleans'd the Augean Stable.
Therefore she converses with no body, nor any body with her: Only she has this
good quality, that she is constant to her Husband, because no body else dares
come near her.

You'il say I am run into the Extremes; it is requisite women should go decent
and neat, but not above their Husbands Estates. Who shall be judge of that? the
proof of the pudding. The man's undone; yet no body can say, by his Wife. Or if
a man have a mind to be undone for his Wife, what is that to any body? his
Marriage is never a whit the more discomfort to him, if he think it not so. And
for the woman, she has no reason to complain; she cannot eat her Cake, and have
her Cake.

However all this while, where is the discomfort of Marriage? Marriage cannot
be said to be the occasion of this man's undoing or misfortune. Wedlock is too
sacred an Institution, to be scandalously reproached. But some men have got a
trick to conceal the infirmities of their Estates you shall never know what
they are worth, till they beak or die. They will never let their wives
understand the intrinsic Value of their Coffers, but boast continually of
their gettings, and their incomes, how much they got such a morning, how much
such a day. And women proportion their demands according to the measures of
what they hear or see; believing what their Husbands swear and lie to is all
Gospel. So that the men have no reason to be angry, if their Credulous wives,
desirous to credit their Husbands, and to keep up their Port and Quality, and
therefore Covetous of a little gay apparel, by which the world generally makes
its conjecture, are so gentile and generous as to place and fix their own
delight in their Husbands Reputation and advantage; and may thank themselves,
if the woman surpass the limits of their Abilities. For it is natural in all
women of life and spirit, and refined Education, to love that which sets them
forth to the best advantage, and renders them most amiable.

Neither must we expect that all women should be she-Philosophers, or so
devoutly given, to throw off the love of pomp and vanity incident to youth,
upon their being married; as if they were entering into a Nunery, when they
first entered their Husbands doors. Friends and Relations are not to be banished
from the Habitations of Married men; and it is better the wife should appear
rather over garbated, than too mean; rather laced, than pacht and greasy. And
truly, as the times go, it is but reason that men should bestow a little more
cost than ordinary, or than perhaps formerly they did, that we may be able to
know the Mistress from the maid, and not run into the mistake of saluting the
servant for the woman of the House.

It Is said, that Clothes are a certain Indication of the Disposition of the
person that wears them. A Woer in the addresses which he makes to his Mistress
may soon give a shrewd conjecture at her temper by her Habit. Pride,
Prodigality, Sluttery, illnature, all discover themselves in her dress and
carriage; especially when she is in her full trim. Pride shows it self in
richness of Laces, prodigality in the vanity of Ribbons, and not knowing the
price of what she wears when she is ask't. Sluttery appears in tawdry, and ill
nature in disorder and carelessness. So that if a man make an ill choice, it is
his own fault.

Oh but the Charms of her face or her Portion are such, that he dies for the
sake of her black brows, or her fifteen hundred pounds, if he have her not.
Then I hope if he have her, he has the main comfort of Matrimony he expected,
not valuing all other incovenience, compared to the possession of what he
enjoys. Which being so, it is not just in him to come with his after-reckonings:
nor is it any real cause of complaint or disquiet, that she duns him for the
same Port and Garb, nay, though it be more, which she could have maintained
without him. For women by Marriage expect to meliorate their condition, and not
to loare the Sails of their Maiden-pomp. So that now enjoying his desired
comforts, he ought to let the Woman have her comforts also, which she had so
fairly paid for, by the surrender of her person and her Portion, If she have
nothing, certainly he Married purely out of love and affection, believing there
was no great felicity or comfort in this world, beyond the possession of her
person; and then I fear me, that person is forsworn every day, that does not
give her more than she demands.

There is a story in Machiavel, that a little before his time, the Devil came
upon earth to choose him a wife, and that at length he found one out to his
mind, and married her; but that among all the plagues with which she tormented
him, there was none more put him to his plunges (being at a certain allowance
from the grand master of Hell) than her Expenses. What Is this to the purpose?
this is but one single instance, and one Swallow does not make a summer. It may
be the Devil met with his match. But we are not to bring a general accusation
against Marriage, for the follies of a few.

Commend old stern Cato to the Female Sex. He was their friend in a corner, and
said, that he that gave them offense was to be prosecuted with as much
vehemence, as he that violated the Images of the Goddesses. We grant that some
women may be extravagant and lavish; but set the Hares foot to the Goose
giblets; compare the good that they do, with their little extravagancies, and
see which surmount. We do not presently wring off a hens neck for breaking a
Venice-glass, because we expect she should lay us more eggs, and hatch us more
Chickens of twice the value.

Neither does it follow, because a woman is a little expensive in Clothes, that
she may not be chaste, virtuous, and in other things sufficiently frugal too:
there is a frugality in expense, and that frugal expense it is, that scatters
the Coin of a Nation, which hoarded up, does no body no good.

Wives are not imposed upon men, but chosen; and he is a fool, and betrays his
own folly too, in lamenting an act of his own, of which he can never repent but
in vain.

But she louts and pouts, she mumbles and grumbles all day, and at night turns
tail abed, and will not let him -- unless -- and all the reason in the world. For
the wealth of a Family ought to be common to both. And therefore a wife has
just cause to be offended, and to show her disgust, if the Husband deny her
that, which she has as much right to bestow on her self, as he has to give her.
He denies her her due, and she denies him his. So that in this case, it is not
the effect of Matrimony, but his own peevish injustice that occasions his
disquiet. For, take away the cause, the effect ceases.

But she demands more than his Estate will produce. He toyls and moyls, and
runs and goes, and labors and sweats, and takes care, yet nothing will content
her. Those things should have been concerted at first. However it is a sign she
had rather have it by fair than by foul means; rather from him than from
another. Otherwise, had she a design to be supplied another way, she would
never trouble him. If it be true which he says, that she does really overcharge
him, has he not the law in his own hands? But this is the mischief on it, all
men desire rich wives; and when they have them, know no bounds of moderation at
first, but spend as if they thought the bag had no bottom. The woman, as she
finds it at first, believes the same Golden age will still continue. So that
when she comes to be stinted and finds the sudden alteration, no wonder she
takes it impatiently, as one that not having seen the account Stated, cannot be
persuaded she has had her share in the dissipation of her Fortune. Better it
were then, that men should seek out wives suitable to their condition, and not
run prolling after great Fortunes, not regarding the fitness of the person for
their society and employment, but the largeness of the Portion, let her be
otherwise Prodigal, or Slut, or what she will. The Boarding-Schools are
ransackt, the Prerogative-Office rumag'd fom one end to the other; and if they
hear of a prey, all the Arts and Inventions of the Devil, Midwives, Nurses,
Chambermaids, and other subtle instruments of Insinuation, and temptation are
set at work to ensnare the poor unthinking Gentlemoman. And what comes on it? if
the intelligence were real, Lawsuits, Prosecutions and Divorces. If not, quiet
possession, the woman's friends overjoyed they are rid of her, and when all
comes to all, both cheated. Then after the heat is a little over, the main
business begins to be scanned; inquiry is made, tip-toe expectations on both
sides. But when the lame discovery comes limping out, then how is the darling
of his Soul cursed and bann'd, and the Match-maker damned, and the deaf Devil
invoked to take 'em both! But there is no remedy; the Thumb is ring'd, that
must not long enjoy that golden Hoop; and so the deluded Couple consume away in
unpaid-for Lodgings, and the poor Chandlers debt.

Sometimes two grave Beard-stroakers meet with their Legem-pone Law, and at
length conclude a Match by way of bargain and sale; and so the young Couple are
at last married by Indenture.

But if any inconveniences arise from these corruptions of Matrimony, they are
not to be looked upon as the discomforts of lawful Wedlock, but as the
puulshments of rash and greedy riot, or the long experienced inconveniences of
Smithfield barter.

But lawful Matrimony, which is the effect of choice and mature consideration
of the mutual temper and affection of both parties, that is the true Matrimony,
that seldom misses the end it aims at; where differences between Husband and
Wife, like discords in Music, render the harmony of their society more sweet
and delectable; and where those little quarrels about new Gowns and Petticoats
do but whet the Appetite, or else awak'n the slumbring kindness of the Husband.

As for stealing of Fortunes and tolling of wives in the Market; they are
Matches generally of Monsieur Satan's making; and therefore if they be
accompanied with ruin and misfortune, it is no great wonder. For Virtue,
Honor, Chastity, Diligence, and good Education, are the chief Dowry to be
looked after in a wife. And for such, let them wear Tissue, if they desire it;
and they will never desire it, if it may not be afforded them.

THE Second Real Comfort OF Matrimony.
BUt the Charge does not end it seems in this; there are other Expenses of
another nature; Stratagems and Collusions of Gossips one among another, that
make the poor man's nightcap sit uneasy. And this Expense is of a long
continuance, from the first Quickening, to the last ceremony of Churching. But
here, give me leave to tell ye, beloved, that if there be any discomfort in
Marriage, it is the woman that feels it, and not the man.

The rolling and tumbling of the little Embryo, twinges her every moment; the
qualms of breeding run through every vein of her body, more particularly
affecting the Stomach, and occasioning that squeamish niceness of Appetite that
requires a more curious and agreeable nourishment and refreshment, as well for
the Infant as the Breeding woman. Nature also busy in the framing of a new
Creature, produces strange operations in Female fancy, which if it be not
satisfied with the enjoyment of those objects which it has fixed upon, is the
occasion many times of great detriment to the Mother by frequent Miscarriage,
and great disfigurement to the Child. And then is time for a woman to try the
affection of her Husband, who must be thought very unkind to venture the life
of his dearest Consort for the want of two or three plump Partridges, or the
corner of a Venison Pastie. It would be a mercy unseasonably shown to his new
shoes, or the soles of his feet, to grutch the trudging, though it were ten
miles a foot, to obtain so slight a satisfaction to a tender wife, suffering
for the sake of his own pleasure. Certainly if there be any content in the
delicacy of Viands, that happiness is enhanc'd; and a man can have no greater
comfort in Matrimony, than to feast and junket with his wife, his best
Companion, and his dearest friend.

It is but an ordinary piece of gratitude to indulge the Palate of a teeming
woman, and to alleviate the throws of Conception and Maturation with the
slender gratification of a few kick-shaws, knowing how great the return of the
fruit which she bears, will be at the end of her time. If nothing less will
serve her than a washbowl of Claret, if she has a mind to confound a whole Sive
of Kentish Cherries, or to deprive a roasting Pig of his Ears, and gnaw them
off upon her knees from the spit, where is the discomfort of Matrimony in all
this? There Is never a man in the world that cares to see his Daughter depriving
her sweetheart of his full kiss, by reason of the piece wanting in her
harelip: Or to see a red spot over-spreading his Sons check, as if Nature had
wrapped him up in a natural Scarlet, for a continual pain in the Gums. And all
this for want of a pitiful forty shillings-worth of green pease in April. Men
never consider the Crowns and Angels they throw away in their pot-revelling,
and Healthing it at the Tavern; their Collations at the Rummer, with Salmon and
old Hock, their Hashes and Potages at the Bear in Birchinlane; while they
grudge the poor Teeming woman at home, under the affliction of their Nocturnal
satisfaction, the bare solace of a single Cony, and a penny whiteloaf.

Oh! -- but then there must be a new Alkove, with a deep Silk Fringe; there
must be a Scarlet Satin Mantle for the newborn Babe, with a broad gold and
silver bone-lace; there must bea Court-Cupboard covered with Tankards and
Caudlecups of Goldsmiths work; and then the Gossips come in in shoales, and
devour like Ethiopian Locusts. There must be Neats-Tongues, and Westphalia
Hams, piles of Oranges and Lemmons, and Mountains of Woodstreet Plum-cakes.
Neither must the French and Spanish Juyces be wanting to wash these sorrows
from their Female Hearts. The women prate and chat and tattle too, and give ill
Counsel, and bad Instructions. They discover by what means and ways they
obtained it, what an Arbitrary power they have at home. Now where is the
discomfort of Matrimony in all this? here is nothing but mirth and comfort it
self; pure rejoicing for the birth of a Man-child. Would you be willing to be
Landlord to a Comfit-maker, and not have him pay his Rent? Then for Gossips to
meet, nay to meet at (...) lying in, and not to talk, you may a^ well dam up
the Arches of London Bridge as stop their mouths at such a time. 'Ti^ a time of
freedom, when women, like Parliament Men, have a privilege to talk Petty
Treason. And he is an Ignoramus, of (...) Husband, that will not pass an act of
oblivion for the Trespasses of a Christnin^ Banquet.

Women are sociable Creatures as well a^ men; and if they cannot talk Philosophy
they must talk of that which they bette^ understand.

I never heard but of one man, an Italian Painter, who was made believe that h^
was with Child; who was so apprehensive of the trouble and pangs of Delivery
that having but a hundred pound in all the world, he gave it all a Physician
for a distilled water of fat Capons, and other Ingredients, to cure him of his
burden. The fellow that had his Brother growing out o^ his side, found it an
unmerciful trouble t^ lug him about.

Men must acknowledge that women have done them a most extraordinar^ kindness,
to ease them of that ponderou^ weight of Infant-carriage. And therefore since
they have all the trouble, it is fit they should have some retaliation and
alleviation of their pains. And therefore they that make these Expenses the
discomforts of Matrimony, are only such as desire an end of the world for want
of Procreation. For they are such necessary and incumbent appurtenances to the
act of Generation, that you may as well separate the Sea from a mouth of a
River, as part expense from the Chamber of Delivery. For man is Lord of the
world, and of all the Creatures, and therefore it is fit that as much of the
Creature as may be, should attend him at his first entry. These are therefore
laudable Expenses; and there can be no discomfort in doing that which is
laudable and honorable.

These are nothing to the discomfort of the secret sinner. The first thing that
salutes him in a morning, going to drink his mornings draught, (and he had need
of it, Heaven knows, to wash sorrow from his heart) is an old woman, that drops
him a curtsey, and gives him a little piece of Foul Paper, ill folded up, and
sealed with the end of a Thumb. Sir, quoth she, it comes -- Well, well, I know,
it is sufficient. -- Well, but Sir, quoth she, -- Well -- wel^ -- no more, quoth
he. -- But Sir, -- and then she gives him the doleful whisper, -- The
Gentowleman is in great distress for want of Money; she expects every hour, and
the people threaten to turn her out of her Lodging. -- Oh the comforts of
whoring then, how they slide to his benumbed heart, and carry a chilness through
his blood, like the juice of Henbane! Ale will not then go down; a Tossed and
Sack must be the Cordial, which taken liberally at first, causes him to indulge
himself into forgetfulness of the business for that day. But the next morning,
fresh Terrors assail his thoughts. Sometimes he thinks he sees a little bundle
of unfortune Innocence lying at his door; sometimes he believes he sees the
same wither'd-fac'd Messenger that brought him the first Letter discoursing
with his wife; loss of Reputation amuses him. The very thoughts of a
Churchwarden, and finding Sucurity, drives him almost to despair. Well,
something must be done. Away he takes a disconsolate march about the streets,
and at length the sign of the Cradle in a by-hole revives his drooping Soul. In
he goes, and fortunately finding the She-professor of Iniquities Mystery, to
her unfolds his deplorable misfortune. The demands run high, besides Lodging
and Candles, a dry and a wet Nurse, and all ready money, no Faith. And that
pinches hard, to pay so high for illegitimate Touch and go. Summa totalis 200
l. and a weekly Contribution of four Shillings, besides Barrows, Clouts, Coats,
diminutive Shoes, Sugar and Candles. All things concluded, in pops the light
Housewife in the dark out of her close Sedan, and goes for the wife of a bad
Husband gone beyond Sea; only the compassion of her friend is such, that his
charity will not let her want.

All this while there is no contract or bargain that will bind these
Purse-sucking Bauds; for the threatening to lay the Child at the door, is such a
terrible thunderclap to his ears, and the Jades do so haunt him, that he may
be truly said to live a continual slave to their necessities: which must of
force be a great consolation to his mind over the left Shoulder.

Whereas the Expenses belonging to the lawful Marriage Bed, bring no such
vexations to the Mind; as being only the occasion of mirth and jollity among
the Neighborhood, and gain the reputation of generosity and kindness to the
Husband.

And thus you find the Country Farmers feast their Harvest-folks and
Sheep-shearers after their work is over. The endurance of pain and travel that
brings advantage, ought to be recompensed to the full. And it is not the kind
and becoming Treatment of a wife, to retaliate her yearly presents of lawful
Issue, that can disquiet a loving Husband, but the paying for a Bastard, and
the subjection he lives in to the concealers of his Infamy, that cause a
fermentation in his thoughts, and make his very Life uneasy to him.

I had almost forgot one thing more; there is the Spiritual Court too, if he
have not a great care to prevent it, will have a considerable fleece from his
back to boot. And is it not a great comfort to a man, do you think, to stand in
the face of his whole Parish, and more Spectators than came to hear the Parson,
lapt up in a white sheet all but his face, as Spirits walk by midnight? and all
for sporting between unlawful sheets, which though two to one, will never be
able to wipe off the disgrace of the single shroud. So great a blemish may a
man receive from white as well as from charcoal black, while the white sheet
discovers what the white sheets were made to conceal. My dear friends consider
these-things.

THE Third Real Comfort OF Matrimony.
WEll -- and what then? -- why when a man has got a woman within the Pale of
Matrimony, she is then like a Mess of Porridge. And there is no man has got his
dish of broth well crumm'd and seasoned for his own Palate, but will be very
angry if another come with his long spoon to eat it up from him. The most surly
maintainer of Liberty and Property; in the case of Matrimony, will not allow
those two words to associate together; for assuming all the property to
himself, he will not admit of any liberty to the woman.

If a Gentleman with a Sword by his side and flaring Cravat with Fringed
Gloves, be observed to visit his wife, presently it is looked upon as an ill
sign: if he Coach her abroad, it is ten times worse, for that by the custom of
the City, the women are never to show their best clothes but only on Sundays,
or upon solemn invitations to Burials and Christnings. The Vicinity being thus
in an uproar, some cunning Mantissimus busie-body or other undertakes, out of
Good will, as he call it, to come and give his Neighbor prudent advice, as
being a young man that had not seen the world; and so most gravely and right
reverendly, over the expense of eight brass farthings, at a penny club,
forewarns and admonishes him of the mischiefs that hang over his head.

This friendly advice puts a hundred maggots into the Husbands head, when
Heaven knows, all was well before. So that if the poor man be troubled
afterward with a tingling in his ears, or worms in his pate, he may thank that
impertinent intelligence of his officious neighbor, and not his wife for it.
For it argues a great folly in a man, not to bid such an impertinent admonitor
go about his own business; rather choosing to live free from tittle-tattle, and
to stand fair in the opinion of the flipperous Town-Flebergebits; than to keep
himself quiet at home, by letting his wife go abroad now and then with a friend.

It Is observed, that women seldom think ill, till their Husbands dream it
first. By trusting a woman, you lay an obligation upon her; by distrusting her,
you put her upon those little revenges which perhaps she never thought of
before. Thus it wa^ the great argument which the Spanish L^^^ used to her self,
that she had not done m^^^ amiss to admit her Page into her Bed, because she
knew that her Husband was a bed with an Innkeepers Daughter of the Town, at
the same time. So that he wh^ keeps his wife under a causeless restraint, lays
the trains himself that blow up his content, and then lays the fault upon
Matrimony.

He that carries her to a Feast, must be her gallant; that is indubitable. But
he that carries her to a Play or a Ball, commits abomination, and is presently
to be excommunicated from the House. So ready are the Mote-spiers in other
peoples eyes, to squander away the content and reputation of their Neighbors;
and yet would be the first that would complain, were they so hampered
themselves.

Therefore say the Doctors in Love-Affairs, that a woman which is kept as it
were under lock and key, and made to renounce all her former acquaintance after
Marriage, is half gained: and your true gamesters must generally prey where
control and tyranny are most sour and severe.

But these Kinsmen, you will say, are no Kinsmen, but men in the shape of Kinsmen;
and what ever the pretense be, the design is quite another thing, and the
Kinsman and the wife concert together. Why, look ye for this, it is a general
custom in England, and many other places, when Locks go hard to oil 'em. If the
humor of a morose Husband be so stingie and rustie, that it will not easily
give way, it must be oiled with fair pretense and clever invention. It Is a
happiness to him, that he has not Married the contempt of the world, but that
he has a wife who deservedly merits the respect of others, besides himself.
There is no man that has any thing of generosity, but that to some, and at
sometimes, lends out the most precious part of his wealth, his Horse, his
silver-hilted Sword, and his Guiueys to boot: And is it such a piece of matter
sometimes to lend out the good company and cheerful society of his wife, so
long as she is safely returned again? Should men be bound to confess the cheats
and shams they put upon their wives, when they have been potting and piping,
and Shovel-boarding it till twelve a clock at night, and pretend they have been
dunning this Knight, or the other Lady, they would think it a hard case. It Is
nothing for a man that has been a Caterwawling all day, and comes home with a
weeping Flagelet, to tell her a story of straining his back in taking a ditch
after a Hare; but the mollified excuse of a Kinsman, to go abroad with her,
must be a crime never to be forgiven. For it must be a Kinsman, or else her
Lord and Master will not let her go. As if a Kinsman were such a guard to
woman's honesty; when if we rightly considered it, the Proverb tells us, The
nearer akin, the deeper in. So then it is not the going abroad, nor the going
abroad with a Kinsman, which is the discomfort of Matrimony; but it is his own
fears and suspicions that muddle his brains.

If I lend my gay Sword to a friend, and he happens to wound another in a Duel
with it, yet if he return it bright and clear, my Sword is never the worse.
What the eye sees not, the heart never rues; why should then a man torment
himself, when he cannot perceive the least injury done him; not so much as the
value of a hair taken from him? On the other side, it is the comfort of
Matrimony, that a man is the owner of a wife admired for her Converse and
Education, which signify little, unless communicated to several, and not
singly to one. Men do not marry to bury their wives alive in a house: and it is
an ornament to their Husbands Reputation, when they do not make themselves
contemptible by silly behavior, but respected for their complaisance and
acceptable freeness. And a man had better be over-indulgent to his wife in
point of liberty, than be accounted her Jailer. In short, it is a greater
comfort of Matrimony to have a wife that loves to go abroad, rather than one
that lies lurking at home. For she that keeps her kennel, is a continual spy
over his actions, and has always a whither go ye at her tongues end; whereas
the the other let us the man take his lopes as she takes hers.

But who can keep his Mistress from gadding, though he pay her never so well?
Where Is your Empire and Dominion there Sir? she scorns the domineering Gully;
values not his sour looks, nor comes to ask leave. But has her Chariots at her
wink to trundle her about the Town among her Jacks and her Jills, while she
frolicks away the spoils of his unruly heat. Fatal scaperloytring sometimes,
that frequently brings the lascivious Prodigal more than Circumcised from the
Surgeon, and sends him Noseless to the grave.

THE Fourth Real Comfort OF Matrimony.
BUt now, Matrimony, have at thee with a swinging blow. Thou art the Product of
Children, and the worst of Children, Daughters, that live and grow up, and
expect Portions, and the Devil a cross there is for 'em. However, besides the
Charge of the Boarding-School, there must be fine Clothes to quicken the
Market; and the Mother would fain be a Grandmother, but cannot. And this, they
pretend, breeds ill blood, wrangling, and snarling, and quarrelling, and twits
and taunts, and I know not what disorder in a Family. But they must certainly
be a very. weak sort of women, that make these disturbances, and consequently
very few: nor ought they indeed to be disturbances to any man of reason. For
the comfort of Matrimony is so great in the having of Children, that it
surmounts all other Considerations. And he that has the greatest stock, may be
said to have a vast Estate of his own Flesh and Blood. But the real discomforts
of Marriage then Clamor loudest, and give the bitterest twinges to the heart,
when the man is reproached for his Impotency, or the woman taxed for
imperfection; which puts the woman into such a passion, that she never rests
till she has found where the fault lies. And I hope that woman cannot blame her
Husband for not providing for that which is none of his own. Therefore you see
the Form of the English Matrimony starts a notable Question about the
Impediment; to show that the end of Marriage is the Generation of Children, not
of Clothes nor Portions. Yet those are Circumstances not to be altogether
forgotten neither. However, the great Lady that called all her Gallants to her
bedside when she lay a dying, and assigned to every one his mare, is a
convincing Argument that a man may toil and moil, and cark and care, and when
he has done, bestow the sweat of his brows in the wrong Christmas-box. Let a
man be sure not to fail a woman in the main point of the Impediment, and he may
be sure he has some, though not all, nay, it may be his share in all; let 'um
share all alike higgedly piggedly, give 'um good Breeding and good Education.
She that carries that to her Husband, carries a Portion as good as a Thousand
pounds. Her skill in raising a Turkey or a Goose-Pye, is clearly to be valued at
the rate of two hundred pound; her knowledge in Marketting is worth two hundred
pounds more, and her skill in Preserving at the other hundred pound; there is as
good as five hundred pound of the Kings best Coin in England. Portions ruin
more than they make: He that marries a Wife for the Portions sake, buys a
Concubine, does not marry a Wife. Do but let us have good Protestant Nunneries
to lay up the lame and the deformed, and then divide the Money to the Sons, and
you shall quickly see the young brisk Lads pick and cull out the rest, as we do
Cherries, till there be none left. If it be the discomfort of Matrimony, that a
man is not able to give his Daughter a Portion, it is a greater discomfort to
him to see his Daughter returned upon his hands, like a Bromigham-groat, after
the consumption of his Benevolence; which if he had never had to part withal,
he had never been under that discomfort. Neither is it safe always to divulge
what a Man intends to give his Daughter; for if that be once given out, then
comes one smooth-chinn'd slipstring or other, and makes a Pye-corner ensurance
of his affection upon her belly.

There are some young Damsels that take too much notice of Men, when they turn
to the wall, and that very carelessly too, to make water; which puts 'um into
such an uncontrollable passion, that for haste they fall in league with the
Groom or the Butler, and run away with 'um.

There are some men that will sit at a Tavern and take off Glass for Glass with
their pin-feather'd Sons, and never rebuke 'um, when they hear 'um cry -- God
-- d -- me, Sir, you don't drink fair, be-G -- Sir, I drank last. Some there
are that make it their sport, and look on without offense, to see the young
Squire kiss and tumble the Vintners Cook-maid before their faces.

Now these are all hopeful, as they call 'um, such as may be easily thought can
shift for themselves without Portions; such as can swim in the world without
the bladders of Dowries and Annuities.

And therefore never let men or women trouble their Brains about Portions; for
if their Sons and their Daughters are truly sensible of their inability, they
can find another way to the wood of themselves. Women are not aware that fine
Clothes, and the assurance of Portion, spoil the Daughters Sunday-Devotion at
Church. And then for the Weekday Morning-prayers, a laced Night-rail and a
long Scarf sets 'um equal with the best. And what occasion have they of gadding
any farther abroad?

Therefore it is no discomfort of Matrimony to be wife-dunn'd for Childrens
Portions; for the recreation and pleasure is as great to see the Ingenuity of
his Children in shifting for themselves, as to stand upon the foyl, and see a
Hare dance and double before the Hounds.

If all this will not stop the Woman's mouth, the man may tell her, That the
Lacedaemonians made a Law that no Man should give any Portion with his Daughter.
It may be she will say, she does not care a f-t for the Lacedaemonians; Then you
may tell her what a good Lady Venus was, who permitted the Cyprian Damsels to
suffer all strangers to make use of their bodies till they had got enough to
marry 'um honestly; and ask her how she likes this Project for her Daughters?
For if a woman will have a Portion for her Daughter where it cannot be had, she
must fetch it out of the fire. When the young bird's flown, the old one never
takes farther care of her. You never knew an old Rook give a Portion to the
young one; only you may find they gave 'um good Learning and Education, and so
leave 'um. Observe but the Temple-Garden. Therefore, O most indulgent Mothers,
cease your Clacks, and let not Matrimony be reproached for your sakes, with a
discomfort, which well considered brings both delight and advantage to your
Husbands.

THE Fifth Real Comfort OF Matrimony,
COme, come, -- we'll soon determine this Controversy; Here Is an old old man
has married a young young woman; and because he cannot give her the least
content, she seeks for aid and assistance elsewhere. As I told you before, it is
a notable question, that in the Form of Marriage, about the Impediment. The
Husband is called to answer for himself, and the standers by are bid and
charged to speak their minds; yet not one will open his mouth, when they know
the old Dottrel to have no more pith in his back than an Elder-gun. And thus
the young Gentlewoman, all fire and high-mettel'd, is deluded and frustrated of
all her Expectations. And this is a wrong not to be repaired by all the Darling
Gold in his Coffers. Her Parents might have as well have married her to an
Eunuch, or the Statue of Priapus.

'Twas a most insufferable injury done to one of the most flourishing Beauties
in one of the adjoining Counties, for a Gentleman to marry her when he was not
only impotent, but defective. I tell ye this, to show ye the Convenience of
Lycurgus's Law about Deputy-Kinsmen. However, such was the modesty of the Lady,
that she never discovered her misfortune, and so died a married Virgin. He
might have gone over ten Counties, and not have met with such a Phoenix.

Say you, the remedy is worse than the disease, it is contrary to Law -- I will
not argue the point of Law -- but I say, here are pregnant excuses that
mollify and extenuate the Fact. Here is a disappointment of Nature it self;
here is the loss of offspring, and the highest violation imaginable of the
Nuptial bed. Now give me leave to tell ye a story; for I think I have one in my
budget fit for the purpose.

There was a very fine Lady that lived in a great City of Italy, who had the
misfortune to be taken a bed in the arms of her Lover. Her Husband like an old
fool grew horn-mad presently, and would needs take the severity of the Law
against her, which was no less than Death. There wanted no proof you may be
sure on the Husbands part; however, the Lady came very clearly off, by her own
discretion. For said she to the Judge, Pray ask my Husband, whether ever I
denied him the satisfaction of my body whenever he required it? The Husband
confessed what she said to be very true. Well then, my Lord, replied the Lady,
what should I have done with the overplus that remained in my own power?
Should I have cast it away, like the Elders Maid? Was it not better for me to
pleasure a worthy Gentleman that was ready to dye for love of me, than a
surfeited Husband, that had ten times more than he knew what to do withal?
Where lies now the discomfort of an old man's marrying a young Lady all fire and
tow? He lies at rack and manger, and has his full swinge of all the pleasure
and comfort that he is in any possibility capable of. It Is the poor Lady that
suffers a continual famine, that lies yawning and stretching for more; but all
in vain: the springs of life and vigor are all dried up. Limberness and
Frigitidy are the only fuel that feed her youthful flames. Her amourous fires
kindled by the Embers of his drooping years, grow violent, and prey upon her
lusty blood. And is it not time to call out for help, when hardly the spout in
a Whales neck will serve to send forth streams sufficient to quench her inward
fires?

Nor can ye blame her for the refusal of his conjugal kindness at some times.
For as he is her Husband, she is not bound to kill him with over-doing. She has
more good Nature. Or if by flattery and dalliance she milk the udders of his
Golden Heifers, it is but reason he should pay for his pleasure, who can afford
her no other Retaliation.

If she seek her relief with prudence and secrecy, it is but common discretion;
and she may be allowed to take fees a both hands, when no body can determine
the cause but her self.

He that cannot keep Shop by himself, may be glad of a Copartner to join with
him. And it may be a question, whether she that neglects the aid of necessary
restoratives in this case, may not be said to be a felo de se, and to be the
occasion of her own death, by confining her self to the steams of a Churchyard
all night, and all day conversing with a walking Charnel-House. These are not
only discomforts, but terrors and affrights: and you may commend her valor
too, as well as her patience, to lie with an Apparition.

But what may we think of those decrepit half-pint Letchers, who being as
sapless as a dried Fennel-stalk, yet you may dog them shuffling along with
their crickling hams, till they pop into one of their old haunts of iniquity?
Where they call for Vice to correct Sin, for forgetting their former Lessons of
Lasciviousness, while the sturdy Queen belabours their buttocks, till their
impotent wimbles peep out of their bellies to beg a reprieve for their Tayls.

There are some, that when their other Tackle fails 'em, love to fornicate with
their eyes. And such a one was he, that when he could hardly draw his legs
after him, but with the help of two Church-pillars instead of Crutches, yet
could not forbear to make his evening visits to a common Bawdie-house in the
Town, where his whole delight was, over two black pots of Ale, to behold the
naked Hanches of a strapping black-brow'd Queen, which she all daubed with soot
as she stood opposite to him, bolt upright in the Chimney, like the Idol
Molock, all bedript with the fat of his Infant-Offerings.

I could tell ye of another grave Father in sin, whose invention was much more
odd and fantastical, and much more chargeable. For he had always a leash, or a
leash and a half of young Queans in his pay, whom he always treated in a great
room, with a roasting fire, and a Table furnished with all the Delicates of the
Poulterers Shops. Where when they came to supper, they were to enter and sit
down as naked as they were born, and fall to merrily, while he, as naked as
they, crept under the Table, and there lay erring and snarling like a Dog, and
snapping sometimes at their Shins, and sometimes at their feet, sometimes at
their thighs, and cranching the bones which they threw him down from their
Trenchers.

Now if it be such a discomfort of Matrimony for an impotent Curmudgeon, that
has Married a vigorous Damsel to her infinite injury, to admit of a friendly
Coadjutor, here are pleasant remedies and inventions found out for him, which
he may make use of for the ease and solace of her discontent; but never let him
be disquieted at what his young brisk and dissatisfied wife does, when he is
the only occasion of all she does himself.

Rather if an old Hunks without life or vigor, have such an inclination to
leachery, let him, in imitation of the former examples, please those senses
which are least defective, and not go about to make a young and
better-deserving Gentlewomans life miserable and loathsome to her, where she
expects her greatest felicity and enjoyment.

THE Sixth Real Comfort. OF Matrimony,
What Is the matter now? why now we are all to pieces again. Here Is a wife with a
wannion, -- she will dine when she pleases, she will sup when she pleases; nay, she will
neither dine nor sup when she pleases: she will command the servants, be Mistress
of Mis-rule; she questions all comers and goers, breaks open her Husbands
Letters, -- Hoyda, -- and what of all this? why it is the greatest discomfort as
can be, to have such a woman as this. Now is not this Husband a Ninnie to
complain of such a wife? it is pity exchange is not permitted by the Law. Why
there are men that would give him their own wives, and a thousand pound to
boot, for such a woman as this. By my Fakins he is shrewdly hurt, to have a wife
that frees him from all his Family-care. Who should question peoples business,
but she who is able to give 'em an answer? who should command his servants, but
she who has authority so to do? But she will not eat her dinner, -- why then let
her let it alone. You may be sure she will never starve her self; and having such
a command in the House, she knows the way to the cupboard her self. But not with
him. Then let him eat by himself: it shows great and Majestical, so that his
servants be but about him. But she breaks open his Letters. What? are they
Billet doux's, or Assignations? if they be, he is a fool to let them come home
to his House. For it is the nature of women to be peeping and the Poet says,
Though you thrust nature back with a Pitch-fork, she will return.

But that which grieves him nost, is, that she is so stingie and waspish,
notwithstanding all his courtship and kindness. Alas! that does but feed the
humor. It Is like drinking Claret to cure sore Eyes. Women's humors are like
the Gout. You may use a thousand remedies, and all to no purpose, till the pain
and swelling wear off of themselves. Besides you may be certain, whatever
humor possesses a woman, that humor pleases her. Therefore let her enjoy it;
it is not the part of a kind Husband to court her out of it.

However, this is a most horrible discomfort, not to be denied; when a man
sends home to his Wife beforehand, and desires her to make provision, because
he has some very good friends to come and sup with him. And what then? why then
shall she, like an undutiful slut as she is, neglect all his commands, and not
only makes no provision, but sends all the servants out of the way on purpose,
to the utter disappointment of him and his friends. Why look ye, if a man wants
Government, he must blame his own folly, not his wife. It Is the opinion in such
a case of some great Doctors, that a man may take his wife to task, as the
world has a genteel soft word for it, to prevent the like miscarriage another
time. Daily experience tells us, that when men find their bodies over charged
with ill humors, they are forced to exercise a sort of kind cruelty upon their
own flesh, and to cut holes in their Arms, Thighs, Legs, and Temples, to let
out those ill humors, with the waste of their lifeblood. The same reasons
then that prevails with a man not to spare cruelty to himself, may excuse him
if with more moderation, he only takes his Wife to task.

Two Gentlemen traveling upon the road, came at length to a place where they
found a Carrier belabouring the sides of a damned resty Mare, that would
neither go backward not forward, as if he had been sheathing a Ship with
sheet-lead. The Gentleman pitying the poor beast, desired the Carrier to be
less passionate. The Carrier bid them meddle with their own business, for he
knew his Mares dispositition better than they. The same night one of the
Gentlemen invited his Friend home with him, and desired his wife to provide him
a handsome Treatment, and told her what he would have; but when Supper came to
be served up, there was not only nothing of what he expected, but every thing
ill dressed and out of order. Thereupon the Gentleman after Supper, in the
presence of his friend, took his wife to task, and was so severe, that his
friend rebuked him, as they had both rebuked the Carrier. But the Gentleman
returning the Carriers answer, went on, taking his Wife to task, till he
brought her both to submission and promise of amendment. You Will say this was
Carrier-like. Oh, Sir, you are mistaken; there is a delight in Correction, that
tickles some men extremely. Else the Presbyterian Parson would never have taken
so much pleasure as he did, in whipping his Maid. Pedagogues delight in
lashing, and are glad when a Boy commits a fault, that they may be at their
beloved sport. And were it the fashion for Schoolmasters to teach Female
Scholars, you should find more whipping than there is.

Well, but on the other side, perhaps the woman may be in no fault neither. For
how does she know but that they may be a company of Town-cheats, that have a
design to dip themselves in her Husbands Shop-book; or else such a sort of
wanton Canary-birds, that have wheadled her Husband to give them a treatment at
his house, to get an opportunity to make an Intreague with his wife? and
therefore she does discreetly to keep out of their way, and lock her self up in
her Chamber. That woman is highly to be commended many times, that retires her
self, to avoid the opportunities of temptation. You may be sure there is
something in the wind, when your flippetting Gallants are so desirous to go home
with a man. For otherwise could not he as well have given 'em a Treat A-la-mode
at the Tavern, as trouble his Wife with a Supper? And another thing is, men
cannot be so merry in Women's company; it is not so proper to swear and tell
bawdy stories in the presence of the Mistress of the House, as when they are
among themselves. Now where is the discomfort of Matrimony, because a Woman will
not expose her self to the inconveniency of these perilous times?

But for a poor-spirited Oaf to be cowbaby'd by his Punk; to let her cog and
flatter out of him not only his own, but the secrets of his Wife; to let her be
familiar with his Pockets, read his Notes and Letters, and understand the depth
of his concerns; to sit in his Chamber cursing, banning, plaguing and poxing
his Wife, to make Music in her Ears; to let her break his Pate, and burn his
Perriwig; nay, and which is worse, to maintain a Strumpet under his Wives Nose,
in her own House, and turn her out of her own Bed, to make room for his
imperious Harlot; to let her be the Domina fac totum, and Mistress of mis-rule
over Wife, Servants, and himself and all: These are the precious comforts of
Whoring, beloved, that may be born with, when the sullen look of a Wife must be
reckoned among the Fifteen Discomforts of Matrimony.

Most certainly such a woman lives under all the discomforts imaginable, to see
a ranting Concubine usurping her authority, and ruling the roast within her own
Territories. No man can suffer any such inconveniences from the pouting and
scowling of a Wife. Neither are men so free from peevish and morose themselves,
that they should think a little doggedness in their Wives such a terrible
Calamity. Physicians give those Medicines which are proper for the Distemper.
And many times a Woman finds her Husband very costive in the Purse. Now if a
Husband be such a Coxe, to let his Wife understand his infirmity, and that a
dram or two of powting will put him into a kindhearted looseness, you may be
sure she will never forgo her Probatum est. I had rather a woman should frown and
hang the lip, then collogue and flatter; for under that grass lurks the most
dangerous Serpent.

A woman that only scowles and lowts, has but one string to her bow; and a
little train of resolution defeats her: but the cunning tongue-pad Slut, like a
Mole of a Gypsy, undermines the very heart of a man, and blows up all his
constancy. Sullenness is only a trial of skill, and may miss as well as hit.
But flattery is mere Witchcraft, and unresistable. Sullenness puts a man to ask
the reason, and many times he finds it: But flattery admits of no
consideration. Good Government prevents sullenness; but flattery is a charm
against discretion.

THE Seventh Real Comfort OF Matrimony.
ANd is it possible that a woman should live so long honest with her Husband,
and turn drab at last? However here is but a piece of a discomfort; the Scene
changed; exit Wife, enter Devil. And the cause of this is, because she has
taken a surfeit of Husband. In this case -- give me leave to scratch first -- I
think we are not to judge over-hastily of this affair. All her Spring and
Summer she lived like a Diana; but toward her Autumn the leaves of her
affection turned Fueillemot. Truly in this the woman does no more than what
whole Nations do, I mean the Tartars and Scythians, who when they have grazed
up one Country, seek fresh Pastures in another She finds the heart of ^ do
their grounds, and therefore lets him lie fallow a while, to try if he can
recover his strength. You say, it is a surfeit -- Very good. Then take this for
a rule, if a man have eaten Lampreys liberally for nine years together, and
surfeit in the tenth, his Physician will not admit him to feed upon that diet
any more. Surfeits are dangerous; and the surfeit of a long thing with one eye,
may be as deadly, as the surfeit of a long thing with nine eyes. Change your
Cock, was a piece of advice once given to a Lady, by a person of eminent
gravity and preferment. That was upon a complaint of ineffectual conjunction:
However, good advice is not confined to one single Occasion.

Having deeply pondered all these considerations, the Woman lays out for
another convenient Mate, and by good luck meets with one; opens her grief, and
finds Compassion. By the way, here is a Woman grieved; and persons aggrieved
are always the Objects that Compassion is in search for. As you men find by all
the stories of the Seven Champions, Don Bellianis of Greece, the Knight of the
Burning Pestle, and a hundred more. Now this person had been no true Knight,
had he stifled so noble a Virtue, since it was in him, as his Compassion. So
great a happiness it is when Grief and Compassion meet together, and so glad is
Compassion of doing its Office. Both which centring in aliquo Tertio, strangely
redound to the good Fortune of the forsaken Husband, that his frigidity should
prove the occasion of the so lucky meeting of Grief and Compassion. All which
considered, the Woman could be in no fault; for she was certainly aggrieved:
and Grief naturally seeks redress. Nor could the Gentleman be in a fault, by
reason of his Charity and Generosity in relieving the distressed. But you will
say, Virtue seeks no corner, and Truth is always naked. Neither do I believe
but the truth of this business was as naked as you could wish or desire. Why
then did the woman not reveal her distress and relief to her Husband? but
endeavor to blind him with her flim-flam-stories, and make him believe she was
as honest as ever she was in her life? Hold a blow there, I did not tell ye the
Gentleman was forced to do what he did: and you know, Charity's a Virtue that
always loves to keep her self private. Perhaps her Husband, had he known it,
would have bid the Devil take the Gentleman's Compassion, and so she might have
been the occasion of her Husbands cursing so great a Virtue: No -- 'twas better
as 'twas. For her grief had been unreliev'd, and the Gentleman's Compassion had
been prevented.

But where is this man's Discomfort all this while? Why upon his Wife's turning
Whore, his Estate got a Gonnorhea, and pined and consumed away to nothing. Or
if you will have it another way, his Wife put his Estate upon the spit of
Prodigality, and let lie it roasting so long at the fire of her Lust, that it
dript quite away.

What then? This is no disparagement to Matrimony. For while the Woman lives
within the confines of Matrimony, and the man retained his Ability, all things
went well. For I must tell ye, Ability is as it were High Constable of the
Hundred of Wedlock, and keeps the peace in Matrimony. Now as the Constable is
nothing without his Staff, so is Ability nothing without a good strong
Truncheon. So that Matrimony is no way to be blamed, but the Dissolution of
Matrimony by the woman's seeking after strange Gods, and adoring other Priapus's
besides her own. Though, in strictness of reason, it may be a question whether
the Woman disanull'd the Marriage or no, and whether the end of Wedlock
ceasing, the Marriage is not vacate of it self. Which if it be true, then was
the Woman upon the ceasing of the former Marriage as free for one as another.

But such is the sad age we live in, that women must be the scape-goats to bear
all the sins and miscarriages of their Husbands.

Yet I have heard of a hoary Fornicator, that had gained the reputation of a
most faithful Husband, one that had clamber'd to the top of the pinnacle of
Parish-preferment, a Common-Council-mans fellow; one that never cheated but in
the integrity of his heart; one with a Saint-like look, peecked beared, Satin
cap'd, little banded; and when he drove a bargain, one that looked up to Heaven
with his hands upon breast in such a manner, that you might have seen his
Conscience in his eyes. Yet this good pious old man, upon an accidental step of
his Wife into the Country, suffered his Maid to steal into his wive's place;
and so, as if he had found her there by chance, got her with child. It Is true,
the good man (for generally such Saints as these have luck) had an ingenuous
and dutiful Prentice that hope him out at a dead lift, or else who knows what a
Family-havock it might have produced? I leave you to imagine the Afflictions,
Terrors, and Agonies that tormented this Senior of the Vestry, when he found
the state of his condition, in the midst of which he had no friend to trust but
his good Prentice; in whom he had the more hopes, because he knew he made no
great profession of Godliness, because he lay out of his house a nights, and
played many other pranks with which Satan inspires Youth. To him therefore he
unfolds his misery; who most dutifully undertakes to father the Child. And now
the Curmudgeons stable and purse are at his command. On the other side, the
young lad provides for the lying in, appears at the Christning, and brings in
Tailors Bills, which are not to be questioned. Now he may go out, lie out,
ramble where he pleases; for still the Prentice was looking after the child,
which though it lived not long, yet too long for the old niggards profit, two
years really alive, and another half year still alive after 'tvvas dead, by the
good management of Father Junior. How many new Govvns would this expense have
bought the poor ignorant wife at home? what a passion would it have put her
into, had she known it? But it hapn'd well for Father Princock, whose Master,
rigid and severe before, was now become his perfect slave.

There was a certain Exchange-man, who had lived well with his wife for several
years -- You might as well have removed Penmen-Maur into Middlesex as have got
him out for a quarter of an hour to drink his Mornings-draught. He canted to
his Customers in Mood and Figure: Nothing more grave, nothing more solid, and
every one prognosticated him a Fur-Gown and a Gold-Chain. And yet after many
years thus spent in reputation, the Extinguisher of Misfortune eclipsed this
flaming Christmas-Candle all upon a fudden. People star'd, wondered, talked and
reasoned the case; but at length all came out: Secret whoring, private gaming,
threescore broad pieces lost of a night, and a thousand flams and shams, and
tales of roasted horses to his wife, not one of the Comforts of Matrimony, had
been the occasion of all this.

Now where were the wives in fault, in either of these two cases? And truly I
am apt to believe, were there a true Catalogue of the excesses of this Nature
of both Sexes, you would find the Poll much more numerous on the men's side. And
to tax the women with expense, is folly. For he is a mere doting infatuated
Nicodemus, that when he finds his wife galloping away with his Estate, does not
hold her in, having the reins in his own hands.

THE Eight Real Comfort OF Matrimony.
I Will hold a good wager, it is no such discomfort of Marriage for a man's wife to
desire the fresh air. It Is an ill sign on the man's side, when a woman is
compelled to strain her invention to obtain of her Husband an innocent
Recreation. Suppose he be at the charges of a Palfrey and a Side-saddle, it is
no such Break-back-expence to endanger the sighing up his Lungs by the roots.
He that travels with his wife to show her the Country, has the same pleasure
himself, to see the variety of Seats and Towns, and cannot have a better
Companion than his wife when he comes to his Journeys end. It Is a sign the
woman has a nobler soul than to intermix with a Tag-rag and long-tail, when
Easter and Whitsontide let loose the toyling Rabble to devour all the rotten
Currants and measly Swines-flesh about the Town in dry cakes, and slices of
glaury Bacon stuffed with Goose-turds instead of sweet Herbs. Or to be wedged in
with the Westward ho Trumpery, till she arrive at drty, dusty Brainford for a
Tansey of green Wheat and addle Eggs, and a game at paltry Nine-pins for
digestion; and then home again with a bundle of dead Tulips and Southern-wood
to garnish her Cobweb'd windows. Precious Comforts of Matrimony indeed! It Is
natural to women to love a full enjeyment, not the sips and taste of pleasure.
Give me a woman that knows what satisfaction is. It Is a sign of Genius and
sprightliness, the sweets of Conversation. Can any man be such a Dunce as to
grutch his wife a Country House? it is for his own interest; it is as good as
going to see his Uncle, to leave his wife on Monday-mornings, and return fresh
again a Saturday-night; and those short absences create new longings and new
affections, and prevent the inconveniences of surfeiting. It Is good for their
Children too; They draw a steady sanity from the innocent and serene air of the
Country, while the corrupted smoke of the City, and the Exhalations of
Brew-house-Funnels do but befoot their lungs for the Chimney-sweepers broom.
There a woman learns industry from the Be, innocence from the Lamb, honesty
from the Cow, that pays so well for her Meat, Drink, and Lodging; the Vine
instructs her true affection, and every flower teaches her every day new
Lessons of Chastity and contempt of Vanity, when she beholds how soon a
ravishing hand despoils them of their glory, and how fading all their pomp and
beauty is; when they that continually harbor in the City, have nothing before
their eyes, but the daily documents of vice and vanity.

These enjoyments certainly may well be allowed a wife, when men themselves
take a far larger liberty to revel with their Misses and Concubines at Epsome
and Tunbridge, or North-hall wells, where Fools and their Money are soon
parted. It may be the man has a mind to prey farther off; and then the Scene is
laid thus. At first great signs of an afflicted spirit, many Symptoms of inward
vexation, the knife passionately slapt down upon the table at dinner, rubs his
forehead, and Well -- quoth he. What Is the matter, my dear? cries the good
woman, simply and harmlesly, Heaven knows. A man would forswear trusting, quoth
he. -- There Is no driving a Trade Husband without it, quoth she. -- It makes me
mad to look in my Debt-book, quoth he. -- There Is a hundred and fifty pound
lies desperate in Hampshire, two hundred pound has been ovving me this three
years in Devonshier; but for the hundred pound in Wiltshire, the Gentleman
promised me so faithfully last Term, that I thought he would never have failed
me. -- Well, I see I must take a long journey this Vacation, but what 'tvvill
signify, Heaven knovvs, -- Pox a this throvving good money after bad -- by
Jove I hate it mortally. Hovvever, quoth she, business is not to be neglected,
we must not loose a Hog for a hapoth of Tar; what must be, must be; I Will take
the best care I can in your absence. -- Ay, quoth he, and then kisses her,
that is all the comfort I have.

Then close in his Counting house for some days, till he has filled his
Letter-case with Bills and Summa totalis's, that you would swear a whole Troop
of Horse little enough to gaurd him home again.

And now all his accoutrements being ready, up he gets betimes in the morning,
puts on his Boots and Spurs; out comes the bread and butter and cold victuals,
and his wife beholds him looking like Jason going to fetch the Golden Fleece --
Well quo he, chawing one piece and cutting another, if I get but half this
money, and good security for the rest, I Will gi'thee the best Gowns, wife, that
ever thou woar'st in thy life. Well, Husband, I wish you good success, with all
my heart, quoth she. Stay quoth he, what money had I best put i'my Pocket --
faith I Will not take above five pound -- the Devll's in it if some or other don't
help me to a recuit before that is spent. But this is only a sham; for his
returns are laid as they lay Posthorses, and are ordered their several stages
already The money brought and fobb'd, he wipes his mouth, busses his wife,
whirles down stairs, whisks up a horseback, then another kiss in the saddle,
and so God bless thee, my dear.

Some time before he gets to Brainford, Mrs. Winifred, being got thither by
infallible appointment before, stays for him at the Red-Lion, and seeing him
come trotting along, knocks for the Drawer. Tell the Gentleman that rid in, quo
she, his Company's here. By and by, ushered by the Drawer, up he comes, --
Lord, my dear, cries Mrs. Winifred, you have put me into such a fright! what
made ye stay so long behind? Gad, my dear, I could not help it for my life, I
met with a Gentleman at Hammersmith Towns-end, who would not be denied, but
that I must drink a Bottle of Claret with him a Horseback. I told him my wife
was before -- 'twas all one, and I believed thou would stay here -- which
made me the less mind it. And thus in the presence of the Drawer the Match is
made up in the twinkling of an eye. They are now Man and Wife in the l^cking of
a cat's ear: Only to confirm it, there must be a little bait, and the Mistress
of the house called up to hear how pleasantly the My dears and the Sweet-hearts
pass between the new-married couple, while the crafty slut in the midst of her
cups cries out, Pray God my poor little Billy do but continue well till we
return; I am fraid my heart will ache many a dear ache for him ere I get home --
Grace a God, Madam, cries the Hostess all will be well -- Ay, ay -- Mistress,
there is no fear on it cries the new Bridegroom, he is with as careful a Nurse as
any in the Town -- So remounting, away they cross the Road, and if possible get
to Guilford that night, for the convenience of the Inn. Whither from thence the
Lord of Oxford knows -- but a ramble they take, you may be sure, till money
growing short, and having played over the play of a wife for a month, with all
the mirth and jocundry imaginable, home comes my Gentleman again, with his
Purse as empty as his two-penny Purse.

Now you are to understand, that this same hot-codpiec'd Monsieur had as much
reason to go a dunning for this money, as he had to throw himself headlong from
the top of Dover-Peer; for what money he had owing, was already secured by
Bonds locked up in his Till. Only the Comforts of Whoring are such delicious
temptations, so ensnaring, so alluring, that flesh and blood cannot forbear
'um. But traveling with a man's Wife is the same thing still, a Tartarian way
of cumbering the road with Family-luggage, and makes every strange Inn look
like his own House. He cannot kiss his Hostess, nor smuggle his Bed-maker,
because his wife's with him. And yet I may be bold to say, he might have had as
smirking a Dairy-made as Mrs. Winifred, near his wife's denied Country House,
at a far cheaper rate, take the half years summer-expences and all in, than his
Autumnal Christmas-gamboling cost him.

And thus you see what a strange discomfort of Matrimony it is for a woman to
hone for a Country House. But Lady's, if your Husbands deny ye next year, lay
these things i'their dishes.

THE Ninth Real Comfort OF Matrimony.
HOw! Haughty and proud, and domineering? Yes, she would have been at it, but
the man kept her at a bay -- He took her down in her wedding-shoes. And so
finding she could do no good upon him, they did as they did in the fir^^ world,
lived quietly and contentedly together, for many years, and begat Sons and
Daughters. These Children grew up too and the boys are sent to the Grammar
School, and the Daughters profit to admiration i'their yellow Samplers. But
when the Gout, or Stone, or both, come to confine him to his Prayer Book,
Hall's Meditations, Montagues Essays, and the great Groaning-chair in his
Bedchamber, then she pays off his old scores; no fire, no candle, no
plum-watergruel, no Mistress, no Maid to hold him the Chamber Pot; or i^ the
wife do now and then give him a visit, it is to taunt, reproach, to plague and
torment him worse than his diseases. The Son takes ill courses, and the Mother
upholds him; his Daughters are not suffered to come at him; with a hundred
suchlike vexations, and all by the Mothers contrivance. This you will say is a
very hard case; but I say, no, but rather one of the greatest Comforts that
could befal^ him, in such a Condition. For the man being now near the end of
his mortal journey, there is no better way to make him weary of his life, and
out of love with the world, than by such means as these Crosses and afflictions
carry a man to Heaven oftimes, when prosperity makes him neglect the care of
his Souls health. Which the Woman having heard at Church, takes that provident
care to put him upon those Contemplations which are most proper for his
condition. She gives him the poportunity to consider that he has lived long
enough in this world, when his wife and children grow weary of him. And
therefore what should I be troubled, quo he, to leave these Trivial Comforts,
that am going to enjoy greater Felicities? Thereupon the man falls to reading;
if he want a candle, to his Meditations; fits and prepares himself, makes his
peace with Heaven, and so defying the world, dies like another Cato. Whereas
were the woman dutiful, loving, indulgent, always lamenting his departure,
wringing her hands, grieving, weeping, blubbering, and crying out, What shall
poor I do? what shall these poor Orphans do, if God take thee away, my only
joy, their only comfort in this world? And then they all fall a howling, though
there be ten of 'um, like so many young puppies shut out of doors in a frosty
night. These things strike so piercingly to his heart, that the Gout and the
Stone are but the nips of a Flea to what he feel there; and causes such a
dissipation of al^ his Heavenly thoughts, that the man devours all the Cawdles
and Ambergrease-Possets that his kind wife brings him; swallows whole ounces at
a time of Syrrup of Marshmallows, and Oil of sweet Almonds to prolong his
Aches and his Misery; dispatches away his Billets to Church for the Prayers of
the Congregation, sends for the Parson of the Parish to comfort him up with the
story of Ezekiah, sends for the Doctor, and asks him -- is there no cure? --
have all Drugs and Herbs lost their Virtue? -- Then cries the woman, For
Heavens sake, Doctor do what ye can -- I am undone if my poor Husband, dies --
never had woman a more kind and tender Husband, never had Children a more
careful and indulgent Father, I Am sure -- Then it is the man's cue, Ay, wife, --
indeed, thou have been always to me a dear and loving wife; and my children, I
bless God for it, have been dutiful obedient children, and I would fain live a
little longer to see 'um grow up and well disposed in the world, if the Lard
saw it fit. And thus these Dialogues of Lamentation do so mollify the poor
man's heart, and so bewitch him with a desire of Life that at length Death
surprises him altogether unrepentant.

On the other side, the woman that leaves her Husband alone, though men are
never less alone, than when alone, gives him all the opportunity that can be to
employ his thoughts in Heavenly and seasonable Meditations, allows him time to
recollect and repent him of his sins; and keeping him from Pothecaries slops,
gives the diseases leisure to dispatch their business without opposition. The
woman has more kindness for her Husband than to see him in pain, well knowing
what an impertinent and silly thing Pity is: Or to let a simple Doctor run away
with half a child's Portion for ridiculous Receipts, when the money may be so
well spared to the good of her Husbands Soul. Is it not better for a man to die
quietly, taking time and solitary leisure, than to be pestered with continual
visits, and to have his Family stand Lowbelling over his gasping Iungs, and
distracting him with their yelling and howling when he is going to sleep?
Therefore, says the truly prudent and kind woman, when a man begins to grow out
of date, let him be well brush't and laid up.

THE Tenth Real Comfort OF Matrimony,
TO be short, Mrs Betty has been Moulding of Cockle-bread, and her Mother
discovers it. However, though the Daughter have got a By-blow in her Belly, the
Mother has got a fool in her eye that shall make all whole again quickly. Well
-- quoth she, and who can help what will away? -- Thereupon, she gives her
Daughter instructions; she takes 'em: the fool comes on, the fool's fooled;
away they post to for better for worse, and so the job's done. But -- with a
pox to it, here is the disaster, she has not been Married above five Months, but
coming home at night, her gulled Husband finds a Leveret in his Chamber, not
dreaming that some women kindle twice a year.

Now what of all this? some men love to open their Oysters themselves; others
care not for that drudgery. Force your ground, and you shall have forward Pease
by the latter end of April, and treatment-Cheries against May Day. Early
Fruit's a rarity. And the Law's positive of his side, the Bantling's no
Bastard. Some men lie fumbling five or six years together, and loose all their
labor; he is admired for the fertility of his Codpiece.

The Maids in Scotland will marry a man to choose out of the stool of
Repentance; for then they find he has been tried. It Is a hundred pound to a
Hazle-nut, he was no Maid himself when he Married her: Come, come, my Masters,
the sauce for the Goose, is sauce for the Gander. It Is a fair Opporunity to
send for his own from Nurse, and so let 'em go for Castor and Pollux. Was there
never such a prank played in the world before? Yes -- nor will not be the last.
Solamen miseris -- He Is a fool that counts his Chickens before they be hatched;
but when he sees 'em pecking their Oatmeal. It Is good to be sure, says the
proverb, and nothing so sure as the Lowse in bosom. For my part I think it is
extremely well as it is; for now having enjoyed her stolen pleasures before
Marriage, she will the less desire them afterward. Now suppose the Child had been
cleaverly conveyed out of the House in the dark, and the wife sent after, who
could have known but that his wife lay in in the Country? and there is no
Law nor no necessity that a man should begin the age of his Child from the
Birth, but when he sees convenient.

But here comes the confounded comfort of this Matrimony. For notvvithstanding
all these grave and solid admonitions, this same young Hairbrains of a Husband
must needs be running to Doctors Commons, with his tale of a tub; there is
nothing will serve him but a Divorce forsooth; there he proves the Milch Covv,
and not his wife. For after all, they tell him, it is natural for the hedge
Sparrovv to hatch the Cuckovvs eggs, and there is no Divorce to be had.
Hovvever, this makes a hubbub in thevvorld, report always spreading like the
circles that Children make in the water with their Ducks and Drakes. And thus
having exposed himself to the world, through his own folly, he becomes the
derision of the Neighborhood, not by the occasion of Matrimony. Nor is the
woman to be blamed for taking pepper in the nose, to see a Nickapoop revealing
the secrets of his wife to his own ignominy, and her own shame. For had the
thing been kept private, and this one single slip passed by, which was a matter
of fact before he could lay any claim to her, she might have proved to him the
best wife in the world. And thus men bring their misfortunes upon their own
heads, because they can neither managetheir business prudently themselves, nor
let others do it for 'em. Like the Peddler, that would not let his wife be
turned into a Mule, because he did not like the setting on of the Tail.

For the Pedlars wife, seeing her Husband had but one Mule, and hearing of an
Artist that could turn a woman into a Mule by day, and change heragain into a
woman at night; quoth she to her Husband, if I could be a Mule by day, and a
woman by night, I could assist your Mule in the daytime, and you in the
Nightime, and we might grow rich. Thereupon, the man was content she should
send for the Artist. The Practitioner came, and was willing the Peddler should
see all things done. First, the woman was ordered to put off all her Clothes,
Smock and all; then she was to posture her self upon all four like the Beggar
with his Hand-pattins, after that, the Artist stroak'd her all over, with a
certain Ointment which was to produce the hair, with another Ointment he
sleeked up her Ears. All this the Peddler liked well enough. But when he came to
put on the Tail, the Peddler would by no means endure that the Tail should be
put on; but cried out, he would have a Mule without a Tail, and so spoiled the
whole design. Thus if men will be the occasion of their Misfortunes by their
own wilfulness, they must thank themselves, and not impute it to the ill
effects of Matrimony. For I appeal to all the world, whether Matrimony could be
the cause of this Woman's loosing her Maidenhead before she was married? And as
for the Man, if it were his Fortune to marry such a one, he took her for better
for worse, and so without noise or hurly-burly he must take her as he finds her.

THE Eleventh Real Comfort OF Matrimony.
BUt what think ye of a Shrew? the best woman in nature. There Is no woman like
her; she is a Paragon, she makes a man both Poet and Philosopher. A Combat
between an Amazon with her Ladle and Potlid, and the Knight of the
Basting-ladle, is a Theme for a second Homer. And then she makes a man a
Philosopher, for she exercises one of the noblest of his Virtues, his Patience.
For which reason Socrates, accounted one of the wisest Philosophers of his Age,
married a notorious Scold on purpose. The greatest Naturalists tell us, that
Beasts are not subject to anger, because they are Beasts. Only Men and Women
are subject to anger, as being the most excellent of Creatures. If then the
more angry the more excellent, Scolds must be the more excellent than men, as
being more angry. Men could not defend their Prince and Country, not assail
their Enemies without anger; nor women defend their peculiar Territories,
Rights, and Privileges, without Scolding. By that means women fetch their
Husbands from their Potcompanions at Alehouses and Taverns, burn the Cards,
knock the Cribbidge-board about their ears, and ring 'em those peals which
their sloth and laziness justly deserve. Were it not for storms and tempests,
the Ocean it self would forget it were a Sea, and condense into dry land.
Thunder clears the air, and thundering women dissipate the excesses of their
Husbands. Scolds are the Imitatrix's of Nature, and supply those passions of
the Middle Region which men want. So that when you call Man a Microcosm, you
must take the Scolds in, or else the Structure nor the Simile is complete.
Juno, the chiefest of all the Goddesses, was a perfect shrew. For which reason
they sacrifis'd Hogs upon her Altars; a creature that makes the most abominabie
noise in nature. How did she persecute Jupiter with continual scolding, for his
kindness to the Trojans? she not only scolded her self, but set all the
Elements too a scolding at 'um; the winds roared, the skies rattled, the Sea
bellowed in such a violent manner, that Virgil's hair stood an end.

Tanta ne animis Coelestibus ira? Could the Goddesses be such shrews so cruelly
to persecute such an honest godly man as Aenaeas? What! always Sweetheart and
Dear? No, Rogue and Rascal sometimes does well; and a good thwack of the
shoulders comes seasonably when a man is so drunk, that he can hardly feel it.
Virgil says, Anger is the Spur of Virtue. Who then more virtuous than Scolds,
the most angry of Mortals?

A gang of Crack-ropes had got an honest simple fellow once, and made him
believe that for so much money they would carry him to a place where he should
find a stone that would make him invisible: the credulous goose agrees and goes
with 'um; and to be sure of the stone, picks up all the stones that were likest
to what they had described, till he had laden himself so, that he was hardly
able to move. As soon as he had done, his Companions call him, pretending not
to see him: he makes no answer? thereupon they conclude him invisible; and
going before, take such order, that none of his acquaintance should take notice
of him in the street if they met him. But when he came home, his wife gave him
such a rally for letting Dinner be spoiled, that he threw down his stones, and
ran in great heat to call his Companions Knaves and Cheats for abusing him. And
thus you see what a deliverance this man had, by his wives scolding. There
never was but one Devil that came upon Earth to marry; and a Scold hunted him
back to his old quarters in the Devils name. Had it not been for a Scold, what
a mixed race should we have been pestered with, half Devil, half Man, worse than
we are already? Another thing is, there is seldom any deceit or sly cunning in a
Scold: They are too open-hearted, they will be heard with a witness, and care
not who hear's 'um. And this makes greatly for the support of Scolding, that
the Poets so highly commend Proserpina for a good woman; for if Scoolding were
a vexation, the Devil would certainly have had a scolding wife, since we hear
of no other torments missing in Hell. Where is there more scolding than at
Billingsgate? and yet where more love and friendship? Those very women that you
saw engaged tongues and nails but just now, you shall see the next moment
bubbing together like sworn sisters.

The Amazons were certainly very great Scolds, of all the women in the world,
yet they were the only remarkable women for great achievements. There -- Gorge
thy self with the blood which thou have so long thirsted for, said that Scold
of an Amazon, Tomiris, when she threw Cyrus's head into a great wash-bowl of
blood. What could any Scold have uttered more bitter and venomous? Hercules did
several wonderful Actions, killed Boars and Lions; but Omphale pulled down his
mettle, and made him glad to spin with her maids. Come, Sirrah, quo she, spin,
or I Will knock the distaff about your shag-pate -- and so he was forced to wet
his thumb and go to work. Now he that will deny Omphale to be a Scold, let him
prove the contrary. Nature has provided for every particular Creature a
peculiar self-defence; bristles for the Hedgehog, tushes for the Boar, quills
for the Porcupine, and a tongue for Women. Which they who best know how to
brandish, make the best use of nature's allowed defense. I question whether the
Fish-wife made that use of her tongue which she ought to have done, that
suffered the Pothecary to slap her bare arse with her own Flounders. Yet so
violent was the pursuit of the rest, that had he not immediately taken
Sanctuary, for ought I know he might have lost a cheek.

But now as to men, I say, a scolding wife has this peculiar virtue to exercise
one of the noblest of his Virtues, his patience. Therefore when Socrates
brought home his friends to Supper with him, and they were something troubled
to see his wife play the Devil with two sticks, throw the meat about the Room,
and over-turn the Table, bid 'um consider, that tame creatures were not always
without their faults, and yet we passed them by, much less were we to take
notice of the extravagant. And another gave Philosopher informs us, that we
must bear with, and endure, not blame what cannot be avoided. So then a
scolding wife is to be born with, and not blamed. You shall find among the
Proverbial Poetry, a hundred Exhortations to suffer and patiently endure
afflictions, vexations, tribulations, or by whatever other term you please to
call the misfortunes of men; and our own Mothers frequently teach us, That what
cannot be cured, must be endured, that Patience is a Virtue. And the Frenchmen
tell ye, He who wants Patience has nothing. What signify all these Golden
Instructions and admonitions of our fore Fathers, or how should we put them in
practice? where should a husband have an opportunity to show the height and
expose the quintessence of his Patience, if it were not for women's scolding?
Take away Scolding, the Cause, and ye take away Patience, the Effect,
presently, and so ye lose the Hog, Patience, for the hapoth o'Tar, Scolding. A
man is not bound to live in a steeple among Bells for the exercise of his Ears,
when he can hear a noise as loud or louder at home. Thus much for Patience.

Now for the Antiquity of Scolding, which is a very great University-argument.
Simonides that lived under Darius Hystaspis above 3000 years ago, tells us that
Jupiter made nine sorts of women, of which one sort he made out of the
Seawater. And that therefore they were sometimes calm and smooth of
disposition, at other times nothing but tempest and whirlwind, there is no
withstanding their fury. So wonderful and so boisterous is the storm, that the
Steers-man of the House is forced to quit the Helm, and commit himself to the
mercy of the Hurricane. Now these must certainly be Scolds. And in Juvenals
time, Scolding was grown to that height, that one single woman would be loud
enough to wake the Moon out of an Eclipse.

But what will you say if we prove Scolding to be a part of Love it self? and
that we shall do from the comparisons appertaining to Love. For Love is
compared to flames and fire, which you see how they rage sometimes, yet embrace
every thing that they devour. What can be more like such a conflagration than
Scolding? Like your vixen Schoolmasters, that when they are thrashing a boys
buttocks, still cry, Corrigote, non quod odi te, sed quod amem te.

Then again Love is compared to a Lightning, which is nothing but the brushing
of the two Thunder-clouds together, and striking fire at the same time. Like
which Lightnings are the glitterings and sparklings of a Scolds eyes, to show
that the thunder of her anger is not without the Emblems of affection in the
seats of Love.

By way of Application then; since there is no man that can be perfectly happy
in this life, but that he must meet with rubs and jumps in the Bovvling-green
of this world, and that nothing more shows a man to be a true Philosopher
than patience, which he can never exercise unless he meet with an
opportunity; there can no real discontent arise from the occasion that gives
him that opportunity to show himself both a Man and a Philosopher. It Is
Heroical to suffer, and Heroical Actions always breed an inward pleasure and
satisfaction. And therefore he that dies Matrimonies Martyr, has no reason to
blame his wise that is the occasion of such a noble Inscription upon his
Monument. And therefore the Yorkshier Knight did ill, that pulled out his
Ladies teeth to keep her from Scolding. For how could she keep her Tougue
betvveen her Teeth, when he had torn up the fence?

THE Twelfth Real Comfort OF Matrimony.
I Agree w'ye, -- it is the general complaint, men do not love to be Cuckolds.
But yet I fear me, these complaints smell too much of partiality. For there is
not one man in five thousand that cares to be confined himself. Why then should
that be a trouble to a man, that always was, still is, and ever will be? It Is
sufficient that a man be a Roman Catholic in his opinion concerning his wife,
and pin his faith upon her sleeve. A woman that never lay with any other man
but her own Husband in her life, might set up for one of the greatest
Doctresses about the Town. For you shall find a story in Herodotus, that Phero,
perhaps Pharaoh, the Son of Sesostris, was struck blind, and so continued for
ten years. The next year he sent to consult the Oracle, by which he was
answered, That if he washed his eyes with a woman's water that had never known
any man but her own Husband, he should recover his sight. You may be sure a
Prince would spare for no cost, nor no search in such a condition. However, he
tried his own wife first; but alas! her water would do no feats. How many
several vvomens waters he tried afterward, Heaven knovvs, but the number
was infinite. At length, when he was almost in despair, he met with one
vvomans water that did his work. Being cured, and well, he caused all the
women whose waters he had experimented in vain, to be brought together, and
thrust into one great City (by which you may guess there was a svvinging
company of them) and there burnt them all together, City and all; and then took
the woman that had cured him to wife.

What then is universal, can never be a true cause of discontent, since it is
one man's fortune as well as another. And for the women, they are not to be
blamed, because their Husbands lead 'em the way. And from whom should women
sooner learn their instructions, than from their Husbands? Therefore said the
Gentlevvoman man to the Parson that called her Baggage, and better fed then
taught, 'twas very true, because he taught her, and her Husband fed her. For
they must still walk by their Husbands rule.

Neither is there any invention of man, no Law, as the Rump-Parliament tried to
little purpose; no Stratagem of Male-wit, than can obviate the suttleties and
devices of women in the business of Cuckoldry. Who would think that any devil
of a woman should have it so ready? For mark how it fell out; no sooner was the
good man gone out betimes in the morning to work, but his wife admits her
private friend into his warm place. The Husband, it being an unthought-of Holy
day, returns much sooner than he was expected, or his company desired. The
woman hearing him knock at the door, puts her friend under an old
Copper-Furnace in the washhouse. As soon as the man came in, Wife, says he, I
have considered that we have no use of that Copper-Furnace in the washhouse,
and so I have sold it, and here is the man come to fetch it away. And how much
have ye sold it for? quoth she. So much, quoth he. By my faith, then, quoth
she, you might have brought your friend before, for I have just now sold it to
another for half as much more: And the man's now under it, to see what holes
there are in it, that they may be mended. And so heaving up the Furnace, the
man came out, paid down his Money, and had his bargain. Where could the man
suspect the least harm in all this? And yet you see there was harm, though not
to be discovered by any but a Conjurer. What could the Father say to his Son in
Law, when he complained of a discovery he had made of his Wife? The Father
desired the Mother to take her Daughter in private, and give her a
juniper-Lecture. She does so, and the Father and Son resolve to over-hear her.
Fie -- quo the Mother, do such a thing, and suffer your self to be discovered
at your years! Where was your wit? where were your brains? I have been married
to your Father these twenty years and upwards, and have had many a private
Friend in a corner, and yet thy Father cannot say, black's my eye. I say, what
could the Father say, when he heard this, but advise his Son to secrecy and
discretion? Or what could the Son do but take his Wife again, and double his
guards.

I would fain know what man cares to be out of the Fashion? or what reason a
man has to be discontented at the Fashion. If it be the fashion to be a
Cuckold, why should that grieve and torment his mind? Rather let him consider
whether it be not a custom, or rather a Law so made by a long Prescription of
near four thousand years; and then comfort himself up in this, that he has the
same liberty.

Revenge, they say, is sweeter than Manna of Calabria. But if there be no
occasion of revenge, how shall a man enjoy the Sweets of that Pleasure?
Therefore it fell out well for that man, that he was a Cuckold, who
understanding his Neighbor had made him so, ordered his Wife to send for his
Neighbor, and lock him up in a Chest in her Chamber. And then sending for his
Neighbors Wife, and telling her the whole story, gave her a Nooning over her
Husbands head upon the same Chest where he lay fast under lock and key. For now
they stood upon equal terms.

Sometimes it may happen that a man low in the world may gain by the bargain.
Like the Foot-Souldier in the Trainbands, who having got leave of his Captain to
dispense with him from the Guard, was got home, and going to bed about one a
Clock in the morning. His doublet was off, and his breeches thrown upon the bed:
But his Wife was so ill of a sudden, so mortally sick, that unless she had a
Cordial presently, there was nothing but present death. The fellow,
compassionating his Wife, snatches up his breeches again, puts on his doublet,
and knocks up the next Pothecary for a Cordial. What Cordial? Any Cordial, that
exceeded not nine-pence; for he had but a shilling, and threepence he must
have to spend next morning upon the Guard. But when he came to dive for his
nine-pence, his fingers in one pocket were up to the knuckles in Gold; which
encouraged him to feel further, he found a Gold-Watch in a by-fob, and a
convenient quantity of Tower-coyn'd Silver-Medals in another pocket. The fellow
wondered at the strange multiplication of his single Shilling, but said
nothing, took his Cordial, and returned home to his expiring wife. In the mean
time the Gentleman was gone with his leathern Breeches, and his single shilling
to bear his Charges through the Watch, and glad he escaped so. And thus you see,
if it hit well, there is content a both sides; if otherwife, a man must take it
as it falls. But yet for all this, I am apt to believe the world is not come to
that pass yet, but that the Men are far more in fault than the Women. 'Twere
impossible else, that there should be so much work for the Surgeons and
Pintle-smiths about this Town. It Is impossible that there should be such swarms
of Charlatans and Knights of the Syringe in every corner of the City. Not a
Gate or spare wall but what is plaistered over like a Country-Ale-house, with
No Cure no Money: A hundred Infallible Cures, and a thousand more defiances of
Mortality, enough to astonish Death it self, as if he were upon his last legs,
and that men had wrested his Scithe out of his sinewless clutches. You cannot
walk the streets without having three or four Schedules in a day of humane
Infirmities pop't into your hands. So that now if a man cannot live by the Tap
or the Syringe, it is time for him to go a Buckaneering to Jamaica.

Whence this Encouragement? Faith, neither better nor worse; women are not so
bad as men would make 'um, and therefore the old trade of whoring still
flourishes. In short therefore, since there is no man that wears a Bulls
feather who is not as apt to give it, let him never think that a discomfort to
himself, which he dreams no vexation to another.

THE Thirteenth Real Comfort. OF Matrimony.
IS she so? Why, what is the matter? Why the Woman's a mere Tiger for jealousy.
And what can be more irksome to a man, than to live under the yoke of
Tyrannical suspicion? His goings out and comings in are dogged and traced like a
Hare in the snow. Where have you been to day? What, you have been to visit the
Tailors Wife, I see by your hang-dog countenance -- But I shall pull the eyes
of her out at one time or other. I hear of your Pranks, I do; but I Will spoil
your swan-hopping in faith. And when he comes to pay his nocturnal Tribute --
No, no, get ye gone where you have been all this day -- I Will have none o'your
Gilflurts leavings -- And this is a great inconveniency of Matrimony that gives
him no rest. But such men not, that your jealous women are the only kind Wives
in the world. It Is not ont of anger that they chime so loud i'their husbands
ears, nor out of disrespect or neglect of Duty that they tell him his own, but
out of pure love and affection. The Woman would never have been at the price of
a halter to hang her husband that was to be executed, and carried it the
Sheriff her self, but that she was jealous lest her Husband should escape the
punishment of his Sin. Where jealousy is absent, there can be no real Love.
Jealousy is the Conditement that preserves Love, as Sugar preserves Pears and
Plums. It Is the Dog and Bell that keeps blind Love in the right way. Jealousy
is the Argos that watches the unruly and wandering footsteps of scaperloytring
Leachery. And therefore men are discontented, and murmur at the jealousy of
their Wives, as little Children hate the Chyrurgeon that cures 'um of a Fistula
i'their Tails, because he hurts 'um. The first Condescentions of women are but
the beginning of Love, but Jealousy compleats and perfects their affection.
For unless a woman loved her Husband, why should she be angry that another
should enjoy him, It Is a sign she is ambitious of her husbands Affection, when
she envies all others that she thinks have any share with her; and a
demonstration that she preserves her chaste embraces entirely for her Husband. A
loving Mother is always brooding in her thoughts over her absent Infant, and
still supicious of the miscarriages of a Neglectful Nurse. In like manner, what
can be more kind and obliging, than a wife that keeps a continual watch and
guard over the safety and preservation of her Husband, well knowing how many
traps and baits that Harlot Pleasure lays up and down in every corner for
Mouse-like men, that are ready to snap at the toasted cheese of every loose and
vain affection. The Surgeon that boasted that he had Nuts of Priapus's enough
(the spoils of venereal Combats) to button a Leaguer-Cloak, gives a woman
sufficient warning to be careful of her husbands ware. It shows a woman has a
true value for her self, when she scorns to be out ^ival'd These Maxims the
Town-Misses are not ignorant of, and therefore count themselves then best
beloved, and are best satisfied, when their Paramours brook no Copartnership in
their Chamber-Practice. In them jealousre is applauded by their wanton
Admirers, and why not in a Wife, whose care is much more tender and cordial?
Thus a jealous Wife takes care of the main Chance; and a Man has the same
reason to be oftended at a jealous Wife, as at an honest servant, who takes
care to keep himself sober, when he finds his Master resolved to be drunk.

THE Fourteenth Real Comfort OF Matrimony,
AY -- that is fine music for a Husband indeed -- for his Wife to lie
hickupping a Bed, as if she were ongaging her stomach to give her Husband a
Pillowposset. He is then in a bodily fear in truth, when he finds her breath
inflamed with Brandy, and is afraid every moment of being burnt in his bed. For
I have heard of a woman than has set her self on fire, and been burnt to death
with swallowing a Snap-dragon. And yet in such a Wife there is both pleasure
and content. For they say, that Women are generally most kind in their cups;
and kindness in a Wife is one of the chiefest things which the Husband expects
from Matrimony.

Lovers are pleased to see Babies in their Mistresses eyes; but when his wife
becomes all Looking-glass, where can he more delight to behold his own
failings? Which if they be failings, he has the advantage thereby to dress and
reform his own ill manners first, and then hers afterward. What greater
pleasure can a man have, than to fuddle with his own Wife? or what greater
kindness can she fhew him, then to fit foot to foot with him at the Tavern?
It Is like drinking on a Sunday in Sermon-time, with the Churchwarden and
Constable of the Parish in company. Or if a man have a mind to be rid of his
Wife, let him not suffer her to disgrace him, by the revail way of only a
quartern at time from the Stillers Shop, but let him extend his kindness, like
the Tailor in the Strand; let her toss off her Noggins by wholesale; let the
Brandy-Firkin stand by her bedside.

Now that Women have as much right to drink Wine, as well as men, is plainly
demonstrable from this, That the Poet assures us, that Bacchus was both Female
as well as Male, and performed the greatest part of his Conquests by the
assistance of women; of which Sex the chiefest part of his Armies consisted.
His Nurses too, the Pleiades, were notable Topers, you may be sure; for they
spill their Liquour to this day, and are the certain forerunners of rain and
fowl weather when they rise in an ill humor. Then, who were to be trusted with
the Religious rites and worship ascribed to this carowsing Deity, but women?
And whether they were not notable Bowsers, you may easily guess by their
Horse-play Ceremonies. But now, Heaven's bless us! what a crime is it for a
woman to drink a glass of wine!

But let us consider, I beseech ye, one thing more. There Is an old proverb, In
vino veritas, the Cup never lies. Whence we infer, that Fuddle-coyf wives
always speak truth. I promise ye then, I think that man has no reason to be
discontented, that has such a precious Jewel; for you know that all other women
are not to be believed although they be dead.

Oh! but you will say, Fudling women are apt to miscarry i'their drink. To which I
answer, that though I might tell ye, more Women miscarry when they are sober
than when they are Tipsie, yet I will only blame the Husdand for that, who
ought to take the more care of her, knowing her disposition, It Is a thing that
looks ill in men, not to take care of their friends in their drink, but suffer
'em to reel home in the dark, and moyl themseves in the kennel; and therefore to
neglect women, the weaker vessels, when they have been a little over-indulgent
to nature, is a Soloecism in a Husband that justly deserves the dreaded
punishment of his carelessness. For her Husband cannot blame her for falling
then, when her tottering condition is such, that without bolstring, it is
impossible she should stand. It Is a question whether the venerable Delphian
Prophetess did not always take a hearty cup before she went to consult the
Oracle. For you see their Answers were generally such insolent riddles, that
the Devil himself could hardly pick out their meaning. And for the Sybil that
carried Aeneas to Hell, you may find in what a pickle she made her self before
she durst adventure the Voyage. When the Trojan Woman burnt Aeneas's Navy, the
story tells ye, they were all fuddl'd (for the mischief was contrived over a
damned Gossiping) yet we do not perceive that the Trojans loved their Wives
e're a jot the worfe for their frolic. Nay, Women are so cleanly in their
drinking, that many times they strain the Wine through their Smocks; when men,
like slovens as they are, drink up dregs and all.

Let men consider their own extravagancies; their flinging the Glasses over
their Shoulders, their burning their Coats, Hats, and Perrwigs; then their
running to Bawdihouses, mad as March-hares, their Scowring, as they call it,
and breaking peoples Windows, their qnarrels with the Watch, their disturbing
the Counter-turn-keys, who are forced to rise in the cold, that their Ratships
moy not lie in the street. I say, let men consider these things, and then tell
me why it should be such a heartbreaking discomfort of Matrimony to see their
Wives tipfie, when they take so much delight in it themselves. For Women, whose
nature it is to be inquisitive, observing their Husbands to take such an
extraordinary delight in trowling the Bowl, are no way to be blamed for their
aspiring to partake of the fame felicity. But lastly, another great comfort
that same Husband enjoys, who has a good Companion to his Wife. For as wine
debilitates both the one and the other; so he has the more rest and quiet in
his bed, and is not dunn'd so often for due benevolence, but that he may easily
afford it.

THE Fifteenth Real Comfort. OF Matrimony.
OH! But the man does not love Hairs in his Porridge. And yet sluts are
generally very kind. For when the Soldiers in Scotland wanted Onion-sawce for
their Wild-Ducks, the woman of the House, to supply their wants, was contented
freely to part with the only Clove of Garlic she had in the world, which her
Child for several days had eat and shit out again to cure the Worms. I must
tell ye, a sluttish Wife inures a man to the inconveniences of War, where a
man-does not always meet with clean sheets or Sun-Tavern Cooks. Sows are the
most nastie creatures in the world, and yet none more profitable or better
Flesh. Persumes are ofcures. And how frequently do we sind that men forsake
their wives Sweet-bags, to have a touch with their greasy Cookmaids? If the
Woman be a slut, yet the man has this comfort, that she is fair, or else the
Proverb's a confounded liar. Now there are certain creatures that having more
potent enemies than themselves, roll themselves over head and ears in the mud,
to escape the danger that hangs over their heads. And thus fluttish wives
conscious of their Beauty, roll themselves over head and ears in dirt, to avoid
the pursuit of wanton solicitations, to the great advantage and comfort of
their husbands. Cleanliness is but a new Invention; Sluttery was the mode of
the Grandmothers of our great great Grandmothers, when Romulus's wife wore a
flannel Smock a whole twelvemonth together, and Aeneas wiped his fingers upon
his Doublet instead of a Napkin. Sluttery is an Emblem of the simplicity of the
old World, before Pomp and Luxury cane in fashion. She that never seeps the
Cobwebs from her windows, has always an example and pattern of diligence before
her eyes; and then she has another good quality, that she keeps her Husband out
of the Mercer's and Lacemen's Books: and then her Victuals too costs little;
for a T -- d's as good for a Sow as a Pancake. Why should a man find fault with
a slut, when Venus her self was born out of the scum of the Sea?

But then for her Virtues, a shut is a Woman of Constancy. She ever was, and
is, and what she is ever will be, a slut. With out any alteration or change of
Humor, accorning to the usual Levity and inconstancy of her Sex.

In the next place it shows contempt of the folly and vanity of the world,
which is one round in her Ladder to Heaven.

Now as for the man himself, this is certain, that a slut can only offend his
nose and his Eyes. Now what man would be so extremely indulgent to his nose or
his eyes, to discompose the whole frame of Natures Habitation for a Hogo in his
Pork, or boiling his Pudding in his foul Nightcap? I have known it rain
buttered Pease at a man's House, merely because his wife brought him an Alchimy
spoon only smeared with a little Candle-grease. Yet who would not rather
choose to feed on a good joint of Mutton, though it fortuned that the
Dish-clout boiled jig by jowl with it all the while, than a dish of Frogs-legs,
or fri'd Mice, though never so artificially cook't a-la-mode de France? Or who
had not rather see his wives nasty Comb in the window, than the slap-dawdries
of paint and Fucus?

So that men are to weigh the good with the bad; some men's meats are other
men's poisons. What some men nauseate, is grateful to other men's stomachs: we
are not to hate Cows, because Cheese is made of their Milk: and as a learned
Divine once said, the pleasures of a Hog are not the pleasures of an Angel. And
therefore in short, men are to take their lots, and either be Fools or
Philosophers. For as all Arguments in these Cases are uncertain, so must be the
Conclusions.

THE Sixteenth Real Comfort OF Matrimony,
BUt forsooth, a man has a fine Estate, and a fine Wife, and a fine Portion;
and this Wife has a fine wit, fine conditions, and fine caresses, -- but -- the
Devil's i'these Buts. -- they come in so confoundedly at the but-end of a
commendation, that they spoil all. -- For this fine Woman is so addicted to
Lantraloo, and Back-gammon, that she makes a perfect Speirings Ordinary of her
House. No sooner is the cloth taken away, but another clean cloth must be
spread; and then out come the Cards or the Tables; and there she sits from
after dinner, till one, two, three, four a clock in the morning, day after day,
night after night, consuming and wasting her fine Portion, till she begins to
prey upon the main stock. And this is a parlous grievance, a comfort of
Matrimony in the name of Satan. All this while the men don't consider what a
happiness they have in enjoying such a wife. One cries, I think my wife will
play away her A --, and what of that? Then there is the thing gone, which is
many times the cause of all his fears, jealousies and disturbances. How many
men are there, that curse their wives tayls? which if the women have a faculty
to play away, there is a fair riddance of the men's discontent. But I must tell
ye, the fear of a Wives playing away her tail, is an idle thing. It Is true, she
may be forced to stake it sometimes; but then, though she should fortune to
loose, yet she wins by the bargain. But on the the other side, how many men are
there, that will loose their own Arses, and let a woman drain their Pockets as
dry as a clean-swept East India ship, for the favor of a little smugling, or
the commodiousness of access to their snowie white breasts? And then again, a
man does not consider, that a Woman addicted to gaming, minds no other
pleasure; she sits squeezing her things and her buttocks, and will hardly stir
from her chair to piss, much less to mind any other Fegaries. A man may
conclude his wife safe, when she is once got to her Cards. And it is a
happiness that one game spoils another. The Lydians were a notable people, and
these notable people the Lydians were the first that invented Cards and Dice.
And the reason was, to keep their wives from other sports, which they thought
more to their prejudice. For after Candaules the King of the Country had put
the Lydian Women agog, by showing his wife stark naked to his friend Gyges,
they were all mad, and bawled at their Husbands that they might be shown naked
too; every one believing her self to be as handsome as the Queen. Ay. -- quoth
the men, we'll find ye other divertisement; and so setting 'em to Cards and
Dice, laid their animosities presently asleep. The love of gaming, where it
once gets the victory, has such an attractive force, that there is no charm of
power sufficient to control it. It keeps women even from Play Houses, the
Nurseries of Hoity toyty Imaginations; it keeps 'em from Lectures, and
polluting the Church with unsanctify'd thoughts. Nay, the very consolation of
having Tib and Tom in her hand, shall cause her to contemn the disappointment
of the most solemnly-engaged assignation that ever woman made; while the
impatient lover makes many a weary step in the Templerounds, vainly expecting
her that is as fast at buying stocks, as the Knights of Jerusalem i'their
Graves.

On the other side, if the wife be so happy as to make Fortune her friend, and
some are so beholding to the slippery Jade, that you would swear she went
snips, then it rains Guineys in that house. The pot boyls upon the score of
Lantraloo-luck; Teal, Widgeons and fat Capons are the Trophies of victorious
Gleek; the Triumphs of Back-gammon excuse the charges of the Fringed Petticoat;
and many times the man too has his share in the taking present of a
Point-Cravat.

Many are the blessings that attend the owner of a she-Gamester. She is always
quiet, never out of humor. She is always patient, always contented; never
lowres, never scolds, never pouts; for her heart rides at anchor in the Serene
harbor of inward ease and joy.

Is she at play? never disturb her -- she is then moving in the proper Sphere of
her own delight. The Dolphin that had such a love for a Child, that he came
every morning to the shore, and carried him over an arm of the Sea to School
with his breakfast in his hand, could never have been so serviceable to the
Lad, had he been taken out of his own Element. When a Woman is peaceable and
quiet, and well, it is a madness to disturb her. Wasps never sting, but when
they are unwarily provoked. A game can never be well managed without prudence,
foresight, circumspection, and policy. Seeing then that a Woman who is a good
Gamester cannot be without all these good Qualities, it is a certain sign, that
he who has a good Gamester to his wife, has a Woman so qualified. And who can
think it a discomfort to him to have a woman polished with so many rare
endowments? By playing the King, they learn to govern, by playing the Queen,
they learn to obey; by playing Tib and Tom, they understand the inconveniency
of putting too much power into the hands of Servants. And stories furnish us
with several examples of great Generals that have practiced the Game at Chesse,
merely to instruct themselves in the Art of War, in Stratagem and Surprise, and
the methods of Embattelling, and encountering the Enemy. But suppose she looses
all she plays for. Then she cannot be thought to have all these good qualities
before mentioned. What then? yet she is still bidding fairly for 'um, still
upon the purchase of 'um; so that if she miss of her aim, it is the unkindness
of Fortune, not her fault. And bought wit is always said to be the best.

And now how would you have 'um spend their time? you would have 'um spin I warrant
-- Yes -- and sit wetting their thumbs, till they grow as lean with exhausting
their radical moisture, as one of the three fatal Sisters. A fine posture
indeed! to sit all day long as if they were twisting the thread of their
Husbands life.

You Would have her mind the Brat in the Cradle; as if it were not far more noble
and gentile to turn up a good jolly Trump, than a bawling Bastards shitten,
stinking tail.

Nor is the loss so great neither, for what a woman loses in gaming, she saves
in hous-hould-expences; in Coaches, Spring-Gardens, and Plays; in Balls and
night-Rambles; so that none may be better termed a Houswife than she, as being
always at home, receiving visits, seldom making any: for where the Carcass is,
there the Eagles gather together. A man is not crucified with the tormenting
thoughts, where or with whom his wife should be at this or that unseasonable
time of the Night. A terrible affliction to those that continually dream of
cornuting.

Suppose she lose her Clothes from her back. Then her Husband is sure to find
her a bed, till she get a recruit.

No question but it is a great vexation to a Woman to lose, and a great toil to
be always laboring for a dead Horse. However, it is much more convenient that
she should fret her self, than vex her Husband.

The Parson that loved gaming better than his eyes, made a good use of it, when
he put up his Cards in his Gown-sleeve for haste, when the Clerk came and told
him the last Stave was a singing. It Is true, that in the height of his
reproving the Parish for their neglect of holy Duties, upon the throwing out of
his zealous arm, his Cards dropped out of his sleeve, and flew about the Church.
What then? He bid one boy take up a Card, and asked him what it was -- the boy
answerered, the King of Clubs. Then he bid another boy take up another Card.
What was that? the Knave of Spaedes. Well, quo he, now tell me who made ye? The
boy could not well tell. Quo he to the next, Who redeemed ye? That was a harder
question. Look ye, quo the Parson, you think this was an Accident, and laugh at
it; but I did it on purpose to show ye, that had ye taught your children their
Catechism as well as to know their Cards, they would have been better provided
to answer the material Questions which I put to them.

And thus men may profit by their wives gaming; and raise many wholesome
Instructions to themselves from their losings. As first, if they knew as well
what belonged to Cuckolding their Husbands as they did to play at Cards, they
would never prefer the misfortune of losing their money, before the pleasure of
gaming with a friend in a corner. Secondly, that it was better for their wives
to sit losing their Money at home, than their Reputation abroad. And thirdly,
it ought to be a great satisfaction to 'um to see which way their money goes.
For that is the great Plague to a Man, when he finds his Money run away like
Quicksilver, but knows not which way the Devil it goes. But she that games
away her money, frees him from that tribulation of beating his Brains with an
impossible enquiry. And I must tell ye, a man had better that his Wife should
game away twenty, than sport away five pound.

But, Gentlemen, confider how you shake your elbows your selves, how you make
the dead men's Bones rattle; you never consider how you fret, and tear and
swear, and swagger and storm, and dam and sink, and curse and bite the Dice,
and gnaw the Boxes. And then at length when the Devil deserts him at the last
throw, then to see rage and despair ding the poor innocent Box against the
floor, as if he designed it through the cleft Earth at Lucifers own head, these
are extravagancies never thought of. What a sad and miserable surprise it is to
be taken by a Creditor with a Sergeant at his Heels, in the height of Security,
at hei a Main, have at all, while the poor wife and bearn at home live only
upon trust with the Milk-woman!

What a pretty kind of Emulation it was between two young Sparks coming losers
out of a Gaming-Ordinary! Quo the one, complaining to his Friend -- G -- dam me
-- I have lost forty Guineys -- G -- dam you -- Quo the the other -- G -- dam me
-- I have lost above fourscore -- Don't you think now, his friend was to blame
if he contested with him for priority?

What a pleasant comfort of Matrimony it would be to a Wife, to see her Husband
undrest by the Dice, as if he were to go to bed to his Misfortune! The white
Beaver leads the Van, then follows the Perriwig, next in order the Cravat, then
the Ruffles and Buttons thereto belonging. The Coat cannot forsake his
Brethren; and the Breeches hone after the Coat, as being of the same Cloth.
And what now? There stands stripped Peel-garlick having nothing but his Shirt and
his fiery Passion to keep him warm: only there is this small comfort left him,
that he cannot play away Title of Squire; that sticks to him as long as the
least scrap of his Fathers Thrift remains. For it comes to that at length, that
all must go, even the Wives Jointure and all. So the willing Soul at length,
overcome with endearment and Caresses, is carried like a Lamb to the slaughter
to Serjeants-Inn, where after she has given a willing answer to the whispering
Judge, she may then go hang her self in her own Garters. For this is the
Finalis Concordia between the Gentle-man-Squire and his Patrimony. Therefore
take him -- King's Bench, to the ruin of Wife, Children, and Posterity, that
cries my Grandfather was a man of Five hundred a year if he could have kept it.
Compare now the little Losings of a wife, and the Patrimony-havocks and
extirpations root and branch of their Estates which men make by the leudest,
wickedest, and most impious methods in the world; and see who has most reason
to complain of Matrimony.

THE CONCLUSION.
BUt it will be easy to remove all the Arguments which are brought against the
Female Sex to prove the discomforts of Marriage, if we can but prove that Women
ought to govern the State, and not Men. For then they are to look upon whatever
is imposed by Women, as the effects of their just Dominion, and not lie
grumbling as they do against the effects of their own ill Conduct. And indeed,
it may be well wondered, that all our Knight-Errants of Philosophy, who have
assaulted and pulled down the whole frame of Nature, and rebuilt it according
to their own Chymerical whimseys, not sparing the very Heavens, but either
tumbling down or dislocating it is Orbs; never contenting themselves with usual
and common remedies, but running in quest after odd and airy notions; this same
Sympathetical, and the other Universal Conundrum; among all the rest of their
extravagancies have forgot to transfer the Power of Governing the World from
Men, that have held it in their hands by violence and Usurpation for so many
thousand years, into the hands of Women; since a Scepter is not more heavy than
a Distaff, and a Cap of State very near as soon made and embellished as the
gayest of Female Head-attire. Was it, for that they, knowing such a superiority
too cruel and insupportable at home, thought it in conscience too dangerous to
recommend it to the public? Or whether was it, that they found the croaking of
those Night-ravens wrought more upon great persons than the found of the
Trumpet, and therefore thought they already possessed the Supreme Power
invisibly, yet in reality, and for that reason needed not any alteraons? Or
whether it were, that (according to their manner) they considered this as a
business not concerning Life, and therefore neglected it as unnecessary?
However it came to pass, certain it is, that they who have employed their Brown
Studies in the transformation of Commonwealths, and made them such, that if men
were good Angels they could not live in them, or if they were Devils, might
possibly be forced into peace; there is not one of them but has forgot to set
down this most excellent and necessary Piece of Reformation.

And therefore I affirm, That Government and Dominion in Women is not only
lawful and tolerable in Women, but also justly, naturally, and properly their
Right. First, though some crazy Philosophers, drunk with vain Aristotelism,
have endeavored to debase them from the same Species with men; and others far
more mad and inconsiderate than they, to deny them souls. Yet when we shall to
this oppose the Scripture it self, which makes Man the Consummation of the
Creation, and woman the Consummation of man; if we should cite those high
Attributes which the Rabbis give them, or instance those particular
Indulgences of Nature which Agrippa ascribes to them, or those peculiar
advantages of Composition and understanding which the learned Portugal Zacutius
makes them to inherit: Or should we bring in Trismegistus, reputed the most
ancient and most Divine among the Heathen Writers, who calls women the
Fountains and Perfections of Goodness: or should we add to all this, that which
stops the mouth of Barbarism it self, that is to say, the high Estimation put
upon them even by the Mahometans, who in them place the greatest pleasures of
their Paradise; it must needs be acknowledged, that these muddy Philosophers
only spoke the sense of feeble and decrepit Age, and that consequently their
Philosophy was as feeble and stupid as their limber and useless Limbs.

And indeed, this is a Quarrel wherein Nature has seemed to have declared her
self an Interested Party, so that we need to go no farther than the judgment of
our eyes, the quickest and the furest that a man can make to decide the
Controversy. For whom can we imagine to be so insensible, as not to be
presently touched with the delicate composure and symetry of their Bodies, the
sweetness and killing Languor of their Eyes, the intermixture and harmony of
their Colors, the happinesses and spirituality of their Countenances, the
charms and allurements of their Mien, the air and command of their Smiles? so
that it is no wonder that Plato should say, That Souls were unwilling to depart
out of such fair Bodies. Whereas men are merely rough-cast, bristly and brawny,
and made up as it were of tough Materials; and if they approach any thing near
beauty, they may be said by so much the more to degenerate from what they are.

And from hence we gained our main Inference. For if the Majesty and Comeliness
of a Governor gain so much awe upon the People, as Politicians have observed,
and experience teaches us that it does: What advantage have they in magically
charming and winning of the People given them by Nature, which the other cannot
aspire to by Art? For who would not be sooner smitten with Tresses curiously
curled and dangling, and built up by a ravishing Architecture, than with bushy
discomposed Locks, though powdered with Gold? Who would not adore a face
glowing with all kind of attractions, rather than a Countenance savage with
Bristles and indented with Scars?

This is a certainty that needs so little Demonstration, that if you look but
into any story, you shall find even the greatest Conquerours, lusty and proud
in their Conquests, humbl'd and brought upon their knees by the fair
Enchantments of Women. This we account Admirable in Alexander and Scipio, that
they could avoid; in Caesar and Mark Anthony we pardon, in respect of the
greatness of their other Actions. And therefore if the greatest Captains and
Soldiers, founders of Empires, be of a higher and more exalted Nature than
others of lower and meaner capacities, yet such as have been always commanded
by women, who have made them decline in their very Meridians; may we not thence
conclude, that Nature has given them a priority, which they enjoy in effect,
though not in outward appearance?

It Is to be supposed, that no man thinks Solomon to be other than one of the
wisest of men, and yet it is well known how these white Devils seduced him.
Augustus, who may truly be said to have been one of the steadiest men in the
world, one that in his youth outwitted all the Craft of the Hoary Senate, was
all his lifetime led by one Livia, who had that predominancy over him, that he
by her means disposed of the Succession of the Empire to a Son of her womb by
another Husband.

But to make this yet more plain, we say that Age begets Wisdom. Now how
general the affection of old men is to women, needs no proof, especially the
older they grow, some of threescore marrying Virgins of sixteen; and therefore
it is a clear Argument of the truth of this point, and of the Wisdom of those
reverend Seniors that choose such Assistants for the Government of their
declining years.

Besides, as certainly there wants not its reason in Philosophy, that all
Virtues belong to the Sex we plead for; so may we also in the perusal of
History find as many fair and illustrious examples of Virtue giby women, as
there has been by men. Look but over the Roll of them, and you may easily from
thence produce a sufficient stock of Presidents, where many things inserted as
done by men, perhaps are either brutish, heady and intemperate, while in the
women things appear more smooth and temperate. Or if there be any thing of
passion or exorbitancy, it is but an addition of Luster to their Sex, as a
blush or glowing in the face sets off their beauty.

Now if it be necessary that Governors should be of good entertainment,
affable courteous, open of countenance; and such as seem to harbor no crooked
or deep design; no men can be so fit for Government as women are. For besides
their natural sweetness and innocence, their talk is generally directed to such
things, as it may be easily inferred, that their heads are not troubled about
making destructive Wars, enlarging Empires, or founding of Tyrannies. So that
if we consider what has been said, and that even those most excellent Qualities
which are to be most desired and wished for in a Governor, are inherent to
them, we shall clearly gain the point which we aim at. What greater happiness,
than to have a Governor that is religious? Now all Philosophy and Experience
teach us, that the softest minds are most capable of these Impressions, and
that women are for the most part most violently hurried away by such Agitations
to which men are subject. How few men-Prophets do Histories afford us in
comparison to Prophetesses! witness the Sybils, and the female mouths of the
chiefest Oracles of the Heathen. And even at this day, who such absolute
followers of the Priests as the women are? If you wish them merciful, these are
the tendrest things upon the face of the earth. They have tears at command; and
if tears be the effect of Pity, and Compassion be the Mother of Virtue, we are
obliged to think, that mercy rules most in them, and it is to be soonest
expected from them. If you desire affection to their Country, where may you
more luckily find it? Have not the women many times cut off their hair to make
ropes for Engines, and strings for bows? have they not surrendered up all their
Rings and Jewels to defray charges? Have they not been content to perish with
their Husbands in their Habitations? and what greater love of Native Country
can be shown? Famous was the Valor of the women of Haerlem in Holland when
besieged by the King of Spain, while they out-did the men in Martial deeds, and
vy'd with their manly fortitude in sufferance of Labor, in repairing and
defending the walls of their City. As memorable was that of the women of
Amsterdam, when it was besieged by the Prince of Orange, who by agreement among
themselves, by their own Industry advanced a great Culverin upon one of the
highest places in the City, and thence continually discharged with great
execution upon the Enemy. And how far might women improve this Honor to
themselves, while they look upon themselves as the Mothers of their Country?
what tenderness would not such a Woman have toward her Children the People?
Especially when we see private women show such extraordinary affection of it,
that it approaches sometimes to do age or madness. Or would you have affection
to the people at home? No effect so violent as that of women. Murders,
Banishments, Proditions, have been but small matters thence arising; and what
Tragical effects their despair has wrought, Poets and Romances abundantly
testify.

Thus were this noble Sex restored to that right which Nature has bestowed upon
it, we should have all quiet and serene in Commonwealths. Courts would not be
busied with Factions, and underminings, but all would flow into pleasure and
liberty. Instead of raising Armies and the continual noise of Drums in the
street, we should be preparing for Masks; and instead of depressing Factions,
we should be all for Balls and Amorous Appointments. So that men might follow
their Handicrafts; Oxen might plough, and Millers Horses lead about the wheel,
while all this Labor and Toil served only for the furtherance and ease of the
Court.

Nor should we then have any wars or Massacres, which so many have argued
against, and against which the people so heartily pray. For women being of
tender constitutions, and for the most part sedentary in their lives, would not
engage in such rough employments, proper only for man, who is but the best and
most exalted sort of Savage, over whom the women have also this privilege,
that they can bring forth the greatest Conquerors, but Man can only destroy
them. Neither for several Emergencies have they wanted their active valor,
whereof they want not their several instances. Nay some Nations have attained
to this perfection of Female-Government, as the Amazons of old: and it may be
well believed, that were it not for the Usurpation of men at this day, we might
have seen something modern very like them; so that Sir Walter Rawleigh need not
have given himself the trouble to fetch them from Guiana.

Moreover, we know well how necessary it is in every Statesman, to be master
of all the Artifices and slights that may be, to gain upon them with whom he
has to deal. Now if any can be fitter to act this part than women, I am much
deceived. For what by their importunities, glances, trains, slights, ambushes,
artifices, and petty infidelity, it is as impossible to escape them, as to go
over fire concealed in treacherous ashes.

But I perceive a Volly, or rather storms of Objections coming on; but such,
as we shall easily escape without being hurt. In the first place, you will say,
They are or will be inconstant. The fitter they are for all occasions of
business. They will turn and tack about according as the wind serves, and so
will never Shipwreck; where as many Princes have spilt themselves and their
Posterity, by being too obstinate in stearing one Course. You will next say,
They will be proud. What more proper than Majesty and high deportment in a
Governor? Without pride, how should there be Reverence, and without Reverence
how should there be subjection?

You will tell me, They will be too delicate and gay. This is but to keep the
Imaginations of the people aloof, which must necessarily be heightened by such
curious deceptions, which are as needful for them, as the Arcana Imperii are
for men. Oh! but they will be talkative. So much the better for the people;
whereas reserved and dark Princes, that either mean nothing or ambiguously,
leave the people in suspense, and make liberty either dangerous, or cause
flattery to misconster it. You say, they will be cruel. I would fain know what
man, take the wisest or the best, that ever boggl'd much if a head or two were
in his way. And therefore why should they be condemned for what is so usually
practiced? Lastly, you will say, they are unwise. The more easy and supple to
be governed by wise Counselors. And therefore we must conclude, that as women
bring forth Children to the world, as they multiply themselves into these
visible and Corporeal Souls, and after they have brought them forth, so they
are most tender and careful to bring them up: And so it is most fitting, having
all these pre-eminencies and indulgencies of Nature, that when they are brought
up, they should also have the government of them. For a Potter would think it
hard measure, that the Pitcher should fly in his face when it was made.

And thus, without one blast, all the Discomforts of Matrimony vanish, since if
women act contrary to their Fancies, it is no more than what the men are to be
contented withal, as being due to the Prerogative of their Sex; and the honor
which men receive in being coupled to their Superiors, ought to drown all
their other vain Imaginations of usurped authority and ostentation.

FINIS.

