A most true and succinct Relation of the late Battle near KINETON in
VVARWICK-SHIRE, Expressed in a Letter from that Godly and Reverend Divine
Master STEPHEN MARSHALL, to his Friend a worthy Member of the Honorable House
of Commons.
Noble Sir,
MY Lord General not having time, give me leave to present you with a short
Relation of Gods late merciful dispensation toward our Army: On Saturday night
we came to Kineton with twelve Regiments of Foot, and about forty Troops of
Horse, some of our Horse and Foot were behind to bring on our Train and
Ammunition from Worcester: On the Lords day morning we had certain
intelligence that the Kings Forces were making toward us; whereupon order was
given to draw forth our Forces with as much speed as we could: The Kings Forces
came down Edgworth Hill about five thousand Horse and thirteen thousand Foot,
as the Lord Willoughby, who is prisoner, says; they got advantage of Hill and
wind; we had not in the Field above thirty Troops of Horse, the rest being
quartered further off came not in; About twelve of the clock the Cannon began
to play on both sides, and about an hour after horse and foot fell to it in
earnest: our left wing upon the second firing fled basely, and the right wing
of horse led by Prince Robert chased them, and it seems thinking the day their
own, fell presently to plunder our Wagons, and killing the servants, even unto
women and children which attended them, but our foot and the rest of the horse
followed it so close, that they wholly cut off the flower of their foot, the
Kings red Regiment, and two or three other Regiments, besides many of their
horse; took many of their Colors, the Kings Standard, some Pieces of their
Ordnance, drove them to retire up the Hill, slew the Lord Jo. Steward, Sir
Edmund Varney, one of the Lunsfords, and other Commanders, Took Prisoners the
Earl of Lindsey their General, who since is dead, his Son the Lord
Willoughby, Sir Edward Stradling, Colonel Vavasour, and Colonel Lunsford,
with other Officers. My Lord kept the Field till about three of the clock in
the morning, and then retreated to the Town; Next morning the Kings Army
appeared upon the Hill, and we took the Field again, but it seems they had no
mind to receive a Dinner from us, who gave them so bad a Supper: we cannot say
that we lost above a hundred of our foot, and a few horse, except the Waggoners
and those that attended them; I know not how many of the Kings are slain:
Colonel Lunsford confessed unto me, that three Regiments were wholly cut off:
Sure I am, God has given us a great Victory, and such a one (to use my Lord
General his own expression) that in as much as ever in any, there appeared
little of man and much of God. For a day or two we are refreshing our Army
hereabouts, and then, God-willing, we shall be fit for further service. What
order you shall receive from my Lord will come from a better hand, and I will
trouble you no further, but recommend you to God, and write my self

Your loving friend and servant, STEPHEN MARSHALL.
Warwick October. 25. 1642.
LONDON. Printed for H. S. November. 3. 1642.


