The Copy of a Letter
Written by Mr. William Newton, One of the Gentlemen Vshers unto the Lady
ELIZABETH, unto his Brother Francis Newton, Esquire. One of the Four Squires of
the Body to his Majesty.
From the HAGE, March the 18. New style, 1641. BROTHER,
WE are here at the Hage, but in little better case, as touching fears and
Iealousies, then you are in England: true, the matter of the Prince of Orange
is seemingly composed, I wish I could say ended, fire raked up, may possibly
appear, yea and flame: The States will not trust him with moneys, and paying
of the Army, as formerly: but will set up and create a new Officer for that
purpose: this sometimes discontents his Highness: the Governor of Bergen ap
Zome, that Town of so great strength, being once a near servant to his
Highness, and brought up a long time under him, in very near services, and
preferred unto that great place of Trust by the Princes mediation: him would
the States now very feign remove; but the talk goes here, that he will not
hearken to it, having that great garrison firm on his side; as it is feared
upon too just grounds; the Prince has all the Army, so that we are not yet
here quite clear of all surmizes of after-claps: the Burgers in the Towns,
plainly give out, that they fear the Prince has been aforehand with them: and
one of the Burgemasters of Flushing, openly in my Mr. the Princes presence
Chamber, told my Lord Goring, in my hearing, that they had just cause to fear,
that the Princes Sons Marriage with the eldest daughter of the King of great
Britain, had set the Prince on such a high strain, that shortly he doubted
either their ruin or his own: pray God things may stand as they were, for
unwonted aspiring thoughts, produce many times enterprises more pleasing then
successful, if distempers should again break out here: I think we must be
forced to come visit you in England: truth is, the States General have never
the better opinion of the Prince of Orange since this Match, some think the
worse: nay, their usual respects are something coulder toward my Lady, and
Master, who I dare say upon my oath, is heartily grieved for this distance, and
discorrespondencie between the Prince and them, and has no interest or
partnership, but sorrow in it, and who must needs reap disconvenience by it.
and may account this to the rest of her crosses: the Queens entertainment at
the Hage, is in my very soul more royal then hearty, the Dut^h liberality
is almost at an end: and the Queens entertainment begins to slaken with them:
only his highness holds on his wonted nobleness in chearing her: they set her
Majesty a day, that they would be rid of her, if so it please or stand with
her occasions: Proclamation against your Parliament delinquents, forbidding
them strictly to repair hither during her Majesty's abode here upon pain of
imprisonment, and sending back into England with strict guard, has been here
published in all Towns and dominions of the States: yet two have bravely
adventured to kiss her hand, who came hither wonderfully well disguised, and
walked nor openly in Court, lay in the Prince of Oranges own lodging, and
after two days took their leave either for France or Brussels: God knows the
Queen is very narrowly watched here, as a Personage of her quality may be,
and I durst pawn my life the Parliament has some agents here merely to attend
that business; and three of them are in my Conscience, L. O. S. S. I H. Her
Majesty would have gone first to Cullen, to have attended upon her Mother,
then to Brussels, but was denied; the Prince of Orange seemed very forward to
accomplish her desire in both, as far as lay in his power; but he was not so
forward, but she found the Dutch as froward, who absolutely denied in plain
terms, studying all the ways they can to gratify, and complie with your
Parliament, not caring who they displease, so they satisfy them; I verily
think, the Queen as the matter stands, will not trouble them long here, and
that ye shall have her in England yet a good while before Easter.

Thus hoping your welfare, and all our contents from his Highness Court at the
Hage this present Friday, March the Eighteenth, I remain your ever true loving
Brother, and Servant, Will. Newton.



