MARY MAGDALEN'S Tears wipt off. OR The VOICE of PEACE TO AN UNQUIET CONSCIENCE.

WRITTEN By Way of Letter TO A PERSON of QUALITY.

AND Published for the Comfort of all those, who Mourn in Zion.

LONDON Printed by J. C. for T. Garthwait, at the Little North-door of S.
Paul's. 1659.

Reader,
THe Publisher of this Treatise, having in his eye no fear of thy dislike, nor
regard of thy applause; has no other solicitation, for thy perusal thereof,
then the opinion he has, that it may be serviceable, to the good of thy Soul.
He thinks he shall be guilty of a very charitable mistake, if thou find an
error in his conjecture; and thou more obliged to offer, then he to ask thy
pardon for it. To prescribe preventive or recuperative medicines, in a great
Plague-time, is no piece of impertinent officiousness, but a prudent discharge
of duty to the Public. If thou be so whole, as not to need a Physician; thou
have had good luck, having lived in so licentious an age, and amongst children
that are Corrupters. Give God the glory of his Grace, and despise not the good
wishes of thy Brethren.

A Short TABLE of the principal Contents in this Book.
OF the Secret and Revealed will in God. etc. page 12 Of the Day of Grace being
spent. page 14 Of Sins of Ignorance and Wilfulness. page 19 Of Presumptuous
Sins. page 20 Of Sins after Baptism. page 22 Of want of Sorrow for Sin. page
26 Of Gods accepting Men's Persons. page 29 Of Personal Assurance. page 36 Of
Sacerdotall Absolution, and Gods Ratification thereof. page 38 Of Esau seeking
the Blessing, etc. page 50 The Example of the Israelites that provoked God Ten
times in the Wilderness. page 52 Of Assurance of Salvation. page 54 Of the
Witness and Testimony of the Spirit. page 56 The Combat between the Flesh, and
the Spirit. page 63 Of the Motions to Sin in Regenerate persons. page 68 Of
perfect and unsinning Obedience. page 73 Of the Measure of well doing in Holy
and Virtuous Actions, as in Prayer, Alms, Fasting. page 75 S. Math. 19.12. He
that is able to Receive it, etc. whether an Advice, etc, page 86 Of Loving the
Lord with all our Soul, etc. and not doing every thing we have ability to do.
page 89 Of Doing Holy and Virtuous Actions in the want of Charity. page 92 Of
making a man's self the end of his Actions. page 59 Against the Fear of Death.
page 98 Of the Falling away from Grace. page 103 Of Conversion. page 105 Of
Relapses into Sin, and Injection of Blasphemous thoughts. page 107 Of Want of
Children. page 112
MARY MAGDALEN'S Tears wiped off, OR The VOICE of PEACE To an Unquiet
Conscience.
MADAM,
I Thank you for your Charity to me, in calling me to my Prayers, and shall by
Gods Grace, endeavor to requite it, by a counter-change of Charity, in praying
for you, as you have desired me. I cannot say, that I am sorry that you stand
in need of being prayed for: we all do so, and they most of all, and the more
for that, who think they need not other men's prayers: But Madam, as I cannot
but admire your Humility in this pious request, (whose gracious Heart, like the
Treasury of the Temple, accepts of Mites as well as Talents) so, I am not a
little ashamed of mine own indigence, and emptiness, and (which is worst of
all) of my own unworthiness. I speak it in good earnest Madam; and being by
your call for my prayers become very sensible of my unfitness, at least for the
Intercessional part of that duty; I can assure my self, that as I trust you
will not be the worse; so shall I be much the better, for my praying for you.

But Madam, for my prayers only, I presume you did not send me that Summons: I
cannot then but esteem my self obliged, to render a duty to you, of the same
importance; but more immediately tending to the production of that effect,
which you have desired me to pray for; and which (perhaps) if more timely, and
individually applied, the Disease had not been so inveterate, and raging as it
is; nor you so distrustful of the virtue and efficacy of Remedies as you are.

By some scattered expressions of my Friend, that delivered your message to me,
I very confidently suspect your languishing under the wasting torment of a
wounded Spirit: but How long, by what cause, or upon what occasion; I have no
hint, upon which I may reasonably ground a Presumption. So innocent has been
that Act of your Life, of which I have been a Spectator; so rational, close,
and undistracted your discourse; that I dare confidently affirm, no Indications
of this secret Malady did ever present themselves to the most acute observer
of your Conversation with us. My thoughts concerning such a State in general, I
have judged it my duty to deliver; but how pertinent, or conducent to the
removal of the particular cause of your trouble, I am not able to divine; for
the reasons before mentioned.

1. The Soul of man comes out of the hands of her Creator, like a rich and
curious Watch; carrying in her self, as the Causes of her own motion; so no
disorder, till she fall under unskilful, or unruly fingers. Her first immersion
into the Body, renders her not only liable to the guilt of Original sin, but
to the future turbulencies, and excesses of those faculties common to us and
Beasts: which, because in them governed only by an uncontrollable instinct of
nature, are wholly sinless, and have in them no other tendency, but the
preservation of that creature in which they work: but with man it is much
otherwise; whose appetites are subjected to a rational choice, under the
penalty exacted by a Law, wholly commensurate with reason, and the noble
dictates of a Soul, emancipated from the Suggestions, and delusions of flesh
and blood.

2. Hence is it that she receives in us no wounds, but by our own hands: her
Peace is never broken, but by Errors in our Election; and that most times but
radically neither; the true resentment of our guilt and danger, being
subsequent to a reflexive act of the Soul; from whence proceed those Smiting
Thoughts, able to wear out, or rend an heart of Adamant.

The source or spring whereof usually are the consideration either 1. of what
we have been; or of 2. what we are; or of 3. what we shall or may be hereafter;
the guilt of sin acted, the prevalency of sinful dispositions in our nature,
and of enormous habits in our persons; the fear of Relapses, and horror of
future punishments, are that which set men's souls upon Tenter hooks: and few
there be, who have been guilty of any gross sin, whose Prepentance (if true)
has not given them some taste of this bitter Cup, apportionate to the course
of their unregenerate life.

3. What we have been] is of the same latitude in our Regeneration, from whence
we are to compute our Spiritual life; as in our Creation, from whence we derive
our Natural being. 1 Cor. 15.22. Ephesians. 2.1. Romans 11.32, Gal. 3.22.
As from Adam all lived, so in Adam all dyed: all dead in Sins and trespasses:
God has concluded all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all. Only the
Difference is in the circumstances, some greater, some lesser sinners then
others: some longer, others less while dead in sins and Trespasses: but the
danger, without repentance, is the same to the sinner; the Cure the same to the
Physician. To him the same thing, to raise Jairus daughter to life, yet
scarcely cold Mar. 5.22. as to bring Lazarus's stinking carcass out of his
grave, John 11.43. Both supernatural works, and a supernatural Worker required
to both: yet both effected without any Intension of the power by which it was
done, because insinitely able to work.

4. But as some of those blind men, whom our Savior restored to sight, saw at
the very first as perfectly, as ever after: but others when their eyes were
first opened, saw men as Trees walking, Mark 8.24. so are not the same
apprehensions of their spiritual estate to all Penitents; though equally
restored to Grace, and favor with God, and Federally justified from the guilt
of past Sins. The Causes hereof are various, arising partly from the
Complexion, and natural or acquasite temper of the Persons themselves; partly
from some errors in such, who applied to them the outward means, and
ministration of their Repentance; partly from some outward accidents of life;
and partly from the Suggestions, and Delusions of Satan, with such like.

Some persons are naturally more apt to impressions of Sadness, Fear, and
Distrust, then are others. Penetrating and quick resentments of danger, once
certainly incurred, render some weak spirits distrustful of their safety a long
time after, be it never so sure and visible: like men startled out of
Melancholic and frightful dreams, who although awake, cannot presently be
persuaded, that they are free from peril. The very apprehension of the danger,
his churlishness and folly had cast him into, made Nabals heart dic within him.
1 Samuel 25.37.

It cannot be denied by the strongest Christian, that the guilt of sin once
truly apprehended, with all the consequents of horror it draws after it, is
able to sink a very clear and serene soul, into an Alysse of black, and sad
thoughts: from which nothing is able to buoy, and raise it up; but the light of
Gods countenance, shining upon, and influencing that spirit, by forcible
assistances of Grace. But yet most evident it is, that the mourning of some
Christians is like that of Rachel, they will not be comforted: yea so
predominant in them, sometimes, is that torpid and pensive humor; that it
converts comforts themselves, into matter of discomfort: the goodness,
patience, and long-suffering of Almighty God, together with his unfeigned
offers of mercy, and pardon to all that truly turn unto him, (those high and
excellent Cordials for soul-sick Christians) being by the prejudices of a
misguided Imagination, corrupted into most bitter jealousies, either against
God or themselves.

Sometimes their spiritual troubles spring from the passions or unskilfulness
of the Ministry, under which such persons live: who either wanting the
sagacity, dexterity, (or which is most to be feared) the Charity of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 19.20, 22. to become all things to all men; especially in that
most Christian and wholesome branch of it, the being weak with them who are
weak, in the Flock of Christ; thunder out the threatenings of the Gospel,
promiscuously in the ears of all; making their hearts sad, whom God has not
made sad, Ezekiel. 13.22. and so vexing them whom God has wounded, Psalm. 69.27.
instead of calling, encouraging and comforting sinners under Repentance (that
small and still voice) terrifying them with the Menaces of the Law, (that loud
and furious wind) and casting upon men strong suspicions of their having
elapsed the time of mercy; seeming to antedate the great and terrible day of
the Lord, by taking the sentence of condemnation out of his mouth. Not
considering, that the Ministers of the Gospel have their Commissions dated from
Sion, and not from Sinai; and that the method, and language of S Paul in the
Pulpit, is not only more suitable to that Message of Peace, but most imitable
by us; because it proved so successful, in the business of Reconciling men to
God.

I know that a Son of Thunder may have much said on his behalf, from these evil
and deaf times in which we live: to lift up the voice like a trumpet, and to
show the people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, Isai.
8.1 is a duty, strongly and indispensably lying on a Minister of the Gospel at
all times, much more in such an age as this we live in; wherein so many
thousands of Christians hold the truth of God in unrighteousness, Romans 1 18.
and turn his Grace into wantonness, Jud. 4. justifying not only Samaria, but
Sodom and her Sisters; by outballancing her, and them, in all manner of carnal,
and spiritual pollutions: but that we speak is mostly against the undue care of
some Preachers of the Gospel, not sufficiently heeding and discriminating such,
who mourn in Zion, Eze. 9.4. upon whose foreheads Ezekiels mark has past, and
against whom the severities of those Comminations ought not to be used.

Sometimes this Trouble of mind, (if it does not wholly spring, yet) receives
much strength and nourishment, from some Accidents of life. Every unusual
circumstance in providential dispensations, in the apprehentions of such men,
carries with it the Shape and Terror of Divine Revenge: and all loving
corrections, of a most wise and merciful Father, are reckoned upon, as the sad
Presages of everlasting Torments. Nothing but the angry frowns of a terrible
Judge, flameing Torches, Fire and Brimstone, are the Scenes and Phantasms of
such clowded brains: yea, so sullen and distrustful, is the Repentance of such
men, that they suspect every blessing, and good thing, that God bestows upon
them in this world, as so many golden Balls cast out before them, to betray
them in their Race. They eat, drink, sleep, converse with such anxiety of
Spirit, that they thereby become intolerable to themselves and others. Again,

Satan most times has a deep hand in these troubles; who being unchangeably
malicious toward mankind, incessantly disturbs the Peace of such Christians
whom he cannot ruin. Yet so secret and close are his Devices, that many
prudent Christians are not able (as indeed it is very difficult) to discern,
betwixt his injections, and the motions of their own Appetites. By which error
Satan exceedingly troubles their quiet, and sets them into perpetual quarrels
against themselves, whereby he thinks it not impossible, at last to ingulph
them in Despair.

To this may be added, that some False Principles have in them a very immediate
tendency to beget trouble in men's minds, who are of instable judgments, but
yet of a good and ingenuous disposition: those especially concerning the
Irresistibility of saving Grace, the necessity of ones believing himself to be
Justified, unconditionate Election to Salvation, with some others, whose
falsity is plainly demonstrated, by many excellent Treatises of learned,
judicious, and pious Divines.

Neither is it a consideration impertinent to the matter in hand, that there is
a difference worthy our observation, betwixt Sin in the Memory, and in the
Conscience of a sinner; the not perception whereof, may cause great trouble,
and disquiet in men's minds. For as the Conscience and the Memory are not
really one and the same thing; so neither is sin to be accounted of the same
concernment to the sinner, when it is only represented by the Memory, and when
charged upon him by his Conscience. Usually, proportionable to the measure of
our Faith and Repentance is our Peace of Conscience; by these are the Marks and
Characters of our guilt purged away by degrees: but the transient Act of sin
committed, is ever recollected by the Memory, apportionately to the natural
vigor of the faculty in every man. And from hence it is, that in the fourfold
distinction of Conscience, there is one sort which is said to be good, but not
quiet: which (for my own part) I conceive to be an effect, produced betwixt the
memorative and imaginative faculties; rather then a true, and distinct state of
Conscience in a Christian; it being, to my understanding, equally possible for
the Imagination, to act and personate Conscience (in some men) as well in the
punitive and vindicative, as in the affirmative and interpretative power of
Law. Where the Imagination (as conscience) may make Law to govern men's actions,
as in some it confessedly does: it is not disproportionable to steason to
believe, that Imagination may likewise perplex, and punish those men, for the
breach of such Laws, as likewise Conscience does.

5. But let the Causes and Occasions of these Distempers be what they will; be
it the Conscience, or imaginative Faculty, or Memory, or all, or any other
thing, that procures, or promotes this trouble; usually, these are the effects
thereof, in sad reiterated Objections.

OBJECTION I.
My Sins are not as other men's, they are not the Spots of Gods Children: they
have these Circumstances, that render them most formidable. They are 1. more
then other men's, 2. greater, 3. more loved, 4. longer lived in, 5. less grieved
for, then the Sins of other men.

SOLUTION.
6. PUt all these Circumstances together, but the last (which shall be answered
by it self) your sins can be but great, many, loved, relapsed, and perhaps
after sharp Corrections for them, Vows against them, sense of strength and
ability through grace, to oppose, resist, and overcome them, and all the most
powerful temptations to them, and this acknowledged, and owned by your self, in
your impassionate, and deliberate thoughts.

Now what hinders the Remission of such Sins? are these the first Scarlet sins
that have ever been brought before the Throne of Grace, to receive another
tincture by the hands of Mercy and pardon? is there any incapacity in the
Sinner, any defect in the means, any qualification in the sins themselves, any
bar or obstacle to the Judge, that these sins, that such a sinner should not
be remitted?

What makes you incapable of Pardon? any Decree concerning your person, in Gods
secret Will? in his revealed Will there is nothing but grace and mercy offered
to you, because to all that truly repent and turn unto him, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22.
but if you suspect the Will of Gods purpose, what he has determined concerning
your Person, in that Will. you must know, that as there are not two Wills in
the Divine Majesty, nor two contradictory Acts of one and the same Will: So may
you assure your self, that what may directly be concluded from his Revealed
Will concerning the salvation of mankind, you have your joynt-interest
therein, with the rest of the Redeemed World: and that no Decree has from all
eternity been past against you, whereby a bar is set against all your good
and square endeavors, and your person rejected into a fatal necessity of being
damned. Impossible indeed it is that such dormant Attainders should lie against
the Persons of some men, for the Prevarication and Rebellion of our first
Parents, and yet that General Act of the Grace and Favor of Almighty God, be
so solemnly proclaimed by that great Ambassador of our Reconciliation, 1 Timothy
2.4.

OBJECTION II.
But I have made my self incapable by losing the opportunities, and heretofore
despightfully using both the inward, and outward means of my Calling, and
therefore justly is that fallen upon me, foretold and threatened in, Prove. 1.24.
Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded, etc. v. 26. I will laugh at your Calamity, etc.

SOLUTION.
7. IF by the Opportunity or Season of repenting unto Salvation, you mean one
point of time, wherein God does sufficiently once for all, or as the last
tendrie thereof, not only offer us the means of Grace, but also sufficiently
prepare and dispose the Will to receive it: I doubt not, but that answer of our
Savior to his Disciples, Act. 1.7. will be very applyable to you, It is not
for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father has put in his own
power. As Grace it self is the free and undeserved gift of God, so are the
circumstances of giving it, for time, manner, and measure, His; and disposed of
according to the Will of his purpose, wherewith you are not made acquainted,
nor privy to any determination concerning your self, unless you have had, some
known Revelation thereof. I believe that the Day of grace, as far as we are
able to collect is not shut up; nor the Sun of Righteousness, that at our
Saviors Baptism rose upon our Souls, with healing in his Wings, set, and gone
down over us, till our life be ended. Some were called at the eleventh hour,
when there was but one hour more to work in: yet by the bountiful promise of
the Lord of the Vineyard were rewarded with the penny, i. e. everlasting life,
as well as they who bore the burden and heat of the day, Matthew. 20.9. Sincerity
of Resolution is precious in Gods eye: and where sufficient time to approve the
same by good works is not allowed; I doubt not of the savable state of that
soul. Yet I do profess, not to believe, that such an one shall have an equal
share of glory, with Saints of the first magnitude; neither can there in reason
be so comsortable a posture of mind looked for in such an one: this being most
commonly the Result of that experience we have of our own repentance, by
bringing forth fruits worthy of it; which ought, when time and means permit, to
carry in them a due proportion, to the continuance, and vileness of our former
unregenerate life.

Now, though Almighty God does sometime accept the will for the deed, viz. a
firm and irrefragable Temptation-proof Resolution of Conversion for all future
actual performances thereof; as being able to Foresee, that that man would
perform his resolutions, in case God did permit him so much time: yet should no
man upon this Consideration, defer his Repentance, but rather most studiously
embrace the present time offered; not only for that this is to be interpreted
an affront of the Divine Majesty, by turning the Grace of God into wantonness;
but for that no man is assured, that ever he shall have any such late, and
precious minute vouchsafed unto h m; or if it be, can possibly have any
assurance, that he will be true to his word with God, in his Vows and
Resolutions; God alone, with whom all future things are present, being able to
foreknow the soundness, and steadiness of such shipwrackt ingagers. And as
these dependencies are seldom so successful (at least not so often) as many men
imagine, and in Charity we may very far hope; so would I have them to be
esteemed, as such, which can have no right Aspect upon, nor encouragement from,
the usual, regular Proceedings of the Divine Majesty: but are rather to be
laid, on the unpromised excesses and superabundancies of an infinite goodness,
extending it self to a sinner, Repenting him of his sins, beyond the full and
free limits of the first gracious Concession of Pardon: from a Relyance on
which, as I would not deter any the most grievous offender; whose neglects
and former Supinity had cast him on this little Plank, in a Sea of
Perplexities; so do I almost assure my self, that such a Christian, who dares
continue in sin, upon the confidence of this superabundance of grace, shall
never be partaker thereof; this being a Pearl of too incomparable a value, to
be cast before that Swine, who has so contemptuously trampled it under his
feet.

Yet, if you mark it, your Case is far different from the state of such a man,
who has neglected (say despised) the offers of mercy till the last minute of
his life, wherein he rather snatches after, then embraces pardon; being more
sensible of his own danger, then the love of God: for (blessed be God) you have
not received any Summons, to a speedy account of your stewardship, by a
decrepid old age, or a violent disease, or other contingency; but have made it
your blessed choice, to double your Pace in the ways of Holiness; having yet,
(as far as we are able to guess) the Postmeridian part of your Day before you;
time enough by the good blessing of God, to finish your Task which is set you,
ere the night come wherein no man can work, Jo. 9.4.

As for your Despightfully using the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. (as you
phrase it after St. Paul) an expression more suitable to a state of Apostasy
than Unregeneracy, (as you would have me suppose yours to be) as in your former
course of life, you set (if I may believe your self) too little an esteem, upon
the ways of God (the manner of unregentrate men:) so have you now too bitter a
censure upon your own, the sins of our unregenerate life, being after
conversion, by all Divines (I presume) accounted araungable, under the style of
Infirmities; and therefore of what sort soever, yet pardonable upon Repentance.

OBJECTION.
I grant (say you) that it may be with some Christians as with St. Paul; he was
a most violent Persecutor of the Church, but then it was in a state of
Ignorance and Unbelief, and therefore he says, God had mercy upon him, because
he did it through Ignorance, and in Infidelity: From whence it is easy to in
infer, that had St. Paul maliciously and knowingly acted those outrages against
the Church of Christ, he had undoubtedly been excluded from all hopes of
Pardon; What think you then will become of me, Who knew the will of my Master
and did it not.

SOLUTION.
8. THat Saint Paul did Ignorantly persecute the Church of Christ is
unquestionable; and that if Saint Paul had done the same Knowingly, and
Maliciously, he had not had any grounds to expect Pardon may probably enough be
true; but I do not take it to be out of all Question, but the Inference from
hence against your self is Illogical, and will by no means follow upon those
Premises. For thus your Argument stands, Saint Paul had mercy from God for
persecuting the Church of Christ Ignorantly, therefore whoever commits any
sin against Conscience and Knowledge shall not have mercy, and such sins I am
guilty of.

I shall not stand to show you the falsity of this way of reasoning, but only
discover unto you how erroneous your Principles are, and that so evidently, as
I need not torture you into a confession thereof; Do you profess to believe
that there is an equality in all kinds of Sin? that Adultery is not a greater
sin than Swearing? Murder or Idolatry than Sabbath breach? Rebellion than
Theft? I am assured you are not involved in this gross error. But then do you
believe, that that circumstance [of doing it Knowingly] can render the same sin
unpardonable, which if done Ignorantly will upon Repentance undoubtedly be
forgiven. Who then can be saved? What were the sins of David and of Saint
Peter? were they not sins against Knowledge, yet Repentance restored both of
them to their former station in Gods favor, you cannot suppose that those
persons with whom our Savior converst, were all of them Sinners only out of
Ignorance: Mary Magdalen was never held to be Ignorant (much less to be
Inculpably so,) that her course of Life was not agreeable to the Law of God:
yet so dear was she to our Savior, upon her hearty Repentance, That after his
Resurrection he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom be had cast seven
Devils, Mar. 16.9.

OBJECTION IV.
But under the Law the Soul that did ought presumptuously, was to be cut off
from Israel.

SOLUTION.
9. WE are not under the Law but under Grace, and Saint Paul tells us plainly,
that a main branch of that Privilege is, That by Him, (i. e. Christ) all that
believe are justified from all things, from which Ye (i. e. the Jews) could not
be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13.39. from whence it is clear, that
Remission of sins is given to all Sinners, who repent and believe the Gospel.
Besides, every sin that a man commits against Knowledge, is not a sin of
Presumption, or a sin committed with an high Hand; Presumption is not an error
of, or in the Understanding, but in the Will; at least is much more fixed in the
Will, than in the intellectual faculty, and therefore to sin against Knowledge,
and to sin Presumptuously are not convertible, and the same thing; Presumption
being not only the highest degree of Wilfullness, and very properly placed
under the v ce of Audacity; but it reflects more upon the person of the
Lawmakers, than on the Law it self; and the contempt of persons in Authority is
ever more grievously punished than the breach of such Laws and constitutions,
as are made by them.

OBJECTION V.
(...) to relapse into sin, after not only Resoluttions but Vows against it, as
they who sin after Baptism do, is intolerable and a sign of one that has
forfeited the Grace, that is given him, and is judicially hardened by God.

SOLUTION.
10. TO sin, and to relapse into sin after a Vow against it, is that thing
indeed which every baptized Christian does: and in those who are Adult, or at
years of discretion (not invincibly ignorant of their Obligation) is infallibly
not only a very great Aggravation of sin, but a sin it self: and such an
Offendour is (in very truth) not only a great Dishonor to the Gospel of
Christ, but a great scandol to the Communion of Saints; dis-inherited (and that
actually) of his interest in the Kingdom of Christ, whilst he continues in
that state of Impenitency: but when the course is broken, the case is quite the
contrary; and the Prodigal returning, capable of as benign and as hospital a
Reception in his Fathers house, as was that other Son, able to boast of his
good demeanor from his Childhood. This is the case of Repentant Sinners, and
for such it is, that when they (nay though but a single one) return, There is
joy in the presence of the Angels of God. Luke 15.12.

But for the Vow in the Baptism, I am not for the present) of opinion, that it
is any aggravation of sin, till the baptized Person comes to years of
Discretion, and has either actually taken upon him the performance of his
Baptismal vow, or else has attained so much knowledge of his Profession, as
that he has, or may have information, that he was initiated thereinto, and
admitted under such a solemn Stipulation. But when I speak of Actual taking
upon him the performance of this Vow, I do not mean that solemn, direct, oral,
and public transferring the Obligation on himself in Episcopal Confirmation:
but also the doing any Christian duty of Communion, whereby he does (though but
implicitly) own his Faith, and consequently his Obligation thereto, made on
his behalf by Suretyes in his Baptism.

And again, you must conceive, that every wilful sin against Knowledge and
Conscience (even in those who are adult, and have Actually put themselves under
the performance of the Vow) is no abdication of our Vow in Baptism, neither do
I apprehend that Person which so offends to be guilty of Perjury, upon every
Act of such sin of Wilfullness, no more than I believe, that every single
disobedience of her Husband may be interpreted to be a perjury in the Wife,
because she has promised, and solemnly vowed to obey him in the Marriage
Contract.

I confess, that an habitual course of wilful sin, in such as do own their
profession; nay that any sin presumptuously committed against the Divine
Majesty, does imply a breach of this vow, as well as final Apostasy; yea that
the abnegation of any evident Fundamental of Religion, as the Resurrection of
the Dead, the Doctrine of the ever blessed and holy Trinity, (after first and
second Admonition, Tit. 3.10. etc. is) a breach of the Vow in Baptism, but
that every Act of wilful sin is such, is to my Apprehension no more a truth,
than for a Christian of the Protestant persuasion to deny Christ's local
descention into Hell, (which has no undeniable ground in Scripture) and for
that error (for to that Persuasion the Church is not infallible) to be held
guilty of perjury in breaking, the second clause, or branch of this Vow in
Baptism, requiring him to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, as
well as does the first and third, exact from him a forsaking of the Devil, the
World, the Flesh, and the keeping of Gods holy Will and commandments all the
days of my life.

But let the most that you fear be granted, and you be held guilty of as many
perjuries, as you committed other sins, and this not only in your own esteem,
but in the opinions of learned Divines, yet still this may render that
condition to be more lamented, but it cannot make it irrecoverable; for is
there any thing in Scripture more frequent than Gods Messages by his Prophets
to the People of the Jews, calling them to repentance, and that after
Covenant-breach, and promising them pardon if they would repent, and convert
unto him? The Prophet Jeremy may supersede your searching any other Scriptures
to this purpose who indeed is abundant in those promises of Mercy, and
therefore a Book very fit to comfort every penitent Soul, and likewise as fit
by reason of the Threatenings therein to convert the Impenitent.

As for that you speak concerning judicial induration, or Gods hardening men's
hearts in Judge ement; Mat. 25.28. Luke 8.18.
I confess, that there is a taking away the Talent from the sloathfull Servant,
a withdrawing of Grace from him that does not use it, to that end for which it
was given him by God: but that such a judgment is not (ordinarily) revealed,
save by the treasuring up of wrath against the day of wrath, the final
impenitence of him who is thus judicially hardened by God, will be difficult to
prove, there being no very sure example of this Induration in Scripture, save
that of Pharaoh, in whom those consequents were most visible, and of those
obstinate and incredulous Jews to whom our Savior preached, or in whose
presence, or Country he wrought so many Miracles, mentioned in Mat. 13.14, 15.
but that you are in danger of such judicial Induration as this, is a very
remote fear, and to my judgment wholly inconsistent with your present Christian
Deportment.

OBJECTION.
But you say, my Sins are confessedly very great, (being accompanied with such
circumstances as they are) even withal the Allowances your Charity or
Judgment can afford them: they cannot then but require a proportionable Grief
for them, which as yet I find not in my self; Moses Rod that drew water from
Rocks of the Wilderness, being not able to break and wound my stony Heart into
Rivers of Tears, such as are fit to cleanse and wrince away these stains of Sin.

SOLUTION VI.
11. THis complaint is but a retrive of one of those Aggravations of your sins
mentioned by you at the first, and by me deferred to be satisfied at that time.
I say therefore that it cannot be denied, but that Grief for sin committed
ought to bear some proportion with the heinousness of our Crimes for which we
desire to grieve and lament: but you may be very unfit to judge of this
proportion; especially seeing your Grief and Revenge, with an intermixture of
other Irascible passions, has made you already too obnoxious to the devices of
Satan, 2 Cor. 2.11. and Peter three times denied that he knew his Master, Mark
14.66. and that with Cursings and Swearings, Imprecations (perhaps) upon
himself if he knew any such man, Luke 22.55. Here was a Complication of very
gross sins, as Swearing, Cursing, Denial of his Master, whom lately he
professed to be the Son of God; and all this a flat Perjury; yet you never read
of Tears shed for these Sins more then once: Mat. 26.75. Mar. 14.72. Luke 22.62.
but then they are recorded to be Bitter ones, what they wanted in the
Extrinsecal Proportion to the Standard of man's Judgment, they had in the
Intrinsic value, most proportionable to the Judgment of God.

You must know then, that Grief and Shame, and such like Affections of the
Irascible Appetite, are parts of that corrective Justice, which we execute upon
our selves; and very properly on the lower Soul, because that has been most
instrumental in our Sins, and has likewise had the greatest share of the
Sensual Pleasure received in sinning; as also for that she is the most proper
instrument to macerate and chastize the Body, (the other Associate and
Conspirator in offending.) That which ought to give the greatest satisfaction
to the Penitent, concerning the Truth and Measure of his Sorrow for Sin, is the
Aversation of his Spirit and Mind to all former evil ways, as such; with a
full Resolution, and sincere Endeavor, to avoid and fly all Sin for the time
to come, and to embrace and practice most impartially, all Rules of Godliness,
Righteousness and Sobriety, at what rate soever he purchase the performance of
them; facilitating his way thereto, by a frequent and prudent exercise of such
helps of Mortification, as his Lord and Master Christ, and the Church his
Mother, have recommended by example, or enjoined by Precept.

Neither is there any cause to complain, that these Severe Courses are not
reconcilable to a cheerful manner of living in this World, so far as not to
cast any torpid Languishments on our frail Bodies, or to render our selves
complyable with sober and honest Conversation: for they who have, and daily do
make Trial of these Rules and Canons for a Christian man's life, do not find so
much trouble in ^e practice of them, as in the sad Reflections on their former
Unregenerate State; which yet they may now contemplate with Glory to God, and
Comfort to themselves, who through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, has
given them the Victory over so Unwearied, so Politic, and so Powerful Enemies
to their salvation: if Reason can persuade you, that it is matter of Sadness
for a man to pass through rough and dirty ways, that he may in short time go
and be possessed of a Kingdom; or if you can imagine, that that man has
reasonable cause of Complaint, who is sure to escape the Bloody Hands of
Assassines, if he will but take the pains to Wind himself after a sure Guide,
through a narrow Path, beset here and there with Briars and Thorns; then, and
not else, has that man cause to complain of the unchearfulness of an Holy
Life, who has engaged to follow Christ his Leader, in the Duties and
Contingencies of so Noble a Profession.

OBJECTION VII.
But I still fear the Issue of all my Travails; not thinking any thing too Dear
to be bought, or too Heavy to be borne, so I might be assured to finish my
Course with joy: I am told by my Savior himself, that many shall seek to enter
in at the straight gate, and shall not be able to enter. If my former Sins be
not pardoned, all I do will be to no purpose; the not accepting of my Person
will render all the good I do contemptible, and punishable by God, as being so
many gilded Sins, as such moral Works are wont to be called.

SOLUTION.
12. IF nothing but your Pardon in your hand will satisfy you, and shake off
the Scruples and Perplexities of your mind; you must know that this Pardon and
Justification of ours, is rather under Promise now, and by Title of Law, then
Actually pas'd upon our Souls in this Life: yet are not we the less secure of
it, for the Word of God is unchangeable; but no man has reason to expect, with
Vnconditionate and Absolute Assurance, what must depend upon our own
Cooperation with the Grace of God. And though God has assured us, that He
will not forsake us, till we forsake Him, no nor presently then neither; yet
what assurance we shall have of our own endeavors, must be sought for in the
promises of God made and performed to his gracious Servants, and also in our
own free Wills, and the preseverance of them in Grace daily and minutely begged
of Him in Prayer. Luke 19.26. 1 Cor. 15. ult. 2 Pet. 2.9. Phil. 1.6.
God first gives us grace to ask, then commands us to ask, then helps our
Infirmities in asking, and promises he will give if we ask as he has bid us;
if then our wants be not supplied, where will the fault lie but in our selves?
Grace is cheaply enough obtained, if it may be had for the asking, and
increased for the using.

But being you speak of Gods not accepting your Person, as if that had so
necessary and immediate an influence upon all your practice, that not only
nothing were accepted without it, but every thing for it and from it; we will a
little consider that expression, as it is used in Scripture, with reflection
upon the erroneous doctrine wherein you seem to me to be (I believe
unwittingly) involved.

To accept any ones person has in Scripture a twofold sense: sometimes it is
taken in a good sense, but not often, so in 1 Samuel 25.35. where David being
interceeded with by the eloquence, wisdom, and presence of Abigail, changes
his determination of destroying her Husband Nabal and his Family, and this is
there called an accepting of her Person. In a bad sense it is more usually
found, so God forbids the Ministers of Justice to accept Men's Persons: Lev.
16.15. and in this sense it is, that God will not accept the Persons of Men, 2 Samuel 14.14. Mat. 22.16. Gal. 2.6. yea in this sense the Person of God Himself
may be, but must not be accepted, as in Job. 13.7, 8. Will ye speak wickedly
for God, and talk deceitfully for him? will ye accept His person? wherein Job
admonishes his Friends that they should not argue for God (with opinion
thereby to vindicate his Justice) from false Allegations of Jobs Hypocrisy. So
do those men, who equivocate, or lie, steal, rob, commit Sacrilege and murder
for Gods glory, etc. accept the person of God.

When therefore the Phrase of [accepting of men's persons] is used in a good
sense, it signifies thus much, that the person of such a man in conjunction
with his good qualifications, or deserts, is accepted and rewarded: but when it
signifies to a bad sense, then it imports thus much; that such a Man is
accepted, favored, or rewarded, without any intuition of his Qualifications be
they good or evil; this is Partiality and Injustice, and we may not use it even
for God himself.

Now by your Objection, I conceive, you believe that he is an Accepter of
Persons in this last sense, viz. an absolute Elector, who out of the mass of
Mankind corrupted, did by virtue of his Sovereign power, and Omnipotent will,
irrespectively choose some few men's Persons, and reprobate Myriades of others,
without any previsional regard to their Works, expressly contrary to that of
Saint Paul, Gal. 2.6. where the Apostle says, that God respects no Man's
person, (the Gentiles being as eligible in Gods eye, as the lineal seed of
Abraham, of which the Jews could not easily be persuaded;) neither James nor
Peter who seemed to be Pillars, being preferred and respected before Saint
Paul, (a late abortive Convert,) by Him who sees not as Man sees. And
therefore if God has not elected some, and reprobated others, without
prevision and Intuition of their Qualifications; as foreseeing what good, or
what bad, or what nouse men would make of Grace given, and consequently,
thereby assure or divest themselves of the Advantages and Privileges of Gods
common Love to Mankind; your fear of not being accepted, because God has from
all Eternity some Quarrel or No Love to your Person, is not only frivolous, but
dangerous, and in it self destructive of all your Labors and Endeavors for
eternal Life; keeping them under the dismal, and false Apprehension of Tyranny
in the Divine Majesty, which the Heathens themselves rejected, under the Notion
of Superstition.

To be short, I shall only confront the Answer of God to Cain, Genesis 4.7. (whom
I believe the Assertors of that Doctrine have ever held to be a Reprobate)
against the strongest Argument that may be used for inducing and confirming the
belief of this prosopoleptical way of electing and reprobating men, without any
intuition of their good or evil deeds: [If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted?] from whence are inferred these two things; First, that Cain himself
might have offered an acceptable Sacrifice to God as well as Abel; and
Secondly, if he had done so, he had been accepted by God, as well as was his
brother. So that it was not any Quarrel and Hatred that God had to the Person
of Cain irrespectively considered; but either to the evil that he had formerly
done (for we cannot presume Cain to have lived without sin, till the time of
the offering that Sacrifice, nor does the Text assert, that to be the first
Sacrifice, that either he, or Abel offered) or that which he had now committed
in offering a Sacrifice not worthy Gods acceptance at his hands.

What reason therefore you should have to fear the success of your Labors in
the Lord, upon Misprision of Personal Acceptance with God, you see by what has
been said; as also of your groundless fears of not being able to enter in at
the straight Gate; our Savior having (if you mark it) threatened, not them who
strive (because he has commanded that active, industrious way of attempting)
but them who only seek, Luke 13.24. (...).
(a way of getting Heaven very different from the former) importing very little
more (though no more to the purpose) than Balaams Wish, that he might dye the
death of the righteous. Numb. 23.10.

OBJECTION VIII.
But though it will follow from hence that Personal Assurance of Remission and
Pardon of Sin, be not always a necessary effect of Gods pardoning of us, or
our being in a way to be pardoned: yet surely it is somewhat unlikely (say you)
that the clean contrary, viz. a persuasion that I shall not be pardoned, should
flow from so happy a condition, as you would make me believe I am In.

SOLUTION.
13. IF you should thoroughly examine your self; that you do thus persuade your
self, will undoubtedly appear to be false. For to what purpose do you then
pray, fast, and give alms, lead a strict and severe life, etc. if you were
indeed persuaded that you shall not be saved? would any one but a mad man keep
on his pace, in rough, and almost impassable ways, if he were certainly
assured, that he should never come to his journeys end? his feet must needs be
thought to confute his tongue, if he should do thus.

Besides how preposterous a thing were it, if you should take such sharp and
severe courses, as you do, to enlarge your score, supposing all these Actions
of yours should be charged by God upon your account, as so many gilded sins,
as you lately termed them? But this, I think, you will have little reason to be
afraid of, seeing our Savior has told you, that the Alms-deeds and Prayers of
the Pharisees themselves were so rewarded, as they desired they should be, (
viz. with the Praises and Commendation of men, Math. 6.16) and are not by him
either styled sins, or threatened with any punishment, more then with the
no-ground of expecting a Reward from God.

But as concerning the pardon of our sin, it will be very useful to observe
these four things. 1. That the point of Faith, concerning Remission of Sin, is,
That by Christ, Remission of Sins is given to Mankind through Faith in his
Blood. 2. That this Remission is not absolutely, though freely given; but does
depend upon certain Conditions or Qualifications, whereby men are made fit and
capable of receiving it. 3. That the Rules as well for the means of conveying
this Donation to us, as for our aptitude and capacity to receive the benefit
thereof, are to be sought out and taken from the Scriptures. 4. That because
many things of Importance, concerning this doctrine, are to be deduced from the
Scriptures, by the Mediation of humane understanding, it is a mark both of
Piety, Wisdom, and Humility, to take the Catholic Church for our Guide, and
relyance therein. False Interpretations of Scripture, prove either full of
Perplexity, or Danger, or both, to our selves and others; but most especially
in such Doctrines, so nearly importing our Salvation, as this of Remission of
Sin does. Therefore it is not to be regarded, by what Medums, or from what
Principles your conclusions are drawn, if they be only your own: if you mean to
sail securely amidst the Tempests raised in the World by such diversity of
Judgments and Imaginations, embarque your self in the Universal Consentient,
and Ancient Interpretations and Doctrines of the Church; and do not adventure
so precious a Fraught, as is your soul, redeemed with the blood of Christ, in
the tottering Boat of your own, or other men's private Interpretations of
Scripture. The Church teaches you this doctrine, viz. 1. That you are
pardonable upon your Faith and Repentance. 2. That God has promised (who
cannot lie, Heb. 6.18.) that he will pardon you, if you believe and and repent.
3. That the Manifestation of Gods pardoning your sins, is at present but
imperfectly, and inchoately wrought in your Heart by the Holy Ghost, and the
use of Sacraments; but the full Evidence thereof is to be expected from Christ
the Judge, and to be patiently, and cheerfully waited for by Faith in the
promises. 4. That the Testimony of your own Spirit, arising from your sincere
conversation in the doctrines of the Gospel, is the most certain Evidence, that
you or any man can ordinarily expect in this life: and all this from pregnant
Testimony of Scripture.

For you, who hold a lawful and uninterrupted Succession of Ministers in the
Church of Christh, you cannot but believe, that in the hands of the Church lies
much of your Peace, as well as of your safety: considering the Power they have
over you, Heb. 13.17. and the Power they have for you, John 20.21.22.23. and
both these derived down to this present Age, and shall so continue wheresoever
the Church shall be, (though there be no necessity that they should be
continued wheresoever Christians are) by verof our Saviors promise, even to
the end of the World. And these powers to be pleaded for by them, and submitted
unto by you, as being of Divine right; framed and appointed by the Holy Ghost,
(the principal Administrator of Church Government) for the Advantage and
Edification of the Body of Christ.

I doubt there be some, and those no inconsiderable ones, that believe this
doctrine not sufficiently asserted by the Church of England, there being in the
Frame and Contexture of her Church Government, too much of the Lay, and too
little of the Clergyman. And though my Judgment tells me, that there is not
any Civil Magistrate on earth, be he Emperor, King or Prince, that has so
Evident, and Immediate a Commission for his Power, and the Exercise thereof, as
has the Church: yet who sees not, that both the Administration, and the
Administrators of this Government are despised, save in such a subordinate way
of dispensing this power, that must needs render it precarious in the eyes of
ignorant men, and the Church Officers themselves, no other things, but such
borrowed Hands, as by pulling, now this way, now that way, help to keep the
carriage of the Civil State from overturning in rough and dangerous Descents

OBJECTION IX.
But you say, that could you have believed the point of Sacerdotal Absolution,
and the Obligation ( that seems to infer) to private Confession; you had long
since enjoyed your Peace, at least you had not felt so great a trouble as now
you do.

SOLUTION.
14. OUr Judgments no whit differ in this, for I clearly believe, that on
earth, as there is no surer way to prevent men's falling into sin (especially
many close Enormities) then the discreet and conscionable practice of the Duty
of Confession: so is there not a more proper and undoubted way, for allaying
the Troubles of mind, flowing from the guilt of Sin; then a grave and
considerate Execution, of the Power of Absolving Sinners.

I say the power of absolving Sinners; for if this Clause in his Commission
stand not good by Divine Right; I know nothing a Priest can do more then other
men; and am well assured, that in some part of their Office, they can do (many
of them) much less. Not to signify any thing of the grief I have, for your not
believing so evident Texts of Scripture, as this Doctrine is built upon; I
shall endeavor to cut up your Infidelity in this point by the Roots, by a very
brief Examination of these few particulars. 1. What the power of Absolving is.
2 Whether it be conveyed down to the present Pastors of the Church, in the
ordinary way of commissioning them to that Function, by the Imposition of the
hands of Bishops and Presbyters. 3. Of what concernment this Power is, in the
Execution thereof, upon Penitent Sinners.

1. The power of Absolving Sinners, is comprehended in one branch of the power
of the Keys, viz. remitting sin: expressly mentioned in Christ's Commission
given to the Apostles and their Successors, Matthew. 16.19. and Joh. 20.23. which
in the point in hand, as it much differs from re-admitting into the Church,
(that part of the power of the Keys which seems, and does but seem to be the
same with this) so is it in a Priest or Presbyter (to my Judgment) no judicial,
but rather an Annuntiative act, the Priest being none of that order to whom the
promise of our Savior is made, Matthew. 19.28. of sitting on twelve thrones, and
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. My reason for my opinion is, because a
Priest cannot be thought to Absolve otherwise, then he can Retein (else there
will be more in one, then in the other of the correlatives,) Now a Priest does
not retein sin judicially (for that is the office of the Bishop, and is only
done by the sentence of Excommunication) but declaratively only, showing the
Impenitents (whether collectively, or personally) that by reason of such or
such Impediments, their sins are not forgiven; but not binding their sins upon
them judicially, so that the Offender shall not only be obliged to repent, but
also (as under the sentence of Excommunication) to sue for the removal of the
Censure. Like as in the Law, one who is sued to an Outlawry for Debt, must as
well procure the Writ of Outlawry against him to be reverst, as take care to
pay the Debt.

Neither do I by this, make the pronouncing of a sinner absolved, by a Priest,
to be of no more efficacy then if a Layman had done it: for a power to
pronounce or proclaim a Pardon in the name of a Prince, by virtue of a
Commission issued out to one for that purpose, or by one to whose office it
belongs so to do; is quite another thing, then the same Pardon reported by one,
who has no power and authority to proclaim the Princes pardon.

But if I am thought by this to infringe the power and privilege of the
Sacerdotal Function, and any way to lessen the Authority of that Order; I must
speak my mind freely, I do not conceive that the same words in the Ordination
of a Priest, do in the Intention of the Church signify to the same latitude, as
they did in the Institution of Christ, and therefore I believe a Presbyter or
Priest, does no (more, but yet as much) in this point, as the Church has
invested him with in her Ordination of him to that Function; which is the
exercise of an Authority limited, as I have already said.

However this is enough for the Penitent, for if the Priest has Judgment
(which in Reverence to the Church which has had Inspection of his abilities we
ought to believe) to discern when the Penitent is pardonable, you cannot deny
but he has authority committed unto him, in Gods Name, and from his Word, to
let the Penitent know, not only that he is pardonable, but that God will
undoubtedly pardon him, and all such as he is; in case of their Perseverance in
their Repentance.

2. As for the second thing proposed, viz. whether this power be so conveyed
down, etc. it is strange, me thinks, it should be any matter of scruple to you.
For if you had not some prejudice to every thing that relates to pardon of Sin,
I would ask you (and do verily suppose should go away without an answer)
whether you believe a Presbyter has power to consecrate the Elements in the
blessed Sacrament, by virtue of this Ordination? and whether a Layman can do
as much therein, if he should take the Common prayer Book, and read over the
Bread and Wine, the Form of the Consecration? I know you believe the later as
much as you believe the former. What hinders then, that this branch of power
should not be conferred upon him in his Ordination? The Authority conferred
upon the Church by Christ is the same in both, and both are by the Church (with
due Limitation) invested on the Presbyter in his Ordination. And good reason it
should be so, for I doubt not that the Sacrament ought (regularly) to be
administered to none but absolved persons; as none were to eat the Passover, but
those who were clean from all Legal pollutions. We see that the Presbyterians,
and all other Sectaries amongst us, are so tender of this point, that they are
so far from lessening the Authority of their Church Officers in this
particular, (or at least of the whole Church as they please to term it) that
they are much more rigid and severe, in executing a Power like this, of their
own making, then ever the Bishops were, in putting the power Christ undoubtedly
gave them, in execution. But I need not say much of this second branch to one
of your persuasion.

3. Lastly, if you desire to know what advantage, this is to a Penitent? I
answer, that if a Penitent do but believe, as much of the Priests authority
(though I shall be thought no very great friend to the enlargement of it) as I
have asserted; viz. an Annnnciative power from God not only to declare men
Pardonable (as he does in preaching the Gospel) but to pronounce them pardoned,
upon inspection of their faith and repentance, as he does in giving them
absolution; he shall not only recieve comfort, by the Priests assuring him of
the safety of his condition, and of his redintegration into grace and favor
with God; but shall enjoy the benefit of his prayers, whom God has appointed
to that Duty most especially, and whom he has promised to accept: together
with the Blessing of the Priest ( Blessing him in Gods stead as well as in Gods
name) a favor which nothing but some lend Hophni's, and Phinees's amongst the
Clergy. Numb. 6.23.27. but multitudes of profane Esau's amongst the Layety,
could have had the skill or luck to have rendered so contemptible as we see it
is, the punishment whereof (as likewise of Despising the Persons and Offices of
such whom God has appointed to serve at the Altar of Blessing, in many other
particulars) both this present and many future unreformed Ages shall (as well
as have some passed times) undoubtedly bear, even to the removal of the Golden
Candelstick from among them.

That thus a Priest is enabled to do, is clear from the Form of Absolution,
appointed in the Liturgy of our Church to be used in the Visitation of the
sick, wherein as the Authority of the Church in that point, as also of the
Priest, are plainly asserted, so is it matter of wonder, that so many Legal
Protestants have such a slender respect for an important and necessary duty,
it is not to be believed that either that Power of the Priest that form of
absolution, and the Duty of Confession are reserved to be huddled up in so
troublesome an hour, and all the time of health past over without any inquiry
into our Accounts: the Church injoyns it to be used then, but does not forbid
the use of it at other times. My advice to you is that if you desire the
recoverie of your own Peace of conscience; you put this Duty in practice more
frequently, and see that your Ghostly Father, do his Duty in this and no other
form of Absolution, (I mean any of his own making) least by some error he may
seem to do more then his power will permit him, or not do as much as the Church
has enjoined.

OBJECTION X.
You will say perhaps what settlement of Conscience by a Sacerdotal Absolution?
seeing the Priest can but see, with the eyes of a Man, and has no Knowledge of
my heart; which is so Deceitful, that it is a very great difficulty, for any
man to find it out, though it lodge in his own breast, and if he had knowledge
thereof, yet is the Act but Ministerial, not Dispoticall, and who knows whether
God will confirm it or no.

SOLUTION.
15. THe Priest sees but as man sees, but he may see what you see not, and
judge better of what he sees then every common person, seeing the lips of the
Priest do preserve knowledge. If therefore he have understanding to discern
and judge aright of what he sees, (as you must suppose he has, else you will
(at least) condemn your self of an unreasonable choice) it is your buisiness,
to lay your Soul before him; and to acquaint him thoroughly, and truly, with
your Condition: if you fail in this (and consequently the Act be done under an
error) the blame hereof will light on none but your self. And as for the
knowledge of your ways, there is no doubt but if St. Paul's Rule be true, though
nothing else without us but God does, yet the Spirit of a man does know the
things of a man, 1 Cor. 2.11. and the heart may be Emptied to the very bottom,
by such rules as a judicious prudent and pious Confessor shall prescribe.

But in the later part of your Objection, I am sorry to hear any question made
of Gods confirmation of that due and necessary Act of Absolution made in His
name, and by virtue of a Commission derived from him. Any thing of this nature
amongst men, would sound too infamous, especially if fixed upon such Persons who
have the Power and Honor of Giving commissions to other men. To question Gods
faithfulness, is a sin of infidelity, and he that has promised under the
second covenant, he will remember our Sins and Iniquities no more, Heb. 8.12.
i. e. of such as embrace the Gospel preached unto them.

14. To conclude my Answer fully to these two last Objections, I suppose, that
because we have no visible bloody Sacrifice, nor a Mostholy (on Earth) into
which the High Priest may enter with blood for his own and our Sins, it is
therefore a matter of difficulty in your judgment to be ascertained of the way
of obtaining pardon for Sinners under the Gospel; the means of doing it being
so secret and invisible, and the Threatenings (in case it be not done) so open
and terrible.

The Apostle tells us plainly, That Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to
day, and for ever: Heb. 13.8. which imports not only the immutability of Gods
accepting Christ, as the meritorious cause of Remission of Sins, but also the
unchangeableness of that method, whereby this Kingdom of Christ under the
Gosper is administered. For this later, which most concerns your case, the
Apostle tells you, that Christ ever liv^th to make intercession for us, Heb.
7.25. this being the most considerable part of his Office in the administration
of his mediatory Kingdom. This Iatercession for us, i. e. the Church in
general, and each one in particular, being his own immediate Act in Heaven,
(and prefigured unto us by the Highpriests going into the Most-holy, once only
in every year, Heb. 9.8.) does consist of two branches, because it supposes
that we have need of two things, Justification and Sanctification, therefore
does our High Priest intercede with his Father for two things; for 1. pardon of
Sin, for 2. grace of Obedience, or holy living; and these not intermitted, but
continued Acts of intercession for us, to the end of our lives, and for all
unto the end of the world.

And this Act of Christ's Intercession for pardon is two fold; First a
preventive act of Intercession, (or rather the beginning of an Act continued to
higher degrees) whereby Christ does intercede with God for us, that the Legal
forfeiture of our lives by sin, may not be taken immediately after the Fact;
and also that Grace of Repentance may be given us: of this nature I conceive
that Intercessional prayer of our Savior, Luke 23.34. Father forgive them,
they know not what they do. Where though the giving to such men Repentance be
not expressed, yet is it (questionless) employed, because without Repentance they
cannot be pardoned. The second branch of this Act is a subsequent mediatorie
act of prayer, or [Plea] with God (for so much the word Advocate will bear, (if
any man sin, we have an Advocate, etc.) on the behalf of the sinner repenting;
whereby Pardon is procured for him, upon Gods Foresight, that his Contrition
and Repentance will be sincerely continued, by the virtue and efficacy of the
grace of perseverance, which is interceded for by Christ, and obtained, upon
the Penitents using the former measure of assisting grace; and this, as a
blessing upon, and a reward of his sincere endeavors of obedience.

This later branch of Christ's intercession for pardon, is that, whereby Christ
the Mediator does receive into his protection, the humiliating acts of a
penitent soul, perfuming the Tears and prayers of such a one, with clouds of
his own most precious Incense; and together with his own, offering them to
Allmighty God, as the fruits of his former Mediation, and an earnest of that
enlargement of his Church, which, as it is the travail of his soul, Iai. 53.11.
which he delights to see, so will it be the joy of the holy Angels in the
presence of God.

16. Upon this Intercession of Christ, depends our pardon of Sin, and
renovation by Grace: from hence it is, that all but Apostates, and such as
cease not to do despite to the Spirit of God, by a continued presumptuous and
malicious course of Sinning, receive a benefit apportionate to their several
Stations and Degrees. And that you have no reason to think your self rejected,
into the fatal portion of them, (being indeed the purchase of the sinner
himself, thus cruel to his own soul) who have no advantage, (nay not the
greatest of all) by this Intercession of Christ: your Eyes filled with your
Tears, and your Ears deafned with your own Sighs, your Hands so busy in
distributing Alms, your Feet so Active in visiting the Sick, and your Knees
made callous (like the Primitive Saints) with frequent Prayings, are a
sufficient witness to your self, and to all the world beside.

OBJECT. XIII.
But you Reply. Did not Esau seek the Blessing with Tears, and yet missed of it.

SOLUTION.
17. BUt I presume you think St. Paul has put this Objection into your mouth;
but if you please to survey the place in Hebr. 12.16, 17. you shall find that
this does not reach you, unless you have at any time sold the blessing for a
mess of pottage, i. e. renounced your interest in the land of Promise, (the
precious promises of the Gospel,) for the enjoyment of that Plenty, Honor,
peace, etc. the Pomps and vanities of this wicked World; I say renounced your
part and interest in the Merits and Mediation of Christ; and that not
indirectly and remotely (as all who are guilty of wilful sins in some measure
do) but orally, scandalously and treacherously; which (I presume) you will not
forge, and charge upon your self; though your fancy has a large Shop, and many
Tools to work with.

Seeing then, that by virtue of that preventional act of intercession, (lately
mentioned) you have not been cut off in your sins; but have your life given
unto you for a prey; and withal, Grace for Repentance unto life, which like
good Physic, by reason of a mass of crude humors in the Stomach) does thus
work somewhat violently in your soul; why should you doubt that other
subsequent Act of Christ's Intercession, whereby your pardon will be obtained?
has God pleasure in the death of him that dies? does not he swear he has
not? Ezekiel. 33.11. and has the Divine Majesty so far lost his credit with you,
as not to be beiveled upon his oath? can he which is Love it self, not only
scorn, but hate the Prostrations of a Sinner? that Sinner, whose eyes would be
content to pour out Rivers of blood before the throne of Grace, to obtain a
Reconciliation with the offended Majesty of Heaven? even that Reconciliation
which Himself prays from us men, by the Ambassadors of his Holy Gospel, as St.
Paul has told us, 2 Cor. 5.20. O do not thus struggle to deprive your self of
your interest, and share in those merciful embraces, which hasten to meet, and
not fly from Repenting Sinners!

OBJECT. XIV.
But yet still, me thinks, my Sins are such, as God cannot in Justice pass
by; his promises are too precious to belong to me; more temperate Sinners, and
such who have not so violenced the Law of God, and provoked his Long-fuffering,
may (doubtless) have the benefit of them: but as for me, why should not my Lot
be with them, who but for ten times provoking were for ever secluded the Land
of Promise.

SOLUTION.
18. YOur Charity is very commendable, that can make you believe so much for
others, and so little for your self: but you should do well to remember, that
the Attributes of the Divine Majesty, may not be limited by us; not that I
think any one so foolish, as to attempt it in respect of their nature, which is
impossible; but in respect of their effects which to do is sinful, they are
infinite in their own nature, and must be so in our esteem: to say God cannot
forgive your sins, is a sin against his power and justice; to say he will not
(where he has promised) is a sin against his truth and goodness. His goodness
has made him promise that he will do it; and that he might make this promise
good, he has provided a full satisfaction to his justice, and all this as much
before us, as without us, and this limited as fully and as largely to you, as
to any other Christian in the world.

This you cannot but see, in that most comfortable and full affirmation of the
Apostle. Heb. 2.9. When he tells you plainly that it was the design of Gods
Grace. That Christ should taste death for every man: and God so loved the World
(says St. John. cap. 3.16.) That he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish but have everlasting life.

As for that example of Gods wrath upon the Provoakers, (which you think does
so nearly concern you, because you have sinned wilfully more then ten times;)
you must give me leave to tell you, that you are very unfortunate in your
application of Scripture; this example not reaching home to your case, indeed
overreaching it more then Jonathans third arrow did the Lad that fetched the
other two. 1 Samuel 20. For the Caution given by the Apostle to the Hebrews, in
that place is, that they take care of falling away from the Gospel, upon
temptations or persecutions; and so after the example of many already fallen
from the faith of Christ, should become Apostates; whereby they might be sure
that the promises of the Gospel, should be no matter of advantage to them,
because they should be as certain never to enter in Gods rest; as were those
provoakers in the Wilderness, who for tempting God so often, were finally by
Gods Oath excluded, from all hopes of entering into the Land of Canaan; their
Carkesses falling in the Wilderness, as the trophies of Gods vengeance upon
them, for their infidelity of his power, and goodness, and promise.

This (I doubt not) does clearly appear unto you (unless you have engaged
never to repudiate your pregnant fancy, how Spurious soever her conceptions
are) to be of no concernment to your case: who carry in your breast, so many
witnesses of your belief of the Gospel, especially the threatening part of it,
that (as your posture is for the present) to fear your Apostasy from the faith
of Christ; were an apprehension too remote from all excuses allowable even to
persons of your temper.

OBJECTION
Yet who knows but I may fall away? I am not yet persuaded that I shall be
saved.

SOLUTION.
19. THough my prayer to God for you is that you may not be so persuaded
totally, and finally, yet if any one should be so, it does not therefore
follow, that such a one is fallen from the faith of the Gospel: for the belief
of this is so far from being a disbelief of the Gospel of Christ, that it is
not so much a direct disbleif of any part of the word of God; because God has
no where declared by special affirmation, that such a man shall be saved. But
be it that you were persuaded that you should be saved, neither of these two
things would follow thereupon, either first, therefore I shall infallibly be
saved, or 2. I am assured that I shall never be an Apostate, because I thus
believe, for what text of Scripture does affirm this proposition, viz. he that
is firmly persuaded that he shall be saved, shall never become an Apostate? or
this, he that believes he shall be saved, shall infallibly be saved?

In a word, had you an Assurance of your salvation absolutely, and
unconditionately given unto you, by all the Divines in the world; yet was this
but an humane assurance, and could amount to no more, but a testimony from men,
the stability whereof would be as demonstrable as their own mortality, being
the evidence of this Proposition [you shall infallibly be saved] is taken from
the will of Gods purpose concerning that man, to which secret will, of the
Divine Majesty, matters that concern Gods prescience do belong, though indeed
the conditional assure ance of any man's salvation, does relate to his revealed
will.

OBJECTION. XIV.
But does not St. Paul. tell us Romans 8.16. That the Spirit it self bears
witness with our Spirit that we are the Children of God? I want both these
testimonies of my Adoption, that of the Spirit of adoption and that of mine
own Spirit witnessing that I am a Child of God: surely then my condition is
not such as it ought to be, and as I desire it should be.

SOLUTION.
20. THat this Epistle of S. Paul (and especially the 7th. 8th. and 9th.
Chapters) has in it some things that are hard to be understood, those Esau,
and Jacob-like contests in the Bowels of the Church about the meaning thereof,
do sufficiently witness: I pray God that we may all of us, in the heat and
animosity of our disputes, have an eye to that example of admonition St. Peter
mentions of those in his times who being unlearned and unstable, did wrest
those and other Scriptures to their own destruction. 2 Pet. 3.16.

But I am persasaded better things of you, and such as accompany salvation. And
therefore to give you a full and tender account of your objection, I conceive
it consists of 3. branches. 1. You suppose that every Child of God has
testimony that he is such. 2. that the Scripture asserts the testimony to be
twofold one the testimony of the Spirit of adoption, the other the testimony of
his own Spirit. and 3. that you want both these and therefore hastily conclude
that you are not the child of God. To these I shall answer distinctly thus.

1. I do affirm with your supposition that every child of God, has testimony,
or witness, that he is such. I shall give you but one place for all, 1 John
3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin i. e. he is such a one as
keeps a sincere Eye upon himself in respect of all, especially of deliberate
sins.

2. In the 2d. I am likewise of your judgment, that this testimony is the
testimony of the Spirit of adoption, and of his own Spirit; but whether it be
necessary that a child of God have both these testimonies, giving the like full
and joint evidence for his sonship; and therefore till such full and
joynt-evidence be given to him, he really is not (and therefore ought not to
repute himself) a child of God is more then matter of doubt with you having (it
seems) indissolvably espoused the negative part. But I doubt you do not rightly
apprehend what the Apostle does mean by [the self same, or the Spirit it self
bearing witness] with our Spirrit, to me he seems to mean one or rather all of
these 3. things, either 1. The Witness of Scripture (which in the testimony of
the Spirit of God) that such as believe in Christ Jesus, i. e. receive him as
their Priest Prophet and King, are infallibly adopted into God paternall
Relation to Christ Jesus, the adoption by Grace, as truly interessing those
believers in Gods Paternity, as does the Divine Nature Christ himself according
to that of St. John. cap. 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. and this
testimony have all the sons of God, or all true believers. Secondly it may
signify the aeconomy of the Gospel in opposition to that of the Jews, whose
state or condition, was that of Servitude; as ours under the Gospel is a state
of Freedom they Servants, we Sons: they full of the Spirit of bondage,
engendered from Sinai, we filled with the Spirit of adoption, flowing from
Sion: Gal. 4.25. a sufficient evidence whereof is the diverse Methods that God
has made use of, in delivering the System, or Rules of either dispensation
unto both People. A 3d sense may be this; the Apostle may intend by the
Testimony of the Spirit in Gods Children, that Inclination and duct of
Obedience which Gods Children do, (though not all of them in the same measure)
feel in their hearts, sweetning their natures, and bringing them gently to a
complyableness with the Precepts of the Gospel, and a putting their necks most
willingly into the yoke of Christ, his Commandments being no whit grievous to
them, 1 Jo. 5.3. like as yokes are very troublesome to Beasts not accustomed
thereto, (as the Prophet speaks of the Jews, Jer. 31.18. I was chastised as a
Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke;) but to such whose necks have been used to
draw in them, yokes are no way dreadful, or troublesome. In the first of these
senses, the word Spirit must be taken personally, for the third Person in the
ever Blessed and Glorious Trinity: in the 2d it must be taken tropically, the
word not signifying in the natural and proper sense thereof, but yet not
without example, Romans 8.2. 2 Cor. 3.6. Gal. 4.29. in the 3d sense it must
signify metonymically, the effect of the Spirit being called by the name of him
that works that blessed effect in the Souls of Gods Children.

In the first and second of these senses, the Testimony of the Spirit is
communicated to all true Christians; but in the third I know lies the ground of
your exception: but because I shall have occasion to speak somewhat afterward
directly to this point, be pleased for the present to remember, that I have
told you, that this inclination to obedience, the duct of the Gospel is not
alike efficacious upon all the children of God, this Spirit being not given in
the same measure to all the Sons of God.

As to the third branch of your Objection, (rather but one part of it) viz. the
want of the Testimony of your own Spirit, that might witness (together with the
other) that you are the Child of God; to give full satisfaction therein, we
must inquire into 1. the meaning of the word [Spirit] in this place. 2. What
the Testimony thereof is. And of 3. what Authority in a business of this
Importance the Testimony of a man's own Spirit is.

For the first; the word [Spirit] in this place must signify (I conceive) one
of these two things: either first, some noble and sublime Essence, presiding in
a Christian, either as a Distinct subsistence from that, which is one of the
essential constitutive principles of every man; or else as the Celestial and
more Seraphical part of the Soul, informing, ordering, and governing the
rational faculties in all Spiritual and Divine things. And in this sense it
must be conceived to have some Resemblance with the office of the Imaginative
faculty; which being seated betwixt the outward senses and the Understanding,
conveyes the Species of all sensible objects to the Intellectual faculty,
being it self of a middle nature, betwixt rational and sensible. To one of
these senses (I judge) those Divines refer their opinions, who assert man to
consist of 1. Spirit, 2. Soul, and 3. Body: unless by [Soul] in this
tripartite division, they understand an Essence capable of no other offices in
Man, but the performance of sensitive and vegitative operations. Or 2ly the
word [Spirit] in this place may signify (and me thinks not at all
incongruously) some excellent gift of the Holy Ghost, infused from above in our
Baptism, into the Souls of Christians, whereby they are not only made capable
of receiving divine Revelations, and things above Reason, but likewise
inclined, and encourain the performance of all those things which God requires
at their hands, to render them capable of obtaining the further inestimable
degrees of his Love and Favor to Mankind. And therefore 2ly the Testimony of
any man's Spirit, is that Evidence which it gives concerning the whole Series of
his conversation, in reference to those principles of Faith and Obedience which
God has given him, in his revealed Will, as the Grounds and Rules of his
Practice. The 3d Authentickness of which Testimony does manifest it self to
every man, partly by the known truth of the things attested, which are not
concealed from him, but represented as the things of himself; and partly from
that power which God has over it, not only in rectifying any Errors thereof,
but likewise in showing himself merciful toward us, in such things, wherein
such a Testimony is not for, but against us. This Testimony you (say you) want,
because you find not any Witness in your self that you are a Child of God.

I conceive it is not impossible for your Spirit to give this Testimony, though
you have deafned your ear to it, and take it for some deception of flesh and
blood, or a delusion of Satan, using all the Devices he can, to ensnare you in
carnal security: but whether it be thus or no, I shall advise you to endeavor
to elicite and call up this Testimony by that which is the Test of it: Do you
continue in any wilful course of deliberate sin? what know you by your self?
are you still guilty of any of those sins which in the judgment of the Apostle
render a man incapable of any inheritance with the Children of God? if you are;
then look not for this Testimony till you have repented, and amended your life;
nor then neither for it presently, until such time as you have good experience
of your Resolutions, how they have held out in the time of trial and
Temptation, and that the greatest and sharpest that in all likelihood may
happen unto you. But if you are not thus guilty (as for my part I believe you a
re not) of any mortal sin reigning in your body; go to the Rule with this
argument in your mouth: The Holy Spirit of God says, Whosoever is born of God
does not sin [willfully and deliberately] Joh. 3.9. But upon a strict survey of
my self, I find that I do not commit any such sin. Therefore I am borne of God.

Upon the Truth of the middle Proposition depends the validity of this
Testimony of your Spirit; for the major is infallible, and the Conclusion is
undoubtedly true, upon supposition that there be no such sin, either of
omission or commission, in your conversation, which may exclude you from your
Sonship: But yet for as much as the Apostle does tell us, that though he knew
nothing by himself, yet was he not thereby justified; we ought in reason to lay
no more weight on this disquisition and search of our selves, then it will
bear: for our Knowledge being imperfect, this search and inquiry into our own
ways cannot be absolutely perfect: and consequently we subject to errors
therein: yet is it most certain, that if we do it in sincerity of heart,
without partiality to our selves; not only, not allowing in our practice any
the smallest sin, but by deeds of Mortification, earnestly, and faithfully
endeavoring to subvert the power of it; we have the Faith of the Divine
Majesty to rely on, in the Tenor of the Gospel, not exacting unsinning
obedience under pains of eternal death, from those who shall be reputed, and
rewarded as the Children of God.

OBJECT. XV.
But if I were a Child of. God, I cannot but in reason expect a more
compliable temper with the Laws of Christ, then I find in my self: even to
those things, from which I actually do abstain, I perceive in my self most
violent, and strong inclinations; so that I have no Comfort from the Victory
over my Lusts; such murmurings and regrets I have in my self, for not letting
loose the Rains of my corrupt Nature.

SOLUTION.
21. MY answer to this Objection will likewise discharge your expectation of
what I promised more fully to speak, in reference to that (supposed) exception
you would have against your self, from the third sense I suggested unto you,
which the Apostle might intend, by the Testimony of the Spirit, in that of the
Romans lately mentioned.

It is not to be denied by any the Greatest Saint upon earth, but that he feels
in himself the Contests of two contrary Principles, Flesh and Spirit, the old
and new man: and evident I presume it is, that from hence arises very much of
their trouble who have tender and good natures, but weak and disordered
Judgments. For first, many of those Christians do conclude, that all, even the
first motions to sin, which they feel in themselves, how suddenly, and
impetuously soever rejected by their Spirits, do yet leave some dangerous guilt
sticking upon their Consciences. And 2ly that the state of a Christian liable
to such motions against the Law of God, springing from corrupt nature in him is
wholly deplorable and forlorn; these being most sure marks of his unregeneracy.

Concerning the first of these; though there be many very judicious and pious
Divines, that are of a contrary judgment acknowledging no more in these motions
to sin, then an jnfelicity accompanying the nature of the holiest men in this
life; affording indeed matter of humility, to all the Children of God, but not
aspersing them with any guilt: yet if your judgment run along with those of the
other persuasion, I shall not Endeavor to alter your opinion; it being long
since imbibed (I believe) and therefore not only difficultly changed, but
almost impossible to be clearly eradicated out of your mind; and consequently;
may be a means not of lessening, but enlarging your Troubles: yet would I
desire you to retein your own Persuasion, with this grain of Salt, viz. that
those Motions are but sins of Infirmity and Venial, which have pardon of course
under the Gospel to all the Children of God; it not being possible that they
can live in the Flesh, without such Motions to sin, unless you will suppose
them capable of living in a state of Impeccability, a not-sinnable condition in
this World; for that such Motions must in reason be supposed to be in all
persons lapsible (as was Adam and all his Sons,) being that indeliberate sins,
as well as sins of a slower fermentation in men's Souls, must be preceded by
such Motions of their Appetites, as naturally and as necessarily, as the
collision of Flints must be before the emission of fire.

As for the second, such Motions as these how vile and irregular soever they
are, ( Blasphemies having the same mint with Fornication, Adulteries, Murders,
as our Savior tells us, Mat. 15.19.) yet being (as we have said)
immediately, and with Indignation rejected by us, are no marks of an
unregenerate Man, but rather the contrary: For do not we Christians engage in a
warfaring life against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil? is not the Holy
man, he that leads a virtuous and religilife, a Conqueror? and is there a
Conqueror where there is no Enemy; have we weapons, spiritual ones, put into
our hands, to beat the Air withal? are not these Motions the enmity of the
Flesh, which we are engaged to oppose and destroy, that Amalek, with which we
must have war for ever? I mean whilst we live in this World. And must it pass
for a Character of Treason or Cowardice, (and not rather a note of Infelicity)
to be daily surrounded with multitudes of these Philistims, which yet (like
David) a valiant Christian destroys by ten thousands at a time? if this be that
Shibboleth, and Test of discerning and distinguishing the good from the bad,
Heaven will be filled with none but Angels, and those innocent Creatures, whose
good hap it was to dye whilst their ignorance of Good and Evil (like the
Children of the Ninivites) might give them undeniable pretensions to the crown
of Glory.

Should you therefore condemn your self, for that such Duels and Battles as
these are daily fought in your Breast, for that Plots and Conspiracies against
the Kingly Government of your Appetites, are daily detected and prevented; the
Plotters and Conspirators subdued, chastised, and kept under by an high hand;
should you, I say, condemn your self for this, you would in that sentence
condemn the Generation of Gods Children; the main difference betwixt spiritual
and carnal Men and Women lying in this, (not that one sort feels no contest
with Motions to sin, the other have Souls daily clouded and pestred with such
Locusts) Gal. 5.16. but one of them, viz. spiritual Men do conquer and subdue,
but carnal Men and Women do yield to, and are vanquished by these Lusts.

Honor and commendation are not only due to Fortitude, but do foment and
cherish that Virtue: take you heed therefore that that be not applyable to you,
which the valiant and wise General of King David's Army foretold him upon his
sour entertainment of his Soldiers, after their Victory over Absalom (the
Kings Darling as much as Enemy,) 2 Samuel 19.7. You ought to encourage your self
in God, and bless and praise him by whose Grace it is that you are thus
victorious, and that for the praise of his Glory, as the Apostle does more than
once intimate in Ephesians. 1.12, 14.

OBJECTION. XVI.
But how then is my Nature changed, where is that new Creature, created after
God in Righteousness and true Holiness? What Renovation by the Spirit, if such
Motions to Sin as these, crowd in upon the Soul of a regenerate Christian? I
cannot but be persuaded it was much otherwise with the Apostle, and is so still
with Holy men, though not with me.

SOLUTION.
22. THe Anatomy of every, or any single Christians Soul, with the true state
and posture of his Mind you cannot certainly know, unless the person may be
presumed, not only to speak truth, but thoroughly to understand his own
condition in this point, even as St. Paul did. But certain enough it is, that
Holy men extraordinarily inspired by God, have grievously complained of the
guilt of Sin, and of their exceeding great troubles for it, even to
distraction, Ps. 88.15. neither of which could possibly happen unto them, (the
later being the fruit and effect of the former) with these precedaneous motions
to fin.

Besides, let the Thoughts, Words, and Deeds of the holiest person which you
would instance in, be sifted to the bottom, and some bran will be found in
them, some chaff will be winowed out of the heap of his conversation; even
since that time, that he has had some comfortable assurance of his good
Estate: but all this is not only tryable by experience, but by Rules and
Grounds of Divinity, which have proportion with the Analagy of Faith.

23. The new Creature, or the Regenerate man who does sincerely endeavor to
perfect Holiness in the fear of God, does not pass into this estate, by any
physical and natural, but by a spiritual and moral change; the principles of
Motion and Operation in him, continuing not only the same, but still liable to
the same Errors in working as before; otherwise (as we have already said) his
state must be a state of Impeccability, which was never in our earthly
Tabernacle but once, when Christ Jesus took our nature upon him: in whom,
though the humane nature was lapsible, because otherwise he had not been made
in all things like unto us, Sin only excepted, Heb. 2.17. (which lapsability is
not,) yet by reason of the hypostalical union of the Humane and Divine nature
in his Person; he could not only not fall but feel no Motion to the least sin,
neither was Guile found in his mouth.

So then, by reason the faculties in the Soul remain the same, after, as before
conversion, (as that man does will Virtue with the same Individual will,
wherewith before he did will Vice: he does love God with the same natural power
of affecting, wherewith before he loved the World.) It must follow, that the
Soul and her Appetites, as well concupiscible as irascible, being still
physically the same; the change is only in these 3 things especially, the 1.
cause, 2. manner, and 3. end of their operation. The Moral cause, (if I may so
term it) by the efficiency whereof the Will and her Appetites are in a
Regenerate man moved to act, upon the proposal of any object, is that Tincture
of Grace, which is cast into the Soul by the blessed Spirit of God: which is a
kind of Principium motus and quietis in Moral, as Nature is in things Natural,
mingling it self into every faculty of the Soul, apprehending in the
Intellectual, willing or nilling in the Elective power, governing and guiding
the Affections in all their Operations, both of aversation and desire, being so
perfectly assimilated to the nature of the Soul, that (as is the Soul in which
it dwells) Grace is better apprehended by her operation in Regenerate men, than
defined in its essence: something there is that moves them to Act, not only so
contrary to others, but even to themselves whilst unregenerate, Romans 6.21. (as
the contrary effects of Glory and Shame in the same Persons, flowing from the
same Acts, though under a different state does evidence) but to define what
this is, whether a substance or a quality, whether an Act, or any Assistant
form, may (possibly) appear a difficulty so much the greater, by how much the
more solidly it is inquired into.

As for the manner of a Regenerate man's working by Grace, it is regular,
according to that order which God himself has fixed in our Nature, Reason being
the Judge of all our Actions, uncorrupted by any prepossession, passion, or
interest, which are the causes of all disorderly Actions of the Soul, invading
by force or stratagemme, the more noble and rational faculties, whereby
Unregenerate men are carried (vertiginously) about with diverse Lusts, as well
as with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. which is a lust in the
Understanding, and so the more dangerous, as are Diseases that fix themselves
in the vital parts, and in circular motion, we know that each part of the Orb
has a vicissitude of Superiority: but in the Soul of man Reason ought to be
fixed in the highest seat, the deepest mysteries of Faith no way deposing this
Queen Regent from her Dignity, but only exacting from her that Homage and
Fealty which is due to Divine Revelations, and the Assistances of the Spirit
acting herein spiritual and heavenly things.

And lastly, for the change that is wrought in the end of a Regenerate man's
Actions, that which he now ultimately and chiefly aims at, is the manifestation
of Gods Glory: and the subordinate end of all his Endeavors, is his own, and
the salvation of other men's Souls: but with men of unchanged Natures, as Nature
in a state of Corruption is the Principle from which they work, and their
Manner wholly enormous; so is their end ever their self, even in that worser
sense, wherein an obedience; and captivity to all, or some kinds of carnal
Lusts, for satisfaction of the unreasonable and brutish part in them is
signified, in opposition to that manual of Gospel-Duties, (as I may call it)
abridged into that most comprehensive Notion of Self-denial.

Briefly then, if you will but observe the Principal efficient of your moral
Actions, the manner and end of doing them, I trust you will be able to see so
great a contrariety betwixt those of the Unregerate, and Regenerate life, that
you will without any just cause of doubt as freely assert the spiritual Life
you lead, from the vigor and energy of that New Nature in you; as you do the
Natural life you live, by the power of the Old Nature, in a physical sense.

OBJECTION. XVII.
But me thinks [say you] I may and ought to be a much better Christian than I
am.

SOLUTION.
24. NO moral duty (like Mathematical proportions) does consist in an
indivisible point. That which we judge to be the worst may yet be worser, and
that which we take to be the best may yet be better, if done by any Creature
not impeccable. Eschew Evil, and do Good is the rule of holy living, Ps. 34.13.
which he that sincerely does, needs not be scrupulous and critically
inquisitive into every single Action of his Life, though he may not be remiss
and supine in doing any the most inconsiderable, whilst it is in doing.

25. There is no Divine, that will assert the necessity of perfect and
unsinning obedience under the Gospel: his own experience without the Authority
of Saint John, will confute such Magisterial Theology, e're it run from a pen,
held by a hand of flesh and blood. All humane Actions must needs carry a
proportion to the nature of the Agent by which they are effected: in all moral
Actions, the intermediate Agent betwixt the Spirit of sanctification, and the
material part of the Action is the Soul of Man, in which, and by which, as by a
natural and voluntary Instrument, the blessed Spirit does work: so that all
moral productions must needs receive some impressions from the next, and
immediate cause of their being: an Artificer never so skillful, yet the defects
and ineptitude of the Instrument by which he works, may somewhat abate of the
excellency of the work, unless he can suppose the Soul of Man in all her
faculties to be not only regular, but inerrable; that transpiercing Eye will
sind some flaw in the most orient moral Action, which a state of Separation and
Bliss might have rendered that Action free from; our very Prayers and Praises
are (undoubtedly) not so perfect in this, as in the other life: and this is one
reason, why till the day of Judgment Christ does not deliver up the Kingdom to
the Father: his Melchesidekian Priesthood continuing in (my opinion) till that
time, both for the Quick and Dead, that they may have their Perfect
Consummation and bliss in everlasting glory: this the Church prays for, and
for what the Body prays, the Head does undoubtedly intercede.

OBJECT. XVIII.
But me thinks (say you) I may do more good then I do.

SOLUTION.
26. COncerning the measure of welldoing, if it were in Moral positive precepts
of Gods revealed Will, there needs nothing more be said, but that of our
Savior, These ought to be done, Matthew. 23.23. But because such doubts or
Scruples, that afflict your mind, are most likely to arise from those duties,
which are prescribed only in gross; but the Quotum or measure left to our own
prudence to determine, as Fasting, Prayer, Alms, etc. I shall only insist upon
these, there being no tolerable doubt or scruple to be made concerning the
other, which oblige ad semper, at all times, and in their full measure.

But you must take notice, that it is not possible that part cular Rules and
Directions can be given to all Christians, concerning these Duties, whereby all
objections may be prevented: some what may be said in general, which may serve
so far to direct you, and all good Christians, concerning these duties, that by
observing them you may be left secure from all damnable omissions of any of
these duties, and from any dangerous errors in performing them. Fasting is a
duty when enjoined by public lawful Authority, and for Christian ends, and to
be performed in a charitable manner, is an indispensable duty upon all, save
such, with whom that Authority does actually dispense, or may duly be supposed
to be dispensable by such an Authority. But for private Fasts, how frequently
they are to be observed by every one, cannot be defined without some regard had
to our constitution of Body, our calling, the usual Contingencies of necessary
affairs, etc. which may hinder the performance, or make it impertinent to our
end. Public Fasts are less liable to errors in the performance, than private
are: one reason amongst others is, because the management of every one for that
time, is for the greatest part left under public circumstances of Time,
Persons, Place, etc. which render the Duty more free from error and scruple in
the Performance: Private asts are seldom free from private faults and
inconveniences. Now because the circumstances of Complexion, Age, Sex,
Contingencies, etc. are so variable; my judgment is, that few Christians oblige
themselves by Vow, (but under a pecuniary mulct to the poor they may) to the
observation of weekly, voluntary fasts, making those the choicest
opportunities, when they are most fit for those duties. The best conjuncture is
Prayer, Fasting and Alms together, (or in those who have no corporal Alms, some
spiritual Largess to the Souls of others, which all may give) these set a price
upon the Service of God, and keep our Religion from being cheap and refuse, and
such as costs us nothing, but the expense of a little time and breath.

But by this I desire not to be thought to discharge the weekly days of
abstinence appointed by the Church, or to commute for them, by the observation
of a day of your own; for I look upon the Authority of the Church you were
baptized in, as uncancell'd in point of obliging you, and all others, who call
your selves the Sons and Daughters of the Church of England.

These Cautions I shall recommend unto you, and others, in reference to the
matter in hand. 1. The duties of our honest and necessary calling, (wherein men
do undoubtedly serve God, when orderly and Christianly performed) may, though
not wholly supersede, either out of our family, or private practice, any of
these duties, yet moderate us in the practice of them. So much time spent in
prayer, cannot in reason be expected, from one that subsists by his honest
Calling, as from him that lives of a plentiful Revenue. 2. Diversions and
recreations ought not to govern us in of respect these duties: but if they be
such as require much of our time to the exercise of them (which I believe is
not agreeable to Christian principles) the seasons must not be robbed away from
these duties, but from something else, wherein we have a power to dispense. I
do not believe that an Hunting-Match, a Cittie-Visit, or a Pack of Cards, etc.
ought to exchange and alter the fittest, and usual times, and hours for prayer,
(though necessary employments, deeds of Mercy and Charity may) much less
abbreviate or wholly dispense with the duty. 3. If it happen that there be an
opportunity of doing some duty of Piety, (as public Prayer or Sermon, etc.)
in that place where you are enjoined to be an Auditor and Member of the
Congregation on the Lords day (or in any other place where you are, in case
there be no Schism in the National Church) you may not absent your self only
for such Diversions and Recreations; the reason is, not only for that a guilt
of omission, and also a scandal will follow from thence, but you may lose an
opportunity of doing, or receiving some good at that time, which you may not
have tendered to you again. To lavish away ones time is a very great imprudence
(besides a sin) in any Christian; but to lose seasons and opportunities is a
very great piece of guilt, as well as folly. 4. In case you have bound your
self to any of these, in respect of the measure and frequency, either by Vow,
or promise, or firm Resolution (especially if by way of Revenge for former
faults, 2 Cor. 7. 11.) by all means, be as projectual as you may in the
observation there of: assuring your self, that as you shall meet with the more
and greater oppositions after such Vow, Promise or Resolution, so you will
find much more trouble upon the not performance of the duty so vowed,
promised, or resolved on; because the duty thereby becomes in its circumstances
to the hic and nunc of it, of the nature of Gods unchangeable precepts, and the
sin of unfaithfulness is added to the omission of that duty by you. 5. You need
not scruple the Condition or persuasion of the Person to whom you give in
bestowing of your Alms; if you perceive the Receiver thereof be such, as by
honest endeavors cannot provide for himself, and his Family in a way
proportionable to the Dignity of man's Nature, you have a good aim to hit the
mark of Charity; if nothing be probably suggested to the contrary, you may
safely suppose any one that asks, capable of your charitable Benevolence. 6.
in giving ever have regard to that your Eye informs you, the poor Wretch stands
most in need of, and which others are not so likely, or so well able to supply,
as your self. I need not mention to you any caution against vain glory, the
forfeiture of your Reward in Heaven, upon our Saviors own caution against it,
will be your daily Remembrancer thereof. 7. To constant Prayers and other holy
Duties in your Family, though there be no Positive command in Scripture for
it, I believe you hold your self obliged. Yet would I not have you so wedded to
any form, as not being able to please your self therein, you should wholly
discharge the Duty it self, that which best opens your Wants as a Christian,
and comes home to the concernments of your own Family, is the most proper, and
in all likelihood may best suit with the temper and persuasion of every Person
in your House; which in this Age we live in, may not be so unanimous, as you
desire. 8. In the performance of any of these (as of all other Duties) labor
to show your self of an alacrious Spirit. For being they are Free will
Offerings, (at least many Acts of them may be so) it is true in all the rest,
which the Apostle speaks of one of them, God loves a cheerful Giver. 2 Cor.
9.7. 9. I shall conclude with this caution (which I desire you to make use of
as a cordial, and not as a conserve to make other things glib and palatable in
swallowing) remember that there is great difference betwixt the certain
punishment annexed to the breach of Law, and a lesser degree of Glory in the
life to come, he that sows plentifully, shall reap plentifully; 2 Cor. 9.6,
7. though where there is no sowing at all, no Harvest (in Justice) can be
expected, yet where there is this spiritual sowing the crop shall be answerable
to what is sown. Though it should be every man's design, to aim at the highest
degree of Glory, and yet believe that he deserves not the least: yet I would
have such as are of your sad temper to consider; that there is no danger
incurred, by being only capable of receiving a less reward then other men.

OBJECTION XIX.
But I think my self bound in Conscience to do the most and best I may, and
therefore I condemn my self of sin, as ost as I fail of doing that which is
best.

SOLUTION.
27. YOur condition may be such, as that you may be utterly incapable of doing
that which is best; and consequently you ought not in reason to think your self
bound to all that is best. A single life is best, in comparison of Wedlock,
(supposing the Person qualified for Coelibate:) yet if you are entered into the
state of Marriage, (though you found your self capable of living without Lust
of burning) yet you must now content your self with that state of life, and
therein abide with God, 1 Cor. 7.24. doing the Duties agreeable, and proper to
that kind of life. But you mean (perhaps) of such things as are yet in your
choice; as to Pray in Canonical hours, as do the Regulars or Religious of the
Roman Persuasion; or to give so much Alms, as may quadrupliate the proportion
you have hitherto given, being able so to do. I confess I do not take it to be
a fault, but a piece of Heroical Charity, if any one does by this means, so
lessen himself, in respect of his former quality, that the Place and Dignity he
formerly enjoyed as his Civil Right, (provided he be no public Magistrate,
which (perhaps) may alter the Case) the Port and Equipage of his living is
thereby deprest, and made inglorious in the eyes of worldly men. But as I take
this to be no fault, but much otherwise; so I must take leave to scruple your
scruple you raise from your private belief in this point; viz. that you are
obliged thus do; because your Conscience tells you, you are capable of doing
it. Your Argument stands thus; Such an Heroical piece of Religion I am capable
of performing, therefore my Conscience tells me I am bound to perform it.

Two things must here be enquired into. 1. Whether my capacity of doing that
which I am not apparently commanded to do, be a sufficient ground to infer my
obligation thereto? in case this be not so, whether 2. my belief that it is so,
has a power of obliging me thereto? as in matters of Indifferency.

That the first Proposition cannot be held for an universal Affirmative, may be
clear to any one, from these two Instances. 1. There be diverse persons in the
world, that are capable of performing the Ministerial Function, in point of
Parts and Moral Behavior; which yet never did conceive themselves, nor any
body else believe, that they were indispensably bound, by this aptitude of
theirs to enter into Holy Orders. I must confess that in the first Plantation
of the Gospel, or in an intolerable scarcity of Ministers, the case may
(possibly) be otherwise; especially if such persons perceive in themselves an
unusual acquisition, and improvement of their abilities, under common means;
and a greater violence and stirring of Spirit in them toward that Profession,
(especially if under persecution, or very slender encouragements to embrace it)
together with the remarkable desires of others, that they would engage therein,
(the Concurrence of which are very near to an extraordinary Calling.) But
generally I conceive the case to be as is before determined. Again 2ly it is clear
from 1 Cor. 7. That a single Life is better, in many respects, then Marriage:
now if a Virgin living in her Fathers house, should find in her self no
necessity to marry, but rather strong inclinations (and for the best reason of
all, that she might serve the Lord without distraction by worldly business) to
continue a Virgin, supposing she were actually obliged so to do, upon finding
in her self this capacity of living unmarried; I desire to know, whether her
Father (if he sees it necessary for himself, estate or Family that she should
marry) may compel by his Fatherly Authority, such a one to accept of a fit
Husband, tendered to her by her Father? on the one side here is the Command of
a Father; on the other (on that supposition) the Command of God; this to
abstain, that to marry; into what a sad perplexity will such a one be cast,
if that supposition were true?

But I desire him that holds the first opinion [that his capacity of doing that
which he is not apparently commanded to do, is a sufficient ground to infer
his obligation thereto] to consider this reason to the contrary: the capacity
of doing any thing, whether precedaneous, concomitant or subsequent to the
command, is no more then a Qualification, or obediential power and passivity in
the object, by which the Law becomes suitable to the Creature, to whom it is
given, and without which the Command can neither be reasonable, nor just it
being as disagreable to original justice, that a Law or Command be given to any
Creature Superior to his abilities of keeping it; as it is contrary to
ordinate justice to punish that Creature, for the not performance of a Command
so given. Not the Obligency therefore, but the equity, or reasonableness of the
Law, is founded in the Capacity of the Creature to obey it (that being indeed
founded in the Sovereignty of the Lawmakers) otherwise there would be
transgression, where there is no Law, contrary to the saying of St. Paul, Romans
4.15.

The main doubt behind is, whether a belief grounded upon such an aptitude,
does oblige that person in whom it is, to the performance of such things, for
which there is no particular precept given him by God? and so may be understood
to be of the same nature with that, which Divines call a Personal precept, as
was that of our Savior to the young man, requiring him to sell all, and give
to the Poor, Luke 18.22. a Precept which Divines have hitherto held to be of
the nature of those Constitutions in the Civil Law, called Constitutiones
personales, Inst. lib. 1. Tit. 2. n. 6. none of which transgreditur personam,
goes further than the person to which it is given, and therefore bebecome not
Presidents or Examples for others, though they have Legis vigorem the force of
Law, in respect of them to whom they are given.

Therefore I answer, That a Person that thus believes, is bound by his
erroneous Conscience, or Judgment to the thing which he conceives himself thus
capable of doing, but yet not irreversibly bound, as that man that receives a
personal Precept from the Lawgiver is, till the Lawgiver himself be pleased to
reverse it. He then that is thus bound by the error of his Judgment, in the
first of those things controverted betwixt us, under this objection, is freed
from all Obligation to performance, as soon as his Judgment (or Conscience) is
rectified; which is done as soon as he is persuaded of the truth of this
proposition, viz. That the capacity of doing what is best, does not render the
Person capable obliged to do what is best. Wherein (I think) the reason
foregoing will give satisfaction to any unprejudicate Person.

OBJECTION. XX.
But does not our Savior discharge the force of your reason in Mat. 19.12. He
that is able to receive it, let him receive it; -- But I am able to receive it,
-- therefore I am bound to receive it.

SOLUTION.
26. YOu must prove, that our Savior injoyns that as a Precept, and not
proposes it as his Advice or Counsel; otherwise it cannot be thought to
contain in it the force of a Command; and consequently has not in it the
obligatory of a Law, but the perswasory efficacy of an Advice.

Now that those words do not contain the force of a Precept in them, will (I
believe) be evident, if you consider the passage to which they are immediately
related; and that is the saying of the Disciples v. 10. concluding Marriage to
be (in point of Prudence) much worse than a single life, in case there ought to
be no divorce of Man and Wife, save for Adultery only. It is not (say they)
good to marry, if the case be thus; which clearly implies thus much, that it is
best in point of prudence, (this being in every man's choice) not to marry; to
which our Saviors Answer is to this purpose, that they are in the right, if it
were alike with all men in respect of abstaining from Marriage; but being it is
not so, they that cannot contein ought to marry, but if a Man can contein,
their Judgment is good, and is confirmed with our Saviors own Resolution
therein, it is best for him not to marry. I believe Saint Baul will give full
satisfaction to this scruple, if you read his 7th. chapter, 1 Cor.

OBJECTION XXI.
But is not every Christian bound in Conscience to use the things that God
gives him, to the best advantage of his Master?

SOLUTION.
27. BE is bound so to do in point of prudence: but not by any express Law
given by God. Now the Obligation which prudence lays upon any man, is not in
respect of such things as are Good or Evil; for therein there is no liberty of
Election, that which is Evil being by no means eligible: but only concerning
such things as may be well or better done, either way of doing them being
choosable without guilt, because there intervenes no Law, which may determine
my will, but I am left to govern my self by prudential reasons only, which
amount to no more, but the modification of my Act of choosing, whereby it is
resolved to be more or less prudent, not to be lawful or unlawful.

Now if I choose that which is least to my own advantage, I do no more then
what may be done, where the election of my will is not predetermined: and if
that be least for the profit of my Master, yet he having given me no other
Command, than to use those things well which he has given me, I have obeyed
his Commands who enjoined me to do so much.

If a Merchant should deliver a large stock of Goods or Money to his Factour,
and should say unto him, employ this to my best advantage, in all instances and
at every opportunity your prudence shall judge to be fit: in this case the
Factor is preobliged, and must do only what is best, else he breaks the
Command of his Master. But if his Master say thus unto him, employ this stock
to my advantage, and your reward for so doing shall be proportionable to the
advantages I receive by your Endeavors: in this case the Factor is not obliged
by his Masters Command, to do anic more than employ his Masters goods to his
profit; which if he do, be it much or little, he obeys the Command of his
Master; but prudence binds him to do the best he can, for the advancing and
improving his Masters Goods, because his own Reward will carry its proportion
to that success, whether it be for the better or no, the case corresponds to
the latter part of this illustration.

OBJECTION XXII.
But how can this stand with mine, (and the obligation of all Christians) to
love the Lord, with all my Soul, with all my mind, and with all my strength.

SOLUTION.
28. I Do not conceive this Paramount Law inevitably infringed, by not doing
every thing that we have ability of doing, but are not thereto expressly
required by precept. Indeed it binds the whole man to all Duties, exacted from
him by Gods revealed will, and to submit to, or not withdraw my obedience
therefrom, for any Competitor whatever, that may pretend claim to my
subjection, because for that time, and in that thing, (if I were never so good
a Christian) my Disobedience of Gods Law, would unquestionablie condemn me of
not loving Him, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my strength;
the demonstration of which Love (as our Savior himself resolves) is the
keeping of Gods Commandments, Jo. 14.15. if you mark it, the keeping his
Commandments is the Test of every man's love, so that he that does that; that
observes what ever does appear to be Gods Commandment, is said truly to love
God, and that with all his Heart. So that consequently there is left unto men a
Latitude of expressing their Love to God, in some Acts of Heroical Virtue,
proportionable to the free will offerings amongst the Jews; whereby God may
have occasion given him, of remunerating such men according to his Bounty; like
as the Duties performed agreeable to his Law, are rewardable by his Justice.
You may take this Resolution of your scruple in this formal way of reasoning.
The Love that Christ requires from his Disciples is the Love of Him with all
their Heart, with all their Mind, etc. But such a Love as this is expressed by
keeping his Commandment. Ergo, The keeping of Gods Commandments is such a Love
as God requires from his Children.

We may add hereto, that when a man does sincerely propose the glory of God,
as the scope and center of all his Actions, every single Act of his Life,
whether civil or religious, may be interpreted as a line tending thereto; drawn
from the Circle of his first Resolution, and cannot be truly said to be a
breach of Duty, for that it tends less to perfection than does every other
Action of his Life; gradual Differences in moral Actions, (as good, better, and
best) making no essential difference in the Subjects in which they are: whereas
the objects of Reward and Punishment, must be opposed by contrariety as are
Virtue and Vice, which diversity of Degrees in the same subject are not, as
well in moral, as in natural Things.

So that without forfercing your Reason you may believe, that you do not love
the Divine Majestic with all your heart, with all your mind, and with all your
strength, because you do not every thing, which some eminent Christians have
done before you, as giving all to the poor; etc. such high Attempts require
long sitting down, and considering with your self, e're you ing age in them;
lest not only that happen unto you, which befell the man in the Gospel, who
beginning a building too great for his Purse, Luke 14.30. and desisting, was
derided therefore by his Enemies, but a much worse thing, I mean the
irremoveable anxiety of future life, with all the vexatious scruples that
Satan, or a volatile fancy may cast upon your Soul.

OBJECTI. XXIII.
But I need not contest so hotly about the measure of holy and virtuous
Actions. The Apostle tells me, that without Charity all is nothing worth: I
cannot deny, but that I do heartily endeavor to do all the good that I may, to
any one who stands in need thereof; but I have no assurance that I do it in
Charity, and so all my Hay, Wood, and Stubble may perish, when it comes to the
Test.

SOLUTION.
29. IT is no small difficulty to define what that Charity is, which you
suspect you want. You accuse not your self of the neglect of any good Duty,
that concerns the bodies or souls of men, and that as your Brethren and
Partners with you in the common benefit of Redemption. You sincerely endeavor
to practice forbearance, are patient and not revengefull of Injuries; kind,
tender and compassionate; as sensible and zealous of other men's good as of your
own,; far from envying; well-pleased at other men's happinesses; hating all
foolish elation of mind; as also all pride and insolence, in over-valuing your
self and despising others; you keep your self from using others unseemlie;
either in Words or Gesture; inclinable to take care of others Good and Safety,
and not only of your own; you fall not upon any provocation, into violent and
immoderate distempers of Anger; keep account of all the Good that has been
done by any, but none of the Evil; you rejoice not at the Errors and Sins of
other men, but are passionately grieved for them, and contrarily made glad, by
the good and holy conversation of your fellow Christians; inclinable to conceal
all the Evil that you know of another, so far as is for his Good, and not
contrary to the greater Good of others; you blelieve without prejudice all the
Good you hear of others? or have Ground in Charity to believe of them? you hope
that you believe not, and never so far despair of their Repentance, as to give
over using all probable means which may reclaim your wandering Brethren;
enduring much pain, trouble and loss, without Regret, for the recovering of
such as are endangered by any unchristian practices. Now that this is that
Charity the Apostle so magnifies, you have not only the evidence of the thing
it self, but the credit of a most learned, pious, and judicious Paraphrast on
that Chapter; whose very words I have transcribed (at least the full importance
of them) for your satisfaction in this scruple: presuming that the authority
of so reverend a Person, will fix your judgment beyond the assaults of any
ordinary Temptations.

I cannot therefore be so uncharitable to you as to join with you in a Verdict
against your self, for want of Charity. I doubt not, but you have in your
heart this Water springing up to eternal life; though like Hagar almost dead by
thirst, you want an Angel to show you this Fountain, Genesis 21. When such fumes
as these darken your Soul, do not seek for light from sparks of your own
kindling; but from the Sun of Righteousness; that Light that lightneth every
one that comes into the world. Jo. 1.9.

In a word therefore, you must know, that when the Apostle thus magnifies
Charity, it is the same thing as to comprize and exalt the whole dutio of man
toward our Neighbor, in that one word; and to prefer that before the gifts of
edification, whether Tongues, Healing, Miracles, etc. the excellency and
reputation whereof, or of any heroical Action, as giving ones Goods to the
Poor, or ones Body to suffer Martyrdom, is not comparable to that practical
Virtue, in the full latitude thereof. And this cannot but be evident unto you,
if you consider the comparison the Apostle makes betwixt Charity and such
Gifts, in the 12, and 13 Chap.

OBJECTION XXIV.
But in all my Actions I endeavor to skrien my self from the wrath of God, and
to prevent his Justice upon my person for Sin already committed, perfectly
indeed abhorring it as the cause of all my Troubles, but not truly enamoured of
Virtue (me thinks) because it yields me no such. Harvest of Content, and
felicity as the Heathens themselves could boast of.

SOLUTION.
30. THat your self should be your end, as well as God, is not contrary to
Piety; but your self must be put in a second and subordinate place, and God in
the first and chiefest: because God, being the chiefest good, and our Salvation
subordinate to his Glory, as he is in this the prime mover of our Wills, (both
objectively, and efficiently) so consequently must he be the ultimate end of
our Actions.

But in this case we must distinguish betwixt what God is, and what we
apprehend him to be: a Sinner is not presently brought to lay aside the fear of
Gods revengefull hand, and to embrace, and depend upon him, for the mercy that
is offered to him. Ordinarily (I conceive God does manifest his love, goodness,
and mercy to penitent Sinners, gradually; and with proportion to future
experience, of the truth and sincerity of their Repentance. I mean such a
manifestation of himself, in these Attributes of complacency and benignity to
Mankind; which one may term the overshadowing of the Spirit of Love upon the
Soul, inlightning, refreshing, and comforting her, against the terrors of the
Divine Justice due to Sin without a Propitiation by Christ.

Let me therefore advise you, to wait with patience till the day break, and the
shadows flee away; Cant. 1.17. till this Sun of Righteousness arise upon your
Soul with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. and to endeavor to be persuaded (as
of other men's so) of your own filiation, and that you may the better believe
it, to bless God most frequently for the inestimable gift of his Son Jesus
Christ, by whom alone a Reconciliation was wrought betwixt. God and mankind; by
the Faith whereof holy Men and Women look for the inheritance of Sons and
Daughters, and do not stand in fear of stripes as vassals, and Bondslaves:
being emancipated from the Spirit of Bondage, through the freedom they have by
the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry Abba Father: Romans 8 15. meditating
upon the greatness, and excellency of that love, the ever-blessed and glorious
Trinity, has expressed unto our Souls, engraven before our eyes in eternal
Characters of Blood; even the Blood of the only Son of God largely described by
all four Evangelists in their Histories of the Gospel; though sundry, yea
innumerable other passages of our Saviors life are omitted S. Jo. 21 (yea even
the birth of Christ by two of them) intimating unto us, not only the certain
truth of his Passion (which had been unquestionable if but recorded by one of
them) and the great concernment of it to all mankind, as well in the example
as necessity thereof; but likewise recommending by that variety of describing
the last tragical Act of his Blessed Life, the frequent perusal of it in all
times, and kinds of Trial, and Temptations.

What therefore you want of felicity (at present) and content in your New life,
do not despair of, but expect; assuring your self, that you shall one day know,
and feel, that the Kingdom of God is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost, Romans 14.17. God alone knows how much of Heaven it is best to give you in
this Life: that Angelical state which you aim at, might be much more dangerous
for you then you imagine. When St. Paul had been rapt up into the third Heaven,
and heard things impossible to be uttered, because he should not be elated by
the abundance of Revelations, there was given unto him a thorn in the flesh,
the messenger of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.7. some humiliating Temptation, that might
make him know, that as yet he was locked up in an earthly Tabernacle, as liable
to the Assaults and Invasions of Satan, and his Accomplices, as to a final
dissolution by death.

OBJECT. XXV.
But still, me thinks, if God had such a Love to my Soul, he should vouchsafe
me some manifestations thereof. St. Paul rejoiced in his Infirmities, desiring
to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: but nothing is so terrible to me as
Death; as if I had either no Christ to go unto, or no such Christ as Saint Paul
had.

SOLUTION.
31. THe Consideration of the World to come, and expectation of the Revelation
of the Righteous Judgment of God, dispensed by Jesus Christ, according to the
things that men have done in their bodies, whether it be good or evil, (2 Cor.
5.10.11.) is questionless a very terrible thing, even to such Christians, as
shall never have their share in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone
for evermore. But is it not the same Word of God which promises a Pardon to
the Penitent, and threatens damnation to the impenitent Sinner? Why do you not
believe him when he promises Mercy, as well as when he threatens Vengeance?
He that believes not the Divine Majesty in any one branch of Faith, revealed
plainly in his Word, does not believe him in the rest; because the ground of
Faith, viz. the Veracity of God is the same in all: the same Truth in Promises
of Mercy, as in Threatenings of Punishment; the same Fidelity in performance of
Good things, as in the Execution of Evil.

As for your instance in St. Paul; (I think) I have already intimated unto you,
that he being a Saint of most eminent and exemplary piety, of a Charity and
Love to Christ and his Church even unto Ecstasy and Frenzy in the eyes of the
World; you ought not to expect the extraordinary favors vouchsaf't him by
Heaven. A lass why should you or I look for so much of Heaven to be delivered
to us before hand? or else must judge our selves wholly unconcerned in the
distribution of those heavenly Mansions? I am confident either of us would be
well content, for such an assurance as had St. Paul, to lie mouldring in our
graves a million of years, after the rest of our Brethren are crowned with
Glory; yea (perhaps) as long in the Refining Flames of the Romish Purgatory.
But I mention not this as the faint Ejaculations of men that live without Hope;
but as expressions, suitable to a sad Reflection upon our own Demerits.

Remember therefore, that if God think fit to give you no Assurance, yet he
has vouchsaf't unto you (with the rest of Believers) Promises of
Glorification, much fitter to be looked after, and relied upon, then any
sensible and experimental Consolation: for what is tendered to us in the Holy
Scriptures, is immutable and permanent: but such conclusions as are drawn only
from experimental knowledge of our own obedience, are very transjent and
uncertain; never (as is the Word of God) infallible and eternal.

As for your Fear of Death; which you are so far from meeting with St. Paul's
alacrity of Spirit, that you dare not encounter the thought of it in your
breast: the sound of a passing Bell, or the Sight of a Friend struggling with
the pains of Death, being (next to your remembrance of your own last end) the
formidablest thing imaginable; no question the moral causes thereof ought to be
heeded, and the effects prevented. I say [moral causes] because I presume there
is in all creatures (men not excepted) a natural cause of fear of death: which
may be as innocent in men, as the affections of Joy, Delight, Grief, Anger,
etc. and this can no more be alike in all men in the world; then it can be
imagined, there should be the same degrees of other Affections, in all
constitutions and complexions of men. Death without question is the most
formidable of all things in the world; being that strong bridle which the hand
of Providence holds in the Jaws of wicked men, who else would (most of them)
break out into the greatest excesses of insolency and outrageous mischief; this
Great King of Terrors overawing the most daring, and violent Spirits of men in
the world. And of this natural cause of fear of death, you cannot but be
thought to have you share; for that neither your Sex, nor your Complexion, can
be supposed to season you against the but ordinary impressions of that
Afflictive Passion.

That which I have termed a moral cause of this fear, I believe you already
apprehend to be that (or some remainders of that) Spirit of Bondage, mentioned
by S. Paul, Romans 8.15. which (as it seems by that Apostle) does in nothing more
fully discover it self, then in the bitter apprehensions of death, Heb. 2.15.
this cannot be excused (much less encouraged in you, or in any other; but will
stand in need of much good counsel, and your own most sinnewed endeavors to
remove or lessen it.

But what is it that you fear in death? the pains thereof you cannot in reason
fear, because you know not of what, or whether of any disease you may dye:
whether you may have pains or no, or sense to feel them, if you have any:
though even against these you are not without a Promise (to which I am assured
you have as good a claim as any one) viz. that God will make the merciful or
Charitable man's bed in his sickness, Psalm. 41.3. though when God undertakes to
make the sick man's bed, his Soul (indeed) shall lie much easier then his body.
But that you indeed fear is after death: that Thunderclap which set Foelix a
trembling, when it sounded from the mouth of St. Paul; I mean, Judgment to
come, Acts 24.25. which for a good man to fear too much is a sign of
Pusillanimiite; not to fear at all is no sign of Piety: our God is a Consuming
Fire, and in the best of us there is that dross, which dreads the fury of
Everlasting Burnings. In a word; above all other Remedies against the fear of
death, there is none more powerful, yea so powerful, as the contemplation of
the death of Christ, which gave the fatal blow to the Chain of Adamant, wherein
all mankind till then, were held captive; being indeed the death of death,
Hos. 13.14. The Representations whereof may be (questionless) very usefulty, as
well as innocently beheld by you, or any other Christians; but not under any
barren and melancholic fixation of your eye or car on the story of our
Saviors Passion: but by a wise selecting out the fruits thereof, and feeding
upon them by discreet contemplation, for the strengthening of our inward man,
against such intimidating thoughts of Mortality.

Neither can I advise you to avoid any thing that may stir up this passion of
fear in your heart; but rather the contrary; I mean to be forward in embracing
any seasonable opportunity of making these objects of sadness familiar to you.
For besides that it is a duty of Religion to weep with them that weep, Romans
12.15. to visit the sick; Matthew. 25.36. to attend at the burial of our (not
friends only, but) brethren, Tob. 2.2. yea to bury them with our own hands, or
to do any preparatory office about their Corpses, if need be: you will find
thereby this double advantage, viz. that you will most earnestly fly sin, (the
cause and sting of death) and in short time gain a great victory over this
Passion.

OBJECTION. XXVI.
But though my fear of death be removeable, yet is not my fear of falling away
from Grace to be removed.

SOLUTION.
32. ANd why do you not as well fear, that the earth will open, and swallow you
up quick? you have some dependence upon the Goodness and Providence of
Allmighty God, that he will not thus deal with you; if you had not, your fear
of the later would be as just, and as irremoveable as of the former. For what
assurance have you against the one, that you have not against the other? are
not the Souls of men as precious in the Eyes of their Creator and Redeemer, as
are their bodies? can there be so great and prodigious a judgment happpen to
the Body of any man, as is Gods total and final withdrawing of Grace from his
Soul? and have you not the same Good Word of God to depend upon in your fears
of the one, as well as of the other? Does God take care for oxen? does he give
and perform promises of Food and Raiment, and Health and Peace, etc. unto the
Body, but is he a dry and a barren Wilderness (as the Prophet expresses it,
Jer. 2.31.) unto the Souls of his People? I shall leave you to ruminate on that
Argument of Saint Paul, Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things?

Remember, I pray, that God takes his Grace from no man, who does not abuse it.
The Talents were taken from none, but him who wrapped one up in a Napkin: from
him it was taken away indeed, and that justly, because he made no use of that,
which was not only intended for use, but would have been increased by using. He
could not help indeed the taking it from him, when God for his Sluggishness
thought this the most proper punishment for the one, and reward for the other,
upon their Reckoning for the Talents; but by Industry he might have prevented
it, as did the other two Servants.

And to render you satisfied with an evident and full passage of Scripture, be
pleased to peruse that of St. Paul to the Hebrews, Chap. 6.15. where after he
had spoken of falling away, and the dreadful and irrecoverable estate of
Apostasy, he adds, that he is persuaded better things of them, and such as are
seen only in good Christians; and his ground of that no fear is, for that God
would reward their former labor of Love with the grace of perseverance, the
due reward of such (as like you) do make use of Grace given, as our Savior
witnesses, Mat. 25.29.

OBJECT. XXVII.
But sensible alteration in me, and the Promised effects of Conversion, I find
none.

SOLUTION.
33. COnversion sounds not the same thing come as it did to the Jews, and
Heathen, in the Apostles times, and after the first Plantation of the Gospel,
who are not only to suffer a Change in point of moral practice, but in point
of belief. Neither are there any extraordinary gifts of tongues, and Miracles,
or Healings, etc. to be powered out upon new Converts, for confirmation of
Faith, and increase of believers. When the Jews were come into the promised
Land, Manna ceased, we are now in a way of ordinary dispensation, and though
the Holy Ghost be the Author of this, as well as of the other; and our
submission to this, as deeply exacted, yet is the Method, and manner of the
oeconomie, in some sort changed, (at least in the accidental parts thereof;)
experience of our Religion, and the Faith of former ages, being argument enough
to convince any rational Souls, of the truth of it.

Such extraordinary gifts, I suppose you will not look for; but if for an
extraordinary change, in your mind (though this may be thought superfluous)
yet do but set Repentance from sin, against Continuance in sin, Obedience,
against Rebellion, Righteousness against Sin, a Child of God against a Child of
Wrath, Heaven against Hell, the Fellowship of God and his Holy Angels, against
the Company of Devils and Wicked men, Eternal joys against Eternal
torments, and the alteration is visible enough. But if the Way bringing of you
into this, must have been by miracle, as was the conversion of St. Paul. or
with an audible voice, as was Gods Revelation of himself to Samuel: the
weakness of this expectation betrays it self, by the singularity of it,
carrying with it a secret condemnation of the Stupidity, of other Christians,
who go hoodwink't they know not whether, never thinking on any such sensible
Epiphanie, and manifestation of Christ to their Souls.

OBJECT. XIII.
But the root of Bitterness, from which most of these Doubts, Scruples, and
Fears do spring is my Aptness to fall into sin; together with such horrible
thoughts Startling up in my Heart that I could even tear that Body to pieces,
and rend out the Soul that harbors, and Evaporates, such black, and Stinking
Eruptions.

SOLUTION.
34. IF the sins you have formerly bin guilty of, are sins of wilfulness, and
the Relapse, you may be thought to intend in your objection, be into such sins;
then is your case so much the more dangerous, by how much the more certain it
is, that such sins of Wilfulness are not reconcilable to a State of regeneracy.
The determination whereof, I must referr to the Judgment of him, with whom you
shall think fit to entrust the Anatomy of your soul. But if they are but sins
of Humane, and Personal infirmity; then shall I offer to your consideration,
these two things: First, that it being supposed that the sins you mention, are
only sins of insirmity; that Relapses into such sins, are no new thing to every
Child of God. as being Spotts so inseparable from a State of mortality, that
the Spirit of God has Styled them by the mouth of Moses, the Spots of Gods
Children. Deuteronomy. 32.5. aly. that it is not to be expected, that there should be
an Equality, of the Number or Kinds of these sins, in all the Children of God;
some being guilty of more, some of fewer; some of more of one kind, of sins of
infirmity; some of another; and much of this not only depending upon the
diversity of the measure of grace given; but likewise upon the different
complexions, and former habits of those Christians, before their Penitence and
Reformation.

But if the case be of other Sins, viz. of Sins of Wilfulness, then observe,
that there is a very considerable difference (at least in your apprehension
perhaps) betwixt the aptness, or facility, of falling into Sin, and actual
relapsing thereinto. You find (perchance) the temptations are frequent and
strong upon you, and your enemy very indefatigable and restless; and you fear
that the battery in the end, will be too forcible for the fortification to hold
out against it is that these assaults of Flesh and blood, will not only Storm,
but take, or else surprise your Resolution: but all this while, this is but
anxiety: and if those temptations do get ground of you; draw your will to some
short parley with them, and thereby increase your fear of Yealding to this
enemy; yet is there no relapse: and if there were, yet ought you to have
conifort, against temptations to despair of final victory: because these
utmost endeavors of yours together with your grief conceived for but inclining
to these temptations, will render your condition commiserable in the eyes of
your tender, and compassionate Father: who will in the end, make his strength
to be seen in your weakness; giving you good reason to ascribe, the cause as
well as the honor of the victory, to him alone, by whom you shall be able to
do all things. Phil. 4.13.

But to prevent your danger by temptation you shall do well, to open your
condition freely to some Grave, Pious, Discreet, and Learned Divine; one well
seen in the Study of men's Consciences, (a great rarity I must tell you amongst
Protestants,) to have often conference with him, to confess freely to him, to
receive directions from him, for preventing your guilt and trouble, to
communicate frequently: the blessed Sacrament having a special designation,
for those in your condition, refreshing of wearied Souls being the great
intendment of that Commemoration of Christ's death: All temptations under such
hard usage as is now prescribed, will wither away, and dye in their prime;
which by our private endeavors of eradication, do most times exceed our fears,
as well as our expectations, in the growth of them.

As for the other part of your objection, wherein you complain of the depravity
and corruption of your nature, belcht out many times in Prodigious thoughts of
your heart, (it may be against the goodness, or justice, or perhaps against the
very essence of the Divine Majesty,) the more holy you desire to be, the more
grievous will such thoughts (as you call them) be unto you. Therefore be
pleased to consider, 1. that in my judgment, many of these are not your own
thoughts, or motions of corrupt nature in you, as you conceive; but really
injections of Satan, strongly savouring of malice against God, and the merciful
work of our Redemption. This Itake to be it, which is called the Devils
putting of somewhat into men's hearts, as he did the treason of Judas, the
prevarication of Ananias and Sapphira, David's numbering the People, and St.
Peter's effeminate suggestions to our Savior, etc. These sometimes are
punishments for sin either in our selves or others, sometimes only trialls from
God, for the manifestation of the power of his Grace, in men's souls: and I
suppose they are not duly styld our thoughts, till they are admitted, and
treated by us, they then become our finfull thoughts, as soon as we incline to
entertain and in^^r ace them. And 2ly. I doubt not, but such as these may be
injected into holy men, as in the case of David, and Peter, as we have
instanced before. Yea and not so only but they may be hardened to, and embraced,
and consequently, their state endangered till renewed again by faith and
Repentance.

Wherefore if you reject, and not own them; grieving for them as punishments
for sin, praying against them, and perfectly hating them, with what e're is the
Author of them, having an holy jealousy over your own nature, laboring to
shut the Den of your heart against such intruders, and to give the possession
of the considerable fort to better friends to your salvation; you are not
hereby endangered by present guilt, or engaged under just fear of Apostasy;
your state in this (as in all other things) being not without example in the
dearest Children of God.

OBJECTION. XXIX.
But God has manifested his Displeasure against me in many accidents of life.

SOLUTION.
35. IT may be Gods not giving you Children is principally intended by you in
this objection: the Key of the womb being (as the Hebrews were wont to say)
in the Hands of God, there being indeed a more immediate coucurrence of the
Divine Majesty required to the fruit thereof then to the production of other
things in the ordinary course of Providence. I have known this prevail very
far with some of your sex, heightning their perplexityes from that of St. Paul
to Timothy, 1. Ep. 2.15. from whence they conclude, that if a Woman continue
barren in a state of Marriage, there is no hopes of her salvation; that
depending so necessarily upon the former condition of Childbearing, to this we
answer by these degrees.

1. It is no mark of Gods irreversible anger against us that many Cross
accidents befall us in this life; seeing they are generally acknowledged, to be
not only matter of advantage to our Souls, bettering us by such chastments? but
they ought to be apprehended as Signatures, or Marks of our adoption; St. Paul
having illegitimated all such as are not owned by God for sons by these
fatherly Corrections of them Heb. 12.8. very far are they too from being
distinctive prognostics, of those everlasting distributions, at the day of
judgment, in the opinion of King Solomon; who tells you that, no man knows
either Love or Hatred by all that is before them. Eccle. 9.1.

2. Where God has given Children, and by some evil accidents taken them away,
there may more justly be supposed a manifestation of Gods heavy displeasure,
then where he gives no Children at all: yet that has been the case of many
(holy Men and Women, as appears in the example of Job. and David, whose
Histories are furnished with most remarkable passages to this purpose, their
lives being chequered (as one may say) with various contingencies of good and
evil.

3. Be it granted that barrenness, amongst the Jews was reputed a curse, and
that God threatens it as a judgment upon them to have miscarrying wombs, and
dry breasts. yet ought it not to have that Character with us Christians, who
are not engaged to obedience by promises of temporal, but of Spiritual and
eternal blessings: things of that concernment even in those days, (clouded
with shadowing and carnal ordinances,) that God himself proposes them to the
obedient Eunuchs, as a full (indeed superabundant) satisfaction for their
Sterility, Is. 56.5. the truth is, there ought not to be (neither is there
without our own fault) any barrenness in Christians of either sex, the forming
of Christ in their Souls (intimated by the Apostle, Gal. 4.19.) being a
mystical birth in all the Sons and Daughters of God; and not without some
reflection on this, did the Church appoint the Magnificat, of that blesed
Virgin, to be publicly sung in her Liturgy; it being hoped that every member
thereof, would consider, that they were bound to bring forth this fruit unto
God.

4. Lastly, for that of the Apostle to Timothy, the sense is so obvious, and
that false interpretation so remote from the wisdom, goodness, and truth of
God; that it is strange the Fancies even of women (who it is confessed are very
forcible) should be able by any chimistry of imagination, to extract such a
disproportionall meaning from that text. For St. Paul. having fixed that sex, in
their due place of subordination in the Church; that he might give them some
reasons to be content with that portion, mentions the order of their Creation,
the woman being not only formed after Adam, as that signifies order of time,
but of Nature also, (the Man being as one may speak the first running of the
metal) and her being first in the transgrssion, (a token of weakness and
frailty) as the Grounds upon which he builds a conclusion, or canon for the
order; not so likely to stand fast, upon the bare authority even of the Apostle
himself without being cemented and crankt with very good and undeniable
reasons. but yet, not to leave them under the dishonor of being first in that
fatal Crime, (Ringleaders in Rebellion seldom tasting, of that mercy which is
showed to their followers) and likewise to keep them from being chrust out of
that place, by the anger and insolence of the other sex, the Apostle tells them
that by the fruit of their Womb they made amends for the miseries and mischiefs
of their fault; the Remedy coming by them (namely the incarnation of Christ)
as well as the disease, of the efficacy whereof they were likewise to have
their part if they should continue to perfor me the conditions of that
merciful Covenant; the Apostle very seasonably minding them, of constancy in
their professions, and Practice: of which the first of that sex, showed no good
example, in her harkening to the suggestions of the Serpent in Paradise.

More (perhaps) might be said to this purpose, but the apprehensions I have of
your abilities and art of discerning, beyond the common capacity of your sex,
having already checked me, for falling into this solemn, and foreseen
Digression.

Thus, Madam, have I given you my thoughts, in these general, and conjecturall
applications hopeing that they may possibly light on the whole, or some part of
the cause of your trouble. I have offered them to you, not so much in
acknowledgment of those favors, I have heretofore received from your self, and
your dear Husband (since with God) (though my obligation, thereby could not be
discharged, by a far greater attempt to recompense them) as for the tender
respect I have to your afflicted state. That this should do a perfect cure
(though I know God does (many times) great things by small means,) I have no
grounded hopes to believe: not only because of the defects, and impotence of my
endeavors, but for that difeases of this kind, are influenced upon by the
distempers, or complexion of the Patient, and have a secret and malign aspect
upon them from many circumstances, not guessable (I presume) by persons more
Acute, then I can deserve to be thought.

I know Divines should not undertake to cure, like Empericks, by Guesses, and
at random; and therefore, madam I have not obscurely intimated, my desire unto
you in this Paper to make a very seasonable and home address to some one of a
Thousand, Job. 33.23. A skillful Phisician of Souls; that you may not be
thought, to subordinate the care of your better, and eternal part, to that
Cabinet of beautiful earth, wherein God has locked up that rich Jewel for
some few years: I am confident Madam, it is not only the best, but the only
Counsel you can follow, with assurance (by Gods blessing) of cureing these
wonnds in your Spirit: no if I have but cleansed and Wiped, or done the least
other good office, of helping forward their cure; as I ought (and you) to give
all the Praise thereof to God, so shall it be esteemed a plentiful Reward, for
this little Labor of Madam,

Your affectionate Servant in Christ Jesus.

A PRAYER.
OAllmighty God, the Creator and Preserver of Humane Spirits, the searcher of
all Hearts, who know, and tryest all our ways, and understandest our
thoughts afarr off: from thy love and bounty it is, and not from our desert,
that we have any measure of grace, whereby we may know, and obey thy Will, any
impression of Godly sorrow, when we have broaken thy laws, any desire to
resolution and performance of what is pleasing in thy sight, after we have
erred and strayed from the paths of thy commandments: mercifully I beseech
thee to behold all such as are grieved, oppressed, and perplexed in Spirit,
through the guilt of sin, weakness of Grace, frailty of Nature, or the devices
of our grand enemy, and accuser. Especially be mindful of thy Servant B. B.
who has aesired the prayers of me thy most unworthy Servant, and grievous
finner. O Lord, to thee are known all the causes, and accasions of her trouble
and confusion of Spirit; the distractions and terrors of her soul, are not hid
from thine Eyes: O thou that have the Balm of Gilead, the Soul-healing Oil of
mercy, and pardon of sin, pour the same I most humbly beseech into her wounded
Spirit, bind up this bruised Reed, kindle this Smoking Flax, preserve her from
the Snares of Satan, free her from the delusions and errors of a deceitful
imagination, and vouch chase to her such a measure of Spiritual Consolution,
that her soul may be comforted and strengthened thereby; to the finishing of her
course with joy, through a final Victory over all her Enemies, by the
goodness and power of Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed and Sold by T. Garthwait at the little North door of St. Paul's.
B. Chapels Methodus Concionandi. 120 -- Notes upon 103. Psalm, being a Praxis
upon that Method. 80 A Commentary on the 5 Books of Moses or Pentateuch by J.
Trap. 40 Remains of Mr. Geo. Herbert. late Orator of the university of
Cambridge. Reliquiae Wottonianae, A Collection of the incomparable pieces of
that great Master of Language and Art. Sr. Henry Wotton Knight. Provost of Eton.
etc. 120 The Works of that profound Divine Dr. Tho. Jackson Pres. of Gorp. Chr.
Col. Oxon. in folio. in 3 Vollumes. Dr. Cosins Scholasticall History of the
Canon of the Scripture. 40 Dr. Waltons Introduction to the Oriental Languages.
in 120 Dr. Steward Sermon at Paris of Hezekiah's Reformation. 120 The
Conversion of Rigep Dandulo, a Turk, to the Christian Faith, by Mr. Gunning. 80
The Rationale on the Book of Com. Prayer, by Mr. Sparrow. 120 The whole Duty of
Man. A Book necessary for all Families 80 Mr. Joseph Mead his Dissertationum
Triga. 40 Dr. Dees Actions and Conferences with Spirits etc. Set out by Dr.
Casaubon. folio
School Books.
Mr. Walkers Treatise of English Particles. 80 Mr. Busbies Horat. Castigat. Mr.
Busbies Juvenal. Castigat. Mr. Busbies Persius. Castigat. In usum Scholae
Westmonaster.

