A LETTER SENT TO GENERAL MONK, To St. Albons the 29 of January.

WHEREIN The Ancient Government of England founded upon MAGNA CHARTA, and the
Petition of Right, is vindicated and proved to be a popular and free
Commonwealth; All the marks of Sovereignty being in the people.

TOGETHER With an Expedient for admitting the Members excluded in 48, and
composing all differences, and settling the Nation upon a sure Basis of PEACE.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1659.

A LETTER TO GENERAL MONK.
Right Honorable,
THis Letter was intended you, before yours to the Devonshire Gentlemen came
forth, and therefore it may not be looked on as an answer, though in it you may
find your objections answered, and an expedient proposed for future Settlement,
which will be more for your honor to close with, than to join with an interest
averse to the Spirit of the Nation. The credit of your Letter has given birth
to 100000. per mensem, and if you should not hasten filling up the House
without laying snares for honest conscientious men, its feared it may involve
us in a speedy war, and lest this intended new Government might pretend to have
something of freedom in it which the People wanted, I have considered our former
constitution, without raveling into matter of fact since the year 40, and have
stated the cause of the Commonwealth, as its now in the Parliament House, and
under the consideration of the wisest, soberest, and most judicious out of the
House; wherein a way of Settlement may be proposed, and prosecuted, as nigh as
possible to the satisfaction of all persons concerned; the pi^lars of the
peoples liberty being these two excellent Laws Magna Charta, and the Petition
of Right, do so well preserve the property and liberty of all sorts and ranks
of men, that the single person could not legally incroach upon the Nobility and
Gentry, nor they upon the Commonalty, each had such a check upon other, that
they were a balance each to other, and were as necessary to each other as the
hand to the head, or the head to the feet, each contributing his part to make a
complete and free Commonwealth, more free than which, never was any. For the
single person was so limited and bounded by his oath to Govern according to
Law, and by Law no former Law or Statutes can be repealed, no new one made or
introduced, but what is moved in the popular counsel, and there debated and
considered whether it be for the good of the People. And if upon the debate it
be not found in all, or in part pro bona Publica, its laid aside. Secondly, the
single person had no power to take from them the least part of their Estates
without their own consents in Parliament, nor to imprison their persons without
the cause be signified in the warrant, and then it ought to be by a legal
Magistrate, which in a certain time is bound to prosecute, which being not
done, the person cannot be denied a Habeas Corpus, and the Judge is bound to
set him at Liberty, the party grieved has a good Action against the Officers
that illegally imprisoned him, notwithstanding the Kings Warrant under Hand and
Seal; For the Government does so well provide against Tyrranny and
Arbitrarinesse, that whatever person puts the Kings illegal commands in
execution shall suffer for breach of the Law, and the Kings Warrant cannot
justify him, and upon that reason was that ancient maxim grounded.

That the King can do no wrong, which has only relation to his politic
capacity; So that it is very perspicuous to every eye, that the Government of
this Nation is a popular and free Commonwealth, all the marks of Soverainty
being in the people, for the negative voice and execative part of the
Government, in the intervals of Parliament they were no way a diminution of the
peoples freedom; for what ever emergency the single person had, he could raise
no money but by Parliament, and in Parliament they never conseded to raise any
money, except the King gratified them in their desires, that is, to grant those
Laws they proposed, so that he was necessarily, and consequently constrained to
grant their Laws, otherwise his necessities were left unredressed; As to the
Militia, it was placed in men's hands of Estates and Interest, the Officers
being men of quality, the Soldiery were composed of the Farmer and Yeoman, who
cannot be thought would join against Law and Reason with the Lust and Ambition
of any single person, to abridge themselves and their posterity of any just
freedom they enjoyed as their Birthright. Besides they had no particular
obligation to obleage them to the King, for they were not his mercinaries
raised to support his Prerogative, but those that lived upon their own Estates,
and were put in trust to preserve the peace of the Country according to Law,
both against foreign invasions, and domestic insurrections; and it were a thing
impossible to imagine that they could ever be so besotted, as to change their
Liberty for Slavery, as some do vainly dream; On the contrary it has been too
evident in our Hemisfere of late years, how easy it is to persuade and lead
mercenary Soldiers to the subvertion both of Law and Religion, and to convert
those that were raised for the strength, defense, and liberty of the
Commonwealth, to become the absolute Lords and Masters thereof; the late sad
experience of this truth I shall leave to your serious consideration. I
acknowledge that several Kings have attempted, making themselves absolute, but
in perusal of the History, you shall find that no King of England since Henry
the 3ds. time, who first granted the Charter, has ever gotten by contending
with his Subjects, but lost; and their Favorets and Counselors were brought to
ignominious deaths. It will be too long for a Letter to recite the particulars,
and we see the great Charter confirmed 32 times by Act of Parliament; Sir, It Is
judged that a people with good Laws, and good Majestrates, may live happily
under a Monarchy, Astrocrasie or Democrasie; the form of Government, neither
adds nor diminishes, for we shall find in History both applauded and
condemned, it is good Laws and good Magistrates only gives the difference; and
therefore no wise good man will be an instrument to change a Law or Government
upon a people, against the genious and spirit of the people, for principally
every body operates to his own good; If the greatest part of the men of
interest, of honesty, and wisdom, center in a Government (excepting only some
few which are biassed by sinister and selfish principals;) It is both the duty
and wisdom of every honest and good man, to contribute as much as lies in him
to the strengthening of their interest. I have but a word more, the Government
of this Nation is Parliamentary; Parliaments elected, sitting and voting
freely, that every Member chosen by the people may freely sit and vote before
he is adjudged incapable by a Legal and fair Trial, that no Member may be
obstructed by a force without: God has made you instrumental in removeing one
force, that you may be truly instructed in the State of the case, to remove all
force from this present Parliament; I recommend you to Mr. Prynnes book, The
Cause of the secluded Members Vindicated; You will meet with objections and
obstructions, and they hang simply upon those two great propositions. First,
how to secure both Lives and Estates of all that have acted since 47. Secondly,
and how to maintain the good old Parliaments cause, undertaken for the good of
the Subject in the year 40. I have a short expedient to offer you; As to the
first, that you will endeavor that six of the secluded Members, viz. Mr.
Pierepoint, Mr. Crew, Sir William Waller, Sir Gilbert Garret, Sergeant Maynard,
and Mr. Ansley, may be Commissioners appointed of the one side; Lord St. John,
Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper, Mr. Weaver, Mr. Letchmore, Colonel Morley, Colonel
Hutchinson, on the other part; and in case there should be any difference,
wherein they should not agree, that three moderate men may be chosen as Umpires
for the healing our Breaches, and composing these differences amongst us;
Whereby this poor Nation may hope for a settlement: It has been your honor to
stand in the gap, to resist the most wicked and arbitrary design that ever was
laid to ensnare a people; It is now your wisdom and interest to espouse the
interest and good of this Nation for a future consistency and settlement, and
therefore you ought not to seek the pleasing of some few selfish ambitious
persons, to the disgust of the whole; Follow your wonted moderation and wisdom,
but give not your Country cause to believe you will leave them destitute of a
friend in this day of trouble. When you come to London, you will find your self
Courted by all parties; The Lord be your Council and Guide, for you now walk
upon the edge of a knife, but he that walks uprightly walks surely. As to You
second, if the Parliament be left free, and the Persons and Estates of all that
have acted under any Government since 47. be secured by an Act of Oblivion and
indemnity, and an assurance of any Estate that has been made over by the
present Authority, or any Authority which acted since the first interruption,
either by re-imbursement of the money, with use, or confirmation of the Estate
by Act of Parliament; Who can distrust that Parliament, (which has a public
Spirit) that managed the heat of the War from 42. to 47. against the late Kings
interest? But they will settle the Nation upon a Basis of Righteousness, and
Public preservation against all Tyrany and Tyrannical usurpation whatsoever; I
crave pardon for this trouble, and beseech you for God and your poor Countries
sake, that you be not slow to consider some expedient, that may be righteous
and equal for the settling of this Nation, which will give you increase of
Honor, as you increase in years here, and leave you a Reputation full of Glory
to Posterity. I Remain

Right Honorable Your most Affectionate Humble Servant, H.N.

FINIS.

