An Epistle NARRATIVE OF THE Barbarous Assault and illegal ARREST of Freder.
Turvill, Esquire: By Sixteen Bailiffs, with the death of one of their Followers.

To a Gentleman in the Country from a Friend of both newly arrived from beyond
Sea, that accidentally was an eyewitness of all Passages.

Quod genus hoc hominum? Quaeve hunc tam barbara morem Permittit Patria? Virg.
lib. 1. Aened. London, Printed, 1660.

An Epistle Narrative of the Barbarous Assault and Illegal Arrest of Frederick
Turvill, Esquire by Sixteen Bailiffs, with the death of one of their followers.
Dear N.
AFter so long absence from thee, and what I was willinglier to part with, in
the unstable state I left it, my Country; thou may perhaps rather look for
an account of my travails into Foreign Nations; stuffed with some of Mandivels
lies, then a homely Narrative of any Domestic accident. But a sad mischance
rolating to a dear friend of ours commands my Pen, and forces me to assure
thee, I have not any where abroad amongst people civilized by Law, or Religion,
been an eyewitness of an action more Barbarous, yet authorized and licensed
by a pretended legality, then what the second day of my residence in London,
presented to my veiw. It made me, I confess, sadly fancy, that where
Gentlemen of Noble extraction were so much abused by base people, under the
Cloak of law; all those Regicides were not extinct that pretended by law to cut
off the head of all laws their King.

It was on the 17th. of this current, that from a Balcone of my lodging in
Covent garden, I beheld the Plazzos comparing them (ut parva magnis) to that of
St Mark at Venice, or the Portici di Bologna, when at a distance, I took
particular notice of two Gentlemen walking together, whom by. the comeliness of
their deportment, and studied negligence of a manly gate, I concluded, improved
travailers I was, I must need say, pleasing my self with this reflection, that
as there is no Munkey more ridiculous in my eyes, then an English Monsier, who
crossed the Seas for fashion more then design, and made it his some months
study to wag his head and heels, as lightly as his Feathers, or swear in an
affected passion a Je reniege dieu! So our Nation may, in this regard, thank
and excuse its late misfortunes, that the unconstant changes of Government, and
constant persecution of the loyal party has forced so many gallant spirits to
quit their Native home, who by wise reflection on the Manners, Natures,
Policies, and Governments, of other States and Kingdoms, have improved
themselves to such a height of Wisdom and Gallantry, hat we need not yield to
any Nation in Europe, as before in Military, so now in Politic and Civil
affairs. These were my thoughts relating to the two Gentlemen, who had but one
Footman attending on them, when behold! on a sudden they were surrounded by a
cluster of rude but sturd, fellows; with swords drawn, hangers and other
weapons, as if they intended a murder. One of them making at the foremost of
the Gentlemen) whom I could not yet discern to be our dear and noble friend.
Mr. Frederick Turvill) was by him several times bid to stand off upon his
peril; but he forcing in, gave not our friend leave to draw his sword, though
he had his hand on it, who having a long leaguer Cloak thrown round his left
shoulder, could not presently draw; wherefore quitting his sword, he whipped out
a Dagger, presented the point, not offering to stab, or thrust at him, but
rather retiring some paces backward toward the wall in the posture of a Legal
defense; but the Fellow (whose name was Gerard) pressing still on, and
endeavoring to close, ran himself upon the Dagger, which passed into his
breast, and he forthwith fell to the ground Another of the Crew in the very
instant caught hold of Mr. Turvills right hand, to avoid whose hold, he changed
his Dagger to the left, and with it struck him that held him: Now three more of
the company made at the defendent with their hangers, and after some blows
closed with him, but could not wrest from him the Priniard, with which, though
held, he put off two passes made a his body which ran through the sleeve of his
shi^t and doublet. Gerard in this interim, still alive to re^enge, arose again,
and making at him, cried out: Thou Rogue, God damn me, thou have killed me! but
by a push was turned again upon his back. It was worthily observable, that our
noble friend being as you know, but of a moderate size, and very neatly
timbred, yet, as unconcerned in danger, in the vehemence of his Passion,
uniting all his spirits, could not be worsted by all these burly, strong and
boystrous fellows; two of whom I could plainly discern, he threw with apparent
ease to the ground, whilst others hung upon his arms and shoulders. There it
was to be seen, how much a clear and neat strength born on by an active
resolution, and an undaunted courage, can prevail against the boystrous fury of
a lubberly rout, whose souls are duller and heavier then their louty bodies,
and would leave a doubt of their final Resurrection, were there not a severer
Judge to condem them to hell, then they find here to condemn their bodies to a
Gallows. My quill is too slow to accompany the active performances of our noble
friend, who being now overpowr'd more by their weight then their motions and
almost pressed to the ground, overturned two of them in a dark cellar, and fell
with them, it is true; but you may easily imagine the nobler element would be
still uppermost: there, I suppose he lost his weapon, who would have caught at
lightning, to dart in their faces, and himself in the dark, but not his
courage. And here I must not omit to tell how bravely the other Gentleman
behaved himself all this while, who with his Sword, kept the other twelve in
play, being only seconded by Mr. Turvills man, who unadvisedly not keeping
close to him, was disarmed, which the gallant person perceiving, and not seeing
his friend any more, retiring a step or two, plucked out a Pisto^l, at which the
Baylisss drew back, and gave him opportunity to make an honorable retreat.
Thus was noble Turvill arrested and carried over to the Rose Tavern, before
either I or any other Gentlemen knew him, much less came in to rescue him, all
this being done in less time then you can read it. He was there confined to a
Chamber, all the Baylisss standing about him with drawn swords, six of them
being wounded, wheere he saw Gerard sprauling on the ground, lie Cursing and
Swearing, and charging his fellows to impute his death to our Friend, till he
spewed out his revengefull soul no doubt to hell, whether it was carried by a
bloody Oath, and imprecation; He left these villains heirs of his revenge,
for they proved so fatihfull executers to his damnable Will, that they still
thirst after his blood, although it be certainly proved, they had no Warrant at
that time against Mr. Turvill, and credibly reported, that they missing their
aim in executing another Arrest, resolved amongst themselves to serve it on the
first Gentleman they met, and by consequence, gave occasion to their followers
death, who was no Bailiff himself; yet they added Robbery to their Roguery, and
picked Mr: Turvills pockets under pretense of searching for Pistols. What horrid
abuse is this of the Law, that a nest of rogues let fly where and at whom they
will, should attempt not only an Arrest without Warrant a robbery instead of
an arrest, but venture at the life of a Person of quality, whose life ought to
be as dear to his Country, as it concerns the Nation, that all such rascals
should be hanged. Quod genus hoc hominum? aut quae tam barbara morem Permittit
Patria? It Is grown now to that height of barbarousnes, that neither Streets, nor
Houses, nor Courts of Justice, scarce Churches themselves are free from these
Vermin, and but one day in the week exempt from their attempts: Were it not
safer for most of our Gallants in Town, that have courage to enter at a breach
in the face of an enemy and the mouth of a Cannon, to travail amongst Bears
and Wolves, where their defense were justifiable and honorable, then to walk
our streets (where every man ought to have public freedom) under the sight
of these Monsters that watch at every door, and start out of every hole, with
forged right to warrant their mischief? may they not at every turn cry out, Per
insidias iter est, formasque jerarum?

After these legal Thieves had robbed Mr. Turvill, not thinking themselves
defensible in their baseness, nor daring to trust their own cowardliness any
more in the open streets amongst Gentlemen and honest people, that had all
their mouths full of Mr. Turvills defense, and praise of his civility,
gallantry, valor, and worth. They called the Constable to their assistance,
brought forth our friend, to conduct him to Justice Blake; multitudes they
were, and I cannot devise how it came to pass, that, we could not possibly get
together above two or three Gentlemen in all that time to rescue him, though
all the people generally spoke high his praise. Two there were, whose gallantry
shall always be by me admired, for they performed against the multitude, as
much as could be done by men, till in dispute my friends man, made his escape,
after whom they crying; stop the murderer! We supposing our Friend had been
disingaged, made good and safe our own retreat. But soon after to our excessive
grief, I understood, he was brought before Justice Blake, from whom I could no
ways expect any civility for a Gentleman, though his wife be a Gentlewoman of
good extraction, and much civility. He is said to be of principles destructive
to all Titles of Honor, and one who was more like to favor his equals, then
give respect to his betters.

Dearest N. O may those happy and glorious days hasten upon us with golden
wings, which we hope for by the means of this free ensuing Parliament, wherein
a Crown may be restored to majesty, Titles to Nobility, Honor to Worth and
Gallantry, Subjection, Quietness, respect and loyal Obedience be found in
Subjects, and a perfect Reformation of all Abuses, Cheates, Trepans taken from
the Law, and insolence from the under rout of People. Let us in the interim
comfort our selves with these loyal hopes, and let me live no longer, if I
live to see any one hair of noble Turvills head to perish for this Gallant,
Noble and Just Defense of his worthy Person.

Thine N.


