To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
THat there is a weighty Trust reposed in you, it is no ambition in me to tell
you; for verily the righteous God requires the performance of it from you; the
right discharging whereof is of great concernment (and the hearty desire of him
that sends this) to you. Never had this Nation since she had the Name of
England, more need of wise Senators, then at this season; for England has
sinned presumptuously against her God, his mercies to her have been of a
wonderful magnitude: What people under the Sun has he dealt so bountifully
with? Or is there any Nation under Heaven has had so liberal a portion of the
blessings of his right hand, and of his left? Has she not been counted the
Mirror of all Nations? Has not the sound of her Inhabitants gone thorough the
earth? Have not the Neighbor Nations round about her, bended to her? Has she
not been a help in needful times unto her friends, and a dread and terror to
her enemies? But how has England requited the Lord? Has she rightly answered
his Love, and walked in his Light? Or has she not cast the Testimony of his
Law behind her? The unparalled Mercies of her God are undervalued and
forgotten by her; therefore is he drawing near in judgment against her; for
the sins of Sodom are found to be within her, and the Cry of Blood pursues her.
Time after time has the righteous God sent his Warnings to her, but hitherto
they have been little regarded by her: Ah! how long has she grieved her
righteous God, and her iniquities been a burden to his people! And to add to
her unworthiness, and multiply her Misery, she has abused God's Messengers:
How many of his Prophets has she imprisoned? And which of her Gaols have not
been v^sited, by her imprisoning the sons of Innocence? Not for any guile that
has been found in their lips, but only for witnessing against her iniquity
and unworthiness. And shall not the righteous God visit for these things? Will
he not be avenged on such a people? Certainly it is time for her to be clothed
in Sackcloth, and happy were it for her, would she fast from iniquity. O that I
might see her Princes set in the House of Mourning, and her Nobles weeping in
the dust. But England is sick, and sees it not; she is near the Grave, and not
sensible of it: Therefore is her Condition more desperate, and her Malady the
more incurable. O England! England! my Native Country, Calamity is coming very
swiftly upon thee, yet neither thy Princes, Peers, nor Prelates (so called)
seek to comfort thee, nor minister any Cordial, or the Balm of Gilead to
recover thee. O cease from thy Iniquity, and kiss the Rod that smites thee,
else verily I see thou runs on to thy ruin, and in thy madness rides post to
Perdition.

Ah friends! Is this a time to fall out with your fellow servants? Has not
England Enemies enough abroad to invade and overrun her, but you must needs
imbrue your hands in the blood of your native Countrymen? Do not your Enemies
laugh at your folly? And will they not be ready to rejoice at your ruin? There
is an opportunity put into your hands, and the God of Englands Mercies without
doubt has done it: Do you not see the undermining subtilty of your Enemies? If
this bloody Spirit be not timely rebuked, Rome will soon triumph in Englands
Ruins. Verily I must deal plainly with you herein; for my life is not dear
unto me, to do England good.

O Parliament of England, as yet thou have Power, and know that England's God
has given it unto thee: Be a bridle to that bloody Spirit, and crush the
Cockatrice in the shell; for if thou suffer this Jesuitical Design to have its
swing, it will neither leave thee root nor branch: Therefore (my Friends) seek
peace, and pursue it, and be no longer leavened with Ammon and Amaleck.

But let your minds be staid upon the Principle of God which he has placed in
your consciences: Be still (I say) in your minds, and come into calmness; let
the loftiness of man be laid low, and wait in filence upon the living God;
listen and incline your ear unto his still voice, that is it which moves to
holiness, mercy, and moderation. The Spirit of the Lord leads to patience, and
counsels his people to forgive their enemies. The righteous Seed seeks not for
revenge, it cannot endure to have its Garment stained with blood, and yet it is
a Principle that pleads for true obedience to Rulers; but would not have the
King drink the blood of the people. The Golden Mean, I must tell you, is the
best; and when you sit in Judgment, see that you remember Mercy; and I warn
you in the fear of God, be tender of the life of man.

And as for Religion, this the righteous God requires of you: Seek not to bind
the Consciences of any whose hearts are truly set toward Sion, nor consent not
to establish any form by an outward force, but give free Toleration in the
exercise of a tender Conscience. Be as zealous as you can in the restraining of
Vice and Vanity in your own particulars, and in the Nation. Let your Laws be a
terror to evildoers, but let the righteous find you favorers of God's people.
And take heed of Amaleck, that Prelatical conscience-binding Spirit, which
subtly presses you to an outward conformity; for Amaleck's design is to
preach up Persecution.

You may take notice of the preceding Powers that have been split upon this
Rock: How many Overturnings have you known of late? And did any persecuting
plot of late ever prosper? And do You think to make war against the Lamb, and
to meet with Victory? If you find it so* then say there is no God in Israel. It
is in vain for man to strive against his Maker; for the Lord God Omnipotent is
leading and will bring his seed out of the house of bondage, and if Pharaoh
shall refuse to let Israel go free, God will multiply his plagues upon him, and
drown him and his Host in the red Sea: Read who can. Wherefore, O Friends, be
persuaded to moderation, and let not the innocent be the object of your wrath,
because in feigned humility they come not to you, nor with the windy words of
man's hollow wisdom they cannot feed you. Plain downright dealing is a Jewel;
and the righteous feel more true joy in the wearing of it, then the Egyptians
do in all their Jewels.

And as for us (whom the scornful generation do call Quakers) were we of the
World, the World would love Us, for the World loves its own; but we are not of
the World, therefore the World hates Us; but we know it hated Christ before us:
And this we know also, our Adversaries cannot lay their yoke upon us, till the
Lord suffer them, nor can they go beyond their limit, and the wrath of man
shall be restrained: God may suffer them to try us, but they shall not destroy
us. Therefore do not You resolve within your selves that you will suppress the
righteous seed in the people called Quakers. For know this assuredly, That
Spirit which goes about it, must bow unto it, and fall before it; for they are
of the seed of the Jews; read me within: Sion must be a burthensom stone unto
her enemies; God is, and will be tender of his Seed, and all that fall upon it,
shall be broken by it.

Alas poor Mortals! think you to limit that which is Eternal? You may as well
command the fire from burning, the wind from blowing, the sun from shining, the
rain from showering, and the grass from springing up or growing, as offer to
attempt it. If you can span the circumference of the Earth, and dry up the vast
Ocean with your breath; if you can turn the Autumn into Spring, or count the
number of the Stars, and reckon every sand upon the sea shore; then may you
limit the holy One, and drown his Israel in the sea.

But who is sufficient for these things? Therefore, O Friends, come into the
Humility, and be no longer high minded, but learn the holy fear, and bow to
God's Witness in every one of your consciences, and answer the requirings of
it, by your obedience to it; while the Light of God is shining in you, it is
day; his spirit shall not always strive with flesh; work while the light is
with you; the night comes when no man can work; wherefore prize your time, and
repent, and believe and walk in the Light, least for your disobedience the Lord
God omnipotent overturn your Mountain, and bring his Wheel over you; and then
what are you?

And as for us, our Hope and Help is in Israel's God, and we fear not man, nor
what man can do unto us, we are well known to be a harmless people, and have
learnt to pray for them that persecute us, and desire to live peaceably with
all men. Therefore be not prejudiced in your minds toward us* nor go about to
make Laws against us, because we de^^ plainly with you; for of a certain, God
is with Us.

Martin Mason.
Lincoln, the second day of the 9th. Month, 1660.
LONDON, printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill, in
Martins l' Grand, 1660.


