A MEDITATION OF Life and Death.

Translated with some Alterations out of the works of the Learned and Ingenious
Eusebius Nierembergius.

-- Agnoscere solis
Permissum est, quos jam tangit vicinia fati
Victurosque dii celant, ut vivere durent,
Faelix esse mori -- Lucan. lib. 4. page 103.
OXFORD, Printed by L. L. for THO. FICKUS Anno Domini 1682.

HUMBLY DEDICATED TO Madam F. N.
Madam,
THO it may seem an unpardonable piece of impertinence, to present a Meditation
of Life and Death to a person, whose whole life (as appears by your Angelical
conversation) is nothing else, yet since it is a subject of such importance
that it can never be too much, or too often thought on, I thought it might not
be altogether unacceptable to add Meditation to Meditation; especially since in
this I was sure to hit your serious humor, and entertain you with a dish of
your own liking. Life and Death, tho two of the most common things, are yet
none of the commonest Subjects in the world. For I believe generally nothing is
less thought of; and perhaps for no other reason but because they are so
common. I dare not promise you any thing new here, perhaps I might another, but
you I dare not. However I hope you will not blame the barrenness of the Author,
but impute it to the excess of your own thoughtfulness, the Anticipation of
your Closet. For my own part I was so pleased with a great many sententious
Remarks and pithy expressions, which occur in this Discourse, that I thought I
might without any Prodigality of time, employ two days in the Translation of
it. But if the product of two days study can afford you one hours
entertainment, I shall think my time could never have been better spent. But
not to detain you any longer from these, or your own more weighty Meditations,
I take my leave of you, with this real and unfeigned protestation, that I am

Madam, Your most humble and devoted Servant

A MEDITATION OF Life and Death.
LIFE in the opinion of most men is the greatest good, and Death the greatest
evil. But they are in this, as in other matters of greatest concern most
^istaken. For rather Life is the great^st evil, if we don't live well; and
Death the greatest good, if you don't lie ill. Neither can you dye ill, un^ess
you live ill. Life if it be not good ^oes but unfold a larger scene of Vice and
misery; Death if not evil, puts a period to all evil. That wicked men think
amiss of Death is no more a wonder, then that a vitiated Palate, disrelishes
the sweetest Honey. If it be evil, it is to them only who have made it so by an
ill Life. There is not one sufficient reason why we should hate Death, but
many, why we should desire it. Whether we consider it alone, or with its
attendants. Whether we c^nsider the evils from which it frees us, or the good
into which it instates us. If we consider tha^ it is not evil in it self, nay
that it (...) good. Or suppose it were an evil, the would not counter pois^^
the good which it brings, or were i^ n^^ goo^ that would ^old no proportion
wit^ the evil it removes. I know nothing in Life considerable besides an
em^^lous throng of calamitys, whose very multitude overwhelms our fear and
which have this only wretche^ Lenitive to make them tolerable their own
commonness, and daily incursion. It Was the opinion of Orpheus that Life was the
punishment of Souls, and such a one to, whereby the Living were commensurately
bound fast to the Dead. The latter part at least is true, for by Life the pure
and eternal Soul is Wedded to a Gross and Corruptible Body. Should God on a
sudden with his Almighty Fiat speak a man into Being, endowed with a free and
perfect use of his thoughts, and give him an entire prospect of all Mankind, he
would no sooner cast about his Eyes, but he would meet with some miserable
objects, which would call for his fears. Either he would see some Blind, or
some Maimed; some Lame, some Begging, some Decrepit, some Languishing, some
Quarrelling, some commiting Murder, some Mad, and almost all, Weeping. And
could he look into the insides, he would find all tormented with Desire and
Discontent. Surely such a dismal Scene of things would make him repent of his
newly received Being, and fall in love with annihilation. And therefore cunning
Nature does leasurely and thriftily dispense the use of reason to Mankind,
that we might not startle at the sudden appearance of evils, but by custom
might be brought to bear them with less impatience.

A piece of policy much like that of the Emperor, Who Cloistered up his Son
from his Infancy in a Magnificent Apartment, and to keep him unacquainted with
the condition of Mankind, took care that he should never see nor hear any
mirerable object That no Poor, Diseased, or Old man, should ever come in his
fight, and that nothing should be said, or done, but what was highly pleasing
and acceptable. A vain project to think to keep out Grief with Cloisters and
Walls, to shut the Gate of the Palace against Melanch^ly, when the door of Life
stood wide open. The very diversions themselves were an ^nlet to Sadness, and
Melancholy crept ^n through the Satiety and Fatigue of pleasure. Change is so
much an Ingredient of all Human delight, that an uninterrupted state of Joy
occasions sadness. Certainly tho the Emperor could keep off all miseries from
the Sight of his Son, yet he could not from his Mind; and tho he could secure
him from other calamities, yet he could find no preservative against desire.
His Son began to long and grow sad in an Elysium of pleasures. And what do you
think 'twas he desired? Not to live so pleasantly. He began to complain of the
tediousness of ^his too indulgent fortune, and Petitioned the Emperor to
uncloister him from his wretched happiness. A Petition which put his Father to
a great straight, who for fear of giving offense to his Son, was fain to alter
his resolution he had made, never to displease him. He consented to his
liberty, but withal took special ca^ that no sad object might come in h^ way.
He gave order that all Blin^ Deformed, Maimed, Poor, and Old me^ should be
removed far off; but ala^ when was diligence so fortunate as t^ conceal all
miseries? They are s^ numerous that they cannot be hid^ much less quite taken
away. Power was here unable to contend with h^ man infirmity, which in spite of
the Emperors endeavors, discovered i^ self. 'Twas the fortune of the youn^ man
to light upon a Blind Cripple and a Leper. He startled, and stoo^ amazed at the
strange spectacle, a^ if he had seen an Apparition. He asked what it was? And
when he knew that these were the fruits or human^ Life, he had his antidote
against al^ the pleasures of it, and took a disgus^ against Life it self. And
that h^ might have as little of it as was possible, where fortune had
possession o^ the greatest part, he presently re^ounc'd, if not his Life, yet
the hope of (...), or what is with many of equal value, (...) is Crown and
Dignities. He took ^anctuary at that which is most like ^eath, obscurity and
privacy, where ^e might enjoy security at least, if ^ot safety. Now if from
such a small occurrence he took such a disgust at ^ife, what would he have
done, had ^e took a general survey of the world, ^ad been presented with a
Scene of Mortality, Charnel-houses, Sculs, Dead Bones and Worms? Had he
ransackd ^ll the corners of the earth, and seen those sordid Foundations, on
which Life is built, the dedication of our misery celebrated by the pangs of
the Mother, and the tears of the Infant. What if he had looked into our bed
Chambers and breasts? He would ^ave seen us in Tears, Desires and ^oathings;
one bewailing his Wife, ^n other his Children, one hungry, another surfeited,
one carking for necessaries, another uneasy under superfluities. What if he had
see^ no house without some misfortune in it? What if he had seen all tha^ were
Wracked with the Gout, Ston^ and other Maladies? What if he had seen all that
Languish under Sickness all that were distracted with Cares all that were
discomposed with desires? This certainly would have prejudiced him against
Life, against the World where we so die in miseries and miseries live in us.
How glad would he have been to hear of a way of setting himself once more at
liberty! I fancy he would extol Death a^ the best invention in the World.

Suppose a man were hedged round with a circle of Wild Beasts, her^ saw a Tigre
rushing upon him there a Lion putting forth his Paw t^ devour him, and in an
other plac^ a Venomous Serpent hissing at him what would not this man give to
purchase a freedom from this assembly o^ mischiefs? what happiness would he
think greater then to be rescued from so many dangers? and will it be a less
to be snacht from greater evils? we are environd with most furious and
impetuous passions, and at all sides assaulted with misfortunes. We are in the
midst of a whole Ring of Evils. Some we feel, and fear all. Now we have but one
Sanctuary from all these evils, and that is Death.

Were it not for this, there would be no end of our miseries. How comes it to
pass then, that we dread that which is recommanded to us by as many Endearments
as there are Celamities in Life. One would think danger were enough to
recommend security. And there is no other besides Death.

And therefore Socrates, after he had took his Deadly Draught offered a
Sacrifice to Aesculapius the God of Physic, acknowledging Death to be the
Catholic Medicin for all Maladies.

I think one of the most rediculous, things Xerxes, ever did in his Life, and
which well deserved the reproof of Artabanus, was when having a prospect of his
Numerous Army from an high Hill he Wept, to think that within the compass of an
Hundred years they shauld be all dead and gone. He thought it seems, 'twas pity
Men should die so soon. But I think he had more reason to lament the flow
process of that Funeral which is ushered along with an age of miseries. Without
question if from his high Station he had seen human infelicitys as well as Men,
he would have dried up his Eyes at the remembrance of that universal remedy;
Death, neither would he have feared that, which takes a way all that is to be
feared. That can be no evil. Which is the only deliverance from evil. Should
those who have tried both Life and Death be put to the question which ^hey
would choose, either to reenter upon that, or to continue in this. ^one would
choose Life but those ^ho were most unworthy of it, those ^ho lived ill. But as
for those who had ^d a good Life, they would never ^epent of Death, or desire
to return (...) Life again, which they would dread ^ore now they were dead,
then they ^d Death when they were alive. (...) is said of Stanislaus, a Man of
^eat Integrity and Constancy, that (...) gave one the Option of Life or ^eath,
who told him he had rather (...) again then live again. So that one ^fe was
enough to Cloy him, whereas ^eath would endure a second trial.

If Souls Subsist as Origin, Plato, ^rmes, and many of the ancient Phi^sophers
would fain make us believe ^fore their Imprisonment in the ^omb, one would
think they should ^auseat their putrid and narrow con^ement, where they are
almost Stifled in Seminal impurities, and mat^rial Concretions. Especially if
should be told them that they must ^^mued up 9 Months in this dark P^^son, and
then above Ten years mo^ in the darkness of ignorance and e^rour. Add to this.
If they knew t^ many Labors and Hardships the were to undergo, wherein they
wo^ taste the miseries of Life before the knew what it was to live. The Infa^
serves an Apprentiship of misery from the very Cradle. The avoidance Hunger
makes him break Prison the first. He goes out according Hippocrates, to Seek
his living abro^ when there is a dearth of provision home. And then falls out
of one ^^sery into an other, which is wor^^ What if he could peep out through
Crany of his Prison, and see all (...) Miserable, Languishing and Decrep^
Wretches that are in this great H^pital the World? He would s^ back from the
sight of so many ev^ much less hazard the enduring of them. Plato ascribes the
suspension of reason in Infancy, and the erroneousness and ficleness of Youth,
to that Consternation and fright which seises ^he Soul at the instant when she
is ^hrown down from her Orb of light unto this Vale of misery, this dark
^ncooth Dungeon of the World and ^he Body. Again what if he knew that the most
lightsome and pleasant part of his Life was most subject to ^ears, and that the
flower of his age must wither in perpetual vexation, that he must always live
in a slavish dread of the Rod, and have his most ^iery jubilees sour'd and
allaid with ^he awe of a Schoolmasters? Again what if he knew that that part
of Life, which is most desired is most Calami^ous?

Multa senem fragilis vexant inco^moda carnis.
Nam macie turpi tabescunt languida membra
Tunc Genuum juctura riget venasque per omnes
^llius in toto frigescit Corpore Sanguis.
Sic bacculo nitens artus sustentat Inermes
Quid tristes memoree^ ge^itus? quid taedia menti^
Somnus abest oculis --
Add to this the train of disease which then troop in togather. For old age is
the Sink of Life. Here is a Stagnation of all filth. The Autumn of our Life is
the Spring of our Infirmitys. Well may the Old man stoop when his burden is so
great. But (...) think Nature deals kindly with us i^ this, that she banishes
all pleasure from Old age, and summons in grief of all Sorts. That so we may be
the more willing to quit the Stage, and after the heat and toil of a tedious
day to refresh our selves in the shades o^ Death. What a deep Tragedy now i^
Life, which begins and ends in misery? I now no longer wonder at Isis for
saying in his Sacred book that the Souls were all in Sadness when they
understood they were Condemned t^ enter Bodies. (...) (...), says he. And
Camephes thus describes their complaint. (...), etc. What have we poor
Creatures done amiss to deserve this punishment, to minister to a cold and
humed Body? Our Eyes shall no longer see the divine Souls, since they are now
straightened within little Orbs and Humors. But as often as we shall look up to
our Native Heaven we shall figh, and sometimes we shall not be able to see so
much as that. For we poor Creatures are condemned, neither have we an absolute
power of sight, but dependent upon the Light of the Sun. Distance of place
intercepts our sight; and we shall hear our cognate sou^s pitifully sighing in
the air for want of our company. Now we are no company for them. Now instead of
the high Arch of Heaven, our house must be the narrow compass of an heart. O if
any one would loose us, from what, to what would he translate us! But thou O
Lord, Father and Creator, who so easily neglects thy workmanship, set us some
bounds, and vouchsafe to converse with us tho never so little while we are here
below. The souls Petitioned Death as a solace of life, and since 'twas their
doom to live in the body at least at length to die. Next to not living at all,
nothing was more desirable then to die speedily. So far is Death more eligible
then life.

There is not one part of life desirable to a considering person, because there
is not one part free from sorrow and dissatisfaction. And therefore as a
Traveller tired with going up a rough and steep Hill, is forced to stand still
many times to recruit and take breath, that he may with the more ease perform
the remainder of his journey: So the Pilgrim-Soul in this rough and uneven
Life, wants the rest and pause of Death. whence she may gather a new supply of
strength for the progress of Eternity. Our jaded Life will not carry us through
in one continued course to Immortality. Such along journey cannot be performed
without resting by the way. The Grave is our Inn, and from thence we set out
for Immortality. Neither indeed can we stay so long till the pause of Death. We
must have many intervals of rest, as wearied Travailers which bait often by the
way and and defer not their refreshments till they take up for all night. The
importunity of our labors and troubles compel us to stop upon the Road before
we take up our quarters in the Grave. What else are the constant returns of
Sleep, but the pause and reparation of wearied and languishing life? So much is
Death better than Life, that our Life is sustained by Deaths; Our Immortality
depends upon Death, and our state of Mortality upon Sleep the Image and Shadow
of it.

Now to compare Death with Life. If that be the repast of this, it will
consequently be pleasant. Or although it be not Sweet in it self, yet the trouble
of Life will make it so. Weariness prepares the pleasure of rest, and
whatsoever succeeds Bitterness is Sweet. 'Twas well said by Charidemus that
Pleasures and Grievances were linkt together in a Chain, interchangably
succeeding one another, so that the succeding pleasure would b^ proportionable
to the proceeding grie^viance. Now what greater grieviance then our Mortal Life,
and consequently what greater pleasere the Death? Phalaris said that Life is
therefore pleasant because we know of n^ greater evil then Death. But h^ speaks
the Sense of the vulgar, an^ yet to the discredit of Life too, find it must be
beholding to an evil to recommend it. I should rather have said. That Death
ought to be thought pleasant because there is no greater evil then Life. And
yet we are flattered on by the emergent happiness of some men. But why do we
look upon those who have escaped shipwreck? We should rather consider those
that are drowned. These are innumerable, and yet are thought few, because they
don't appear.

Let not now the Tears shed at Funerals be alleged against what has been
said. This depends all upon the opinion of the vulgar. And indeed every one
laments rather himself, then him whom he call's dead. I say do not alleadg the
Tears of others, you may your own. It Is a man's own thinking which makes him
either happy or miserable. What argument is it for the preference of Life
before Death, that others weep When you die, if when you are born you your self
weep? It Is a folly to rate our miseries by other men's opinions. Contrary
circumstances attend our Death and Nativity. At the Birth of a man others
rejoice, but he himself weeps, at his Death others weep, but he will rejoice,
unless his Death be embittered by an ill Life. Neither are we to think this
gladness the less, because calm and inward, and not so obvious to the sense.
The Infant that wept at his Birth, by sleep learns to smile says St. Austin. He
dedicates the Image of Death, with a smile, who begins his Life with Tears. A
notable presage of the miseries of Life, and of the happiness after Death.
Weeping is narural, we need no teaching to dissolve in Tears; joy is a
difficult Lesson, slowly learnt, and not without Discipline. It Is one of the
precepts of Seneca, learn to rejoice. Sleep gives us a sip of joy, but Death
the full draught. Grief and Misery are Natural and Born with us, but joy
advances more leasurely. For we may credit Avicenna, the Infant has no sense of
joy till after the Fortieth day. The reason therefore why others weep at thy
Death is because they never made trial of it, and the reason why they rejoice
at thy Birth, is because they are not to live your life. You alone, who can
best presage human condition, refuse it with Tears, which are the language of
unwilling nature.

And as the Ceremonies of our Birth are contrary to those of our Death, so is
the condition of the one contrary to that of the other. Death either inverts or
restores all things. Or rather restores by inversion. For the inversion of
things that are upside down, is the way to set them right. 'Twas a Funeral
Ceremony in use among the T^bitenses to turn their garments inside outward.
Death it self is termed a change, and it is our last and greatest, for all
beyond it is a State unchangeable. The change is from confinement to liberty,
from Time to Eternity, and (unless it be our own fault) from misery to
happiness.

Fortune is commonly preferred before Life. How many are there who prodigally
throw away their Lives in the pursuit of a Kingdom! But is there any proportion
between Fortune and Happiness, between a speck of Ground, a Point, and the
Kingdom of Heaven? Death adds so much to our happiness as it cuts off from our
Life. Before present admission into Heaven was procured, long Life was proposed
as a reward to the good Patriarchs; but now when there is an immediate access
to the joys of Heaven

We falsely think it due unto our friends,
That we should greive at their untimely ends,
It Is envy now to mourn their early, fate,
He only dies untimely, who dies late.
And yet we are not sufficiently in^amour'd with those Glories which Death
leads us to. Sometimes we cast some faint longings that way, and tho oppressed
with miseries, are not yet enough desirous to be rid of them. The miseries of
Life make us wish for Death, but yet

Distrust and darkness of a future State
Make poor mankind still fearful of their fate
Death in it self is nothing, but we fear
To be we know not what, we know not where
We would sometimes be dead, but are unwilling to die. Or if under the pressure
of some Pungent calamity we passionately court Death, the Fit is no sooner
over, but we repent of our best Wish, like the Man in the Apologue, who
languishing under his burden threw it down and invoked Death, but when it came
and demanded his business he told it 'twas to help him up with his burden.

So apt are those to hug their miseries who hope for better exchange We are
tired with out Toil and Labor, and yet we resume the burden

What Hungry man that stood on a barren bank, where there was no hope to
relieve his Appetite, an^ saw at the other side of the Rive^ Trees laden with
delicious Fruit would be grived to hear of a Brid^ or be afraid to be rowed
over in Boat, choosing to starve on the bank then hazard himself on the River
(...) O the unaccountable folly of Men We commit our selves to the perfidious
Ocean inquest of Gold, which lie at the Suburbs of Hell and yet we ar^ loath to
be Transported into our Celestial Country, to the Glories of eternity. Suppose
there were no necessity of dying, but that every on^ had the disposal of his
own destiny yet he were a fool who would no hazard the attainment of felicity
by Death, and had rather live always in a state of misery then by dying to
end it. It Is a great folly to fear that which we would wish for, were there no
such thing. Much more then should we bear Death patiently now it is necessary.
The popular argument why Death ought to be born patiently is because it is a
necessary evil. Here is a true consequent but a falls principle. For rather
Death is a necessary good. However if an evil, requires patience on the Score
of necessity, much more does a necessary good. Death as good, calls for our
joy, as necessary for our submission. That is certainly a very great good which
puts us out of the reach of misery, which frees the Captive without a Fee,
which restores the Exile to his Country, without fear of return,, which sets
at liberty the Slave, without the consent of his Master, which cures the Sick,
without a bitter Poti^n, which redresses all the defects of fortune, and
unequal dispensations of providence. 'Twould have been a less error if they
had drawn an argument from necessity to bear Life patiently, for that more
deserves the name of a necessary evil. For it is that which thrust you into evil
without your election, and then Wheedles you into evil with your own Consent.
'Twas cunningly contrived by Nature that Souls should be unknowingly Immersed
in the Body, and cast blindfold into such a sordid Dungeon. For who that is in
his right will, at the last Gasp, would if he might reenter the Prison of his
Mothers Womb, be nourished with filth, be deprived of light so many Months, and
of sense so many years; run again the gandelope of Fortune, resume the
senslesness of Infancy, the Fears of Childhood, the Dangers of Youth, the
Cares of manhood and the Infirmities of Old age? I believe never any man had a
life so happy, as to be willing to live it over again: Certainly if Life were
offered to us without the condition of Death, what ever Happiness it promised
else, it were to be refused.

The likeness that is between Death and Good, is enough to take a way all
Suspicion of its being evil. None live more happily the those who most resemble
the Dead. Death is the Idea and rule of the best Life. The greatest perfection
of Life is to imitate Death, as every Heroical Person does when he abstracts
his Mind from his Body, holds no commerce with his Senses, and Weds himself to
the Divinity. On what account do you think it is that Sleep is often priviledgd
with Visions and Revelations? God Loves and Honors the Image of Death.

Ecstacie and Abstraction from Communication with the Body is one of the ways
of Oracle, and I Prophecy. The Mind which is disengaged from the Senses is the
more capable of Divine infusions.

Besides what is Philosophy but the meditation of Death? And why not? Since the
fruit of Philosophy is virtue, and virtue is the imitation, or incoation of
Death. It Is the principal artifice of Philosophy to make Life pleasant by the
imitation of Death, and Death by conformity of Life. The moral Death smooths
the passage for the natural. The separation of Soul and Body is intolerable to
him who has not disengaged himself from his passions, but must swallow down the
bitter Potion of Death all together. Our very Meat would Choke us if we did not
Mince and Chew it, and Eat it piece by piece. Death if taken by degrees will be
gustful and wholesome; if we lop of one Passion to day, an other to morrow.
There a test weight is portable, i^ born by parts. Philosophy is an
anticipation of Death which by daily Substractions lessens its weight. What
wonder is it if Death be insupportable to him who under goes a great many
Deaths in one? The loss of one thing as of Honor, Pleasure, or a Friend, is
enough many times to wound us to the Heart, what a Grief will it then be to
loose all our Life in one moment? And therefore the Soul of a Wise man
disengages it self from the Body by degrees, that it may converse with it self
and God. She finds that she reasons more clearly, when withdrawn from the hurry
of the Senses, and that she must retire a while from the Contagion of the
Flesh, if she will speculate a refined truth. Truth is a pure thing and cannot
be beheld but by a clarified and spiritualized Sight.

Therefore the whole study of virtue consists in a separation of the Soul from
the Body, and in near approaches to Death, which for that very teason it
loves, or at least less fears. How can he fear Death, who by dying lived well?
Who divested himself of more then Death can? Who has already drained all its
force? Will he, who all his Life time endeavored to Sequester himself from his
Body, draw back when he is just about completely to enjoy his Wish? No Man
will be troubled if what he has a long time been laboring in vain to effect,
be at last done by another, Nature finishes that by Death which virtue had
begun in Life.

The affinity between Death and Virtue may be farther illustrated from the
exhibition of honor. For as virtue becomes Majestic from the resemblance it
has of Death, so it commands reverance to be given to others as Death does.
What can be more venerable then that for whose sake the most Wicked are not
evi^ spoken off. For as ill Men for the very awe and honor of Virtue will not
own them selves so; assuming to themselves some imaginary excellency, so for
the reverence of Death we spare those that have been evil, nay scarce ever name
them without some commendation. So venerable is Death that it procures respect
to the most contemptible. We are apt to praise him when dead, whom we envied
when a live. according to that of Minermus (...). Envy stops short of this side
of the Grave Every one speaks honorably of the dead. And what do you think is
the ground of this esteem? It Is the current Philosophy even among the Vulgar
to take them for happy which are exempted from the calamities of this Life. And
all happiness is honorable. Neither is this honor given to the Soul only, but
also to the Body, tho now under the most vile circumstances. How awful is the
sight of a Coffin! With what Majesty does it ly! What lectures of Morality
does it suggest! We are not so composed in the presence of a King, as at the
Sight of a Corpse. Nay it is not only Venerable but Sacred; The Honor of Burial
is become a part of Religion.

Another reason of the Goodness of Death, may be taken from the wholesome
influence it has on our Lives. The Death of others profits us who see it, and
our own profits them that Celebrate it. And certainly the best Philosophy is,
to season our whole Lives with the meditation of Death. And therefore to this
end Nature supplies us every Moment with Emblems of Death. The Chiefest of
which is Respiration. We live by little Essays of Death, and Retain our Spirit
by continual emissions of it. Nay that which most of all displeases us in
Death, the certainty of the thing, and the uncertainty of time, and manner, is
of great use to us. I take this mixture of certainty and uncertainty to be one
of the most ingenious Stratagems (I may so speak) of divine providence for the
government of Man kind. God would have us always good, and consequently always
uncertain of certain Death. So that hereby Care is taken that the lateness of
Death may not be an inducement to security, nor the suddainness to despair of
reformation. But that the possibility of each may make Men careful, but not
desperate. The possibility of a speedy Death allievates the labors of Life,
and prevents the delays of virtue. For if a Man would be troubled if he knew
he had but one Month more to live, how dares he laugh and neglect his duty, who
knows not whether there remains a day, an hour? The World was never more
vicious then when Men were longest lived. Then 'twas that nature required an
expiation by Waters. And therefore I think Theophrastus, was very unreasonable
to complain of nature because she had granted to some Brutes, a lease of Life
for above Five Hundred years, whereas the Life of man the most excellent of all
her works was so brittle and short. He erred both in his desire and in his
judgment. 1 For wishing for so many years, and 2 For thinking that Life whose
measure is action and not days, was to be reckoned by them. The time and
manner of our Birth have some certainty, but there is no set manner of dying.

'Twas a Favor to set open more passages for a flight from, then for an
entrance into evils. It Is therefore possible you may die at all times, that
should live well at all times, that you should not live in that State which you
would be afraid to die in.

The easiness or frequent contingency of Death is no small commendation of it.
Our Body and Soul are ill matched they are so easily divorced. There is no
creature of so frail a constitution as man. He falls by the least accident, and
shakes off his ill-suted Body. Fabius, was choked with an Hair, Anacreon, with
a Grape-stone. Baptista Mirandulous, died of the very fancy of a Wound. Honor
killed Clidemus, exultation of Spirit Diagoras, Laughter Philemon. Life is so
frail a possession, there is no need of violence, the very blandishments are
enough to shake it. We receive our Life through difficulties, enjoy it with
difficulty, and keep it precariosly. Any one may deprive us of Life, but no
body can keep Death from us. That Is as free to a Slave as to a Prince. The
Emperor Leo imposed a Tax upon Births, but never was such a Burden put upon
Death; The Infant was taxed at his entrance into the world, but 'twas ever free
to die.

Do you lament the unseasonableness of Death? All Death is seasonable to every
age. It rescues Old age from misery, Youth from vice, and Infancy from both. It
gathers old men as ripe, turns the Blossom of youth into Fruit, and
compendiously ripens infancy. If thy Death could be put off a little longer,
what advantage will it be in thy accounts of nature or happiness? They that
3000 years agon died unwillingly, and stopped Death Two days or a Week, what
is their gain? Where is that Week? And yet poor spirited Mortals use arts of
protraction, like the miserable Sinners at Noab's Flood. The waters drove them
out of their lower Rooms, then they crept up to the Roof, having lasted half a
day longer, they knew not how to get down. Some crept up to the top branch of a
Tree, some climbed up to a Mountain, and lingered it may be Three days longer.
But all that while they endured a worse torment then Death; They lived with
amazement, distracted with the ruins of mankind, and the horror of their own
approaching Death.

Another thing which commends Death is, that it cannot be repeated. Tho some
think that an unhappiness, hoping to mend that in the second Death, which went
amiss in the first. All other afflictions are not so civil and courteous. They
are importunate in their visits, come and go a Thousand times over. Death will
not be troublesome, comes but once. But why would you have it repeated? To know
by experience what it is to die? Neither do you want that convenience. The fates
are ingeniously contrived. Tho Death comes but once; yet it does not come all
at once. It insinuates it self by degrees, makes several preliminary Essays.
Childhood Death of Infancy, Youth the Death of Childhood, Manhood of youth, old
age of manhood. The last Moment is but the consummation of what the first
began. You may know Death by her retinue, shedding of Teeth, trembling of
Joints, gray Hair, baldness etc. You cannot live a day without the taste of it.
All succession of time, all the changes in nature, all varieties of light and
darkness, every creature does preach our Funeral Sermon, and calls us to look
and see how the old Sexton time throws up the Earth, and digs a Grave, where we
must lay our sins or our sorrows. Sleep which is the Image of Death we daily
experiment. We desire it, we are refreshed by it, it is the end of our labors,
the deposition of our cares, the reparation of the man. Now the Image is never
so excellent as the Prototype. If we love the shadow, why do we hate the
substance? Nature intended Death as the comfort and support of Life, and
therefore least the delay of so great a good should make us impatient, has left
us its image to solace our selves withal for the persent.

But suppose after all this, that all Death were evil and dreadful. Why then do
we not care for that which we profess we fear? Why do we neglect that which we
do not contemn? If it be evil, why don't we prepare for it? We make provision
against other dangers tho contingent; we arm our selves against Casualties. Why
do we not make preparation against that which we know to be necessary? There is
a great difference betwixt contempt and neglect of Death. None provide more
against it, then those who contemn it; none fear it more then those who neglect
it; and what is more strange don't only therefore fear it, because they have
neglected it, but neglect it even while they fear it. Who would think it
possible that Men could be guilty of such incomparable Sottishness, who know
that the only Security of Life is the assurance of an happy death, and that the
only assurance of an happy Death, is the testimony of a good Life.

FINIS.

