A Conference WITH A THEIST.

PART II.

SHOWING The Defects of Natural Religion; The Necessity of Divine Inspiration;
The Rationale of the Mosaical Laws, and defense of His Miracles: Together With
an Account of the Deluge, the Origin of Sacrifices, and the Reasonableness of
Christ's Mediatorship.

By WILLIAM NICHOLLS, D.D. Rector of Selsey in Sussex, and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable Ralph Earl of Mountague.

The Second Edition Corrected*

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Francis Saunders at the Blue-Anchor in the
New-Exchange; and Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1699.

To the Most Reverend FATHER in GOD THOMAS Lord Archbishop OF CANTERBVRY.
May it please your Grace,
I Having begged Protection for the former Part of this mean Performance, under
the Vmbrage of Your late Dear Friend, and our good Bishop, I presume to lay the
Second Part at your Grace's Feet, whom God has made next under himself; the
Succourer of his Afflicted Family. And I humbly pray, That You would be pleased
to add one more Token of your Respect to the Memory of that Admirable Person,
as favorably to accept this poor Present from one of his Vndeserving Friends.
This, My Lord, I address to Your Grace, with all Heartiness and Sincerity, and
with the humblest Thanks for your kindness to the Relations of my Unfortunate
Diocesan, and for Your Assistance in getting his Station, in the Church,
supplied by so excellent a Successor, thereby mitigating the unspeakable Loss,
sustained by the whole Diocese, and, in particular, by,

My Lord, Your Grace's most Obedient, and Dutiful Son and Servant, Will.
Nicholls.

PREFACE.
THat indifferent good Reception which my Bookseller informs me, that the
former Part of this Conference has met withal in the World, has made me presume
to venture abroad a second. It is my hearty Prayer to God, that these mean
Endeavors may contribute to the abating that reigning Infidelity which has
poisoned such a number of the Gentry, and others of this Nation; or at least
may stir up some abler Pen, to encounter with it this way: For after all the
Objections which I have heard made to me about my free way of arguing the
Theistical Arguments in Dialogue, I think it is more like to do good among the
Infidels, than a Methodical Discourse ranged into Chapter and Section; for
those that are tainted with these Opinions are generally a sort of fastidious
Students, who though they talk much, read but very little, and every thing
which is designed for their use must be attempered to their Palats, to make it
go down with them. Now the Dialogical way of all others is most apt to excite
Attention, by constantly springing up new Objections, which set a continual
edge upon the Mind, and make it eager to see them removed; so that the Author
of a Dialogue has this advantage above others, that he carries the Read^
Thoughts always fresh along with him, (...) are generally lost, or at least
often grow languid in a continued Discourse of any considerable length. I have
not indeed brought in such frequent Interlocutions as are requisite for a just
Dialogue, like those of Plato and Lucian: For that would have taken up a great
deal more Paper to little purpose, only to please a few curious Critics; and
at last the Argument would be but the more obscured by it. And on the other
side I have avoided the dry method of the Scholastic Ob. and Sol. where the
Objection is proposed without any manner of Life, only in order to be refuted;
which can never be pleasant to the Reader, who at first sight sees that the
Author sets this up only as a Man of Straw, which when he fights with it he
shall be sure to get the better of. I have therefore made use of the middle
way, in clothing the Objections in such a dress, as two Men that had a mind to
convince one another, can be supposed to use. And this is the Pattern which the
best of Writers, Cicero, in his Philosophical Tracts has set; whose very faults
I should never be ashamed to imitate.

As to those Tragical Exclamations which some honest People have made
concerning my urging the Infidels Arguments with that little Wit and Briskness,
with which they are usually talked in; and putting some Expressions in my
Deists Mouth which reflect upon Christianianity: I cannot, upon the most
serious Consideration, approve their Zeal. For when I was to write a Dialogue
upon this Subject, I must make the Theist say something or other; and I think I
should but little have observed the Rules of Decency, to have made the Infidel
talk in the Language of a Grave Theologue. For, I am sure, if I had done so, I
had made more People laugh at me, than now I have made angry. Besides, I have
the whole World before me for Precedents in this matter. Those Atheistical
Prosopopoea's which are are brought in by Solomon in Ecclesiastes, are urged
with a peculiar Poignancy of Wit, which the Atheists of all Times have
endeavored to excel in. And Cicero, in his Book de Natura Deorum, frames the
Arguments of Velleius the Epicurean, with a great deal more Wit and Smartness,
than those of Cotta the Academick, or Balbus the Stoic. And in the same strain
all along in Minutius Foelix, Cecilius exposes the Doctrines of the Christian
Religion. And so the Arguments of Trypho the Jew, recorded in Justin Martyr;
Those of Celsus in Origin, and of Julian in St. Cyril, are more Blasphemous
Reflections and Insinuations against Christianity, than any that are found in
this Conference. If any shall say that I help vicious Men to Arguments against
Religion: I answer, that these Arguments are common enough to be found
elsewhere; and those whose Minds are biased this way, know well enough where
to look for them in those wicked Books, where they may find all the Poison
without the Antidote.

As to those Schemes of the Creation and the Deluge I have made in this and the
former Part, I must tell the Reader again, that I design them only as possible
Theories; which I do not lay down as if they were exactly true, but that they
might be so; which is all I am concerned to prove against the Infidels who deny
the Possibility of these Mighty Revolutions. And those People that pretend to
be angry at any Philosophical Explication of the Creation and the Deluge in
this way, may as well be displeased with Butio and Dr. Wilkins, for proving the
Possibility of the Reception of the Animals in Noah's Ark, and with the
generality of the Commentators upon the Bible, who do upon occasions show the
Possibility of those many miraculous Relations which are found there.

If this Part finds as kind usage abroad among those Judgments I most value, as
the former did; or if I can learn it does any good among those I designed it
for, I will publish the Third and last Part: or otherwise I have done with the
Subject, and -- Hic Caestus Artemque repono.

Fig. I
Fig. II
Fig. III
Fig. IV.


A Conference WITH A THEIST. PART II.
CRedentius thinking himself obliged to return the Visit which Philologus had
lately given him, after a small walk of some half a Mile, his House lying from
Credentius's, but at that Distance, he very opportunely hears that Philologus
was retired to his study after Dinner, and not suffering the Servant to give
him the disturbance of calling him down, he with his wonted familiarity, enters
upon him there. The Room it self was adorned with all the beautiful Paint and
Figures which a skilful hand could add, and the Books were Methodically ranged
into various Classes, under the Images of Ancient Philosophers and Poets, and
some other celebrated Modern Writers. Nor was there wanting any Greek
Philosophical, or Philological Writer down from Homer to Pletho; and all the
Latin Classicks stood in the exactest order and the most curious binding; and
what yet commended them most, they were chiefly of the charming Editions of
Aldus, the Stephani, and Vascosanus. Here were all the Learned Adversaria,
Dissertations, etc. of the famous Philologers of this, and the last Age,
Trapezuntius, Valla, Volateranus, the Scaligers and Casaubons; here was a
Collection of every thing curious in the Philosophy of the Moderns up to
Petrach and Mirandula; all the Wits of our own and the Neighboring Nations,
every thing useful and delicate in the Methematicks and Poetry, most singular
sets of the Modern History, Maps and Travels; in short a well chose Collection
of the most refined and pleasing Authors, which may tend to render the study of
a Gentleman agreeable and to highten his Genius. Philologus drawing a Chair for
him to sit down, according to his wonted pleasantness, tells Credentius he was
heartly glad to see him, but for Entertainment he must expect the same that he
gave him the other day, endeavoring always to write after so good a Copy as
Credentius, so that he must expect to be treated only with Discourse. Adding
with all, that the Entertainment too of that nature would be very mean, and be
no tolerable recompense for that instructive Discourse he was pleased to afford
him the other day, which he protested had made him ever since both wiser and
better.

Cred. I perceive, Sir, you retain still so much of the complemental strain
that I have not yet brought you up to that plain sincerity of that Religion I
am Advocate for. And if you find any forcible conviction in the Arguments I
then urged, you must attribute that to the evident Truth of our Religion, and
not to my management.


Phil. I would not have you, Sir, conclude too fast neither, my Head is not so
full of Revelation yet, as to swallow the whole doctrine of the Bible without
chewing. Truly, Sir, I am a kind of an obstinate Heathen, I shall hold out my
Infidelity to the last, and Faith must gain upon me by Inches, or not at all.
You indeed have defended strenuously enough the History of the Creation and the
Fall; but this tends no more to make a Man a Christian than to make him a Jew.
I expect to have the reasonableness of the New Covenant as you call it made
clear to me, and the Mediatorship in all its particulars. I must demand an
account why simple Natural Religion should not perform as acceptable a service
to God Almighty, as when it is cumbered with Jewish and Christian Rites; why God
should not as well be pleased with a Man's doing his duty himself as for the
sake of a Mediator; and to what purpose a Man must be forced to believe the
Inspiration of a few Books wrote I know not when, and by I know not whom; and
which for the most part tell us no more but what Natural Religion told us
before. Therefore by your leave, Credentius, I will attack you, 1. With the
sufficiency of Natural Religion in general toward the Worship of God, and a
good life. 2. Particulars of the Conference.
In opposition to the Mediatorship of Christ. 3. In opposition to the Writings
of the Bible.


Of Natural Religion.
And now, Credentius, have at you upon the first head.

I think I need not de^uce Arguments for this out of the depth of Philosophy,
for I dare say you will never be able to answer these four Verses of our
English Poet.

Natural Religion easy, first and plain,
Riddles made it Fabulous, Priests they made it gain;
Offerings and Sacrifices next appeared,
The Priests eat roast meat, and the people star'd.
I protest the cunning Blades had a brave time of it when they could fill their
Bellies at the peoples charge, who thought themselves well paid to look on and
see them feed. But in the mean time the poor folk were miserable befooled, when
they were made to believe, that they rendered the Deity more their Friend or
themselves the better Men by stuffing the Priests Guts. For what signifies a
Fat Bullock to God-Almighty? but the roguish Priests knew well enough what use
to make of it, when it served them thus to gormandize upon. And truly their
Brethren of the holy Tribe have kept up the same Craft and Legerdemain ever
since. It is but the same Juggle of the designing Priesthood that upholds all
the superstitions in the World; that maintains both the Pagods of India, the
Mosques of Turkey, and provides so confortable a maintenance for all the
sanctified Gentlemen here in Europe. The plain dictates of nature are a
thousand times a better Rule of Life than the foolish rites prescribed by these
superstitious Coxcombs; that rook the people of their money by telling them
strange Tales and exhibiting odd Ceremonies for them to gape at. What cannot a
Man Live and Die as becomes a good Man without Sacrifices and Ave Mary's, and
Sacraments and Absolution? Cannot I live as nature directs without being
plagued and tormented by a parcel of Creed-contriving, Sin-making Hypocrites?
For my part I grudge those Harpies every morsel of Bread they eat; and think
that Cheats and Pick-Pockets ought to be maintained at the charge of the Nation
as well as they. It vexes me to think that the generality of people should be
such Cullies to part so easily with so considerable a part of their Estates to
pay their Priests for Hypocrisy and Lies; and at the same time to adore their
Holinesses for their Piety and Good service. For my part, they shall get as
little of my money as ever they can; and I generally tell them their own when
ever I meet them. I know two or three of our Neighbors that tamely deliver up
their Nose to their Priests Fingers, and truly you, Credentius, suffer them to
buzze about you like so many Flies, but you have sense enough to discover the
Foxes Ears through the Sheeps Livery; it is only your good nature that hinders
you from doing any thing unkind to any one; but for my part, I make the Sparks
know their Distance, I give them no quarter when ever they fall in my way; and
that makes them as much scared at my Company as the common People are at their
Tales.

Cred. I perceive, Philologus, The unreasonableness of vilifying the Clergy.
you have a little transported your self by your own Talk, and have lost your
Argument to railly upon the Clergy. But I must needs tell you, that this custom
you have got of exposing the Profession and Persons of the Clergy is one of the
worst qualities I discern in Philologus, and is a great blemish to those other
Gentleman-like accomplishments which adorn his Character. I shall speak to that
simplicity you would have in Religion, by and by; but in the mean time, I must
beg leave to speak a word or two upon this irreligious ill-bred Custom of
abusing Clergymen, which has so much obtained among the Gentlemen of this Age.
Now this piece of ill-breeding was not of our own Growth here in England, it
was brought, like the rest of our Follies, from France. Our traveling Gentry,
who had spent their time to no purpose beyond Sea, thought they must bring home
something remarkable, and it was generally that little banter and drollery with
which the French Gentlemen used to make sport with their ignorant Friars and
Curees. All the improvement it gained in our Nation was more Malice and more
Dullness; for we English are generally a grave sober Nation, and nothing looks
so awkwar'd in us, and is such a force upon our tempers, as Drollery; so that
when once we go to imitate Fools we generally are such. And indeed we have
imitated the French in this but miserable sillily; for I think there is no
comparison of our Clergy and the generality of their Friars who are commonly
very ignorant and silly, and oftentimes not only lewd themselves but Panders
to other Men's Debauchery. But generally our Clergy live lives of Virtue and
strict Piety, at least few of them are notoriously vicious; their Education is
commonly such as gives them Learning, equal at least to the Neighboring
Gentlemen; and considering the remiss Education of the Gentry under the late
Reigns, for the most part superior. There is nothing vile and contemptible in
their Profession, as there is in some which tend to vanity or debauchery, or
which do denote some vile servitude and drudgery; but their calling is high and
noble, the subject of it God, and the most sublime and divine Truths; and the
end which they drive at, is to make Men good and peaceable. Now there is
nothing in all this that should render this order of Men the subject of
Contempt and Drollery; and Men might, if they please, with as much advantage,
make sport with Physicians and Lawyers, as they do with Divines. Give me leave
to say, it is an unmerciful piece of Barbarity to fall foul upon innocent Men,
to abuse their Persons and Profession, when there is no manner of provocation
given them for it; nay, it is most pitiful Cowardice to give such usage only to
those who they know, by the Character of their Profession, must not revenge it,
which they dare not offer to those whom they suspect may. If such a Man
believes the Gospel, he offers one of the greatest injuries to Religion, by
exposing the Ministers of it, and lessening their credit, whereby they are less
able to reform the lives of wicked Men; and does withal foolishly give the lie
to his Faith, by ridiculing and affronting the Officers of that holy
Institution, which by his Baptism and Communion he has declared the greatest
Veneration for. And truly a Man may as well pretend to bear a great respect to
the Government, when he is always exposing and traducing the King and his
subordinate Magistrates, as to pretend an esteem to Christianity, and to be
always railing at its Ministers. This is a practice so shameful among
Christians, that would render them an opprobry to Infidels, in seeing them so
disgracing the Dispensers of those Doctrines and Mysteries they hope to be
saved by. Nay to speak more particularly, neither will the known faults of
some, or many Clergymen, excuse this Custom; because though some are faulty
there are others who conscientiously perform their duty in all respects; and
therefore to involve all under the same imputation is shameful Injustice. But
besides, the faults of a Clergyman are of so tender a nature, and are of so
nigh a concern to Christianity, that for the credit of Religion all good Men
will be very cautious of divulging them; and therefore wherever we find Men
forward to pick up and relate stories of this nature, it is a certain sign they
are no Friends to the established Religion, and is usually a sign that they are
no good likers of the common Christianity. And truly, Philologus, I must own
that the Gentlemen of your Sentiments have taken very proper methods by
vilifying the Clergy to propagate your Opinions, for this one reason, because
it may easily be observed, that the greatest number of Atheists and Deists, in
this Nation, is made up of such, as have formerly, before they declared for
Infidelity, been the greatest Railers against their Parsons. I will not
determine whether this comes to pass by the Judgment of God, or the natural
tendency of the thing; but this is certain, as far as my observation can reach,
that the chiefest of the Body of these Infidels is made out of the
Antimonarchical and Rebellious Party of the late Reigns, and the Jacobites in
this; Men that are grown sowr'd and peevish at the miscarriage of their design,
and exasperated against the Clergy for their opposition to their practices; and
so have resolved at last to be revenged upon Religion in spite to its
Ministers. But I Will warrant you by that smile, Philologus, you imagine that the
compliance of the Clergy with the last Reigns, and at last with the present
Government, is the true reason of the growth of Infidelity now. I shall leave
the Gentlemen of that Order to justify their own actions, who know their own
Conscience best. But thus much I will say, that if the Clergy of the Church of
England had not complied with the Government, we had had, by this time, such a
medly and confusion in Religion, as would have made a great many Men have
nauseated all. For nothing can be so great a cause of Infidelity as the
unlimited license of Fanatical Zeal and Enthusiasm; and for one Atheist or
Deist we have now we should have had twenty then. And it may be we had been in
as bad a condition if the Clergy had not vigorously opposed the Rebellious
Principles and Practices of those dangerous Phanaticks, and their Abettors, who
were going to overthrow a Lawful Government, and an Orthodox Church. So that I
am so far from condemning the Practice of the Clergy of the Church of England
in these last Reigns, that I highly approve it, both as being very uniform, and
of a piece with its self, and very consonant to Reason and Law. For by the same
reason they comply with this Government which is established by Law; they
refused to comply with the Illegal demands of King James, who was acting
against Law, and to their utmost opposed the unlawful Seditions, and at last
Rebellion of Factious People, who were for advancing the Title of a Lawless
Heir, who had no pretense to the Crown by any Law in the World, in opposition
to two Successive Princes, who had undoubted Right to, and were in actual
possession of it; and to the injury of all the lawful branches of it. So much I
have thought fit to say concerning the Abuses which are frequently given to
Clergymen, by Men that have not cast off all regard to Christianity, but are
willing to lay hold on any pretense to fall foul upon them, and to wreek their
Spleen. But further, as to Gentlemen of your persuasion, who look upon our
Religion to be a Fable, and think you can have no tie upon you from that; yet
methinks Civility and common Justice, which you pretend to be the greatest
Advocates for, should restrain you from abusing any one, especially those who
are used to bespeak you with all civility and respect. And as for their Dues
which you make a sport in defrauding them of, you know, by Law, they have as
good a Title to them as you have to your Estate; and your Copyholders might,
with the same Justice, detain your Quit-Rents, as you do their Tithes. And if
Religion be only a Politic Contrivance of State, if the Law think fit to
direct it so, the Clergy by instructing Men to be Virtuous and Religious, and
by that means keeping Men peaceable at home, have as good a Plea for the Tenth
of our Estates, as the Soldiers have now for the Fifth, for fighting against
our Enemies abroad.

I beg your Pardon for this long digression from our main design, which yet
your discourse led me to. And now I shall speak to the Argument of your
Poetical Friend; which one would think should be irrefragable, considering it
is so often repeated by your Gentlemen with such Grace and Emphasis.

The Priests eat Roast meat, and the People star'd. The People partook of the
ancient Sacrifices.
But had not the People their share of Roast meat too as well as the Priests?
Now here is a good Jest spoiled for lack of understanding the Roman or Greek
Antiquities, or for want of reading the Books of Exodus, or Leviticus. For
every Child knows that the Jews were obliged every Year to go to Jerusalem, not
to see the Priests eat the Paschal Sacrifices, but to eat it themselves. And
it is plain, that the People eat likewise of other Sacrifices, by 1 Samuel 9.13.
where it is said, the people will not eat till Samuel come, because he does
bless the Sacrifice. And nothing of the Jewish Sacrifices were peculiar to the
Priests but only the remainders of the voluntary piacular Offerings, Lev. 6.16.
And so in the Heathen Sacrifices, after some small parts were offered to the
Gods, the rest made a Feast for all the Sacrificers together, both Priests and
People in common. So Homer speaks in general of all present at that Sacrifice.

(...)
(...). Hom. Il. 1.
And thus the Labor done and Dinner dressed,
They every one do share an equal Feast.
And so speaking of the Wine in the Sacrifice, which he makes common to all.
Likewise he says, -- (...)
(...). --
-- Crowning the Bowls with Wine
Which they to all present --


And so Virgil whom Servius and Macrobius remark to be admirably Versed in the
Sacrificial Rites, speaks of that Sacrifice of Aeneas in the Eighth Book of the
Aeneis.

Vescitus Aeneas simul and Trojana juventus
Perpetui tergo bovis, and lustralibus extis.
Aeneas and his Trojans, all do eat
In order, of the Sacrificed Meat.
But further Lylius Geraldus, in his Treatise de Diis Gentium, informs us out
of Herodotus and others, that the people were so far from not having a share at
the Sacrifice, that they might carry (...), or Cuts of it home with them to
their Friends, so that they too might partake of the Sacrifice. Which might
perhaps give occasion to the like custom of the Christians in the Eucharist.
Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 5. Cap. 24.29. Nay these voracious Priests were so far
from eating up the Sacrifice, that many of the remaining parts were afterward
sold at the Shambles. Vid. Herod. Clio. Augusto Expos. in Romans which gave
occasion to those scruples among the Corinthians, concerning the Idolatry,
which St. Paul so judiciously satisfies, 1 Cor. 10. Whatsoever is sold in the
Shambles eat, asking no question for Conscience sake, etc. Which Custom the
Apostate Julian improved so far to be revenged upon the Christians at Antioch;
as to make all the food which was brought to Market to be first dedicated at a
Heathen Altar. Theod. Lib. 1. Cap. 14. And so much for your gormandizing
Priests.


Phil. Well this is but a small matter to talk of. But I can never forgive the
Sanctimonious Brotherhood, for all the mischief they have done to Natural
Religion, by burying its pure and divine Light in such a Load of Ceremonious
Trumpery. If it were not for these Inventions of Priestcraft, a Man might do
his duty as far as nature directs, with all the ease imaginable. If a Man would
but take care to do what unprejudiced nature prompts him to, not to overcharge
her with more than she craves, nor to check her in her just desires, and to
have as great and august thoughts as he can of the Deity; he might perform the
whole business of Religion to all intents and purposes. All the ceremonious
foppery which does so pester Mankind, is owing to the Priests contrivance, who
would not have got so much by the free, easy directions of nature, as they do
by long Catalogues of Articles of Faith, and a fine Pageant-like-Raree-show
worship. For my money give me good old, Pure, natural Religion, which was in
diebus illis. In pious times ever Priestcraft did begin. Before, etc.


Cred. Natural Religion not the Tendencies of nature.
Which was in Vtopia, or only in the Brains of the Gentlemen of your way. For
your notion of natural Religion is so far from being Gods Law, or a Rule of
Mankind, that it was never dreamt of, till Mr Hobbs would make his vicious
qualities the rule of humane Actions, and some of his Disciples had improved
further upon him since. It Is true, I am for that natural Religion, which is the
dictates of right reason, as much as any one; but your natural Religion is the
corrupt inclination of a depraved will and disorderly Passions, made out of
Fear, Pride, Lust, and a Selfish humor. Men of these Principles are Temperate,
only for fear of the sickness of a Debauch, or in hopes to live as long as the
Old Gentleman of Malmesbury. They forbear to kill, or rob their Friend, for
fear of the animadversion of the Leviathan, or Commonwealth; or that they may
not incurr the danger of being hanged, or losing their reputation. Adultery
indeed may be a little against the Pact we entered into, when we retired from a
State of Nature; but moderate Whoring is as innocent, as Eating, Drinking, or
Sleeping. And now what a noble Idea of natural Religion is this, for Men thus
to Philosophize themselves into Beasts, and to call that pure Nature which is
the worst sort of Brutality? It cannot be denied, but that we have some
disorderly affections within, which are apt to prompt us to such Actions; but
we have before shown, that these Appetites have received an original
depravation, which has been the Opinion of all wise Men; and besides, in the
midst of this Tumult of unruly Passions, we still find a right reason within
us, disallowing of these irregular Tendencies, and a Conscience checking us for
the submiting to them. And now let any one judge which has the justest claim to
the Title of natural Religion and the unblameable practice of Mankind; those
wise dictates of reason which restrain these desires, or the mad Passions
themselves. And yet when all comes to all, your Infidel Sparks after all their
cry for natural Religion, and pure uncorrupted nature, mean no more by it, than
uncontrouled sensuality. Which is so vile an end for a Man to propose to
himself, that it reflects a disgrace upon our common Reason; and at last, let
him gain as much of it as he can, he will never arrive that way to the
happiness of an ordinary Beast. For a Boar, or a Monkey, can enjoy more of this
sort of satisfaction, than ever a Libertine of 'em all. Epicuri de grege Porci!


Phil. I beseech you, Credentius, not so severe. All we Infidels are not such
Hogs as you would make us; for some of us are better principled than this comes
to. Such Men as you describe are our Heretics, as I may call them; though they
pretend to natural Religion they have highly corrupted it, and almost destroyed
it. But we Orthodox Unbelievers have our Tenets fixed upon a sounder Bottom,
and take nothing up for natural Religion, which is not the Result of right
reasoning, and grounded upon the clear principles of natural Light. For this is
the sole Rule which God has given us to walk by; not that Men like these
Libertines should mistake the cravings of their Irregular Appetites for the Law
of nature, but to govern them by it. For I suppose God to have given us these
Appetites not to be Law to our actions, but as a subject to exercise our
obedience to this Law of God, or Nature upon; so that then we are said to act
according to the Law of Nature, when we follow those dictates which every ones
unbyassed reason affords him, even in opposition to these irregular Tendencies
of our vitiated Appetites. This is that noble Rule which alone, if followed,
will make a Man Wise, and Virtuous, and Happy. Under the influence of this Law
alone (till the Priests began their Reign) Primitive Mankind lived golden Ages;
and went to Heaven, at last, without Sacrifices and Revelations.

Hac art Pollux, hac vagus Hercules
Innixus arces attigit igneas.

Cred. I find you are continually harping upon the Priests being the Authors of
all the ceremonious parts of Religion, and particularly Sacrifice; and that the
World was a considerable time without either Priests or Sacrifice under the
conduct of pure natural Religion, and that the Priesthood was but of late date,
and crept into the World by imposing upon the People pompous Ceremonies. Now to
set you right, in this mistake, will you please to attend to these following
particulars.

1. There was always in the World a Rank of Men who had the Office of the
Priesthood annexed to them, Priests in all places of the World, and all Ages.
whose office it was to put up Prayers to the Deity for the People, to offer
Sacrifices, and the like. That this office was entailed upon Primogeniture, as
some maintain from Numb. 18.16. Vid. Grot in Luke 2. I think is not so certain;
but that it belonged, and was constantly practiced by the Heads of Families and
Princes, of Nations in the earliest times, is unquestionable. So Noah after the
Deluge Sacrified for himself and Family, Genesis 8.20. The like is recorded of
Abraham, and Jacob, and Job. And so among the Gentiles, in the highest Ages,
the Crown and Priesthood went together; of which the History of Melchizedek
King of Salem is a remarkable Instance in Scripture. And amongst Profane
Authors Virgil tells us the like of Anius King of Delus.

Rex Anius, Rex, idem hominum, Phoebique sacerdos. Virg. Aen. 3. Upon which
Verse Servius has this note. Sane majorum haec erat consuetudo, ut Rex esset
etiam sacerdos, vel Pontifex. Vnde hodieque Imperatores Pontifices dicimus.
This was the custom of the Ancients, that the King must be also Priest or
Pontifex. And from thence at this day we style the Emperors Pontifices. And so
likewise in his notes on the 10. of the Aeneads, he says Aeneas was likewise
sacrorum Rex, or Pontifex. And before him Priamus the Trojan King offers the
Sacrifice which is described by Homer. Iliad. 3. And so not only Iulus, Aeneas
his Son, succeeded his Father in the Priesthood, but the Priesthood continued
for many Ages afterward at Rome in the Gens Julia, which descended from him.
Numa instituted those sacra called Regia, which were to be performed by the
Kings only; ordaining likewise some subordinate Priests, who should supply
their places, when they were engaged in the Wars. So Julius Caesar, in right of
his Family, was High Priest, and after him Augustus; and at last the Emperors
were Pontifices Max. on course. So that you see the Priesthood, Philologus, is
not such a modern Incroachment as you Deists would pretend.


Phil. Let the Invention be early or late it matters not much, for it is so very
and useless one that Mankind would not be a farthing the worse for, if it was
quite laid aside; for it cost us, I am sure, a great deal of Money, and no
body, that I know, is the better for it. For People may live honestly, and say
their Prayers as often as they think fit, without the help of Parsons: or if
they must have Guides, such an honest old Author as Tully, or Seneca, or the
good Advice of some sober wise Gentlemen, will conduct them in the Rules of
Morality, without taking Tithes for it.


Cred. The World is very bad as it is, The Advantage of a Ministry.
but I believe it would be ten times worse, if there was not an order of Men
that did continually put People in mind of their duty; and though they be very
negligent of Instruction, yet by hearing their Duty so continually inculcated
something sticks at last, even in the worst Minds, and keeps them from being so
profligately wicked as they would otherways be: It Is true indeed, it is possible
some Men may live good lives without a Priesthood, or Clergy to instruct them;
and so it is possible to blunder out a strange way in the dark; but all Men must
allow it is more easily gone with an experienced Guide. But besides, I have one
Argument to prove the Usefullness, of a Priesthood, or Ministry, that will
reach you Gentlemen that allow no Revelation. All you Theists grant to pray to
God is a Part of Natural Religion, and that in public too upon special
occasions, as to deprecate God's Vengeance in public Calamities, and to thank
him for public mercies, and the like. Now you would not have all the People at
Church to be charming and gabling together every one his own Prayer, but for
decency and Order sake one ought to speak for the rest, to whom if the Public
allow any thing for his pains, then you have what we call a Priesthood or
Clergy. So that even upon the pure Principles of Deism, this Order is
requisite; and you must destroy your own Hypothesis by making them useless and
insignificant. A good and conscientious Clergyman that makes it his business
to encourage Piety and Virtue, will do more good than a hundred Tully's and
Seneca's; and the World would be well hope up, if they had no other Guides in
Morality, than some of those wise sober Gentlemen as you call them, many of
which continue lewd as long as they can, and in their old Age turn
Moral-mongers when they can be vicious no longer. But to go on.

2. Neither is your other supposition true, that there was ever any Age or
Nation in the World, Pure Natural Religion no where practiced.
when or where such a pure Natural Religion as you imagine, without any manner
of Rituous worship, was ever practiced. I know not what secret Histories your
Gentlemen may have of the Golden Age, but as for us dull Believers, we cannot
see one word in all the ancient Books we meet withal, that gives us the least
hint of such a naked natural Religion as you speak of. If we have recourse to
the Poets, to whom we are beholden for all that is known of these Golden Ages,
when these brave men lived; they make Religion as Ritual as it is now; and
altogether as full of Sacrifices and Revelations. Nay, the account we have of
the Goddess Astraea, which is a principal part of the Poetical History of the
Golden Age, is that she was a Numen sent from Heaven to converse with Men on
Earth, to inspire them with Justice and Sobriety, and to teach them Virtue and
a good Life.

(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...). Arat. Phoen.
Although she did immortal glories share,
She freely did converse with mortals here:
She taught them Virtue as she walked the streets,
She taught them Counsel in their close debates:
From her their Oracle they did derive,
Laws and the Virtues of a Social Life.
Which Fable by the way is but an ancient Tradition of the frequency of God's
conversing with holy Men, in the first Ages of the World. Neither did those
Golden Ages want their Sacrifices more than their Revelations. Nay, if we will
believe the Poet Hesiod, he tells us the Golden Age was particularly remarkable
for their Sacrificing to the Gods; and that Jupiter was angry with those of the
Silver Age, and took that race of Men out of the World for neglecting it.

-- (...)
(...).
-- (...).
(...)
(...). -- Hesiod. Op. and Dies.
Neither do we see any of the Ancient Poetical Heroes, your Hercules's, and
Pollux's, your brave natural Religion-Men, but they are as much in at
Sacrifices as other People. As we see by the Examples of Priam, Ulysses, and
Achilles, and Aeneas in Homer and Virgil, of Cadmus in Ovid, of Perseus,
Theseus, and all the Argonauts in Apollonius and other Poets.

And as there was never any Age of the World in which this superfine natural
Religion was universally practiced, so neither was there, nor is there, any
Part or Nation of it, where it can be found. All the anciently known World,
from India to Britain, from Africa to Scythia, was all full of Rites and
Ceremonies. To begin with our old Britains at home, they were so far from
professing such a pure natural Religion as you contend for, that they were full
of Idolatry and cruel as well as silly Ceremony. Their rites were almost wholly
Magical, and they were so much wedded to that Art, as Pliny says, Hist. Lib.
30. Cap. 1. ut dedisse Persis videri possint, that they seemed to set a Copy to
the Persians in it. They adored a multitude of Idols, portenta Diabolica pene
numero Aegyptiaca vincentia, as Gildas calls them, Gildas de Excid. Brit.
a Company of Devilish Monsters almost exceeding the number of those in Egypt;
for besides the Saxons Idols of Tuisco, Thor, Woden, Seater, etc. they had the
Celtick Teutates and Hesus; and likewise Belenus, or Bellatucadrus, as appears
by an ancient Inscription lately found in Westmorland, dedicated Sancto Deo
Bellatucadro; as also another old God mentioned by Sedulius, Sedul. in op.
Pascal.
(who was a Scotch- Britain) called Geada, or Geta. And when we further
consider the fond Ceremonies used by their Priests the Druids, in gathering
Plin. Lib. 30. Cap. 1. Plin. Lib. 16. Cap. 43.
Oak-branches and seeking Misletoe for their Sacrifices, their cruelty in
humane Sacrifices, their killing the Victim Vid. Strab. Lib. 4.
upon the Altar with Arrows, or binding him round with straw, and so burning
him a live, with other barbarous and devilish Ceremonies; I say, when we
consider all this we may very well exclude the Britains from the purity of
natural Religion. And if we proceed to our old Neighbors the Gauls, we shall
find them as deep in Ritual worship as the Britains: they had the same foppery
of the Druids with them, which Caesar Caes. Bell. Gall. Lib. 6.
says they borrowed from the Britains, and those who would be exact in that
Discipline traveled thither. They had the same humane Sacrifices, and well
nigh the same Gods, as Lucan informs us, Lib. 1.

Et quibus immitis placator sanguine diro
Teutates, horrensque feris altaribus Hesus;
Et Taranis Scythicae non mitior ara Dianae.
The Spaniards, as Macrobius tells us, Macrob. Sat. Cap. 19.
worshipped Simulachrum Martis radiis ornatum cum maxima religione, Neton
vocantes. They adored an Image of Mars adorned with Rays with very great
veneration, calling him Netos. They had a Temple with the rites of Strab. Lib.
4.
Apollo Delphinius; and Varro, as Pliny Plin. Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
relates, derives Lusitania from Lusus the Companion of Bacchus, whose rites
were celebrated there. If we look upon the ancient face of Germany there is as
little of pure natural Religion to be found as any where else, but all is full
of Idolatrous Ceremony. Bell. Gall. Lib. 6.
And Caesar says they Sacrificed to the Sun, Vulcan, or the fire, and the Moon;
which were the only Gods they saw, but as for others, ne fama quidem
acceperunt, they never so much as heard of. But Tacitus Ann. Lib. 4.
and De rebus Geticis.
Jornandes make likewise Mars their principal God. Tacitus mentions their
singing Hymns to Hercules when they went to War, De moribus Germ. and Paulus
Diaconus speaks of their Woden whom he interprets Mercury. To say nothing of
the rites of Tuisco, Friga, etc. which the Saxons afterward transplanted into
Britain. If we look Southward into Africa, we shall find them there busy with
the rites and Oracles of Jupiter Hammon, and with the worship of an abundance
of their dead Kings Tertull. Apol. Cap. 24. Lactant. Lib. 1. Cap. 15.
; and if we look Northward into Scythia and Sarmatia, we shall find the
Scythians bloody with the humane Sacrifices to their Diana Taurica, or
Scythica, so renowned of old; and the Sarmatians worshipping in strange rites
one Deity called Pogwisd, another Jessa, a third called Lacton; and Nia,
Marzana, and Zievonia, Goddesses; besides two famous Deities named Zelus and
Poletus, which were jointly worshipped like the Dioscuri. I need not make any
remarks upon the Ceremonious worships of the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans;
for among them I am sure natural Religion was buried under Loads of Ceremonies:
There we shall hear of nothing but Temples, and Priests, and Altars;
Expiations, Lustrations, Pomps and Processions; Images, Hieroglyphics,
Auguries, Plays, and a thousand other Rites, which learned Men have wrote large
Volumes to explain. And if we go further Eastward into Persia, and Syria; we
shall see the former employed about strange Ceremonies in the worship of the
Sun, keeping in the sacred Fires Sacrificing Horses to Mithras, with many other
rites which the Magi had invented; and shall find the Syrians running after a
Troop of different Gods with a different Worships, Moloch, Ashtaroth, Baal,
Dagon, Beelzebub, Nisroch, Rimmon, Nebo, etc. Vid. Seldom de Diis Syris.

And if you please to look upon the Books of Travels into the East and West
Indies, you will find altogether as much Ceremony in the Heathens worship
there: So that I beseech you, Philologus, to show in what part of the World
this natural Religion of yours lay sculking, in this universal Reign of Rites
and Ceremonies. And if you cannot, I must conclude, that this story of the
ancient Universality of pure natural Religion is all Philosophical Romance, and
never had any being, but in the brains of the Gentlemen of your persuasion, and
those of some System-Makers, and Preachers of late, drawn from the scattered
sayings and Books of Philosophers, which some have fansied into a complete
System of Religion which alone was owned and practiced for some Ages in the
World. But I think it is clear from the foregoing observations, that your
notion of such a simple natural Religion was never practiced in the World as
far as profane History goes; and as for those that allow the sacred, the
Sacrifices of Cain and Abel, will evince Ritual Worship to be as old as Mankind
it self. Which will be yet clearer when it appears,

What is called Natural Religion was at first Revealed.
3. That the Common Rules of Morality, or a Good Life, which we generally call
natural Religion, were at first revealed by God. This may seem a little strange
to those who are preposessed by other Opinions; but it seems rather more
strange to consider that those moral notions should come into the Soul by the
usual ways they are generally supposed. It was formerly the current Opinion of
the Schools that these moral notices were Idea's connate with the Soul, and in
a certain manner inscribed upon it. But it is very odd to think, how such
propositions as these, Parents are to be honored, Friends are to be assisted,
The Marriage Bed to be undefiled, Whoredom and Drunkenness avoided; it is odd to
think, I say, how that these propositions which are the complication of so many
distinct and simple Idea's which we are sure are generally attained by
experience and reason, should yet be asserted to come into the mind by such an
unaccountable way as this of Inscription. But saying no more is meant by this
Inscription, than a kind of natural and universal Inspiration of the Soul, or
Imbution of it with these moral Principles; this is altogether unagreeable to
the Souls of Children, Idiots, and some very barbarous People, who we are
certain do want most of these moral notions. So that of late this Opinion of
Innate Ideas has been generally exploded by learned men and another taken up,
it may be subject to as many difficulties, which attributes the origin of these
moral notions to the deductions of right reason, asserting that the generality
of Men having the use of reason, and few of them being so brutish but in their
life Time they apply their minds to the consideration of these moral Duties,
and so by the agreeableness of them to the Social Life of Mankind, do easily
infer the obligation of them. And so the Law natural is by this explication
nothing else, but a Scheme of Virtues and Vices which every Man, by his own
reason and Experience, has found out to be such from their agreeableness and
disagreeableness to Society, and to the ends Man is designed for. Thus I am
supposed to come to know, that to rob my Neighbor is unlawful, because this is
contrary to those Vid. Hobb's Leviathan.
Pacts of fidelity we have entered into together, or because this is
inconsistent with that mutual Parker 's Law of nature.
Love and kindness we ought to bear to our Fellow Creatures; or because this
violates the natural right which accrues to another by occupation, Puffendorff
de Jur. Not. and Gentium.
and which cannot be alienated but by Gift, or Sale, or Dereliction. Now there
is many a poor honest Indian who knows it is his duty not to steal, as well as
ever a Hobb's, or Puffendorff of them all; and yet he never in his Life so much
as dreamt of Pacts, or Fides Data, or Occupation. Suppose I bargain with an
honest Virginian for a Pipe of Tobacco, and a Bottle of Sack, to watch my Tent,
whilst I sleep, from Wild Beasts, or Banditti's; now when he might cut my
Throat, and run away with all that I have, what is the reason that the poor
Fellow stays walking about as trustfully with his Bow and Arrow, as if he were
set Centinal by a Captain that would hang him for running away? Why, say most
of our natural Religion-Men, by frequent exercise of his reason and thinking,
he has come to the knowledge of the horridness of the Sin of Murder, and the
Baseness of Unfaithfulness. But then who can ever think that this poor ignorant
wretch should ever have given himself to such grave and Philosophic
Disquisitions; that he should ever have considered that to kill a rational
Creature was to deface the Image of the All-wise Deity, to usurp a barbarous
power over one naturally equal with himself, and to take away that Life which
mutual Friendship obliged to protect; that to violate a given Faith was a
baseness beneath the dignity of a Rational Man, and which if universally
practiced would destroy all Society out of the World. No certainly, the poor
Indian never troubled his Head with these matters; his thoughts in his younger
days run all upon Hunting, and Swimming, and loving, and afterward to get good
store of Progg for his Wives and Children; but he never thought a word of these
Rationale's of Morality which were invented by men of a learned Education and
busy Thoughts. How came then this poor fellow to the knowledge of these moral
Duties? Why truly I can conceive no other way than by Tradition; his Father
taught them him, and his Grandfather his Father, and so up to Adam, the common
Parent of us all; who had them first from God-Almighty as the universal Laws
that all his Posterity should be governed by. Nor is it any objection against
this Opinion, that Tradition does not seem to some so proper a means to convey
Morality by to Mankind because of its liableness to Corruption, and that it
would have been more sensibly vitiated than we find it is, had it descended by
this Method: For though Relations of matters of Fact, Ancient Customs, and
difficult Articles of Faith, may suffer much by being conveyed this way,
because the Understandings of Men cannot be supposed to have a clear
understanding of these things upon the first proposal, and so may be liable to
mistake them, which must occasion very great alterations in such a number of
Deliveries; but these plain Rules of Morality, such as Worship God, Honor thy
Parents, thou shall do no Murder, thou shall not steal, etc. are so natural to
the understanding, so easy to be embraced by it, and appear upon proposal to be
so extremely useful to Mankind, that they must be assented to and can never be
mistaken or forgot. The same is the case of these Moral Rules, as of very early
and useful Inventions, such as Spinning, Weaving, Arching, etc. which are
conveyed to all the World, not by being written in Books, or in Man's Hearts,
but by the handing down from one to another for several thousand years
together. Now unless it was the general Opinion of Mankind, that this was the
ordinary way of conveying the Rules of Morality to their Posterity, to what
purpose should they take so much pains in instructing their Children as we find
men have done in all Ages, and in all Countries. But if Morality were inscribed
on Men's Hearts, and so were all one as if it were implanted in their nature;
Parents might with as much Wisdom pretend to teach their Children to eat and
drink, to love their Children, and desire a propagation of their Species, which
they cannot but do; or if these moral Duties were the necessary and
unavoidable, deductions of Reason, it would be as simple to go about to learn
them the rules of Virtue as to teach them that one and one make two. And it is
further particularly remarkable, and which may serve as a good proof of what
has been said, we find the Parents are commanded by God, Deuteronomy. 6.6. to teach
their Children these Moral Duties. For after the recital of the Ten
Commandments. ( viz. the Moral Law) He adds, And these words which I command
thee this day shall be in thy heart; and thou shall teach them diligently to
thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy House, and when
thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And
it is yet further remarkable, that what Moses here says, shall be in the Jews
hearts, the Apostle says, Romans 2.15. was written in the Gentiles Hearts; So
that unless there can be a substantial Difference evinced between being in the
heart and being written there, all the Doctrine of inscribed Propositions falls
to the ground. And I am sure there is no reason why God should write Moral Laws
in the gross and literal sense in the Gentiles Hearts, and put them into the
Jews by the ordinary way of teaching and instruction.

Riddles not the Corruption of Natural Religion.
4. But in the fourth place, Philologus, you are something mistaken in asserting
that it was the ancient Riddles, when Men affected to deliver sacred Truths in
the Aenigmatical way that first debauched natural Religion, by introducing all
the fabulosity of the Heathen Polytheism. This is a position which is asserted
very confidently by some, who I believe are better Friends to Religion than
you, but I think without just ground; for what ever I could see.


Phil. I beseech you, Sir, don't go to run down the grounds we build our
assertion upon, without understanding what they are. For there is a great deal
of reason to believe, that the Aenigmatical way of explaining the nature and
providence of the Deity, gave occasion to the Heathen Polytheism, and serves
very much to apologize for it. For I look upon the Heathen (...), or Jupiter,
with the learned Ancients Cic. de Not. Deorum. Lib. 3. Plat. in Timaeo.
Sallust. de Diis and Mund. Cap. 6.
, to be but the Ether, or that fluid agitated part of the Universe which
permeates the pores of all Bodies, and is the cause of all motion, generation,
fermentation, etc. and therefore is well called Jupiter, quasi juvans pater.
The Goddess Juno Cic. ib. Plato in Cratyl.
, or (...) (i. e.) quasi (...), is the Air, which warmed, or agitated by the
ether, is a principal cause of the procreation of Animals and Vegetables, and
was for that reason worshipped as the Goddess of Child-births. Cic. ib. Natal.
Com. Myth. Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Aug. Civ. Dei, Lib. 7. Cap. 19.
Saturnus quasi Satur annis, or (...), is said to be the Father of Jupiter,
because before the World was Time was. He is said to dethrone his Father
because the Creation of the World put a Period to that long unmeasured
Duration. Ceres quasi Geres a gerendo, the Goddess of Corn, or (...) qu. (...),
or Mother Earth, is only the Ground, as Neptunus, the Sea, or the same Deity
exercising his providence in all; or to use St. Austin's words, who expresses
the meaning of the Ancients well, thus; Civ. Dei. Lib. 4. Cap. 11. Vid. De. hac
re Var. De Ling. Lat. Lib. 4.
Ipse in aethere est Jupiter, ipse in aere Juno, in mari Neptunus, in
inferioribus etiam maris ipse Salacia, in terra Pluto, in terra inferiore
Proserpina, in foris domesticis Vesta, in fabrorum furnace Vulcanus, in
syderibus Sol, Luna, and Stella: in divinantibus Apollo, in merce Mercurius, in
Jano initiator, in termino Terminator, Saturnus in Tempore, Mars and Bellona in
Bellis, Liber in vineis, Ceres in frumentis, Diana in sylvis, Minerva in
ingeniis, etc. So that all the ancient Theology and Theogony is only an account
of the divine Attributes and Providence in an aenigmatical and mythological
manner; and was only owing to the mean capacities of the Vulgar, that they
blundered into Polytheism by it: just as when the Scripture mentions Wisdom and
Religion in the notion of a Person, her ways are ways of pleasantness, etc. an
ignorant Christian should take her for a Goddess, and as when St. Paul Preached
(...) Jesus and the Resurrection, the Greeks took him for a setter forth of
strange Gods, Act. 17.18. an Introducer of a new God and Goddess, which the
Athenians in all their Theogony had never heard of. So that at last there was
but the same Deity under Varro's three thousand Names, and the same supreme
Jupiter was not more distinct under all these, than when he was called (...),
or Jupiter Capitolinus, or Stator. And this I think is a fair account of the
Rise of the Heathen Polytheism, and the many superstitious Rites which crept
into natural Religion upon it.


Cred. I confess, Philologus, Heathen Polytheism not the diverse Exhibitions of
Providence.
you are not mistaken that many of the Ancient Philosophers have given this
account of the rise of the Heathen Idolatry which you do, but then I very much
question the Truth of their Assertion and the Validity of their Arguments, and
I think there are other and better Reasons to be given of the Origin of it. Nor
is the Opinion of the Philosophers much to be relied upon; for they lived long
after Polytheism was introduced, and knew as little of its Origin as we do; and
besides, they had an Interest to serve, which was to represent the folly of the
Heathen Polytheism as favorably as they could to Men of Sense; they were (if I
may so say) the Condoms of Paganism, to qualify it, the better to go down with
men of Thought and Enquiry. Neither is there any thing in it, for ought I see,
but a little Wit and Fancy, of which Plato, who (I think) was the Author of it,
had enough. For Socrates having suffered for an Unitarian, and deriding the
Gentile Multitude of Gods, Plato had a mind to Trim the matter, by this kind of
Reconciliation, which you have mentioned in his Dialogues Timaeus and Cratylus.
And what I pray are all these fine derivations of the names of these Deities
(which are the principal part of the Argument) but mere sportive rovings of
Fancy, and as splenetick as making Men and Chariots in the Clouds? I would
undertake as easily to make these Principal Deities to be the four Quarters of
the Year, as you have made them the chief parts of the World; and I think with
as much verisimilitude. Let Juno be the Spring, and the Greek (...) is nigher
(...) the Spring than (...) the Air. Let (...) be the fervid hot Summer. Pluto
the rich Autumn, and Neptune (or if you will Saturn) the cold watery Winter.
Now if this had come from an old beard, and a Pallium, and had had but the
prescription of two thousand Years, it would have been looked upon perhaps by
many of your Gentlemen as a rare comment upon the Heathen Theology. But after
all, these fabulous stories of the Gods are incapable of allegorizing, or
having any tolerable mystical sense put upon them. For what other sense besides
the literal meaning can be put upon the Rapes and Whoredoms of Jupiter, and the
other Gods? What mystical meaning can be put upon Jupiter's rape of Europa, in
the shape of a Bull, or Danae, in a golden Shower? Indeed so far the story may
be unriddled, that Jupiter who committed this wickedness was a Grecian Prince
named Taurus, as Palaeph. de Incred. de Europa.
Palaephetus contends, or in a Ship called the Bull as others: that the golden
shower by which he corrupted Danae was by giving her money, or by bribing her
Keepers. But after all the story is a lewd story still, and which cannot
without horror be heard to be attributed to the supreme God of Heaven and
Earth. And what good sense can be put upon those yet lewder Amors of Jupiter
and his Boy Ganymedi, Apollo and Hyacinthus, Hercules and Hylas? Indeed Plato
in his Dialogue de Pulchro, seems as if he had a mind to interpret this
infamous familiarity of Jupiter with Ganymede into his Platonic Love, but in
my mind that very Dialogue lacks Apology its self, for a Man finds there so
much of the (...) and the (...) the Amator and Amasius, with such odd allusions
to that execrable Vice, that one had need of very virtuous thoughts and a very
charitable mind to allegorize all the strange Metaphors of that discourse into
a chaste meaning. A Man would be hardly put to it, to moralize and unriddle all
the Poetical Banter about Jupiter, and Mars, and Venus, and Bacchus, etc. and
at the same time take them for Gods, or only particular Energies of the Divine
Providence. For what can one make besides some fanciful Remarks, of Saturn's
devouring his Children; of Jupiter's castrating his Father; of Rhea the old
Beldam Goddess, her being in Love with Atys, a Young Boy; of the Adultery of
Mars and Venus; of the Titan's Wars and Vulcan's Celestial Forge? Now who can
ever imagine that all this horrid, lewd, and simple stuff, was ever designed
for practical Divinity, and to teach Morality to Mankind by representing their
Gods so mean, so foolish, and so debauched? It remains therefore, that some
other account, must be given of the Heathen Mythology, than that of ancient
Riddles, and Theology and Morality's being delivered under those Umbrages.

Therefore I suppose that the Heathen Idolatry and Mythological Divinity was
owing to the illiterate darkness of some Ages which succeeded after the Flood.
Caused by the darkness of the Postdiluvian Ages.
In Censorin. de Die Not. Cap. 21.
Varro does very well divide Time (at least as far as 'twas known to the
Heathens) into the (...), or that obscure Time which was from the beginning of
things to the first Cataclysm (i. e.) Ogyges his Flood; the second was the
(...) reaching from the first Cataclysm to the first Olympiad, called Fabulous,
because all the Poetical History was transacted in it; and ever since has been
the (...), or Time of History, when a true account of matters of Fact have been
given us. Now the reason why there was no certain account of these two former
Stages of time was the want of the Invention of Writing, or at least the
general use of it. So that all the Accounts of former times could only be
deduced and carried down by Tradition; and what sad work this would make in
History and Theology every one knows. The People of the several Nations had
some general Notions of the Deity, they had heard of Gods freely conversing
with the Patriarchs after the Flood, of the Ministry of Angels, etc. and this
they jumbled together with the stories of their Kings, like a piece of Turkish
Chronology. Their Kings, according to the usual flattery of those Ages, were
made Gods, and then the common people who never stood upon the Decency of the
Character, ascribed to them all the actions and infirmities which belonging to
their Manhood, after they were Gods. When they told a story of former Times in
a barbarous Age it was hardly worth hearing, unless there was something strange
and prodigious in it, and it was safe making it as wonderful as one pleased,
because there was no standing Histories to contradict. From hence no doubt it
must come to pass that all our Monkish stories and Romances much be out done as
the barbarity of those first Times was the greater, so that all the stories of
Jupiter, and the Centimani, and Pelion and Ossa, Bacchus and Theseus, Andromede
and Medea, etc. were but the first Edition of Giants, Enchanted Castles, Knight
Errants and Kings Daughters. Therefore it grieves me to see learned Men
(Christians especially) abusing their Time and Letters, to fish out
Philosophical reason for all these Lying Fooleries.

By deifying of Princes.
2. It was in great measure owing to the deifying of Princes. For most of those
Gods which were worshipped by the old Heathen were Kings formerly of the
Country where they were adored. It is agreed by all, that the great Assyrian
Belus was either Nimrod, or some other great Prince of that Country: And
Diodorus Siculus relates the same of the Egyptian Horus, and Osyris. Hist.
Stabul. Lib. 1.
The Greek (...), or Jupiter was King of Crete, at least he that was commonly
worshipped; as Tully himself is forced to own, though he be so great an
Advocate for the Natural Deities. Saturnus, Janus, Faunus, Fatua, Do Not. Deor.
Lib. 3.
Romulus, and all the Dii indigites, are generally owned to be Princes of
Italy, and the Latin Jupiter might probably be Aeneas, who was called Jupiter
Indiges. Neither does he receive his name a juvando, as being so principal a
part of the Universe, as Varro, and Tully pretend; but is only the Greek (...)
with the usual addition of Pater, as Marspiter, Deispiter, in being usual to
change the Greek z when put in Latin into J or G, which has the like sound, as
(...) Gingiber. And as for Juno, I look upon her to be but the old Jana, and
Saturn to be the True name of that old King, which is preserved still in the
Teutonick, Seater. So was the famous Hammon of Africa, Cham the first Prince,
or Founder of that Country, Bacchus a great Conqueror in the East, and the
celebrated Rhea, or Cybele, an adopted Daughter of Minoes, an ancient King of
Phrygia, and Ceres, or Isis, a Queen of Egypt. There is no doubt but these
Deities were first taken in as ascititious and Tutelar Gods of the place, and
worshipped together with the supreme God, but in time, like Saint-worship among
the Papists, they justled out God-Almighty through pretense of their particular
inspection, and brought his worship to little or nothing. And besides people
stood upon punctilio's of Honor to have their particular God the greatest God;
so that there was not any little hedge God of a puny province but by his
Votaries was equalled to the Gods of the King of Assyria. Hence Zeal, for their
Deities, and a fanciful Bigottry, sounded abroad a number of their Miracles and
Excellencies, which coming to the Ears of Foreign Countries they in time of
extremity, when they were willing to try all Experiments, adopted them their
Gods too; as the Live. Hist. Lib. 39. c. 10.
Matter Idaea was brought to Rome when Hannibal with his Army was ravaging
Italy, and Id. Lib. 10.
Aescusapius was Canonized there in that raging Pestilence which happened, An.
V. C. 460. So that in time this translating of Deities from one Country to
another did very much conduce to the increase of the Heathen Polytheism and
Fabulous stories of their Gods.

3. Another great cause of it was the early and almost universal worship of the
Sun, Moon, and Stars. It is certain, By the Worship of the Sun, Moon, and Stars.
that the Idolatry of the Sun and Moon is very ancient, by the Book of Job,
which probably is the oldest writing extant; for Job there maintaining his
Integrity, disowns his ever having worshipped the Sun or Moon. If I beheld the
Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and my heart has been
secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand; this were also an iniquity to
be punished by the Judge, for I should have denied the God that is above, Job
31.26, etc. And Macrobius spends seven whole Chapters in his first Book of
Saturnalia to prove, that Apollo, Mars, Mercury, Aesculapius, Salus, Hercules,
Isis, Serapis, Adonis, Attys, Osyris, Horus, Nemesis, Pan, and even Saturn and
Jupiter, were nothing else but the Sun. And if one considers the gloriousness
of that Planet, and its extraordinary beneficialness to the Earth, one can
hardly imagine, but that the first Idolaters paid their worship to it. It Is
plain by History, that the Persian Mithras was but another name for the Sun.
And Learned Men have proved, that the Moabitish Baal-Peor, the Syrian Moloch,
the Arabian Vrotalt, the Ethiopian Assabinus, and other Deities were nothing
else but the Sun. V. Vossium de Orig. Idol. Spenc. de Leg. Heb. Seldom, de Diis
Syris. That Hecate and Diana were but other names, for the Moon, is known to
every one; and, Orpheus in his Hymns makes her Proserpina too.

(...)
(...) --
Spinster of Time, of bright and beauteous Form,
O shining, horned Goddess.
The same was in probability the Egyptian Isis, the Assyrian Astarte, or
Astaroth, the Arabian Alilat, and the Greek Ilithya. The other Planets gave
names to some Gods, as to Mars, Mercury, Venus, or Dione, as the fanciful Forms
of the Constellations might do to others, as to Hercules and Orion; and when
all these different names, which were given the same Luminaries in so many
several Countries, came to be carried to Greece, and Rome, who understood
nothing of these barbarous Languages, they presently took them for new Deities,
(...), outlandish Gods, which they had never worshipped before; so that this
alone must in time swell their List of Deities to a considerable length.

4. Another cause of their Polytheism and Fabulous Divinity was their making
Gods and Goddesses of words, By deifying words.
a sort of Grammatical Deities that were made Gods when of the Masculine, and
Goddesses when of the Feminine Gender. Thus Somnus, and Dolor, and Pavor, were
He Gods; and Pecunia, Prudentia, and Concordia, were She ones, with a World
more of the like. Now when the Heathen had gotten this way of stocking Heaven,
it is a mercy they had not left us the whole Dictionary full of Gods. And just
at the same rate the Nurses and good Women were the Authors of a multitude of
Deities. It was they that invented the Office of Lucina to give an easy labor,
of Opis to receive the Child; Vid. Var. ^ing. Lat. Lib. 4. August. Civ. Dei,
Lib. 4. Cap. 11.
of the God Vaticanus, that opened the mouth of the Child to cry; of Levana,
that took the Child up when 'twas down; of Cunina which guarded the Cradle, of
the Carmentes which read the destiny of it, of Rumina which made it Suck,
Educe, and Potina, which made it eat and drink; of Menas, Fortuna Barbata,
Juguntinus, etc. Now I fancy, Philologus, I should make you break your brains,
should I set you to give a philosophical Account of all these Deities, which an
old Woman could Coin twenty of them in a Breath.


Phil. I thank you, Sir, for your kind offer, but I don't care to be set to
such sort of work as the Conjurers do the Devils they raise, to pick Oatmeal
and tell Sand. But although some silly People might make odd sort of work with
natural Religion heretofore; yet as it was taught and practiced by the wisest
of the Heathen, it was a noble Religion, full of wise thought and rational
deduction; the dictates whereof were not proved by Chapter and Verse, but by
solid and curious reasoning. And this your Divines are aware of well enough,
when they are forced now and then to bring in a shred, or two of the ancient
Learning, to add a poignancy to their dull Discourses of Morality, to keep the
folk from sleeping; and I observe generally an Auditory of a sudden to look
brisk upon Plato and Tully, when they have been nodding over Paul and Peter.
And truly there is good reason for it, for their Books and sayings afford us
such admirable Lectures of Morality, in them we may see the duty of Mankind set
out so fully and exactly, and in such charming strains of Eloquence, that all
your inspired Authors, as you call them, look very poor things to them. Now who
can blame me for standing up for Natural Religion, when you see it could raise
these Philosophical Minds to such a noble height, as Revelation can never
pretend to? I cannot read a piece of Seneca, or Plutarch, or any of those
excellent Philosophers, but methinks, my Soul is warmed with the braveness of
the thoughts, and I am at the same time convinced of, and in Love with my Duty.
And I doubt not but had I lived in those times to have made the observation, I
might have perceived that the Lectures and Examples of these admirable Men had
considerable influence upon the Lives of the common People; at least, I am
sure, there was force enough in their Doctrine to make them completely good.
Sit anima mea cum animis Philosophorum; and in another state, let me but
consort with the Plato's and Zeno's, and I shall never envy your Armies of
Saints and Martyrs.


Cred. I will be kinder to you than you are to your self, and will put up my
Prayers to God, that you may have a place in the Resurrection of the just, and
may be of the number of God's Elect, and then I am sure you are safe. It shall
not be my business to predetermine the future State of those good Heathen that
have lived up to the Light of their reason; I know they are to stand or fall by
the judgment of a merciful God, and therefore for my part I am always inclined
to hope very well of them. But this I am sure of, that the Morality of the
Heathen Philosophers was so far from being a complete rule of Morals, that it
was very erroneous, both as it represented the Nature of God and the notion of
Virtue; and that it was so far from having any influence upon the Lives of the
Commonalty, that for the most part it had little or none upon their own. As for
the good language and handsome thought, that was the Talent and peculiar Study
of those Ages; but then again, that which sullied all their performances, and
spoiled the best things they did, or said, was, that Pride and vain glory,
which was common to all of them, and which all their words and actions were
bottomed upon. For I will make it appear to you, Philologus,

Morality of the Philosophers grounded upon Pride. Lib. de Anima.
1. That Pride and vain glory was the Primum Mobile, the first spring of the
Morality of the old Philosophers, and not a design of doing good. Now such a
pitiful end, as this is, is enough to spoil the best action in the World.
Tertullian, I remember, calls a Philosopher the Animal of Glory, and if one
considers the generality of their Writings and Practice, one shall find he had
great reason for it. And Cicero is so ingenious as to own the charge though
against himself. For he tells us sincerely, Cic. de Amicitia.
Vult plane virtus honorem: nec est vertutis ulla alia merces. Virtue does
plainly desire honor, neither has she any other reward. And if a Man scans the
whole tenor of the Philosophers Lives, he can never think they had any other
end. For what other account besides gaining glory and a name in the World, can
be given of their hatching so many different Principles, both in Physiology and
Morality, but only to be taken notice of for inventing something singular and
remarkable? What was it but this vain ambition that put them upon such affected
habits which many of them are reported to have worn, upon such singular Diet
and odd actions which the Writers of their Lives relate of them? If they had
designed to do as much good as they could by their Philosophy, they would have
communicated it to all; but instead of this, they taught it only to a select
number of Men that were their own Disciples, and this oftentimes under an
engagement of secresy, or in a way of Cant which was unintelligible to all
others. So that all these noble rules of Morality which would have made the
World so happy, were confined to a few Gentlemen only, that could afford Time
and Money to get such Philosophical Tutours; but for the rest of the World, for
all the Philosophers, they must be content to live like Beasts still.

The ancient Philosophers mistaken in the Nature of God.
2. The Doctrine which was taught by the generality of the Heathen Philosophers
was injurious to the nature and attributes of God. Now to conceive wrong
notions of Gods nature will perfectly Poison Men's Morality; for Men must needs
suit their Actions so as to be agreeable and acceptable to the Deity they
worship. So that if Men fancy God an Impure, Sensual or Careless Being, there
is no doubt but their Lives will be of the same Piece. Therefore the erroneous
Opinions of the Heathen Philosophers concerning the Deity, were not pardonable
Blunders, as many others in their Physiology were, but such mistakes as were of
fatal consequence to the Vertuousness of their own and Followers Lives. And
what a World of mistakes shall we find them subject to of this kind? Some of
them were downright Atheists, and believed no God at all, as Sext. Emp. Hypot.
Lib. 3. C. 24.
Diagorus, Melius, Theodorus, and Critias Atheniensis. The Spirituality of God
was denied by Epicurus, Id. ib.
who was an Anthropomorphite, simply presuming that God was of the figure of a
Man; and by Zenophanes, who made him (...), a great impassible Sphere or Globe
of matter. So Parmenides Eliates Clem. Alex. Protrept.
would have the Deity to be Fire and Earth, and Hippasus Metapontinus, and
Heraclitus the Fire only, (...). Cohort. ad Graecos.
which Justin Martyr relates of Plato likewise. The Unity of the Deity See
Onatus the Pythagoreans Arguments for Plurality of Gods Stob. Eccl. Phys. Lib.
1.
was Universally denied by them all, and they owned either the Gods of the
Country, or the Parts of the World to be such; and though it was charged
against Socrates in his Trial, that he disowned his Country Gods, and their
worship; yet at his Death he discovers himself to be downright Pagan, and
orders his Executours to Sacrifice the Cock Plat. Phaedo.
he had vowed to Aesculapius. And as for Plutarch Plutar^
one of the soberest of the Philosophers, he was the horridest Polytheist of
them all; for he asserts two supreme Anti-Gods, one infinitely Good, and the
other infinitely Wicked, which of all errors is the most monstrous and
abominably absurd. The Infinity of God was denied by all those that asserted an
infinite number of Worlds, Stob. Ecl. Phys. Cap. de Ort. and Inter.
as Anaximander, Anaximenes, Archelaus, Diogenes, Leucippus, Democritus, and
Epicurus; and by the Stoics who generally made him the Anima Mundi. For two
actual infinites are impossible, and if the World be infinite, God is not. And
as for the Anima Mundi, they made that only a subtle corporeal flame permeating
the whole World, and so must be terminated at the bounds of it, and
consequently finite. The Freedom of the Divine Will was destroyed by the
Fatality of the Stoics; and so was God's Omnipotence fettered by the stubborn
Laws of their unalterable Fate. As for God's Providence that was perfectly
excluded the World by Epicurus, and not allowed by Aristotle Id. Ec. Phys. Cap.
25.
on this side the Celestial Spheres. Thus you have seen how these great Oracles
of Reason, and brave Natural-Religion Men have been mistaken, even in the
common Notions of the Deity; let us see now whether they are not,

Erroneous in their Moral Doctrines.
3. Mistaken in their Opinions concerning Virtue and Vice. I should make a Day
of it, should I recite all the silly and the wicked Opinions which occur in the
Writings and Lives of the Philosophers; I shall only mention seem few of them,
to put you in mind that these old Sages are not such excellent Masters in
Morality as your Theistical Gentlemen would pretend, and that their Reason is
no such infallible Guide in Natural-Religion as you would have it. And now what
shall we think of the little puny Philosophers, when the great Plato himself
was an Advocate for the community of goods, Plat. Respub. Lib. 1.
which would perfectly destroy all industry and peace in a Commonwealth, and
what is yet worse, when he contends for the common use of one another Wives?
The Famous Zeno Lactant. Lib. 3. Cap. 22.
the Founder of the Stoical Sect, with his Followers after him, made all Sins
equal, and that it was as great a Sin to steal a Pin, as to kill ones Father;
and Sextus Empiricus (...); Hyp. Lib. 3. Cap. 24.
quotes out of him a Passage, wherein he would prove, that it is as lawful to
lie with ones Mother, as to stroke her Arm; he likewise brings in the same Zeno
with the Celebrated Stoic Cleanthes and Chrysippus Id. ib.
, as making that execrable Crime of Masculine Venery a thing indifferent. And
Diogenes Laertis Diog. Laert. Vit. Zen.
in his Life lays it down as one of his principles, to be merciful to no one,
and to pardon no body. And Theophilus Antiochenus Ad Autol. Lib. 2.
brings in him and Cleanthes as asserting that Sons and Daughters might as
lawfully roast and eat their Parents Flesh as other food. He asserted that his
(...), or Greatness of Soul, which was nothing else but a Stoical pride, was
sufficient for happiness; Laert. in Vit. Zen.
but his Scholars Panaetius and Possidonius seeing this liable to so many
Absurdities, were forced afterward to allow health, wealth, and strength to
make it up. Diogenes the Cynick Laert. in Vit. Diog.
, as all his currish Sect denied that there was any shamefulness in public
Commixtures, and asserted, that Parents Theoph. Antioch. ad Autol. Lib. 2.
might lawfully Sacrifice their Children, and eat their Flesh. And Epicurus Id.
ib.
allows incestuous Copulation with Mother, or Daughter. Aristippus Laert. Vid.
Aristippi.
refused to maintain his own Children, saying they were no more to be regarded
than the spittle, or the Lice which were produced by the Body. He made the
positive brutish pleasure of the Body (not Epicurus his Indolence) to be the
chief good of Man; and taught that a wise Man might commit Theft, or Adultery,
or Sacrilege, (...), when he saw a convenient opportunity, and not otherwise:
that these Crimes are not sinful in themselves, setting aside the Opinion of
the simple Multitude which has made them so. And Laertius records a sophistical
Argument of his, which he used, to prove the lawfulness of Sodomy. Cle. Alex.
Strom. Lib. 2.
Democritus condemns the use of Marriage for the trouble of it, and Epicurus
agrees with him in the same. And even Aristotle Arist. ad Nicom. Lib. IV. 2.
and Tully Cic. de Invent. 2. and Ep. ad. An.
are Advocates for Hatred and Revenge, those two most Diabolical Dispositions
which Mankind is subject to. Now this is enough upon this head to show how
mighty deficient your natural Religion is to teach Men their duty, and how
infirm a Rule of Morals human reason is, when these so great Masters of it
could in these matters be so shamefully mistaken.

4. Neither was the practice of the Heathen Philosophers, as to Moral Duties,
Their Lives vicious.
better than their Principles. And truly without breach of Charity, I may
conclude them all, except Socrates (whom I am willing to have a good Opinion
of) to be a parcel of Hypocritical designing Knaves, who talked a great deal of
Virtue, when they had not the least pretense to it. St. Austin Aug. de Civ.
Dei, Lib. 8. C. 12.
remarks Plato to practice the Idolatry of his Country, though against his
Conscience. His Spleen and Pride were noted by all his Contemporaries; which
made Antisthenes Laert. in Vit. Antist.
, when he saw him once vomiting, say, I see his Gall come up, but where is his
Pride? The same Philosopher seeing a prancing Horse with gaudy Trappings, said
to Plato, Behold your Picture. He spent a good part of his time with
Aristippus, as a Flatterer in Dionysius his Court. Diogenes the Cynick kept a
dirty Whore called Phryne Tertul. in Apol.
, and lay with her openly in the streets Laert. in ejus Vit.
. The famous Speusippus was killed in an Adultery. Aristippus Tert. Apol.
Lactant. Lib. 3. Cap. 7. Laert. in Aristippo.
, besides a Houseful of Boys and Whores which he kept, was familiar, as he
acknowledges himself, with the famous Strumpet Lais. The same Aristippus
villainously forswore Tertul. in Apol.
the Money which was deposited in his hands. Crates, and the Philosophess
Hipparchia Laert. in vita Hippar.
, used to strole about the Country, and lie together publicly in the Eyes of
the People. Xenophon was a notorious Sodomite Diog. Laert. in Vit. Xenop.
, and kept a Boy called Clinias, to whom in Laertius he thus expresses his
scandalous Passion, I would be blind to all things else, so I might see
Clinias; thanks to the day and the Sun that reveal to me Clinias his face: and
his Adversary Mero Pharsalius there upbraids him not for the Vice it self, but
for his (...), he making use of grown Men for his lewd purposes. Menippus Id.
Vit. Menip.
the Cynick was a sordid Usurer, and hanged himself at last for a great loss.
Menedemus Id Vit. Menedemi.
another Cynick (as most of the Tribe) despised all industry and human
Sciences, and one showing him a delicate Sun-dial, said only, 'twas a fine
Invention for a Man not to lose his Supper. The Philosopher Herillus Id. in
ejus Vit.
was in his youth a Pathick Boy. Cleanthes Lact. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
, Chrysippus, and Zeno, made away with themselves; and so did Cato, whom
Lactantius calls Socraticae vanitatis imitator; and Cleombrotus, by reading
Plato's Book of the Immortality of the Soul. In short the Philosophers in
general were noted for their beastly corruption of the young Scholars they had
the charge of; and this was one of the Articles Laert. in Vit. Socr.
, though perhaps groundless, which Anytus and Melitus objected against
Socrates, and which he was condemned for. Now this imputation was so notorious
against the Philosophers, that Lucian makes sport with it throughout his
Dialogues, and the Socratici Cynaedi was grown to a Proverb to denote the worst
of those infamous Wretches. Nay I remember somewhere that Plutarch does in some
measure Apologize for this Vice of the Philosophers, because they make amends
by the improving their Minds for the corruption of their Bodies. These are the
Fathers, Philologus, of your infidel Church, whom you build your Religion upon;
but for my part, let my Soul be with Christ and his Apostles, and all his holy
Saints and Martyrs, which I am sure are in a better condition than these lewd
unregenerate Wretches.

The Lives of the common Pagans highly vicious.
5. And as for the common and illiterate People, one cannot expect that their
Lives should be any thing virtuous, when their Philosophers, who pretended to
teach them Virtue, were so mistaken in their Principles, and for the most part
debauched in their practice. For they poor People, for the most part blindly
followed the impulse of their Senses and Passions, and could propose no other
end of their actions but the present gratification of their Affections and
Inclinations. For Everlasting Life and Eternal Glory, which is the great spring
of the Christian Virtue and Holiness, was unknown to them; and was the great
promise only of our blessed Savior, who has brought Life and Immortality to
light through the Gospel. They had nothing among them like it, but some
fanciful stories of Elysium, which too was generally looked upon as a Poetical
Dream, and believed by none so as to found any Religious action upon it. And
therefore the Philosophers (who depended little or nothing upon the Rewards of
a future state, They and the Philosophers wanted a True End of their Actions.
though they might sometime talk of it) devised a hundred sort of several Ends
of human actions, or notions, wherein they fansied happiness did consist, which
all referred only to this World; which they would never have done, had they
steadfastly believed a happy state, or a Reward for Virtue in the next. Thus
Epicurus would have Man's happiness to consist in an Indolence or Freedom from
all pain, in not hungring, or thirsting, or being cold; and of this he was so
confident, that he was wont impiously to say, (...), he would contend with
Jupiter for the Truth of this Opinion. Dinomachus and Callipho made their end,
the doing any thing a man might reap pleasure by. Aristotle, and most of the
Stoics, made their End to live according to Virtue: so that Virtue according
to them was its own Reward. Cleanthes his end consisted in living agreeable to
nature, and (...) in understanding Logic, or Reasoning well. Panaetius his end
was, in gratifying the appetites of nature, and Passidonius his, in
contemplating the Truth and Order of the Universe. Herillus his end was, to
live according to Philosophy, of Knowledge. And those of the latter Academy
would have it consist in a firmly abstaining from appearances or
representations of senses. Vid. Cic. de Fin. Diog. Laert. and Plutarch. in Vit.
Philos. and Clem. Alex. Strom. Lib. 2.
Anaxagoras his end was, Contemplation; Pythagoras his, the Knowledge of the
Perfection of the Virtues of the Soul: Democritus his, the Tranquillity of the
mind, which he called the (...) or well-being: Hecataeus his, sufficiency:
Nausiphanes his, Admiration: Antisthenes his, a vacancy from Pride: and the
Anicereans, who were a party of the Cyrenaick Sect, despised their Master
Epicurus his end, and neither would have pleasure, nor any thing else, the end
of human actions, but to do what one list. And as for the Immortality of the
Soul, it was denied and ridiculed by all the followers of Democritus and
Epicurus, it was doubted by the Academicks, it was made only very vivacious and
surviving to the Conflagration by the Stoics: and even the great Socrates the
Founder of the Platonic Philosophy is brought in by Plato in his Phaedo, as
only having good hopes of it, and of which he will not be very confident. Now
who can expect that the common People among the Heathen should make any great
progress in Virtue, when the most knowing among them had no principle to
practice it upon? Indeed some of these whimsical ends of human actions might
serve a Philosopher to banter upon, but none of the common People would ever
govern their Lives by them. When they did not believe the Immortal Bliss of
another World, they must with the Cyrenaick Philosophers propose all their
happiness in the pleasures of this, which was the most sensible deduction, and
which the Apostles does plainly confirm upon this supposition, what advantageth
me if the dead rise not, let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die, 1 Cor.
15.32. And if we consider the Lives and Actions of the ancient Heathen, we
shall find their worship of the Gods, and the vitiousness of their Lives wholly
agreeable to this Hypothesis: and though the Lives of Christians generally be
not answerable to those admirable Laws of our Savior they are blessed with;
yet those Divine Precepts have had that influence upon the Christian World, as
to make the generality of them live better, and not to be guilty of those
notorious Errors and Vices the Heathen were.

And truly, Philologus, The Lives of Christians better than the Pagans in many
particulars.
it is to me a demonstrative proof of the great necessity of our Christian
Revelation, and the defect of Natural Religion, that since the Preaching of the
Gospel a great part of the World has been freed from many Epidemical Vices and
Errors, which they were overrun with before. I shall not now trouble you with
showing what an Influence the Christian Doctrine had over the Philosophy of the
Gentiles after its propagation; for it is easy for any one to observe, that
Epictetus and Antoninus, Plutarch and Hierocles, Maximus Tyrius, and Arrian,
had quite another cast in their Morality from the old Philosophers, and their
thoughts appear every where more elevated and Divine after they had mended
their Philosophy by Christian Principle. I shall only transiently touch upon
some of those many wickednesses and mistakes which Christianity has dispelled,
and with which the Heathen World was heretofore, and is still (where it
continues so) infected with.

Idolatry.
All Men of your persuasion allow that Idolatry and Image Worship are very great
Errors and very injurious to the Divine Nature; and this you know the Heathen
World was overrun with: but Christianity as far as it spreads has fairly
delivered it from; unless where the Papists have in some measure brought it
back to the scandal of our common Christianity.

Magic.
The use of Magic was a Vice that the Heathen were almost universally addicted
to, not only Persians and Gauls, and other barbarous Nations, but also the
Greeks and Romans, and even the Philosophers themselves, as appears by the
Examples of Apollonius Thyanaeus, Apuleius, and Porphyry; but in Christian
Nations it is rarely known, it is generally abominated, and when detected,
severely punished.

The several sorts of Augury were either superstitious Delusions, Augury
or else a communication with Evil Spirits by odd signs of the Flying of Fowl,
by the entrails of Beasts, or feeding of Chickens, which universally obtained
among the old Pagans; and which by the Grace of God we Christians are not
taxable with.

Human Sacrifices, Human Sacrifices.
and the most unnatural sort of it, of their own Children, was a Devilish
Custom which was common to all the Heathen Nations, and was used not only among
such barbarous People as the Syrians and the Britains, but among the Greeks and
Romans; for Justin. Mart. e Demarato in rebus Tragicis, and Dorotheo in rebus
Italicis. Lewd Worships.
Erectheus Atticus Sacrificed his own Daughter to Persephone, and so did Marius
his Daughter Diis Averuncanis; which execrable superstition the Christian World
is freed from.

We have nothing in our worship like the Heathens lewd Worship in the Feasts of
Flora, Priapus and Cybele, in which such abominable Lusts were acted as is a
Shame to mention; and this our part of the World may thank Christianity for too.

I do not know whether a perfect and chaste Matrimony was used in any part of
the World but among the Christians. Hasty and humorsome Divorces were allowed
both by Greeks and Romans, Unlawful Marriages.
and sometimes they superinduced, as they call it, a new Wife over the other.
The Persians Sext. Emp. Hyp. Lib. 3. Cap. 24.
married their Mothers, Egyptians their Sisters; and Polygamy, was practiced
all over the East, and in most Parts of the World. But Christianity has
established the most decent and peaceable kind of Matrimony; which is most
agreeable to the ends of nature, better for the education and provision for
Children, and for the mutual satisfaction of each other.

We are beholding to the Christian Religion for that humanity and good nature
which obtains in the World since the Planting the Gospel, in respect of that
diabolical Cruelty which reigned among the Heathen. Cruelty.
Our Christians, though otherways but bad Men, could take no pleasure in seeing
the poor Gladiatours forced to Butcher one another, as they did; they would
abominate that so many Men should die for no purpose, as were exhibited by
Trajan, one of the best of their Princes, who in three Quarters of a Year
Murdered ten thousand Men this way. Our Flesh trembles at the thoughts of those
horrid punishments they took delight in seeing inflicted upon the poor
Christians; and we cannot, without horror, now think of Men's being torn
asunder by boughs of Trees, and Wild Horses, of being roasted with Salt and
Vinegar, of being broiled upon Grid-irons, and scalded in boiling Oil. The most
cruel Tyrant that ever the Christian World beheld, never, like the Roman
Emperors, fidled and sung over the Flames of a burning City, made an
entertainment of seeing Men tortured, and were delighted with the music of
dying Men's groans, as Nero and Caligula were.

We Christians do abhor Self-Murder, Self-Murder.
and fix a public Infamy on those that lay violent hands upon themselves; but
among the Romans it was accounted a piece of Bravery, and countenanced by the
Philosophers. Vid. Sen. de Ir. Lib. 3. Cap. 15. Plin. Not. Hist. Lib. 2. Cap.
63.

Common swearing is forbid by our Religion, Common Swearing.
and discountenanced by all good Men of our Faith, and the most wicked are not
so impudent as to use it in their serious Discourse, or their Writings; but
among the Heathen it was used by the most sober Men, for (...), and Mehercule:
to swear by Jupiter and Hercules, is the usual Phrase of Socrates, Plato, and
Cicero; to speak nothing of Epicurus, whose Books are noted to be filled with
unhallowed Oaths.

Exposing Children.
In all places where Christianity has footing, Men have a tenderness for their
Children, and take care to educate them as well as they can, though to their
own detriment; but among the ancient Heathen it was a common thing to throw
their Children, when born, into the next Ditch they met with, and leave who
chance to find them to take care of them.

Unjust Wars.
Though the Arms of Christian Princes cannot always be excused, yet none of them
have ever had the confidence, as the old Heathens had, barefacedly to Proclaim
War for Honor and Glory sake. No Prince among us ever went to Butcher so many
Countries as Alexander did, only to wear Garlands; or as the Romans did, to
have the glory of a Triumph; who, as one observes, if they should have restored
again what they had unjustly got, must have been reduced to their Romulean
Cottages. And I am sure none of our Divines ever stated the case as Tully did,
That Wars for Glory sake were not absolutely unlawful, but only mitius gerenda
sunt, they are not to be carried on with such Cruelty as others.

The most prodigal among us are soberly parsimonious, Luxurious Living.
if compared with those mad excesses in the way of living among the Ancient
Romans; if we consider what prodigious quantities of Money were expended in
making Shows for the People, in Largitions, in building Baths, Amphitheaters,
and the like; if we recollect, how some of them have made Suppers that cost the
Revenue of Provinces, that pounded inestimable Jewels to drink their Mistresses
and Lovers Healths; that Heliogabalus exhibited a Naval Fight in the
Amphitheater, and made all the Ships Sail and contend in Wine, and that see
made a Dish of the Brains only of six hundred Ostriches; that so inconsiderable
Fellow as Aesop the Tragedian, who had got an Estate by Stage-playing, made a
Dish of a hundred of the rarest Singing Birds which imitated Man's Voice, which
cost six thousand Sesterces a piece; so that the whole Dish stood him in, of
our English Money, four thousand seven hundred and forty eight found.

Enormous Lusts.
We live indeed in a very vicious Age, in which Sensuality does highly abound
among Christians: but if you consider the Lives of the Ancient Heathen, or even
Mahometans and Idolaters now adays, our Vices are no ways comparable to their
scandalous Turpitudes. The Greeks and Germans used Masculine Venery as one of
the laudable Customs of their Country Cor. Nepos. Alcib. Sext. Emp. Hyp. Lib.
3. C. 24.
; and in Egypt the more common a Whore was, the more honorable, and for this
reason was allowed to wear a (...), or a Garland of honor upon her head. In
short, the Christian World has indisputably gained so much of Virtue by the
means of the Gospel, that many of those abominable Lusts which were generally
practiced by the Heathens, as appears by their Authors, have never been heard
of by the generality of the most lewd and debauched Christians.

No devout Worship.
And lastly I observe, that before Christianity there was hardly any such thing
as a conscientious and devout worship of God, or even of their own Deities.
They never prayed to God for Virtues and Graces, but only for Riches, Honors,
or Children, or the like; Their Prayers were generally such as the Woman's in
Juvenal.

Formam optat modico pueris, majore puellis
Murmr, cum Veneris fanum videt anxia Matter,
Vsque ad delicias votorum -- Juv. Sat. 10.
The anxious Dame to Venus Temple hies,
And for fine Boys she moderately cries:
But for fair Girls her Voice is higher raised;
Eager, and with her bare Petition's pleased.
And all their Sacrifices, which we have an account of, were only designed to
bribe the Gods, to procure them a Victory, or some such Temporal Advantage, or
else to return them thanks, for the same, Orandum est ut sit men's sana in
corpore sano, was rather a Philosophical thought, than the practice either of
the multitude or the Philosophers themselves; and it was never known that ever
Men met together in Assemblies, or usually prayed to God in private, for any
blessings of this Nature; but under a Revealed Institution.

So that upon the whole, Sir, you see, that Natural Religion, as it is the
result of Reason only, is a Rule of Morals miserably defective. For how
strangely at a loss must the poor common People be, to get a knowledge of a
great part of their Duty, which the most sagacious and learned Philosophers
blundered at? Or how shall we think that Natural Religion is sufficient to
regulate the lives of ignorant and barbarous People, which the World is for the
most part made up of, when two such knowing Nations, as the Greeks and Romans,
were so scandalously mistaken in it? Make the best of Natural Religion you can,
it will be at least but a Candle to the Sun, in respect of the knowledge which
our Christian Revelation affords; for under the Gospel our very Women and
Children, and the ordinariest of our Catechumens, are more knowing in Moral
Duties, and more right in their notions of the nature and Attributes of God,
than the Sages of old were after a Life spent in the Porch or the Garden; and
tell me any Philosopher that has bravely defied Death; and we will with
infinite Advantage on our side, confront him with whole Armies of Christian
Martyrs.


Phil. This is brave positive tearing stuff, for a Person to talk to a bigoted
Auditory, where there is no fear of being contradicted; but I can never
believe, that God should give such an imperfect Law, which you would make of
the Natural one, to the generally of Mankind, and put no body of all the vast
swarms in the Gentile World in hopes of Salvation, but only some few Christians
for their believing in Jesus Christ. God Almighty I am sure is a kind and
merciful Father, and contrives the greatest good for all his Creatures, which
they are capable of; and therefore whereas all the Gentile Nations have
Immortal Souls, and are capable of Everlasting Felicity, it can never be
supposed, but that in this World they are in the way to Salvation, and that the
Law that is given them, which can be none but the Natural one, is sufficient to
attain it by: So that if this be sufficient to carry them to Heaven, you may
banter what you please about the imperfection of it. For my part I am for going
thither the nearest way, and that is by Natural Religion: I am not for coasting
about to take in Ceremonies and long Articles of Faith to no purpose. Either
God Almighty has damned all the Heathen World, that practiced Natural Religion,
which none but a Popish or a Calvinistical cruelty can assert; or I, who am for
the same Natural Religion, am in as comfortable a way of Salvation, as ever a
Gospeller of you all.


Cred. I think, Sir, you conclude a little too fast, God more severe to modern
Theists than ancient Heathens.
when you say, that you modern Theists are in as good hopes of Everlasting
Happiness, as the old Heathen; for I take your cases to be very different. They
poor People never were in a Capacity of receiving the glad Tidings of the
Gospel, or they were possessed with such invincible prejudices of Education
under a superstitious worship, that they could not receive the blessed seed to
improvement; which without all doubt God will make great allowances for. But
the Persons of your way, after having received the seed of Gods word, have
trampled upon it; you have seen the light of the Gospel, and shut your Eyes
upon it; you have turned Renegado's to your blessed Redeemer, and perfidiously
deserted his Institution, which in your Baptism you swore to live and die
under. So that you are strangely mistaken, to think that your condition
hereafter will be as good as the old Pagans. Your cases are as wide, as those
of Foreigners and Domestic Rebels, in a Civil War; their Obedience was not
expected by Christ, but you have traitorously deserted him, and fought against
him, contrary to your sworn Allegiance. So that whatever mercy they may find at
God's hand; you can expect nothing but the utmost severity.

And then as for the case of the Heathen, Heathens do not go to Heaven.
which you would willingly skreen your selves under; though I cannot be so
uncharitable as to think, that all they are concluded under Eternal Damnation,
for not being of a Religion they never heard of; yet I can see no grounds to
believe they shall ever be Heirs of our Christian Salvation, or that State of
Glory which Christ has promised to his Followers. To be saved, or to partake of
whatsoever Glories are comprehended under that name, is the peculiar Privilege
of us Christians; for the Scripture says plainly, there is no other name given
under Heaven, by which we may expect Salvation, but only the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ; that no man comes to the Father but by him; that God added to
the Church such as should be saved, and the like. So that a Heathen has no more
Title or probability to be saved, than I have to be a Nobleman of Venice.
Because Salvation, as I observed, is the peculiar Christian State of Glory,
that place which our Savior says he is gone to prepare for us, John 14.3. So
that, though the Heathen may probably have other Places, or States of Glory,
ours does not belong to them. Nay it is hardly reconcilable with the
distributive Justice of God, to advance unregenerate Heathens to the same State
of Happiness, as those that are redeemed by the blood of his Son, Baptized into
his Cross, have partaken of his Sufferings, and have denied and mortifyed the
dearest of their affections in obedience to his Commands.

What other provision God may make for them.
But however, I doubt not but that God may in another manner make provision for
the honest sober Pagans in another World; for in that very Verse, in which our
Savior says, he goes to prepare a place for us Christians, he tells us, that
in his Father's House are many Mansions. There are many glorious Places or
Seats in the Universe, unto which these good People may be transferred there to
enjoy a considerable happiness, though very unequal to the Joys of our
Christian Paradise. Our Mansion or State of Happiness seems to be the choicest
of all the rest, one of our Savior's own choosing, and taking up. In my
Father's House are many Mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you; I
go to prepare a place for you. It is a Metaphor taken from a Harbinger's
Office. And the sense is this: Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in
God, believe also in me. In my Fathers House, etc. I would not have you
dismayed upon my sufferings, and be distrustful about your future State, upon
your being initiated into a new Sect of Religion, as if you were not to enjoy
so much happiness hereafter as the Jews, or other Sects of Religious worship in
the World shall; for in my Father's House are many Mansions; there shall be
some degrees of happiness, some seat of blessedness for good People of all
sorts; but I go and prepare a place for you, I who am the beloved of my Father,
and the chiefest in his Glory, will obtain a place of the most extraordinary
happiness for you to abide in.

So that at last, though it should be granted, that you Theists, that have had
a Christian Education, should be admitted to the state of good Pagans in
another World, yet you are a very narrow Soul'd People, that you will aspire to
no higher a degree of happiness, when it lies easy before you, only by
maintaining your Gospel Covenant, which in your Baptism you have engaged to.


Phil. That is more, Credentius, that I have Faith to believe yet; I have a
great many Rubs to get over, before I can come to that. But however I have no
abhorrence to your Christian worship, I can go to your Churches upon occasion,
hear a Sermon, and say my Prayers with you, without any check of Conscience at
all. I have no reason to think but I might lawfully go to an Indian Pagod, and
worship the supreme Deity, though under the representation of a Horse-faced
Image, I should never stick out to pray to him among Mahometans in a Turkish
Mosk, or hear Mass in a Popish Chapel; nay I am of Opinion, I might, as one
expresses it, Summi Entis vim adorare in flosculo An Epistle of a Deist in
Przircovius his works, page 600.
, adore the power of the supreme Being in a little Flower. For the principal
part of all Religions is the same, viz. Morality and a good Life, and the
common notions of Good and Evil; so that I do but laugh at all the little
squabbles of so many Angry Sects in the World one with the other; for my part I
fall out with none of them, for they all agree with me as far as my Creed goes,
so that I have no reason to forbear Communion with the worst of them. Indeed
most of them have added some superstructures of their own to Natural Religion,
which I do not approve, but I can step over a hundred things of this nature,
for the sake of Peace and Unity. And to speak freely, I could never approve
your Christian Zeal and earnest Prayer to have all the World of the same
Christian Religion; for, as the King of Siam has observed, that diversity of
Religious Worships is one of the great Beauties of the Universe. For says that
wise Prince to the Person who came to him in the name of an Ambassador from
the French King, and proposed to him his turning Christian, I wonder that
Prince should so busy himself in a matter relating to God, for which there is
no sign that God does show any concern himself, as leaving it altogether to
Man's Discretion. For (says he) the true God who created Heaven and Earth, and
all the Creatures comprehended therein, and who has endowed them with natures
and inclinations so various, had it pleased him, when he gave Men Bodies and
Souls alike, he could have infused into them the same sentiments of the
Religion they were to profess, and have united all Nations under one Law. But
it is obvious, that Providence permits variety of Sects and Opinions, because
God takes as much pleasure to be adored with different Forms of Worship and
Ceremonies, as to be glorified by the wonderful diversity of his Creatures,
whose various Beauties set forth his Infinite Power. So that in short,
Credentius, I think it every Man's duty to comply with the Religion established
in his Country, whatever his private thoughts may be concerning it, and that
God-Almighty is satisfied with the inward worship of ones mind, though for
peace sake he complies with an erroneous outward one. But however I hold his
folly inexcusable, that will expose himself to suffering and contempt, rather
than to comply with a few simple Niceties which particular Sects and Nations
are fond of; when all of them own Natural Religion for their foundation. In a
word, as some have boasted themselves to be Citizens, so I am a Churchman of
the whole World; and though you perhaps may be offended at me for an
extravagant Latitudinarian, yet I am sure I have more reason on my side, than
those narrow-soul'd People, that are hedging in Salvation, and keeping their
Communion only within the bounds of a little Paultry Sect.


Cred. Not indifferent to be of any Religion.
I thank you, Sir, for this great freedom, for by this frankness you have laid
open the very Soul of Deism, but withal have given such a vile Character of it,
as no honest Man would be very fond of embracing it. I am afraid there are too
great a number of Men in the World of these sentiments, and by whom Religion
suffers more than by avowed Atheists; for these are open and generous Enemies,
whilst the other are striking at the Vitals of the Church, as they lie fostered
in her Bosom. But that you may understand how unreasonable and wicked this
Opinion is, be pleased with me a little to consider,

1. What horrid Hypocrisy and Dissimulation it is, It Is Hypocrisy.
to communicate with a Religion, that you do not believe a Tittle of the Truth
of. There cannot be a greater Falsity and Cheat in all the World than this is.
To tell a Lie, or to act a shuffling Trick in bargaining, or the like, seldom
deceives but a very few; but such a wicked dissimulation, in matters of
Religion, deceives a whole Congregation, or it may be in a Man of Figure, a
whole Nation, This is the basest act which any Man of honor or any pretense to
Virtue can condescend to, so perfidiously to deny the Truth, to make use of
such false Arts, and such little creeping Tricks, to pursue an Advantage. But
what is worst of all, it is the most intolerable Affront to God Almighty that
can be imagined, to offer to pay a worship to him which we are conscious that
neither he nor our selves do approve, and to join in Prayers and Devations,
which we know must be an abomination to him. Which must,

2. Be more wicked when the worship you join with is downright Idolatrous.
Sometim Idolatry.
What excuse can you make for worshipping or falling down before a Popish Host,
which you believe to be only a Wafer, and you pay to it the worship due to the
supreme God? How can you without horror think of worshipping an Indian Idol,
with pretense it is but a Symbol of the Deity, when it is generally but the
Representation of some horrid Figure the Devil uses to appear to them in? You
may talk what you please of the Extensiveness of your Communion, but I protest
I am scared at such a Religion as you pretend to, and I think you had better,
with the Atheist, openly bid farewell to all, and lay claim to none.

Morality not the same in all Religions.
3. As to what you assert, that the Morality of all Religions is the same, and
is the principal part of them; I think that is a great mistake. For many
Religions are so made up of Ceremonious Foppery, that Morality is little taken
notice of in them; and some retain such Dangerous Errors and Faults in their
Doctrine and Worship, that there is no Communion with them, without violations
of moral Honesty, or intrenching upon the dictates of Natural Religion. As when
the worship is Idolatrous, when wrong and injurious Notions are entertained of
God's nature, when Dead Men, Devils, or Images have divine honors paid them;
when Indulgences are granted to Sin, and Crimes are pretended to be pardoned
without Repentance; when a good Intention shall be allowed to justify Evil
actions, and the like. So that there is no communicating with such Religions,
without committing an Offense against the ordinary Rules, even of Natural
Religion, and Schismatically and perfidiously deserting that true Religion, we
have been educated in.

4. As to what you say concerning every Man's being obliged to be of the
established Religion of his Country, Not always to be of the Religion of our
Country.
and to profess (to speak in the usual way) all the Tales which the supreme
Magistrate shall think fit to allow; I look upon this to be wildest of all
Hobbs his silly Paradoxes. For if the Magistrate be the Public Conscience by
which all Men are to be governed, as he asserts, why did God give every Man a
Conscience of his own, which Natural Religion informs us every one is to be
governed and judged by? There are very few Men can quiet their own Consciences
after the Commission of a grievous Crime, only because their Prince might allow
it; or believe a Ballad to be Holy Scripture, though there was an Act of
Parliament to call it so. But if we must be of the Religion, which the
Magistrate enjoins, we must make the Magistrate, God Almighty; for no one but
he has Authority to command any Religious Doctrine to be believed, but God.
Besides, this Opinion would make Religion the most trifling and inconstant
thing in the World; a Man might change his Religion as often as he does his
Clothes; and the poor Men of the Frontiers in Flanders should be Papists,
Calvinists or Lutherans, three difference Religions, in so many Moons. This
would be to render contemptible the noblest thing we are capable of doing, the
service we owe to Almighty God, and to make it the sport and May Game of
Profane and Atheistical Men.

Sin outward is to comply with a false Religion.
5. But whereas you assert, That God Almighty will be satisfied with the inward
good Intention and worship of the mind, whilst you outwardly comply with the
most false and erroneous worship: This Opinion will open a Gate to all the
Deceit and Villainy in the World. Upon this Principal, Men may Murder and Steal,
for the glory of God; and cut Men's Throats, to save their Souls. There would be
no tying any Man by Oath or Compact; lingua juravi, mentem injuratam gero,
would always be the burden of their Song, and a good pretense too, if the
inward sense of their mind might be allowed to be different from their Actions.

6. As to what you lay down, No folly to suffer for Religion.
That it is a folly to suffer for a True Religion, rather than to comply with a
false one; I take that to be a most false and pestilent Doctrine, but however
it is that which your Sect is founded upon. For you Theists owe your Origin
here in Europe to this pusillanimous Opinion, and to the want of Christian
perseverance, and a patient bearing of Afflictions. For as calamities make good
Men better, so they make often very ill Men worse. Not a few sufferers in our
late civil Wars took up with these damnable Opinions, because their Religion
had exposed them to some Losses; and the same, I hear, has been the mishap of
many poor Gentlemen in their late persecution in France. But are Religion and a
good Conscience things of so slight a value, as to be parted with for such
temporal profits? Must Truth be thus Sacrificed to interest? If a Man believes
the Holy Scripture, it will make him tremble when he but thinks of such a
perfidious Defection. He that denies me before men, him will I deny before my
Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 10.33. It Is hardly possible that they that were
once enlightened, etc. if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
Repentance. Nay if he considers but the words of a Heathen Poet, it is enough
to make him much more honest than this comes to.

-- Phalaris licet imperet ut sis
Falsus, and admoto dictet perjuria Tauro:
Summum creed nefas, animum praeferre pudori,
Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas. Juv. Sat. 8.
Though Phalaris commands thee to deny
The Truth, or in his Brazen Bull to fry.
Tell the fierce Tyrant, that his Threats are vain,
And Vice must not be chose, to bribe off Pain:
That he is the greatest Villain, who will strive
To lose the ends of living, for to live.
K. of Siam's Argument answered.
7. But for the King of Siam's Argument, I wonder how so many Men should be
dazzled with such a Tinsel Reason as this. Whether this be the King of Siam's
Argument, as is reported, or no, I shall not now dispute, although by the
sophistry of it, one would guess it had more of the Jesuit in it, than the
Prince. But I pray how he knows, that God takes so much pleasure in these
various forms of worship? This is a thing taken for granted, which no body that
owns a Revealed Institution will allow. For if God have revealed his Will by
the command of any particular Worship as he has done to Jews and Christians,
then all other Religions do of course fall to the ground. Well, but God permits
these different Religions, by his not ordering all Men to be of the same
Sentiments in Religion; whereas he might as easily have done this, as to have
made their Bodies and Souls alike. But is God's permission a sign of his good
liking? Why then by the same rule all the villainies which are committed in the
World are well pleasing to him, because they cannot be done but by his
permission. Besides, it is very true on the other side, That God might have
infused into all Men the same Sentiments of Virtue and Vice, and have made all
Men good alike; but it is plain, that he permits the greatest number of Men to
be vicious, which is therefore an evident sign that he does not concern himself
about Virtue and Vice, and therefore it is a wonder that Men should show such a
concern about Morality, which God himself by this permission does seem to have
little regard to. Now you see this same Argument, if there be any thing in it,
will make as much against Natural Religion, as it does against Revealed; and
therefore you Theists ought to have a care, how you make use of it, for you
thereby put a Weapon into the Atheist's hands, and plainly give up your cause
to him. But on the other side, you ought to consider, that as God's permission
of Vice is no sign of his liking it, he having otherways declared his will by
giving to all Men a Law of Virtue; so his tolerating so many false Religions,
does not evince his Approbation of them, when he has manifestly declared his
will how he will be worshipped, viz. in the Christian Religion. This is that way
which he himself has set out for us to walk in, and to go in any other road is
but wandering.

Simplicis ipse Viae dux est Deus, ille per unam
Ire jubet mortale genus, quam dirigit ipse
Sublimem dextro celsa ad fastigia clivo. Prud. cont. Sym.
God is our Guide in one plain simple way,
He would not have Mankind in others stray.
That one steep Road which to the right does tend,
Is the sole way that does to Heaven ascend.

Of Revealed Religion, and the Doctrine of the Mediator.
Phil. I think, Sir, we have talked enough about Natural Religion, and
therefore, Sir, if you will oblige me with your Thoughts concerning that
Revealed one which is owned by Christians, and will give me satisfaction as to
some scruples, I have conceived concerning it, it will be a very agreeable
favor. I confess I am not very averse to think, that there is a great defect
generally in Man's reasoning concerning religious matters, and Men's Thoughts
do very much vary therein, so that it is not a difficult supposition to suppose
that the gracious Deity, who had compassion upon all our infirmities, has
contrived a way more certainly to guide fluctuating Nature in such momentous
concerns, and may have been pleased sometimes to have enlightened Men with a
Ray or two of his Wisdom, from above, by revelation of some divine Truths. But
then how shall we come to know, to whom he has particularly vouchsafed this
favor? What marks of Grace shall we go by, to distinguish who are Heavens
darling Favorites, that are blessed with such obliging manifestations? The
Jews and Christians indeed pretend to it, but why not the Turks and Tartars as
well as they? But if a bold pretense to Revelation, be an Argument for it,
every little Hedge-Sect of Idolaters in India shall bid as fair for
Inspiration, as ever a Jew or Christian of you all. And in truth if there be
any such thing as inspiration, for ought as I know, all the different Religions
in the World may be (to use the Apostle's phrase) but diversity of gifts of the
same spirit. The Chinese may have the same Divine Revelation to worship their
Tanquam and Teiquam, as we have to worship Jesus Christ. The Banians and
Bramins the Priests in India, may have the same plea for all the Devotions they
claim for their Deities there, and so may the Japonese for their famous Gods
Fotoques and Games, as the Mexicans for the rites paid to their Virachoca. Nor
does my conjecture stand singly alone, but I have your own sacred Writings to
back me in it. For there are many Texts of Scripture, which seem plainly to
affirm, that God-Almighty has revealed his Will by a Positive Institution to
the Gentile World, whom you look down with so much contempt upon, under
pretense of your superabundant privileges. For Genesis 14.18, etc. it is said,
that Melchisedeck was King of Jerusalem, and Priest of the most high God; and
that he blessed Abraham, which was a principal Office of the Mosaical
Priesthood ( Numb. 6.23.) and that Abraham paid Tithes to him of his Spoils.
From whence it is plain, That God had a revealed Institution before the Jews or
their Forefather Abraham's time, and that when Abraham is commended for keeping
God's commandments, and statutes, and Laws, Genesis 26.5. it is only these
positive injunctions in the Land of Canaan which Melchisedeck was the Priest,
or Prophet, or Dispenser of. So Malachi 1.10. Who is there among you that would
shut the doors of my Temple, that fire should not be kindled upon mine Altar.
For from the rising of the Sun unto the going down thereof, my name shall be
great among the gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my
name, and a pure offering, for my name shall be great among the heathen, says
the Lord of Hosts. By which words it is plain, That at that time the Prophet
did not think the Jews dearer to God than other People, and that the Heathens
worship was as acceptable to him as theirs. So Psalm. 145.18. The Lord is nigh
to all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in Truth. And in the
same Psalm v. 9. it is said God is good to all, and his tender mercies are over
all his works. So God himself gives a Testimony of Job a Gentile, that there
was none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright Man, Job 1.8. So Jonas
said he determined to flee to Tarsus, because he knew God to be a gracious and
merciful God, Jon. 4.2. and who would therefore pardon even the Gentile
Ninevites. Besides, we read in Scripture that several uncircumcised Gentiles
had the gift even of Prophecy, as Enoch, Noah, Abimelech, and Balaam. Nay
several of the Jewish Prophets prophesy for the use of the Gentiles, Ezechiel
prophesies to all the Nations then known. Obadiah prophesies only for the
Children of Edom; and Jonas principally for the Ninevites; Isaias foretells the
calamities and deliverance of the Egyptians, Is. 19.19. and the Prophet Jeremy
is called expressly a Prophet of the Nations or Gentiles: Before thou came out
of the Womb, I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations,
Jer. 1.5. and Chap. 48.31. he says he will howl for Moab, he will cry out for
Moab: and v. 36. My heart shall sound for Moab like Pipes, etc. which pathetick
expressions show that he was sent by God a Prophet, as well for the Gentile
Moabites as the Jews. But as for the Prophecy of Balaam, that is so express,
that all the major and minor Prophets cannot pretend more to the Spirit of
Prophecy, than this one Gentile Seer. So that, Credentius, you may make what
brags you please of the Jewish and Christian Revelations, but if you do not own
old Balaam, as much a Heathen as he was, to be a very good Prophet, you will
want one of the most considerable proofs of Christianity. Nay the Scripture
gives this Man all the Characters of a Prophetic spirit. He has said who
heard the words of God, who saw the Vision of the Almighty, falling into a
Trance, but having his Eyes open, Numb. 24.4. Now methinks it is a little
unfair, for you, to make such an outcry about God's particular Favor to you by
Revelation, when those very revealed Scriptures themselves, which you make such
brags of, allow it to the Heathen as well as you.


Cred. One can hardly think you Theists are in earnest, when you object against
the Scriptures and our Religion, that God has revealed himself to other Nations
as well as us; No Revelation to the Gentiles for their Religions.
I always take you to have a mind only to be pleasant, and to put a banter upon
us Christians, rather than to defend your own Tenants, which do not seem much
to be furthered by it. And when Spinosa contends so mightily for it, I fancy it
must be only an humorsom Paradox of that odd Man, and not his settled Opinion;
or at least the effect of a Pique he had conceived against the Jews, and so was
resolved to set them upon the same foot with other Mortals. But that the rest
of the World have no Revelation for the diverse Religions they profess, will
appear by considering.

Because Idolatrous.
1. That most of the Religions in the World are Idolatrous. Now it is impossible
to suppose, that God by a Revelation should command Men to do that which all
wise Men would be ashamed to do: to fall down before Stocks and stones, to
worship the Sun and the Moon, senseless, inanimate Creatures, and to adore dead
Men, and Tyrannical Princes; or even Herbs, or Beasts. Now though we should
suppose, that God was in no ways jealous of his honor, and that it was
indifferent to him whatsoever Thing we worshipped, yet as he is the God of
Truth, it is impossible he should command a false worship, or instruct People in
paying devotion to things as Gods, which are only mean and perhaps wicked
Creatures. Now the far greatest part of the Unchristian World, are and have
been such Idolaters; and therefore to make God to have revealed to them their
superstitions, is to make God to represent himself such as it is impossible for
him to be; to be delighted in a worship which is false and wicked, and to be
himself the Chief Author of the Imposture; which is so horrid, as no body will
contend for.

2. Other Unchristian Nations that are not Idolaters (as chiefly the
Mahometans) profess a Religion which allows Immorality, Immoral.
the Founder whereof was rather possessed by the Devil, than inspired by God. A
Lewd debauched Fanatical Wretch, that lived by Rapine and Murder, and spent his
days in Whoredom, Adulteries and Sodomies. Now his Religion allows its
followers to propagate it by the blood of the opposers, and by all manner of
cruelty and barbarity against Men of other persuasions. It allows Concubinacy
and Whoredom, and even Sodomy it self; and the very rewards it proposes in
another World, are such infamous Lust, as a good Man would be ashamed to think
of in this. 3. As for your Instances out of Scripture, Melchisedeck.
because you should not too much insult over us, as having wounded us with our
own Weapons, will you be pleased to accept this answer to the first, That
Melchisedeck is no proof of a Revelation among the Gentiles, more than of that
Universal Revelation, which was given by Adam and Noah, to all Mankind; and
upon which, as was shown before, what is generally called Natural Religion, is
grounded upon. For though Melchisedeck, was no Jew, as not descending from
Abraham; yet he was not properly a Gentile, especially such a one as is usually
understood by the word, viz. one that has degenerated from the ancient and true
Religion, into an idolatrous superstition. For Melchisedeck was a true and
Orthodox Member of the ancient Noachical Church, and no ways tinctured with the
prevailing Idolatrous Vice of those Ages, but in the midst of the mighty
defection to false Gods and Idols, was a Priest of the most high God. So that
it is a great mistake to say, That God had a Priesthood among the Gentiles, from
the Instance of Melchisedeck; because I say Melchisedeck was no Gentile, but a
constant Perseverer in God's Church, from which the Gentiles had even at that
time made a defection; he kept up to the Noachical Precepts, which the Gentiles
round him had neglected. But if in strict speaking you will have him a Gentile,
because he was not circumcised, it does not from hence follow, that God had an
instituted Church among other Nations, distinctly instituted as the Jewish was.
For the Scripture does not give us a particular account who this Melchisedeck
was: the Jews will have him to be Shem the Eldest Son of Noah, because perhaps
they would allow no body else to be greater than their Father Abraham to bless
him; but though this does well enough agree with the Age of Shem, who lived
till after Abraham's time; yet it is not probable that Shem dwelt in the Land
of Canaan, which was the Seat of Cham's Posterity. But be he Shem, or any one
else, and though he were a Worshipper of the true God, yet he was so only upon
the Principles of the old Revelation made to Noah, which was common to all the
World with him: he had not any particular Revelations afforded him, as Moses,
to found a new Church upon; neither he nor his People had any such Favor
vouchsafed them, as to have the Oracles of God committed to them, as the Jews
had, Romans 3.2. He was a Priest as he was the Elder of a Family in the old
Patriarchal way, and not by any positive Institution among the Gentiles; and so
blessed Abraham who communicated with him in the Divine worship whilst he did
officiate, as he might have done with Abraham in such an Eucharistical, or any
other Sacrifice. 4. As for that Text of Malachi, where it is said, that God's
name shall be great among the Gentiles; (though Spinosa translates, it is great
among the Gentiles, when the Verb is wanting in the Hebrew, which is wrong, for
the Book is prophetic, and speaks of futures, and therefore must be rendered
shall be) this does by no means set the Gentiles at that time on a Level with
the Jews, but is a remarkable Prophecy of the Kingdom of the Messiah, when the
Partition Wall should be taken away, and God should have one Church made up
both of Jews and Gentiles. 5. As to those places of the Psalmist, that God's
tender mercies are over all his works; and that God is nigh unto all them that
call upon him: It is the design of the Psalmist to show forth God's superlative
goodness in this Psalm, and therefore among the rest of God's Attributes, does
praise him for his merciful Providence over his Creatures, his tender mercies
are over all his works. And so his being nigh unto all them that call upon him,
does not in the least denote any particular divine Institution like the Jewish
Revelation among the Heathen, but is only in general, an Assertion of God's
Universal Love to Mankind, and his willingness to assist them, which no
reasonable Man can deny. 6. As for your Instance in Job, that he was a good Man
and acceptable to God; why, so were all the good Patriarchs before the Law, or
the Circumcision; nay though we should grant that God spoke by Revelation to
this good Man, as it may appear from Chap. 38.1. yet it does not follow, that
all the Idolatrous Heathen afterward received the same favor. For before the
Law, and in other Nations, where the Law was not received, Morality together
with the easy Noachical precepts, were the Rule of their Duty; and therefore
until they had forfeited this communication of the divine favor, by the
enormity of their Lives, and their deviation from the True worship, they had as
good a Title to the Inspiration of God, whenever he should please to afford it
them, as the Jews had after their Church was instituted. 7. But as for what you
allege, that Jonah was only an Ethnic Prophet, I think by your favor, that
is a great mistake. For Jonah was principally a Prophet to the Jews, and
prophesied under Jeroboam the second, the King of Israel, as is plain from the
14. Chap. of the 2 Kings, where it is said, that Jeroboam restored the coast of
Israel from the entering in of Hameth unto the Sea of the Plain, according unto
the word of the Lord God of Israel, which he spoke by the hand of his servant
Jonah, the Son of Amittai, the Prophet, which was of Gath-hepher. Whether or no
that Prophecy which is there referred to were ever written or no, or whether it
was only verbal, we cannot now determine, there being nothing like it in our
Canon of Scripture; but it is from hence very evident, that Jonas was a Prophet
originally to the Jews. That he was afterward sent to the Gentiles, was a
great favor indeed to that Heathen City of Niniveh; but then he had first
Prophesied to the Israelites, and when they had profited little or nothing by
it, he like Christ and his Apostles, turned to the Gentiles. 8. As for your
exceptions from Enoch, Noah, etc. they lived before the general corruption by
Idolatry, and therefore it is but reasonable to suppose, that they living up to
the old true Patriarchal Religion, might partake of the divine Revelation as
well as the Jews. And the Prophet Ezechiel's Prophecy is wholly taken up in
showing God's judgments upon the Jews, and endeavoring to bring them to a true
sense of their Sins; only a Chapter or two are interposed to foretell God's
Vengeance likewise upon their Enemies, whose wickedness God's All-wise
Providence had made use of to be a scourge for the Sins of his People. And so
for the Prophets Isaiah and Jeremy, their bemoaning the Calamities of the
Heathens of Jazer and Edom, that is not a prophecy on their behalf, but only is
a lively Hypotyposis, or Poetical Description of the sad Miseries which those
People should undergo, to hearten up the Jews in their afflictions when they
should understand, that God would lay such heavy burdens upon their Enemies;
and to show them that they had no reason to forsake the true Religion, when
they should see that the Heathens underwent as severe judgment as they. 9. And
so again as to the Prophecy of Obadiah, whom you assert to have been a Prophet
only to the Edomites, he was a Prophet only to the Israelites, and for ought
appears to the contrary, originally of Jewish extraction; for I think little
credit is to be given to the Jewish Authors, who would make him an Edomitish
Proselyte. But that Obadiah was a Prophet to the Jews only, is evident by the
whole tenor of this short Prophecy, where first are denounced God's severe
judgments against the Edomites the Enemies of the Jews, and his vengeance for
their Pride and Insolence, and afterward the Jews delivery from them, and
conquest over them. But upon mount Sion shall be deliverance, and Jacob shall
possess their possessions. And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the
house Joseph a Flame, and the house of Esau for Stubble, and they shall kindle
in them, and devour them, and there shall not be any of the house of Esau; for
the Lord has spoken it, v. 17, 18. Now does this look like an Edomitish
Prophet? But this is just as Spinosa and Hobbs, and the Devil are used to quote
Scripture. 10. The most considerable Instance is that of Balaam, who may seem
to be an Ethnic Prophet, by his living in a Heathen Country, and his being at
the command of a Heathen King, and by his predicting so plainly such remarkable
Events, which afterward so punctually came to pass; as the greatness of the
Commonwealth of Israel, the destruction of the Canaanitish Nations, and the
coming of the Messiah. But then although this be true, yet it does not from hence
follow, that the gift of Prophecy was common to other Nations as well as to the
Jews, from this Instance. Because this Prophecy was designed only for the
benefit of the Jewish Nation, and although it was pronounced by the mouth, of a
Heathen Man, yet the design and purpose of it was for the good of the Jews; and
truly it was but a small privilege of the Heathen to have one of them to
pronounce a Prophecy of God only in favor of the Jews, and that too for the
utter Extirpation of themselves. So that for ought I see in this Instance,
Baalam's Ass would be as good a one altogether to prove, That Inspiration is
common to Brutes too, because God once made use of his mouth, to confute his
Master's folly. 11. Well but Baalam, you say, was a true and accustomed
Prophet, and not made use of only by God upon this extraordinary exigence. I am
afraid this is an assertion which cannot be so easily made out as said, and
indeed the contrary thereof may be proved by the context. For first he cannot
be a true Prophet of God, because he made use of unlawful Arts, and as the
Scripture says, fought for enchantments, Cap. 24. 1. and what we from the
Vulgar, Translate the rewards of divination, are in the original only
divinations (i. e.) instruments of divination, conjuring Books, Wands, or the
like. And secondly he is called Kosem, a Diviner, or Sorcerer, Josh. 13.22.
Which word has always an ill Character fixed on it in Scripture, notwithstanding
Spinosa maintains the contrary, though without any Instance of it. I have
carefully examined all the words that I find in Scripture which come from this
root, and I do not find any, unless by way of Metaphor, but carry an ill sense,
and signify unlawful knowledge of future things; or a lying pretended one; and
as for those places of the Prophets, Is. 24.25. Jer. 14.14. Ezech. 13.7, and
23. Micah 3.6. etc. Where they may seem to signify simple Prophecy, yet it will
be manifest by closely considering the places, that they are only harder words
to characterise the false prophecies of some lying Prophets, among the Jews; as
if I should call an Astrologer a Gypsy, or a Conjurer, names which carry more
vulgar disrepute and shamefulness in them. I know but two places in Scripture
where they are used in a good sense: the first is, Prove. 16.10. A divining
sentence, or divination (not as we translate it, too far from the original
words a divine sentence) is in the Lips of the King, and his mouth
transgresses not in judgment. That is, the King is a wise sagacious Man in his
judicial determinations, makes shrewd conjectures from outward appearance to
discover Men's inward Intentions, and by that sort of Political divination
awards judgment accordingly. The second is, Is. 32. where it is said, The Lord
does take away from Judah the judge and the prophet, the Kosem, the
Conjecturer, or the prudent and the Ancient. Where the Septuagint do very well
translate Kosem (...), one that makes good conjectures or Divinations: which is
a Metaphorical sense of the word in most Languages, drawn from the Heathen
Auguries, as is particularly plain in those verses of Ovid concerning the
Childrens play at Even and Odd: Est etiam, par sit numerus qui dicat, an impar,
Vt divinatas auferat Augur opes. Ovid. de Nuce.



Phil. By your Criticisms you have roved a little too far from the main point;
but pray if Balaam were not a true Prophet, how came he to say, that he would
bring Balack's Messengers word, what the Lord Jehovah the true Judaical God,
should speak unto him, Numb. 22.7. The LORD refuses to give me leave to go
with you, v. 13. I cannot go beyond the word of the LORD my God to do less or
more, v. 18. And God came unto Balaam, etc. And Balaam said unto God, etc. v.
9, 10. I pray how came he to have this intercourse with the Lord Jehovah, and
yet be such a Heathen Conjurer, as you would make him? Nay how came he to make
such fine Prophecies of Jesus Christ, and yet be such a Diabolical Necromancer?


Cred. I think, Philologus, you are not a little mistaken in Arguing after this
manner. For it does not appear from Scripture, that Balaam, did endeavor to
seek after Jehovah, or the true God, when he designed to make enquiry after the
future fate of the Israelites upon Balack's request, but only after Baal, or
some other false Deity of the Moabites. That the search made to him is said to
be made to Jehovah, is, because Jehovah is the Jewish name for God, which no
doubt in the Moabitish Language was Baal, or some such like name; which Moses
writing in Hebrew calls by the Jewish name Jehovah. Not that Baal and Jehovah
was the same, but that Balaam took his Baal, a false God, viz. some deifyed
Prince of that part of the World, for Jehovah, or the True God; and therefore
Moses in regard to his Intention calls him by that name. Nor does the Truth of
his Prophecy argue him to be a divine Prophet, to whom the True God was wont to
reveal himself; because although he might intend to make his address to a false
God, yet Jehovah, or the True God, might take advantage from this to promote
his True Religion, by inspiring a false Prophet of the Heathens, and in
despite of them, to make them hear the Prediction of their own destruction
from the mouth of their own Friend. Nor is it so strange to suppose, that a
Prophecy concerning our Savior should come from a Heathen Priest; since the
Sibyls have predicted the same, and filled the whole World full of expectation
of some mighty Deliverer about the time of our Savior's Birth; as Virgil's
Eclogue is an undeniable instance of.


Phil. But if Natural Religion be so Defective, and Revelation so necessary, as
you contend for, and withal, if the Jews were only blessed with this favor,
how can we excuse the partial Justice of God, to make so much of this odd sort
of People, and leave all the rest of the World to shift for themselves, as if
they were none of his Creatures? Methinks of all the Nations of the World, the
divine Prudence should never have picked out this currish Nation, to have
lavished out so many favors upon a People that from the time of their Original
to their Overthrow were the Opprobry of the World, who as Tacitus and Justin
tell us, Tacit. Hist. Lib. 5. Just. Hist. Lib. 36.
were expelled Egypt for a pack of scabbed Lepers, that would have infected
the whole Country; and when they lived at Rome, they were observed by Juvenal,
Juv. Sat. 6.
to be of such a dogged Temper, that they would not so much as direct a Man in
his way, unless he was of the same circumcised Race. Now how can any one,
Credentius, suppose, that God Almighty should overlook all the Nations of the
World, and make himself so extraordinary familiar with this cross-grained
Rabble? One would have thought, if the Deity had been inclined to have made a
distinction between any of his Creatures, that the Greeks or Romans should have
stood fairest for such a favor; for they were Nations of great Candor and
Generosity, who had minds that did generally abound with extraordinary Virtue
and Honor: but the Jews of all Nations in the World were remarked for sour
unsociable qualities; and whom their own Prophets cannot forbear calling them
often, a stubborn, untoward, perverse, crooked, and stiff-necked People. And
therefore, Credentius, pray let me see how you can excuse the Justice and
Wisdom of God in being so liberal of his Revelations to this People only.


Cred. I do not in the least see, Philologus, how the Justice of God is touched
by this gracious manifestation of his will in particular to the Jews, rather
than to other Nations; or that they deserved it less than any other. For,

1. This was no more than what God had done before in other Ages of the World,
This agreeable to God's usual Providence.
in order to preserve to himself a Church or chosen People, selected from the
other ungodly People of the World. Thus are the Children of Seth, God's visible
Church in the Antediluvian Times, who were for this very reason called the Sons
of God, Genesis 6.2. And the Children of Shem and Japhet, are separated from the
profane offspring of Ham, Genesis 9.26, 27. And therefore in the time of
Abraham, when Idolatry was spread, well nigh over all the World, it was very
wisely contrived of God Almighty, to set up the Posterity of this good Man, to
be the Worshippers of the True God, when the rest of the World had lapsed into
profane Idolatry.

2. Neither can this argue any injustice in God, No injustice in God.
because it does not appear that the Heathens had any right to demand of God a
Particular Revelation. They had the Law of Nature as it is generally called, or
the old Adamical Revelation to walk by, and what Rewards, or Punishments were
annexed to that, they were either to expect, or fear. This was sufficient
(though with more difficulty) to square their Lives by; and God was in no ways
obliged to make their Task more easy, since he might dispense his Rewards upon
what Conditions he pleased. I doubt not but that good Gentiles had their Reward
allotted for them; but then I see no Reason why they should be their own
Caterers, and cut out what work they pleased for themselves. For, if it pleased
God to set the Gentiles to work out their Salvation with more pains and danger,
and the Jews and Christians with less, why should the divine Justice be taxed
with Partiality, more than you should be, when you think fit to set some of
your Workmen to an easier, and others to an harder Task, when all of them are
obliged to undergo the most difficult and painful, when you shall be pleased to
assign it?

Other Instances of Providence as unaccountable.
3. Neither can I see any reason why the Justice or Wisdom of God should be
called in question for this liberal distribution of Revelations to the Jews
alone, for which we can assign no reason. For there are a thousand Instances in
Providence to be made which are subject to the same difficulties. Tell me why
the unhappy Inhabitants of Greenland, and Island, are not all born in such a
Garden of the World as Italy? Or why God bestowed such a Delicious soil upon
the Italians only above all the rest of the Europeans? Tell me, Philologus, why
God has blessed you with a more delicate Personage, and a happier Stock of
Natural Parts than your Neighbors? Why such an one is born to a great Estate,
and others to none at all. Why such an one is made a Man, and not a Monkey? Why
another Thing is an Animal, and not a Tree? Now these are all particular
favors of God Almighty, which other parts of the Creation want; and yet you
will not say that this is any reflection upon the Wisdom or Justice of God. Why
therefore should we tax them in bestowing this favor of particular Revelation
to the Jews? For I dare say, I can as easily prove, That the Jews were as much
deserving of their Prophecy, as any Man can be to be an Italian, or an
Englishman, to be beautiful or wealthy. We Men are not able to give a reason
for any of these benefits, and therefore must refer all to the (...), or good
pleasure of God. Not that this good pleasure of God is any capricious
resolution of him, but a wise determination of his Will, grounded upon just
reason, although unknown to us. Nay, I doubt not, but we Men in another World
shall be able to give an account of many difficulties in God's Beneficent and
Vindictive Providence, which in this World are so apt to amuse us; and that in
the great circles and revolutions of God's future Dispensations all the present
Inequalities shall be made up, and all accounts balanced. But after all, the
Order of the Universe alone is a sufficient reason to satisfy all reasonable
Men of the Wisdom and Justice of God, in placing Men and Things in a better or
worse station in the World, and in communicating to them greater or lesser
benefits. If all were to enjoy the same favors of the Deity, there would be no
subordination of Beings, which is the great Beauty of the Universe; there would
be only one confused Heap of good Things without order or design, which would
be so far from being an Argument of the divine Wisdom, that it would be a
considerable proof against it. Besides, no one would praise God for the
Benefits they enjoy, if all enjoyed the same in common with them, for the
universality would take off the edge of Men's Admiration, and consequently of
their Gratitude; and they would be as listless to give thanks to God in this
condition, as they are to thank God for Health, or Wealth, as when they never
experienced either Sickness or Poverty. And therefore as God has wisely
contrived it in his Natural and Political Providence, for the Beauty and Order
of the Universe, that some Beings should be Vegetables as well as others
Animals, that some should be Brutes and others Men; and among Men themselves,
that some must be Poor as well as others Rich; that some must labor as well as
others govern: so likewise in his Spiritual Providence, or in his care of the
Everlasting welfare of Men's Souls, it is no wonder, that God should ordain
several Classes or Orders of Future Happiness, or should be more or less
bountiful to them in affording them Means in this World of attaining it.

4. And as for the Jews whom you do not think to be such fit Objects of the
Divine favor in communicating to them his Revealed will, Jews not such ill
People as pretended.
as the Greeks or Romans; that is a Point, I am afraid, you will never be able
to make out. Indeed it is grown a mighty fashion of late, even among those that
are better Friends to Christianity than you, to cast very severe Reflections
upon the Jewish Institution, and, under pretense of showing the Nobleness of
the Christion Religion, do upon all occasions be-devil the Poor Jews. I do not
think this the best way to support Christianity, by undermining the foundation,
which it is built upon; for the Law is but the Groundwork of the Gospel, and
if we destroy the first, the latters falls. And as for the People of the Jews,
which of late are so much used to be vilified, I do not find that they are more
liable to censure of this nature than other Nations. It cannot indeed be
denied, but that this People were prone to Idolatry, and did very often lapse
into it; which is the occasion of those very severe reprehensions you meet
withal in the Prophets, and which you hinted at just now. But then this is in
some measure to be palliated by the mighty grandeur and pageantry of the
Idolatrous worship of all the Nations round about them, and the great scorn and
reproach which was cast upon the Jewish singularity in the worship of one God,
which must needs have no inconsiderable influence upon vulgar minds. And as for
their aversation to a familiarity with the Heathens, it was but a practice
agreeable to the Mosaical Law ( Vid. Deuteronomy. 7.) which was a wise command of God,
which alone preserved his True Worship, in that Nation only, free from the
infection of Idolatrous Nations round them, for so many Ages together. And
although perhaps in the Times of Trogus and Tacitus, the Jews might be more
scrupulous this way, than their Law required; yet that must be imputed to
Pharisaism, which was the prevailing Sect among the Jews at that time, and
which by false Glosses and superstitious Doctrines, had perfectly debauched the
Jewish Religion, and soured the greatest part of them into an unsociable
Temper. But after all the faults that may be charged upon them, the steadfast
worship of the One True God, for so many Ages in that Nation only, when all the
World besides was overrun with Polytheism and Idolatry, when they were so much
scorned and vilified by the Heathen World for his sake, underwent so many
Captivities, Persecutions, and Martyrdoms; this was enough to endear them above
the rest of the World to God Almighty, to incline him to commit his Oracles to
them alone, and to guide them by his revealed Word; rather than to the Greeks
or Romans, or any other Idolatrous Nation, who, besides their diabolical
superstitions, were ten times more lewd and debauched.

5. As for a few scandalous reflections which are usually brought against the
Jews out of Justin and Tacitus, Justin, etc. considered.
I think nothing in them is worthy being taken notice of, unless it be the
disingenuity of the Relators, who I am confident report things which they
themselves do not give the least credit to. For why, I pray, are not the Holy
Scriptures and Josephus, that are the Books of that Country, fitter to be
relied upon, than the mistaken reports of malicious or half informed
Foreigners? I beseech you, Sir, where would you look for a true account of the
Matters of England, in Camden, Speed or Baker, Men of our own Nation, or in
Mounsieur Sorbeir of France? I think the question is easily resolved; and then
why should you take these scandalous accounts of the Jewish Nation from Justin
and Tacitus, when you have Writers of their own Nation which give contrary
accounts of them? Both of these Heathen Authors are notoriously mistaken in
their account of the Jews; but because Justin gives the fullest account, be
pleased to observe one or two of the Absurdities of his Relation. It is plain,
that the foundation of Justin's Relation was out of the Book of Genesis, by the
names of Abraham, Israel, the particular History of Joseph Minimus aetate inter
fratres Joseph fuit, cujus excellens ingenium veriti fratres clam interceptum
peregrinis mercatoribus vendiderunt, a quibus deportatus in Aegpytum, cum
magicas ibi arts solerti ingenio percepisset, brevi ipsi regi percarus fuit.
Nam and prodigiorum sagacissimus erat, and somniorum primus intelligentiam
condidit; nihilque ei divini juris humanique ei incognitum videbatur, adeo ut
etiam sterilitatem agrorum ante multos annos providerit: periissetque omnis
Aegyptus firm: nisi monitu ejus rex edicto servari per multos annos fruges
^^ssesset. Just. Lib. 36. Cap. 6.
, the Envy of his Brethren, his Interpretation of Dreams, his being sold
pereginis mercatoribus, to foreign Merchants, (...) ^rediction of the Famine,
his famili^y with Pharaoh, his storing of the ^^rn, and the like. Now it is
impossible, that such a particular account should be had any where else, than
from the Bible. The Bible therefore must by you Theists be allowed to have so
much of the Truth of Profane or secular History, as to regulate Justin's
History, who seems plainly to have copied either at first or second hand from
it. So that if there be any Truth in Justin, the same must be more express in
the Bible, from which Justin had his Relation, though he has blended it with
other Fables. Nor is it difficult to think how a Heathen should come at a sight
of that Book, or at least a Relation out of it. For Trogus Pompeius, who wrote
the History which Justin Epitomized, was a Retainer in the Family of the Great
Pompey who Conquered Judea, and therefore in the Expedition of his Master
there, without doubt he picked up this imperfect Relation of the Jews, either
by reading their Books, and afterward, forgetting or mistaking them; or by
mixing the True History with the Fabulous reports of some Neighboring
Gentiles. So that in short, the Scripture-History must regulate his report. And
then see how finely This does agree with it. He makes the Jewish Original to be
from Damascus, and that Abraham was King of that place; where Arathes the Wife
of Syrus, one of their ancient Kings, was worshipped. That after Damascus, who
gave name to the City, succeeded Azelus, and then Adores, and then Abraham and
Israel, which Israel divided his Kingdom among his Ten Sons, but made them all
to be called Jews from his Son Judah. That Joseph was Israel's Youngest So^,
and that Moses was Son to him: That the Jews were drove out of Egypt for being
Scabby; that they were followed after by the Egyptians, because they had
stolen some of their Sacra, and that the Egyptians were forced to return home
by a Tempest: That they were forced to fast seven days in the deserts of
Arabia, which occasioned the Institution of the Sabbath; That the Memory of
their being drove out of Egypt for their scabbiness, made it a part of their
Religion not to converse with strangers, lest the Knowledge of their Infirmity
should render them contemptible. That Moses his Son's name was Arvas (i. e.)
Aaron, who was an Egyptian Priest, who afterward succeeded Moses in the
Kingdom, and from hence came the custom that the Jewish Kings were always
Priests.

Now what a foolish and contradictious account of the Jewish History is this
Report of Justin? Who ever heard of the names of Azelus and Adores in the
Jewish story? When was such a Goddess as Arathes worshipped generally by the
Jews, who were always famed for the worship of one God? where by the way this
is only a simple mistake of the Author, to say Arathe for the Astarte, or
Astaroth, of the Sidonians. Here is again Abraham mistaken for the Father, who
was the Grandfather of Israel. Here are Israel's Ten Sons set down for his
Twelve; his little Estate mistaken for an Empire, and the Twelve Tribes for Ten
Kingdoms. Here is Joseph taken for Jacob's Youngest Son, who was his eldest by
another Venture; and Moses passes for Joseph's Son, who lived Three or Four
Hundred Years after him. Here is the name of Jews said to be imposed by Jacob,
which was not known till the time of the Captivity, a Thousand Years
afterward. Here are the Plagues which Moses inflicted upon Egypt, altered for
the scabbiness of the Jews, as if those heavy judgments came only by infection;
and the spoiling of the Egyptians of their Bracelets, Earrings, etc. turned
into the running away with their Sacra. Here is the History of the Manna and
Quails confounded with the Institution of the Sabbath; and their Injunction of
not communicating with the Nations attributed to the foolish Fable about their
Itch, or Leprosy. And, besides, here is again Aaron, Moses his Brother,
mistaken into his Son, and turned from a Jewish into an Egyptian Priest; here
is the same Aaron made King of the Jews, who was never otherways than Priest;
and that said to be the original of the Custom of the Jews having their Kings
their Priests, when never any such Custom obtained amongst them; but only the
Author has blundered the History of the Maccabees Government into this Fable.
So that, Philologus, I would have your Gentlemen for shame leave of, to abuse
the Jewish Nation with false stories out of Heathen Historians, that knew so
very little of their Country, and are guilty of so many mistakes about it. For
in this short account of Justin you see there are almost as many mistakes as
words; whether they are willful and malicious, or no, I shall not determine;
but I am sure the account we find in Scripture, to all reasonable Men must be
ten times less liable to exception.


Phil. These are but small things, Credentius, for us to make many words about;
but I am afraid, you Inspiration Men are guilty of a very great fundamental
Error, in taking that for some supernatural Revelation of God, which is only
Natural Reason. For I cannot be brought to think, that the Prophets or other
Writers of the Bible, which are said to be inspired, had the Mind of God
revealed to them, any other way, than by the common natural way of reasoning,
and Knowledge. For Natural Knowledge is but the Revelation of God, wherein God
reveals to our minds the natures of things, which were unknown to us before; so
that God may he as well said to speak to us by our reason, as by the
Scriptures; and Natural Knowledge may be allowed to be divine, as proceeding
from God, as well as they. And I doubt not, but that it was the Hebrew way of
using the word, God, that has betrayed both Jews and Christians into the fancy
of Inspiration and Revelation, in the modern sense; when formerly nothing but
pure natural Knowledge was meant by it. For the Hebrews had always a very
Religious and Devout way of talking, and attributed almost all Natural Actions
to God: if they had gotten Money by their industry, they would say it was given
them by God: if they had a good thought, they would say, God put it into their
Hearts, and the like. So a great many other things were said to be divine, or
to come from God, which were only natural, but wonderful, or extraordinary.
Thus the mountains of God is only another name for great mountains; they Sleep
of God for a deep sleep; and the Sons of God, Genesis 6. are but great Sons or
Giants. Now it would be a mad way of Interpretation, to say all these things
were inspired, because they have God's name added to them. Therefore why should
we suppose that those Men, who are called Prophets in Scripture, had any divine
and supernatural Revelation, only because they are called the Men of God, or
are said to have the Spirit of God? For this is only an usual Hyperbole to
denote that they were extraordinary Men, Men of sound Reasoning and notable
parts, and exquisitely gifted to move and persuade the People. And this is no
more than what the Greeks and Latins mean by Divine or Godlike (i. e.)
extraordinary; only because the Hebrews made use of Genitives instead of
Adjectives, they called him the Man of God, which the Heathens would have
called a divine, or extraordinary Man. So when the Prophets are said to have
the Spirit of God, what needs I pray of coining an Inspiration or Revelation of
divine Truth, to explain this by? For the Spirit of God has so many senses; and
those so very diverse in Scripture, that I think it is not fair to clap that
particular sense only upon it, which it may but bare possibly signify.
Sometimes it signifies only the Wind, as Is. 40.7. The Ruach, or Spirit of the
Lord, blew upon him, that is a very dry and fatal wind. Sometime it signifies
the Soul, as Job 47.3. The Ruach, the Spirit or Breath of God is in my
nostrils. Sometimes it signifies Life, as Ezech. 37.14. I will give my Spirit
to you, and you shall live: That is, I will recover you, and give you Life or
Spirit again. Other times it signifies Mercy, as Mich. 2.7. is the Ruach, the
Spirit (i. e.) the mercy of God straitened? And the word Spirit it self singly
is noted to signify a Temper of mind, as, Caleb was of another Spirit, (i. e.)
a better temper than the murmuring Jews, Numb. 14.24. And in other places of
Scripture the Spirit of Jealousy, the Spirit of Meekness, the Spirit of
Holiness, etc. all which signify Tempers and Dispositions of Mind.

From all which I conclude, that when in Scripture the Prophets are said to
have the Spirit of God, the meaning is only, that they have great Minds, or
Spirits, or extraordinary holy dispositions, above the rest of the People.
Which expression signifies no more in Hebrew, than what the Greeks mean when
they say, the same of a brave Poet or Orator, that he has in his Writings
(...), some thing divine and admirable, and far above the rate of common
Authors. So that when by these Passages of Scripture, it will appear, That the
Prophets were good solid Writers and Excellent Preachers; why should you go
about to spoil their Character, and make them only Enthusiastical Dreamers? And
now, let my Infidelity be as great as you would make it, you see I am a better
Friend to your old Prophets, than you your self.


Cred. You have given us here a great deal of learned Banter, and it is great
Pity that Men should study Scripture so much to make such ill use of it. But to
give an answer to this wild sort of Arguing, which I can hardly persuade my
self you urge in earnest;

Natural Knowledge not Revelation.
1. You assert, That Natural Knowledge is the Revelation of God, and that the
Scriptures have not any more reason to be called so than that: But this is a
great mistake. For Natural Knowledge cannot be said properly to be the
Revelation, but only the Gift of God. Indeed what ever we know, we should never
come to the Knowledge of, unless it had pleased God's goodness to endow us with
these intelligent faculties; but then no body says, that God reveals these
natural Truths to us, but only he gives us the faculties of discerning them.
Nay let us be as Platonical as we please, and assert that all the notions of
the Soul are but so many Intuitions on the Deity, and our viewing some of those
Infinity of Truths, which he is pleased to exhibit to us, by communicating
himself to us: I say although we explain natural Knowledge this way, yet this
is far from being the same, which we generally understand by divine Revelation.
For this first is a general way of God's communicating himself indifferently to
all Men; for all Men do indifferently partake of a considerable measure of
Natural Knowledge. But this latter way of God's revealing himself, which in
particular we call Divine Revelation, is a favor which God has vouchsafed but
to a very few of all Mankind, that they might communicate, what was so revealed
to them, to the rest. By the first, Men only have a power of perceiving the
Ideas and Impressions of outward Objects, of compounding and dividing thoughts,
of affirming and denying concerning them, of fitting premises, and deducing
Consequences; which every ones own experience tells him he has by nature. But
the latter is a supernatural Impulse of the Divine Power, which instills into
Men's Minds Thoughts not attainable by human Reason, or else gives them an
Authority, as coming from God, which they had not before. And therefore it is
an idle Fallacy, to call those natural Deductions of Reason and Common Ideas of
Things by the name of Revelation, from which they do as widely differ, as Light
and Darkness. This is only a ludicrous Artifice which your sort of Men have got
of making use of Religious Terms, when you believe nothing of the Thing, and
exposing Religion, by leaving nothing in it but a few empty names. And besides,
they have another end to serve by it, which is this, That then their Infidelity
does not appear so barefaced when they make use of the old Terms in an Infidel
sense; for otherways such Writers as Hobbs, Spinosa, and the Author of the five
Letters, would appear so horrid to all Ears that had the least spark of
Christianity left, that Men would be scared from them at the first reading; and
so all hopes of making Proselytes for the Devil would be over. But by this
bantering and mincing the matter, Readers are cajoled into Infidelity unawares,
and the Authors escape the punishment likewise, which would otherwise attend an
open and barefaced Blasphemy.

2. And it is much such another kind of Argumentation, Prophets not only
extraordinary Men.
when you would have the Prophets, which are sometimes in Scripture called the
Men of God, to be only Men of good Parts, and very considerable Men; because
forsooth great things in Scripture are sometimes called by the name of God. For
what though the Mountain of God be a great mountain, and Nimrod a Hunter of God
be a mighty Hunter, may not therefore Moses, and Isaiah and Jeremy be inspired
Prophets? I pray where lies the consequence of this? Indeed if they were only
in general said to be Men of God, and had no other Title, nor no other
demonstration of their Prophetic Spirit, there would be then something
tolerable in this Argument. But the name of Men of God is an expression which
is but rarely, but once or twice in Scripture, made use of to signify a
Prophet, 1 Kings, Chap. 13. there are other names which are generally used for
that purpose. Such as Nabi which signifies one that has particular converse and
familiarity with God, Genesis 20.7. and Roeh, 1 Chronicles. 9.22, and 16.28. and
Choseh, 2 Samuel 24.11. 1 Chr. 21.9. both which words signify Seers, as denoting
Men that are accustomed to divine Visions, or supernatural Revelations.

But besides there are such innumerable expressions in Scripture which
demonstrate a particular Revelation from God Almighty, and a peculiar
intercourse of these holy Men the Prophets with him, that no reasonable Man can
deny it, unless at the same time he denies the Authority of the holy Scripture
and makes it altogether an Imposture. Genesis 15.1. The word of the Lord came to
Abram in a Vision saying, Fear not, Abram, etc. Now what tolerable sense can be
put upon these words, but only that this was a particular Revelation of God to
Abraham? You cannot say that this is only some remarkable saying of Abraham,
and is therefore in the Jewish Phrase called the word of the Lord. For here is
no room for any such kind of Metaphor. Here is a particular Dialogue of God and
Abraham, God said: Fear not, Abram, I am thy shield and thy exceeding great
Reward. And Abram said, Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go
childless, and the Steward of my House is this Eliezer of Damascus? Then v. 4.
is related the reply of God Almighty. And behold the word of the Lord came unto
him, saying, This shall not be thy Heir, but he that shall come forth out of
thine own Bowels, etc. Now what can be more positive and express of Abraham's
immediate Revelation and Intercourse with God, than this Relation? So again,
Exodus 2.5. The Revelation made to Moses is related as expressly. God called unto
him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. Then follows the
answer of Moses, and Moses said, here am I. And the Lord said, I have surely
seen the affliction of my people, etc. Come now therefore and I will send thee
unto Paraoh. And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go to Pharaoh,
and that I should bring the Children of Israel out of Egypt? And God said,
Certainly I will be with thee, etc. And after this rate the Dialogue continues
the full length of the Chapter. Now if this be not a relation of an Intercourse
with God, and a Revelation from him, there is no sense to be put upon any
words, though never so plain, there must be no assent given to the literal
narrations of Thucydides, or Livy; but the credit of both those Histories may
as well be criticized away as this.

So again as for the other Prophets, when we are particularly told, that the
word of the Lord came unto them at such a time, in such a manner, in such a
particular Year of such a King's Reign, what can possibly be meant less than
that God revealed this to them? When they are commanded to take rolls and to
write, as Is. 8 1. and Jer. 36.2. and the Prophecies so commanded to be
written, are there recorded; when every Prophecy begins with the word of the
Lord, or thus says the Lord, when in some of them are particular
Interlocutions between God and the Prophet; if this be not Revelation, the
Prophets who wrote these Writings, must be the greatest Cheats and Impostours
in the World, in so often pretending to it when they had not the least share of
it. But it vexes one to spend time to answer so simple an Objection, which is
worth no ones notice, but that the great Spinosa has taken so much pains in it;
and other retailing Infidels after him would seem to do some great matter with
it.

3. Nor are your Criticisms upon the Hebrew Ruach, or Spirit, more solid,
Spirit of God in Scripture signifies Revelation*
by which you would pretend that word does not signify Revelation or
Inspiration, but only Wind, Life, temper of Mind, and the like. But what an
unreasonable mistake is this? I do not deny but that word in Hebrew has many
significations, as several other words have in that narrow Language. But then
on the other side there are a great many places in the Bible, in which it can
signify only Inspiration or Revelation, what think you of Genesis 41.38. Where
Pharaoh says of Joseph, after he had interpreted his Dream, and prophesied of
the Years of Plenty and Famine, Can we find such an one as this is, a man in
whom the Spirit of God is? Certainly by the Spirit of God here is meant the
Inspiration of God, or there is no sense at all in it. And so again, Numb.
27.18. The Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the Son of Nun, a Man in whom
is the Spirit, and lay thy hand upon him; where by Spirit the Chaldee
Paraphrase interprets Prophecy. And what else can be meant by that Spirit of
the Lord, 1 Kings 18.12. which carried Eliah from place to place, by which he
did such mighty Miracles, and so undauntedly uttered his, Prophecies, but only
a supernatural power of God which did continually attend him? And so Isa.
59.21. God tells the Prophet, that it was his Spirit that inspired him with the
words that he spoke. Says the Lord, My Spirit which is upon thee, and the
words which I have put into thy mouth, etc. And so several times in Ezechiel,
The Spirit of the Lord fell upon me, Ezekiel. 11.5. and the Spirit entered into
me, Chap. 3.24. And often in the Book of Daniel, the Spirit of the holy Gods is
said to be in him, Dan. 4.8, and 9, 5.11, and 14. In short, divine Revelation
is all over the Old Testament called by the name of Spirit; and even that
extraordinary Inspiration which was foretold by the Prophet Joel to prevail
under the Gospel, is called so likewise: I will pour out my Spirit upon all
flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, your Old Men shall
dream dreams, and your Young Men shall see Visions, Joel 2.28. Where you may
particularly observe, that the word Spirit is joined with Prophecy and
Revelation. And upon this account the Holy Ghost which was the giver of these
Prophetic Gifts, is in the New Testament called (...), the Holy Spirit. And so
is divine Revelation among the Heathens called by the same name. As, Dii
coeptis inspirate meis, and Inspirante Deo.

It is plain therefore that by the word Spirit in Scripture is frequently
understood Divine Revelation, which is the effect of the Operation of God's
Holy Spirit, conveying to the minds of several Prophetical Men, whom God has
been pleased to choose, many extraordinary Truths, conducible to the good of
his Church. Which is a thing so frequent and so plain in Scripture, as is not
to be bantered away by a little foolish Criticism; and is a Truth never to be
shaken, unless the Infidels have force enough to overthrow the whole Body of
the Scriptures.


Phil. Well we will see, Credentius, what we can do as to that matter, some
time or other. But in the mean time methinks you outshoot your selves a little
in your Notions of Revelation. For you generally assert, that Revelation is
caused by a more immediate and supernatural Application of the divine Spirit,
to the mind of Man, and so does make known to it, those extraordinary Truths;
which indeed is only a Cast of the Jewish Unphilosophical Ignorance. For when
they, poor Wretches, could not understand the Natural Causes of Inspiration,
they were presently for a (...), for calling in God to help out their sorry
Philosophy. Every thing which was a little surprising to them, they must needs
attribute to the immediate Act of God, they were every moment making Mountains
as well as Men of God; and according to their Philosophy, an equal degree of
the divine power was requisite as well to make a Great Hunter, as a great
Prophet. But if they had understood better the Natural Causes of Inspiration,
they would never have been guilty of such manifest Absurdities. For that
Inspiration which the Jews, and the Christians after them, would needs have
proceed immediately from God, is only the effect of a vivid Imagination. For it
is not to be thought that the Prophets had any more immediate Converse with God
Almighty than other Men; but only they had warmer Heads, a quicker Imagination,
and a more lively Fancy. Other Men's Imaginations and Dreams did not leave such
deep and lasting Impressions upon their Minds, but were quickly over, and they
perceived that they were but Dreams and Fancies: but the Prophetic Imaginators
had such strong Fancies in their Heads, that were as clear to them as the
representations made by their outward senses, and they thought they were as
certain of what they so fansied, as of what they heard or saw.

And it is plain from Scripture, that strong Imagination only is the grand
Requisite for Prophecy. And upon this account without doubt the Jews will not
allow Solomon the Gift of Prophecy; for he was a Wise Man in whom good sense
and a clear Judgment was prevalent, and therefore he was ill qualified for
Prophecy, to which Fancy was chiefly requisite. So those famous Men in
Scripture, who are renowned for their Prudence, Heman, 1 Chr. 2.6. 1 King. 4.31.
Darda, Kalchol, were not Prophets; but on the other side, the Prophets were
for the most part out of the Country People, or Men of no Erudition; or
sometimes Women, as Hagar, Abraham's Maid, had the gift of Prophecy. For these
People having but little understanding, had stronger Passions, and did abound
more in Imagination, than Men who had better sense, and who governed their
Fancies by their Reason.

And that you may understand that Imagination was the Foundation of Revelation,
be pleased to consider, that their Prophecies differed only by the diversity of
their Imagination, which is a plain Argument, that the one was the cause of the
other. If the Prophet was of a merry cheerful Temper, then Victories and Peace
were revealed to him; because Men of that complexion are apt to entertain their
thoughts with such delightful subjects. If he was a Melancholy Man, then he
prophesied only Wars and judgments, and such other dismal things, which are
usual to go along with such black Thoughts. And so the like Diversity, if the
Prophet was addicted to Anger, or Grief, or Pity. And for the proof of this
there is a remarkable Instance of Scripture, 2 Kings 3.15. The three Kings of
Judah, Israel, and Edon, are in a great strait for want of Water for their
Armies, they go and consult Elisha the Prophet, and he being very Angry at the
sight of his Enemy, the King of Israel tells him, if it was not for the
presence of Jehosophat King of Judah, he would not look toward him, nor see
him. Now he could not prophecy any thing that was pleasing to them, whilst his
Choler was so high. And therefore he very prudently desires that a Minstrel
should be brought him: And when the Minstrel played, the hand of the Lord came
upon him. That is, the Music put him in a good humor, and then he was
inclined to imagine as pleasant Things as the Kings would have him.

So when Moses was Angry with Pharaoh, he had revealed to him the miserable
slaughter of the Egyptians firstborn, Exodus 11. So God was revealed to Cain
when his Reason was over-clouded with passion, when he was very wroth, and his
countenance fell, Genesis 4.5. When Ezekiel was impatient with excessive Anger,
(for the Text says, the Spirit lifted him up in bitterness, and in the hot
Anger of his Spirit, Ezekiel. 3.14.) then he prophesies the miseries, and
stubbornness of the Jews.

So Jeremy was always a Melancholy Man, and weary of his Life, and therefore he
does nothing but prophecy dreadful Calamities, which should befall the Jews;
and upon this account King Josias would not consult him, but chose rather to
consult Hulda the Prophetess, who being a Woman had more tender Passions, and
to whom it was more fit that the mercy of God should be revealed. Nay
oftentimes Revelation does proceed from the strong, though false Opinions of
Men.

Thus King Nebuchadnezzar's Augurs Prophecy of the Destruction of Jerusalem by
looking into the Entrals of Beasts, and by divining with Arrows, Ezekiel. 21.21.
and thus the Nativity of Christ was revealed to the Magicians, Mat. 11. who
believed the fooleries of Astrology, under the Imagination of a Star, which
they supposed to have arisen in the East.

So that in short this Prophetic Imagination was a very good way of
recommending a Religion to the Jews, who were a very ignorant People, and were
more wrought upon by these fanciful Representations of God made by the
Prophets, the descriptions of his feigned Appearance, Interlocution, Promising,
Threatening; than by any just and Philosophical Discourses of Virtue and Vice,
which should be made to them.

Not but that Natural Knowledge does include more certainty than this Imaginary
Prophecy, only this latter serves better for the use of less inquisitive Men.
For Natural Knowledge brings Self-Evidence with it, but Revelation requires
always a Sign, or reputed Miracle, which the Prophets were forced to make use
of as the Credentials of their Prophecy. Indeed Revelation may have something
in it of a moral Certainty, that the Men who pretend to it are honest, well
meaning Men; and that the matter, which they speak, is designed for the
bettering of Mankind, and the reclaiming them from their Vices: but I think
there is little evidence concerning ^t, that it proceeds immediately from God,
and that it may not proceed from ^atural Causes, as I think, I have already
sufficiently showed it to have done. Therefore I wonder, Credentius, that a Man
of your sense should have recourse to occult Qualities and an Omnipotent Power
to explain matters, which you see might be accounted for, by such an ^asy cast
of your Philosophy.


Cred. For my part, Sir, That Prophecy does not consist in Imagination.
I do not care ^o make use of my Philosophy to dispute ^way my Religion; nor do
I see any ^eason, why Men should use so much ^ndustry and Artifice to prove,
That Revelation does not proceed from God; when wise Men in all Ages have ever
^llow'd it. Read but Jamblichus his Book of Mysteries, and Tully de
Divinatione, and you will see the Opinion of those wise Heathens, that the
divine Nature has ^evealed it self to Mankind, and that (...) prescience of
future things can come no other way than by a Revelation from God. Xen.
Memorabil. Lib. 1.
And hear how admirably Socrates ^n Xenophon (as well as a Heathen could ^e
expected) reasons of these matters. Of ^ll these predictions, to refer none to
the revelation of God, but only to humane pru^ence, is (says he) (...), to be
perfectly mad. That in those things which are obscure to us, we should consult
the Gods by Divination, for they make known those things to them, to whom they
are propitious. Indeed I think it but a vain attempt to go prove to you, That
Imagination is not the Cause of Inspiration: for I do not suppose that in
reality you do believe it; only by this odd sort of disputing, you endeavor to
make our Religion stand upon as loose a bottom as you can, that you may be able
to overthrow it at your leisure. For I dare say, you do not believe a word of
Revelation at all, and therefore why should you trouble your self about the
causes of it? All that you and your Master Spinosa mean, when you talk of
Prophecies consisting in lively Imagination; is, that the inspired Prophets
were only a parcel of Melancholy, crack-brain'd, Enthusiastical Folks, that
preached to the People of Judea a number of Phanatical Dreams and Visions. But
because there is so much pains taken in this Argument, I will show you, that
the Prophets, or inspired Men of Scripture, were not Men of this complexion, as
you contend for, and that the Instances which you have alleged, make nothing
for this Opinion.

1. For it does not appear, that the Prophets were more Melancholy or Fanciful
than other Men are. Prophets not Melancholy.
And it is but a fancy of Mounsieur Petit, de Sibyllis Lib. 1. to assert, that
Melancholy was the chief Disposition to make a Prophet; and that Moses was an
extraordinary Melancholy Man, because he chose to live a solitary Life in the
Wilderness, feeding his Father-in-law Jethro's Sheep; and because he is noted
in Scripture to be slow of Speech, Exodus 4.10. For these do not appear to be
any Arguments at all of Melancholy. For a Pastoral Life does by no means denote
a Man, to be of a Melancholic Complexion, but contrariwise more debonair and
pleasant; and therefore the Shepherds in polite Nations, as among the Greeks
and Romans, are always described as Men of great Mirth and Jollity, and
spending their whole Time in Pleasure and Gayety. Neither did Moses leave the
Egyptian Court, for a Melancholy Retirement in the Country; but was forced to
fly from Egypt to avoid the Anger of the King, after it was known, that he had
slain the Egyptian. Neither, whilst he so absconded, did he show any sign of
Melancholy there, but only according to the Custom of his Nation, and generally
of those Ages, chose to make his Employ the Keeping of Sheep. So that David,
who is described in Scripture to be of a sanguine Complexion, and famed for
sprightful Singing and Playing, may be as well taxed for Melancholy, when he
kept his Father's Sheep, as Moses might. Neither is the slowness of his Speech
any Argument of his Melancholy, because very sanguine Men are often troubled
with that infirmity, which does generally arise from some defect of the Vocal
Organs in the Mouth, and not from Men's Complexion and Temper of Mind. And
besides, what is commonly translated slow of Speech is in the original, Heavy,
or Difficult of Mouth, which may be any defect of speaking, which does render
Men less easy to be understood, by stammering or fast speaking, as well as slow
speaking. And therefore, Ezekiel 3.5. People of another Nation are said to be
heavy of Language, because they could not be easily understood by the Jews. And
Moses might as well have been very quick in his Talk, and upon that account
mightily given to Hesitation; and then this would rather argue him to be of an
eager and volatile Temper, than any ways given to Melancholy.

But as for all the rest of the Prophets, it is plain, that they were no
Melancholy Enthusiasts, because their Discourses and Writings are perfectly
different, from what is usually said by that sort of Men. There is nothing
comes from them, but what is grave and sedate, and agreeable to good sense and
Reason, and a well-composed mind. Do we find any thing in them, that is like
the mad Transports of James Naylor? Read but the lives of Sancta Teresa, Vid.
Dr. Stillingfleet's Fanaticism of the Church of Rome. Dr. William's 1 Sermon
1696.
and Maria Magdalena de Pazzi, and see if the Prophetic Writings bear any
manner of Correspondence with their foolish talk. Did ever any one of the
Prophets spend three Years before his Death, in nothing but repeating such an
odd Ejaculation, as thy Will be done in Time, and in Eternity, as Molinos
reports of Gregory of Lopez? Besides their Writings are full of just reasoning
and serious unaffected Relations, which do by no wise agree to Enthusiastical
Men. Read but the History of the Pentateuch, and other Historical parts of the
Bible, and see if they look like the Compositions of wild Enthusiasts. If
Naylor had been to write the Book of Genesis, he would have made an otherguise
spot of work of it than Moses has. He would have clogged every Relation with
odd Parentheses, [Great is the Lord of Host! Judgment! Horror! Desolation,
Damnation! etc.]; he would never have kept his brains close to the order of a
just Narration, but would have jumbled the Creation and the Flood, Noah, and
Abraham, and Pharaoh, all together. Do you think that any one of those Popish
Dreamers could have made use of such solid Reasoning, and such Critical Remarks
upon the Old Law, as are to be found in the Writings of St. Paul, and the
Author of the Book of the Hebrews? Could they have made such wise observations
upon humane Life, and given such Rules of Piety and Conversation, as the Books
of Solomon are full of? Could they have framed such admirable Forms of
Devotion, as the Book of Psalms? All that they were able to do, would be to
write some mad stuff, which no Man of sense would have Patience to read three
Leaves of. Had the Scriptures no other inspiration, than the imagination of
fanciful Brains, there would no one part of it be coherent with another;
History would be clashing with History, and Prophecy with Prophecy, and nothing
suit together, with that order and symetry, as now we find it. Ask two crazed
Men in Bedlam to tell a story out of the Bible, and then see how these Men of
Imagination will correspond together; talk singly with two Enthusiastical
Quakers, till they be warm upon the Book of the Revelations, and see then how
finely their Prophecies will agree. I am sure they will fall infinitely short,
of being so uniformly of a piece, as the holy Scriptures are. Let the greatest
Infidel of you all consider, that wonderful correspondence there is between the
four Evangelists, among themselves, where there is no difference to be found,
but what among Writers, which had not confederated together, should be; and
observe the same in the Books of Kings and Chronicles. See how the same great
Design is visible throughout the Mosaical Writings, the Prophets, and the
Gospel. How exactly does the lapse of Mankind, by Adam, agree with the
Reparation made by Jesus Christ? How does the old Levitical Law plainly appear,
to be but the Sciography, or rough draught of the Gospel, and the Characters
and Lines of one exactly visible in the other? For my part, I think it
impossible for so many, though judicious and wise Men, without assistance from
God, to carry any one design with that exactness that the Penmen of the Holy
Scripture have: but I am sure it is the greatest of Absurdities to assert, that
such a noble and uniform Design should be carried on, through so many Ages by a
parcel of wild Enthusiasts. So that let the Writers of the Bible be what you
please to style them, either Inspired Men or Impostors, I shall not dispute
that now, they must needs be Men well in their Wits, and what is more, Men of
good sense.

Prophets had the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.
2. It is very evident from Scripture, That Prophecy proceeded from another
Cause, viz. the Influence of God's Holy Spirit. The innumerable Instances in
Scripture of the Prophets and Apostles being in the Spirit, of the Spirit's
coming upon them, of their speaking things by command, and of the Lord, of
their being caught up into heaven, etc. are undeniable Proofs of the cause of
their Revelation, viz. the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of God. Indeed it is not
easy, to give a Philosophical and Notional account of this supernatural
Influence, or by what means it was conveyed, or by what criterion, or marks;
they could distinguish it from a Delusion; because we who are not honored with
these supernatural Gifts, and therefore can have no Idea of these things, as
having never been the Objects of our Understandings; but it is not to be
doubted, but these Holy Men had as absolute certainty of the Truth of them as
we have of things that do immediately strike our senses, and did as perfectly
know them to be the word of God, as that those things are, which we see to be,
and that they could as little question their Inspiration, as we do our Senses.
For as the Senses are only the ordinary way of God's conveying Ideas to us, and
these are so clear to us, by their familiarity and repeated Trials of their
faithfulness, that we cannot but rely upon them, and cannot but give assent to
them; so the Inspiration of God to the Prophets, by their clear Evidence
continually, and by their wonted Experience of it, left no more doubt in them
of the Truth of it, than the Appearance of the Sun does leave in us, that it is
Day, or that what we see is really seen by us, and is not the Delusion of a
Dream. To say we ordinary Persons can have no notion of this Extraordinary
Influx of God, and therefore it cannot be, is only to expose our own Ignorance;
and a Blind Man might with as much Modesty pretend to demonstrate against the
Existence of Colors, or a Clown laugh at Mathematical Theorems, as we pretend
to dispute against the certainty of this supernatural Influence, which God
Almighty has been pleased to give us no notices of. Might not God Almighty as
well have given us Ten Senses as Five? And if he has been pleased to make an
extraordinary Impression upon some Men's Minds, which his does not on all, must
we therefore assert this as impossible; because we, who do not experience it,
do not perceive it? Must all Men be blind, because we are so? Or must every Man
be Mad and Enthusiastical that has better Eyes than we? I am sure this is a
very mad way of Arguing, and yet there is no more reason for Men to question
the Truth of the Revelation of the Prophets, than blind Men have to question
our sight. Nay the miraculous power which did usually attend Prophecy, was more
undeniable Evidence to the Beholders of their Divine Influence, than the joint
assertion of the generality of Mankind can be that there is such a Thing as
Sight or Colors to a Blind Man; Because Sensation is a greater degree of
Evidence, than Testimony, and because a Man will sooner believe his senses than
a Thousand Witnesses. A Blind Man cannot believe there are Colors but only by
being told so; but when I see a Prophet, doing Miracles, I am sure he is
influenced by God, because I see he does works above the power of Nature.

3. You are very much mistaken, Prophecy not inconsistent with Wisdom.
when you assert that prophecy is inconsistent with Wisdom, and that Men of
good sense, such as Solomon, Kalcol, Heman, etc. were no Prophets, but only,
poor Shepherds, Women, and other Persons of mean parts were endowed with that
Gift. One would wonder how Men could lay down an Assertion, which is so easy to
be confuted as this is. Pray what must be thought of Moses, to whom there arose
not since in Israel a Prophet like unto? Does his noble Genius, his invincible
Courage, his sagacious Prudence, his vast Depth in Philosophy, argue him a Man
of mean parts? Methinks the Heathen Longinus his Character of him, that he was
(...), No mean Man, should be enough to free him, at least, from his share in
this Calumny. What do you think of Nathan, Israel, and Daniel, who were bred up
Courtiers, and made a great figure in the Ages, when they lived, and the
Writings of two of them show them to be Men of fine parts? But, I think, you
have a little outshot your self, in the instance of Solomon, in denying him to
be a Prophet. For it is recorded in Scripture, that God revealed himself twice
unto Solomon, First at his Entrance upon his Kingdom, when he asked Wisdom of
God, 2 Chronicles. 1.8. Secondly, upon his finishing the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 7.12. Nay
what do you think of David, who was a Prophet as well as a King? And as for
your Instances of Kalkol, and Heman, those great Masters of Music, as if they
were Men of too good sense to be Prophets, if you please to turn to 1 Chronicles.
25.5. you shall there find, that one of them, viz. Heman, is there expressly
called the King's Se^^, or Prophet.

Prophecies no^ variable according to the Prophets Passions.
4. You lay down also another very false Supposition, that the Prophecies vari^d
always according to the different Passions and Dispositions of the Prophets,
and therefore would hence conclude, that their Prophecy was only Imagination.
But this is very false, and very Illogical. First, it is false. For Moses who
is Characterized to be the meekest of all Men, did Prophecy as dreadful
judgments against the Israelites as any of the Prophets, Vid. Lev. 26.14.
Isaiah his Prophecy is in the several places very different, sometimes he
Prophesies joyful, at other times very dismal things. And even Jeremiah the
most mournful Prophet of all, does foretell the Jews joyful deliverance from
their Captivity, as well as the Captivity it self. And Daniel at that very
time, when he was mourning and fasting in Sackcloth and Ashes, had revealed to
him by the Angel Gabriel the joyful coming of the Messiah, with all the
Benefits which should follow from him. Secondly, there is no consequence in the
Argument, if the supposition were true. For if God did so far comply with
second causes, as some times to cooperate with them, it does not follow that
those causes could produce a supernatural effect of themselves. Though God should
pick out merry Men to foretell joyful things, and Melancholy ones to foretell sad
ones; it does not follow that either Merry or Melancholy Men could foretell any
thing without the assistance of God. Because prediction is the effect of Divine
and Infinite Knowledge, and not of Bodily Temperament: it would be still the
Gift of God, though such qualifications were necessary for the receiving it.

5. Passions not the Cause of Prophecy.
As for your Instances of some Men's being under some Passions, at the time of
their Revelation, and therefore they must be the cause of it. This is an
Argument with a Witness. What though Elisha called for a Minstrel, must
therefore Mirth be the cause of Prophecy? I suppose the reason why he called
for it, was to compose his Spirits, which were ruffled at the presence of a
wicked King, and it was therefore proper to render his Mind sedate, before he
presumed to offer up his Petitions to God, for the prophetic influence of his
Spirit. What though Moses did predict the slaughter of the Egyptian
Firstborn, when he was angry with Pharaoh, must Anger be the cause of
Prophecy? Indeed angry Men may wish ill, but they seldom, I think, Prophecy it;
for if they did, the World would be in a sad condition. But, I think, Moses
brought it to pass too; so that it appears there was something more in this
heavy judgment than a little Scolding Threatening, which you Theist make of the
rest of the Prophecies. Cain was wroth when God spoke to him, but in those
ancient times, God was wont to reveal himself to Mankind in other Tempers. And
when Ezekiel is said to be in the hot anger of his Spirits, before his
Prophecy, this must not be understood of natural Anger, but only the violent
exagitation of the Spirit in him. So the Spirit lifted me up, and took me away,
and I went in bitterness, and in the heat or anger of my Spirit, but the hand
of the Lord was strong upon me. Which is a most lively description of the
operation of the Prophetic Spirit in the Body of the Prophets, with all his
struggles and reluctancies under it. It Is a Metaphor taken from a hot fiery
Horse, that struggles and contends, and is impatient under the Bridle of his
Rider. It is a Description not unlike that of Sibylla in Virg. Aen. 6.

At Phoebi nondum patiens immanis in antro
Bacchatur Vates, magnum si pectore possit
Excussisse Deum, tanto magis ille fatigat
Os rabidum, fera corda domans, fingitque premendo.
Neither is there any force in what you say, as to the Distinction which you
would have Josiah make between Jeremiah and the Prophetess Hulda; for there is
no doubt to be made, but if Jeremiah had been consulted upon the same point, he
would have given the same answer.

6. But in the next place, Vain Opinions not mixed with Prophecy.
you advance a strange Paradox, when you assert that Prophecy varied according
to the idle opinions of the Prophets, as if King Nebuchadnezzar's Diviners, and
all the Persian Magi, were true Prophets. For that passage in the 21th of
Ezekiel does not say that those Diviners did truly Prophecy, but only that the
King of Babylon made use of those Divinatory Arts, the (...), the (...), and
Auruspicy which are there mentioned; he does graphically describe the coming of
the Babylonians, and therefore prophetically relates all the superstitious
rites which were preparatory to that expedition. And as for the Persian Magi,
by whom, you would have our Savior's Birth to be revealed, whilst they were
looking after their Astrological Fooleries; I answer, that by this, God gave no
countenance to any divination by the Stars, as if there were no more certainty
in divine Revelation, than in this sort of fortune-telling, as you would slily
insinuate; but that there being an universal Belief throughout the whole East,
that some great Man should about that time be born in Judea, as Suetonius
relates, these Magi, or Wise Men, took occasion to travel into Judea upon the
appearance of this extraordinary Star, supposing that this might prognosticate
something of this great expected Birth. God might take this occasion to make
known the Birth of his Son to the Gentile World, and yet give no countenance to
all the fooleries of Judicial Astrology. Such an extraordinary Phenomenon as
this was enough to awaken the attention of any inquisitive Men, though they
were not given to that superstition, so as to search after the meaning of it;
whose diligent Endeavors God was pleased to bless with the glad Tidings of the
Gospel of Peace, and a Savior of the World.

7. Besides, More in Prophecy than fancy and well meaning.
I would beg you to consider, that there is something more in Prophecy than
Fancy and Well-meaning. The Prophets were something better than religious
Madmen. They generally had a foundation of good sense and a learned Education,
being for the most part brought up in the Schools of the Prophets, whereof one
is mentioned at Naioth in Ramah, where Samuel lived, 1 Samuel 19.19. another at
Kiriath Jearim, 1 Samuel 10.5. Neither was Prophecy among the Jews, only the
running about the Country, now and then, of a crazed Wretch, as your people are
wont to say; but in a manner, a settled Dispensation; there being great numbers
of the Prophets in that Nation. For even in the most corrupt times, there were
Fifty of the Sons of the Prophets together, beholding Elijah when he was caught
up into Heaven, ^ Kings 2.7. and Obadiah hid an hundred Prophets, fifty in a
Cave, during the rage of Ahab's persecution, 1 Kings 18.4. Now it is not
possible that such a number of Men so regularly educated, should all be
Enthusiastically mad. But I see any thing can be asserted, to serve a Turn, or
to vilify Religion; sometimes God's Ministers must be mad Fools, at other times
cunning Knaves, though methinks the Priestcraft, which you are so often upon,
and Madness, do not so very well agree.


Phil. Come, Credentius, we will not make any words about that matter now; for we
are now entering upon another Stage of difficulties, which are so many and so
great, that, I am afraid, they will make you sweat under them, before you have
got through them. What say you to the business of Miracles? Are not these think
you pretty things to cheat the Mob with? But I am afraid they will never stand
the Test of Philosophy and Reason. One would wonder how such Non-sensical
Notions as these should come into the World, but considering the stupidity of
them, one might guess them to be of Jewish Original. For probably when the
first Jews saw the Neighboring Gentiles worshipping the Natural Gods, as Sun,
Moon, Earth, Water, etc. they to show these constant mutable and visible Gods,
to be under the dominion of their Jehovah, or Invisible one; began to brag of
the Miracles which they pretended Jevovah had done by triumphing over poor
Nature for their dear sake, for whom they were fond to believe all things were
made. Thus this notion got from the Jews to other Nations, and so they have
been coining Miracles ever since. But really, Sir, a Miracle in your sense, is
Nonsense. For you suppose something above the power of nature, which is the
greatest and highest power in the World. For the power of Nature is the power
of God. Nature is one, eternal, fixed, immutable Chain, which is infinitely
drawing out and expanding it self, and not capable of the least alteration; now
if it was possible (as you suppose) by a Miracle that one Link of this, should
be disturbed or broken, the whole frame of nature would be confounded, and the
whole Scheme of future Beings would be infinitely irregular. Nature is the
Eternal Will and Decree of God, executing it self, and the Will of God is his
very Essence; however it is firm and immutable, nay impossible to be changed by
the contrary Will of God himself: and therefore we may be sure, it is not to be
interrupted by the Hocus Pocus of every Capricious Prophet. And indeed Miracles
are nothing else but the Dreams of blockheaded brains, or a ready solution of
what the uneducated Mob are wont to gape at, and can give no account of, so
that I doubt not, but that a common Almanack-maker that could calculate an
Eclipse, or write it out of an Ephemeris, would be a most wonderful Prophet
among the Indians; but when these People, by liberal Education, come to
understand the exact motions of the Heavenly Bodies, the Miracle would be at an
end. Nay any thing that is unusual is by the vulgar reputed a Miracle, because
forsooth they admire it, though it be never so natural; but it ceases to be a
Miracle, when their Admiration is wrought of. Thus a Comet is to them a most
wonderful Miracle, because it appears but now and then in a great many Years:
but the Sun is no Miracle at all, because they see it every day; not that they
understand the nature of the Sun better than that of a Comet, but by
continually beholding it, it does not make so great impression upon their
fancies, and therefore they cease to admire it. And I doubt not but this is the
true reason of most of the reputed Miracles of Scripture, which are but the
unusual works of nature, which would necessarily have been for all any Inspired
Person; but only, they being uncommon works of nature, the vulgar wondered at
them, and deemed them Miracles. O! but we must have a care of exploding
Miracles, because they do demonstrate the being of a God; and very lamely too.
For the necessary Laws of Nature, and the frame of the World, are a thousand
times more demonstrative of it. For Miracles, or Interruptions in Nature, make
wise Men rather doubt of it, and seem rather fortuitous Blunders, than the wise
works, or Efflux of the Deity. Nay what proof is there by Miracles of any thing
else, or that any Doctrine came from God? For the Jewish Law allows, that
Miracles might be done by false Prophets, as appears by Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there
arise among you a Prophet, and gives thee a sign or wonder, and the sign or
wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other
gods, etc. you shall not hearken unto the Prophet, for the Lord your God
proves you. Nay what were the Jews the better for all the Miracles they had
among them, supposing they were true? Moses with all his Miracles was not gone
from them but a few days, but they were turned as arrant Heathens as any in the
World, and fancying the Image of God into the figure of a Calf. Nay, for all
Miracles and Inspirations, the great Solomon himself was a downright
Epicurean, and imagined all things to come by chance, Eccl. 3.19, 20.


Cred. By your leave, good Philologus; You have heaped here together so many
Falsities, or Mistakes, that I am forced to interrupt you, before you go any
further.

First notion of Miracles not from the Jews.
1. I pray what reason have you to think that the notion of Miracles had its
origin from among the Jews? Had not the Greeks and Romans, in the earliest
time, before they ever consorted with the Jews, the same notions? What more
common in Homer and Virgil than strange Prodigies which are wont to amaze whole
Armies, till they be unridled and rendered favorable by some Augur? What more
usual in Greek and Latin Authors, than (...), Ostenta, Portenta, Miracula? And
you may see a whole Chapter of several of these Miracles collected together in
Valerius Maximus, and a great deal of the same in Plutarch. Inquire of any
Barbarous Nations in the World, and you shall find, that they have the same
notion of Miracles, though they never heard of the Jews. For our notion of
Miracles, that it is the extraordinary power of God, or a power above Nature,
is natural and easy to the minds of all Mankind; but that a Miracle should be
the necessary power of unwonted nature, is only a Dream of the Hobbian
Philosophy, that few People who are awake, think of.

2. No Immutable Chain of Nature.
Neither is it any good Argument against Miracles, that they would break your
fixed and immutable Chain of Nature which you contend for. For there is no proof
that there is any such fixed immutable Chain; for if there was, there would be
no such thing as Freedom, either in God, or Man, but all things would be bound
up by a rigid Fate, of which every word we speak, or action which we do, is a
sufficient Confutation. Now either this fixed immutable Chain of Causes is God
himself, or the Creature, or Work of God. That it is not God himself I think I
have sufficiently evinced, Conference with a Theist. Part I.
in a former Discourse, with you; from the Absurdities which would follow by
allowing in God all the Imbecillities, Vices, and Irregularities in Nature,
which are inconsistent with his Infinite Perfection. And the Freedom of Man,
the Spontaneous Actions of Brutes, and the Alterations and Changes in the
inanimate parts of the World, are sufficient Arguments against the latter. Now
if the World be the Creature of God, as we have proved it to be, then it must
be subject to his Power and Providence. For God's Creation supposes it subject
to his power, for what is not subject to the Power of God must have a greater
Power of its own to resist his Power. But this is impossible for the World, or
nature to have, because all the power which they can possibly have, they had
from God in their Creation. Therefore God still keeps the power over them,
either to annihilate them, to continue them in their being, or to alter them.
To say that God has alienated this power, or given them a greater, is more
absurd. For this is in effect to say God has divested himself of his Deity, and
made the World God instead of himself. All that can, with any probability, be
said, is, That God by the frame and constitution of the World has been pleased
to make it immutable, and therefore this power being passed out of his hands,
he cannot recall it, without violation to his Wisdom, and a perfect Confusion to
the present Scheme of Beings. But to consider this a little. As God by his
Omnipotent Power created all things, so by his Providence he governs them, and
takes care of them. And it is equally absurd to say any thing should not be
governed by Infinite Providence, as to assert any thing might be created
without Omnipotent Power. Both these are God's Attributes, and to do Violence
to either of these is injurious to God. Now how can it be said, that God by his
Providence takes care of the World, when he has made such a fatal unalterable
World that it is out of his power to take care of? For whatsoever is
governable, or the subject of Government, must be in ones power and alterable:
but God can no more govern a fatal World, than a Man can govern the Winds and
the Sea. But to govern and take care of his Creatures is the necessary
Attribute of a Wise and a Good God; and therefore the World which he takes care
of must be governable, and consequently not Fatal.


Phil. But by the way, Sir, is it not more agreeable to the Divine Wisdom to
create a World fixed and immutable, than such a one whose Laws should be weak
and shattered, that they must need his Assistance every moment, to preserve
them, and make them go according to his Will?


Cred. I do not deny but that the Laws of Nature are in themselves sufficiently
firm and immutable, God's Providence better than Fatality.
and that they will unchangeably preserve their Course when it does not please
God they should be interrupted by his superior power. But it is no reflection
upon God's Wisdom, that he did not make the World so immutable, that his
Providence could not interpose in it. Nay it would have been a greater
Reflection upon his Wisdom, to have made such a World, which it was out of his
power to control. Let any one judge, if a Prince does not act more prudently
by granting a limited Commission to a General and Deputy to be superseded at
his pleasure, than by granting an absolute and unlimited one, which it is our
of his power to restrain.


Phil. This is true among Princes, because they have a finite understanding,
and can have no knowledge of futures; and so may undo themselves by not
reserving a power to themselves upon some extraordinary emergency; but God
Almighty knows all things, because he eternally decrees them: and therefore
nothing can happen afterward unexpected, or contrary to his foresight; and
therefore he might very well compose a fixed and immutable World, without any
prejudice to himself, or reflection upon his Wisdom.


Cred. Though we must not consider God as a finite Prince, God a wise Governor
without Fatal Laws.
yet must consider him as a wise Governor; and he cannot be a wise Governor
by fatal Laws. For the Laws of Virtue which are certainly God's Laws suppose
Liberty; but to command a thing to be freely done, which cannot but be done, or
is impossible to be done, does argue a foolish Governor; and therefore God
cannot do so. God must therefore reserve to himself the continual management of
the affairs of nature to maintain the Freedom of Man's Will; and to adjust
matters so as becomes a good Governor. But to go on where we left of.

3. Miracles not Occurrences, which the Vulgar do not understand.
It is another of your great mistakes to assert, That Miracles are only such
occurrences in Nature as the vulgar do not understand. For generally the
Miracles which are recorded in Scripture, are such as the vulgar are as proper
Judges of as the greatest Philosophers. Indeed if the Miracles were only some
extraordinary performances in recondit Arts and Sciences, then they would
afford some reason for Learned Men, to question their sincerity. If they were
the Resolution of some very difficult questions in Algebra, some curious Tables
of the motions of the Heavenly Bodies for many Years, some wonderful
performance by Mechanic Philosophy, which had amuzed the common People into
the Opinion that they were Miracles; then something of this nature might be
pretended. But when all the Miracles in Scripture are such as the meanest Men
might be Judges of, and which they cannot be deceived in, the case is quite
different. Any ordinary Man might be Judge whether it were not by a Miraculous
power, that Bitter Waters by a word of the Prophet were made sweet; that an
Iron Hatchet was made to swim; that a Dead Child was raised to life. Every
ordinary Man was as good a Judge of Taste, of the Heaviness of Iron, and when
the Soul was departed from the Body, as the greatest Philosopher. When our
Savior, by a word spoke, turned Water into Wine, Cured the Blind and the Lame,
and raised Men from the Dead; in these cases the relieved Persons, and every
beholder, could tell that this was above the power of nature, as well as those
that had continually applied themselves to the study of it. There is no need
for an Insight in Philosophy, or the Mathematics, for Men to know when they
are sick, or when they are well; to know that though Physic does often cure
diseased Men, yet words naturally do not; that Medicinal Operations are slow
and gradual; and therefore when they see Men instantaneously cured of a
Disease, which for a long while has baffled the power of Medicine, that this
must needs be by a supernatural power, when they see all natural means have
failed.

4. And your Assertion is equally false, Miracles not make Men doubt of a God.
wherein you lay down, That Miracles do rather make Men doubt of a God, than
prove his being to them. Now we do not say, that Miracles are the best Argument
to prove the Being of a God, for the most excellent frame and contrivance of
the World are the most obvious proof of it. But Miracles are far from making
any wise Man doubt of the being of a God. For the wise, and constant Ends and
Regularities in nature are so forcible a Proof upon Men of his Being; that
every little disorder cannot make a wise Man doubt of it. For if I behold in
any work a thousand Wise Ends that I am able to discover; I may very well
conclude that a few other things were as wisely designed, whose ends I am not
able to guess at. But why should Miracles make Men doubt of the Being of a God?
In my mind they do plainly prove his Existence. For when ever a Miracle is
done, there is something done by a power superior to nature: now if there be a
Power superior to Nature: then Nature is not Self-existent, and consequently
there is a God which created Nature. This must be demonstration to all
materialists, that allow nothing in the World but infinite and eternal Matter,
and a necessary concatenation of Causes. For if a Miracle or supernatural Power
breaks or disturbs one Link of these Causes, and Nature afterward goes on
undisturbedly again, it is most certain that there is a Power above nature
which directs it; for otherways a necessary and fatal Nature would move on with
an infinite disturbance. So that I say, Philologus, that though to an Epicurean
who would have all things come by chance, Miracles are not so good a Proof of a
Deity, as the Frame of the Universe, and the Wise Ends of things; yet to a
Materialist, who will have all things to be nature, the Eviction of a Miracle
must be demonstration: for this overthrows his whole Hypothesis, and tells him
to his face, that Matter and Nature are but a limited and subordinate Power,
and in subjection to a superior Mind or Power, which is God. Nay let the
Miracle be true or false, either wrought by God, or the Devil, it is home-proof
against a Materialist; for a Witch, or an Apparition, is total Destruction to
that Philosophy. Therefore it is no wonder, that so great an outcry is raised
against Miracles and preternatural Powers; for if these are once evinced, the
Hobbist is at an End.

5. False Miracles no Argument against true ones.
And whereas you object against Miracles, that they are no Proof of an
Inspiration from God, because there may be a great many false Miracles; and
that Moses, in the 13th of Deuteronomy. gives them warning of the same: I think this
is only puzzling the Case, and raising a dust instead of arguing the Point. For
what though there be false and pretended Miracles, are there therefore no true
ones? Because there have been many false Witnesses, must therefore no true
Evidence be credited? Because there are very many Quacks and Empiricks, are
there no good Physicians in the World? Because there are many Knaves, are there
no honest Men? This is a mad way of concluding, which would destroy all humane
Society and Conversation out of the World. Men must neither eat nor drink,
because some Men have been poisoned those ways. They must receive no good
money, because there is a great deal of Counterfeit. They must believe nothing
that is told them; because there are many Liars among Men. Now Man would be the
most miserable Creature in the World, if he were to square his Actions by this
Method. But God has given to all Men judgment and reason to distinguish between
Truth and Falsehood, between sincerity and design. And this we must make use of
in considering miraculous powers, and proving the Spirits whether they be of
God. By this we may discern whether the produced Miracle be above the Power of
Art or Nature, or whether it does not show the finger of God; whether it be the
effect of a deluded Imagination, and not rather the Evidence of clear and
undisturbed Sense; whether it be the operation of God, or the power of the
Devil; whether it tends to the Advancement of the Kingdom of Light, or of
Darkness; whether it tends to further Moral Goodness and Piety, or else
Wickedness and superstition; whether it contributes to the strengthening or
overthrowing of God's Laws; whether it confirms what we are sure God has
revealed before, or contradicts it. Now with this caution we may very well
distinguish true from false Miracles, and assent to the True, whilst we reject
the False. And therefore Moses, in the Chapter which you alleged, does with
very good reason, give the Jews warning that they do not receive Impression
from Miracles with too great precipitancy, and gives them a good Rule to judge
when they are false, viz. namely, when they contradict the standing Rules of
Morality or any other Revelation of God. If there arise among you a Prophet, or
a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a sign, or a wonder, etc. saying, Let us
go after other Gods etc. ye shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet,
etc. but ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and keep his Commandments, and
obey his voice, etc. This is but wise and discreet caution; but to condemn all
true Miracles for the sake of some Impostures, is unreasonable Skepticism, and
would tend to dispute all Truth and Certainty out of the World, and make all
men turn Pyrrhonicks and Seekers.

6. And it is likewise false, Instances of the Jews, and Solomon, considered.
which you in the next place lay down; That the Miracles, and Inspiration among
the Jews, had no influence upon their Understandings, or Lives, from the
Instances of the Idolatrous Jews in the Wilderness, and King Solomon. Indeed I
can by no means excuse the Jews for their Perfidious Defection to Idolatrous
Worship, whilst Moses was in the Mount; but yet I cannot go with you so far, as
to assert, that the figure of a Calf was thought, by them, to be the Divine
Image. For this is such a Grosness as is not to be supposed in Humane Nature;
it is most probable that they designed this only as an Hieroglyphick, or Emblem
of the True God, in imitation of the Egyptians. For as the Egyptians, with
whom they had long conversed, worshipped their God Apis, under the
Hieroglyphick of a Bull, or Calf: so the Jews who loved a pompous ceremonious
worship, thought to worship the True God so too. For it is plain, that they
intended to pay their Devotion to the true God, because in the relation of this
passage, Exodus 32.4. It is said, This is the Elohim, or God, which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt. Which is more particularly explained in the next
Verse, To morrow is a feast to the LORD, or to Jehovah. And as for those places
in Ecclesiastes, after all that is objected by Atheists, and Socinian^, I do
not see any thing to the contrary; but that these are only Prosopopoeia's of
Epicureans, wherein the Absurdities of these Opinions are exposed, and brought
into the number of those other Vanities, which in this Book he is condemning.


Phil. But after all, Credentius, I cannot be persuaded, but that it was the
prejudiced Opinions of the Unphilosophical Jews, and their pretense more
immediately to the Divine Protection, which gave occasion to the rise of so
many Miracles in Scripture which might otherways be naturally accounted for. It
would be too long to run through all the pretended Miracles in Scripture, which
I could easily make out to be done by the power of Nature; I shall only pick
out one or two which may serve as a sampler for the Rest, and may prove, that
they all may receive a Philosophical Solution. Now, 1 Samuel 9.15. God is related
to send Saul to Samuel, but in this mission there was nothing, but what the
Order of Nature did require; for Saul at that time was seeking his Father's
Asses. So God is said to send the Locusts as a Plague upon Egypt, of which
there was a plain natural Cause, for an East Wind blew them out of another
Country, and a West-Wind carried them back again. So God is said to set the
Rainbow in the Clouds, which is produced there by the natural Cause of
Refraction. And again, there is a wonderful Miracle related in Joshua of the
Sun's standing still, and making a long and miraculous day, when it happened
only by the reflection of the Sunbeams on the Neighboring Hills, or the
refraction which was caused by the Air, which at that time was full of Hail and
Snow, as is evident from the great shower of Hailstones, which so annoyed the
Enemy. Now, these, and such like Miracles, were devised, only to raise the
common People's Devotions, and to affect their Fancies, which would not receive
an Impression by an ordinary way of Relation; but when it was said, That God
immediately interessed himself in such an Action, it made them presently to
prick up their Ears, and be very attentive and devout.


Cred. Miracles not naturally come to pass.
Although it cannot be denied, Philologus, but that the Jews had a Religious way
of talking and attributing to God the ordinary effects of his Providence, when
brought to pass by the most easy and natural means; yet it is impossible that
those supernatural and stupendous Relations, which are to be met with in many
places of Scripture, are to be accounted for, this way. Neither do your
Instances, which you have alleged, in any wise prove what you contend for. For
as for your Instance of God's sending Saul: although Saul by the bent of his
own Inclination was seeking his Father's Asses; yet God by making use of this
natural Act of his Will and proper Resolution, brought it to pass, that he
should meet the Prophet Samuel, who came to anoint him King. For unless you
allow that God Almighty has the power of inclining, overruling, and turning to
his own proper ends the Wills and Designs of Men, you must exclude God from
having any thing to do in the Government of the World; otherways Mankind would
be the arbitrary Lords of the whole Creation, and as a long as they had a
Free Will, (unless opposed by an open and apparent Resistance) they must act in
Defiance to their Sovereign Lord and Maker. And therefore God in his infinite
Wisdom is pleased, to let his Almighty Power mix and blend it self with the
natural actions and inclinations of Men, that he may gently lead them to the
Ends he has proposed, whilst they are seemingly going thither themselves. Which
is a great kindness and condescension to Humane Nature, that he will not ruffle
and struggle with them, and force them against their Wills to do what he would
have them, but only casts such a gentle influence upon their minds that they
shall do that of their own accord, which he might otherwise have forced them
to. It Is needless to give a philosophical account of the divine Inclination of
the Will, whether it be by exciting new Ideas in the mind, or reviving old
ones, by Reminiscence, or Memory, by raising and setting a keener Edge upon the
Passions, by bringing new objects to the senses, or engaging them in a nicer
Observation: for let the Modus of this be how it will, as long as God is the
Governor of the World, and does exercise a providence over his Creatures, some
way or other, he must have an Influence over Men's Wills, though at the same
time they seem to make use of them with the greatest Freedom. And this way God
Almighty is said to have sent Saul to Samuel, by gently influencing his Will,
and the exterior Objects which inclined it, so as to make him seem to do that
of his own proper motives, which God would have him do. It is not easy to
ascertain, where Divine Influence gave the first Impression in this case. It
may be probable upon the fancies of the Cattle, who had some unusual Idea
raised in their Imagination, which inclined them to wander, and then it was
natural enough for Saul their Master's Son to pursue them, where he met Samuel.
So that you see in this case that every thing worked with its own proper
tendency, but yet all was managed and overruled by the Wisdom and Power of
God. But as to your Instance in the Rainbow. Now though this does proceed from
natural Causes, yet it is very properly in Scripture attributed immediately to
God. For though it is probable, that the Rainbow was antecedent to the Deluge,
(there being the Sun and Seas, and consequently Clouds and Rainbows) yet God is
very properly said to set his Bow in the Clouds: because he sat it there for a
Token, or a Sign: although it was a Rainbow, yet it was not a Sign or Token
before it was a Rainbow by the ordinary Course of Nature, but it became a Token
by God's special Ordinance. And so for the matter of the Locusts, Exodus 10.14.
What though they came with an East Wind, and went away with a West? Will the
pure blowing of an East Wind produce Caterpillars? Or supposing them to be
blown from another Country, such innumerable quantities of them, as were never
heard of before, so great as utterly to destroy all the Herbage of Egypt, were
equally, as miraculous, as if there had been an instantaneous Creation of them.
And what reason is there to assert this Plague of Egypt to be natural, when
all the others are so apparently miraculous? You must either deny the History,
or grant the Miracle; for there is no bantering of all those wonderful and
tremendous Plagues with such little Criticisms. And the same I have to say to
your Explication of the Sun's standing still in Joshua's time. Now let any
reasonable Man consider, if there be any thing in that Relation which looks
like Spinosa's account of the matter, viz. the Twilight, being at that time
more than ordinary protracted by the refraction of the Sunbeams, through the
Snowy Air. I grant something like this may happen, for a minute or two; but
what is this to the Suns standing still a whole day? So the Sun stood in the
midst of Heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day. Josh. 10.13. Nay
though we should grant you, what sometimes comes to pass from the thick sleety
Air in Greenland, that the Sun was seen when it was a degree or two below the
Horizon; yet this will not salve the matter. For the Text says expressly, that
the Sun stood still the whole day in the midst of Heaven, or the Twelve a Clock
Line; that is, it was twelve a Clock for twelve hours together, the Sun staying
so long in that one Point. But if your account by Refraction were true, the day
must receive its Lengthening about Sunsetting, when the Sun was near the
Horizon, and that not above a quarter of an hour at the most. Neither could
this easily come to pass, in so thin an Atmosphere as that of Palestine.
Besides, the Scripture says expressly, that this was prayed for by Joshua, in
order to encourage the Jews, and to dishearten their Enemies. But why should he
pray for such a natural Effect as you would have this to be? Was it worth any
ones while to wish for a minute or two more day light, which it was impossible,
that either the Jews, or their Enemies, could observe? But I am weary of
answering such Arguments as these, which fall of themselves, and which I am
confident can never convince those that urge them; and it is honester to deny
the Authority of Scripture altogether, than to explain the Force of it away, by
such jejune interpretations.


Phil. Why then, Credentius, if you would have me appear a Barefaced Infidel, I
must plainly tell you, that I do not think, that either Moses, or the Prophets,
who succeeded him, had any degree of that Inspiration which they pretended to.
For what ever is inspired must needs be true, and agreeable, both to Reason and
Goodness; but there are many things to be found in their Writings and Lives,
which are contrary to both. I shall begin with Moses. Indeed, Credentius, you
have, in some measure, vindicated him from some Absurdities, which are usually
imputed to his History of the Creation Conference with a Theist. Part I.
, but I Am afraid your Art will fail you in doing as much, for some other
Objections against his Books and Character. Now I pray; Sir, what do you think
of his History of the Deluge? Don't you think this very odd, that the whole
World should be drowned at the same time? For my part I can as soon believe,
that a Man could be drowned in his own Spittle, as that the World should be
deluged by the Water in it. Now Moses says expressly, that all the high Hills
under the whole Heaven were covered. Now to do this, we must have water enough
to reach up to the Top of the Pique of Tenariff, which is at present three
Miles perpendicular, and at the Time of Noah much more, a considerable part of
it being washed down by the rains since. Now where shall we find water to cover
the Earth above three Miles high quite round? If the whole Ocean were
circumfused, it would do little or nothing toward this effect, much less a
Rain of forty days. For the Water of the Sea, take one place with another, is
hardly a quarter of a Mile deep; for though in some places in a deep Channel it
may be half a Mile, toward the shore it is but three or four fathoms, so that
all together it is not more than a quarter of a Mile deep. But if this were all
pumped out of the Channel of the Sea, and kept against its Nature by a Miracle
stagnating upon the higher Earth; it could cover the whole Earth no deeper in
Water than the Sea is now, which is but a quarter of a Mile; So that there will
want two Miles and three quarters of the height which Moses assigns to it. This
is upon supposition that the Sea and the Dry Ground are nigh of the same
Extent; but I believe an exact survey of the Earth about the Northern and
Southern Poles, would show that the Earth was much larger. But granting them of
the same bigness; to raise the Channel of the Sea, three Miles higher (that is,
to the Tops of the highest Mountains) round the World, would take up
twenty-four times as much Water as there is now in the Sea, twelve Quarters of
a Mile deep in Water ( i. e. twelve Oceans) to be laid upon the Sea, and twelve
more upon the Land. And then pray consider, what becomes of the pretended
Inspiration of Moses his History, when it is Demonstration that there is not the
twentieth part of Water in the World, as is sufficient to cause such a Deluge.


Cred. Difficulties of the Deluge accounted for.
Your Gentlemen are often wont to call that Demonstration, which is oftentimes
but lame Argument. For nothing can be Demonstration against the Divine Power,
but absolute Incompatibility and Contradiction. And every Supposition which
shows the possibility of the thing is sufficient to overthrow your
Demonstration, as you call it. And therefore several Learned and Ingenious
Gentlemen have of late years set themselves to consider how to give a
Philosophical Account of the Deluge; and have published some Hypotheses upon
this subject, which are full of fine learning and curious Thought. The main of
all of them, are good Argument against the Infidels, because each Hypothesis,
shows the possibility of that Deluge which they deny. As for the Ancient
suppositions, that this immense quantity of Water was owing to the coming down
of the supercelestial Waters, or the Condensation of Air; they are, I think, a
little too unphilosophical for this inquisitive Age, and are therefore like to
do very little good among the Unbelievers.

The most agreeable, Remarks on the late Theories, etc.
and surprising Book which of late Years has offered it self to the World, was
Dr. Burnet's Theory upon this subject. The Design whereof was so Great and
Noble, the Language so exact, the Thought so delicate; the whole work so
uniform and of a piece with it self, and adorned with such variety of pleasant
learning; wherein were such ingenious Accounts given of the Great Revolutions
of Nature, of the Formation of the World, the Paradisiacal state, of the
Antediluvian Longevity, the Deluge and Conflagration; that though there might
want some degrees of probability to make every Reader believe his Theory,
exactly True, yet it pleased most of them so, as to think it was pity it was
not. Far be it from me to detract from the ingenious guesses of that Learned
Man; but yet there are some things in that Hypothesis, which ly very difficult
in my mind, and do not seem so agreeable to the Mechanical Laws he goes by, and
other Phenomenon, which are observable in Nature. The Oval Figure, which he
ascribes to the Antediluvian Earth, seems inconsistent with the present Figure
which it is found to be of, that is a Prolate Sphaeroide, or an Oval turned
about its lesser Axis (i. e.) of the fashion of a Loaf. Which was a prudent
design of Nature to make it of this figure, because the additional Heaps of Ice
and Snow, which are continually lodged at the Poles, by the vapors constantly
flying North, and South, should never increase the Globe beyond a Circle. His
excluding the Annual Motion of the Earth, and its Motion of Parallelism to the
Poles of the World, allowing it only a simple Motion round an Axis Parallel to
the Poles of the Ecliptic, and consequently taking away the vicissitude of
Seasons, which is one of the greatest Beauties of the World; and leaving the
greater part of it uninhabitable, is a matter which one cannot so easily comply
with; especially when the first Chap. of Genesis says, that the Stars shall be
for times, and for seasons, and for Days, and for years. And so is his
exclusion from thence of the Seas, Hills, and Great Rivers, allowing only some
trilling streams from the Poles. For the World without the Sea, would be but a
Prison, where Men would be locked up from one another without intercourse,
would have no communication in Commerce, Arts, Invention; but People must be
content to live uncomfortably at home, upon their own Stocks, and their own
Improvements. Without Hills, Men would be bereaved, of the Ornament and
Convenience of Metals, of the usefulness of Minerals and Stones; and Men would
have wanted Money, Domestic Utensils, Physic, and Buildings. Nay without
Hills to drain off the Mist and Rains, and Seas to evaporate the Mist and Rains
from, it is unaccountable to me, how there should be such a thing as a River in
the World; and I fancy the easy descent upon the declivity of an Oval as big as
the Earth, is not agreeable to the Laws of Hydrostaticks, and the usual current
of Waters. Nor is it less difficult to me to imagine, how a Crust of so vast a
Thickness, as that of the Earth must be, should be broken by any natural force,
especially being supported equally by the subterraneous Waters; or as for any
fissures or cracks by the Heat of the Sun, they are demonstrated in the hottest
Countries, not to go many Yards into the Ground; and as for any Earthquakes
raised by evaporation of the Abyss below, every Ditcher can tell, that the Heat
of the Sunbeams does not go so many inches under Ground, as this Hypothesis
must suppose Leagues; and besides Earthquakes, and subterraneous Eruptions,
are not caused by rarefied Vapors, but by the accension of sulphurous Damps,
which like Gunpowder, rend, tear, and carry all before them, and are often
wont to break out in visible Flame. Nay further, those vast Fissures and ugly
Gaps would have been more inconvenient and unsightful in the Antediluvian
Earth, than the most barren Mountains and roughest Seas are with us. Neither
does the usual depth of the Channels of the Sea, seem to answer to the Depth of
the Abyss; nor the regularity of the Mountains to the accidental Fragments of
such a Crust. There would then appear frequently prodigious Wells and Gaps,
where the fragments did not exactly meet, and such horrid and naked Apices,
which could not by this time, have been any thing smoothed by Rains, or covered
with Grass or Herbs. Nay even in the very situation of the Mountains, and
greatest Hills, there appears wise contrivance, and not accidental Fracture;
for to go no further than our own Country, all our great Ridges of Hills, in
England, run East and West, so do the Alps, in Italy, and in some measure, the
Pyrenees; so do the Mountains of the Moon, in Africa, and so does Mount Tauras,
and Caucasus. And further there appears a prudent foresight, in not making the
ridges of Hills, continued, but by breaking them off into Tumuli, or Heads,
parts of each of which lies obliquely behind another, and generally admits a
skew passage between. For unless there was such a Ridge of Hills frequent from
East to West, the Vapors would all run Northward, and there would be no rains
in the Mediterranean Countries, but the Rivers dried up, and the Sea it self in
time evaporated and frozen into Polar Ice. And unless the Hills were divided
into these oblique Breaks, so as to keep back the Vapors and let in the
Northern Air, the World would be far more liable to Pestilences and
Putrefaction than now they are, and all Places as unhealthy as Scanderoon.
These things, with the Deduction of the Americans from another race than Noah,
and some other matters of less consequence, are my reasons why I cannot
subscribe to that learned Doctor's Solution of the Noachical Deluge; and
therefore must beg his leave to cast about and see if I can find a better
elsewhere, that I can more easily acquiesce in.

Dr. Woodward, to whom the World is forever indebted, for his curious and
diligent Observations of Shells and Minerals, and other subterraneous
Phaenomenas, has promised in his Essay, a more natural Hypothesis; but one of
the Grounds which he designs to build his Theory upon, does seem to me so
precarious and impossible, that I must see a great deal of good proof, before I
can assent to it. For it does not appear to me, how it is possible that the
waters continuance a few months upon the face of the Earth should dissolve the
Compages of the most rigid Fossils, and suspend the particles of them all in
the circumfused water, except only conchous substances; and that, when the
waters were withdrawn, they should be let down to fix and be compacted again.
For if it was possible that water in so short a space could dissolve Marbles
and Adamants, yet methinks the same should more easily dissolve Oistershells
and Cockles, which are of a more tenuous composition, and more easy of
Dissolution.

Mr. Whiston, in his Theory, has avoided most of the Difficulties which were
chargeable upon the First, and has given the World a Taste of the extraordinary
Mathematical, and Philological Learning he stands possessed of. The chief fault I
find in him is, that he has stuck more to Mr. Newton's than Moses his
Philosophy, and seems too too fond and credulous of his Ingenious Hypothesis of
the Comet. Nay the imputing this great Catastrophe to the necessary Laws of a
Comets Trajection, which the Scriptures tell us was sent by God for the Sin of
Mankind, seems to give too great a scope for the scoffs of Libertines, and the
Atheistical Fatality. His Turning Days into Years, and denying the Diurnal
Revolution of the Earth at first, is methinks a little too bold, when it does
not seem at all to favor his Hypothesis, but only to give God six Years time
to work in, when the Infidels already grudge him so much at six days. His
fancying two Courses of Rain from the Scripture, which only seems to repeat the
Relation of one, is not to me so satisfactory; nor his Exclusion of Clouds and
Mists, which is agreeable indeed to the Burnettian Theory, but, I think, not to
his. Neither can I conceive, that the bare passing through the Tail or
Atmosphere of a Comet could afford the thousand part of the Water that Theory
has occasion for, and he himself is forced to fetch a great part of it from the
Abyss. Nor is it credible, that the Earth, a cold Planet, should go off with
750,000. Miles of the Comets Tail, which could not be supported by the Comet it
self, but only by reason of the burning heat of the Body of it. And it is a
mistake, I suppose, to think, that the round Circle about the Body of the Comet
is a watery Atmosphere much grosser than the Tail, so as to afford nine times as
much Water to the Earth passing through that, as through the Tail; for the Ring
is by some curious observers thought to be only the curling and winding round
of the smoke, rising at first to a determinate height from all parts of the
Comet, and then making off to the part opposite to the Sun, as you may see Fig.
III. Neither do I fancy that the Earth, passing even through the Atmosphere of
a Comet, could gain any more Water by that, than any thing can do by passing
through the smoke of a Chimney; for both of them are but smoke, only the former
is the thinner, as being the Fume arising from the Terreous part of the Comet,
by its Parelion almost vitrified and calcined, the aqueous parts being first
evaporated and sent off farther in the extremity of the Tail. And besides, I
cannot conceive, how the Earth should not almost have been fired, and Noah, and
his Ark, burnt to powder, by the glowing heat of the melted Planet; for
according to my little Philosophy, I should imagine it as comfortable living in
a red hot Oven for an hour or two, as in such a sultry Atmosphere as this. And
it is hard to think, that this Comet should give no more disturbance in this
part of the Universe, but only to turn the Earths Annual Orbit, from a Circle
to an Ellipsis; for according to Mr. Newton's Principles, if the Comet had been
bigger than the Earth, it had carried it away to rights in its Parabola,
through the vast extra-Saturnine spaces, and if it had been less, it had been
stopped by the Earth, and so we had been troubled with its smoaky Tail about us
ever since. Or if it had been of the same bigness with the Earth, and if it had
well nigh the same celerity with the Earth, we should have had the same
troublesome Companion nevertheless; or however, it is ten thousand to one, but
it would have run away with our Moon, if it had happened to have come nigher to
That than the Earth does. Nor does it ly easy upon my mind, how such a
prodigious quantity of Water, that he supposes to have come from the Comet,
could be disposed of; it is impossible it could be one quarter of it suspended
in the Air, or lodged in the Channels of the Seas; for the Channels could bear
no proportion to it. Nor can I think the Seas were so much as enlarged by the
Deluge, but that they both, before and since, have been growing less, and less,
by the prodigious quantities of Water employed in the production of Trees and
Plants, which are reduced afterward into Mold, and always retain the species of
Earth, or ly buried in the Ground, and never return to the Sea again. To say
nothing of how much more is employed in the concretion of Stones and conchous
substances, how much is licked up by the Ether out of the Atmosphere as the
Earth is swiming through it, how much more flies over in vapors to the Poles,
notwithstanding the Barricado of the Hills is frozen there and never returns
again, unless some few Particles, it may be, of them at some seasons of the
Year in Winds: and to pass over the observations of the Channels of great
Rivers near the Sea, which seem formerly to have been far broader than they are
now, and the many great Countries which the Sea has deserted. And besides
lastly, in my mind it is impossible that the swelling of the Abyss should alter
the figure of the Earths Crust, from a Circle or Oval to a Sphaeroide; that the
Water had force enough to do it; or that this effect could happen without
shattering the whole Compages being of a brittle saxeous substance, into
pieces. These are my reasons, why I cannot acquiesce in the Hypothesis of that
ingenious and learned Gentleman, as exactly True; Yet I think it a curious
Essay to show the Infidels not only the possibility of the Mosaic History, but
how finely it may be made to correspond with Philosophy; and after all, that
it is easier to find faults with this Theory, than to compose another so good.


Phil. Well! Now you see how these great Wits are miserably at a loss, to
explain this unaccountable History; and therefore it is in vain to try any
further to explain that, which will admit of no solution. So that you had
better ingenuously give up the Cause, and own that it is an impossible
Relation, calculated only for the Illiterateness of those times, to make the
Jews stand in fear of the Deity, when they were told that such a Tragical
Punishment was inflicted by him upon Mankind for their Sins.


Cred. If God was the cause of the Deluge, as our Religion supposes, and not
Natural and Mechanical Causes of their own proper Tendency; then God might
bring it to pass a thousand ways, that we know nothing of; for his Omnipotence
will be able to bear up against all the pretended Impossibilities that you are
able to raise against the History of the Deluge.

Tradition in all Nations of a Deluge.
1. But if this History of the Deluge be such an impossible unaccountable
History, how come all the Nations of the World, to have such an impossible
Notion got into their Heads? Though several Men might have the same
unaccountable fancies, yet it is hard to think that all Men should be troubled
with the same Dreams. And it seems to me to have more impossibility, that all
Nations should have Traditions of a Deluge, if there had been no such thing as
a Deluge; than any you can show me in the Deluge it self. The Babylonians,
Phoenicians, Assyrians, in their Histories make mention of a Deluge, as you may
see in Eusebius and Josephus. Deucalion's Flood was so famous in all the Greek
and Latin Mythologists and Poets, that nothing more need be said of it.
Martinius in his History of China relates the same of the Chinese; and so does
Josephus Acosta, Herera, and De Laet of the Americans. And Lucian De Dea Syria.
relates the ancient Tradition they had of the Deluge at Hierapolis in Syria;
which is almost as exact as the Mosaic relation of it. The account, though it
be something long, is not unpleasant, and deserves consideration. This Race of
Men, which now is, was not the first; but that Race was quite destroyed. But
these are of a second Generation, and from their first Progenitor Deucalion
have increased to so great a Multitude as we see. Now of those former Men they
tell this story: They being contentious, did very unrighteous things, they
neither kept their Oaths, nor were hospitable to strangers; for which this
great misfortune befell them: All of a sudden the Earth gave out of her self a
great quantity of Water, there were mighty showers, the Rivers overflowed, the
Sea was much higher, by which all things became Water, and all Men perished.
Only Deucalion was left unto the second Generation, (...) This is agreeable to
what the Scripture says of Noah his being a Preacher of Righteousness to the
ungodly Antediluvians.
upon account of his good Counsel and Piety. Now he was saved after this
manner. He had a great (...) (i. e.) an Ark or Chest, into which he came with
the Children and Women, of his House; and then entered, Hogs, and Horses, and
Lions, and Serpents, and all other Animals, which live upon the Earth, (...),
all of them with their Mates. And he received them all, and they did him no
harm; for by assistance from Heaven there was a great amity between them. So
all sailed in this one Chest, as long as the Water did predominate. But these
things are told in the Greek Histories of Deucalion. But of those things which
happened after, one thing worthy of great admiration is told by the Inhabitants
of Hierapolis; That in their Country, there was a great Gap into which all this
Water sunk. Upon which, Deucalion built Altars and a Temple over the Gap, and
consecrated it to Juno. I my self saw the Gap. It is very little at the bottom
of the Temple, as I told you. Whether it was formerly bigger or no, and grown
narrower by Age, I cannot tell; but this I can tell, that That which I saw was
but little. Now they make this the sign of the History. Twice in a year Water
is brought into the Temple: and not only the Priests bring it, but all Syria
and Arabia. Nay Men come even from Euphrates to the Sea, all carrying Water;
which they first pour into the Temple. Then the Water descends into the Gap;
and though the Gap be small, yet it receives a prodigious quantity of Water.
And when they do this they tell, that Deucalion first instituted this Custom,
to be a Memorial of the Calamity, and his Deliverance from it. This is the
ancient Tradition which those about the Temple tell.

From which Relation it is remarkable, that it was the Opinion of the People of
Syria, that there had been an universal Deluge, that a certain Man and his
Family were saved in an Ark, and a Male and Female of every kind of Animals, to
restore again the drowned Creation; and that all this vast quantity of water
sunk into an Hiatus of the Earth, and made the World habitable again. Now I
hope, that Moses his Relation is not so incredible when it has the joint
Testimony of so many Nations, and particularly the Heathen Syrians so exactly
corresponding with it. Indeed this story in Lucian is told after his way
drollingly, as if he did not believe it; but yet there is no question to be
made but that it was the relation of those People, though he has a mind to
expose it.

But I need not trouble my self to prove the Being of a Deluge by Tradition of
Nations, when late observations have given Demonstration of it. The Beds of
Shells which are often found on the Tops of the highest Mountains, and
petrified Bones and Teeth of Fishes, which are dug up hundreds of Miles from
the Sea, Trees and Shrubs buried many fathoms under ground, are the clearest
Evidence in the World, that the Waters have some time or other overflowed the
highest parts of the Earth; which was the Deluge which we contend for. The
truth of these matters is not to be contested now, by any that have but the
least Insight in Experimental Philosophy. Nor can it be with any degree of
probability said, that all these subterraneous Bodies are but only the Mimical
and mock Productions of Nature, for that these are real Shells, the nicest
Examination both of the Eye and the Microscope do attest; and that they are
true Bones, may be experimented by burning them; and then they will first turn
into a Cole, and afterward into a Calx, as other Bones do. How far Nature may
sport her self in the subterraneous World, in the impression of the Images of
Terrestrial Plants upon Slate and Coals, I will not dispute; but that it should
produce True Bones and Shells, which answer in all respects to those of the
Genuine Animals, is incredible, and next to the boldness of an Epicurean
Concourse, for the Frame of the World.

2. That the Deluge was possible.
I shall therefore only set my self to prove, that there is Water enough in or
about the Earth to drown it, and to rise up to that height which Moses did
report it did.

I confess I do no think, that the Waters of the Sea are one quarter enough for
such a Deluge, and therefore it must be sought for elsewhere. That there is a
vast quantity of Waters under ground, Vid. Dr. Burnet's Theor. p. 1.
and an Abyss within the outward Crust of the Earth, is I think evident to any
who considers, that in many places the Sea disgorges it self into the bowels of
the Earth, and does not pass off by any Out-Current. The single Mediterranean
Sea is a sufficient Instance of this: for considering how many, and some vast
Rivers run into it, and it having no visible outlet, what should become of the
Waters? Nay considering that there are two Currents of the Sea set into it, one
at the Straits of Gibralter, and another vastly strong one of the Pontus, which
the Ships do, with difficulty, bear up against; it must necessarily be allowed,
that this Sea does empty it self by subterraneous passages into some great
receptacle of Waters underneath. For otherways, many Ages ago the Mediterranean
had over-flow'd and drowned several Countries on the adjacent Shores. Nay the
fathomless bottoms there which some have tried in vain with so much Cordage to
reach, Vid. Dr. Smith's Account to the Royal Society in the Philosophical
Transactions.
is the most evident proof which can be of the Truth of this Assertion. And the
same holds likewise in the Caspian-Sea. And I think there is little doubt to be
made, but those dangerous Gulfs and Eddies which the Sailors shun in many parts
of the Ocean, are but only great Holes or subterraneous Passages, through which
the upper Sea is gulping down into the Abyss beneath. Now if there be such a
great Receptacle of Waters beneath the Earth, as there is no question to be
made of it, so many mighty Seas continually running into it, then the Earth
must be hollow, and only a superior Crust concluding within it an Abyss of
Waters, as is represented, Fig. I. and Fig. II. If there be the same Quantity
of Water remaining as there was at the Creation, then the total Hollow of the
Earth will be filled up with Water: but if any part of it be lost, or
consolidated upon the outward superficies of the Earths Crust; then by the Laws
of Attraction, if the Water does not exceed in Gravity the Circumambient Earth,
it will lie round it in the Ring P S R Q and there will be a Hollow in the
Central Part u w x z. But if the Body of Water be of greater Gravity than the
Crust of the Earth, then the Mass of it will lie next to the thickest part of
the Earth, or where there is more Matter; so that if the Earth be thicker about
the Pole X, or if there be any Internal solid there, it will then lie round
part of the Limbus of the Earth U T X Y and leave the Hollow at U Y. Fig. II.
Now suppose the Diameter of the Earth or Terraqueous Globe to be, as it is
thereabouts, 8000 Miles, and the thickness of the Crust of the Earth a 32d part
of this, as the second Figure represents, then the Crust will be 250 Miles
thick, which will be a solidity strong enough to contain the Internal Waters,
to resist the chapping from the Sun, to keep a consistency in all the rapid
motions of the Earth. Or let it be an Eighth part, as is represented, Fig. I.
and then the Earths Crust will be 500 Miles thick, which to be sure is
abundantly sufficient. Now upon either of these two Suppositions, there will be
Water enough, when drawn out upon the superficies of the Earth, to drown the
World to a far greater height, than what Moses relates. Now it is but
supposing, that God by a Miraculous power sucked out part of this Abyss through
the Foramina, or subterraneous passages which ly dispersed at Bottom of the
Sea, as suppose about the Point T of Fig. II. to the height of four or five
Miles; and then the highest Mountains will be laid under Water, the Water
diffusing it self both ways from h to k; so that if it be in h four Miles high,
it will be at least three in k, And then if after that the suspending force
were taken off, and the Water descended through the same Foramina, and left the
Earth dry as it was before; you have, Philologus, at least a possible Account
of the Deluge.


Phil. But truly, Sir, this Miraculous power sticks most in my Stomach; That is
so strangely Unphilosophical and such a subterfuge of dull Divines, that
methinks any Man of sense should be ashamed to make use of that shift. Besides,
I am not very well reconciled to your Waters which you suppose to fill up the
Hollow of the Earth. Indeed those who allow a Central solid have somewhat more
to say for themselves; but your Hypothesis destroys the Laws of Specific
Gravity, and makes the lighter Waters most unnaturally to ly below the Crust of
the heavy Earth.


Cred. Let the supposition of a Miraculous Power in the Deluge be as
Unphilosophical as you please, I am sure it is more Unchristian, and more
Unreasonable, to suppose, that it came to pass by natural Causes. For if it
came to pass by natural Causes, there must have been a Deluge, whether the
Antediluvian World had been so wicked or no; and then, the Preaching of Noah to
them had been all collusion, and God's Menaces beforehand had been
inconsistent, both with his Justice and Verity. If they had repented upon
Noah's Instructions, they could not have escaped the Deluge, which by this
supposition depended upon necessary Causes, and could not but have been. Or to
say that it was necessary both for the Antediluvians to be so perversely wicked,
and that the Deluge must likewise happen; is to assert a Fatality of sinning,
is at the same time to destroy all Religion, Free Will, and the Goodness of
God. It Is therefore plain, that the Deluge did not depend upon natural and
necessary Causes; but upon the just and providential Power of God, which
overruled the Power of Nature, and might either bring the Deluge upon the
World, or withhold it, according to his good Pleasure and Wisdom, or as the
Deserts of Mankind did require.

Neither is your Notion of specific Gravity any Objection against our
Supposition of an Abyss being included within the Crust of the Earth, even
without the Fancy of a Central Solid, or Dense Fluid, which some imagine. For
the notion of a Central Solid is but a Contrivance to keep in the Central Fire
that some men fancy there, which otherways would be quenched by the
circumambient Waters. But this Central Fire is only Cartesius his Conceit, who
by this means has contrived to turn burning Earths into Suns, and incrustated
Suns into Earth; which is a Fancy the World now begins to be weary of. And as
for a dense Fluid, that I take to be a more precarious Hypothesis, and less to
be relied upon than the other. Neither can it be supposed, that Nature must be
confined to work in the Creation according to the Laws of specific Gravity.
For according to this Rule the Sun, which is the Center of the Magnus Orbis,
must be the densest of all the Planetary System, which though it be the
biggest, yet is the most thin and Refined. See Mr. Newton's Princip. Philos.
Math.
Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, though nigher to the Center of the System, are
Denser than the Earth. Neither is this rule observable in the Earth it self.
For several of the heaviest Fossils, as Metals, Marble, and Stone, lie often
very high toward the surface of the Earth, and other lighter Strata below
them. Nor is there any reason to think that God in the Creation wrought by such
Laws of Gravity. For without doubt he wrought either by his immediate
Omnipotent Power, or else by a subordinate Plastic Nature, as he does in the
Production of Animals and Vegetables since. And here the Laws of specific
Gravity have little or nothing to do; nay we see they are constantly
superseded. When the Fibers of a Tree thrust themselves upwards from the
Center, and the Juices of it, contrary to their own proper Tendency, are drawn
up so many foot from the Ground, what become here of the Laws of specific
Gravity? Is the body of any Animal composed after this manner? If this were so,
there would be no such thing as Organical Parts, which are composed so
admirably for the Use and Beauty of the Animal. If this were so, a Man, which
is the most Beautiful, would be the most clumsy Creature in the Creation. His
Bones must all lie toward his Feet, his Flesh next to them, his Blood and
Spirits where his Head. And then consider what a Monster of a Creature, this
specific Gravity would make him. Neither does it avail any thing to say, that
the Composition of an Animal does in some measure answer to the Laws of
specific Gravity, because the heavy Bones which lie inmost are enclosed with
the Flesh and Blood which are lighter. But then pray consider, that the Bones
were not placed there by this Law, but by the prudent direction of nature to
support the pliable Flesh, and to extend it to that just proportion which she
designed. But granting the supposition True; yet the Marrow, which is much
lighter than the Bones, is concluded within them; the Bones being its
superficial Crust, in the same manner as we suppose the Earth to be to the
Abyss. Now why should not we suppose that God used as much Wisdom and
Contrivance in the Formation of the Body of the Earth, as in that of an Animal?
Or why should specific Gravity tie him up more in one than the other? No doubt
there was the same most admirable contrivance in the formation of the course
Body of the Earth as in other finer and smaller contextures. Only the Earth is
a Body whose parts are so great as they cannot be distinctly viewed at the same
Time, and many of them hid from us, and therefore we are apt to conclude that
they are less elegant; so we proceed to Philosophize upon it under this
mistake, and allow it only the rude contexture which might arise from the bare
subsidency of Parts and the Laws of specific Gravity. But this is a grievous
error, and we might, with as much Philosophy pretend to give an account of the
Organization of Animals by the same Laws. For I doubt not, but if we were let
into the subterraneous World, and could have a distinct view of Stones and
Minerals, the excellent Disposition and variegation of the several strata, the
wonderful Contrivances of subterraneous Currents, by which one Sea is fed by
another, and all receive their Origin from the one great Fountain of the Abyss,
and to which they all pay their Tribute again; to consider the spreading Veins
of the lesser Springs, which at first are distilled from the Rains and Mists,
by uniting together do form the greatest Rivers; if we consider all this, we
cannot but allow, that God formed the Earth with as much Wisdom and Contrivance
as other parts of the Creation, and that he might make it to be a Thick-shell
surrounding the Abyss, though contrary to the Laws of specific Gravity, if
that did contribute to the good of the Whole and the Usefulness of Mankind, as
I think the Communication of the upper and lower Seas sufficiently does.


Phil. But still, Credentius, this unaccountable Miracle lies hard upon me,
especially when your Divines allow, That God generally works by Second Causes,
even when he acts Miraculously and above the power of Nature; by giving Nature
as it were a power superior to it self. And indeed in the present case, it
looks very odd, that God should engage his Omnipotence to make the Water of the
Abyss ascend contrary to its Nature, or that his Inferior Agents the Angels
should be employed invisibly to pump up so much Water from thence as would
drown the World. Without doubt it would lie more easy upon Men's Minds, if this
great Catastrophe were accounted for in a more natural way; in which the Laws
of the Universe are not so forcibly opposed as in this supposition.


Cred. For my part, it lies as easy upon my mind to think, in general, that God
miraculously raised up the Water of the Abyss, and sent such continual Spouts
and Rains, that in forty days time the whole World was drowned; as if I was
able to find out those immediate Causes he made use of in this dreadful
Judgment. For after all I must own it to be the Finger of God, either making
use of intermediate Causes, or himself immediately producing the Effect. If I
am sure the Effect was miraculous, what need I care where the divine power was
first impressed, whether immediately upon the effect it self, or upon any of
its pre-existing and necessary Causes? I am sure by the divine Relation, that
God is in it either first or last, and this is sufficient for my Conviction;
and I think, the Holy Scripture is not so much obliged to gratify our
Curiosity. I doubt not but there are innumerable ways which God could have made
use of to drown the World, even by intermediate and natural Causes, which the
wisest Philosopher never dreamt of; and if any of these ways are shown to be
possible, then all the Arguments which would infer the Impossibility of the
Deluge are at an End. Now to comply with your curiosity for once, I will
endeavor to show what second Causes God might possibly make use of in the
deluging the World, and by what means the Abyss was drawn up over the Face of
the Earth. Not that I am so vain to think that he did make use of these means;
but that if he did, the effect would be so far from being impossible, that it
would, upon that condition, be necessary.

Now it is most generally among the best Philosophers agreed, that the Moon is
the Cause of the Tides, and that the nigher she is to the Sea, as at her time
of Southing, she raises the Water the higher by her Attraction of it toward
her. So that if by the supernatural power of God the Moon were brought very
near to the Earth, or the Earth to the Moon, such a vast Tide would be raised,
upon supposition there is communication between the Abyss and the Upper Seas,
that the World would be drowned to the height which Moses assigns. Now I fancy
this might come to pass by the pure Acceleration of the Earth's Annual Motion.
For let C D A B represent the Annual motion of the Earth in the time of the
Antediluvians, Fig. IV.
which is a perfect Circle, in which it is probable all the Planets, after
their Creation at first, revolved. Let B represent the Earth, and I the Moon,
revolving round the Earth in the Circle I p i l. Now when the Earth was in the
Point I, let us suppose its Annual motion to be accelerated, so as to exceed
the Exact Proportion there was formerly between the Attraction of the Sun H,
and the Celerity of the Earth; and then the Earth, instead of coming to the
point B in the Circle C D A B, will go off to the Point c and move in the
Ellipsis E F D A. Now by this new Elliptical motion the Earth in the point c
will be nigher to the Moon I, by the distance B c, than it was in the point B;
which would raise such a Prodigious Tide as would produce the Effect we contend
for. And then the Moon for a considerable time would revolve about the Earth at
c in the Circle I m h, instead of its ancient Orbit I p i l, which will so long
keep up the Tides over the whole face of the Earth, as is described Fig. I. and
II. But the Tides will decrease gradually as the Moon by her Menstrual Course
shall have made more Perihelions, for every time she comes nigher to the Sun,
the Sun will more and more conduce together, with the resistance of her own
Impressed Motion, to draw her from her late contracted to her ancient and more
enlarged Orbit. So that a month or two after, when the Earth, in its Annual
Course, shall be in the Point F, and the Moon be in her Perihelion Q she shall
then have enlarged her Orbit to o Q ^ greater than her contracted one w y z, or
m h I, so that after five months, the time of the Continuance of the Deluge,
when the Earth shall have come to the point D, then the Orbit of the Moon shall
be enlarged to u s t, equal to her former one I p i l, or as great as her other
she had before the Acceleration of the Earths Motion. So that then the Moon
being as far distant from the Earth as formerly she was, those great Tides will
be over, and the Deluge at an End; all the Waters being again sunk into the
Belly of the Earth, through the same Cavities by which they ascended.


Phil. But stay, Sir, this does not much mend the matter, for this attributes
the cause of the Flood only to the breaking up the Fountains of the great Deep,
which Moses likewise attributes to another cause, viz. the Rain of forty days
and forty nights.


Cred. Indeed, Moses says, that at the beginning of the Deluge it rained forty
Days and Nights; but he does not say that these Rains added any thing
considerably to the Deluge of the whole World. They only raised the Waters to
such a height that the Ark was born up, and swam upon the Waters. And the
Flood, or Rain, was forty Days upon the Earth: and the Waters increased and
bore up the Ark, and it was lift up above the Earth, Gen 7.17. But in the two
following Verses is expressed the Effect of the Waters rising out of the Abyss.
And the Waters prevailed and increased greatly upon the Earth, and the Waters
prevailed exceedingly upon the Earth, and all the high Hills, that were under
the whole Heaven were covered. So that what was the Effect of the Rains to lift
up the Ark, Moses calls only increasing of the Waters; but when he afterward
speaks of the eruption of the Abyss, he says a great deal more, that Waters
increased greatly, and prevailed exceedingly. And indeed this previous Flood
from the Rains, or Preludium of the Deluge, was wisely designed by God
Almighty, that the Ark might be lift up, before the Torrent from the Abyss
came; or otherways such a mighty Current running with so great a Force, would
have overthrown and drowned it before it could have been lifted up. But a Rain
of forty Days having before made a Land-Flood, great enough to bear up the
Earth, the fury of the roaring Torrent of the Abyss would be broken by the
yielding Waters under the Ark; and so would by degrees be raised to the height
which the Waters rose to without Danger. I will not contend that there was no
more than this forty Days Rain; for it is probable that it Rained the greatest
part of the Time that the Waters covered the surface of the Earth; for the Sea
then being above as large again as it formerly was, must supply a far greater
quantity of vapors than could possibly be suspended in the Air, and therefore
must fall down in frequent, or continual spouts, or Rains. This I take,
Philologus, to be a possible account of the Deluge, and is a sufficient
confutation of them who decry it as an impossibility.


Phil. Well! supposing that the Absurdities of Moses his relation of the Deluge
are not so great as are generally imagined, yet I cannot allow him to be a true
Prophet; because the pretended Miracles by which he endeavored to establish
his Laws and Doctrines, seem to me to be mere Artifice contrived only to
beguile the silly Jews, and to lead them tamely by the Nose without opposition.
They poor Creatures! thought that God wrought mighty Miracles by his hand,
whilst he was only working Designs for himself, to purchase himself Admiration
among the Rabble, or else to gain a Jurisdiction under the specious name of a
Theocracy. But alas! these Miracles are all Craft and Collusion, which any
Cunning Man might seem to do, If he had but such simple Inspecters. Witness his
pretending to receive the Law in Mount Sinai; where he gave out that he
conversed with God, who appeared there in smoke, and thundering and lightening.
No doubt the poor folks were strangely amazed at this terrible Scene. But Moses
or any other intelligent Man, knew well enough, that there was no great matter
in it. For all this wonderful Appearance was in all probability only a Volcano
in that Mountain, which Moses did very politically forecast, that the Jews
should not come to the knowledge of. For if they had run gazing up the Mountain
as well as he, the secret would have been found out, and the Miracle spoiled.
But Moses very prudently commands, Ex. 19.13.
that a hand shall not touch the Mountain, but he shall be stoned or shot
through, whether it be beast or man: nay, not so much as the Priests themselves
must come up, lest the Lord break forth upon them, ver. 24. but only Moses and
Aaron, who were let into the Mystery, must come there. Nor is this Volcano in
Mount Sinai only a Conjecture, but is confirmed by the observation of
Travelers, who still behold the Mountain full of Ashes, which do plainly show
the Ruins, as it were, of an extinguished Aetna. This, Credentius, is an
Objection not to be bantered off; for if this stands, your whole revealed
Religion shakes; because this is the very Foundation of the Jewish and
Christian Institution; and if there be any Trick here, as is much to be feared,
all that is built upon it, is good for nothing.


Cred. There is so much false suggestion and groundless Assertion in this last
Objection, that it is intolerable; and one had need of the Patience of that
Holy Religion you are opposing, to be unmoved at it.

1. But 'pray, Sir, what By-Ends had Moses to serve by his playing this sham
Prank, as you do suppose, in the Mount? He could not get a greater Authority
over them than He had before; he had been their Deliverer from the Egyptians,
and was their conducter in the Wilderness, and had as absolute command over
that People as could be desired. Neither could Fame or a Desire of raising his
Family, put him upon any such indirect Methods. For he seems to have been the
most sincere and modest, and most disinterested Man of all Men that ever lived.
He is so open and faithful in his History, as to record his own Failures, and
those of his dearest Relations, his Brother, and Sister. He gave the
Priesthood, which was the most considerable honor in that Nation, away to his
Brother Aaron's Family, contenting himself that his own Posterity should only
be ranked among the Ordinary Levites. And at his Death disposed of the
Government to Joshua, a Stranger. Neither is it credible, that he would make
use of such a mean trick as this, which was so easy to be discovered by every
bold Man, whose curiosity might prompt him to venture the Menaces, especially
when he had established sufficiently in them an Opinion of his miraculous
power, by all the wonders which he had done in Egypt, and at the red Sea.

2. Nor is there any tolerable ground for this supposition of a Vulcano's being
formerly in Mount Sinai: I know your Brother Infidels make a mighty Noise with
this story, but I believe they have very little Authority for it. I have seen
several Draughts and Descriptions of this Mountain in Books of Travels, but
never found any thing which made for this story. The likest matter, which ever
I could find, and which might perhaps give contenance to this Assertion, is a
Relation I find in the Travels of Christophorus Furerus a German Knight.
Itinerarium Christophori Fureri Printed at Norimberg, 1621.
And he in the Description of St. Catharines Hill, which is nigh Sinai, has
these words. In valle propinqua Collis est miri aspectus, quasi totus exustus
esset and cineribus tectus, quo loco Mosen ovium soceri sui pascendarum curam
habuisse memorant. In the Neighboring Valley there is a Hill which is
wonderful to look upon, appearing as if it was all burnt and covered with
Ashes; in which place they say is the place where Moses kept his Father-in-Laws
Sheep. Now unless it can be supposed that this Hill was Mount Sinai, it will
signify nothing. But the same Furerus gives a particular Description of Sinai
in the following Chapter, and therefore, that can be none of the Hill which he
before described. This is in all probability some little Hill nigh St.
Catharines and Mount Sinai, whose Earth is of a blackish color and barren, not
unlike many of our Heaths. And this is all the ground I can find they have for
the Volcano of Sinai. But supposing that little Barren Hill, were Mount Sinai,
they very little understand the Nature of a Volcano, to think there should
remain no other Marks of it, than only a black ground like Ashes. Read but the
Descriptions of Mount Aetna in Polybius and Strabo, and you will strait be of
another mind. For all such Burning Mountains have an Open Mouth on Top of them
through which they belch out their Flames, which the Ancients called the
Crater; because the disgorged Cinders and melted Metals of Mount Aetna, being
hardened about the Brims of the Hiatus, did resemble the Lips of a Pitcher. Now
it is impossible there should be a Burning Mountain without such a Crater, or
Hiatus; which would needs appear after the Fire was gone out, in the figure of
a Monstrous Gap unto the End of the World.

3. Nay this Appearance of God, or of an Angel representing him, in Flames of
Fire, with Earthquake, Thunder, etc. is very agreeable to all the Ancient
Theology. For my part I am of Opinion with many of the Ancients, that it was a
superior Angel that personated God, and not the second Person of the Trinity,
as some. And this is more agreeable to Scripture, as when it is said, Gal.
3.19. That the Law was given by Angels in the hand of a Mediator (i. e.) Moses.
And so Josephus remarks of his Nation; Antiq. Hist. Lib. 15.
We have received of God the best and holiest Parts of our Law by Angels. And
so the Author of the Questions to the Orthodox, In Just. Martyr 's Works.
The Angels which spoke in Gods stead to men, were called after Gods name, as
the Angel which spoke to Jacob and to Moses. Nay sometimes men are called Gods.
To both these it is granted to possess God's Name and his Place, by reason of
the Office which is entrusted to them. But when their Office expires, they then
cease to be called Gods, because they received that compellation only for the
sake of the Office. And therefore Jamblicus Jamb. de Mysteriis Sect. 2. Cap. 3.
calls the Heroes and Demons (...), Spirits that appear for themselves to Men;
whilst the superior Spirits have their Representatives. And so Socrates
Plutarch de Genio Socratis.
could not believe that the Gods did appear (...), and said all were Pretenders
and Cheats who affirmed it. Now that when Great Angels appeared, very great
Flames of Fire were seen, and great commotion in the things about happened, may
be known from the words of an Heathen Author, and who is therefore more
unexceptionable. Jamb. de Mysteriis Sect 2. Cap. 4.
As often as Archangels appear, certain parts of the World are shaken, and a
fore-running Light ushers them in, and according to the largeness of their
Empire, is the largeness of their preceding Light proportioned. And so again
afterward, the Archangels are full of an excessive Splendor, Angels have some
Light, and Demons a turbid one, etc. And again he says, Archangels Fire is
undivided, that of Demons is divided, and more circumscribed; and the Fire of
the Archontes, the higher they are, is the brighter. And so God himself is
represented by the Ancients as dwelling, or enclosed in Fire. So Orpheus in his
Hymns: (...)
(...) --
For round thy burning Throne attending stand
Crowds of Angelick Orders --
And so the Chaldaick Oracles.

(...)
(...)
(...).
When you shall see the shapeless sacred Fire
With dancing gleams shining quite through the World,
Then hear the Voice from out the Fire.
And to the same purpose that Oracle which is extant in Cedrenus and Malela,
Not. in Jamblichum page 300.
and corrected by the learned Dr. Gale, (...)
(...)
(...), etc.
There does from the capacious Heaven descend
Vast and Eternal Light, Immortal Fire,
Which all things tremble at, Earth, Heaven, Sea,
With the Tartarian Vaults; which Demons dread:
Fatherless Father of all things, alone,
Father and Son to his Eternal self,
Born of himself, Untaught, Unchangeable,
His Nature unaccessible to Reason,
His Habitation Fire; and this is God,
Of whom we Angels are a slender part;
And now in silence from our Altars go.


Now this Notion was so frequent in the most ancient and Oriental Theology,
that it might possibly give original to the Worship of the Fire among the
Chaldeans and Persians; to those Magi among the Cappadocians, called Pyrethi,
which Strabo Lib. 15.
make mention of; to the Vestal Fires among the Greeks and Romans, and the like
Custom among the Solinus Cap. 35.
Britans. Therefore the Unbelievers show a great deal of Ignorance, when they
tax this Relation of Moses representing God's appearing on the Mount in a flame
of Fire, with any Incongruity, or invent any groundless stories to account for
it; seeing this is nothing but what is agreeable to the Ancient Divinity and
the usual Sentiments of most Nations in the World. And so as for the
Earthquake, or shaking of the Mountain, it is no more than what all Nations
have thought has come to pass at the presence of God. As Psalm. 68.8. The Earth
shook, the Heavens also dropped at the presence of God. And Psalm. 104.32. He
looks on the Earth, and it trembles. And Virgil in his Description of the
Approach of Phoebus, does in a manner but translate the words of Moses.

-- tremere omnia visa repent,
Liminaque Laurusque Dei: totusque moveri
Mons circum, and mugire adytis cortina reclusis,
-- all things do seem to quake,
The Doors and Laurels of the Gods do shake;
The tottering Mountain moves in Eddies round,
And from the Curtain creeps a hollow sound.
So whenever the coming of Hecate is described, as in Theocritus his
Pharmaceutria, etc. Or when any great Deity appears, as that great Demogorgon
which Lucan mentions, Lib. 3. the Earth is always said to tremble.

-- peretis, an ille
Compellandus erit, quo nunquam terra vocato
Non concussa tremit --
But after all here was not the least ground to suspect any Deceit in this
wonderful occurrence; for Moses deals very openly with the Israelites in this
matter, and suffers them to come up into the Mountain after the LORD had
departed thence. And there is a signal given them when they shall venture to
come. When the Trumpet sounds along, they shall come up to the Mount, Exodus
19. v. 13. Now if there had been any thing of this pretended Vulcano in the
Mountain that Moses had cheated them with, to be sure Moses had forbid them to
come up to the Mountain altogether; for their viewing those natural Eruptions
afterward would have laid open the Cheat; as much as if they had been present,
when Moses gave out he was receiving his Law from God, who exhibited himself in
that Appearance.


Phil. But still, Credentius, there is another of this Legislator's Actions,
which sticks much in my stomach, and that is his making the Jews believe that
by a divine power he turned the Waters of the Red Sea into two solid Walls
standing up on each side of the Israelites to let them pass through upon the
dry-ground. But to say nothing of the pleasantness of this Miracle: Methinks
this was but a cast of the Legislator's Cunning; to coin a Miracle out of the
Seas Low Water. For it is a Tradition among the Egyptians, that Moses being a
little more subtle than the ignorant Jews, or the Egyptians which pursued
him, understood the exact time of the Tide of that Sea, and so carried over
upon the Ebb, his People safe, whilst the Egyptians were lost for lack of
better observation. Ant. Lib. 2. Cap. ult.
Which Thought so wrought upon the Learned Josephus, that he allowed the same
to be done by Alexander, in passing the Pamphylian Sea. Or however this Miracle
is much lessened, if we assert with a great many of the Divines, that the Jews
did not cross the Sea; but only went in a little way, and came out again on the
same side; and then ignorant folks that lived far off from the Sea, might be
imposed upon at the same rate, every time it is low water with us.


Cred. It is a wonder at this time of Day that you witty Gentlemen who are
endeavoring to settle all things upon a new Bottom, should be beholding to one
of old Porphyry's Cavils to bespatter our Religion; or to an idle Tale of the
Egyptians. But in answer to these Insinnations.

1. I am of Opinion, The Israelites did not pass round the Head of the Sinus.
there is no reason to think, but that the Israelites passed quite through the
Channel of the Sea from one shore to the other. For the only reason which gave
rise to the other Opinion was the Relation of the Journies of the People, Numb.
23. where v. 6. it is said that they departed from Succoth which is on the
Egyptians side of the Red Sea, and pitched in Etham, and from thence moved to
Pi-hahiroth, passed through the midst of the Sea into the Wilderness, and so
went three days journey into the Wilderness of Etham. Whence they conclude that
Etham, and the Wilderness of Etham, must needs be on the same side of the Sea;
and consequently the Jews did not march cross the Sea, but only through one
side of it, in a semicircle, and out again a little higher on the same side.
But this is contrary to the express words of Scripture which say, they passed
through the middle of the Sea. And as for the difficulty about Etham, that is
fairly solved, by allowing only two Ethams, the one a Town which they encamped
at, on the Egyptian side, the second on the Erabian side, a Wilderness.
Instances of which are common enough in Scripture and Profane Histories. But
if we must needs have the Wilderness of Etham denominated from the Town, Mr. Le
Clerk Dissert. de Maris Idumaei traject.
has ingeniously guessed that Etham the Town was situated nigh the upper part
of the Sinus Arabicus, and gave denomination to a great Desert which surrounded
the Head of that Bay, and reached down a considerable way on both sides. So
that though they marched from the Wilderness of Etham cross the Bay, they would
be only in another part of the Wilderness of Etham still.

The Waters did not stand erect.
2. Neither do I see any reason to assert that the Waters are miraculously
consolidated; or that they did in a literal sense stand on an heap, or erect
like a Wall. But only God sent a strong Wind, as the Text says, which blew back
the Tide and all the waters, which covered the sands over against Pi-hahiroth,
further toward the Ocean; leaving some waters stagnating toward the Head of
the Sinus all along toward the Mediterranean Sea. So that by this mean the
sholes about Pi-hahiroth must needs be left dry, for the Israelites to pass
over: Indeed it must be a North wind which must produce this effect, or at
least a North-East; whereas our Translation says, an East. But there is no
necessity of translating Cadim East, it signifying only a strong wind. And so
St. Jerome interprets it, ventum vehementem and urentem, a vehement and burning
wind. And Ps. 48.7. Thou breakest the ships of Tarsis with a Kadim, the LXX.
Vid. Cler. Diss.
translate it, (...), with a mighty wind. Vid. Ez. 27.26. Job 27.21. Jer.
18.17. And then this explication will be very agreeable to the words of the
Text, and that division which is assigned to the Waters there. And the Lord
caused the Sea to go back by a strong East Wind all that night, and made the
Sea dry-land, and the Waters were divided, Ex. 14.21. Now as for those words in
the song of Moses and Miriam, where it is said, that the Floods stood upright
as an heap, and the Depths were congealed in the heart of the Sea, that must be
taken only as a Poetical or Metaphorical Expression. And where it is said that
the Waters were a Wall unto them, it must be understood only that there were
Waters on both sides the sholes they passed over. And this is agreeable to the
expression in the Prophet Nahum, Art though better than No-ammone, or populous
No, that was situate among the Waters, that had Waters round about it, whose
Rampart was the Sea, and whose Waters were a Wall? Nah, 3.8.

Not beat back by a natural Wind.
3. Nor did this come to pass by any natural Wind, but by a miraculous one,
which the Scripture says was sent immediately by God, for that purpose. For no
Histories give account, that ever since that time, the Waters were so blown
out, which must have often come to pass, if the cause had been natural; nay
more frequently of late than formerly, the Waters of all Creeks and Sinus's,
being more shallow in these later Ages of the World, than the Centuries which
were nigher to the Deluge. But if such Ebbs had been so natural and frequent as
the Infidels pretend, it was impossible that Moses could have put such a Banter
upon so great a Multitude, who could not have all been ignorant of the Tide of
so Neighboring a Sea, nor would the Egyptians have ventured into the danger
of a Sea, the time of whose return they must needs know as well as Moses. Nay
it is impossible, that such a great Army should be drowned by the coming back
of an ordinary Tide, and that there should not remain so much as one of them.
It must therefore be allowed, that God kept the Waters back by this
preternatural Wind, till the Israelites were passed over, and then suffered
them to return back upon the Egyptians, in their full fury.

4. Alexander's passing the Pamphylian Streights, no Parallel.
It does not make any thing against the Truth of this Miracle, that Alexander
passed his Army over the Streights of the Pamphylian Sea; for those Streights
are naturally dry at every low Water; which, I believe, Josephus was ignorant
of, which made him compare it with this great Occurrence in the Mosaical
Expedition. Now of that matter Strabo writes thus, Strab. Lib. 14.
About Phaselis there are Streights toward the Sea, through which Alexander
passed his Army. There is also a Mountain called Climax, which lies to the
Pamphylian Sea, leaving a straight passage to the shore, which is quite bare,
in good weather; but when the Waves arise, it is for the most part covered with
them. Now the Road by the Mountains is about, and difficult, and therefore in
calm weather they go by the shore. Now Alexander name thither in stormy
weather, and trusting to his Fortune, would go over before the Waves were
abated, which made his Soldiers go all day up to the Navel in Water. And much
to the same purpose does Plutarch speak Plutar. Vit. Alexandri.
. This March through Pamphylia has been a subject to many Historians of mighty
wonder, and fine Declamation, as if the Sea, by order of the Gods, gave place
to Alexander, which almost always is a rough Sea there, and does very rarely
open a smooth way under those broken Rocks. And this Menander hints at in his
Comedy speaking of a Wonder (...), etc. But Alexander himself in his Epistles
speaks of no Miracle, but only says he passed by Climax as he came from
Phaselis. Now it is plain this was no Miracle, by the joint Authority of these
two Excellent Historians, who make the passage there an ordinary Thing; but the
Mosaic Transit must remain a Miracle still, till you can find as good
Historians to vouch for the same commonness of a passage through the Red Sea.

The Egyptian Tradition groundless.
5. As for your alleging the Tradition of the Egyptians making this Miracle
only a Trick of Moses: I think there is little to be built upon the credit of
the Egyptian Traditions, which if hearkened to, would fill all History full of
Fable. And they are less to be depended upon, when they seem to be set up on
purpose to discredit the Nation of the Jews, whom they had such a mortal Enmity
to, and whom to discredit they coined so many Lies, as appears by the Books of
Manetho, Lysimachus, etc. Well, but what is this Egyptian Tradition? It is
only a report of the Memphites which was as strongly opposed by the
Heliopolitans. Vid. Clem. Alex. Strom. Lib. 1. Eusebius. Praep. Lib. 9. Cap. 27.
As appears from the fragment of Artapanus his History of the Jews. Now the
Memphites (says he) tell, that Moses who was well acquainted with all the
Country, knowing the Time when the Tide would be out, carried over all the
Multitude when the Sea was dry. But the Heliopolitans say otherways, That the
King followed the Jews going away with what they had borrowed from the
Egyptians, bringing with him a great Army and his holy Animals. But Moses was
commanded by a Divine Voice to strike the Sea with his Rod; he touched the Sea
with his Rod, and the Waves giving place, he led over his Forces in a dry
Tract. Now set this Tradition of the Heliopolitans which is very agreeable to
the Letter of Scripture, and that of the Memphites, which seems only to be a
groundless Cavil against the Jews, both together; and what do they make more
for the Infidels than the Believers? And why are the Memphites to be believed
against the Scripture-History, more than the Heliopolitans for it? But there is
no wonder to be made but that there would be variety of Traditionary Stories in
the Neighborhood about such a wonderful Occurrence as this. And thus we find a
like story among the Ichthyophagi, who were situated not far off from that
place of the Red Sea, where the Israelites in probability went over, being over
against Mount Sinai, Hist. Fab. Lib. 3.
thus related by Diodorus Siculus. (...), Among the Ichthyophagi who live hard
by, this History is handed down by tradition from their Forefathers, that once
there was a mighty Ebb of the Sea, so that every place of this Bay was dry,
which then looked green, the Sea flowing to the contrary parts. But when the
Earth had for some time appeared, there then came again a great Tide, and made
the Bay as it was before. So that you see, Philologus, that these Traditions of
the Egyptians are so far from discrediting the Truth of this Mosaical Miracle,
that they tend much to support it. It not being to be supposed, that the
Tradition of such a remarkable Action should be totally lost in the Country
where it was performed; or that it should be handed down with all the
particulars of Truth, with which he that did it himself has related it. And
besides, if you consult the Descriptions of this Bay given by Belon, Furerus,
Thevenot, etc. You will not find that any such Reflux ever happens there now,
or that, though there be some shoals which incommode the Ships, Men can at any
time pass over upon dry ground.


Phil. This is pretty plausible, Sir; but pray how will you be able to excuse
his Laws from the Absurdities which they abound with? Now these stab the Jewish
Religion to the Heart; for how can those Laws have God Almighty for their
Author, which do not so much as seem to be composed by wise Men? I cannot stay
to run through his whole System of Laws; but for my part I look upon a great
number of them to be absurd and ridiculous, others contrary to common Justice,
and the rest but mean and pitiful, and unworthy of God the Author. What more
silly than the command of not eating the blood of an Animal? as if it was worth
the cognizance of a Legislatour to forbid Men the use of Black-Puddings. Is it
worthy a Divine Law to forbid the sowing of Maslin, or that poor Folks should
wear Linsey-Wolsey? And does it not look a little like a jest gravely to
establish, that an Ox and an Ass shall not be yoked together? Besides, there
are other things in the Body of his Laws, which contradict the common notions
of ordinary Justice. What is the setting up in his Commonwealth so many
Asylums, but only making a Rendezvous, or an Alsatia, for a number of
Hedg-Rogues to plague their honest Neighbors; His Lex Talionis is unmerciful
Cruelty, that when I by chance, or in a scuffle, have beat out a Man's Eye, I
must stand still to let him bore out mine in cold blood. His redemption of
Estates, after the year of Jubilee, is to discourage good Parts and Industry,
and to entail Estates for ever, it may be, upon the Block-headed Heirs of those
particular Families which first laid hands upon them. His other Laws about
Murder, Theft, Sacrifices, etc. are such as are equaled by the meanest
Commonwealths, and the ordinariest superstitions; only here are some things
more ridiculous than are to be found elsewhere, with a deal of Injunctions
about Red-Cows, Scape-Goats, and forty things more of the same Nature. But if
God had been the Author of these Laws, and this Institution, they had without
all doubt been grounded upon admirable reason, excellently fitted to the
benefit of Mankind, and the usefulness of them to Society, and to make Men good
would have been apparent to all that considered them; but these seem only to be
an odd jumble of Arbitrary Precepts; for which there is no other but a Woman's
Reason to be given, Because, forsooth, God would command them. And is not this
a fine way of making Laws --


Cred. I find you are running, The Jewish the best of all Political Laws.
Philologus, upon your old strain, and therefore I must beg leave to interpose
a little. I believe it is want of due consideration of the Laws of Moses, which
makes you talk against that, which when you understand better, you would rather
admire. For my part I look upon the Judaical to be the most excellent Civil
Constitution which ever was, or ever will be in the World; and if you will but
compare the three Legislative Books of Moses, with what are extant of the
Egyptian, Attick, and Lacedemonian Laws, the Roman twelve Tables, their
Plebiscita, and Imperial Rescripts, nay even when they were collected into the
Digests, You will find, that they all fall short of these Laws of Moses. I do
not speak this at random, nor in the least to detract from the Roman Laws; but
considering the Circumstances of the Jewish Nation, their Laws do, I think, far
exceed the other. Indeed the Jewish Laws were not drawn up into such an exact a
Systematical Method, nor adorned with such Artificial Terms, nor do so
precisely set out the minute Boundaries of Right and Wrong, as the Roman; but
yet they are better calculated for ordinary Justice and Neighbourly Society;
The extraordinary mercifulness of them.
and what is better yet, for Mercy and Charity. I say Mercy and Charity, and I
defy any Civil Constitution in the World to show so many good-natured Laws, and
enacted with such a tender regard to their Fellow Creatures, as the Jews can.
What more kind Constitution could there be than to ordain Cities of Refuge for
the innocent Manslayer to fly to, to avoid the impotent Anger of the Relations
of the killed, which according to the Custom of those times, were wont
immediately to revenge their Kindreds Death; thereby to give him Time to clear
himself: which if he could not, the Law allows him to be dragged even from the
Horns of the Altar, Exodus 21.14. The kind usage which by those Laws is to be
given to Slaves; and the stripes which are not to be exceeded in punishing
Criminals, are another Argument of the Mercifulness of these Laws above others.
The great care which is taken to prevent mischief which might happen by the
flat roof'd Buildings of those times by ordering Battlements to be made round
them; and the penalty of Women's taking abortive potions, do confirm the same.
The forbidding the Jews to suffer a Beggar among them, and not allowing new
Married Men to be forced from their Wives the first year to the Wars, are a
Tenderness which most other Nations are wanting in. Indeed the same Laws punish
Adultery with Death, but then they are so mild as to punish Theft with only
abundant Restitution. In which sanctions you may see an admirable Temperament
of Justice and Clemency; and which may serve for an Example to other
Governments, where Adulteries which are irreparable are pretended to be
recompensed by pecuniary Mulcts, and Thefts, for which restitution may be made,
are Capital. Nay in these Laws there is a tender Regard had to Beast
themselves, of which the forbidding to muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads
out the Corn, is a sufficient instance; mercifully providing that the poor
Beast which provides sustenance for us, should not be denied its natural
cravings after its own. And so it is in the case of the coupling an Ox and an
Ass and other (...), tenderly taking care that one Beast of greater strength
should not force another poor Creature of less toil beyond its ability. Thus
much I have thought fit in some few particulars to point out the Merciful
Disposition of these Laws, which is not so visible in any civil Constitution in
the World as in this.

The great Wisdom in them.
And, besides, you may perceive as much Wisdom and excellent Design running
through the whole frame of it. The Distinction of Families and Registery of
their names was the most useful thing which could be in a Commonwealth;
thereby to know its own strength and abilities, to prevent Lawsuits, and to
settle Inheritances. The sabbatical or fallow year was a noble contrivance to
keep a Country in fertility, and from being worn out of heart by covetous
Tillers. The weekly Sabbath, setting aside the Religiousness of it, was a
wonderful ease both to Servants and Cattle, and must even upon this account be
esteemed a very wise Establishment, which other Nations were wanting in. But
their severe punishment of Idolatry of all sorts, and the great encouragement
of the Worship of the one true God, from whom the whole World had relapsed, is
such a Glory of the Judaical Laws above all other, as can never be eclipsed by
all that can be said against them by Infidel Tongues. Talk what you will of
your Solon's, Lycurgus's, and Numa's, but the Idolatrous Worships which they
established by their Laws is enough to ruin their Character in the Opinion of
all sober Deists; whilst they must needs have a secret esteem for the Jewish
Legislatour in setting the Worship of the one true God among his People alone,
in opposition to the whole Idolatrous World. Nay that hostile odium which the
Historian calls their Aversion to a free conversation with other Nations which
their Law obliged them to, was that which preserved both their Religion and
their Laws from the encroaching powers of their Neighboring Potentates: For if
they had wanted this, they had been lost in their Babylonian Captivity, and
forever mixed with that Idolatrous Nation. And truly this surliness was such a
good piece of Policy among the Jews, that we Englishmen in the midst of our
complaisance, should not do amiss to learn, who have so long been fond of
fetching over the Customs of a Neighboring Nation, that they seeing us so very
obliging, were once in a fair way to have sent us over their Government and
Religion too.

Objections against particular Laws answered.
As to your exceptions which you have raised against some particular Instances
in the Mosaical Law, I think they are not very material. The forbidding of the
Blood of Animals for food was a Noachical Precept, as well as Mosaical; which
God by a new sanction thought fit under Moses his dispensation to continue. And
at the first giving of it in Noah's time it was a very proper Injunction, and
highly rational: For God at the same time gave Mankind a License to eat the
Flesh of Animals, excepting only the Blood. This being as it were a kind of
Sacrament, or Token, to put them in mind of the tenderness they ought to have
in shedding Human Blood; as appears by the Context, where Murder is forbidden,
and Blood is required for Blood. As to your objection against the Law of sowing
mixed seed, I presume the reason which Philo gives is sufficient, that the
strength of the ground might not be worn out thereby, and no encouragement
given to the Husbandman's Covetousness. The wearing linsey woolsey was probably
a proud fantastic fashion of the Heathens at that time, which therefore the
Jews were forbid to imitate. Though further I believe all the three
Conjunctions mentioned, Deuteronomy. 22. of yoking the Ox with an Ass, the mingling of
seeds, and wearing Linen mixed with Woollen have, as Theodoret observes,
something emblematical mixed with the precept, to make Men have the greater
abhorrence of all venereal commixtures contrary to nature. As for the Lex
Talionis of the Jews, let it have been as rigid as you would make it, it is no
more than what was practiced in other Nations, and had a place among the
celebrated Roman Laws in the 12 Tables. Nuct. Anic. Lib. 20. c. 1.
And as it is set down in Aulus Gellius is thus; SI MEMBRVM. RVPERIT. NI. CVM.
EO. PACIT. TALIO. ESTO. But the Jews say that for Mutilations where Death did
not ensue, a pecuniary Mulct was generally accepted and granted to the maimed
person; and that the Judge did never inflict the Talio, but upon the desire of
the injured party, who unless he were very malicious would rather accept a
recompense in Money. And so for the Return of mortgaged Estates to the owners
at the Jubilees, there is no manner of injustice in this Law, because the
Estate could be sold for no more Money than an Annuity from the time of sale
till the year of Jubilee, was worth, and it was at the purchaser's peril if he
ventured more upon it. And there was encouragement enough for Men of Parts and
Industry to raise themselves by purchase only of Annuities for fifty years: Nay
further this Law seems to be excellently contrived to hinder the encroaching
purchaces of Covetous Men, which has given so much disturbance in all
Commonwealths, and which occasioned the Leges Agrariae, which gave such great
Content to the Roman Live. Hist. Lib. 4. cap. 48. Lib. 6. c. 11.14.
Citizens. So Aristotle in his Politics says, Arist. Pol. Lib. 2. c. 7.
That Solon made a Law, and that other Countries have the same, that every Man
should not purchase as much Estate as he had a mind to. And again, the Law
forbids to sell a Man's Household goods; Id. Lib. 6. c. 4.
as the Law of the Locri, which obliges a Man not to sell them unless he can
make it out that some great calamity has befell him. Besides, the Law commands
to keep those ancient Patrimonies which came by Inheritance. And so again in
another place. In many Cities it is established by Law, that no one should have
power to alienate the ancient Inheritances. And there is a Law which is said to
be of Oxylus, which injoyns that no one should lend Money to another, and take
his Estate as a Pawn for it. So that if this be a fault in the Mosaical Laws,
the Attick and Roman are liable to the same Censure. As for the Red Heifer
which is commanded to be Sacrificed, Numb. 19.2. the reason most probably is,
that such an one is more beautiful and choice, such as the Ancients made use of
for Sacrifice; of which Plut. Isid. and Oysr.
Plutarch says the Egyptians were so scrupulous, that if a Red-Bull had but
one black or white Hair, he was unfit for Sacrifice. And lastly for the
Scapegoat, I take that to be an Expiatory Sacrifice purposely designed to be a
Type of our blessed Savior, and was expiatory only by relation to his
sufferings.


Phil. For my part I have no great liking to your Types and Figures; but why
should not these Laws be given in opposition to the Zabii, those ancient
Idolaters, which Learned Men of late have found out; and from whose Doctrines
methinks they give a pretty handsome Rationale of the Mosaic Laws.


Cred. Let this Rationale be as pretty as you please, I believe it is very
false, and that there were never any more such a Nation as the Zabii, than the
Vtopians. They never had any more being than in the Dreams of the falsifying
Jews, who four or five hundred years ^go writ some Sham-Books, under their
Name. I do not doubt but that Maimonides saw them, and was imposed upon by
them, so that the cheat does not lie at his door. The Zabii among the ancient
Arabians were esteemed a Name for Sorcerers, Aul. Gellius Lib. 4. c. 1.
or Fortune Tellers, and signified no more than the Chaldaei Az. 2.
in Latin and the Gypsies in English. And thus it is used in the Alchoran Hist.
Din. p. 281.
: and Abu^-Pharaj^us set out by Dr. Pocock, says their Profession was the same
with that of the ancient Chaldeans. Now should not we make pretty work of it,
if we should go to give an account of the old Egyptian rites and customs, and
the Coprick Language, from the lies and cant of our vagrant Gypsies? and truly
the case is the very same of those Books which Maimonides relies upon, that
pretend to give an account of the old Chaldean Idolaters in Abraham's and Moses
his time, and to be wrote as long ago as that. Vid. Maimon. More Nevoch. Part.
III. Cap. 29.
Now if these Zabian Books, which Maimonides and his Followers so much rely
upon, prove to be Forgeries, then all this Zabian Hypothesis fall to the
ground. Now these Zabian Books which Maimonides saw, were one called
Haistamchus, another Hattel eshmaoth, or of speaking Images; another called
Tamtam, another named Hasscharabh, another of the Degrees of the Celestial
Orbs, and of the Ascendant Figures in each degree, another Book of speaking
Images, a certain Book attributed to Hermes, a Book wrote by Isaac the Zabian,
which disputes for the Law of the Zabians, and his great Book of the Customs
and Particularities of the Zabians. Besides, another Book of Agriculture. Now
is not this a pretty Library of Books, for the Abrahamical and Mosaical Times.
But if they are so ancient as is pretended, how came they never to be heard of,
but among the Jews in Egypt, or Spain, about four or five hundred years ago?
One would have thought, that some of the Writers of the Old, or New Testament,
should have spoke of some of them, or some of the Learned Fathers, who
understood the Orientals, as St. Jerome and Origin, who were so inquisitive this
way; methinks, they should have somewhere mentioned them. But to go no further,
some of these Books carry forgery in their very Titles. The Book of speaking
Images looks like the stories of the Talismans which the Arabian talks so much
of about that time. The Book of Celestial Orbs and Ascendants looks like a
forgery about Rambam's time, when the Follies of Judicial Astrology among the
Arabians were at the height. But Isaac the Zabian was infatuated to give
himself that name, pretending to be older than Abraham, and yet take his Son's
Name. Or however his Jewish Name must needs tell all the World, he was no
Zabian. And besides Isaac, in his great Book, treats of the Temples dedicated
by the Zabii to Intellectual Forms; whence any body would know, the Book to be
wrote by some one, who had been bred in a School of the Peripatetick
Philosophy. And the Disputes in those Books about the Eternity of the World
show, they were compiled by some one, who had been where Aristotle's Arguments
upon that subject had been bandied about. I should weary you, to tell you all
the simple Tales which Maimonides quotes of these Books; which are all composed
in the very strain of the Talmud; from whence any body may guess their
Original. They make Abraham very doughtily disputing with a great King of the
Zabians, That there is another God besides the Sun, and that the Sun is but the
Hatchet in the hand of God. For which the King claps Abraham up into Prison;
but notwithstanding that, Abraham disputes there still; so that the King at
last fearing, lest Abraham should do mischief among his People by his subtle
Disputations, seizes all his Goods, and banishes him to the further part of the
East. Now does this look like a Zabian, or rather not like a Jew, who had a
mind to aggrandize the great Parts of his Progenitor? Besides, the foolishness
of that Writer is betrayed, by making such great Monarchies in those Ages of
the World, when Kingdoms were generally confined to Cities, or small Provinces,
as appears by Abraham's fighting half a score of such Kings with 318 Men. The
same Books tell you strange Tales, of Adam, and Seth, and Noah, etc. which
plainly show them to be wrote by one, who was acquainted with the Mosaic
Genealogy. That Adam was the Apostle of the Moon, and exhorted Men to her
Worship; that Seth was a Renegado to his Father's Worship, and so was Noah, who
condemned Image Worship. That Adam went into a far Country nigh India, and
brought home a Tree with Flowers, Leaves, and Branches of Gold; and likewise a
Tree of Stone, with the Leaves of another green Tree, whose Leaves would not
burn in the Fire; that was so large that ten thousand Men of the bigness of
Adam might shelter themselves under it, and that the two Leaves which he
brought with him were so large, that each of them would cloth two Men. But I
will tire you no longer with these insipid Talmudical Lies, which methinks any
body might guess, a Jew to be the Author of. But however, what rare stuff is
this to explain Scripture by? One would wonder how it should come into the
heads of Learned Men to think, that God in framing his Sacred Laws should have
any regard to such idle Tales. For my part I pity them when I see them so
sweating themselves in such a silly Enterprise, and throwing away so much
Labor and Learning to no manner of Purpose: and besides the great Advantage
they give to the Infidels, to expose the Laws of God, when they see that
Christians settle them upon so slender a foundation.


Phil. It behooves you to be as zealous for your Religion as you can, for you
find we get ground upon you every day. We live in a very prying Generation, and
it is not laying your hand over a sore place in your Religion, that will secure
it now, you must maintain your cause by pure dint of Argument, or lose it. But
what say you now to your great Legislator, when we shall prove, that all his
Celebrated Religion which he pretended to give the Jews from Heaven, was only
pinched from the Worship of the Heathen Egyptians? And this your own Divines
are sensible of at last, and, by reason of the plain Evidence of the Case, have
given over the Cause to us. For some of them have proved the Christian Religion
to be all Jewish; and others the Jewish Religion to be derived from the
Heathen: and therefore for my part, I am for taking my Religion at the Fountain
head, and so will continue a Primitive Heathen in defiance to all innovation. I
have nothing to say to Christianity, for the Judaical Laws are the matter now
in hand, and these, I say, were most of them (the Ceremonial especially)
nothing but Egyptian Rites, which Moses brought over with him thence; which is
a considerable Argument against the Divinity of them: for to be sure God
Almighty would never have copied his Laws from a parcel of simple Idolaters. To
begin with Circumcision, which is pretended to be the Characteristick of the
Jews, that to be sure was taken from the Egyptians, or some other Nation; that
Ceremony being used not only in Egypt, but in Aethiopia, by the Colchi and
Arabians. Thus the Vrim and Thummim was enjoined in imitation of that Locket of
Jewels, which hung from the Neck of the Egyptian High Priest, mentioned by
Hist. Fab. Lib. 1. c. 37.
Diodorus Siculus. The Linnen-Garments which the Jewish High Priest and other
inferior ones wore, were copied from the Egyptian Priest, who wore the like,
as Herodotus Herod. Hist. Lib. 2. c. 37.
and Plutarch Plutarch de Iside and Osyr.
relate. The Cherubims were only the imitation of Apis his Hieroglyphick, or
Image the Bull, or of those (...), so much in fashion among the Egyptians; as
the Image of Sphinx upon their Temple Doors does evince. And so was the Ark of
the Covenant fetched from the use of the Cista, in the Rites of the Egyptian
Osyris, the Orgia of Bacchus, and the Eleusinian Sacra. The Feasts of New Moons
were taken from the like practice, among the Heathen; and so were the Jewish
Purifications from their Lustrations. And lastly the Temple of Jerusalem, was
but a Copy of those Egyptians, who are observed by Herodotus Herod. c. 4.
, to be the first Authors of Altars, Images and Temples. And what I pray
becomes of your Religion now, when the Foundation of it was borrowed, you see,
from the most stupid of all the Heathen Idolaters, that fell down and Worshipped
the very Pot Herbs of their Garden?


Cred. I am heartily sorry that the learned Author De Legibus Hebraeorum has
put a keen Sword into the Infidels hands, Jewish Rites not derived from the
Egyptian.
the better to attack Religion with, which their blunt Arguments would have
been less able to do. Not that I think, if Dr. Spencer's supposition should be
true, that the Judaical Rites were derived from the Egyptian; that the
Infidels would absolutely get the better of us. For it is possible that God
Almighty might make such condescentions to the hardness of the Jews hearts and
their slavish hankering after the Pomp of the Egyptian Worships, as to allow
them in some particulars of their Ceremonies. But I think there is no necessity
of granting this; for all the Rites commanded by the Jewish Law seem either
perfectly set up in opposition to their superstitions, or are such as were
practiced in common with them, and the ancient Patriarchs, or else were such
ordinary performances in Religious Worship, as no Nation could easily avoid. I
confess, I am far from the other opinion of those who assert, That the
Egyptians, and others of the Heathen World, learned all these Religious Acts
from the Jews, because some of them they might learn from their common
Forefathers, and others they might jump upon by chance, or be led to them by
the natural Tendency of the thing. There are a Thousand things which Men do
very alike, and yet neither of them can be said to learn or copy from one
another; nor can be so much as said to dream of what the other did. Indeed, Men
of Wit and Learning may make a pother about them, show their own parts in
maintaining a Paradox, and amuse unwary People; but they can make nothing
solidly out in such a manner. To make use of an odd Instance. I will undertake
to take an ordinary Scrivener's Conveyance, that is drawn up after the most
blundering Rate, and put it into a Learned hand that will vouchsafe to lay out
time this way; and he shall fetch your Parallel cases for every period or word
out of the Antiquities of Greece and Rome, bring like quotations to every line
out of the Codes and Pandects, allege apposite sayings out of Tully and
Demosthenes, Libanius and Themistius; so that the Scrivener might almost seem
to have stolen the Conveyance out of these Books: whereas perhaps the poor Man
never heard a word of them in all his Life. And truly I think Dr. Spencer's
Book is but a Project of the same Nature. He finds that some things in the
Jewish and the Heathen Ceremonies agree, and therefore resolves the first was
derived from the latter. Now it is an easy thing for a learned Man, that has
leisure enough, to pick up out of such a number of Heathen Books, which are
extant, a great many expressions in their Explication of Heathen Rites, which
may make them look something like the Jewish Ceremonies; and yet in reality
they might be no more alike than the Scrivener's Conveyance to Cicero's Oration
pro Milone. But to speak to the particulars which you have mentioned:

1. Circumcision, Circumcision not from the Egyptians.
though it were not a Rite purely Judaical, yet it was first given to Abraham,
and so descended down to all his Posterity; and as to what other use of it
there was in other Nations, it was learned from him and his Offspring. As for
the use of Circumcision among all the Ismaelitish Race in Arabia, and among the
Edomites and other Descendants from Esau and Abraham's Sons by Ketura they
being of the Seed of Abraham as well as the Jews, it is no wonder that they
maintained their Paternal Rite as well as the other. As for the Colchi, Grotius
has proved them to be probably of the Ten Tribes carried away by Salmanasser,
for the Scholiast upon Aristophanes declares, that they own themselves to be of
Jewish Extraction. And if the Testimony of Alexander Polyhistor, Jos. Lib. 1.
c. 16.
quoted by Josephus be to be credited, that the name of Africa came from Afer
the Son of Abraham by Ketura, who planted a Colony there; then we have an easy
account how Circumcision came to the Aethiopians also. There remain then only
the Egyptians, and why they might not learn it from Abraham, or Joseph,
especially when he was in his grandeur in Pharoah's Court, I confess I could
never see any good Reason. Indeed, it is something difficult to think, that a
whole Nation should learn such a troublesome Rite of a Stranger. But the whole
People of the Egyptians were not circumcised only the Hierophantae, and the
Priests. Epiph. Har. 30.
And they might take this up in emulation to Joseph, that they might not seem
to be outdone by him in any extraordinary mark of Holiness; as the Magicians
vied with Moses in pretending to do the same Miracles with him. And I take it
to be plain, that no other Nation made use of an universal Circumcision of all
their Males, but the Jews only. The Egyptians had among them a sort of a
Female Circumcision mentioned by Strabo, a custom never dreamt of among the
Jews. And it is evident that the Gentiles generally believed that Circumcision
was the Characteristick only of a Jew, or else those reproachful names given to
the Jews upon this account, such as verpus, recutitus, curtus, etc. mentioned
by Juvenal, Martial and others, have no sense in them; they being designed to
stigmatize the Jews by them, for a particular singularity in this matter above
other Nations; which if so many Nations, as you pretend, had used, there would
be no ground for. But we never find, that these odd names were given to the
Egyptians, Arabians, the Colchi, or the Aethiopians; and therefore it is plain,
that they were not universally circumcised, as the Jews were.

2. And so for the Vrim and Thummim, Nor Vrim and Thummim.
although the Heathen Egyptians might use something like it, yet it is more
probable, as Grotius says, that they did it ut pueri virorum res imitantur,
imitate this as Boys use to do what is done by Men; than that this usage should
be taken from the Heathen: This being the Custom of the malicious Demons, to
put their Idolatrous Worshippers upon, as may be seen in many particulars, as
learned Men have proved at large. There are two Authors which make mention of
this analogous Rite of the Egyptians, Diod. Hist. Fab. Lib. Ael. Var. Hist.
Lib. 14. c. 24.
Diodorus Siculus, and Aelian. Diodorus says that the Chief Justice of Egypt
had an Image of Precious Stones hanging from his Neck by a golden Chain, which
they called Alethea, or Truth. And that the Causes then began, when the Chief
Justice had fitted to himself this Image of Truth. And Elian relates the same
not much unlike. Of old among the Egyptians the Priests were Judges. And the
Chief Judge was the ancientest among them, who gave judgment to all. Now he of
all Men ought to be the most Just and Impartial. He had an Image about his Neck
of Sapphire Stone, which was called the Image of Truth. And Diodorus adds
further, that after the Litigants had twice given their Libels to the Judges,
then the 30 Judges confer among themselves, and the Chief Justice does (...),
apply the Image of Truth to the other side. Now in all this there is nothing so
like the Vrim and Thummim, as does necessarily evince that this Jewish custom
was derived from the Egyptian. For in Egypt this was the Ornament of the
Chief Justice, among the Jews the Ensigns of the High Priest. Among the Jews,
it was a standing Oracle to consult in extraordinary affairs of state, among
the Egyptians used in ordinary Justice. Nor does it appear to me, that this
Egyptian Alethea was any more, than an Honorary Ensign of the chief Judge, who
could not regularly perform his Office without it, and had nothing more
Oracular in it than a Serjeant's Coif, or an Alderman's Chain. And Petrus
Vallensis in a Letter wrote from Grand Cairo seems to have seen a Mummy of one
of these old Judges, which does ascertain the Figure of the Egyptian Alethea.
Where he says he had seen a Mummy, about whose Neck a Golden Collar was
painted, hanging from his Neck like the Knights of the Golden Fleece. And in
the middle upon his Breast, was the representation of a Plate of Gold, with the
Figure of a Bird upon it. Epist. 18. Now this is very different from the Vrim
and Thummim of the High Priest, which was made of Cloth beset with Precious
stones. All the difficulty is what Diodorus means by his (...), by applying the
Alethea to the contrary side. Now since no History mentions any thing oracular
in this; we cannot fancy it more than only some Hieroglyphical Memento to the
Judges, of the Regard they ought to bear to Justice and Truth; or to the
Witnesses or Litigants, which the Chief Justice did often exhibit to them, to
put them in mind of their Duty. But you will say, how then came the Jews to
have an Usage so very like the Egyptian, if they did not learn it from thence?
Why, I answer it was a common Ensign of Honor in all Nations, to wear a Golden
Chain, and many other People have used it as well as the Jews and the
Egyptians. Thus not only Pharaoh, when he had a mind to advance Joseph to
honor and a place of great Trust, put a Chain of Gold about his Neck, Genesis
4.42. but the King of Babylon did the same to Daniel, Dan. 5.29. For as Crowns
and Scepters in all Nations have been Ensigns of the Regal Authority, so are
Gold Chains and Rings Tokens of the higher Honor, and used not only by the
Eastern Satrapae, but even by the noble Gauls in the West. As is evident by
what Pliny relates of the rise of the Family of the Torquati at Rome from the
first Torquatus, Plin. Hist. Lib. 20.
who was called so from his killing a noble Gaul and taking his Chain from him,
yet reeking with blood, and putting it about his own Neck. Now what great
occasion for wonder is there that the Chief Justice of Egypt had a Chain, with
a remarkable Medal appendant to it different from other Nobles? Or why might
not the Jewish High Priest hang his Breast Plate by a Golden Chain, without
going to Egypt for the Invention? For any other Nation could have taught that
wonderful contrivance as well as the Egyptian. And as to the Appendants, there
is so little agreement between them, viz. a Cloth a span square beset with
Jewels, and a Golden Medal representing the Figure of a Bird, that one of these
can hardly be said to have given rise to the other.

3. Priests linen Garments not from Egypt.
As for your borrowing the use of Linen only for the Garments of the Priests;
I think the just contrary thereof is true, and that the Jews in this were
rather perfectly opposite to the Egyptians, than their Imitators. The
Breast Plate and Robe of the Jewish High Priest were ordered to be made of
Scarlet, Blue and Purple Woolen Cloth, only embroidered with wreaths of fine
Linen. But the use of Woollen Cloth was, as Plutarch says, execrable to the
Egyptian Priests, de Is. and Osyr. And Herodotus tells us, Herod. Lib. 2. c.
37.
that they wore only linen, and shoes of the Papyrus, and that it is unlawful
to them to use any other garments or shoes. But the Jewish Highpriests Robes
were rather like the Babylonians than the Egyptians. For of the Babylonians
Herodotus writes thus, This is the fashion of their Clothing. They use a linen
Garment down to the Ankles, over this they put on another of Wool, and over
all a (...), Id. Lib. 1.
a kind of a short white Coat, which does exactly resemble the Ephod. And
besides he relates this of the Laity among the Egyptians, That they wear
linen Coats fringed about the Legs, which they call Calasyris, over this they
put white woollen Garments, but they do not come into the Temples with them,
nor are buried in them, that being profane. Now to take all this together, it
seems rather that Moses his Laws, concerning the Sacerdotal Robes, were given
in pure opposition to the Egyptians; by ordering that the Jewish High Priest,
the most Sacred Person of all, should wear some of his Garments of Linen and
others of Woollen, like the ordinary Egyptians in their common conversation;
and that the subordinate Priests should be dressed in the Temple but like the
common Laity in Egypt.

Not the Cherubim.
4. And so for the figure of the Cherubim, there is as little ground for the
pretended imitation in this as the other. There is no constat in any records of
the Egyptian Antiquities, that there was any thing among them like a
Mercy-Seat or Covering over the Ark, adorned with such like figures. I think
there is no necessity to assert, that this Covering of the Ark was to be
absolutely plain, without any manner of Sculpture. And if the figure of
something must be engraved, why not the figure of Cherubim as well as any thing
else? Do you think that Imagery was proper only to the Egyptians? Or do you
think that all Nations in the World must be beholding to them to make a figure
of any thing? Had not they Eyes to behold postures, and fancies to delineate
them without going to Egypt for them? Nay is there not in this Ordinance a
particular opposition to the Egyptian Idolatry? For their Temples were
generally filled with the Images of Monkeys, and Calves, and Serpents, the
representations of real Animals, which according to the natural Deism of those
Times, they fancied to be Parts or exhibitions of the Deity, and had supreme
worship given them. But Moses here orders figures to be made, Antiq. Lib. 3.
Cap. 6.
which had little or no resemblance of any thing in the World; and therefore
Josephus says they had a form (...), like nothing that is seen by Men. Their
Images had divine Worship paid to them, and Temples consecrated to their
Honor; but these by the Mosaic Institution were made subservient to the
supreme Deity, and constituted Attendants upon his Mercy-Seat; as it were in
despite to the Egyptian Polytheism, showing that these were the
representations only of Angelick Natures, who were so far from being Gods, that
they were only God's Ministering Spirits. What was the particular figure of
these Cherubims, at this distance is hard to imagine. Indeed, Grotius and
others have very ingeniously conjectured from the Creature^ seen by Ezekiel in
his Visions, Ezekiel. 1.5. and 10.15. which he calls Cherubims, that they had the
Face of a Man, the Wings of an Eagle, the Mane of a Lion, and the Feet of an
Ox. And by this Grotius will have the Dispensations o^ the Divine Providence by
the ministry of Angels Symbolically represented; The Lion representing the
Severity of his Justice, the Eagle the Celerity of his Bounty; The Man his
Goodness and Mercy; and the Ox the slowness of his Punishment; which comes, (as
the Greek Proverb says) (...), with an Ox's foot. Whether or no the Angelick
Appearances in this Form were common to the Patriarchs, I shall not now
dispute; but the Ideas of the Cherubim seems to have been ordinary enough among
the Jews, by Moses his not describing them ^s he does other Things; and was as
^ell known as the painting among us of ^n Angel, in the figure of a Beautiful
Tall Youth with Wings. Among all the ^egyptian representations, I do not find
any thing like this to represent the Ange^ck Natures; and therefore it is in
vain to ^ring in their other Simulacra (...), which were Hieroglyphics of
their Osyris, ^sis, etc. which they worshipped not as Angelick natures depending
upon the ^upreme Deity, but as Sympiternal Deities themselves. Neither need we
grant that his Hieroglyphical, or Symbolical Imagery was at all owing to the
Egyptians, more ^han to other Nations; that sort of enig^atical representation
being in use over ^ll the Eastern Countries, and even the Teraphim in use in
the Patriarchs time, Genesis 31.19. And as for the Image of Sphynx, which was
frequently Pictured upon the Doors of the Egyptian Temples, as Clemens Alex.
relates, Strom. 5. that cannot be conceived in any wise to have contributed an
Origin to the Cherubim, not only because they were situated in a quite
different place; but because the occasion of the Sphynx being painted there,
was to be an Hieroglyphick, that a great many of the Ceremonies in their
Temples were enigmatical, and had another hidden meaning more than their
outward one did declare.

Nor the Ark.
5. Indeed Dr. Spencer has amassed together an abundance of Learning to prove,
that the Egyptians, and Ancient Idolaters made use of a Cista, an Ark or
Chest, Plut. de Isid.
in their superstitions. That the Stolistae, or those of Osyris his Wardrobe,
made use of a Chest or Ark; which any body might guess, without that Doctor's
learning, was to keep their Cloths in He shows a great Deal of the use of the
Cista in the Orgian and Eleusinian Sacra.

Pars obscura cavis celebrabant Orgia Cistis.
Catul. Pelei Nupt. Et levis occultis conscia Cista sacris.
Tibul. Lib. 1. El. 8. Now what a mighty wonder is this, that these Idolatrous
Priests, who pretended to such an abundance of mysterious and absconded Rites
in their superstitions, should make use of a Chest to keep their Trinkets in,
from the Eyes of the Vulgar. If they had been laid open to every Bodies Eyes,
all their mysterious Sacredness had been lost; which was kept up by their lying
under Lock and Key. Besides, these Priests of Cybele and Bacchus, were a sort
of Itinerant Gypsies, that carried about their Trinkets from place to place,
and therefore they must have a Chest, or something like it, to carry their
Raree-show in; unless you would have them put them in their Pockets. For my
part, I cannot imagine any Analogy between these Cistae, and the Ark of the
Covenant; only they were both Repositories, the one for the Law, the other for
the Idolaters lewd Fopperies. If the Law was to be laid up carefully, why was
not a Chest a very proper and apposite Convenience for this Purpose? Or why
must they needs copy from Egypt such a wonderful Contrivance? Certainly no
Nation in the World could be so stupid, as not presently to think of this
themselves. But who can think without horror that God Almighty should institute
his Sacred Ark in imitation of the Lewd Cistae of the Heathen? Read but Clemens
Alexandrinus his Protrepticon, and see what those Cistae were filled with,
Phalli, Pudenda Bacchi, etc. and let any modest Christian judge, if it can be
supposed, that the Purity of the Divine Law could condescend, to be the Ape to
such hor^id Debauchery.

6. Feasts of the New Mons not Egyptian.
The reason why the Feasts of the New Moons were commanded to the ^ews, was
not, I conceive, any wise in ^mitation of the Gentiles; but to engage them more
particularly to Piety, and in observation of the Ancient Patriarchal Usage.
They were enjoined them as a pious Institution, that some portion of each
division of Time might be kept Holy to give a Blessing to the rest; for as the
Sabbath was set aside to be kept Holy in the Week, the Passover, Feast of
Tabernacles, etc. for the Year; so was the Feast of the New Mood ordained to
give a Blessing to the Month. Indeed, it cannot be denied, but that the
Heathen^ kept holy the New Mons too, when they offered up considerable
Sacrifice to the Gods, as Meursius, and Monsieu^ Petit have sufficiently
proved, and D^ Spencer more at large. And it is plai^ from that passage of
Demosthenes, ^rat. I. in Aristog.
when he says, that in the New Mons all com^ up to the Acropolis, and
supplicate the God to give Blessings to the City and themselves. But then I can
never assent, that Mose^ took this from the Heathens. It rathe^ seems to me to
be a practice of the Tru^ Worshipers of God through all Age^ down from the
earliest Times; and f^ descended both to the Jews and Gentile^ from their
common Progenitor Noah^ And it is yet more probable to assig^ these Feasts an
Original in those ancien^ Times, when perhaps the Lunar wa^ the only Year, the
Solar Motion being not yet sufficiently adjusted; and then the New Mood must
with them have all the Solemnity of a New Years Day. Which Opinion will be yet
more satisfactory, if we consider the observation which a learned Man has made,
Jo. Cler. in Numb. 28.
That God does not bid the Jews remember to keep holy the New Mons, as he does
the Sabbath, but only gives them such rites to observe them with, supposing
they knew, that they were to be observed before.

7. Nor washings.
And as for Washings and Lustrations, I cannot assent that they had by any
means their Original from the Gentiles Lustration, but were probably brought
into use by the first Sacrificers in the Eastern Countries, and might be as old
as Noah or Adam. For washing the Hands and the Feet was a part of the Ancient
Cultus, or Neatness, which was a preparation which was never omitted, when they
enterprized any thing which required Neatness or Reverence. Thus we find it
used always before Meals in Abraham's time, Genesis 18.3, 19, 2. And without doubt
natural Reason would suggest that the same respect was owing to God Almighty,
by all who approached his Altar at a Sacrifice; and was as easy and natural a
Token of their Reverence they owed to him, as putting off the shoes and bowing
down. And I doubt not, but the sprinkling the People with Water mixed with the
Ashes of the Sacrifice, was as ancient: It being used; not only in the Jewish,
but in the Roman Sacrifices. Ovid. Fast. Lib. 4. For it was thought requisite
that all, who were present, should in some measure partake of the Sacrifice;
therefore as I showed you before in the beginning of this Discourse, some eat
of it there, and others carried pieces of it home with them. But in expiatory
Sacrifices, for the whole People where the Sacrifice would not suffice for all
to eat of it, it was thought sufficient to mix the Ashes of it with Water, and
so to sprinkle them all with it, that so all might receive something of the
Expiation.

Nor the Temple.
8. After so many Ages from the first use of Temples, it is a very difficult
matter exactly to ascertain the Original of them. It Is true, Herodotus says the
Egyptians first invented them, because the Greeks derived most of their
Customs from that Nation, and therefore the Greek Writers seldom fetch the
Original of any thing any further. I am apt to think that there was not a
general use of Temples, till such time as Idolatry spread over the World, and
had dedicated the Tombs of Heroes to a superstitious use. But yet long before
this, and as ancient as the Noachinal Times, there were not wanting Temples, or
Houses dedicated to a Religious use. For good Men in all Ages have used a
Religious Worship in Public, even in Enos his time, when men began to call
upon the name of the Lord in public Congregations, after Mankind was
considerably increased; and therefore in great Cities and settled Polities the
Convenience of Temples for appointed places to meet together in, and to defend
from the Injuries of the Weather, could not be long wanting. The ancientest
places of Religious Worship I take to be Groves; which were used by the
Patriarchs, and were Lawful places of Worship till such time as, by reason of
the Idolatrous superstition they were applied to, they were taken away by the
Mosaical Law. So Lucian says, that Woods and Mountains were first consecrated
to the Gods. Lib de Sacrif. And Pliny speaking of Trees says, Haec fuere
Numinum Templa, priscoque ritu simplicia rura etiam nunc Deo praecellentem
arborem dicant. These were formerly the Temples of the Gods, and those rural
places which maintain the ancient and simple Rites, are wont to dedicate an
extraordinary Tree to some God. Thus Genesis 21.33. Abraham planted a Grove in
Bersheba, and called there on the name of the Lord the Everlasting God. And it
probably was in a Grove, where Abraham designed to Sacrifice Isaac, and where
the Ram was caught in a Thicket by his Horns, Genesis 22.13. And so probably was
the place where Jacob slept, Genesis 28.22. which he says shall be called the
house of God. Not that from hence can be concluded that there were no Temples
at that time, because the Patriarchs did not use them. For they living a
Pastoral unsettled Life could not have convenience to build them, and were
therefore contented with the more ancient Custom; but this very last Text
implies there were at that time Temples or Houses of God, because Jacob,
Metaphorically, calls that stone, or Place so, which is an undoubted Allusion
to the Temples of those Times. And in all probability Noah built a Temple
presently after the Flood, for the Convenience of Religious worship. He is in
Scripture expressly said, to have built an Altar, Genesis 8.20. which is directly
contradictory to Herodotus, who make the Egyptians Inventors of Altars too.
And why he might not build a Temple, as well as an Altar, I see no reason. Nay
profane History gives a great deal of encouragement to the Conjecture that he
did. For Lucian in his description of the famous Syrian Temple before
mentioned, says, (...), etc. Most Men say that this Temple was built by
Deucalion, namely that Deucalion in whose time the Deluge happened. So that
this ancient Tradition makes Temples as old as the Flood, and does confirm,
that Noah was the first builder of Temples. And Janus, whom learned Men will
have to be another name for Noah too, is said by Macrobius out of Zeno, primum
in Italia templa fecisse, and ritus instituisse Sacrorum, Lib. 1. Sat. cap. 9.
He first built Temples in Italy, and instituted Sacred Rites. So that upon the
whole I think, there is vastly more reason to think, that the use of a Temple
among the Jews came rather down to them by Patriarchal Tradition, than that it
was copied from the Egyptian Idolatry.

And I doubt not, Other Nations have Customs as like the Jewish
but that a great many usages in the Jewish Law came the same way, and were
taken up both by the Heathens and them from their common Progenitors; and
sometimes it may be by chance and ordinary convenience. And I dare say, a
learned Man might as easily prove that the Jewish Ceremonies were derived from
any other Nation, where the like are to be found, as the Egyptians. Vid. Ap.
Lib. 3. Cap. 4.
Philostratus describes the Vestment of the ancient Indian Priests just like
the Jewish; and says they use Oil in their Consecration. And Strabo says it is
a great crime there (as among the Jews) to offer a maimed Victim; Str. Lib. 15.
that they have a Lex Talionis, and that there is a Law, that no Indian should
be a Slave. The Brachmans, the Indian Priests wear Bells about them like the
Jewish High Priest. Slaves there have their Ears bored through, and a perpetual
Light is kept in their Temples; Women and Newborn Children are unclean till
they are purified with Lustrations. They punish Incest and Adultery with death.
Only the Brachmans like the Levites must go into the inward Parts of the
Temple. They are defiled by a dead Body, and have Cakes before their Idols like
the show Bread; and the Brachmans like the Jewish Highpriests must marry
Virgins. Vid. Thevenot. Huet. Them. Prop. 4. Cap. 6.
And the Inhabitants of the Country of Tangath redeem their firstborn with a
Ram. Now when the Jewish and the Indian Rites are so very like, why might not I
assert, that Moses had them from India, as well as you from Egypt? Nay even
the Barbarous Tartars have many things not unlike the Jews. Vid. Conring. These.
Rerump.
They celebrate the New Mons with Songs and Compotations, they bewail their
Dead Thirty Days, they breed no Hogs, and punish Adultery with Death. And so as
to the new World, the Children of the People of Mexico and Jucatan are
Circumcised; and the Mexicans keep in a perpetual Fire. The Charibeans
celebrate the New Mood with the sound of a Trumpet, and abstain from Swines
Flesh. Those of Mechoacana are defiled by dead Bodies; and those of Peru, and
new Spain, marry their Brothers Wives. And in Nicaragua Women after Childbirth
are unclean. Besides, the Attick and Roman Laws and Rites are in many things as
like the Jewish as the Egyptian. The Attick Laws establish that no (...) or
Heiress should marry out of her own Tribe, their (...), or Cakes answer to the
Shewbread; Plut. Sol.
and the Law of Solon that Women in grief should not tear their Cheeks is not
unlike that of Moses, Lev. 19.28. Their Priests were to marry Virgins and
Citizens; and no Lamb was to be a Sacrifice less than a Year old. And we may
say the same of the Roman. Their Sacrifices bore a great correspondence with
the Jewish, the burning the Holocausta, their Mo^a S^lsa, Lustrations, etc.
Their Nudip^dales seem very like the Eastern Devotion of ^ulling off the
shoes. Their Puer^^ae abstaining Forty Days from the Templ^ the Frondeae Casae
in the Feasts of Anna ^erenna, and the Neptunalia, so like the Feast of
Tabernacles; the unhallowing of a Priest that touched a dead Body, or who
^ssociated with his Wife before Sacrifice; all look as like the Jewish Laws, as
any Custom in Egypt. From all which I conclude, that since so many Nations, in
so different parts of the World, have the same Rites with the Jews, either by
chance or Tradition, or it may be by the mimikry of the Devil; I am sure it is
very great Boldness to say, that all these came to the Jews from the Egyptians.


Phil. Well, Credentius, you have made a fine learned Harangue upon the matter,
if we Infidels were to be convinced by that. But I have a notable Objection
which lies both against Moses and all the Sons of the Prophets. And that is,
they appear to be like the rest of the Jews, miserable ignorant People, and
after all their mighty pretenses to the Knowledge of the Divine Nature, are
scandalously ignorant concerning it. They every where seem to be gross
Anthropomorphites, representing God as having Eyes, and Hands, and Feet. Adam
to whom God made his first Revelation, knew nothing of God's Omnipresence, or
Omniscience, but pretended to hide himself from him, and to make a simple
Excuse to him. And Moses, who relates the story brings in God like a Man
walking in the Garden. The same Moses was so silly as to fancy God visible, and
to desire to see him, Exodus 33. And some of the Prophets endow God with humane
Passion, and make him to repent, to be sorry, and to be glad. But above all the
contrivance of the Prophet Jonah is the wisest, who thought to run away to
Tarshish out of God Almighty's reach, as if God had no power out of the Country
of Judea. Now who can expect Revelation to come from those Heads, which were
not furnished with the common notions of natural Religion?


Cred. You do a great injury to the holy Scriptures and to the memory of the
Holy Men, recorded there, to conceive such an extravagant Opinion of them:
especially when it is taught there, that God is a Spirit, that he beholds all
things, is present every where, that he is not a Man, Jews far from being
Anthropomorphites.
and the like. And therefore you ought in all candor to suppose that these
expressions which attribute Hands, Eyes, etc. to God, are only to be taken
metaphorically, and are spoke only (...), after the manner as Men speak. And to
this the Jewish Writers, who are supposed to understand their own Language
best, do unanimously agree. This Maimonides spends several Chapters in his
first Book of his More Nevochim to prove. So the Targum, when the Scripture
seems to impute any corporeal Action to the Deity, interprets it in a way more
agreeable to the Divine Nature. As Genesis 28. And behold the Lord stood above it.
Onkelos paraphrases, the glory of the Lord stood before it. So Genesis 31.49. The
Lord watch between me and thee, The Targum says, the Word of the Lord watch
between me and thee. And this is the constant use of that Interpreter, says
Maimonides More Nev. Lib. 1. Author Halic. Ol. c. 1. quoted by Hottinger in his
Dissertat. Theolog. Philolog.
Cap. 46. And a Jewish Rabbin writes, that when they meet with any expression,
or Metaphor, concerning the Deity of this Nature, they are used to interpose
Cabiacol, if I may so speak. Vid. Buxtorf. Lexicon Talm. Rad. (...). Now the
true reason why the Scripture does express the Attributes of God by Bodily
actions and properties, is not, that those Writers thought God of a bodily
shape, but by the reason of the narrowness of the Hebrew Tongue they wanted
abstracted Terms to express them by. And when these Corporeal Terms were
applied to God, the People of that Nation knew as well what was meant by them,
as the Schools do by all their Quiddities. Thus the Eye of God is the same as
the Providence of God. So Jer. 39.12. Cast thine eye upon him (i. e.) take care
of him. And 2 Chr. 16.9. The Eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole
Earth; (i. e.) God takes care of all People in it. So the Heart of God was as
well understood to the Jews, as if it had in more Scholastic Language been
called his Decree, or his Will. David was a Man after God's own heart, that is,
lived as he would have him, or according to his Will, or Laws. By the Mouth of
God they easily understood his revealed Will, by the Hand of God his Power. By
God's arising, his Vengeance; by his hiding himself, his Dereliction, or
withholding his Grace and Providence. Vid Maim. More Nev. Lib. 1. Adriani
Isagog. Lit. Sac. ed. per David Hoeschelium. Nor is there any reason to blame
the Sacred Writers for these Metaphorical ways of expressing the Nature of God,
because they are best adapted to give the People an understanding of them,
Hebrew Language as well expresses the nature of God as the Scholastical.
and to animate their affections toward God; whilst dry Scholastical and abst
acted terms would lie flat upon their Minds, and serve only to amuse and
confound them. And after all, the most precise and Philosophic way of speaking
concerning the Deity must needs be very improper and altogether Metaphorical.
For Languages were not composed to speak of the Deity, but for Men to maintain
an intercourse with one another; and therefore unless we would contrive a
perfect set of new words, we cannot speak at all of God if we should not use
our old Terms in a tralatitious sense. And thus the words Providence and Mercy,
etc. if we respect their Original use, and do not take them in a Metaphorical
sense, are altogether as absurd, when applied to the Deity, as the Eye, or
Hand, or Heart of God, in the grossest sense: For how improper is it, literally
speaking, to say, God looks before him like Men when they act cautiously, or
that God has that yearning of Bowels which pitiful Men have over a
compassionate Object? And truly if we should perfectly contrive new Words to
speak of these transcendent Truths, they are so far above the reach of our
understandings, and we are acquainted so little with them, that even then there
would be a World of improprieties in our speech concerning them. Therefore I
think, that we may sit down very well contented with the Jewish Forms of Speech
concerning the Nature of God; and that we have rather great reason to bless his
Goodness in ordering it to be explained in such a way as is intelligible to the
meanest People, who would have been but amused and distracted at the abstruse
niceties and explications which Philosophic and Scholastic brains would have
made concerning it. This I take to be a very proper Explication of those human
Parts and Affections which are in many places of Scripture attributed to God.

But as concerning some natural Actions which are applied to him, as his
Walking, Coming, Going, Wrestling, etc. this to be attributed to the Angel
which did represent the Deity in those Appearances. And I doubt not but it was
such a Vicarious Angel which appeared frequently before the Fall to Adam and
Eve in Paradise. And that it was the Voice, or sound of him whom they heard
walking in the Garden in the Cool of the Day. That is, they heard that Wind or
Voice which used to go before the Representing Angel which they were
sufficiently acquainted with. For with this circumstance the divine Appearance
used to be attended. As the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, Job 28. And
1 Kings 19. And behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent
the mountains, and after that, an Earthquake, and a Fire, and still small
Voice. Now the guilty couple understanding by these preludes the coming of the
vicarious Angel hid themselves for fear. Nor did they pretend to make simple
Excuses to God Almighty out of Ignorance of his Omniscience, as you falsely
imagine. For they are so far from that, that they unhappy Creatures plainly
confess the fact upon the first charge, in all the naked circumstances of it.
The woman whom thou gave me to be with me, gave me of the Tree, and I did
eat. The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. There is nothing in these words
which implies any thing like such absurd Excuses. Only some fanciful Expositors
will make Adam here to shift off the Crime upon his Wife, which God had given
him, and to cast a severe Reflection upon God's Ordinance of Wedlock, which
they say he here slily insinuate to be the cause of his Fall; and will have Eve
to lay all her blame upon the Devil. But the words import no such thing, here
is only a just confession of exact matter of fact; and I think there is no
reason they should make their case worse than it was, and take the blame of
others upon them, when they had sufficient of their own. Neither is it to be
supposed that Moses desired to see the Divine Essence, but only to have the
Glory of the representing Angel more particularly manifested to him which had
hitherto been wrapped up in a Cloud; that That might be a more evident Token to
the murmuring Jews of his divine Mission. And it pleased God to hearken to this
request, and to let the divine glory make such impression upon his Face as
dazzled the Eyes of his Beholders. And the Children of Israel saw the face of
Moses, that the Skin of Moses's face shone, etc. And as for your instance in
Jonas, which you Triumph so much in, no body can with any reason think, that he
should be so silly, as to imagine that that Great God whom he worshipped as the
Maker of Heaven and Earth, should have no power over him out of the land of
Judea; or that he could suppose when he got to Tarshish, he should be out of
God's presence. That was the least of Jonas's Thoughts; and the words of the
Text do not imply any thing like it. It is said, Jonas arose up to fly to
Tarshish, not Miphne, from the face or presence of God, but Milipene from
before the face or presence of God; dead facies Jehovae: That is, he turned his
back upon God at that hazardous and uncomfortable Revelation, and endeavored
by any ways to get off from the Appearance of God at that Time. He might have
thought of any other place to fly to, where his dejected Fancy let him, as
well as Tarshish; but only that place lying just contrary to Ninive, he
contrived to fly thither. He could not think of avoiding God's universal
presence, which he could not but know was every where, but only by flying
somewhere he might avoid God's Prophetic presence at that time which he had
either hopes he should not be tried with again, else fondly imagained, as most
of the other Jews did, that no Revelation could be afforded in a Gentile
Country.


Phil. I design to speak but one word more concerning your Prophets of the Old
Testament; but that shall be a home Thrust at last. They seem to me to be
either a parcel of Whimsical Crack-brain'd People, that played a hundred
Enthusiastical pranks to make the Rabble gape at them; or else were seditious
Mutineers, that set themselves up, under the umbrage of God's Authority, to be
saucy with their Princes. One of them you may find pushing with a great pair of
Horns upon his Head, another lying 390 days upon one side, and a third marrying
a Whore in the midst of his Prophetic Spirit. You may see Samuel carrying
himself after that presumptuous rate to King Saul, as if he was a School Boy.
And Hanani the Prophet gives King Asa, whom the Scripture remarks for a good
King, intolerable Language and provocation, only for making a League with the
King of Syria. And I think the King did very well for putting the Seer into the
Prisonhouse for his pains. Now are these Men fit to be trusted with Revelation
for the government of the Lives of all Mankind, that are not able to govern
their own actions or passions with common decency?


Cred. Your prejudices, Philologus, transport you too far in censuring the
actions of the holy Prophets, without considering the Customs of those times,
and the extraordinary Messages they were sent about. There are none of their
Prophetic Speeches which were delivered to the Princes of those times, but
what are made with all due Decency and regard to their Character; but yet the
Prophets having an immediate Commission from God himself, they ought to have
spoken with greater Boldness to them than every ordinary Haranguer, who could
only pretend to speak by way of Persuasion. When they were commanded by God, to
reprimand wicked Princes, and to denounce Judgments against them, they had
betrayed their Trust if they had not spoken the Truth with boldness; and had
incurred the penalty of those who feared God less than Man. And as for some
unusual actions which they did, as Micaiah's making him Horns of Iron, that was
the usual way of those Times to prophesy by signs: for under such
Hieroglyphical representations most of the Morality and Divinity of the Eastern
Nations were couched. Neither were all those signs which are related in the
Prophetic Writings really acted, but some of them only in Vision; and this in
all probability was the case of Hosea, when he took the Wife of Whoredoms, and
of Jeremy, when he is said to have lain so many days on one side. As for your
Instances in the Prophets Samuel and Hanani; Samuel had had the Administration
of the Jewish Theocracy immediately under God, before Saul, and was a Prince
when he was but a Peasant, had singled him out and Anointed him King, and when
besides he had the command of God to rebuke that headstrong King; this will
bear him out in all his severity of Expressions he used toward him. And as for
Hanani, he did very justly reprove King Asa, for his relying on the King of
Assyria, and not on the Lord his God. It Is not his bare making a League with
the King of Assyria, which he is reproved for, but for his putting more
confidence in this than in God's Providence. Besides, to compass this he had
used very indirect means; for he purchased that King's favor, by
sacrilegiously taking the Treasures of the House of the Lord 2 Chr. 16.7. to
make a present to him.' And though the Scripture does affirm of this King Asa,
that his heart was perfect all his days, yet this is to be understood only of
his Zeal against Idolatry; yet several grievous faults he was guilty of, as
particularly the imprisoning this Holy Prophet, and his oppressing the People
at the same time, v. 10. and even in his last disease it is recorded, that he
sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians, v. 12.


Phil. We are arrived now at last to a leisure to talk more particularly of the
Mediatorship, and a satisfaction to be made for Sins. Now your whole Religion
is bottomed upon the supposition of that which is all false and erroneous, and
inconsistent with the Nature and goodness of God. For this supposes God a rough
implacable Being, that is easy to be offended, and hard to be pleased; when on
the contrary nothing is so good and kind and willing to be reconciled to his
Creatures. Indeed the wickedness of Men, who have been apt to think every one
as bad as themselves, has inclined them to have such hard Thoughts of God
Almighty, and made many of them think, for many Ages ago, the Deity to be a
severe sort of Being, and the subtle Priests found it for their Advantage to
encourage the notion; and hence the Practice of Sacrificing got into the World.
For when Men found they had done something which was displeasing to God
Almighty, they thought to make him amends another way, and so would sacrifice a
good fat Bullock or Ram, at his Altar. This was the first silly Logic in early
and Barbarous Ages, and the Priests for their profit have been improving it
ever since; till at last they have vamped it up into that Mediatorship and
satisfaction which the Christian Religion is grounded upon. But in the first
and purer Ages of the World, these idle worships were unknown, when they
worshipped God with Prayers only, and Praise, and never thought of appeasing the
Deity with these foolish Briberies, which must be so far from being grateful to
him, that they must needs be his Aversation.

(...).
(...)
(...);
(...),
(...);
What Man is such a silly Wight,
To think that Gods should ever delight
In nasty Bits of Broiled Meat,
Which hungry Dogs would hardly eat;
And to be pleased in such a sort
As to grant Men their Blessings for it?
And this the Scripture Writers themselves are forced to own, although they
were bred up under Sacrifices. In burnt-offerings and Sacrifices for Sin thou
have no pleasure. Psalm. 40.7. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, I am full of the fat of the burnt offerings
of Rams, and the Fat of fed Beasts, and I delight not in the Blood of Bullocks,
or of Lambs, or of He-Goats, and the conclusion from all which the Prophet
makes is, that they should lay aside this Expiatory Trumpery, and take up with
good honest Deisin and natural Religion: Put away the Evil of your doing from
before mine Eyes, cease to do Evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve
the oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow, Is. 1.12, etc. So
that you see this Sacrifice and Expiatory satisfaction is all Butcherly stuff,
which is neither acceptable to God, nor agreeable to the sentiments of Wise Men.


Cred. Expiation consistent with the Mercy of God.
You run away a little too fast with your Argument, when you make such
exclamations about the severity and implacableness of the Deity, where it is
asserted, that he requires Expiation and Satisfaction for Men's Sins. Wicked
Men, that are resolved to live on in a Course of Sin, may flatter themselves,
that God has nothing in him but Mercy; but I am afraid in time they will find,
That God in his Laws has regard to his Justice too. I will not assert, That it
is impossible that God as God, all whose Attributes are infinite, should
forgive the Sins of Men without a satisfaction to his Justice; but yet I say,
that considering God as a Legislatour who designs to govern Men by his Laws, it
is not agreeable to his Wisdom to suffer his Laws, to be trampled upon with
impunity by Bold and Regardless Sinners. And indeed all God Almighty's
Attributes are directed by his infinite Reason and Wisdom, and his Mercy is
not, as a great many take it to be, a sort of Feminine tenderness that cannot
hold out against the Cries of suffering Offenders: but such a good and wise
relaxation of the punishment which his Justice in rigor might demand, as may
secure the honor of his Laws, his Eternal Justice and Purity, and with all
make all possible allowances for the Infirmities of Mankind. And upon this
reason I take the nature of Expiatory Sacrifices in all Ages to have been
grounded, to show the great Aversion God has always had to Sin, and to deter
Men from Sin, by showing the great satisfaction which he required for it. And
therefore I do not approve the Reason which a late Author Discourse concerning
Natural and Revealed Religion, p. 100.
gives, that the end of Sacrifices was to make Sin costly to the Offender, and
to appease the Consciences of penitent Sinners, by showing that God accepted
the Death of the Beast in lieu of theirs. For these are only general Ends, but
the most principal and particular End which was aimed at in the Sacrifices of
Beasts was, that they might be Types and Forerunners of the Great Sacrifice of
our Blessed Lord, from the Efficacy of whose infinite satisfaction they
received all their Expiatory Nature. For as the Apostle argues, Heb. 10.6. It
is not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sins; and
therefore these must all have reference to the infinite satisfaction of Christ,
which alone can. So that these Bestial Sacrifices both before and under the
Law, were to the Sacrifice of Christ as the Tabernacle to the Temple, God
Almighty was pleased to accept them as expiatory till such time as that great
Sacrifice was finished: but as when the Temple was built, the Tabernacle was
destroyed. So after the suffering of Christ, these ritual Sacrifices were at an
End. Nay we have rather great reason to adore the infinite Mercy of God, than
to tax him with severity, for accepting of such vicarious sufferings; for he
might in justice have demanded the personal suffering of the Offended himself,
his Life, for every Trangression, which would soon have put an end to the Race
of sinful Mankind. To have forgiven all without any satisfaction would have
been in effect to have given an uncontrollable license to Sin; and to have
punished to the utmost rigor, would have left no room for Men to adore his
Mercy: but by this admirable mixture of Justice and Compassion, his own Honor
is preserved, and Men's Sins are pardoned.

Neither can I assent to your Opinion, The Origin of Sacrifices from ancient
Revelation.
that Sacrifices are the pure Invention of Men, for it is highly probable that
they were at first instituted by God Almighty, and Directions for the
performance of these sacrificial Rites given to the first of Mankind, and so
have been handed down to the several Branches of their Posterity ever since.
Indeed, Grotius, and some others are of Opinion, that Sacrifices owe their
Original to the Gratitude of Mankind, who in thanks to God were willing to
return back to God some part of the good things they did enjoy; and that before
the Flood there was no Sacrifice offered of Animal Creatures. But granting,
that Gratitude have Origin to Eucharistical Sacrifices, we are as much at a
loss to find a reason for the Piacular, unless we allow they came by the
Institution of God. Neither is his reason convincing, by which he would prove
that no Beast was Sacrificed till after the Deluge; viz. because Sacrifices are
never but of such things whereof Men used to eat: now there being no flesh eat
before ^he Deluge, that indulgence being afterward granted to Noah, he
concludes, that no flesh was Sacrificed. But this Argument is but weak. For it
is very much to be doubted whether the Antediluvians did not eat flesh; and
Bochartus contends strongly that the Grant to Noah, Genesis 9. was not larger than
what was afforded to Adam, Genesis 1. And besides in piacular Sacrifices in many
Nations they never stood upon the edibility of the Sacrifice; but oftentimes
Sacrificed Horses or Men. Besides, it is probable that these Expiatory
Sacrifices of Blood commenced from the first fall of Mankind, to be the (...),
or vicarious Punishments for the Lives of Adam's Offspring then forfeited. And
then there is some reason for their Institution at that time; but there is none
that I know for their being set up in the Time of Noah. And when the Scripture
says expressly that Abel Offered of the firstlings of his Flock and the fat
thereof, methinks it is a jejune interpretation, to say he Offered only Lanam
and lac pinguissimum, Wool and very Fat Milk (i. e.) Cream. I am therefore
persuaded, and I think upon good ground, that a Model of Sacrificial Rites, or
at least a command in general of Piacular Sacrifices was given to our first
Parents, and by them transmitted down to all their Posterity. For otherways it
is impossible to give a satisfactory account why we should meet with the same
in all Ages, in all Countries from the East to the West- Indies, from Africa to
Scythia, and there find Men practicing the same Piacular Rites almost in an
uniform manner. If their Sacrifices were owing to the Gratitude or Reasoning of
the different Inhabitants, they would be as widely different as their Customs
and Manners are; but when we find so many different People that have no
intercourse with one another doing exactly the same things as if it were by
confederacy, killing the Sacrifice, burning the Flesh, and that too upon an
Altar, by the Ministry of a Priest, and with an Opinion that their sins are
discharged by that vicarious punishment of the devoted Animal, with many other
like circumstances; this must needs prove that they could not all jump upon
these things by chance, but had them delivered down to them by some ancient
Predecessor, who was Progenitor to them all.

Conf. Part I. p. 154.
And as I proved to you before by this Argument, that the Americans did proceed
from the Europeans; so I think it is as plain that they did all proceed from
Adam, from whom the general System of sacrificial Rites has been propagated to
them after the succession of so many Ages. And here we may fix our foot, and
settle the Commencement of all Moral and Ritual Religion, and whatsoever we
find of them both, though never so vitiated in the different parts of the
World, esteeming them to be but corrupted streams of the ancient Revelation
afforded to our first Father: and as for those Texts of Scripture which you
allege, they do by no means undervalue or cast any reflection upon God's
Ritual Laws and Sacrifices. But the design of them is to show, that Men should
not place their Obedience only in the Ritual Parts of Religion, whilst they
neglect the more substantial Duties of Morality; and this is a Truth which
every honest Christian, as well as you Deists, thinks himself bound to believe.


Phil. I confess what you say does not altogether want some Probability. But
still methinks these vicarious Punishments seem but insignificant Trifles in
matter of Religion, because they do not make Men the better or the more
innocent. Indeed if these Expiations either in themselves, or as they had
relation to the Death of Christ, did perfectly take away sins, then there is
something in what you said: but they only leave the Man as they found him,
unless true repentance did make him better. So that the Mediatorship without
Repentance signifies nothing at all, and Repentance where they know nothing of
this Mediatorship must by all charitable Men be allowed to be valid; and
therefore what need of the Mediatorship or satisfaction at all? Repentance
after sinning is all that Man can do, or God can require. It Is true the Debt we
owe to God Almighty by sinning is infinite, and what then, Oracles of Reason,
p. 207.
If I owe a Million and can pay but a thousand pounds, my Creditor can have but
all. It Is true my Body is then subject to imprisonment, that is to the further
Extent of the Law; but then that Law is void of Mercy. So that when I have done
my All, that is repented, what need is there of Expiation; when God's Mercy
will acquit me, as having paid what I was able?


Cred. God's honor to be considered in the Mediatorship.
It is true, that God's Mercy is that blessed Attribute to which the pardon of
all our sins is owing, and upon which the Mediatorship is founded. This is that
which gave life to the stipulation between Christ and the Father, that He
should die for the sins of the whole World, in which all sufficient Sacrifice
all other Expiations received their Force and Energy. And it is likewise true,
that after Sin committed, Repentance and Amendment is all we can do on our
Parts. But then further we Christians say that the Mediatorship must do
something likewise on God's part as well as ours. By Sin God's honor is
violated, and our Lives are forfeited, now both these are to be remedied by the
Efficacy of the Mediator. Indeed Mercy for God to Pardon, and Repentance for us
to amend, is all that is necessary for our security. But then on the other side
why must there be no satisfaction given for the injured honor of God? God may
be as merciful to the World as he pleases, but still he must be just to his own
Dignity; for otherways he would divest himself of the Government of the World,
and leave impudent Sinners to Sin without control. And therefore we say that
therein lies the admirable Wisdom of the Mediatorship, that both Parties are
thereby satisfied; God has the security of his Honor, and Man of his Salvation.


Phil. But, Credentius, this satisfaction, as you call it, in the Mediatorship,
is a Business which lies so cross in my Brains, and is pregnant with such a
number of Absurdities, that I can never away with it. And therefore you see,
that not only we, but your Brother Christians the Socinians, are so aware of
the Grossness of this Doctrine, that they are unanimously agreed upon it, to
explode it; as giving Men such a barbarous notion of the Deity, as is
inconsistent with the Excellency of his Nature. For satisfaction does suppose
an angry revengeful Temper, which desires to be glutted with the punishment of
the offending Party; which when that is brought about, becomes tame,
good-natured, and reconcilable. But this is such a pitiful imbecility, even
in humane nature, as wise Men are ashamed of; and therefore to attribute this
to the infinite Purity and Wisdom of God, is no less, I think, than the most
daring Blasphemy. But supposing there was such an Angry Vindictive Nature in
the Deity, yet methinks even then he should rather choose to take revenge upon
every one for their own Demerits, which would be agreeable to Justice; and not
make one Innocent Person, viz. Jesus Christ, who had no Sin, as you suppose, to
suffer for the Sins of all other wicked Men; and to lay the deserved Sufferings
of so many outrageous Offenders upon the back of the most pious and spotless
Man, that, by your account, ever came into the World. But when we farther
consider, that this innocent Person is owned by you to be the Son of God, and
his only Son too, and must nevertheless be Sacrificed to appease this
Vindictive nature of God before he could be reconciled to the World: this is
such a horrid Representation of the Best of Beings, as shocks human nature to
consider; and far outdoes all the stories of Scythian Sacrifices, and Busiris
his Altars. And yet greater Monsters of Absurdities do appear, when we
consider, That this suffering Person was the supreme God himself, who by this
Scheme is supposed to have took upon him all the Infirmities of an Human Body,
was hungry and thirsty, and at last, was crucified, and died. Now this does
imply a sort of a Passibility in the Deity, which of all Heterodoxies is the
most gross and absurd.


Cred. I have not time now to enter with you into the nice disputes of the
Socinian Controversy upon this Subject. What is meant by satisfaction.
But however I do not see any thing in the general notion of Christ's
satisfaction, which does reflect at all upon the Goodness of the Divine Nature.
Indeed the word satisfaction is not found in Scripture, but the whole substance
of what the word imports, is; and this and all other words which are used to
express any of the divine actions, or nature, must be used Metaphorically, and
not be taken in so strict a sense, as when they are used properly, and
according to their original application. Now the satisfaction which is here
meant, is not such a satisfaction as an angry Man requires, but a Judicial or
Forensical satisfaction, which a Governor requires of an Offender, upon the
violation of his Laws. Now whereas the whole Economy of our Salvation is
delivered in Scripture in Forensical Terms, as when God is represented as a
Judge, Man as an Offender or Criminal; God's word as the Law by which he is
Condemned, Death as the Punishment, Christ as a Mediator and Surety, his Death
as an (...), or Price of Redemption; now I think it not at all improper to call
that which Christ did to free us from the obligation we were under to the
Divine Justice, upon account of our Sins, by the name of Satisfaction. For this
is no bloody revengeful satisfaction, which impotent and passionate Minds are
wont to call for; but only such a just debt as ought to be paid to the Justice
of God, considered as the Governor of the World. I am not insensible, that
some Calvinistical Writers have carried this matter a little too far, by
leaving no room at all for the Mercy of God to exert it self in this wonderful
dispensation, and making the divine Justice to require a satisfaction to be
made, by the same specific Infinite Punishments which we had deserved, in the
Sufferings of our Savior; so as to think that no satisfaction could be, unless
Christ actually suffered upon the Cross all the Eternal Torments of the Damned
intensive, as they speak, though not extensive; so that our Savior in his
Agony and Crucifixion, must suffer Torments as much infinitely greater than
Damned Souls, as their Eternity of Suffering is longer than the hours of our
Savior's Passion. But this has no foundation in Scripture, and seems horrid to
Christian Ears. It is enough to say, That the Mercy of God disposed him to
accept of the Temporal Sufferings of Christ for our Sins in lieu of the Eternal
punishments, which we had deserved. And so the infinite dignity of the person
suffering was a sufficient satisfaction to the Divine Justice offended, and
unspeakable mercy was shown to offending Mankind by being free from that
punishment which otherways they must have undergone themselves. So that Infidel
and Socinian scoffers do very ill to arraign the Mercy of God, and to tax him
with Revenge and Implacability in demanding such a Legal satisfaction; for by
the same Rules they might expose all the Legislative Authority in the World
when Criminals suffer by their sanctions. For there is no other way to maintain
the L^gislatours honor, and to engage Men to observe his Laws but by
inflicting an Exemplary punishment on offenders: for otherways their Laws would
be but Cobwebs, and their Authority the May Game of Licencious Transgressors.
But in this vicarious punishment of Christ for us, God is far from showing
himself an Angry or Implacable Governor; but does rather manifest the greatest
Tenderness and Compassion in being willing that all the World should escape
their deserved punishment, and Christ only suffer for them all; and in
accepting the Temporal Pains of his Cross for those of Eternal Death which they
had deserved.

AVicarious punishment not unjust. Genesis 9.25. 2 Samuel 21.8. 2 Samuel 24.15. Jos.
7.14. 1 King. 21.29.
2. Neither is it unjust that Christ should undergo a vicarious punishment for
us. For that vicarious punishments are not in themselves absolutely unjust, may
be proved not only from Scripture Instances where Children are punished for
their Parents, and Subjects for their Princes; but by the notion which the most
civilized Nations have always had of the lawfulness of punishing sureties for
the Parties they were engaged for, by their denying the public honors to the
Children of notorious Offenders, by Decimations in their Armies, and by killing
the innocent Hostages when the Articles were not performed. Now if the Greeks
and Romans, who of all other Nations pretend to the exactest Rules of the
aequum bonumque, could see no obliquity in these vicarious punishments; there
is certainly a far less pretense of injustice to be laid to God's charge in
ordering Christ to suffer for the Sins of the World. Now it is impossible here
that there should be any injustice, or injury. Here was no injustice done to
Christ, for he was pleased voluntarily to lay down his Life for us. Neither was
it any injustice done to God, for God Authorized him to do it, by a mutual
stipulation betwixt the Father and the Son. And our Savior says expressly, Joh.
10.18. I have Power or Authority, (...), to lay down my Life. So that there is
no more injustice committed in our Savior's laying down his Life in a
voluntary Suffering for us; than there is in his laying it down according to
Socinus his Notion, for a Testimony of his Doctrine. And I am sure I could
prove it as equally unjust for God to put him upon preaching a Doctrine that
would cost him his Life; as to let him lay down his Life to save a World.

3. Christ though God might suffer.
And as for your Tragical Exclamations against the Orthodox Doctrines which
makes the Eternal Son of God, who is himself God blessed for ever; to be
incarnate, and to suffer for the Sins of the World; this does by no means
render the Deity passible, a Notion which all Christians abhor. But by reason
of the Union of the Deity with Flesh or Humanity which was Patible, Christ was
then in a possibility of suffering, and those sufferings which were proper only
to one Nature are attributed to the whole person by reason of the intimate
Union of the two Natures. Nay the Scripture it self attributes the properties
of the inferior Nature, viz. the Humanity, to the Divinity the superior one.
As when it is said, that we are redeemed by the blood of God; we must not think
as if God could bleed or die, but that That Person who was both God and Man,
who by virtue of his Humanity, was capable of suffering, laid down his Life for
us, to redeem us. Now here is nothing in this of Absurdity but only adorable
mystery, and admirable Wisdom, which the Thoughts of Man could never have
reached to, and no human Counsel could ever have contrived: To find out such a
way to save the Souls of Lost Mankind, and to secure God's honor, and the
Authority of his Laws.


Phil. I have one thing more to objects to you upon this head, and that is the
Christian Doctrine which you teach about Christ's Intercession, and that is so
odd and gross a notion, as no rational Man can assent to. For you make Christ
continually at his Prayers in Heaven to God the Father, to pardon the Sins of
Mankind upon their Repentance, and to bestow his Benefits upon them; which God
in his own nature is inclined to do, without this bustle of Intercession.
Besides, it looks like a piece of Pageantry (as your Doctors explain it) to
have Christ continually exhibiting the wounds of his Crucified Body to the
Father, to move him to compassion, and to put him in mind of the Sacrifice he
was made for Man's Sins, which it is impossible that an Omnipotent Knowledge
could be unmindful of. Methinks this looks like a Piece of Homerick Divinity,
when the Poet describes Heaven acording to all the formalities and sillinesses
which are seen in human nature.


Cred. There is nothing in the Christian Doctrine of Intercession but what is
agreeable to good sense and reason: No Incongruity in the Dostrine of Christ's
Intercession.
and all expressions which do seem to imply any such grossness in them, as you
imagine, must only be understood Figuratively. To what state of Bliss the
Glorified Body of our Blessed Savior is exalted, whilst we poor Christians
live in this Vale of Misery and Tears, we are not able to imagine; or with what
divine actions his humanity is employed. All that we can be certain of is what
the Scripture tells us, that we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ
the righteous, 1 John 2.1. that he is said to intercede for us at the right
hand of God, Romans 8.34. that he is entered into Heaven it self now to appear in
the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. that he is a Priest continually, and his
blood speaks better things than that of Abel, that he offers his own Sacrifice
for sin for ever, Heb. 9.25. and the like. Now there is no need to assert that
all these Expressions are taken literally, when it is plain that many of them
are Metaphors taken from the Levitical Law, from the Piacular Sacrifices, from
the Intercession of the High Priest for the People, from his entering into the
Sanctum Sanctorum, etc. Now St. Pa^ makes use of these ritual Phrases, the
better to explain to the Jewish Converts the Nature and Efficacy of Christ's
Death, from those outward Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law, which they were well
acquainted with. And I doubt not but the Unbelievers themselves do think these
Expressions are Metaphorical; but only they have a mind to be picking up
something to be flinging at Religion though they are at the same time sure
(...) will do no harm.


Phil. Pardon, me, Sir, for t^is, and I will not at present trouble you with
any more Infidel Objections; and f^^ the rest of the Time that you will honor
me with your Company, I will endeavor to entertain you with more inoffensive
Discourse. Though I ca^ not but acknowledge that I wish I wa^ fully persuaded
of the Truth of you^ Religion; which seems indeed, upon further consideration,
to be a Rational Institution, and well laid together, which lays down the Laws
of Morality more exactly and fully, than the ordinary Reason of Mankind; which
gives an account of the grand Periods and Revolu^ions of the World, and God's
Providential Dispensations, beyond common ^hilosophy, and the light of Nature;
and (...) I could get rid of some other doubts, which I beg you will, at your
leisure satisfy; then I hope you will make a thorough Convert of me.


THE END.
NOta Been, That the Internal Solid, which is engraved in the Plate, Fig. (...)
and is supposed to move round the ^orthern part of the Globe, in a Circum-Polar
Line, does not belong to the present Hypothesis; but is a supposition ^hereby,
in Time, may possibly be ^ade out two great Difficulties in Natural Philosophy,
viz. The Cause of the direction and alteration of the Magnet, and the Constant
Parallelism of the Earths ^xis to the Poles of the World.


