THE INDEPENDENCY OF ENGLAND Endeavored to be maintained By HENRY MARTEN, a
Member of the Parliament there, Against the Claim of The SCOTTISH
Commissioners, In their late ANSWER UPON THE Bills and Propositions SENT to the
KING in the Isle of Wight.

London, Printed for Peter Cole, at the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange, and John Sweeting, at the Angel in Pope's Head Alley. 1648.

THE INDEPENDENCY OF ENGLAND Endeavored to be maintained against the Claim of
the Scottish Commissioners.
TO rectify, not to upbraid you: You have for diverse years together been very
well entreated by us of this Nation, and that from a willingless we ever had,
as upon all occasions, so particularly in your persons; to manifest the
brotherly respect we bear toward them who sent you: Upon the same account many
former Boldnesses and Provocations of yours have been winked at by the
Parliament, as (I am confident) this last Answer would likewise be, did you not
therein seem to have remained here so long, as to have quite forgotten why you
came.

You may therefore please to be remembered. That it was no part of your first
business (whatever supplemental Commissions may since have been procured for a
further exercise of your patience among us) to settle Religion, not to make a
Peace in England; so as all those devout-like and amicable Endeavors for which
you think to be thanked, were not only Intrusions into Matters unconcerning
you, but so many Diversions from performing, as you ought what was properly
committed to you.

As for our Religion, since the zeal of your Countrymen would needs carry
their care thereof so far from home, me thinks their Divines, now sitting with
ours at Westminster, might excuse your trouble in this particular, or at least
might teach you by their practice, That your Advice therein to the Parliament
is to be but an Advice, and that an humble one.

As for the other particular of Peace, it is true, that about three years agone
here were Ambassadors from our Neighbors of the Low Countries, who having found
the King almost weary of Fighting, made use of their Privilege, and did his
Errand (in stead of their Masters) which was with big words to beg a Peace.

After that, when the Kings Cause had nothing left to lean upon, but the
Treachery of our false Friends and Servants, an Ambassador from our Neighbors
of France did ( en passant) make a certain overture of Accord betwixt the Crown
and the Head. But your employment here from our Neighbors of Scotland had so
little relation to Peace, that your only work was to join Counsels with a
Committee of ours, in ordering and disposing such. Auxiliary Forces as that
Kingdom should send into this for carrying on the War.

As to the Delays you charge upon the Parliament, in that they Answer your
Papers sometimes late; and sometimes not at all, yet require peremptory and
speedy Resolutions from you, as if their dealings were unequal toward you, I
hope you will give over making such Constructions, when you shall consider how
much more business lies upon their hands, then upon yours; and how much flower
progress the same Affairs must needs find, in passing both Houses, then if
they were to be dispatched only by four or five Commissioners. Were not I
conscious to this truth, and to the abundant civility they have always for you
in their undelayed reading, present referring, and desire of complying with
what you send them, so far as might consist with their Duty to this
Commonwealth, and that they want nothing but time to say so, I should never
have presumed to trust so great a Cause upon the Patronage of so rude a Pen:
Neither indeed is it left there, my design being to let the world imagine, how
strong a stream of Justice runs on our side, when I dare oppose the Reasons of
my single barque, against all the advantages of Number, Abilicies, and
Countenance that you can meet me with.

For orders sake, I shall take the pains to set the body of your Discourse as
upright as I may (its prolixity and perplexity considered) upon two feet.

One is, The Claim you make in behalf of the Kingdom of Scotland, to the
inspection of and conjunction in the matter of our Laws, and the conditions of
our Peace.

The other (mistaking the first for evinced) is, Your telling us what you think
fit, and what unfit, for us to establish in our Church and State, and what way
you conceive most proper for obtaining of a Peace betwixt the King and us;
together with the Proofs wherewith you seek to fortify your several Opinions.

It would give your first foot too much ground, to hold Dispure with you upon
the second; therefore since a man may see by your forwardness in printing and
publishing both these and other your Transactions with the Houses, that your
Arguments (like the Kings in His Messages) are not framed so much to satisfy
the Parliament, as to beget in the People a dis-satisfaction toward the
Parliament. I will (God enabling me) take a time apart to undeceive my
Countrymen concerning both the King and you, by laying the Hook as open as the
Bait in all your lines; And for the present apply my self only to the showing
you, That when you shall have offered your Counsel to the Parliament of England
(as for ought I know any one man may do unto another) in matters concerning
this Kingdom only, though the most wholesome Counsel that ever was or can be
given, and the Parliament shall not approve it, not so much as a Conference
upon it, it is no more manners in you, then it would be in the same number of
Spaniards, Indians, or of the most remote Region of the Earth, to press it
again, to insist upon it, and to proclaim your unsatisfaction in it.

Let us (with your favor) confider your pretenses: You do not aim (as your
selves profess in the second Paragraff of your fourth page) at sharing in our
Rights, Laws nor Liberties, but in other Matters, viz. such as either in their
own Nature, or by Compact, are common to both Kingdoms; which I take the more
notice of, because one would suppose you to be grown kinder now then you were
the other day, when you went about to make us believe, that nothing in our Laws
did properly belong to us, but the form and manner of proceeding therein, the
matter of them being held in common with the Kingdom of Scotland; and
therefore, and for their possibility of containing something prejudicial to
that Kingdom, to be revised by you before they receive their perfection.

But the truth is, you are still where you were; only the Peoples ears are by
this time so habituated to the Doctrines you frequently sow among them, those
Doctrines so improved by your Seminaties, who find their own Interest
interwoven with yours, and the Parliament seeming but a looker on, that you
persuade your selves any thing will pass that you shall set your Stamp on,
otherwise you would certainly have been ashamed to disavow the busying your
selves with our RIGHTS, LAWS and LIBERTIES, and with the same breath to dispute
our Rights, correct our Laws, and infringe our Liberties.

Nay, contrary to that moderate concession of yours, you do in this Answer
entrench upon the very form and manner of our Bills and Propositions; and as if
the marshalling them, the putting them into rank and file, were to be by your
order, you take upon you to appoint which of our Desires shall have the Van,
and which the Rere in this Expedition.

And (which is the most pleasant part of the Story, if it would take, as truly
such a thing might have done, when you and we were first acquainted) though the
Parliament of England (as I told you even now) would not order the motions of
the Scottish Army that served us in our Country, and for our Pay, but by
Conjunction of Counsels with Commissioners of that Kingdom; yet you (as you
could not forbear meddling with our Army when it was in modelling, so) do in
this Paper continue the Office (you put your selves into) of Disposing,
Disbanding, Dismembring, Catechizing and Reviling this Army of ours, the
greatest Bulwark, under God, of our Liberties, that yet had proved ineffectual,
if your Counsels had been followed, or your Importunities regarded.

Since then your way of advising us is not in a modest or submitting manner,
but as if you meant to pin your advice upon us whether we will or no; give me
leave, I pray you, to examine qua fiducia, promising you faithfully for my
part, that whensoeever you shall bring the matters contested for, within the
rules of your own setting down, that is, either in nature, or by Covenant, or
by Treaty to be of a mixed concernment; I will either not deny you a joint
interest in them, or acknowledge my self to have no more honor nor conscience
in me, then he may be said to have, who being entrusted for his Country,
gives up their dearest Rights to the next stranger that demands them without so
much as arguing the point.

Your arguments (by my computation) are five, and (if I understand them) speak
thus.

Arg. 1. The same common interest upon which Scotland was invited and engaged
in the war ought to be [continued] (so I read you, and not improved, that
being a wild expression, and reaching neither you nor I know whether) in
making the peace.

For answer thereunto, should I admit it, the word [invited] puts you in mind
that your Contrymen came not to the war before they were called, keep you
the same method in accedendo ad consilium, and we shall still be friends. But I
cannot subscribe to this position, for I believe it was a duty that the people
of Scotland did own unto themselves to give us their assistance in the late
war, though they had not been invited; yet does it not follow from thence
that when the war is ended (as you often say it is, and yet most riddlingly
take huge pains for Peace) they are bound to mingle with us in our Councels,
nor help us to settle our own Kingdom, which we think our selves able to
settle well enough without them, at least without their prejudice to whom a
good Peace or a bad, so as it be a Peace is the same thing. For instance, the
Law of this Land that gives me leave to pull down my neighbors house when it
is on fire, in order to the quenching of it for the securing of my own, will
not authorize me against his will, to set my foot within his threshold, when
the fire is out, though I make it my errand to direct him in the rebuilding of
his house, and pretend the teaching him so to contrive his Chimneyes as may in
all probability prevent for the future a like loss to him, a like danger to my
self.

Arg. 2. You demand the same conjunction of interests to be given you, that was
had of you. There I join issue with you, and profess, that if ever the
Parliament of England or any authority derived therefrom did offer to put a
finger into the proper affairs of Scotland, or into the Government, Civil,
Ecclesiastical, or Military of that Kingdom, and being once required to
desist, did notwithstanding prosecute their title of advising volentibus
nolentibus, I shall readily so far as in me lies, grant you to have a hand
with us in the managing of this Kingdom, and the government thereof.

Arg. 3. You affirm that the Covenant entered into betwixt us makes you
copartners with us in every thing there mentioned, by which reckoning neither
this Nation, nor that of Scotland has any right law or liberty which either
can properly and distinctly call its own, but both interests are jumbled
together, and the two Kingdoms are not confederate, but incorporated
Concerning the Covenant therefore (which my self, among others considering it
first as well as I could) have taken) I shall shortly give you my sense in
relation to the point before us.

First, I do not conceive the parties to that League intended thereby to be
everlastingly bound each to other, the grounds of striking it being merely
occasional for the joining in a war to suppress a common enemy, accordingly
we did join, the enemy is (if we be wise) suppressed, and the war (as you
say) ended, what should the Covenant do, but like an Almanak of the last year
show us rather what we have already done, then what we be now to do.

Secondly, what would it do, were it renewed and made perpetual? Thus much it
says in my opinion, and no more. Whenever you shall be violently hindered in
the execution of that Religion you had amongst you at the time of the
engagement, and shall require our assistance, we must afford it you, for the
removal of that violence. In like manner, whenever we shall be so hindered
in the exercise of that Religion which we according to that Covenant shall
establish here, upon request to you made for that effect, you are tied to
assist us. And so throughout all the other clauses respectively and equally,
carrying this along with you; we are hereby obliged to the reciprocal defense
of one another according to the Declaration of the party wronged in any of the
particulars there comprised, without being cavilled at, or scrupled by the
party invoked, whether your Religion be the same it was, or ours the same it
should be, whether the bounds of your liberties or ours be not enlarged beyond
their then-line, whether your Delinquents or ours be justly so or no. For, the
native rights of both peoples being the principal, if not the only thing we
looked on, when we swore; we do not keep our oath in preserving those rights,
if we do not allow this master-right, to each several people, namely, to be
sole judges within themselves, what Religion they will set up, what kind of
Laws they will have, what size, what number of Magistrates they hold fit to
execute those Laws, and what offenders to be tried by them. Hereupon you know
we did not enquire at all how Orthodox your Religion was before we vowed to
maintain you in it, that is, in the quiet professing of it, (not in the
Theological truth of it, a business for a University perhaps, not for a
Kingdom) being well assured, it was established by them who had all the
authority that is visible to choose for themselves, and could not without
apparent breach of order, and injury to fundamentals be disturbed in the
exercise of what they had so chosen.

So far is the plain text of this Covenant from confounding interests that
it clearly settles and confirms them upon the several bases where it found
them. And it would not be unworthy of you to take heed lest this Covenant upon
which you seem to set so high a rate, be not as easily violated as slandered,
since the most deadly wars have been said at least to begin with
mis-understandings.

Arg. 4. Your entituling your selves to a conusance in the conditions of our
Peace, and consequently in the matter of our Laws (when they relate to an
agreement, as I confess the four Bills do which were sent) is grounded upon a
very great mistake of the eighth article in the treaty, the words whereof are
indeed very rightly incited by you, and the article it self so rational, so
ordinary, so necessary in all wars joined in by two States, that I do almost
wonder as much what need there was to have inserted it, as I do how it is
possible for you to mistake it. It stands briefly thus. One of you (for the
purpose) and I (pardon if you please the familiarity of the instance) have
solemnly engaged our selves each to other for our mutual aid against a third
person, because we conceived him too strong for either of us single, or because
one of us doubted he might have drawn the other of us to his party, if not
pre-engaged against him, but which soever of us was first in the quarrel, or
what ever was the reason of the others coming in, we are engaged, and though
there were nowritings drawn betwixt us, no terms expressed, were not I the
veriest Schelm that ever looked man in the face if I should shake hands with
the common adversary and leave you fighting? against such a piece of baseness
(supposing it belike to be in nature) this Article provides, and says that
since these two Kingdoms were content to join in a war which without Gods great
mercy might have proved fatal to them both, neither of them shall be suffered
to make its peace apart; so as if the Parlianent of Scotland upon consideration
of reasons occurring to themselves should offer to readmit the King into that
Kingdom (I say not with honor, freedom, and safety but) in peace, the
Parliament of England might step in and forbid the banes, telling them we are
not satisfied that an agreement should yet be made, similiter, if this
Parliament would come to any Peace with him by Bills or Propositions, or by
what other name soever they call their plasters, you may (being so authorized)
in name of that Kingdom or the Parliament, thereof intervene, and oppose,
telling us that you who are our fellow-Chirurgions, merely in launcing of the
sore, are not satisfied in the time for the healing of it up. But for you to
read a lecture to us upon our medicaments and their ingredients, to take
measure of our wounds, and to prefer your measure before that of our own taking
was never dreamt on by the Framers of this article.

Here it may perhaps be demanded though not by you, whether (according to my
sense of the treaty, tying up both Kingdoms to a consent in the Fiat, not in
the Qualis fuerit of Peace) if one should be obstinately bent to hang off, the
other be necessitated to welter everlastingly in blood for want of such a
concurrence. I answer, yes, for these reasons.

First, a wise man will fore see inconveniences, before he make his bargain,
and an honest man will stand to his bargain notwithstanding all inconveniences.

Secondly, there will be no great encouragement for any obstinacy of that kind
when it shall be remembered that the party obstructing the peace must continue
to join in the war, and is liable to all the consequences thereof.

Thirdly, there is another and a more natural way to peace and to the ending
of a war then by agreement, namely by conquest. I think he that plays out
his set at Tennis till he win it, makes as sure an end of it, and more fair,
then he that throws up his Racket when he wants but a stroke of up, having no
other way to rook those of their money that bet of his side. If I am trusted to
follow a suit in Law for friends concerned therein, together with my self, and
daube up a rotten compromise with my adversary, my fellows not consulted, but
desiring the suit should still go on, it is not fit they should be bound
thereby; but if I continue to do my duty and bring the cause to hearing to a
verdict thereupon, and to judgment upon that; such an end of the quarrel I
hope I may make without their leave, and if the trial went with me, certainly
without their offense.

To return to the nature of confederacies, Is the war wherein we are joined
an invasion from without? any one man of either side if he have strength
enough, has authority enough to end it by repelling the invader, is it a
rebellion from within? it were strange to think that any Law or engagement
should hinder a single man from ending it, if he be able by suppressing of the
rebels. The unworthy friend in the fable, when his companion and he met a bear
in the wood, might have been allowed to kill her himself, but he should not
have sought his safety in a tree, without taking his friend along with him.

One thing more I shall add to justify the reason of this 8. Article, such as
might (for its clearness of being employed) have excused its being listed among
the rest. Never did any people that joined in arms with a neighbour-nation
patch up a peace apart, with more dishonor to it self, then either of us
should do, if we could imagine our selves to be so vile; for the common enemy
in this war is not a stranger unto either Kingdom, but the King of both, so
as which soever of the two closes with him by it self, before consent, that
there shall be at all a closure, does not only withdraw from the other those
aides it should contribute, but of a sworn Brother becomes an open enemy.

Here I must observe, that as you put an interpretation upon this Article,
which it will not bear, and from the power you have thereby of hindering us from
agreeing with the King at all, would enable your selves to pry into the
particulars of our Agreement, so you do not once glaunce at the point which was
the true genuine scope of the Article: You do not protest against our making
peace with this man; and give such reasons as Jehu did, upon a less occasion:
You do not wonder what confidence we can repose in him, after all this
experience of him, and before so much as a promise of any amendment from him;
you do not warn us, by the example of your Country men, what a broken reed we
shall lean upon when we make a pacification with him: You do not remember us
with what horror the Assembly of your Church did look upon his misdoings; nor
what sense both Kingdoms had (not of a reconcilement with him, but) of
suffering him to come near the Parliament of England, until satisfaction were
given for the blood which he had then caused to be shed in the three Kingdoms.
In fine, You do not say (for you need not give us your reasons) that you will
make no peace with the King; therefore we ought not, but you do as bad as say
that you have made your peace already, and that not only without our consent
(in despite of the Article which you urge against us) but without our privity,
that you are come a degree beyond being friends with him, to be advocates for
him, not in mediating that his submission might be accepted, his crimes
obliterated, and their salary remitted, but in asserting the same cause which
we have been all this while confuting with our swords, the same cause, which,
what Englishman or Scotish-man soever shall have endeavored to maintain in
Arms, is a declared Traitor to his Country, if by his tongue or pen in that
Kingdom of the two where he is no Native, a manifest incendiary. But there will
be time enough to do your errand into Scotland after I have proved England to
be a Noun Substantive, against which you have the shadow of one Argument left
still.

Ar. 5. The strength of your last Reason is this. Our Parliament has formerly
communicated unto you the matter of their Propositions, and of their Bills, in
order to Peace, and generally indeed whatever has passed betwixt the King and
us, since the conjunction of the two Kingdoms against him. Thereupon you have
offered us your Advice concerning the Particulars so communicated, and we have
re-considered them upon your Advice, sometimes complying therewith, other times
making it appear to you why we could not; that communication of counsels, say
you, we would never have suffered, if we had not been bound to it, which if we
ever were, we still are.

Custom and constant usage (I acknowledge) does commonly obtain the name of Law:
but the late practice of some four or five years, has not an aspect reverend
enough to deserve the name of Custom; it is as old (you will say) as an usage
can be that is grounded upon a treaty of the same age, and shall be sufficient
to signify how the parties to the Treaty did understand their own meaning. I
should not deny this pretense of yours to be more then colorable, if you could
prove that our transactions with the King were imparted to you in relation to
that Engagement, nay if I could not show you upon what other ground we did it,
and that we could not reasonably be imagined to do it upon that.

First, to prove, what the Parliament had in their intentions, when they
advised with you, I believe you will not undertake, especially this being the
first time, to my remembrance, that this point came in question betwixt us. I
shall therefore endeavor to tell you, as near as I can, (having been an attentive
witness to most of their Debates upon that subject) what it was that moved them
to give your challenge so much probability of advantage as this amounts unto.
You ask that now, without being answered, which you were wont to have without
asking. You were so; and that from these two Roots: One was the extraordinary
care the Parliament had to omit no act, no circumstance, of civility toward
you, which might express or preserve the amity and correspondence betwixt them
and your Masters, though they were not ignorant what extreme prejudice
courteous and good natured men have often drawn upon themselves in their
dealing with persons of a contrary disposition. Another was, since both
Kingdoms have been imbarqued in the same cause, as men of War, and were
afterward resolved to trade for peace, since the commodities of both were to
be stowed in the same bottom, and bound for the same Port; we thought it but an
ordinary piece of friendship, for us who could make no markets, when we should
be arrived without your allowance to open and let you see before we launched
our several parcels and instructions concerning what we would export and what
bring home; not that we meant to consult you what kind of Merchandise you
thought fittest for us to deal in, which questionless is better known at the
Exchange then at Edinburgh, nor to follow such advice therein as you should
give us without asking any further then we liked it; and so far the best
Merchant in London is content to be ruled by the Swabber of his ship: but
merely to the end, you might (if you pleased) from our example, and from your
aprobation of the ware we were resolved to deal in, furnish that Kingdom (whose
Factors you were) with Merchandise of the same kind, and for evidence that the
Freedom we used toward you was no otherwise understood by you, you did
actually under write diverse of our Bills of Lading in these sillables: The like
for the Kingdom of Scotland.

It remains to be showed how little reason there is you should fancy to your
selves such a ground of the Parliaments former openness to you, as you strive
to father upon them. For, first, If they had communicated their Propositions to
you as conceiving the word [Agreement] in the eighth Article to comprehend all
the preparations to, materials of, and circumstances in an Agreement, they
would not have adhered (as many times they did) unto their own resolutions
notwithstanding your reiterated dissatisfaction. Again, If they had conceived
themselves bound to any such thing by this Article, would they not have thought
the Kingdom of Scotland as much bound for their parts; Should we not have been
as diligent inspectors and castigators of your Propositions as you have made
your selves of ours?

When you shall ask me, setting the point of duty aside, and granting all that
has bin done by us in this kind to have been voluntary; Why we do not observe
the same forwardnes in communicating our matters to you, the same patience in
expecting your concurrence with us, and the same easiness of admitting your
Harangues and Disputations amongst us, which you have heretofore tasted at our
hands, and how we are become less friendly then we were. I have this to say.
There is some alteration in the condition of affairs: So long as we needed the
assistance of your Countrymen in the Field, we might have occasion to give you
meetings at Derby House, and now and then in the Painted Chamber, it being
likely that the Kingdom of Scotland might then have a fellow-feeling with us of
the wholesomness or perniciousness of your counsels; whereas now since we are
able (by Gods blessing) to protect our selves, we may surely (with his holy
direction) be sufficient to teach our selves how to go about our own business,
at least without your tutoring, who have nothing in your considerations to look
upon, but either your particular advantage, or that of the Kingdom whence you
are. And as there is some alteration in affairs, so there is very much in
persons, I mean in your selves, unless being indeed the same at first which now
we find you, you only wanted an opportunity to appear; but whether you be
changed or discovered, what Englishman soever shall peruse the Papers that you
have shot into both Houses of Parliament, especially into the House of Commons
these two last years had as lieve take advice from the King as from you, and if
a stranger should read them, he would little suspect the writers for Friends, or
Counselors, but for Pleaders, for Expostulators, for Seekers of a quarrel, and
that (which is the most bitter weed in the pot) in the behalf, not so much of
them who did employ you, as of him against whom you were employed, and against
whom, if you were Scottish-men, nature would teach you to employ your selves.

By this time I hope you see we have greater cause to repent, that we have kept
such thorns thus long in our sides, then to return with the dog to the same
vomit, and with the lazy Sow, scarce cleansed of herformer wallowing to bemire
our selves again. I bestow a little the more ink upon this point, because I
would prevent the like claim hereafter, and have it left to the liberty of this
nation, next time they shall be invaded or oppressed, though they did once call
in their Brethren of Scotland to their aid, whether they will do so any more or
no.

Having gone through your 5 Arguments, at the end of your dozen Commandments
(so I call desires that must not be slighted ou pain of incurring the guilt of
violating Engagements, and of such dangers as may ensue thereupon) I observe
one engine you use, whereon you lay more weight then upon all you say beside;
It begins with a flourish of oratory bespeaking a fair Interpretation of your
meaning, though your motion be to take the right eye out of every one of our
heads; then you think to make your desires legitimate with fathering them upon
a Kingdom, and put us in mind how well that Kingdom has deserved to reign over
this. For to the offering of desires, as desires, there needs no merit, sure,
but since your opinion, (that the advantages of honor lie all on that side, and
that Obligations of this sort have not been as reciprocal between both Nation,
as those of Leagues and Treaties,) will force my pen upon this Subject. I shall
let you know that some what may be said (when modesty gives leave) on this side
too; and yet all the kindnesses we have received from Scotland, shall (by my
consent) not only be paid for, but acknowledged: and I can be content to
believe, that our Neighbors did not know how ill we were, till we were almost
past cure, and therefore came slowly to us; that they did not know how well we
were in a year after we had nothing for them to do, and therefore went slowly
from us. Only I would have it confessed, that the fire we talk of, was of your
Countrymans kindling, began to burn at your house, to be quenched at ours and
by our hands. But admit this Nation had been merely passive in this War, and
did owe their deliverance out of the Kings Talons wholly to the Scottish
Nation, if the rescuer become a ravisher, if they have protected their own
prey, they have merited only from themselves, and have their reward in their
hands. What have we gotten by the bargain? What have we saved? What have we not
lost? For if once you come to fetch away my Liberty from me, I shall not ask you
what other thing you will leave me: and the Liberty of a people governed by Laws
consists in living under such Laws as themselves or those whom they depute for
that purpose shall make choice of: To give out orders is the part of a
Commander; to give the Law, of a Conqueror; although our Norman did not think
sit so to exercise his right of Conquest; Nay our condition would be lower and
more contemptible, if we should suffer you to have your will of us in this
particular, then if we had let the King have his.

1. A King is but one Master, and therefore likely to sit lighter upon our
shoulders then a whole Kingdom, and if he should grow so heavy as cannot well be
born, he may be sooner gotten off then they. You shall see a Mounsiours horse go
very proudly under a single man, but PLACE="marg" N="*" To carry double
to be Charge en crouppe, is that which nature made a mule for, if nature made
a mule at all.

2. The King never pretended to the framing and imposing of Laws upon us as you
do; he would have been content with such a negative voice therein, as we allow
you in the making of our peace with him; did we fight rather then afford him so
much, though seemingly derived unto him from his Predecessors; and shall we
tamely give you more? Give you that which your Ancestors never yet durst ask of
ours?

3. Lastly, it had been far more tolerable for the King, then for any Foreign
Nation to have a share in the making of our Laws, because he was likely to
partake, and that largely in the benefit of them, if good; in the
inconveniences, if bad; which strangers are not: nay contrarily, it is matter
of envy and jealousy betwixt neighbors to see each other in a flourishing
estate. So as the proper end of Laws, being to advance the people, for whom
they are made in wealth and strength, to the uttermost; they are the most
incompetent Judges of those Laws in the world, whose interest it is to hinder
that people from growing extremely rich or strong.

By what has been already said, and by a word or two of close, it will (I hope)
appear, that the claim you make to the voting with us in the matter of our
Laws, and the conditions of our peace as a thing whereunto we should be obliged
by agreement, is;

1. Mistaken in matter of Fact, there being no such engagement on either side.

2. Unreasonable for the considerations above mentioned and for being
destructive to the very principles of property.

3. Unequal (notwithstanding the reciprocation) more then Cyrus, his childish
judgment was, in making the little boy change coats with the great one, because
his was long and the others short: For our coats are not only longer then
yours, but as fit for us that do wear them, as for you that would.

4. Unusual, there being no president for it, that I could ever read or hear
of; and yet there have been leagues betwixt states of a stricter Union then
this betwixt us, as offensive and defensive, ours only defensive.

5. Unsafe, for the keeping up of hedges, boundaries and distinctions (I mean
real and jurisdictive ones, not personal and titulary) is a surer way to
preserve peace among neighbors, then the throwing all open. And if every man
be not admitted wise enough to do his own business, whoever has the longest
sword will quickly be the wisest man, and dis-inherit all his neighbors for
Fools.

6. Impossible to be made good to you, if it had been agreed: For the
Parliament it self, from whom you claim, has not in my humble opinion
authority enough to erect another authority equal to it self.

As for your exhortations to piety and loyalty, wherewith you conclude. When
you have a mind to offer Sacrifice to your God, and Tribute to your Emperor
(since the one will not be mocked, and the other should not) you may do well to
do it of your own, and to remember, that the late unnatural war with all the
Calamities that have ensued thereon, took its rise from unnatural
enchroachments upon the several Rights and Liberties of two Nations, resolved
it seems to hold their own with the hazard of a war, and all the Calamities
that can ensue thereon.

Henry Marten.

FINIS.

