SOME RETURNS TO A LETTER Which came from a General Meeting of Officers of the
Army of England, Scotland, and Ireland, sitting at James' Westminster.

ALSO A blast from the Lord, OR A WARNING TO ENGLAND, By way of Exhortation to
take heed, and not run upon their own destruction; which will be speedily,
without true repentance.

By a Lover of the Truth, and a Prisoner for declaring Truth abroad BEN:
NICHOLSON.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Black-spread-Eagle, near the West end of Paul's. 1653.

Some Returns to a Letter which came from the General Meeting of Officers of
the Army of England, Ireland, and Scotland, sitting at James' Westminster.
Dear Friends,
1. WHereas you say, that, By seeking the Lord and humbling your selves before
him, he has convinced you of your slothfulness in his Service, and that your
hearts have been looking after the things of this world, and your own private
Affairs more then the things of Jesus Christ and his people.

Then consider, that God which gives light to discover them gross darknesses
in the which you have lived in, does likewise require a departing from those
evils, and a walking up to what he has made manifest in you: For, they that
confess their sins and forsake them, shall find mercy; but if you again hide
your sins, you shall not go unpunished.

2. That, A slothful spirit has overtaken you, and you grew weary of the work
of the Lord, and were ready to say with Baruch, that the Lord had added grief
to your sorrow, that you fainted in your sighings, and found no rest. Jer. 45 3.

Then take heed and seek no longer great things for your selves; for the
determination of the Lord is to bring evil upon all flesh speedily, and to pull
down whatsoever it has built, and to pluck up whatsoever it has planted, and
to establish truth and righteousness in the earth by his spirit.

3. That, Those who feared the Lord both in Army and elsewhere, have not in
this time of peace so improved their Interest, (or rather employed their
talent) to the edifying each other, as did the Churches in the primitive times,
boldly witnessed forth the truth in all places where they went, Acts 9.27, to
32. then had the Churches rest, etc.

Then be careful for the time to come, that like the slothful servant, you
hide not your Talent in the earth (lest the Lord take it wholly from you) but
improve it only to his use, that he may establish peace amongst you, that you
may walk in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, that
you be not cut off with the unprofitable servant, etc.

4. That, The people of this Nation are subject to grievous oppressions,
through the obstruction of Justice, and that the Lord might say to you, What
could I have done more, etc. as he said to his Vineyard, Isa. 5. And he looked
for grapes, judgment and righteousness, but behold wild grapes, oppression and
crying, etc.

Therefore beware that iniquity be no longer lived in, nor oppression upheld by
you, nor any thing that may cause a cry or complaining of iniquity, oppression,
or unrighteousness among you; but bring forth the true grapes, judgment and
righteousness, lest the Lord take away the hedge which he has set about you,
and let you be eaten up (as all they that have brought forth wild grapes are)
and trodden down, laid waste, and not dug, but there come up briars and
thorns, and he command the clouds that they rain no rain upon you, as Isa. 5.5,
6, 7. verses.

5. That, Through the corruptions of many in places of Authority, some good men
have been made to suffer for conscience sake, and many bad men have taken
encouragement to act in their licentious principles, and profane practices, by
reason whereof wickedness does very much abound amongst us.

Then let it be a warning to all you who see these things in others, that you
live not in them your selves, lest now you shall judge your selves afterward;
and take heed that the corruptions which you speak against in others, be not
upheld by you, that good men suffer not under you; that by your injustice none
take encouragement in any licentious principles, or profane practices and
wickedness abound amongst us as now it does, being rather countenanced then
truth to speak openly and reprove it, etc. Therefore like men of truth, fearing
God, and hating covetousness, be what you seem, that in all things
righteousness may be acted by you according to the will of God, who made man
only to serve him, etc. that as it is written, Our Judges may be restored as at
the first. Isa. 1.26. to end. That our Officers may be peace, and our exactors
righteousness. Isa. 60.17, 18, etc. That Kings and Queens (all in Authority)
may be nursing fathers and nursing mothers of truth and Godlyness, that all
oppression may be taken off from the poor, and all cruelties cease, and that
crying may be no more heard in the land, nor complainings in the streets. Isa
46.33. Psalm. 144.14.

And seeing that upon all these considerations forenamed, you are strongly
convinced that it is a duty very much incombent upon your spirits to awaken
your selves, and by all lawful means endeavor the procuring of these things
following, and surely to prevent the forenamed grievances.

Then be careful, if you be convinced, to obey the Lord in all things you are
convinced of, and take heed of smothering any thing the Lord has made known
unto you, for that is a strangling of the righteous one Jesus Christ, which is
forbidden Act. 15.20. but be valiant for the Lord, and execute true judgment
and righteousness every one in your place, and let mercy be over all your
works, that mercy may be shown upon you, I am. 2.11. to end: and take heed of
judging for men, but stand up for the Lord, and judge for him, that he may
establish truth, peace, and righteousness amongst you.

The second Conviction as to duty.

1. You say, that, For the many inconveniences apparently arising from the long
continuance of the same persons in Supreme Authority, that there may be
successive Parliaments, consisting of men faithful to the Interest of the
Commonwealth, men of truth, fearing God, hating covetousness.

Then it will follow, that no untrue man, no wicked nor covetous persons can
have any right in the election or choice of, or being in any place of
authority; for those only are fit to rule for the Lord, that are ruled by the
Lord in all things, which power is ordained of God, and is to be honored; and
he that resists shall receive to himself damnation.

2. That, The Laws may be regulated, that all things whatsoever is good in them
may be maintained, and whatsoever is really burden some may be taken away, etc.

Then whilst there is any Law made or upheld by the wisdom and policy of man,
or whilst there remains any evil principl'd, or covetous person in any place
of authority, it cannot be but burdens, vexations, and grievances will be
upheld; for he that cannot rule his own house well, (or rather is not ruled by
the Lord) and all his passions subdued, can never be fit to rule for the Lord.

3. That, Liberty and protection may be given by a Law to all the truly Godly,
though of different judgments, to worship God peaceably, without imposing
upon, or molesting one another; but no encouragement be given to such as are
Popish or profane in the exercise of their superstitious forms, and licentious
practices.

Know that the worship of God is spiritual: for, he is a spirit, and will be
worshipped in spirit and truth. And where there is a Government by the spirit
of God living and ruling in those that Govern, there will be unity with the
worshippers and Governors in that one spirit where they both live; and there
will need no outward Law to protect the worshippers from being persecuted by
the Governors* for none ever hated their own flesh, and surely the spirit of
the Lord ruling in the Rulers, cannot hate or persecute the spiritual
worshippers; neither was it ever known to persecute any, but overcame all
things with goodness; nor since the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh, it was
never read nor known that any of the Saints or servants of God did impose any
corporal punishment in any manner upon any one, but by exhortation, reproof,
and correction, with spiritual weapons beating down all the strong holds of
sin, and bringing into subjection every evil thought and imagination of the
carnal heart. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. which stands up in opposition against the truth
of God, which is the sire the Scripture speaks of which shall burn up all the
old earth and heavens (the carnal parts of man) it is that love that shall
overcome all things, and place it self only: But we look for new heavens and
earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13. ver. Behold
therefore what manner of persons ought we to be in all godlyness and holiness
of conversation of life?

4. That, The Gospel of Jesus Christ (you say) may be dispensed to all the
people in this Land, and that all those that labor faithfully in that work,
may receive all due countenance and encouragement.

Those who are faithful laborers in the Gospel of Christ, dare trust Christ
for maintenance, though they be sent out without bag or scrip, shoes or two
coats, Luke 22.35. For God that clothes the lillies of the field, and feeds the
ravens when they cry unto him, will not let those that trust in him want any
good thing. Mat. 6.26. For he cares for all those which cast their care upon
him, and if he spared not his only Son Jesus Christ, but delivered him up to
death for us, will he not with him freely give us all things richly to enjoy.
Romans 8.32. And all the Scriptures bears witness with these things, and I am
sure that those who are the Ministers of Jesus Christ, have faith to believe
that their Master will provide for them in all things, and so takes care for
nothing but how to advance the Gospel of Jesus Christ, wholly doing his will,
and can tell how to abase, and how to abound, Phil. 4.12, 13. and are content
with imprisonment as well as liberty, with wants as well as fullness, and in all
things show themselves approved as the Ministers of God, and Messengers of the
everlasting Covenant. 2 Cor. 6.4. to 10. As there is many now adays, and not a
few tried, ever praised be the Lord for it.

Further you say, What the Lord shall set upon your spirits by way of
Conviction, either as to sin or duty, if you communicate the same to us, we
shall take the same as a sign of your acceptance of this our brotherly freedom
toward you. But whether you mean to all, or to the Soldiery only, I know not.

I as one who have obtained mercy from the love of God living in me, and love
all men without respect of persons, see the Lord stepping toward Sion, and he
will speedily be in his Temple, and I see the walls of Babylon falling, and
they will speedily be all thrown down (at which the Inhabitants of the earth
shall mourn, but the Saints shall be exceeding glad and rejoice. But to the
words as convicted as to sin or duty, you mean what sin is to be punished, and
how, and what duty is to be used, and how.) I answer,

And guides my light forth, or sets it upon the top of the Candlestick, that if
the Lord will, all that read may see white from black, light from darkness,
love from cruelty, and says thus,

All sin is to be punished with fire, for Tophet is prepared of old for high
and low; the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a
river of brimstone does kindle it. Isa. 30.33. and the man of sin, or all sin
in man, shall Jesus Christ destroy with the breath of his mouth, and the
brightness of his coming (as experience does plainly declare) when God does
manifest himself to the creature, then is the time of Christ's coming, and the
time of the destruction of sin in every man; yea he is that happy one that
shall dash in pieces all the brats of Babylon, every sin is a brat of Babylon;
and every Saint of God is a living stone, with the which Jesus Christ shall
dash in pieces all the children of Babylon, and those living stones ere long
shall be so common in every street, that a brat of Babylon shall not look out,
but by them be dashed in pieces. Thus the stream of righteousness shall run down
our streets like mighty rivers, and cleanse every corner from filthiness, and
the glorious Lord God shall be unto his people a place of broad rivers and
streams, wherein shall go no gally with oars, nor gallant ship shall pass
there; thus shall the presence of the mighty God of Jacob cause the earth to
fly away, and the mountains to remove out of their place: all the earthly
powers and buildings of men, the great men and Rulers of the earth are the
mountains which shall be removed, and the pillars that shall be shaken, and all
carnal actings of man is the earth that shall fly away when God appears, as he
has already begun, whose appearance is as the morning, and there need no
borrowed lights there; this is new Jerusalem that the lamb shall be the glory
of, and there shall be no need of any outward Law to direct to walk; but the
inward Law of righteousness which the Lord will place and write in the tables
of every man's heart, and the Lord alone shall be the teacher and sole ruler of
his people, for I am God Almighty says the Lord, all in all, all over all, and
will presently dispose of all things to his own praise and glory, he will cause
to walk uprightly to speak righteously, to despise the gain of oppression, and
to shake all hands from taking bribes, and all ears from hearing blood, and all
eyes from seeing evil, then shall we need no Scribe nor Receiver, nor counter
of the Towers; none to write our accusations one against another, nor to
receive money for the same, neither will there need any taking account of men,
or numbering of Armies (the Towers or strengths of Nations;) but we shall dwell
safe up on high, even in the munition of rocks, in the Lord God Almighty, our
bread shall be given us, and our waters shall be sure, and we shall see the
King in his beauty, and we shall dwell in the Land which we have seen afar off,
(Jesus Christ the spiritual Land) and Jerusalem (spiritual Jerusalem) shall be
a quiet habitation that shall not be taken down, nor one of the stakes (never a
Saint of God) shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be
broken, for the Lord will be there; the Judge, Law giver and King, he will
plead for us, and save us from the hands of all that hate us. Isa. 33.21, 22.
and we shall need no steering in the filthy waters of the light of natural or
carnal man, by the Powers of the earth the rotten Galleys, nor with the humane
learning and policy the sore cracked Oars (and will presently be broken) to
carry us over the poluted, above the carnal, and through the corrupt ways of
fallen man; nor need we any fighting to defend us from them; but the Lord will
only save all that trust in him, his name is a strong Tower, the righteous
shall fly thither and be safe, this is the strong Tower which the Lord God has
ordained for his people, salvation is the walls and bulwarks thereof, eternal
safety and happiness is in the Lord Jesus; and though fear lay hold upon the
wicked, yet the Godly shall neither fear nor be afraid: Thus the righteous
shall be as bold as Lions, but the wicked shall fly when none pursues, as may
be instanced by many (though nameless) who runs to the powers of the earth to
help them, and climbs up to the tops of the ragged rocks to save themselves,
yea and calls to the mountains to fall on them, and to the hills to cover them;
but they all cannot save them from the presence of the Lord, for the breath of
the Lord, and the brightness of his appearance in his Saints, shall consume all
the whole body of Antichrist, whereof they are members (the Town-Clarks of
England which shall cease ere long) for behold the great day of the Lord is
near at hand, and will consume every evil doer, therefore come out of your Idol
worship, and be ye separate from your iniquities (out of the Coasts of Babylon,
lest ye perish with the evil doers, and know that the carnal man has no right
(though he take power to himself, Cain-like) to judge the Saints; neither is it
sitting that a Lion should judge a Bear, nor a natural man a natural man, for
God is Judge of the whole earth, and a natural man knows not the things of God,
nor can he do any good thing; neither is it any reason that a Wolf should judge
a Lamb, every natural man is a Wolf, and every spiritual man a lamb, as it is
written, The spiritual man can be judged of none, but he himself judges all
things, and the Saints shall judge the world, and the Kingdoms of the world
shall be given to the Saints of the most high, and they shall reign and rule in
righteousness for ever, etc:



away, and incorruption placed in the stead, and the vile bodies be changed, no
good thing can be brought forth, for an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit
(the which every natural man is) man being in honor considered, if not become
like the beasts that perish, every man in his first nature is a beast, and what
reason is there that a beast should judge of any thing; and for the Saints of
God, they cannot smite any but by love; for as they have put on Christ, so walk
they in him, as patterns and examples, servants to all; the which none can do
whilst they are alive in (or unto) sin, for they are dead unto Christ, and
until Christ live in them they can do no good thing. John ^5.5. to end. and
this is the resurection the Scripture speaks on, and the Saints are made
partakers of, and all they who have part therein, the second death has no
power over; this is the true resurrection of the invisible or spiritual body of
Jesus Christ, in this Tabernacle or visible body; but it is a great mystery,
for we shall not all die, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, etc. but none knows these things, but those who are taken
into the being of them, and lives in them. (I desire from the very bottom of my
heart) you were all so changed* etc. Again, the Scriptures holds forth (and
the Saints knows a day of judgment within, and the Kingdom of heaven to be
within, which are so hard to be understood, that they who are unlearned or)
undisciplined cannot understand, but wrest to their own destruction, as in 2
Pet. 3.16. likewise says St. Paul, Reckon your selves dead unto sin, but alive
unto righteousness. As Romans 6. cap. And whilst we were dead in trespasses and
sins, has he quickened us together with him. And again he said, I was alive
without the Law, but when the Commandment came (the Law written in his heart)
sin revived and he died (to sin;) he was alive in sin, until the righteous Law
which came forth of Sion, met with him, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh,
but made him alive to the Law of righteousness, that Law is quick and
powerful, wherever it meets with any, it kills sin in them, but gives life
in God: and how can they which are dead unto sin, live any longer therein? Romans
6.2. They who have passed from death unto life, can testify this resurrection
(and none else) for they know that they are translated from death unto life,
because they love the brethren, and they know they know they love them indeed,
because they love God and keep his Commandments, for the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus living in them frees them from the Law of sin and death, and thus
the same power that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, quickens their mortal
bodies, and this is the resurrection, that whosoever lives in, and believes,
shall never die more. (This will dazel some of your eyes, etc.) as says the
Scripture: The carnal man cannot discern the things of God, because they are
spiritually discerned. Thus in plainness the Scriptures bears witness with
me, and offer in figures, as that of Lazarus and of the grains of corn cast
into the earth, and of the prodigal Son, etc. and before ever any can know
perfecty that they are found, they must know themselves lost; and dead before
they can know themselves alive. This my son was dead, but is now alive, etc.
but none knows the things of God, but the spirit of God. Oh that you all tasted
with me, that you might feell how good the Lord is: For to be carnally minded
is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace, and except a man be
born again of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter in no wise into the
Kingdom of heaven, which is within in the power and demonstration of the Holy
Ghost. Dear friends, the time is come that many that were dead have heard the
voice of the Son of God, and are made alive; and the time is still going on,
that all that are in the graves shall hear and come forth, some to life, and
some to death: Sin shall arise and be condemned; but Christ which lay dead (the
seed) shall live every natural man is a grave where Jesus Christ lies dead, a
new Sepulcher where never dead came but he: So Christ called the Scribes and
Pharisees painted Sepulchers, whited Tombs, and graves that men go over and
cannot tell: filthiness did bear all sway in them, and smothered the good seed,
yet their outsides were so fair, that none knew it but the spirit.

Nor does any Natural man know, that he is a Grave, and that Christ lies dead
in him: yet know that the seed is sown in all grounds, and that the Light is
come into all the world, though it he did in the earth, and darkness cover the
Waters; (the light is put under a Bushel, etc.) Lord open your eyes, and
consider what good will it do you to believe in a Christ come to take away the
sins of the world, and yet you live in sin; for know assuredly that he came
not to take away part of our sins, and leave the other untaken away, here you
count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, wherewith you were sanctified,
Heb. 10.29. for I am sure he perfecteth for ever all that come unto him; and
the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, and he will save to the utmost
them that believe in him; therefore where sin is lived in, there is but a dead
faith and a false light, which is the Egyptian Seas, that must be dried up:
False light put forth, and dead faith made alive before the true faith, true
light, and clear Crystal waters, flow into the soul to purify, enlighten and
cleanse it of all corruption, for faith purifies the hear, and true light
guides into the paths of righteousness, and true Righteousness will like
mighty streams runn down our streets, (all has gates and goings) and cleans
them from all filthiness, etc.

As for duty, they that worship the Lord, must worship him in Spirit and Truth,
for he seeks such to worship him, John 4 23, 24. And they that Judge for the
Lord must judge righteous Judgment; as it is written, He has showed th^e O man
what is thy duty, and what the Lord requires of thee, for to do Justice, to
love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God, Micah 6.8. And this is the whole
duty of man, Fear God, and keep his Commandments; all which is, to love God
above all, and our Ne^ghbour as our selves: This Love is the Tree whereon
grows leaves that will Cure all Nations, and whose Pruit will be meat for all
People: the Shatamits two Armies, Love to God and love to Neighbors, which
overcomes all things both within and without; this is the F^re of the Lord
that will consume and bu^n up the whole World of Sin and Corruption; this is
the destruction of the world that now is, which is reserved for Fire, until
the destruction and day of ungodly men; this exceeding great Love of God shall
overcome and burn up all the Heavens and Earth, which now is all false rests
whereon the the World does center, and they shall be swallowed up in this Love,
which is Heaven it self; He that lives in Love, lives in God, God is Love,
and the Center of all Joy and Happiness; whosoever shall abide therein, shall
have all hatred taken away, and all things become new unto him: New Love that
shall last for ever, New God, and all the old Gods of the earth shall be
famished, the God of this World shall be served by him no longer (Money:) New
Christ, newly risen from the dead, or newly made manifest, which had been often
talked on; New Life, and the name written in the book of Life, (Righteous and
true holiness the Lives thereof:) New Heavens and new Earth wherein dwells
Righteousness, and then shall Judgment be established in Truth in the Earth;
until which time he that Judges his Brother is a transgressor of the Law;
for they that judge their Brethren of any thing, and are guilty of the same,
are vain men, and have nothing to do to judge any, they are inexcusable: As
the Lord lives that searches the hearts and tryes the reins, if any Ruler or
Judge of this Nation live in any of the seven Abominations spoken of, Prove.
6.17, 18, 19 ver. Or if any of them be set up in their hearts, they can be no
fit Judges to judge of Abomination in others; and the Natural man judging the
Saints, is but Esau warring against Jacob; and until the Lord shall throw down
all Esaus forth of places of Authority, there shall be no true judging of the
Brethren, nor true Judgment set up.

But least I should seem to you wholly to obstruct your proceedings, or to set
difference amongst you, I shall come home to you in particulars:

Then know, that after the Lord brought the Children out of Egypt, they had a
great way to pass before they came into the good Land: which thing was a true,
and perfect figure of the spiritual Isreal's deliverance from the Egiptian
bondage of sin and corruption, and all bondages of services whatsoever; at
whose deliverance they shall find no less troubles in the spirit, then the
natural seed of Israel did in the flesh (which condition you are now in) and
shall find the Sea before, the Egyptians behind* and great Mountains on each
hand: The Red sea of persecutions before, the Egyptian bondage of Sin and
corruption behind (ready to devour you:) and on each hand great Mountains; on
the right hand Carnal Worships, and on the left hand Carnal Laws, that
incloseth you in that you cannot go either backward or forward, nor to each
hand; therefore take heed that like the Israelites you do not murmr against
the true Moses, nor tempt God; but know that as their strength were to stand
still and see the salvation of the Lord, so is yours now, and then he will
divide the Sea of persecution, that you may pass through, and you shall pass
through the Mountains, and leave them behind you, and the Egyptians will the
Lord drown in the Sea, which they thought to have driven you into; but being
got over the Red sea, and all the Egyptians lie drowned on the shore, yet but
in the wilderness, and great trials and distresses is there; and a mixed
multitude now begins to lust for flesh, and murmuring gets up, and a great
slaughter from the Lord destroys the mightiest of the murmurers; so that where
God gives the hearts desire, if it be not only used ta his Glory, it brings
the greater Condemnation. Thus going on to Mount Sinah, and behold there is a
Fire upon it, blackness and darkness, and sore tempests, and fear and much
dread overcomes them who look upon it, and thunderings, and loud voices, and
great Earthquakes there make the people tremble; (all those things are plain to
him that runs the righteous Race, and are all seen within, and there the Law of
God is written in the heart, and added because of transgression; and the guilt
of Sin, and punishment for the same does appear: now the Law of God being
written in the heart, does judge and condemn all sin there, and there the day
of Judgment is come, and there is a separation of the precious and vile, Sheep
and Goats, good and evil, which good is by God received into rest, and
cherished, but the Evil is punished and cast into torments, as plain example
will show in the children of Isreal's progress, for they that believe not cannot
enter into the good land: But dear hearts be careful of turning back again
into Egypt in your hearts, but go on with courage for all the difficulty; for
they that endure to the end shall be saved: Hearken to Moses the servant of the
Lord, the manifestations of God within, that which does convince of sin and
evil, and direct to or in truth; and this true Prophet of the Lord will not
only lead you into the Mount, but into the good Land, though now but at the
side of the Red sea: but if you will not hear this Moses, you shall be cut off
from amongst the people of God: therefore, dear Friends, as the Lord has
manifested himself to you, be faithful, and as ye have put on Christ, so walk
ye in him in faithfulness according to what ye have received, for the Lord
accepts of that which a man has, and not of that which a man has not, and he
requires no more then he gives; so he that is faithful in little, shall be
Ruler over much; being faithful of a little manifestations of God, begets a
rule over much sin and corruptions, though they be never so strongly placed in
the affections, therefore take heed of backsliding; for if any set their hands
to the Plough and look back, they are not fit for the kingdom of Heaven; and
know, that it were better for them never to know the ways of God, then after
they know them to return back from them, etc. And whereas you say, The Lord
has strongly convinced you of the great evils you lived in, and of the great
good you ought to do which you have omitted: That which does so convince, is
the true l^ght, which being obeyed will lead into all Truths.

Therefore harden not your hearts against the Lord, which has discovered
himself so largely unto you, for he discovers not sin to be lived in, nor
duty to be neglected; for that light which discovers these things being
obeyed, gives strength to forsake sin, and to perform duty: this is the pillar
of fire which God lead the children of Israel by through the plain of the read
sea, or by the way of the Wilderness of the read sea, and over the read sea (or
thorough) the which their enemies pursuing were a cloud that they could not see
them; This is the light of God that enlightneth every one that comes into the
world (without end) but is darkness to the carnal heart, and called evil by
every natural man; this light does discover sin and iniquity in the heart. O
enter into the secrets of your hearts and wait upon the Lord there for the
manifestations of his love mediate and pray there in secret, and the Lord which
sees in secret will reward you openly: by abiding in the house, it will appear
you are the virtuous woman, (and all will follow and seek after you) whose
price is above Rubies, and that you are the bride, the lambs wife, married to
him in truth and righteousness, and he will take care for you in all things,
and direct you in all ways how to walk; for the woman is to be in subjection to
her husband, as also says the law (of righteousness) but if you gad abroad for
council, you will declare to all you are the harlot whose feet abide not in the
house, whose paths go down to death, and all that follow you shall taste
thereof. O take heed; for every one shall give an account unto God for the deeds
done in the body, whether they be good or evil: Therefore O ye heads of the
people which judge and rule over them, beware of taking gifts and rewards, they
blind the eyes, they will wholly put out the light of God within you: and take
no bribes, for as the Lord lives, for those things has the Lord cast down all
out of the place of judgment that have acted in them; and be sure, if you
still continute the same work, you shall have the same wages: for if ye judge
for hire or rewards, or take gifts or bribes, the Lord will utterly consume and
cast you ou^ as he has done all before you: The children of Israel was a
perfect figure of this, for the which offenses the Lord scattered them abroad
amongst the heathen, and they drove them forth of the land (as might be
witnessed in our days.)

Ob. But may some say, Though the Lord be to be worshipped in spirit and truth,
yet he has left the Civil Government to man, for man is a reasonable creature,
by the which he ought to Govern at his own discression.

Ans. No man is reasonable but he which has faith: For, all are unreasonable
men that live upon sense, (and it is the property of a beast to live upon
sense) as all our Judges, Rulers, and Town Clarks do now all, judging and
preaching for hire, taking gifts and rewards, which is contrary to sound reason
because the Lord forbids it, surely the potter should have power over the clay
to make it, and then to use it at his pleasure for his own use, and not the po^
please it self: True reason ought to guide every one. God made man a reasonable
creature, but man being not content with that condition God had placed him in,
but acted in his own reason, became like the beasts that perish; thus pure
reason was destroyed, and corrupt reason took place, as it does this day in
every natural man. God made Adam innocent, and placed him in a happy condition,
and gave him a Commandment that he should not do such and such things, if he
did, he should die; but Adam aspiring to be wise in himself, disobeyed the
Lord, and followed his own wisdom, which was against all pure reason, that he
being made by God, should forsake the Commandment of God, and follow his own
will and wisdom: for, surely God that made man only for his own glory, and made
all other things for his use and service, ought to have served God in all
things, as all things was to serve him, and no man ought to rule contrary to
the Record of the spirit, the Scriptures, which are written for our
instruction, and as the testimony of the word of God within shall teach and
direct; the which if it had been obeyed, Adam had not fallen, nor Cain killed his
brother Abel, nor Ishmael scoffed Isaac, nor Esau hated Jacob, neither had the
children of Israel murmured and tempted God in the wilderness, and there fallen,
but that they lived upon sense; neither had Saul the King of Israel any reason
to save alive Amalekes King, or to spare the best of the sheep and oxen which
he had command to slay; for which disobedience the Lord rent his Kingdom out of
his hands, as be has done all that disobeyed his word, and will do all that
ever disobey him, before which he ever gave warning, and still does,
complaining against the Rulers which rule with force and cruelty, and against
oppressors, saying, Oppressors rule over my people, and with force and cruelty
do they rule over them, and they that lead them cause them to err, etc. Love is
the fulfilling of the Law, then sure it is good reason that the Law should be
used in love; and great reason that man should rather live in honor then like
a beast, as every natural man is; every man being guided and governed by God,
and that walks according to what he commands, is in honor; but being guided
by his own will is a beast; but the beast and the false Prophet which deceives
the people with their lying wonders, shall be shortly taken and cast into the
lake which butneth with fire and brimstone.

Dear hearts, if our faith were steadfast, our hope firm, and our Love perfect,
then should we be established in everlasting peace; for faith is powerful and
subdues Kingdoms; hope is upright and will keep steadfast to the Lord, to walk
in holiness with boldness and love, being lived in, will overcome all things,
and establish eternal peace, these are the Saints heavens wherein they dwell,
or the three heavens of rest, whereof two shall cease, but the third shall
abide for ever. Search and examine your selves where you are, try whether you
be yet in the faith or no; faith purifies the heart from all dead works, hope
keeps firm to the Lord in true holiness and righteousness, nothing can remove
it: perfect love casts out all fear, and overcomes all torments; faith is a
valliant Champion, hope is an upright judge, and love an everlasting King of
glory that shall reign for ever. If you know the ways of God, happy are ye if
you walk in them; for he that follows righteousness and mercy, finds life,
righteousness, and honor. Pro. 21. ver. 21. Thus farewell dear hearts, and the
God of peace establish you in peace for ever, which is the hearty desire of him
who dearly loves all appearance of truth, though now a prisoner for truths sake.

York Castle, Feb. 8. 1652. Benjamin N^chelson.

FINIS.

