NEVVS CERTAIN AND TERRIBLE FROM THE KINGDOM OF POLAND, BEING The Copy of a
Letter, sent by Jerome Nicholas to a friend of his, dwelling at Gravesend.

Relating how the Turk has past the Confines of the Kingdom, with an almost
invincible Army: and what barbarity they use toward Christians in those parts,
having gotten the upper hand.

Nunc tua res agitur paries dum proxim^^ ardet. LONDON: Printed for Andrew C^^.
1642.

Dear Sir,
REceiving from you Letters at all occasions, wherein you certify me how all
matters go in England, it should be a very unkind part in me, not to write
back something to you, although it did concern you nothing; yet that which I
write to you now concerns not you only, but also every good Christian. Know
therefore good Sir, that upon the twentieth sixth day of January, the great
Turk having ever in his heart a grudge against the Polanders, for ancient
quarrels, determining now also to be revenged, when a great part of his Forces
are employed elsewhere, gathered together above forty thousand of his most
expert Soldiers, being to the number of eighteen thousand Janissaries, in whom
consists his chief strength, and two and twenty thousand Timariots, which
are horsemen lightly armed, for the most part, employed in forraging, and in
pillaging of the Country, where the Turk does maintain any war, these
passed on above fourteen Leagues in the Country, making havocke of the poor
people all the way as they went, sparing neither young nor old rich nor poor,
but sweeping all away with a most bloody massacre: using also extraordinary
torments to those that would not immediately abjure the Christian Religion,
binding them to posts, and then circumcising them* At ^runstad a little Village
near to our City, the Lieutenant General with five thousand horsemen, gave
the Timariots battle, which was upon the twenty eight day of January last
past, but being oppressed with their number, he was forced to fly, having lost
but a few of his men, leaving all the ground bestrewed with the dead bodies of
the Turkish horsemen; Having himself also received one dangerous wound in the
right side, with a Lance, but we hope he will shortly recover; for the rest of
his wounds are nothing so dangerous. And indeed if he did not, we should find
great want of him; for to speak the truth, he is an excellent man, and very
expert in all manner of Military Discipline, and in many Battles fought
against the Turk he has approved himself very valiant to his King and
Country.

But to return to the Turkish Army, they being proud of this dear bought
victory, and vowing sharp revenge, marched still on toward the City in which
we now remain, killing every one that had not fled to the next Town, with
extreme tortures; it being thought a sport amongst the Turks, to rip up women's
bellies with their Scimitaries, and to carry young children upon the top of
their Lances, springing with blood. They have approached our City, and lie
very near to it strongly entrenched, and have planted five Canon and six
Demi-Canon against the walls of the City, and they threw every hour over our
walls hot burning Grenades, which (blessed be God) by reason of our
watchfulness and care, do no great harm; only a woman as she was passi^g
the street, with her child in her arms, both she and the poor infant were
killed by the unhappie fall of a Granadoe.

We kill every day both with small shot and great, huge numbers of that
unhallowed pack, especially at their last assault; where by reasonable
computation, there was found to have dyed a thousand in less than three
hours. Out Town is very strong, God be praised, and our Soldiers are
courageous enough, especially the Inhabitants, as they have best reason, they
being sure to loose their houses and fortunes, (if the Town be taken) if not
their lives withal. Out Town has endured the Siege at least twenty-two days
now, and our walls are mightily battered, I beseech God to send us speedy and
strong succor, and let us rather have any mischance, than to fall into the
hands of those cruel and savage people. For our Governor has been diverse
times called to a parlie with their Captain, and had articles delivered to
him, to which agreeing he should yield the Town. But having showed them the
Soldiers and Townsmen, they all drew their swords, and swore they would rather
die than accept of any such conditions.

The Articles are these; First, That every one of the Townsmen and Soldiers,
should deliver up their weapons and ammunition and victualling. Secondly, That
they should go out of the City with ropes about their necks, and their hands
bound behind them, in token of submission, all except the Governor. Thirdly,
That they should leave their wives and children and goods behind them: and
carry nothing with them but one suite of clothes, and one pair of shoes with
them. Fourthly, That they should swear by Mahomet never to serve the King
again. Fifthly, That they should all be marked in the forehead.


These are the Articles; The bearer is in great haste, being in danger to be
surprised by the Turks Scouts, if he stay till break of day.

Farewell; Remember me to my wife and children, tell them that I am in health;
but by no means relate to her in what danger I am in; so committing you to God,
I rest

Halberstad the 22 of Feb. 1641. Your most obsequious friend, JEROME NICHOLAS.


