A FAITHFUL WARNING, WITH GOOD ADVICE FROM ISRAEL'S GOD, TO Englands KING, AND
HIS COUNCIL; That they may wisely improve this little Inch of time which the
God of their Life as yet affords unto them, before the Day of their
[approaching] Misery come upon them.

Which may serve as a Caution to all others in Authority within the Nation.

Sounded through one of the Mourners in Sion, known by the name of Martin Mason.

Hear ye, and give ear, be not proud, for the Lord has spoken.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins l' Grand.

A FAITHFVL WARNING, WITH GOOD ADVICE FROM Israel's GOD, to England's KING AND
HIS COUNCIL, etc.
BEhold, to obey is better than sacrifice; and to hearken, is better than the
fat of Rams. Listen therefore, and incline your Ear, be attentive, and read
without prejudice: For the Righteous God has laid it upon me, once more to
Warn the Men in Authority, the Rulers of this Nation; even from him that fits
upon the Throne, to the inferior Governors of the people, that they cease from
their iniquities, and fear the living God.

Know ye therefore, large has the love of God been toward you, and with
wonderful loving kindness has he visited you; his patience verily is beyond
expression; for your iniquities have highly provoked him: How many Warnings
has he given you, all which hitherto have been but little regarded by you? O
let his righteous Witness in all your Consciences arise, and it will testify
the wonderful Mercies of your Maker toward you. Have you answered the End and
Requirings of the Lord from you, in his Overturning your Enemies for you, and
thus settling the Government of the Nations upon you? Came you not in without
any Conquest? Can you justly glory in your own strength, that it was your own
Arm that has done this for you? Was it your own Valor that vanquished your
enemies? Or is it not the hand of the Lord that has thus exalted you, and
abased them that had the Government before you? I say, Have you answered the
Requirings of the Lord? Let his Witness be awakened, and arise in all your
consciences, and answer to me. Did he lay no injunction upon you when his heart
was inclined to exalt you? Did he not enjoin you to amendment of Life, to show
mercy, to glorify your Maker, to be Patterns of Piety, and good Examples to
the People; to let Mercy, Truth and Righteousness live amongst you, and be
exercised by you toward the people who are now fallen under you; to show
favor to the Righteous, to help the helpless, and to remedy the wrongs of the
poor and needy; to suppress Vice and Vanity in Court, City and Country; to be
a terror to evil doers, and a praise and encouragement unto them that do well?
And have none of you in the time of your distress promised to the Lord the
performance of these things? Did the Lord (I say) set you upon the Throne, and
thus restore you to outward Dignity, when you seemed to be going down into the
place of forgetfulness, when you had little hopes to have such a Day without a
secret enjoining to these things? Did he give you the desire of your hearts,
only to be revenged of your Enemies, and to aggravate and multiply the
miseries of his People? If his Witness were awakened in your Consciences,
surely you would say, Let God be justified, and sinful man condemned?

Oh my Friends, how have you trifled away God's precious time, and your own
Deliverance! How has Vice and Vanity abounded in the Nation since the Day of
your Exaltation in England? Does not Iniquity, Pride and Luxury Lord it amongst
you both in Court, City and Country, with an impudent forehead? Is not
Profaneness countenanced by you? Are not the wicked and ungodly had in
estimation with you? Do not the unrighteous boast in your strength? And has
not your Horn exalted them throughout the Nation? Are not the Merchants of
Babylon grown familiar with you, and the Sons of Belial advanced by you? Or is
there any people receive such favor from you as the Rotten Interest, who are
now indulged by you? What Is become of Sion? Are you acquainted with her? Do you
minister true comfort to her? Is she advanced or discountenanced in your Court
and the Kingdom? Are you true Subjects to Sion's King? Rules he as Caesar in
the Kingdom of your hearts? Do you know Him, and pay Tribute to Him? Do you
observe His Laws, Statutes and Ordinances? Do you own His Light in all your
Consciences to be your Leader, Judge and Lawgiver? Oh happy were England had
she such a King, and happy were Englands King had he such Counselors?

But alas! alas! Sion is in the Dust, and no man regards her; her Enemies now
seem to be too many for her, and make themselves merry over her: They who
should be as Nursing-Fathers to her, withdraw their affections from her; she
sits weeping in the House of Mourning, for the misery that is coming upon this
People; while the drunkards of Ephraim tunn themselves with Wine, and
intoxicate their Brains with strong Drink; and the greedy Shepherds devour the
silly Flock, and the lustful ones love to have it so; while the Priest and
People conspire together against the Lord and his Anointed Jewels, to stop the
Mouth of Truth, and fill their prisons with innocent people; yet can they not
center here, Mordecai's Seed is a great Mote in the Devils Dish, which the old
Dragon seeks to devour by some unrighteous Decree from Caesar: For the Crown
they count sure of their fide, and that is the topstone of Egypts strength. To
the Refuge of Lies they now betake themselves, and by their Majestical Craft do
abuse both their Prince and the Country, Cum Privilegio, and all for want of a
good Understanding.

For would but Caesar and his Council stop their Ear to their
Trencher-Chaplains, and the alluring enchantments of such devouring Monsters,
who seek to subvert and murder the Innocent: I say, would but the King and his
Council once be persuaded to come into calmness, and take counsel of God's
ORACLE, the Light in their Consciences, and by it be guided, how soon would the
dark, misty Fogs of Egypt and her Magicians, be dispel'd, and driven back into
the bottomless pit. No croaking Frogs durst then come forth to abuse the Honor
of a Prince; nor wound his Reputation, by enticing him to Cruelty; nor scrue
his Prerogative above the Peoples Tranquillity: For the End of all Government
appointed by God, next to his Glory, is the good of the People Salus Populi
Suprema Lex.
. For the great God of Heaven and Earth so loved the world, that he sent his
Son a Light into the world, not to destroy men's lives, but to save them; yet to
punish the evil-doer according to the nature of his Crime, but not with
Imprisonment, Death or Banishment for every small offense, much less for that
which is no offense at all.

For what ever is not Malum in se, an evil in it self, ought rather to be
indulged, than so severely punished. For a man to be covered with his Hat
before Authority, is no evil in it self, though falsely so counted by the evil
ambitious one; nor for a man to be honestly employed upon your Popish Festival
days, is not sinful or evil in it self, though sinners rashly so judge it, and
wrongfully imprison the Righteous for bearing their Testimony against it. Nor
is the Conscientious refusing of an Oath, an Evil in it self; for Christ the
Oath of God expressly commands, Swear not at all, and therefore it is (must of
necessity be) an evil in him that punishes the Innocent for not violating the
Law of God, with imprisonment [at pleasute] and lose of Estate. Far be it from
the Sons of Innocence to Plott or Confederate against the Person of a Prince;
and as far be it from them by stooping to the Will of Man, to violate the Law
of the Living God; and it should be far from the Prince to punish such a People
for not transgressing the Command of Christ. And did not our Adversaries answer
us with more rashness, rage and raw Arguments, than good reasoning, concerning
our not Swearing, if Sic volo sic jubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas, were not
too predominant with them, we should not in that particular receive such hard
measure from them.

Man placed in Authority, should Rule for God, and ought to have his Eye within
his Head, his mind (I mean) staid upon the Light of Israel, God's Witness
placed in his Soul, and read and meditate in that Book day and night, even all
the days of his life: And this is not durus sermo, a hard saying, but a
well-doing. This was that made David honorable, and a man after God's own
heart, and Solomon his Son, the wisest King that ever sat upon a Throne.

O that England's King and his Council would summo conatu, seek after true
Wisdom, which if any man want, let him ask it of God; the way to find it, is to
beg for it, of him alone who has the disposal of it; the King of David, the
God of Solomon, who dwells in the Light, which enlightens every man that comes
into the world: His Wisdom is to be prized more than Gold, she is of more worth
to a Prince than Pearls or Rubies; Cabinets of Jewels are not to be compared to
her, and glistering Diamonds come too short of her; the Tongue of Men and
Angels cannot sufficiently commend her; the High and Lofty are not worthy of
her: It Is the Sons of Innocence that have Right unto her, and the Children of
the Day that are adorned by her: Rough Esau's Birth is a stranger to her, and
must not have the Honor to be acquainted with her; that brood for a mess of
Pottage would sell their Birt-right, and abandon her: It Is only smooth Jacob,
or Valiant Israel who wrestles with his God, as a Prince (who in his heart
affects her, and fixes the delight of his soul upon her, and as the Jewel of
his God does honor her) that is worthy of her: On him must the blessing come.

And have not England's King and his Senators need of such a Counselor? Is not
this WISDOM worthy to be inquired of by them? Or are they wise enough to do well
without her? The Wisdom of this World is not to be compared unto her.

For if that muddy thing
Could honor England's King;
He and his Council have a Spring.
But that poor Toy
Gives no true Joy:
It Is Wisdom from above,
Comes from the God of Love,
That sarisfies the humble mind,
And does the Proud in Fetters bind,
Come then O England's KING,
Drink at pure Wisdoms Spring,
And you his Gouncil turn your eyes
To Israel's Light, if you will be wise.
For know this from the Lord, never had King more need of wise Council, nor
such a Council more need of a wise King, then you have at this season. Alas
poor Mortals! whither are you posting in the dark? Hold in the Reins, and curb
those pampered Steeds that carry you so swiftly (as it were on the wings of the
wind) down into the Gulf of endless misery. Stop poor men; dismount, dismount,
ride on no further; repose your selves, and deliberate a little season; see if
you can come to a a little Rest; Retire your selves within, come into your
Bedchamber; commune with your own hearts, and be still: Listen, and incline
your ear to that still Voice of the Righteous God, that gently calls upon you
in your Consciences, and counsels you to show mercy, and use moderation, that
reproves for sin in the heart. Come I say, to the Cross of Christ, O ye Great
Council of the Kingdom, and all that are in Authority in this Nation, and know
a bridle to your Lusts: Learn of the Lamb of God, and of his Light which he
has placed in your Consciences) to be meek and lowly; let your minds sink down
unto, and center in the Seed of Life, which lies low in you all, that Babe of
Glory who lies in the Manger, and all this time has had no room in the Inn.
Mind (I say) the breathings of that Innocent Babe within you; observe the sweet
sound of his Voice who never sinned, who yet calmly reproves you when you sin
against him; obey his command; his yoke is easy, and his burden light; he
will counsel you to part with nothing that is worth your possessing; Vice and
Vanity, with all manner of iniquity and lust, are loathsome to him, for these
he is angry with you; yet in the Light he is willing to be reconciled to you:
Lo, how he calls upon you in his love, and shows pity toward you: Ah how like
a tender Father does he bear with you! How long has his Mercy spared you! How
unwilling is he to enter into judgment with you, would you but turn unto him
at his reproof! Nothing will he require of you, but what would be exceeding
good for you, (which indeed is a duty sies upon you, and were you but willing,
he would give you Power to perform) to honor him that made you, by believing
and walking in the Light. Believe in him who in the secret of your hearts lets
you see when you are entering into, or have committed any sin, or are hatching
mischief in your hearts against the Innocent; Believe that Voice to be the
Voice of God, the Light in your Consciences, and give up your selves unto it,
and be guided by it; Keep friendship with it; Forsake all that which is
reproved by it, and follow the Light whithersoever it leads you; if it lead you
through the Cross to your carnal minds, out of sin, out of mire and dirt into
the path of purity and holiness; out of Passion, into Patience; out of Pride,
into true Humility; out of Hatred, into hearty Love: (O blessed Change, if you
were willing to be changed by it!) out of Revenge, to a free forgiveness; out
of Folly or Worldly Wit, into Divine Wisdom: Who would not go after such a
Guide! Who would not serve such a Noble Lord, that sends not his servant upon
any service by himself alone, but goes alongwth him, or rather before him, and
is a Guide unto him! What he commands him to do, he only requires the heart, a
willing mind, and does the thing himself, or gives power to perform it. Such a
Lord is Israel's God; all the gods of the Heathen are not to be compared unto
him. He calls, My Son, give me thy heart; and, Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden with the load of your iniquities, and I will give you
ease. O Golden Promise of a gracious God! which he freely performs to all his
people: To as many as receive him, (and believe in him, and are willing to be
guided by him, to leave Lust, and walk in the Light, which makes war against
it) he gives power to become the sons of God; [mark] to these he gives power to
become the Sons of God. O bountiful God! O merciful King of Saints! worthy of
all Honor, Glory, and everlasting Praises: Thou gives power to those that have
rebelled against Thee, and have been Traitors to Thee, to be at peace with
Thee, to be reconciled to thee, and receive pardon from thee; yea, to become
thy Children upon their submission to thee: It Is thou Righteous God, works all
our good works for us, and in us, and then acceptest of thine own. Here is a
pattern for all Princes and great ones to forgive your Enemies. O! let Revenge
live no longer in you, but be buried in the grave of eternal forgetfulness; Let
the Immortal Witness of God arise in the Court of your Conscience, that Love
and Innocence may live, and the contrary Nature dye.

It Is time, yea high time for every Individual of you to turn your minds to
God's gracious Gift, his Light in your Consciences, that all Arbitrary Power
and Oppression may be turned out of your hearts, that bitterness of spirit may
no longer live, or burn in your breasts. O beware, beware of the Spirit of
Revenge, and down with all Idolatry, and Idolatrous Superstition; for Dagon
cannot, nor must not stand before the Ark of God. O come to the Grace of God in
your own particulars, you that are the Council to Englands King, and you
inferior Officers; come I say, and receive the wholesome Instructions of that
Divine ORACLE of God in your Consciences which brings Salvation with it (to all
that are willing to be saved by it, and love the Light better than their Lust)
which beats down the Devil's Kingdom, and teaches, and will teach you (be you
but willing to be taught by it) to deny ungodliness and all worldly lusts,
Pride, Arrogance, Scorn, Frowardness, Covetousness, vain-idle-talk,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Passion, Cruelty, Luxury, and all Superfluity of
Naughtiness, Revenge, Hatred, Malice; these are all Ungodliness, and makes that
man who lives in the commitment of them, unlike to God. You being willing to
bear the Reproof of the Lord for these, and what other sins your hearts are
addicted to, and in love withal; you being willing to part with these Whorish
Lovers, base Lusts, who have stolen away your hearts, and separated you from
your God; the Light of God in your Consciences which testifies against these
things that they are evil, will beget in you a dislike and loathing of all
these filthy noisome lusts which defile the soul, because they grieve the Holy
Spirit of the Righteous God; and then you will see every sin (as it is) to be
ugly; Pride to be an Evil Seed, which the Enemy has sown in the heart;
Riotousness, Luxury, Lust, Revenge, Swearing, Drunkenness, and the like, to be
all fruits of the Devil's begetting, generated in the heart of man in the time
of darkness and ignorance: Then shall you see the wrath of God due to that
Nature which delights to wallow in such miry wickedness; so shall you come to
know the holy Fear planted within you, that when the Tempter comes to assault
you, he cannot enter upon you. The faithful Soldier and follower of the Lamb
is kept upon his Watch; he sees the Thief comes to rob and steal the heart from
the Lord, but consents not to the Thief, but resists the Tempter, who then
flies from him; He dares not do such a wickedness, and sin against his God.
This would be a blessed Condition, and happy are all they that are found
therein.

And verily my friends, it is high time that you meet the Lord by unfeigned
Repentance, and forsaking of your sins; for his wrath is kindled against you,
because your hearts are not right before the Lord. How long, Ah how long have
you sought to hide your Counsels from the Lord, and to beguile the Children of
the Light, and deceive the Simple with fair sugared words, when the poison of
Asps has been under your tongue! but the Sons of Wisdom, the true Children of
the Day have not been deceived by you.

Think you the Lord is well pleased with you? Can you be persuaded that he sees
you not, or that he reveals not your vanity and subtilty to his Seed? Or do you
believe that he winks at your wickedness, and will not visit for all your
iniquity? O be not so foolish and unwise; for verily such as you sow, such
shall you reap; and if you persist in your obstinacy against the Lord, and
withstand the Day of your Visitation; if you will still run on in the race of
iniquity, and cast the Testimony of his Law-behind you; if you will let your
minds still pursue the pleasures of this world, and prefer the transitory
things of this life before your souls Peace; if you will count worldly gain to
be godliness; if you will speak smooth things to your King, deceitfully, and
counsel him to rejoice and make merry over God's Witness in his Conscience, as
if he should never come to judgment; if you will lend your ear to the Charming
Sorceries of the Hireling Priests, the English Rabbis, who now are doting upon
Romes Trash and Trumperies, who preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, and
Proyhesie lies unto the people; who chiefly seek for their gain from their
quarter, and greedily hunt for the Golden Fleece, but profit not the Flock, but
leave them as they found them, (if not worse) ever learning, but never able to
come to the knowledge of the Truth; if you will make Covenant with Death, and
confederate with Amaleck in his cruel Conspiracy against the Innocent; If you
will be one with Haman in helping the wicked one to obtain the help of Caesar
against the Helpless; if you will involve your selves into that cursed League,
and bind your selves (as it were) with an Oath against the Innocent; if you
will be on the Serpent's side against the Seed of the Woman, and strengthen the
hands of the bloody Shepherds who seek to devour and woory Christ's sheep; if
you will give your Power to the false Prophet, and let him ride upon you, and
make you his Vassels to afflict and torment the Innocent; if instead of helping
the Woman against the Dragon, who is now casting out the Floods of his Wrath
and Mischief against the Lambs of Christ, and help the old Dragon to cast the
harmless into nasty Holes, Caves and Prisons; If you will not quit your selves
like men of Honor, and show your selves to be of a good understanding, fearing
God, and hating Cruelty; If you will not look into the Royal Law of God, and do
to us and all men, as you would have us and all men do to you: But if you will
suffer us to fall into the hands of our Enemies, whose very mercies are
cruelties, and you stand by, and rejoice at our Calamity: If you will not while
you have Power, be a bridle to the Wicked, nor Rebuke this Exalted Spirit that
seeks to Raise and Enrich it self in the Ruins of the Lord's People, but give
your Consent and Countenance to the Wicked in their Cruelties against us; if
you will stop your ears at the cry of the Righteous, and suffer our Adversaries
to oppress us all the day long, and plow great furrows upon our backs, and make
our Afflictions grievous to be born.

Then know this assuredly, The Lord will remember the afflictions of Joseph;
and though our Brethren sell us into the hands of the Egyptians, and intend
our utter Ruin; though you and they in your secret Contrivances and
Imaginations devise mischief in your Beds against us, yet the Righteous God
will not forsake us, he will stand by us in all our Troubles, and his blessing
upon us, his presence with us, his comfort to us, nor you, nor any Mortal can
take from us. In all our sufferings he is, and will be with us, and in his due
time he will work Deliverance for us, and in the mean he will support us in all
our Tribulations, he will fill our hearts with joy, when the hearts of the
wicked shall fail them; he cannot forsake his own: He will fill us with Divine
Wisdom, and give us Courage to bear all the Wrongs and Injuries which the
Wicked shall be suffered to lay upon us; He will Arm us sufficiently with his
Patience, and give us such Spiritual Weapons as shall wound the Head and Heart
of the Wicked: The innocence of our Sufferings shall kindle a Fire in the
Hearts of our Adversaries, that shall burn like an Oven, and shall not be
quenched.

The more you strive to suppress the Truth by persecuting those who live in it,
the more shall Truth prevail and prosper: And if you should seek to fill all
the Prisons in the Nation with us, or to take away that from us, which is not
dear unto us, if the God of our Life require it of us; For We, our Life, our
Goods, our All, is freely given up unto our God when he requires them of us. We
can in his Strength glory over your Weakness, and in the hight of your Fury we
fear you not: We know him to be with us, who is greater than he that is against
us, and He will not fail us in the time of our greatest need.

That way you think to Raise your selves, and Ruin us, shall be the Ruin of
your selves; that very Way shall Deliverance come out of Sion to the Captive
SEED. For alas poor men! you strive not only against us, but you contend
against your Maker; the God of Israel is engaged with us, he Fights our Battles
for us; for he is within us, then why should we fear what man can do against
us? Did ever any of Cain's Brood (you are no better who ere ye be, if you join
with the Beast and false Prophet against the Lamb) prosper long in their
afflicting of God's People? Why should you wilfully throw away the Mercies of
your Maker? Are you able to contend with him? Or did ever any strive against
him, that were not broken and confounded by him?

If you can pluck God Omnipotent and Eternal from his Throne, and raze his
Witness out of your own hearts, and utterly extinguish his searching, shining
Light in your own, and the Peoples Consciences; Then may you go on in your
persecuting of the Saints, and challenge the Peace of God to be your Portion:
But if not, What is Man that he should Vye thus with his Maker? Therefore be
persuaded yet while the Light of God does shine in your hearts, to be guided by
it; least for your disobedience to it, the Lord God Omnipotent, the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, (who now suffers as a Lamb within you) Arise in his fury, and
put on Strength; If he Roar out of Sion, he will make all the Beasts in the
Field to Tremble, he will be dreadful to the Wicked. If you persist in your
Impenitency, Cruelty and hard heartedness, and seek to dye your selves in the
Blood of the Innocent -- Then Know this assuredly from the Lord, The Righteous
God will visit you for your Iniquity, the Blood-thirsty Men shall not live out
half their days: A short work will the Lord make in the Earth; Vengeance,
Vengeance from the Lord God, shall speedily overtake you, though we forgive
you, and never lift up a hand against you, The Dreadful God in his Terrible
Wrath. will be avenged on you, you shall all surely surely perish, both YOU and
your KING.

The LORD has spoken it. O that Men would yet let the Fear of God take place
in their hearts, it would Deliver them out of the Snares of the Cunning Hunter,
who continually goes about like a Roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. O
that men would once learn to be wise, and cease from their Worldly Wisdom, and
seek after God's pure Wisdom, which is only found and obtained in the Light.
Surely they might do well to take heed unto his Light which shines in their
hearts, which secretly reproves all the Deeds of Darkness, And would draw them
from Iniquity unto Holiness; from Pride, into pure Humility; and from under the
Power of Satan, unto God: But this is the Misery and Condemnation of the World,
That Light is come into the world, and men love Darkness rather than Light,
because their Deeds are evil. It Is but now, as it was ever; The Seed of the
Serpent cannot love, or be at peace with the Seed of Life; for Truth ever bears
its Testimony against the World, That the Ways, Customs, Worship and
Traditions thereof, are evil: And that is the reason why the Heathens rage, and
the cause of the Enmity between the two Seeds, even from the time of Righteous
Abel, to this day. Search the Scriptures, and there you may find plentiful
proof of this true Assertion.

Never did the Light of the Gospel since the Primitive Times, shine in more
purity than now it does. Never had the Lord a people since the days of the
Apostles, who walked more innocently and inoffensively as to God and Man, than
he has raised up, and manifested in this Generation; And never did any people,
who made so large a Profession of God and Godliness, as the Priests and
Professors do at this day, that ever manifested more Enmity, Malice and
Opposition against the Innocent for the Hat and Knee, Thee and Thou, and such
like things, than these men do at this day. Oh wonderful! That men who pretend
to such a hight of Profession, should be so dark, so sottish, and have so
little understanding in the Mysteries of God's Kingdom, at this time of the
Day, when Truth has gained so much ground in the Nation, as all the strength
of Antichrist shall not be able to recover one foot thereof from the Lamb and
his true Followers in the Warfare against the Beast. Oh! I am wounded, I am
wounded to see the Wickedness of the Wicked, to see the Beast and false Prophet
boast it self in its own strength, and thus triumphingly exalt his Horn against
the Heritage of God, and vaunt as if he were not to be moved; to see the
undermining subtilty of the old Serpent, seeking the Lives of all the Innocents
in these Nations, only because Truth cannot feed Deceit, nor put into the
Mouth of the false Prophet, but reproves sin in the Gate, and makes Spiritual
War against the Man of Sin; because in the living Power and Authority of the
Eternal God, it reproves Pride, Covetousness, Lust Wantonness, Swearing,
Revenge, and makes war against the Drunkards of Ephraim: Because it upholds not
the Devil's Kingdom for term of life, but preaches up the Hope of Glory, the
Power of the Living God in his People to be all-sufficient to destroy and put
an end to the Devils works; this makes the Devils roar, and increases the rage
of Antichrist and his Adherents against the followers of the Lamb, and makes
the Brats of Pride gnaw their very tongues for Madness, because the Sons of
Meekness dare not in awe to God bow to that exalted Spirit, or feed the Beast
with flattering titles.

Tell me you that are well read in Histories, if ever you found any Pagans or
Christians (so termed) since the foundation of the world, that ever persecuted
an Innocent people for wearing their upper Garment, which God has given them
to be a Covering for their Head; and for using the Language, which Christ, the
lip of Truth, and all his Lambs ever used one to another; yea, which all
Nations under the Heaven, in the Rudiments of Teaching, use for a Foundation. O
that men should be so void of the Fear and Dread of the Living God, as to
suffer their hearts to be so filled with fury against the harmless Flock, who
lifts not up a carnal weapon against their enemies! What is your meaning to
hatch this Mischief against them, thus earnestly, to feek so subtly to
destroy them.

What evil, Ah! what evil (O thou Enemy to the righteous God) do thou know
by his Lambs. In the fear of the Lord I challenge thee to declare it to them,
if thou can, either in Doctrine, Life, or Conversation. How often have thy
dreaming Priests attempted to impeach the one, and the Serpents eye watched
over them for the other. And how often have they been foiled, and their eyes
even failed and grown dim, and wearied themselves with their watching for our
halting; How has the righteous God confounded their wisdom, and driven it
backward, and powered shame and contempt upon them for their portion. How many
have perished in their foolish expectation of the Fall of the Righteous! How
often, yea how wonderfully has the Lord stopped the mouths of these greedy dumb
dogs, who never have enough, and silenced both Priest and People, Professors
and Prosane, even by his Babes and Sucklings, who are nourisht at the breasts
of his consolation, and drink at the water of life freely, and can now no
longer like foolish children dabble in the dirty Pools of the polluted Priests
of the Nation, nor buy their lying merchandises any more. So that now for want
of just matter of accusation against them, they are fain to fly to their old
Refuge of Lies, subtle Inventions, false Accusations, to ensnare the Innocent
touching the things of their God, wherein the Serpent knows they dare not
violate the Law of their God in the least, or act the Hypocrite's part, to save
his Head, and lose his Soul: And therefore they run to their rotten Laws Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, Oath of Abjuration.
, never constituted by God, nor approved of by Man who lives in his fear, to be
a Snare to the honest-hearted: And would but you Rulers of this Nation do to
these Innocent Ones, as you could have all men do to you, the persecuting Seed
would not for these things harm one Saint. But the Will of the righteous God is
worthy to be done, who in his due time will sweep away the Refuge of Lies,
which the Wicked one fathers upon Christ's Flock.

Have not thou O ENGLAND, in the time of thy late Troubles, had large
Experience of the Innocence of these People? Have they ever had a hand in any
Plots or Conspiracies against thy Governors? (though often falsely accused:) Let
God's Witness arise, and it will give in true Evidence on the behalf of the
Innocent; for I bear them record in the Name of the Lord, They are a harmless
and a peaceable People, (those called QUAKERS, who live in the life of Truth
professed by them) and seeks not the life of any, nor desires any harm in their
hearts to their very Enemies:

They cannot confederate, nor never could (since they came into the life of the
Lamb) with this or that part against any Government; but were ever counted as
Sheep for the Slaughter, and many of them have deeply suffered for
Conscience Sake; as is sufficiently known to many thousands in the Nation; but
more now of late than ever.

O England! England! Art thou so drunk with Iniquity, so blinded with mad Zeal,
Art thou grown so fond of Romish Trumperies, that thou will needs quarrel and
fall out with thy surest friends, and not be satisfied without the blood of the
Innocent? I bear them record, they are the choicest, the very best of thy real
Friends, and the purest Gold that is current in thy Kingdom.

Can thou not bear with the tenderness of their Consciences? There is not a
people in the Nation (I am bold to speak it) that would so freely give
toleration to tender Consciences, as they would do: Thou allowest some Grains
(I well know) to thy Gold; and why not a little lawful Liberty to a truly
tender Conscience? Why will thou offer to urge an Oath upon them? God's Witness
in all Consciences knows their yea and nay is as binding unto them, as all the
Oaths and Bonds of the best of thy Inhabitants beside them. And why do thou,
O Supreme Power, imprison, or suffer any to be imprisoned or disquieted for
working in their Calling upon those called Saints days? Is this the Toleration
thou intendest to allow to tender Consciences? O! What Is become of the Word of
a King?

And tell me now, O ye men in Authority, and all sober-minded people, if
Passion be down, and Prejudice removed: What is that O man, in thee (whatsoever
thou art) high or low, rich or poor, that is offended because the
honest-hearted bows not with his body to it, or stands not bare without his Hat
before it? Or frets and fumes like a Fool, or a Fellow new come out of Bedlam,
if a man do but speak proper English to him, Thee or Thou to a single person?

Is it the Babe of Humility, or the Seed of Pride that is so soon puffed up into
passion, that sometimes to an affectionate kind word, it answers discourteously
with blows or buffetings?

Oh England! England! When will thou come into the Humility? When will thy
Malice cease against the Innocent, and thy surious folly find an end? When
will thou leave persecuting thy own Bowels?

Not so long as the Beast and false Prophet have Dominion over thee; not till
the Righteous God awaken thee with his Judgments: And verily O England, it is
time that thy Governors knew, thou ripens fast, thou art fattening for
Destruction, while thou licks up that which formerly thou vomited, and can
now conform (though with gripings in thy Conscience) to Popery and Popish
Prelates, and persecute the Saints in Prison for not submitting to thy Popish
Festivals.

Oh whither are you wheeling, you great Counselors of the Kingdom! O England,
England! would thou not even drink the very dregs of Popery, if the Lord
would try thee? But he has a Cup for thee to drink, which will awaken thee, he
has Arrows in his Quiver that will wound thee to the heart, and lay thy
persecuting Head-pieces in the Dust, though the Innocent lift not a hand
against them.

The Righteous God will plead the Cause of his People, he will suddenly smite
the stiff-necked and stout-hearted, that say of his Son, the Light of the
World, Nolumus hunc Regnare, we will not have this man to Rule over us; He will
make the fat Bulls of Bashan Roar; he will make the Beast feeble in his sinews,
yea as weak as water.

Down goes the Beast and the blind Guides together, and they that are willing
to be deluded by them, who make war against the Innocent: An irrecoverable
wound shall the Wicked receive, and then shall they know the evil they have
done in outstanding the day of their Visitation, and helping on the miseries
and afflictions of God's People.

UNto Thee, O Lord God Omnipotent, do we commit our Cause; Thou Lord know
the Integrity of thy Chosen ones; Thou sees we have no other help in Heaven but
thee, and that there is none in all the Earth from whom we can expect
deliverance, but from Thee, Thy Mercies are sure to thy Righteous Seed, and thy
Compassions can never fail, nor be separated from it: This is our Stay, this is
our Comfort, O thou God of all Consolation, thou art with us, thy Love is to
us, thy Presence is amongst us, and thy All-sufficient power is felt and
witnessed within us: Thy everlasting loving kindness (which compasses us about)
no mortals can take from us. Glory, glory, unto Sion's King for ever. Lincoln
the 7th day of the 11th Month, called, January. M. M.

THE END.

