AN APOLOGY FOR THE HONORABLE NATION OF THE JEWS, And all the SONS of ISRAEL.
Written by Edward Nicholas, Gent.

Isaiah 14.1. For Jehovah will have compassion of Jacob, and will yet choose
Israel, and cause them to rest in their own land, and the stranger shall join
himself unto them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.

Deuteronomy. 23.39. Happy art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people! saved
by Jehovah, etc.

Jer. 30.7. Alas for that day is great, so that none is like it; it is even the
time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be delivered from it.

Jer. 31.14, 15, 16, 17. Thus says Jehovah, A voice was heard in Ramah,
lamentation and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her children, refused to be
comforted because they were not: Thus says Jehovah, Refrain thy voice from
weeping, and thine eyes from tears, etc.

London, Printed by John Field, 1648.

AN APOLOGY For the Honorable Nation OF THE JEWS.
THat our Nation of England has already suffered much affliction, and that we
yet labor under many burdens, fears, and doubtings, what will be the sequel,
is a thing so clear, that lamentable experience does abundantly testify.

Those that are in authority in this kingdom, and we all, may make the
application; that the crying sins of our Nation do call for vengeance, which we
have just cause to expect, unless we meet God by repentance, and satisfaction
of the oppressed.

To undertake to speak of the many gross and loud crying sins we lie under the
guilt of, were to lessen them; they are so many, 'twere better to be silent,
then to use few words in rehearsing them that are so odious to God, least we
seem to extenuate them: I shall confine my self to two, The oppression of the
poor, And the persecution of the Saints of God. As for the first, I hope that
the multitude of affairs (wherein we are involved) have interupted (partly)
good and pious intentions: The sufferings of many of the faithful friends of
the Parliament have been great, and must needs vent themselves by some
complaints, and the rather, seeing our good God has forgiven Ten thousand
Talents, as by their great, if not miraculous successes appears, yet every
cruel servant takes his brother by the throat for small matters, and exacting
the utmost usury (which in quiet and peaceable times is contrary to the Law, as
I humbly conceive by some Statute appears) not allowing the freedom to walk on
the Lord's Day, and to join themselves with such Congregations of Gods people
for the refreshment of their souls, amidst their sufferings in the outward man,
as they desire to do.

But the sin principally intended here, is, The strict and cruel Laws now in
force against the most honorable Nation of the world, the Nation of the Jews, a
people chosen by God, as appears by the many and large expressions of his favor
to them, stiling them, His Gems, his firstborn, a precious people above all
peoples of the earth, a kingdom of priests, an holy people unto himself: And
further says, they are his own servants, and should not be in bondage to any,
being only to serve six years, and the seventh to go out free, and in the year
of Jubilee, every man was to return to his inheritance: But above all, that
privilege of theirs, the benefit whereof has an influence on all the
faithful, and redounds to their happiness, That in thee and thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed: So strong an obligation are we bound in to
them through Gods mercy.

And now let all the faithful servants of God take to their considerations, how
great indurings that honorable Nation has suffered, what bloody slaughters
have been made of them in London, in the North country of England, and diverse
other parts of this kingdom; and how they have been proscribed and banished this
kingdom, and denied that commerce allowed to all others, even to barbarous
Infidels; so that the transcendency of this sin is not to be paralleld, in
regard they being so honorably styled and owned by God himself, in rejecting
them, we highly incense the Majesty of Jehovah: whereas we ought rather to
honor them whom God honoreth, and to have a grateful remembrance of those
people of God, by whom he has conveyed to his people so great blessings and
incomparable privileges, to comfort the afflicted, and not to take the
opportunity, when God was angry with them, to help forward the affliction. In
their next place, if we would but follow the politicians rule, that aim only
at their own ends and gains (proh dolor) that may prove, and will certainly be
an advantage to us diverse ways, and on the contrary, most dangerous to this
kingdom, for that the protection of all men is in Gods people, whose blessings
are continually showred down on a Land for their sakes, of whom are these a
part that we have thus abandoned. It was a notable observation of a reverend
and godly learned Preacher, before this Parliament, on this Text, Touch not
mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.15. That the good or evil
usage of Gods people, is the greatest State-interest in the world: how great
cause have we then to lay this to our hearts, the godly can best judge.

Furthermore, besides the judgments of God, which our Forefathers have felt by
bloody Wars, and other miseries, we at this time have experience of many
calamities; and now the years of recompense are approaching, which we have
cause to believe, when we read of the many comminations of God, against the
spoilers and oppressors of his people the Jews, as Jer. 30.16. Therefore, all
they that devour thee, shall be devoured and all thine adversaries, every one
of them shall go into captivity; and they that spoil thee, shall be a spoil,
and all that prey upon thee, will I give for a prey: and Isa. 33.1. and 34.1.
to 8. and 41.11. Behold, all that were incensed against thee, shall be ashamed
and confounded, they shall be as nothing, and they that strive with thee, shall
perish, and so to the end; and 49.25. Even the captives of the mighty shall be
taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered, for I will contend
with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children: And I will
feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh, and they shall be drunken
with their own blood, as with sweet wine, and all flesh shall know, that I am
thy Savior and Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob: and Jer. 25.31. and Isa.
51.22, 23. and 60.14. and 61.3, 4.

It Is Objected, The great guilt that lies on the Jews for crucifying Christ,
and that therefore, and for refusing the Gospel, they are rejected of God, so
unworthy of favor, assistance, and compassion herein desired. In Answer, though
this be imputed to the whole Nation, yet it is apparent in the Gospel, that
that action was done by the Elders, chief Priests, and Scribes, his Doctrine
reproving their Hypocrifie, and laziness and pride, that they wrought a faction
against him, and not that the whole Nation were guilty; for the people
ere-while brought him into the city, crying, Hosanna: And its said, when Jesus
was condemned by Pilate, and the chief Priests and Elders, that they persuaded
the people to refuse Jesus, and to choose Barrabas: it is probable that they are
so well versd in their own business of so high a nature, that they can say more
for themselves: It is too great an undertaking for me, and will require a
larger Tract, to clear the matter against all Objections, which may be done by
men of more learning then I profess to have; the regal Government of the Jews
being long before ended: what God in his secret will and judgment intended in
the scattering of the Jews, I presume not to understand or to guess at: my
purpose is only to prove, That God yet owns them for his people, and though
cast off for a time, yet their certain future reduction is promised, as Paul,
in Romans 11.24, 25, 26. For if thou wast cut out of the olive tree which was
wild by nature, and wast grafted contrary to nature in a right olive tree, how
much more shall they that are by nature, be grafted in their own olive tree?
For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this secret (lest ye
should be arrogant in your selves) that partly obstinacy is come to Israel,
until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in: And so all Israel shall be saved,
as it is written, Isa. 59. and 27.9. and Jer. 31.33, 34. Heb. 8. and 10. I have
next to offer to your considerations, the many promises made by God by the
mouths of his Prophets, for the reduction of them into their own country,
still owning them for his own people, a country, I say, lawfully theirs, by
the donation of God himself, and a propriety, that no Prince under Heaven can
plead the like, the promises also setting forth the restoration of the pure
worship of God, the restitution of all things to their primitive Estate, That
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea, Isa. 11.49. and 60. and 61. to the end of the Prophecy; besides many more
places in this and other Prophets, some whereof do more plainly extend to the
advantage of the Gentiles, as Isa. 56.6. And the strangers that cleave unto the
Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of Jehovah, to be his servants; every
one that keeps the Sabbath from poluting it, and takes hold on my Covenant,
Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of
prayer; their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine
altar, for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all peoples; And
consequently for us (the faithful) as well as for the Jews.

Now weighing well with our selves both these threats and promises, were it not
a strange negligence (I conceive it a madness) in us to forego so great
privileges, as by those honorable people of the Jews may accrue unto us, and
as great wilfulness to lay our selves open to those judgments threatened, I
leave to the judgment of all men that are any thing affected in this matter,
or that tender the glory of God, their own good charity toward that the people
of God: We have great and important cause to take heed, lest we of this Kingdom
of England, putting from us and abandoning these people of God, we separate not
our selves from Gods favor and protection, this being a greater aggravation of
the sin, for that it is now more known. It is not tolerable even amongst Moral
men, if we go no further, to add affliction to the afflicted, as we do in
continuing Laws in force against them; it stands not with a generous spirit, to
triumph over a man helpless and in misery, much more hateful is it in men that
profess themselves the servants of god; but rather that we endeavor to comfort
them, and (if it were possible) to give them satisfaction for the innocent
blood of theirs shed in this Kingdom, and to restore them to commerce amongst
us.

It is objected, That many of these prophesies have respect to the seventy
years Captivity, and their release from Babylon, and of Gods vengeance on the
Enemies of the people of God of those times. In Answer, Although many
prophesies do so, yet the places abovementioned, and many more, do abundantly
prove the reduction of all the house of Israel, the ten Tribes never yet
returned into their own Land, and the great joy that is promised them in those
yet future blessed times, as Hosea 3. they are esteemed by God, as the spouse
to the husband, and in the last Verse, Afterward shall the children of Israel
return, and seek the Lord, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and
his goodness in the latter days; And Ezekiel. 36. the Prophet is directed to the
whole house of Israel, as appears more plainly in the 10 Verse, And I will
multiply the men upon you (speaking of the mountains of Israel all along
before) even all the house of Israel wholly, and the Cities shall be inhabited,
etc. And a much more luculent place is the 37 Chapter of Ezekiel. where mention is
made of the return of all the Tribes of Israel, the Prophet being commanded to
take a piece of wood, and to write upon that to Judah, and the children of
Israel his companions, and then to take another piece of wood, and write upon
that to Joseph, the tree of Ephraim, and all the house of Israel his
companions, and join them one to another into one stick, and they shall become
one stick in thine hand; And when the children of thy people shall speak unto
thee, saying, Will thou not show us what thou meanest by these? say unto them,
Thus says Jehovah God, Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in
the hand of Ephraim, and the Tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them
with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall
be one in mine hand; And the sticks whereon thou writest, shall be in thine
hand before their eyes: And say unto them, Thus says Jehovah God, Behold, I
will take the children of Israel from among the Heathen whither they be gone,
and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own Land: And I
will make them one Nation in the Land, upon the mountains of Israel, and one
King shall be King to them all; And they shall be no more two Nations, neither
shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all, neither shall they
defile themselves any more with their idols, etc. These words are an
explanation of the parable of the dry bones in the beginning of the Chapter;
whereby part of my purpose is sufficiently proved, that their restoration and
inhabitation of their country here on Earth, is yet to be fulfilled; for the
ten Tribes that were first captivated by Shalmanezzar, never yet returned to
this day, which yet shall be in the time appointed by God, and consequently
their oppressors bear the greater and notorious sin, undervaluing a people to
whom God has made such precious promises. And whereas it is again Objected,
That these places of the several Prophesies, do intend the state of the Church
triumphant, of the new Jerusalem, conceived to be in Heaven after the day of
Judgment, and that these places have a mystical signification in them,
mentioning David to be their King, who was a type of Christ. Answer, doubtless
God has given us the Scriptures for our instruction and edification, and has
given us reasonable souls, understanding, and other faculties, it were strange
then that there should be a literal construction of these places following,
which are so adapted to the understanding of even the simplest, that nothing
can be more clear: Isaiah 65.21, 22. speaking of the Jews return. And they
shall build houses and inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards, and eat
the fruit of them; They shall not build, and another inhabit, they shall not
plant, and another eat: For as the days of a tree, are the days of my people,
and mine elect shall enjoy in old age the work of their hands: and Zech. 8.5.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, there shall yet old men and old women dwell in the
streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand for very age:
and the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls, playing in the
streets thereof: and Ezekiel. 28.26. And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall
build houses, and plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell safely, when I have
executed judgments upon all round about them that despise them, and they shall
know that I am Jehovah their God: and Micah 4.4. and Jer. 31. and Zech. 10.6.
and 12.6. with many more pregnant places. As these Scriptures do most plainly
set forth and prove their reinhabitation of their country, so it proves that
the same has not been yet fulfilled, for after their return from Babylon, we
know how their country has been desolated by the invasion of their Enemies,
and how often by many Nations, as it continues to this day. It is further
Objected, that in diverse places mention is made of David to be their King for
ever, who is held a type of Christ, and that therefore it seems to allude to
the future estates of the Saints in Heaven. Answer, though mention be made of
David's being their Prince for ever, and of their dwelling in their Land for
ever, yet I conceive those places do not conclude the estates of the Saints in
Heaven, for it is said in Jer. 30.21. And their noble ruler shall be of
themselves, and their governors shall proceed from the midst of them; and I
will cause him to draw near and approach unto me: We know that this Prophecy
was long since David's time, and therefore how this future kingdom shall be
instituted, God only knows, which he will reveal in due time: It Is plainly
proved by other places that they shall enjoy their honor here on Earth, and in
the sight of the Heathen (their oppressors) which does plainly imply, that it
shall be here on Earth that the Jews shall enjoy this blessing and deliverance,
etc. Ezekiel. 28.25. Also we read Jer. 31.36. If these ordinances depart out of my
sight, says Jehovah, then shall the seed of Israel cease from being a nation
before me for ever: So that their: continuance to be a Nation, proves a
terrestrial estate; whatsoever additions of glory, and privileges further God
will confer on them: Commentators have their several judgments herein (and
differ among themselves) yet whatsoever they say, I conceive we have no warrant
to wrest those Scriptures only to a spiritual sense, unless they do repugn
some known truth of God in the Scripture. Since these things are so, How far
are we from that godly zeal of those people of God of the Gentiles, that shall
bring the beloved Jews in their arms, and their daughters on their shoulders,
when Kings shall be their nursing fathers, and Queens their nurses, Isa. 49.22,
23.

The rage of men in all countries of the world have been very extreme against
the Jews, it is not so much wonder to see the barbarous Infidels, robbing them
and embruing their hands in their blood, as that men that profess more of Gods
truth (though falsely:) In Spain there were 120000 Jews cast out and banished, in
the year 1493. In Italy and other places, the like hardship they have endured.

But I hope better things of our Nation, that when our troubles at home by Gods
mercy are composed, there are many gallant men now in arms, and others that may
be instrumental for the beating down Gods Enemies, and the Enemies of his
people: Gods power is enough, and who shall let it; yet he usually works by
means, and who knows but these now in arms may have the honor to do Gods work
herein; I am sure it is to be wished, that we wrestle with God by Prayer, that
this design for Gods glory and his people may be advanced; and that our weapons
(when quiet here at home) may be bent against the cruel oppressors of his
people in foreign parts, and those mercyless Tyrants so rigorous toward the
Jews where they are, vexing them, and spoiling them of their lives and
livelihood; That at the last we may beat our swords into plowshares, and our
spears into pruning hooks; when Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn war any more, Isaiah 2.4. I trust God will direct his
instruments in their proceedings to this great deliverance (whosoever they be)
in just and righteous ways, and will crown those actions that are built on just
foundations: When Solomon built the temple in Jerusalem, it was ordered that
the Timber and stone was hewn and prepared in Lebanon, that noise of hewing
being not heard, at the erecting of that glorious House for Gods worship; what
mean out late tumults and blooshed then? as a reverend Preacher (now deceased)
well observed, Since God will do his own work his own way, and by his own only
power, but this may be the hewing and working in Lebanon which we have heard;
it behooves then all the Servants of God so to approve their hearts to him, that
when the Lord comes with Refiners fire, and Fullers soap, such instruments may
have the blessing to be exact in Gods work, that others employed hereafter
outdo them not, howsoever there are many infirmities in the best, yet is it
their duty to strive for perfection.

Whereas I style them honorable, though it may seem ridiculous to their
Enemies, and the ignorant; yet I may truly say, They are of the highest and
most honorable descent of any Nobility in any Country in the world, being
ennobled by God himself, and the reason is given which must be most righteous;
not for any thing in them, or for their multitude, but because God set his love
upon them. We see Princes favorites are much courted, there is much more reason
that Gods favor should attract a greater respect to these sons of Israel then
they have: God made good his promise made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who
descended from Sem the choice and beloved seed: The works and wonders God
showed in their deliverance out of Egypt, honoring them with his presence, and
leading them by a pillar of a cloud by day, and alpillar of fire by night: Why
should then the great Princes and Nobles of the world, so much magnify
themselves, for their ancient and honorable descent, whereas the Jews were Gods
chosen people and beloved, and descended from the most holy men of God,
accounted Princes and Prophets in their times, and of the Kings of Judah,
whereof there were more Religions Princes, then of any Kingdom we read of in
all ages or Nations? And this I believe to be true Nobility, having God to
ratify it. The Gentile Princes had the beginnings of their greatness by the
Sword, Tyranny and Policy, most ordinarily, as the Turks now, and the Romans of
old, and others; And what challenge can they (yea, more legitimate Princes then
they) make from Gods dispensation, in comparison of the Jews: And though the
Jews have contracted a great guilt, for their unthankfulness for the peculiar
blessings given them of God, and other grievous sins; yet when God, who is Lord
over all, and against whom their sins were committed, shall acquit them of this
guilt, pronouncing, Isa. 40.1, 2. That her warfare is accomplished, that her
iniquity is pardoned, and that she has received of the Lords hand double for
all her sins: Why then should Princes and their great nobility, both which are
but the progeny of Princes of a lower degree then Abraham and David?
furthermore, why should the Pope and his Cardinals, with their Clergy, that are
but impostors, and have cheated the whole world, and but upstarts of base
degree, why should all these? and what have they to challenge to themselves, to
be so hard masters to those honorable people, of whom God has pronounced, That
the Jews shall be feared of them whose servants they were.

I know the great impugners of this Apology for the Jews will be the Pope and
his Clergy, and of them the Jesuits, his principal Agents, for that this
opposes their chief principle, the political upholding of the Papacy and
themselves; and its no wonder, their cruelties showed upon them, and their
detestation of them is such, that in Italy (though they are allowed some
commerce, which the Italians do for their own profit they make by the Jews
diverse ways) yet the enjoin them to wear apparel, of color distinct from other
people, insomuch that men abhor the wearing of a red Hat, least they should be
accounted Jews. The Papists are especially offended with them, because the Jews
so much abhor the Imagery and Idolatrous Worship of theirs, for touch that, and
touch the corner stone of their Politic foundation: The Jesuits do nestle
into all Kingdoms and States of Christendom, and have an influence on their
Counsels, as also of Universities, Armies, great Cities and Corporations,
wherein they employ the choycest wits they have, who undertake any kind of
professions, the better to cloak their designs; as Gentlemen, Divines,
Physicians, Soldiers. It is most heartily wished, and now hoped for, that their
Cyrens Songs shall not inchant the ears of the godly, whatsoever they may work
on carnal Politicians and Hypocrites.

I humbly offer this Apology, with these considerations, to the whole Kingdom
of England, from the highest to the lowest, that as God has exceedingly
blessed this Kingdom above others, especially in this, that it has been almost
One hundred years, the chief Bulwark for defense of the Truth, and retreat of
the afflicted in Europe; so now that we all show our selves compassionate and
helpers of the afflicted Jews; and pray, that the same Authority that proceeded
against them formerly, that now the same power and authority will repeal those
severe Laws made against them: That our receiving them again, and giving them
all possible satisfaction, and restoring them to commerce in this kingdom, may
be exemplary to other Nations that have done them, and continue to do them
wrong; till which time (God putting their tears into his bottle) God will
charge their sufferings upon us, and will avenge them on their persecuters.

And what I have now written, was not upon any man's motion of the Jews Nation,
but a thing that I have long and deeply revolved within my heart; but truly and
indeed, my endeavors are for the glory of God, the comfort of those his
afflicted people, the love of my own sweet native country of England, and the
freeing of my own soul in the day of account; for I thought my self obliged in
conscience, to publish my conceptions herein; and furthermore, do most
earnestly pray, That the potent parties may no longer continue in division, but
denying all Councels of the flesh, the acquiring of Honors, and all self ends,
may ingenuously confess themselves and their failings one to another, and
dealing with lenity one toward another, and humbled before Jehovah, may obtain
remission of our sins and miseries, and a blessing from God be showed down upon
us, which God Almighty of his infinite mercy grant.

FINIS.

