CASES OF Conscience Practically Resolved.

By the Reverend and Learned JOHN NORMAN, late Minister of Bridgwater.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. for Edw. Brewster at at the Sign of the Crane in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

THE PREFACE.
THe reverent Author of this ensuing Treatise Mr. John Norman, some few years
since deceased, is by that state secured both from flattery, or obloquy; why
then should we light a candle of Praise behind his back. In short, the sole
motive to these few lines was this, Some dear Relations and Friends of his,
desirous that his name and worth might be made known to such as knew him not as
it was in the Orb wherein he both moved and shined, have importuned this
unfeigned character and testimony of him. What therefore we have seen and heard
we testify. While he lived in the Ministry he shined as an eminent light in
this world, holding forth the word of life. His Race while he was in his work
was not long, yet did he run his race with great diligence and patience;
outstripping many. A workman that needed not to be ashamed, adorning his talent
and province, and fulfilling, I had almost said the Apostles character, 2 Cor.
6.4, 5, etc. And thus when his Lord came, and called him off, he found him
doing. Thus he shined in all his motions, and trials, following the Lamb where
ever he led him. For the time of my intimacy with him, I found him a man of a
choice spirit. He was relatively godly as a Pastor, Husband, Father. God
endowed him with rare natural Parts, blessed with no small acquests both of
grace and learning; he was acute, clear, and solid in his reasonings; and in
his converse grave condescending, communicative, and of an amicable sweetness.
True to his own light, yet not Magisterially imposing it as a rule to others.
No superstitious admirer or adorer o^ his own notions and sentiments especially
in small and disputabl^ matters; no supercilious censor of another man's liberty
or latitude; as ready to borrow light, as to ^end it; accounting it a character
of little souls to be too nice in little things, and yet not refusing the
^earch of any thing, by others judged material. Among all other his ar^ainments
he had a Scholastical ^exterity, able to tie, and untye Gordian knots, and no
mean ca^uistical faculty, wherein it were to ^e wished more of our Nation
be^^des Mr. Perkins and Ames had ^udied to excel. Hereof this en^ing piece is
some taste, intended ^y him but as an Essay in this part ^f Theology. Which
thou have Christian Reader) presented to thee without correction or alteration,
wherein if any defect appear, his own Revisal (prevented by death) would have
supplied; accept and peruse it now as it is. A Treatise of Conscience requires
a conscientious Author; which this had, and a conscientious Reader which it
calls for. This is needful in every age and state of the Church, and perhaps
principally in ours; both to point our judgments, rectify mistakes reduce
strayers, heal divisions, settle unstableness, and steer our course. For it is
a subject practical, and has influence into the very vitals of Religion; and
though it is a duty, and withal some difficulty to observe a rule, yet much
more to give a rule; this requires a Master-workman: though we are cast into an
age critical, curious, and too much quarrelous, (which God heal) yet be thou
rather in thy study conscientious practical, and peaceable, this time as well
as this Treatise calls for it. I have purposed with my self to intermix nothing
of mine as to the Rhetoric part of this subject or the praxis. This Torch is
set before thee singly by it self, shining in its own luster; walk while thou
have the light, lest darkness come upon thee. If thou and I by such helps as
these rise up to this blessed frame, and attain this inestimable Jewel, a good
conscience, which is my prayer, thou have thy advantage, and he his aim, who is
thine in the Lord,

William Cooper.

CASES OF Conscience.
CHAP. I. Of Conscience in General.
Quest. 1. Whether there be such a thing as Conscience in Man?

A CASE of Conscience is any such Practical Question as falls under the
Judgment, or if you will under the disquisition and determination of
Conscience. Having propounded to my self (in so great a defect, and in so
general a desire of Casuistical Tractates in our English Tongue) to contribute
whatever my poor abilities can afford to a work of so important a nature, and
of so eminent need: I think it very agreeable to your expectation and my
employment, in my entrance upon this work; The an sit and quid sit, as also the
quotuplex be put upon the enquiry. And so, what some arrogant Scepticks
foolishly start, and Atheistical sinners would fain shake off, is the subject
of this preliminary Question See Baldw. Cas. Cons. l. 1. c. 1. Fenner Treat. of
Cons. p. 33 ad 41. Binchi. Mellif. Theol. par. 2. p. 121.
.

The question is not whether there be the same Conscience in all men? (the same
it is in genere naturae, though not morum.) But whether there be found such a
thing as is Conscience in all men? Which I affirm. In this,

1. Will you consult the Scriptures? Lo, These suppose a Conscience in all; 1
Cor. 10.29. 1 Cor. 10.19. 2 Cor. 4.2. 2. Send all to consult with their own
Consciences, Ps. 4.4. 1 Cor. 11.13. 3. Set all upon cleansing and keeping of
their Consciences, with the utmost diligence, Prove. 4.23. 1 Timothy 1.5. 4. Show
you a Cloud of Witnesses, not only among the Pious, but the Profane, the
Pagans, in the exercise of Conscience, Act. 24.16. Genesis 42.21, 22. Romans 2.15.
5. And speak the kinds, the keeping, the comforts, concussions, acts,
authority, etc. of Conscience; of which hereafter.

So that, though the Scriptures never attempt to prove that there is a
Conscience, (as being a proposition of clear evidence in Nature, and of
confessed evidence among all Nations) yet do they abundantly proclaim, that
there is a spirit (a Conscience) in Man; and that the inspiration of the
Almighty has given him understanding, Job 32.8.

2. Will you but commune with your own selves? Whence are those seeds and
dictats of such religious dues from you to God, of righteousness to men, and of
sobriety in your selves, which so frequently put forth within you? What or
whence those suggestions for refraining sin, and for rouzing up your selves to,
and in the service of the eternal God, and for securing your everlasting good,
which are so often prompted to, and pressed upon you? What, or whence those
silent reasonings and motions within your own breasts, and the several returns
you make into your own bosoms or hearts? What or whence those searchings and
self-reflections, upon what you are, and act? And secret rebukes when you are,
or act amiss, though no eye sees it? As also those sweet refreshments you
inwardly feel, in consciousness of your own innocence, when others unjustly
censure you, or injuriously oppress? Briefly, what or whence those secret
inward records of what you have declined and done, and suitable inclinations
and recalls thereof to your hearts, especially when death or some notable
distress is come upon you, or coming on? What I say are all or any of these,
but the exertings and acts; and therefore evidences and arguments of that
spirit or conscience in man, which is the candle of the Lord searching the
innermost parts of the Belly? Prove. 20.27.

3. Will you confer with such who never heard of Christ, or have read the
Scriptures? Read their written Confessions, or review the workings of their
Consciences. There are few things that more fully or frequently occur in their
Writings, than the presence and power of Conscience in every man, which God
(say they) has given to every one Consciamens ut cuique sua est, ita concipit
intra Pectora pro facto spemque metumque suo Ovid. Fastor. l. 1. s. p. 2.
, as his deputy, and for their direction, overruled, and oversight (...).
Menand. -- (...). Hierocl.
. That from this is no subterfuge, nothing latent (...). Isocrat. ad Demonic.
Nunquam fides latendi fit etiam latentibus, quia coarguit illos conscientia and
ipsos sibi ostendit. Senec. Epist. 97.
. That its Testimony is of all others the strongest Conscientia mill testes.
Turpe quid acturus te sine test time Consciamens recti famae mendacia ridet.
Ovid. Fastor. l. 1. Magna vis est conscientiae judicis, and magna in utramque
partem: Vt neque timeant qui nihil commiserint, paenam semper ante oculos
versari putent, qui pecc^rint. Cicer. pro Milon.
its tranquillity sweetest -- Hic murus aheneus esto; Nil conscire sibi nulla
pallescere culpa. Horat. l. 1. Epist. 1. Conscientia rectae voluntatis maxima
consolatio rerum incommodarum. Cicer. Epist. tam. 4. l. 6. Nulla re tam laetart
soleo, quam officiorum meorum conscientia Id. -- Quae eti^m obruta delectat,
quae concioni^ ac famae reelomat, and in se omnia reponit and cum ingentem ex
altera purte turbam contra-sentientium aspexit, non numerat suffragia, sed uns^
sententia vincit. Sen. de Benef. l. 4. c. 21. Licet ipsum Corpus plenum bona
conscientia stillet placebit illi ignis per quem bona fides co^^ucebit: Id.
ibid.
; its torments sharpest. They therefore abundantly counsel man to study his own
Conscience (...). Tecum habita, Pers. Sat. 4. Nec te quaesiveris extra. Pers.
Sat. 1.
, and affectionately complain that men search not into, but slight their own
Consciences Vt nemo in se tentat descendere, nemo! Persius. Sat. 4.
. As for the workings of their Consciences, that of the Apostle is written
Nihil est miserius quam animus hominis conscius. Plaut. Occultum quatiente
animum tortore flagellum, -- Men's sibi conscia facti, Praemetuens adhibet
stimulos torretque flagellis Luer. Poena autem vehemens and multo saevior illis
quos and Caeditius gravis invenit and Rhadamanthus. Nocte dieque suum gestare
in pector^-testem. Juven.
as with a Sunbeam in their life, as well as his Letters. The Gentiles which
have not the Law, are a Law to themselves, which show the work of the Law
written in their hearts; their Consciences also bearing witness (or their
Consciences witnessing with them), and their thoughts the mean while accusing,
or else excusing one another, Romans 2.14, 15.

It Is true, we commonly say, such and such are of no Conscience; or have lost
all Conscience. But this is and must be understood with reference had rather to
the quality, than to the faculty; i.e. they are of no good or honest
Conscience; or as Conscience is considered in act, rather than in habit; they
have lost their Conscience as we say, men have lost their reason; i. e. the
free and uninterrupted use of it. And it is true also, that there are who have
made shipwreck of all good Conscience; that have seared their Consciences; and
that there are such whom God has justly given over to a reprobate and
remorsless. Conscience, cannot be denied, [1 Timothy 1.19. Romans 1.28]. But
Conscience it self cease not; though such qualities may cease, or are
changed. Conscience is not destroyed when defiled; it is Conscience though
contemned, Tit. 1.15. 1 Timothy 4.2. We find the arrests and acts of Conscience
even among the damned, the devils, [ Mat. 8.29. Mar. 9.44.] So that there is a
Conscience universally in all, and cannot utterly be extinct in any See D.
Tailor Ductor. Dubitan. 1 l. 1. ru.n. x. 5.6, 7.
Even they that say unto God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways; are not therein without the evident self-reflections of an evil and
seared Conscience, Job 21.14, 15.

Q. 2. There being a Conscience in every man implanted by God, how ought every
man to employ his Conscience in order to God.

Though Conscience be under the Sovereign command, and of the sole Creation of
God, yet has he substituted every man to be the keeper of his own Conscience
under him, and must surrender an account thereof to him, Prove. 4.23. Mal. 2.15.
Romans 14.12. And if God has implanted in every man a Conscience, then every man
should employ his Conscience,

1. In the behalf of God, who has made both them and it for himself, Isa.
43.7. Prove. 16.4. And so in pursuance of his holy inclinations, furthering his
supreme Government; in promoting his holy interest, vindicating his sovereign
glory; in patronage of his holy image, forwarding serious godliness; in
propugning his holy intentions and institutions, frustrating (in what they may)
the strong hopes and oppositions of his enemies, sin, the world and satan.

2. As before God, who, as he made the Conscience, will assuredly manifest the
counsels of the heart, 1 Cor. 4.5. It Is good to mind her often of her original,
and of his omniscience; which will both quicken her to her employment, and keep
her from extremes. Yea, it is necessary, that all the acts of Conscience, and of
you toward Conscience, be done as before the all-seeing Creator, lest they lose
their efficacy and authority upon you, and you lose your end and attempts upon
her, whose pravity is so desperate, and policies are so deep, Romans 2.15. Jer.
17.9, 10. Psalm. 64.6. Let her often know from you, that God who created and
implanted her, has a most intuitive knowledge therefore of her, and all her
intrigues lie open to him. Woe to her if she would hide counsel from him. Psalm.
9.4.7. -- 12. Heb. 4.13. Is. 29.15, 16.

3. In the business appointed her of God. Look, what are those offices, which
he has deposited with her, and see that neither you nor she decline them. Look
what are those operations which he has designed by her, and see that she do
them, and that you accordingly demean your selves toward her, [of which Q. 4.]
God has surrogated and set her up. 1. To be a lawgiver from him, employ her
in the study and revelation of what his laws are, and your lives should be, and
see that you receive the truths she dictateth from him. 2. To be a witness for
and with him; Employ her in the observation and report of his works and your
ways, and see that you refuse not the testimony she delivers for him. 3. To
be a judge under him; Employ her in the search and determining of your
condition; and see you remove not the sentence which she receives from him,
while you remain in this condition, Romans 2.14, 15. Joh. 8.9. 2 Cor. 5.11.

4. In a befittingness and accord to God; who has invested men with it, and
imprinted his mind upon it. 1. In accord to his work herein; Men should not
call their concupiscence, humor, lust, illusion, contumaciousness by the
precious name of Conscience. It reflects disparagement and an odium to its
divine rise and original. 2. In accord to his worth; If Conscience be implanted
in you by him, she is inferior to him, and should not impose upon you, against
or above his commission. She is then under the rule and authority of him, and
must render an account to him. 3. In accord to his will, as may best express
his superiority over her, his similitude upon her, and best exemplify those
sacred instructions, which he has left upon record concerning her.

5. Beyond and above all for him. If Conscience be first implanted by him, she
should be finally employed for him. It Is a sordid employment to put Conscience
upon the palliation or extenuating of a man's corruption; or upon the provision
and erecting of a man's credit, etc. And it is a sorry end to determine her
highborn operations within the narrow confines of the object, sense, or of a
man's felf, If she be of an higher efficient, she should be busied for an higher
end. Her acts and answers should be all toward God, 1 Pet. 2.19.3.21. Men
should study to approve their Conscience to him, to assure their Conscience
before him, and to advance and celebrate him by all the elicit and imperate
acts of their Conscience, 2 Cor. 5.9, 11. 1 John 3.19. Psalm. 34.1, 2, 3.

6. So as to behold, and steadily own whatsoever truths he has ordered out for
man's knowledge and observation, by implanting him with a Conscience. And the
more eminent any of them are, the more firm should be man's assent to them, and
the more full and vigorous his adherence to, and asserting of them.

Q. 3. What great truths may every man know and gather up from hence, that
there is a Conscience in him.

Among and above others, every man may hence know and infallibly conclude these
ensuing verities. Is there a Conscience in every man? then let every man,

1. Behold a Deity Conscientia optimus testis divinatis. Tert. lib. de testim.
animae.
. That which may be known of God is manifest in them from within, as well as
manifest to them from without; so far at least as will render them inexcusable
in sin, though not as far as may be requisite and effectual to Salvation. The
eternal power and Godhead are written in lively and legible Characters (not
only upon the Creatures, but) in the Conscience, enough to convince the
Atheist, and whereby he may arrive to the knowledge, both that he is, and (to a
good degree) what he is also, [ Romans 1.19.20. 2.14, 15]. The several truths
which are conserved in the Conscience, does she not dictate as the will of God?
The special testimonies the Spirit communicates, does she not declare as a
witness for and with God? The sentence and judgment wherewith the Spirit
concludes, does she not deliver as a substitute from, and as the sentence of
God? I need no other evidence for this, than your own experiences, which do
plainly enough acquaint you, that all the offices Conscience does discharge are
done under and for God; and that the obligation she infers is as from so by
God, So that the being and acts of Conscience are both a pregnant proof that
there is a God, and do powerfully persuade men to acknowledge his Government,
and ascribe him worship and glory.

2. Behold the Doctrine of Eternity; rewards of good and evil, that extend
beyond death, and all duration of time. Behold your Consciences do not confine
themselves in their converses with you, within the narrow limits of mortality.
They carry engraven on them an immortal state, with accord to the immortality
of your Souls; and by the prospect of this, they inhibit and restrain from
vice, instigate and rouse us to virtue, refresh men's hopes at one time, and
raise fears and torments at another. Manifest it is, that Conscience
principally restrains and rules by the hopes and fears of a future immortality
of glory and misery. And if there were no such thing, her government should be
for the most part frivolous and delusory. 2. Gods giving her to many persons
would be vain and unnecessary; for how should she contain armed force, or
artificial fraud, within the bounds of duty, when the one can sin safely,
beyond the punishments of this life, and the other secretly? Besides, 3. her
glory, in being thus capacitated and raised above the brute Creatures would be
hers and our shame and misery, and render her and us beneath them; while her
hopes she rules by, are frustrate, and her fears are vexing. which are things
utterly to be rejected by all rational men.

3. Behold a Doomsday, or day of judgment. If every man has a Conscience,
then every man must give an account, and come to judgment, and necessary it is
that the several judgments of Conscience may be set right, and the secrets of
Conscience may be revealed and set open; [ Romans 2.12. -- 17. 1 Cor. 4.5.]
Conscience is praejudicium judicii, as Tertullian well. It Is an Emblem and
evidence of the day of judgment. Conscience keeps many a Court before hand as a
Judge; but lo, she conducts men, as by the hand to a more solemn and supreme
judgment. Yea, how often does she cite men hither, and arrest men from hence!
So that Paul preaching of Judgment, makes even a Pagan Judge to tremble, Act.
24.25. Plain it is, that the judgment of Conscience refers higher, and reminds
men often of a more impartial Judge and Judicature, that is future and certain.
Conscience contains the records of Gods Laws and men's lives as a Book. Here men
often keep this Book clasped and sealed; but the righteousness of God in and
for the reward of men requires, that the Books be, and they shall be opened,
Revel. 20.12. Conscience is the Candle of the Lord, searching, yea and showing
what men are, and have done, as a witness, whose work it is to give evidence in
judgment. Here men sometimes baffle, at other times bribe this witness. It
shall therefore be brought into an open and impartial Court, where it may
neither be flattered nor frighted, Prove. 20.27.

4. Behold Man's Dignity. If every man has a Conscience, than is Mankind
advanced in dignity, next the very Angels. Some of the Creatures have being
only and no life, others have being and life, but no sense; these again have
being, life and sense, but no reason. But man was created, and is continued
with being, life, sense and reason likewise. Let your condition as creatures be
considered, and you are but little lower than the Angels, [ Ps. 8.4. etc.] The
noblest of brute and inanimate Creatures have no principle of Reason, no power
for self-reflection; they have neither science nor conscience; You have both of
them. Be thankful for, be tender of, improve and justify this Dignity: Mind
it, maintain it; otherwise this Dignity will but heighten your damnation, and
you will be worse than the beasts that perish, who, while men injure and abuse
their Conscience, employ and improve their brutish knowledge, Romans 1.18. ad
finem Ps. 49.12, 14, 20. Isa. 1.2, 3, 4.

5. Behold his duty. If every man has a Conscience, then no man is left to a
sinful license without a check or restraint upon him, or to his self-lusts
without a command to rule him, without a Controller to reprove him, a
Conscience to curb and reprehend him.

What duties are delineated and drawn out upon every man's Conscience I shall
not discuss or enquire; though I doubt not to say, that there is since the fall
(at least) a minute-draught left of the Moral law of God upon her: So that he
that will not shut the eyes of his Conscience must needs see, that he is under
a law, and debt, of religion toward God, of righteousness toward man, and of
temperance and sobriety to his own self. The Gentiles which have not the Law
are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their
hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, etc. Romans 2.14, 15.

Q. 4. But what duties has every man to look to, in that he is not left
without Conscience?

I answer, in that every man has a Conscience, he is engaged thereby to look
well to the whole compass of his duty, and in all things to live honestly, Heb.
13.18. For therefore is Conscience bestowed upon him, for the better knowledge
of his duties, for binding and keeping him to his duties, and for his better
conduct in and throughout his duties. But more particularly See Eenners Treat.
o^ Consc. p. 38, etc.
there are duties incumbent on you, both 1 in regard that you have a
Conscience, and in 2. regard of the Conscience that you have.

(1.) In that you have a Conscience.

1. Be less sensual. Sensuality is for Brutes, that are led by sense and
imagination. But there is a spirit in man, an internal principle of knowledge
and Conscience, which no sensible object is suitable to, or can satisfy. [ Ps.
49.6. ad finem] the wisdom, wills, ways that are earthly and sensual, are below
a man; are brutish, yea devilish, Jam. 3.15. Jam. 73.22. Compared with the
former uses.

2. Be more Spiritual, both in the offices you perform, and in the objects you
pitch upon. There is a Conscience in every one of you, which knows the things
(not only without, but) within man, the interior motions of the mind, as well
as the exterior of the members, 1 Cor. 2.11. See there be truth then in the
inward and hidden parts; and slubber not over outward religious actions without
inward religious acts and affections. Let there be a proportion within, to your
practice without; which is not only requisite, in that you have a Conscience,
but it will richly assure your heart and Conscience before God, 1 John 3.18, 19.

3. Be more strict in secret. You cannot look Conscience out of your Closets or
Countinghouses. Here is a spy and sentinel from God upon you, yea in you,
wheresoever you are, and whatsoever you are about. The most secret omission or
commission can never escape the privy search of Conscience, or its judicial
censure. It searches all the inward parts of the belly, Prove. 20.27.

4. Be more circumspect. Ponder the paths of your feet, look well to your
estates and actions. Walk circumspectly. Hazard not a breach with Conscience
for these bitter-sweet comforts, or thy Salvation for Secular vanities.
Adventure not upon sin, or the snares that induce to, or entangle in sin.
Remember Conscience is with thee, yea within thee; a strict Notary to write, a
sure Observer to witness; and a severe Judge to punish thy precipitate,
especially thy preconsulted iniquities.

II. In regard of the Conscience you have. Have you a Conscience? Then,

1. Act Conscience. All habits and all powers are for action. And the more
eminent they are, the more for exercise. You employ the sensitive and brutish
part; why should the Rational and Angelical part (as Conscience is) lie idle?
The more inactivity, the more you contract of inability here; and the more will
be compensate for this injury hereafter, Romans 1.21, etc.

2. Attend Conscience. Its orders, offices, obligation, all the items,
intimations, and instructions, which thou have from it. Whatsoever it says,
especially that it self be safe; here is the main guard; if Sin or Satan
seiseth this, what is safe? Keep thy heart (which includes the Conscience)
with all diligence, above all keeping, for out of it are the issues of life,
Prove. 4.23.

3. Acquaint your selves with Conscience. You seek correspondence abroad, and
should you be strangers to Conscience at home, which dwells under the same roof
with your self; and is expressed to you by your very selves in the Scripture?
Judge in your selves, 1 Cor. 11.13, 18. i.e. Judge in your Consciences; Let a man
examine himself: i.e. Let him examine his Conscience, 1 Cor. 11.28. Kn^w ye not
your own selves? So large acquaintance with others and so little with thy own
self? Go, commune with your own hearts upon your beds and be still, 2 Cor.
13.5. Psalm. 4.4.

4. Assure Conscience. Here is an intestine friend or enemy, and therefore the
best friend or worst enemy. It Is a general office, and of greatest oversight.
Oh the happy consequence of assuring Conscience, you assure the God of
conscience who will acquit and accept you; and therewith confidence toward God,
not only of access to, but of audience, by him, in whatsoever you ask of him. 1 John 3.19. -- 23.

Q. 5. What is Conscience in Man?

What Conscience in Angels is, comes not within the compass of this Question,
nor much concerns our knowledge. It Is true, we find Conscience at work, both in
the Angels that kept their first estate, [ Rev. 19.10.] and in those that kept
it not, [ Mat. 8.29.] But this is eccentrick to our design, which is to discuss
Conscience in man; wherein I may not apply my self to feed the itch of a
Polemical School-querist, but as may best fit the intention of a sober
practical Casuist.

The An sit has been spoken to; the Quid sit is the subject now before us. And
in that the nature of the thing is often exhibited us in the notation of the
term, whereby it is expressed.

I shall premise something of the name, then present to you its nature.

1. For the Name. There is not one word which precisely signifies the
Conscience, whereby it is expressed in the Old Testament. Sometimes it is
expressed by Spirit, Prove. 18.14. Psalm. 34.14. and therewith accords Paul's
mention of it, 1 Cor. 2.11. The spirit of man ( i.e. his Conscience), which is
in him. Sometimes by heart, 2 Samuel 24.10. 1 King. 2.44. with which agrees that
of 1 John 3.20, 21. If our heart ( i.e. our Conscience), condemn, etc. I shall
not omit what is observed by A. Burges, Of Orig. sin par. 3. c. 2. s. 1.
that the first signification of the word, [(...) leb.] rendered heart, is a
conspersion, or meal sprinkled with water; which points us, how the heart or
conscience of man is conspersed, and watered with some common principles and
notions about good and evil, and accordingly is to make application of them.

The Greek (...), and Latin Conscientia, from whence we have our English word
Conscience, signify a knowledge together. Conscientia est quasi conjuncta
scientia. Conscience is a conjunct science; both as it respects several
subjects, and several objects. A knowledge together of many Subjects; or by and
with others; and of many objects, or of others.

1. It Is a knowledge together with others. Conscientia est cum alio scientia, as
Aquinas Sum q. 79. a 13.
. And that not so much with other men; though the sincerely conscientious would
fain commend himself to every man's Conscience in the sight of God, and is
careful of keeping close to that universally received rule of Conscience, Math.
7.12, Luke 6.31. 2 Cor. 4.2. 2. Nor so much with a man's own self; when the
heart and head are agreed in the judgment which is made. And a man can say with
Paul, My conscience also bearing me witness. Conscientia est quasi cordis
scientia, says Bernard De interior: Domo. Cor quando se novit appellatur
Conscientia, quando praeter se alia, scientia. Id. ib.
. Knowledge in the head alone is barely science, (as one says Sheffield Good
Conse. c. 1 p. 17.
); but knowledge in the heart too is Conscience rightly so called. 3: But it is a
knowledge together with God. Cum Deo scientia. Behold my witness is in heaven,
and my record is on high, says Job, Chapter 16.19. And Paul, I speak the truth in
Christ, and lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost,
Romans 9.1. He produces three witnesses say our Annotators Ad loc.
Christ, Conscience, and the Holy Ghost.

2. It Is a Knowledge together of many objects. These Conscience does not
abstractly or apart consider, but always conjoyns in its proceeds and
operation, knitting one knowledge and object to another, and conjoyning one to
another: Adding science unto science, as one says Sanders. de Oblig. Conse.
Praelect. 1.. 6.
. The universal knowledge, or the knowledge of law and right, to the particular
knowledge, or the knowledge of the fact, by applying one unto the other.

2. The nature of Conscience I shall briefly discuss, in explicating this
definition. Conscience in man is man's judgment of himself; i.e. of his estate
and actions, as it and they are subjected to the judgment of God. The
definitions and descriptions hereof are variously given by various Authors.
This of Dr. Ames De Cons. l. 1. c. 1. n. 1.
seems to me very consonant, and comprehensive enough, which is closed with by
devout Fenner Treat, of Cons. p. 32
, and by Dr. Anneslie Cripleg. Lect. Ser. 1. p. 3.
. This speaks its nature, and suits with Scripture. Judge you. Judge in your
selves. If we would judge our selves. Judge between me and my Vineyard, Act.
14.19. 1 Cor. 11.13, 31. Isa. 5.3.

First. I say it is man's judgment: I know there is who likes not the mention
hereof in the definition of Conscience; Because, says he, some acts of
Conscience cannot, without some force or straining, be referred hither. But I
must acknowledge (without any ill reflection had on an Author, whom I do so
highly reverence) that the force of this reason is not so ponderous and
pressing with me, while this which I adhere unto, has the favor and
countenance of the Scripture (as before) and while (in a fair construction),
Conscience judges what is the matter of law before it in the first
proposition; what is the matter of fact in the second proposition, and is most
strictly and plainly acknowledged to be a Judge in the third proposition. Q.
What is the subject of the Conscience; wherein it resideth?


Conscience then is man's Judgment, and so appertains to the Understanding;
not to the Speculative understanding, which judges only of things as true, and
has this alone for its object; but to the practical underderstanding, which
judges of things not only as true, but in their tendency also; or as they are
operable or ordinable to action. Conscience appertains then to the practical
intellect Vid. Saunders. de oblig. Cons. Prae. 1. 21. Rutherf. Libert of Consc.
c. 1. p. 4, 5. Baldw. Cas. Cons. l. 1. c. 3.
, not to the speculative, nor to the will. Conscience is a conjunct science as
has been said. The heart knows its own bitterness, Prove. 18.14. Often times
also thine heart knows, that thou also have cursed others, Eccles. 7.22. But
the will is a blind, and no knowing power, as is generally acknowledged.
Nevertheless it is true, that as the will has no small influence upon the
Conscience, to interrupt it in, and to incline and engage it to the discharge
of its acts and offices; so the Conscience does in the discharge thereof,
include therewith, at least infer thereupon, suitable inclinations ordinarily
in, and impressions on the will; I might add, and upon the affections also: its
judgment usually being received, either with delight and joy on the one hand,
or with displicence, Q. Whether Conscience be an act, power, or habit?
dread and grief on the other.

But now, whether Conscience be an habit, or act, or power of the practical
understanding, is of a more strict and subtle disquisition among the
Schoolmen; for accommodation whereof, consult our own learned Saunderson De
Obl. Conscient. Prael. 1.. 7. ad 2^. Burges. Or. sin part. 3. c. 2. s. 1.
. Truth is, it is but very little we understand of our own selves; a labor of
unquestionable difficulty to define and discriminate things of so near a
cognation in nature, and connection in use and exercise, as powers, habits, and
acts are. Yet something must be left for loosing and untying this knot.
Conscience is sometimes of a larger, sometimes of a stricter and more limited
acceptance.

1. Conscience is sometimes largely taken, and in the vulgar use of this term,
it is of a very large circumference and comprehension. It is of known and
confessed observation, that the judgment of Conscience is not consummate or
perfected, but by discourse in some practical Syllogism, which is still
formally or else virtually done Vid. Ames. de Consc. l. 1. c 1. n. 7, 8, 9, 10.
. As thus, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. But I believe and
am baptized, Therefore I shall be saved.


In the first proposition you have the Truth, which Conscience dictates, and
therein still shines forth the light and laws of Conscience. In the second you
have the Testimony, which Conscience delivers, and therein we still see the
written Records, and witnessing reflections and reports of Conscience. In the
third you have the Sentence denounced by Conscience; and herein Conscience sits
most properly as a Judge. Now thus, within the circumference of Conscience are
these three things. (with a different respect unto which, Conscience may be
accounted either a power, or habit, or act), 1. there is the (...), or
conserved truths and laws of Conscience, which are still had in the first
proposition. 2. And the (...), (Conscience more properly so called), or the
consentient Testimony of Conscience, which is still assumed in the second
proposition. 3. And the (...), or conclusory judgment, which is still made in
the last proposition. All these fall within Conscience, its lines of
communication, its large and usual acceptance Rutherf. Libert. of Consc. c. 1.
p. 6, 7.
. And indeed all these are manifestly included in the having and exercise of a
good Conscience, professed by Paul, Heb. 13.18. Act. 24.16. and in the advice
and exhortation which is pressed by Peter, 1 Pet. 3.16. Having a good
Conscience, etc. i.e. a Conscience well principled with truth, as concerns the
former proposition, and well performing its testimony and judicial sentence, as
concerns the two latter. A Conscience conserving good laws, and conformably
giving a good suffrage or testimony, and a good sentence or judgment. With
respect to the former (unless as it is subjectively taken for that intellective
practical power, wherein these laws are engraven (which yet we usually say are
written in the Conscience) it is an intellective habit (as the Schools Aquin.
Sum. 1. q. 79. a. 12. Sayr. clav. reg. c. 2.
generally determine, and ours Ames. de Consc. l. 1. c. 2 n. 1. etc.
also) of the first principles about good and evil. With respect to the latter
I humbly conceive it is a power of the practical understanding, (of which by
and by). And as it is taken effective for an act or motion of the Conscience,
(as it is used in 1 Pet. 2.9. If a man for Conscience sake toward God endure
grief, etc. i.e. for the dictates and directions, and so discharge o^ his
Conscience), so it may be described by an act.

2. Conscience is strictly taken, as has been noted. And that it is not an act
in this sense, as Aquinas Sum. q. 79. a. 13.
and his Followers do contend, seems to me evident. Partly because there are
the acts of Conscience, as to accuse, acquit, etc. and acts do not flow from
acts, but either from some forms or power, or habit: 2. And because of the
absurdity thereupon consequent. If Conscience were an act, then Conscience were
not, when it acted not; and should cease to be, as often as we sleep, or
Conscience does cease to act, which is against the evidence both of Nature and
Scripture; which states it to be Conscience still, though now seared, 1 Timothy
4.2.

I close with them rather, who call it a power See Perkins Treat. of Consc.
vol. 1. p. 517. Baldw. cas. l. 1. c. 3. Rutherf. lib. of cons. c. 1. p. 3. etc.
Huit of Consc. p. 87.
, rather than an habit of the practical intellect^ (though it be true, that the
other opinion has its strong and subtle patrons Scotus and Duran. l. 2 Distin.
39
and specious, and shrewd pretensions). Not only (1) in that Conscience cites
and calls before it, all the other powers, sifts, sits upon and censureth them
Harris. Paul's Exercise.
. But in that (2) it is contradistinguished from another power, viz. the Mind,
Tit. 1.15. (3) In that by this men have their potency, to the acts hereafter
mentioned. Qu. 4. (4) And also, in that it is proper to, and inseparable from
any the sons of men; and therefore is as natural, as any other power of man
whatsoever. Yet that Conscience may in no sense be called an habit, as well as
is science, for the reasons by a Modern Sanders. ibid.. 16, 17, 18.
given, I shall not impugn.

Secondly. Q. What is the object of Conscien. which it respects and treats.
I add Conscience is Man's judgment of himself; i.e. of his estate and actions.
Conscience rides circuit throughout all the man, and reflects upon all in and
of man, It Is set up as a Judge, not only in Man's self, 1 Cor. 11.13. but of man's
self, v. 31. Conscience is therefore placed as it were in the midst, between
God and man, as an arbitrator to give sentence, and to pronounce, either with
man or against man, unto God. So Perkins Treat. of Consc. c. 1.
. There is nothing of us or ours hid from the inspection, enquiries and
judgment of Conscience, neither our estate, nor actions See Annesley Cripl.
lect. p. 4.
. It Is the candle of the Lord. searching all the inward parts of the belly.
Prove. 20.27.

1. For Man's Estate. It is not only put upon the scrutiny of our estates once
and again, [2 Cor. 13.5. Psalm. 4.4. cum. 3.] but passes sentence frequently.
Conscience told the Jailer and those Jews, that they were in a lost and
miserable estate; so that they cried out, Sirs, what must we do to be saved?
Act. 16.30. 2.37. Conscience tells John and other Believers in Jesus, that they
were in a safe and happy estate; We know that we are passed from death to life,
Joh. 3.14. See also ver. 19, 21.

2. As for Man's Actions. It sees into and sits upon and sentenceth all of them,
whether external or internal; whether duties and services, or defects and sins,
whether toward God, or toward man; all acts concerning holiness or honesty, [
Act. 24.16. Heb. 13.18]. Conscience looks inward to, and judges of the root,
spring, and sincerity of our actions, [ Heb. 9.14. 2 Cor. 1.12]. Outward, to
the fruits and circumstances of our actions, [2 Cor. 4.2. 2 Timothy 1.3, 4.]
Upward, to approve its actions in Gods eye, and to answer Gods ends, and his
engagements, [2 Cor. 2.17, 1 Pet. 3.21]. Downward, by an holy activity and
self-judging, to avoid the severe judgments there prepared, [1 Cor. 11.31, 32].
It looks backward upon former actions, and smites for them, if they have been
evil, [2 Samuel 24.10.] And forward also, toward future actions, cautioning us
against such as are evil that we decline them, [ Genesis 39.9.] And charging us to
such as are good, to do them, [1 Pet. 3.16]. The object of Conscience then is
very large and extensive. So that as one says Annesley qu. supra.
, It Is much easier to reckon up, what is not the object of Conscience, then
what is. In brief, whatsoever is morally operable is the object of Conscience,
whatsoever Conscience does or may operate about in a Moral sense; and so takes
in both our estate toward God, and all our actions; not only such as are moral
operables in a stricter sense; but such as are only thus, in a larger sense, as
is Evangelical faith it self to be accounted Sanders. Prael. 1.. 23.
. This being as the command, so the work of God; that we believe in his Son
Jesus Christ, Joh. 6.29. 1 John 3.23.

Nay, there is not an act of that Moral indifferency, which we may call
properly humane, (the indeliberate and immoral actions of man, which grow out
of the imagination and disposition of natural qualities I except, as being not
in propriety of speech humane, as not proceeding from the Soul as reasonable
Aquin. Sum. 12. q. 18. a. 9.
) I say there is not so indifferent an act, which comes not within the sight
and censure of Conscience, though not as such, or secundum speciem; yet in its
singular existence, and as it is circumstanced; by which circumstances
Conscience considers it, made either morally good, or else morally evil. Thus
David's heart smote him, but for cutting off the skirt of a garment, an act in
it self indifferent. But Conscience attends the circumstances. It was the skirt
of Saul his Sovereign, and Gods Substitute; and therefore a sin in him, who was
his subject, servant, etc. 1 Samuel 24.5, 6.

Thirdly. Q. What is the end of Conscience to which it resers?
It Is Man's judgment of himself; i.e. of his estate and actions, as it and they
are subjected to the judgment of God. Conscience being Gods Substitute, and set
by God himself upon the throne of Judicature, does therefore subordinate all to
God; all its objects and in all its operations. It eyes God as the supreme
Judge, both of it and of them, in its regular acts and exercises. Search me, O
God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, Psalm. 139.23, 24. Nor does
Conscience ascite either the estate or any action into, or sit upon them in
judgment; but as they and it are subjected to him, who is superior to the
Conscience, greater than the heart, and knows all things, 1 John 3.20, 21.
Truth is, when Conscience acts it self it is steered by, and subordinated to
the judgment of God in its whole judicial process. In the first proposition
it is ruled by, and subjected to the judgment of God, in point of truth; or as
to matter of law. In the second proposition it is ruled by and subjected to it,
in point of testimony, or as to matter of fact; and therefore in the third
proposition (which is but a result from and upon the two former) there cannot
but be a subordination and subjection still had and made, either virtually or
formally, to the same righteous and unerring judgment. How shall I do this
great wickedness and sin against God? says Conscience in Joseph. As I have
done, so God has requited me, says Conscience in Adoni-bezek. Whether it be
right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye? say
Peter and John to the Jewish Rulers, when they would set Conscience in them at
work. Genesis 39.9. Judge. 1.7. Act. 4.19.

The office of Conscience then in general is to judge, for, from, and under God,
which is inclusive of many particular acts, or (as some please to phrase it)
offices, whereof I shall give you a succinct view in opening a sixth Question.

Q. 6. What are the Offices of Conscience? and how may we so order her and our
selves in them as to come off with more clearness.

The Offices of Conscience are best observed and opened by a review of the
manner of its operation or judgment, which is by way of Discourse, in a
practical Syllogism, as has been already mentioned. Let me offer two instances
more. Thus, All that have the Lord for their God are in an happy or blessed
estate. But I have the Lord for my God. Therefore, I am in an happy or blessed
estate.


Again, All sin is to be avoided for it self. But this idleness of mine is sin.
Therefore, This idleness of mine is to be avoided for it self.


Here are two Syllogisms which show the manner of Conscience, its operations,
both as concerns my estate in the first Syllogism, and as concerns action of
mine in the latter. In each Syllogism there are (as you see) three
propositions. This is the proceeding of Conscience, in all the judgments it
makes. The offices of Conscience are obviously pointed us out in and by these
several Propositions.

The first Proposition still manifestly contains some general law or rule,
whereby I may come to a clear issue in judgment, what my actions have been, or
else should be, and what my estate is. Thus Conscience has the office of a
Lawgiver; thus she is to conserve for us, and (1.) to communieate or dictate
to us laws or rules, of general right and verity, as concern our estates and
actions. And so the Apostle sometimes appeals it: Know ye not ( i.e. do not
your Consciences tell you?) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God? 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to
obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience to righteousness? Romans 6.16. i.e. Do not your Consciences dictate as
much as this? So 1 Cor. 11.13, 14. Judge in your selves, etc. Conscience is
appealed to in this general concernment; Is it comely that a woman pray unto
God uncovered? Again, Does not even nature it self ( i.e. does not even natural
Conscience) teach you, that if a man have long hair it is a shame unto him?

(3.) To chalk out and descry our liberty. As it is to dictate law, or what
must be in matters necessary; so it is to discern liberty, what may or may not
be, in matters of indifferency Ames. de Consc. l. 1. c 3. n. 1. Q. 5 p. 26.
. That Conscience has to order and officiate for us in thing adiaphorous, is
before premised, and the Apostle prompteth, 1 Cor. 10.25, 27.

I know there are that approve not the mention of these acts to the account of
Conscience. But the twofold acceptance of Conscience tendered you ( Quest. 5.
page 21.) a more large and in a more limited sense) may salve their exceptions.
And that such dictates and laws appertain to Conscience, in the common and
received usage of Conscience, (which I am particularly concerned to attend)
needs no other proof, than the frequency of such speeches among us. My
Conscience tells me, Men should do to others as they would be done by. My
Conscience tells me such and such things must be done which are matters of
general right and equity. And they that deny such clear and commonly received
laws of general right, are in common speech said to offer violence to their
Consciences. So my Conscience tells me such and such matters may be declined
and forborne, which are matters of indifferency.

It Is true, there is no small difference between the (...), the conservation of
such laws and rules, and the (...), or Conscience strictly so called See Baldw.
Cas. Cons. l. 1. c 4.
. But I must follow the vulgar usage and sense of this term, as most fitting my
design. There is an habit, bank, and treasury of light and laws with
Conscience, and which it conserves: Here is the (...). There is the application
of them had and made by Conscience; here is the (...) and (...).

The second and third Propositions still make application of some general law
or rule (had in the first Proposition) to a man's particular estate or actions.
Thus it is the office of Conscience, to apply general Propositions and Canons
to a man's personal and particular case and concern. And indeed the Thomists
Aquin. Sum. 1. q. 79. a. 13
do make Conscience to be nothing else, but an application of the knowledge or
light which is in the Synteresis, and therefore define it to be an act. Though
to speak properly, as one Sanders. Prael. 1. de Consc.. 14.
observes, the application of science is not Conscience it self, but an act of
it. And as another Rutherf. libert. of Consc. c. 1. p. 6.
says. It Is the same Conscience that acts all three parts, of a law, of a
witness, and of a judge.

The second Propofition contains the direct testimony of Conscience; and with
respect to this, the office of Conscience in general is that of a witness. Thus
Paul suggests of his own and touching the Conscience of the Gentiles, -- My
Conscience also bearing me witness, Romans 9.1. Their Consciences also bearing
witness, Romans 2.15.

The witness of Conscience may be either considered, 1. as it is in habit, and
rests upon record. Or 2. as it is in act, or is reduced thereunto: which is by
two steps. 1. Conscience casts back a reflection upon its own records, of our
estate and actions; and considers and ruminates upon them. And then 2.
Conscience comes forth and reports to us, how the case now stands, or has
stood, agreeable to those records, and to this reflection.

The office or act of Conscience then in respect of the second Proposition, is
threefold.

(1.) To register and book down, what a man is and does. And in truth,
Conscience is (as one Sheffield. good Cons. c. 4. p. 52.
well) the great Register and Recorder of the world: It has the pen of a ready
writer. Not a word from the mouth, not a work of man, not a thought of the mind
can escape or pass its swift pen. It is Gods Historian, says Dr. Reynolds Of
the Passions, c. 41.
, that writes not Annals but Journals. Conscience has its book, and had its
table, whereon it did indelebly write both the sins of Judah, and the sincerity
of Job, Rev. 20.12. Jer. 17.1. Job 27.6.

(2.) To reflect and bring back to the heart, as the expression of Solomon is
in the margin of 1 King. 8.47. Conscience is to every man, not only as his
private Notary, but as his petty-Constable, to search into and seize upon every
miscarrying act and habit. Conscience reviews its register, recalls and reads
over its records. Here are those sayings in, and sayings to the heart, that
Scripture and experience tell us of, Jer. 5.24. Hos. 7.2. marg. Those
communings with our hearts, and calling upon our own actions and estates, those
countings and self-searches how the case stands. Psalm. 4.4.77.6. Herewith
Conscience comparing our past actions and intentions with the Canons and rules
conserved in the (...), ruminates and bethinks according to the case and
concern before it. Conscience considers the matter, I considered in my heart,
says the Preacher; or, I gave or set to my heart, Hebr. Eccles. 9.1.
Conscience is not only to consult its books, or cast back an eye; but to
consider the affair before it attentively. Now therefore thus says the Lord of
Hosts, consider your ways, (Hebr.) Set your heart on your ways. Hag. 1.5.7.
Here are those layings to heart, we read of in the Prophets. Jer. 5.24. Mal.
2.2.

3. To report and bring forth its testimony, according as the matter has been
or is. Thus Conscience in Joseph's Brethren, had taken and bookt down their sin;
after this, turns back and tells them of it, and of the circumstances wherewith
Conscience considered it to be aggravated. We saw the anguish of his Soul, and
we would not hear, etc. Genesis 42.21, 22. Conscience in Pharaohs Butler had
recorded, did recall, rip up and read him his faults. Genesis 41.9. David, Job,
and Paul are contumeliously censured, and cried out upon; Conscience casts back
a reflection, consults its own records, considers their uprightness, and the
others reproaches, and clears up their righteousness, Psalm. 7.3, 4. Job 27.5,
6, etc. 2 Cor. 1.12.

As this is the office of Conscience to give testimony in relation to what is
past; so also in relation to what is present; Conscience witnesses both 1.
what we are, or what our estate is. The spirit witnesses with our spirits,
that we are the Sons of God, Romans 8.16. 2. And what we act, or what our actions
are. Witness Paul's example. I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
Conscience also bearing me witness, Romans 9.1. 3. And whatever you are or
intend, Psalm. 17.3. 2 Cor. 1.17.

The third Proposition contains the decisive judgment of Conscience; and with
respect to this most properly and strictly, the office of Conscience is to
judge; If we would judge our selves we should not be judged, 1 Cor. 11.31.
Confcience is herein judicially to apply the truth dictated in the first
Proposition, upon the testimony delivered in the second Proposition, and does
infer the Conclusion from those premises, according to its apprehension of the
rule or law in the first or major Proposition, and according to its attestation
and report of our life or actions in the second or minor Proposition.

The judgment conscience pronounces sometimes respects our estate, and
sometimes respects our actions, and both of them either 1. as good, or else
2. as evil. And thus again either 1. as it respects the time past or present;
or else 2. as it respects the time future, either as they have formerly been,
or now are, or henceforth should be.

First, as it respects the time past and present. The office of Conscience in
regard of what is and has been good, is to acquit and clear; In regard of what
is and has been evil, it is to accuse and condemn, Romans 2.15. Their Conscience
also bearing them witness, and their thoughts the mean while excusing, or else
accusing one another.

1. If the estate and actions be or have been good, Conscience is accordingly
to acquit and clear. This it does (1.) to and before God, as its superior in
judgment, whom it does 1. sometime appeal, as the supreme Judge. Judge me, O
Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in
me, Psalm. 7.8.26. 1. And 2. sometimes it apologizeth and excuses us to him,
not by extenuating our sin Excusatio enim hic non strictiore sensu accipitur,
quo diminutionem vel attenuationem culpae designat; sed illo quo plenam culpae
and reatus amotionem notat. Ames.
but by insisting on our sincerity. Lord, (says Abimelech) in the integrity of
my heart, and innocence of my hands have I done this. Remember, O Lord, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. So Hezekiah, Genesis
20.5, 6. Isa. 38.3.

This it does also (2.) from God, as his substitute in the judgment from whence
Conscience is by office to approve and absolve. 1. To approve the good, and so
our hearts are assured before, and we have confidence toward God, 1 John 3.19,
21. I have finished my course (says Paul) I have kept the faith; Conscience
approves it, and so assures him. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me, etc. 2 Timothy
4.7, 8. 2. To absolve from evil, 1. from evils threatened by Gods laws, the evil
of divine indignation, 1 John 3.21, 22, Nay, says Conscience, whatever be the
charges laid against him, or crosses lay before him: Who is he that condemns?
it is God that justifies? In all these things I am more than a conqueror
through him that loved me, Romans 8.31. -- to the end. 2. ^^rom evils thrown upon
him by men's lusts, the evils of humane imputations and hard censures. Amidst
all calumnies Conscience acquits Job, and asserts his integrity. Let his
adversaries write a book against him, he can bind their censures as a crown
unto him. Let them reproach him of hypocrisy, Yet, says he, till I die I will
not remove my integrity from me. My righteousness I hold fast and will not let
it go. My heart shall not reproach me, so long as I live, Job 31.5. to the end,
27.5, 6.

2. If the estate or actions be, or have been bad, Conscience is by office
judicially to accuse and condemn. I say judicially to accuse, because it is
accusation, per modum testis, as a witness, appertains to the second
Proposition. Thus it likewise does,

(1.) As to and before God; to and before whom it accuses us, and causes us
to acknowledge our guilt. Thus David's heart smote him after he had numbered the
people, and David said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have
done, etc. 2 Samuel 24.10. And after he had gone in to Bathsheba, Against thee,
thee only I have sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, etc. Psalm. 51.4.

(2.) As from and under God; who is greater than the Conscience. So Conscience
is by office. 1. To convict the sinner, and does conclude it as to the sinful
state and actions, for which it stands arraigned before it: Witness those Jews,
Joh. 8.9. Who were convicted by their own Consciences, (...) Significat (...)
convincere and causam eo deducere, ut obijci enti praetexi nihil amplius queat.
Hyperius.
. So shut up by arguments, and by the authority of this Judge, that they could
not start from it. 2. To censure and set a brand and mark of infamy upon the
sin. So David in the Text before, 2 Samuel 24.10. I have done very foolishly. And
elsewhere, So foolish was I and ignorant, I was a beast before thee, Psalm.
73.22. Here the least Conscience as a Judge can do, is dislike and displicence
with the sin, and with it self for sin. The evil which I do I allow not, says
Paul, Romans 7.15. 3. To condemn, 1 John 3.20. i.e. to pronounce the sentence,
which is a sentence of condemnation to the sinner, where the estate is bad,
whereof is no reversal, but upon repentance, Act. 2.37, 38. Tit. 3.11. A
sentence of castigation, and to contrition, where the estate is good, Jer.
31.19. and is still a sentence of condemnation to the sin, and for the
crucifying of the same, whether the estate be good or bad, Lam. 3.39, 40, 41.

Secondly, as it respects time future, and what is to be. Thus Conscience is by
office, in particular; not only, 1. to tell us or hold forth what is right and
what is wrong, what is good and what is evil, to us in particular, agreeable to
the general law in the first Proposition. But 2. to tie and oblige us
respectively to that evil, and to this good, agreeably still to the same law in
the same proposition. And 3. to thrust forward, excite or impell us, for the
avoiding of that evil, and for the attaining or doing of this good; with accord
still to that general light or law. In relation to these Offices, the holy
Scriptures speaks of the Conscientious man, as one stirred, as one bound, as
one pressed in his own spirit, Act. 17.16, 18.5.20, 22. He is not only a
debtor, Romans 1.14. But there is a necessity upon him, as from Gods command, so
from his own Conscience. He is constrained and cannot choose (unless he should
offer violence to his own Conscience) but do, what his Conscience dictates, 1
Cor. 9, 16. 2 Cor. 5.14. Act. 4.20.

I am not ignorant, that these three last Offices of Conscience are commonly
placed elsewhere, and conceived to appertain rather to the first Proposition.
But in that Conscience does therein dictate but the general right or law, and
these acts do evidently include a particular respect and application to a man's
own estate or action, and this conclusive as to his estate and action: As the
operation of Conscience aforesaid does obviously witness. I do therefore rather
choose to place them here. Not that I blame others for the liberty which they
please to take; nor shall bind up my self strictly this order, in the progress
of this Discourse.

Q. 7. How may and should we so order our Conscience (in relation to the first
Proposition) that they offer us true and right Laws and Rules, and none but
such concerning our estates See Q. 3. Direct. 1. in Chap. 3.
and actions?

To this end it is necessary, that you

1. If the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the ditch, Mat. 13.52.
Romans 2.21. Mat. 15.14. Therefore (1.) apply your hearts to instruction, (not
your ears, or eyes, or heads only, but your hearts) in the use of Scriptures,
and of all subservient helps and means which God has appointed for the
attaining and advancement of sound knowledge, Prove. 2.2.23.12. Psalm. 90.12,
Excite and engage the pursuits and desires of thine heart, the determinate
purposes of thy will. See thou be not willingly ignorant; hear instruction, and
refuse it not. Be daily at Wisdoms-gates, wait at the posts of her doors, Lo,
now you have a promise, if you apply your hearts to its pursuance, Prove. 18.1.
2 Pet. 3.5. Prove. 8.33, 34, 35.2.2. -- 10, (2.) Let instruction abide upon your
hearts. What is it to furnish a commonplace-book with what thou read and
hear? furnish Conscience rather: At least, transcribe thy Notes from thy
Books into thy breast. Nor think it enough, that thou have apt rules for all
Cases in thy Bible, they must be nearer hand too, in thy bosom. Write them upon
the table of thine heart. Hear what God speaks to thee, Let thine heart
retain my words: Let thine heart keep my Commandments; keep them in the midst
of thine heart, Prove. 3.3. c. 7.3. c. 4.4, 21. c. 3.1. Thy word have I hid in
mine heart, says David, that I might not sin against thee. To this is the
promise of knowledge; and thou may be confident, that when wisdom enters
into the heart; Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee,
Psalm. 119.11. Prove. 2.1, 5. c. 2.10, 11.

2. etc. For these will but bring her into snares, bewray her to Satan, feed
her disease and sickness, and fetch her off from the divine simplicity, which
the Scriptures use in the Doctrine which is according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3,
4, 5, 20, 21. Tit. 1.14. Mat. 15.9. 2 Cor. 11.3. (2.) From ambiating and
indulging a carnal liberty, which will not be either checked, or confined by the
restraint of law and rules, Psalm. 2.3.12.4. It Is true, where the spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty: And that ye are called unto liberty; but not such as
serves the interess and inclinations of the flesh, or snaps asunder bonds of
obedience. Still you are the servants of God; and so are under a law of
liberty. His precepts are Gyves upon your lusts, but give you liberty. If
Conscience aspires after a carnal liberty, she is in hazard of the most
lamentable captivity, 2 Cor. 3.17. Gal. 5.17. 1 Pet. 2.16. Jam. 1.25. 2 Pet.
2.19. (3.) From arrogance; either in justifying her self; as if she knew enough
already. This will precipitate and outlaw Conscience, perverts and overthrows
knowledge, prevents and obviates all care and endeavor for its improvement and
increase, Romans 1.22. 1 Cor. 3.18. 2 Cor. 8.2. Prove. 26.12. Or in imposing on
your selves. The rules she dictateth may not be without (much less against) the
revelation or direction of God. She is not Sarah the Mistress, but Hagar an
handmaid; under God, though above you; and is to conserve and manifest rules to
you, not to create and make rules for you. (4.) From inordinate haste, to which
she is oft-times too prone, and by which she is oftentimes perverted, both in
the determining and dictating of rules. Let not thine heart be hasty. Bid thy
Conscience (as the Levite did the Children of Israel), consider and take advice
first, and then speak her mind, that thou may be able to say with the
Preacher, For all this, I considered in mine heart, Eccles. 5.2. Judge. 19.30.
Psalm. 50.22. Eccles. 6.1.

3. Sift your Consciences, What! know ye not? i.e. do not your Consciences tell
ye this and that? Romans 6.3, 16.7.1. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.5.6.6.2, 3, 9, 15, 16,
19.9.13, 24. (2.) Sift them by their rule. Thou say, this is your rule: But
tell me, O my Conscience, does the law of my God say so too? Where has he
revealed it? where read'st thou it? where is it written? in the book of Nature,
or of Scripture? show it me; for why should thou measure thy self by thy
self? And if thou bind the law continually upon thy heart, behold God has
assured thee, When thou go it shall lead thee; when thou sleep it shall
keep thee; and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee, Luke 10.26. 2 Corinthians. 10.12. Prove. 6.21, 22. (3.) Sift them before their Ruler; has not God
written to thee, O my Conscience, excellent things in counsel and knowledge,
that thou might know the certainty of the words of truth? Will thou say,
this is the truth, as in his sight? Has he not set thee up as a Preacher in my
bosom, to receive the Law at his mouth, and cause me to hear his words? and
will thou (Oh! do not) prophecy deceits, and speak the visions of thine own
heart, and say he sent me, as the false Prophets sometimes did? Behold he
knows what is in the darkness, and the light dwells with him, Prove. 22.20,
21. Romans 9.1. Jer. 23.16, etc. Dan. 2.22.

4. Jer. 5.24. Eccles. 9.1. Urge her from 1. thy necessity of a rule in this
case; 2. from the nature of a rule, which should be known and clear; 3. from
her nature and office, who is to receive the rule from the supreme Legislator,
and reveal it to thee. 4. from the notoriety of that account, which she must
one day render unto him.

5. David; and with Job say to him, That which I know not teach thou me, Psalm.
119.18, 19, 33, 34, 125. Job 34.22. 2. To incline and establish thy Conscience.
O! let me not wander from thy Commandments: Make me to go in the path of thy
Commandments. Incline my heart to thy testimonies. Let my heart be sound in thy
statutes, Psalm. 119.10, 35, 36.80.

6. Psalm. 1.1, 2.64.9. Ecles. 5.1. The iterated acts of meditation will 1.
habituate the principles which you already know; 'twill root them deeper, and
rivet them faster upon the mind and memory. And Conscience will be ever and
anon calling them into counsel, Psalm. 119.15, 16, 23, 24. 2. They Will affect and
pour in oil upon the flames of love, delight and desire toward these and such
other principles: O how love I thy law! says David. What was it that kindled
and caused it to burn up to such an height? It is my meditation all the day,
Psalm. 119.15, 16, 48, 97. 3. They Will advance these principles to an higher
progress and proficiency in knowledge. Meditation will not only be dilating on
them; but deducing inferences from them, and drawing on the judgment and
conscience from one field of truth to another for the delicious views of the
full harvest of divine verities, having drunk in so much sweetness already from
a few sheaves of it. This was it enlarged David's understanding beyond his
teachers, and above the ancients, as well as above his enemies: Thy testimonies
are my meditation, Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100.

Lastly, Psalm. 81.11, 12. Isa. 6.9, 10, 11. Romans 1.18, 21, 24, 28. But Sirs, if
you would have Conscience true in giving rules to you, you must be true to the
rules which Conscience gives you; you encourage Conscience when you exemplify
her laws in your lives and conversations: But if you turn not her directions
into duties, you tempt her to deal (at most) but by halves with you, as you do
(at best) with her. The doers of the Commandments have the most discerning
Conscience, and dwell most in comforts. If ye know these things, happy are ye
if ye do them. He that does what he knows is most likely to know what to do.
He is secured by promise. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine, and God will manifest himself to him, Ps. 111.10. Joh.
13.17.7.17.14.21.

Q. 8. How should we so order our Conscience (in relation to the second
Proposition) that she may give us a true and right testimony, and none but
such, concerning our estates See Chap. 3. Q. 3. Dir. 2.
and actions?

To this end it is necessary, That you

1. Ply your Conscience with arguments. (caeteris paribus) to her office, and
the more regular in her operations. You may urge her (1) from her ability.
Thou, and thou only under God, can fully and clearly testify. For what man
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him? God has
set thee up, as a shining lamp, for surveying all the several periods and acts
of my life, and thou searchest all the inward parts of the (heart,
metaphorically expressed by the) belly, 1 Cor. 2.11. Prove. 2.27. (2.) From her
authority. For this art thou constituted by God in and over me. And this is his
command upon thee, to testify what is my consonancy to, or dissonancy from
those laws he has imposed on, or engraven in me. Thou have his warrant, and
it is thy work to witness, a work approved by him in Scripture, and agreeable to
thy nature. Who can exempt? or what shall excuse thee? Romans 2.15. (3.) From her
avail. Thy single testimony alone does supercede the witness of the whole world
besides. I can appeal from them to thee; but from thee I can appeal to none but
God. Next under his, thy witness is of highest weight, both with him and me,
Job 23.10, 11, 12. Romans 9.^. (4.) From her acts: Why did thou dictate truths
and laws to me, if thou will deny thy testimony to my life? By those I know
what God appoints, and demands of me; but it is by this alone, I can know
what I am, and what is done by me. Should I know his statutes only? or should I
not also know my own self, 2 Cor. 13.5. Besides, how can thou otherwise
descend to judgment? who passes sentence without some previous evidence? And
if this be unsound, that cannot be safe. So that deny or deprave thy witness,
and thou undoest thy whole work. (5.) From her advantage. Witness thou must,
and shall. Now it may be done with less smart, and more security, then if thou
should defer it till the cords of distress, or fetters of death and judgment
do constrain thee. (6.) From her account. An account thou must render at Gods
Bar shortly. He will then open the book of Conscience, and every line of thy
heart and life shall be read over distinctly. He now observes, what
reflections and reports Conscience makes of what has been done by thee, and
has eminently marked out her silence, as a sore evil in thee, Jer. 8.6.
Eccles. 4.8. (7) From what attends. Why? O my Conscience! my work and welfare,
both as to time and eternity, do all turn upon this one hinge. How can I repent
either from or for my past or present sins, or state, if sinful, on the one
hand? Or how can I rejoice in, or be thankful for my past or present sincerity,
and Gods salvation on the other; if thy silence or partiality in giving witness
shall leave me still under the thick and dark vail of ignorance?

2. Press her by and before authority. Psalm. 50.22. Jer. 12.3. Art thou not (1)
to witness from him? has not he substituted and sent thee? How will thou
answer it to him then, whom thou abusest infinitely, if thou adventure either
to suspend thy testimony, or to speak untruly. (2) Art thou not to witness for
him? i.e. in his cause and concern, as well as on his commission? Durst thou so
slight his honor, and therewith thine obligations, as either to speak wickedly
for him, or to be speechless, or shuffle in thy witness, when the interess of
his government, glory, etc. is at stake before thee? shall not his excellency
make thee afraid? Job 13.7, 8, 9. (3) Art thou not to witness to him? Does thy
testimony terminate with me? Nay it is transmitted to the supreme Judge. The
records of it must lie in heaven with him. And can thou impose, by lying,
upon an infinite truth? or hide any thing by a loose and fraudulent testimony
from his immensity? (4) Art thou not to witness as before God? As of God, in
the sight of God, so should thou speak. The answer of a good Conscience is
toward God. Whether it be right in the sight of God is her grand enquiry. And
durst thou withhold or wrench and obtort thy testimony before his eye? should
not his presence better poyze, and be of more prevalence with thee? 2 Cor.
2.17. 1 Pet. 3.21. Act. 4.19. (5) And what is God from, for, to and before whom
thou art to witness? Does not he know both all the matters of fact, and all thy
manifold frauds, with the highest exactness? Thy witness cannot add to, nor thy
wrestings abate from his knowledge, Jer. 17.9, 10. Psalm. 119.168. Or will he
cover either, because thou concealest them, or castes a vail over them. Nay if
thou say, Behold, I know it not; Does not he that pondereth the heart
consider it? and he that keeps thy soul, does not he know it? And shall not
he render to every man according to his works. Prove. 12.24.

3. Chap. 2. Qu. 2.) and principle her with holy habits. Purity will be an
excellent preservative from the temptations proffered her from without, and the
treachery she is prone to from within. As for the pure his work is right: The
witness of a pure Conscience will not be blinded with, or blinded by any carnal
interess; 'twill continue pure like her self, 2 Timothy 1.3. Prove. 21.8. Tit.
1.15. Fidelity is not less effectual then expedient and necessary. She will not
be either bought off by temptations, or brow-beaten by trouble, nor will she
bruise upon the truth, or baffle in her testimony. A faithful witness will not
lie. A true witness delivers souls, Prove. 14.5, 25. Chap. 12.17.

4. Prove. 4.23. Chap. 22.5. Act. 24.16. Let Conscience know 1. allurements are
fallacious and deceitful; they are but to betray her from her irksome duty into
the more irrecoverable danger. And however they now briskly sparkle in the cup
and entrance, yet in the consequence and end they will bite like a Serpent,
they will sting like an adder. 2. Their arguments are all frivolous and
sophistical. The true spiritual self-love easily sees through, and scatters
them all. She sees that the witness of Conscience serves our best welfare and
comfort* And if troubles ensue upon her testimony, she will see and say they
are but preparatory to our everlasting tranquillity, and preventive o^ eternal
torments: Or suppose the worst, i^ you weigh their suggestions in the scales o^
self-love indeed, she will soon inform you, It Is better to bleed once, than to
burn for ever: Better you should smart once, than suffer always: Better
Conscience should be giving witness on earth, than be a gnawing worm in hell:
To be now testifying, than for eve^ tormenting, etc. Luke 16.23, 24, 25.

5. Davi^ sometime did Abigail, Blessed be the Lord which sent thee to meet me
this day; and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou of the Lord 1 Samuel
25.32, 33. It Is good for you (1) to invite her, and that in sincerity, if she
seems strange. There is a saying to the heart which the Scripture suggests to
us, Hos. 7.2. If Conscience seems to withdraw, speak to her the more winningly;
and say not to thy self by her, as Judah did to his servant, concerning Tamar,
Let her alone, enquire not after her, lest we be ashamed, Genesis 38.23. But see
that thou do it in integrity. Do not invite her, as Amnon did his Sister, to
deflowre her testimony first, and then turn her out of doors afterward. 2 Samuel
13.17. (2) Entertain her with promises of security, if she seems suspicious and
^earful. Tell her thou will bear with, and shall bless God for her integrity,
and wilt bear her but against her enemies; As David to Abiathar, Abide thou
with me, fear not; for he that seeks by life seeks my life: But with me
thou shall ^e in safety, 1 Samuel 22.23. (3) Encourage ^er, if she yet seems shy
and doubtful; as Moses was to encourage Joshua; and as God ^couraged Paul, Be
of good cheer, Paul, as thou ^ast testified of me in Jerusalem, so thou must
bear ^itness also at Rome. Speak out freely, fully, ^ithfully, I shall not
oppose, but own it thank^lly: Tell her as wisdom does her Children, With me
thou shall dwell in safety, and shall be ^iet from fear of evil, Deuteronomy. 5.38.
Act. 23.11. ^ov. 1.33. Receive her testimony then, and ^at in reality, and with
all readiness; where^^ you shall eminently disappoint the hopes (...) sin and
Satan, and encourage her to the dis^arge of her office. You receive the witness
(...) men, the witness of God is greater; and the witness of Conscience is Gods
witness i^ and to you; it is the candle of the Lord. 1 John 5.9. Prove. 20.27. Be
sure 1. you d^ not menace her from giving testimony; a^ Amariah did the
Prophet, Art thou of the King^ counsel? forbear, why should thou be smitten*
Lest she forbear indeed, as the Prophet did to his destruction, 2 Chronicles. 25.16,
2. No^ smite her for giving testimony, as Balaam di^ his Ass, when she rebuked
his madness; le^ the Angel of the Lord slay thee for smiting he^ as he was like
to have slain him: Nor as Ab^^ and Zedekiah did by Micajah, and died mise^ably.
Numb. 22.22. -- 34. 1 King. 22.15. -- 38. 3. Nor mince the testimony she gives
lest thou^ become odious to Conscience, a Hanan to David; while thou cut'st off
h^^ testimony, as Hanan did his Messengers ga^ments in the midst, hard by their
Buttocks, an^ she revenge this shame upon thee as Davi^ did that with blood and
slaughter. 1 Chro^ 19.4 -- 16.

6. viz. she is to record, (...) reflect, to report. The report of Conscien^^
which is the consummation of her office i^ witnessing, is raised upon, and
results from the two former acts, which include the i^ choation and progress of
her witnessing: H^ witness is resting as in habit with her, if we respect the
first office, and is now a reducing into act by her, with respect to the
second. So that as ever you would have Conscience report or finish her
testimony aright, whether as concerns your past estate or actions; your eminent
care is required in and touching the two former, (wherein I shall more
particularly direct you, and in the next Question which you should premise); I
say past, because in the testimony of Conscience touching things present, this
gradual passage, from one act to another, is not so observable.

Q. 9. What course should we take touching the recording of things by our
Conscience, in order to their giving a right witness?

To this I can say but little here [for the consulting and review of her
Records belongs to the next Question, Direct. 1.] Touching the due compiling of
them, I shall only offer two things, in the case. 1. What she does do, as a
motive to incite you. 2. What you should do, as that which may instruct you.

1. Remember what she does. She does, Isa. 65.6. Deuteronomy. 32.34. And such is her
relation withal to thee. Conscience is one of those books the Scripture speaks
of, and thou shall be judged out of those things which are written in this
Book, according to thy works. Dan. 7.10. Rev. 20.12. She books down thy actions
then, and that truly and thoroughly. And though through the darkness of mists
without, and of the mind within thou can not now discern all her prints and
characters; yet in the light of some grievous distress, or self-discussion,
thou may discover some of them, (as Joseph's Brethren and David did. Genesis
42.21. Psalm. 77.6.) and in the light of that great day, they will all be
discovered. And those Letters on it which now seem invisible and illegible,
like Letters written with the juice of a Lemon, will be then clear, when it is
brought to the fire of Gods judgment, 1 Cor. 4.5. Yea, as she records them 1.
impartially; so likewise 2. indelibly. Her records are written with a pen of
iron, and with the point of a Diamond, they are graven upon the table of thine
heart; so that there is no obliterating, or razing them out. Jer. 17.1.

2. In all things that I have said unto you be circumspect. Exodus 23.13. Psalm.
119.9. 2. Knowledge and confidence are requisite on her part, wherewith it
should be your care to furnish her knowledge; lest she record virtue for vice,
as Abimelech, Genesis 20.5, 6. or vice for virtue, as those, Prove. 16.25. Isa.
5.20. Confidence; for if she writes with a trembling and palsie-hand, she is
like to write (if truly, yet) illegibly and less accurately. If you menace her,
you do but make her write in Characters which you cannot understand, without a
key to them. Record she will, but so as you shall not read them, who attempt to
rend them, as we have clear instance, Romans 1.18. to the end. Give her
confidence, and you shall not go away without a good account. She never records
with more clearness to us, than when she is treated with most confidence by us,
Heb. 10 22, 23. (2) Take care to keep these records as legible as you can. Men
are but too prone to blur and sully them; either through sensuality, they
themselves contract blots and filth upon them; or through supiness they suffer
others to cloud and blemish them. And so when Conscience should be reporting
them, men are to seek how they should read them. Some let the dust of secular
vanities cover them. So did Pharaohs Butler for some years; as if the records
of his Conscience were to rest there, rather as in a grave then as in a Court
of Record, Genesis 41.1. cum 9. Others let the copperas and gall-nuts, or ink of
sin to continue on and canker them. (...) did David for near an whole year
together, till Nathan revives their legibleness, and reads them over to him, 2 Samuel 2.13, 15. Others let the worms and moths of Satan's temptations corrupt
them, as did those Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Your care then should be 1. to lock them up
in a safe repository; 2. To look after them, so as neither the defilements of
sin, or dusts of sense, or devices of Satan may reach, at least rest upon them.
3. To look that they be always in readiness, that they be not to seek when you
should be surveighing them.

Q. 10. What course should we take in and about the reflections of our
Conscience, that they may give us a true and right witness?

In the reflection which Conscience makes (at least of actions past) she
casts back an eye upon two things; upon her own records, which are reposited
with the memory, which speaks back what our actions either be, or have been;
and upon those holy rules, which are reposited with the mind or (...), which
speaks back what they should have been, or now should be. So that Conscience in
her reflection is both to consult her own records, and to compare the concern
before her, wherein she is to witness with those holy rules. I advise then,
that you

1. Q. 9.) let her reflect hither, remember and read them over, without which
you cannot now reach the end, or reap the benefit, of their being so reposited.
Remember this, how they are enrolled, and why, Call it again to mind, O ye
transgressors; to use the words of the Prophet, Isa. 46.8. Now that you may
consult these records aright, and have Conscience to reflect; Its requisite
that there be (1) Self-denial, without which this work will not be done at all,
or not aright; but Conscience like the unjust Steward will be writing fifty for
an hundred. For be sure your wills and affections, yea Conscience it self
(through the corruption that cleaves to it) will be drawing back from such a
difficult and flesh-displeasing work; or at most will not dwell long upon it.
And therefore the Apostle doubleth the charge: Examine your selves, prove your
own selves; as knowing how hardly we are brought to it, and how the heart hangs
back from it, Luke 16.6. 2 Cor. 13.5. (2) Serious deliberation, lest you
misread and misunderstand her records, and the result be a mistake and
misrepresentation of your case; which will minister nothing but matter for
repentance, as it did unto David, I said in my haste, etc. Psalm. 31.22. and
116.11. (3) A steady diligence; My spirit made diligent search, Psalm. 77.6. 1.
In rubbing up and ransacking the memory, where these records lie, as in their
most proper repository. For many of our actions lie there, rather as so much
rubbish which we have swept out of sight, then as so many records that are
orderly shelv'd up for a surveigh. 2. In reiterating this method, our actions
many times lie so far off, and so many things interpose between them and the
eye of Conscience, that there must be a raised and repeated diligence; yea and
giving all diligence, to remove other matters, and to reduce them again to our
minds. It Is therefore called a bringing back to the heart, 2 Pet. 1.10. 1 King.
8.47. Isa. 46.8. 3. In the reception and right nicking of the means. The court
of records stands not always open; and it is ill slipping the first season. Now
diligence would be doing e're the doors are shut; and the draught by Conscience
is yet fresh and unsullied: As David sometimes immediately reflected, upon the
cutting off of Saul's garment, and upon his numbering the people. But at another
time, when he yields to his own sloth, and falls not in with the first season,
Vriah is murdered, and his Wife constuprated by him, etc. and he never casts a
reflex upon either of these prodigious acts; yea notwithstanding the Parable
came so pat and plain upon him, till the Prophet was fain to put himself in the
place of Conscience, and tell him, Thou art the man; and you know what this
negligence cost him, 1 Samuel 24.5. 2 Samuel 24.10. Chap. 11, and 12. Psalm. 51.

2. on that as good? but by comparing this and that with the rule, which can
alone resolve her what is good and what is bad. Now as Gods revealed will is
the only rule and measure of all moral good and evil; so the reflection of
Conscience connoteth a respect to this rule. For Conscience does not cast back
an enquiry after the physical being of an action; as whether I have eat or
drunk? but after the moral being of that action, as whether I have eat or drunk
to Gods glory, etc. as his law enjoins me; or else to excess, etc. as his law
inhibits me? Mic. 6.8. 1 John 3.4. 1 Cor. 10.31. Ephesians. 5.18. Now hereunto these
three things are requisite; which though they are not of that obvious necessity
and distinct use, in those sudden and transient reflections which Conscience
often makes; yet are they of very needful observation and useful distinctness
in her more solemn and abiding reflections in the more serious returns we are
to make upon our selves as before the Sacrament, etc. or when we undertake the
solemn examination of our selves.

1. Set the rule before thy Conscience in its spiritual power, purity, and in
the several parts of it. On this she is to reflect, and by this she must be
regulated. It Is not enough that you have them lying in habit with the
sunteresis, but they should be now actually educed and brought forth to view.
For in that you are now to search your selves by them, you must take an actual
surveigh of them. David therefore did not satisfy himself that the laws of God
were ever with him, but he did expose and lay them before him. Thy judgments
have I laid before me, Psalm. 119.30. cum 98. And without this, the course you
are now taking will be much-what ineffectual, and can never be fully
commensurate with your design, this duty or Gods demand, who bids you take heed
to your ways according to his word, Psalm. 119.9.

2. Sift your Conscience, and therewith your lives and actions, by the rules;
compare her and them with this: Examine your selves, prove your own selves,
(...), as men try metals, by bringing them to their proper measure, as Gold and
Silver to the touchstone, 2 Cor. 13.5. Self-discussion by the divine standard
is of singular advantage, both for the discovery of your sins, as David and
Paul found it, and for the drawing out a discovery of your sincerity, as Job.
Ps. 19.11, 12. Romans 7.8, 9, etc. Job 23.10, 11. Will you but cast an eye on
this glass, you should see more of the nature and number of your sins; the
nature, necessity, and beauty of Gods service, and continuing therein, should
contract his blessing on your selves, Jam. 1.25. But in your solemn
examinations, let me advise you to call forth the laws of God, and rules of
godliness successively and distinctly, and so to compare the several periods of
your lives with them, both in the matter and manner of your actions. Has the
matter of my life born accord to this, that, and the other precepts? or has
there not been an attempt on, and violation of both this and that, and the
other prohibition? For the manner of my actions; have they been done upon that
account, and with those aims, affections, etc. that these rules prescribe me,
and whereupon they promise a blessing to me? By this course, Conscience will be
1. Less complicated in her work, through the artifices of sin or Satan. They
usually hide their deceits under the covert of generals. This unravels all the
clue. 2. More complete in her witness. For by this means many of those actions,
which lay out of sight upon her records, are suggested by and to Conscience
afresh. 3 More cogent in her witness; and it being more particular, it will be
more prevalent with us; when Conscience can now say to us, as Job's friends to
him, Lo this, I have searched it, so it is; hear then at, and know it for thy
good, Job 5.27. 4, More constant in her witness, and more quick henceforth and
ready to her work. Her frequent converses with these rules and comparings
therewith, form her unto a more habitual promptness, and present activity to
cherish good, and check evil, while it is yet but in the egg and entrance.

3. Stay thy Conscience with the rule, and upon the reflections, which thou now
make. Let her not give a glance only, and so go off, but consider, (Hebr.)
Set your heart on your ways; as David, I considered; (Heb.) I thoughted my
ways, Hag. 1.5, 7. Psalm. 119.59. By this means, if consideration be taken up in
making such comparisons, your work will thrive upon your hands, to a greater
extension and a more gracious intension. Consideration will fetch in the whole
compass of Gods commands and our conversations. If Conscience reflect upon an
evil, this will rip it up in all its circumstances, as it did in the Patriarchs
and pious David; If upon a good this will run down its enquiry into the root
and efficient of it, and then run it up again into the exemplar and end of it,
and so returns fraught with repentance on that hand, with rejoicing on this,
Genesis 42.21, 22. Psalm. 51.3, 4, etc. 2 Cor. 4.2. c. 2.17. 1.12. It Is necessary
then that there should be some immoration of our Conscience, in an intent
consideration, when we are employed in these self-converses. The worth hereof
is great; the efficacy of such reflections depending eminently thereupon. David
thoughted his ways, and immediately turns his feet to Gods word. The Preacher
considers, and is forthwith cured of his trouble and tentation. Whereas others
through inconsiderateness run on in sin, and some are held upon the rack of
sorrow and anguish, Psalm. 119.59. Eccles. 9.1. Isa. 1.3. Psalm. 73.21, 22. Let
me add a fourth.

4. Shake off whatsoever will retard you in, or retain you from this work. Sin
and Satan will be suggesting disswasives and determents. Slothfulness will be
sticking at the difficulty and diligence which must be used. The sensual and
sensitive part will be startling and bogling at the displeasingness and danger
of it, as that which will hazard all her ease and self-enjoyment. Yea, your
selves will be but too shy of such a duty, if you shake not off all such
insinuations and suggestions, and set to it with all your might.

3. Herein do I exercise my self (says Paul) to have always a Conscience void
of offense, Act. 24.16. And elsewhere he speaks of it in the present tense,
(Not we had, or shall have, but) we have a good Conscience, Heb. 13.18. And
that is the good Conscience which gives the quick reflex. It is true, I
acknowledge, that your actions are quick and sudden in their motions; but
Conscience is as quick and sudden, and though those may have gotten the start
of her as Cushi did of Ahimaaz; yet she can easily overtake and outrun them,
as Ahimaaz did Cushi; because she runs (as he did) by the way of the Plain.
There are many more things to interrupt their motion, than hers. Truth is, 1.
When an action is yet but in purpose, or in the proposal, Conscience should
reflect immediately (as she is capacitated accordingly) to promote it, if good,
as in Solomon; or prevent it, if evil, as it did in Joseph, 1 King. 5.8. Genesis
39.9. 2. Or when an action is passing from the inward intention to outward
execution, Conscience should catch it by the heel, in the place of the breaking
forth of Children, as Jacob did his Brother; and as being Gods Sentinel, should
require its pass and certificate, and remand it back, if it it be bad, or
rescue it from its assailants, if it be good as Paul did, Hos. 12.3. Romans 7.15,
-- 24. 3. Or is an action past forth, without her animadvertence? she should
forthwith pursue it, and put the arrest of her reflection upon it; and be
asking what have I done; Or ask us, as Joab asked David, What have thou done?
Jer. 8.6. 2 Samuel 3.24. To this end, labor for tenderness of Conscience (of
which hereafter) which will soon reflect upon the least touch and pressure, 2
King. 22.19. But alas! where is the Conscience that has not abused us, more or
less, in all these? who can say my heart is clean? therefore urge her (2) To
reckon with thee, at least, in the close of every day. Conscience should be
still every day, a doing with us; but there are two seasons in the day, wherein
we especially should have to do with Conscience; viz. in the morning, that she
may tell us what we have to do this day; and in the evening, that she tell us
what we have done. Commune with your own heart upon your bed, Psalm. 4.4. It Is
good communing with our selves, and speaking to Conscience, before we compose
our selves to sleep. Job reflected every day upon the carriage of his Sons, and
therefore (no doubt) upon the carriage of himself. Thus did Job continually
(Heb.) all the days, Job 1.5. This is the way to keep your accounts both more
short, and more sure. Well, if conscience be shy or sullen, plead the cause
with her as the very heathen could do Quotidie apud me causam dico, etc. v.
Senec. de Ira l. 3. c. 36.
, and then put her to the question. What good have I done, or else declined
this day? or if she return thee, that thy actions have been good for the
matter; Return upon her yet again: Yea, but in what manner did I it? upon what
motives? with what mind? in what method? etc. So, what evil have I committed,
or cherished, or else given check to or crucified this day? or if this and that
were not evil in it self; have not I wounded it by some evil circumstances?
Believe it, Christians, it would be of excellent advantage to your actual
growth and eternal good, if you had such a compendium of sins and duties by
you, or rather in you, as Conscience might call it over every evening, and
comparing your employments that day with it, might be able to witness clearly
your estate and actions of the day now past you.

4. Show kindness to thy Conscience, He that hears reproof gets
understanding, (Heb.) possesses an heart, Prove. 15.32. Be not of those, that
can reflect on a mote in their brother's eye; but not on a beam if in their own
eye. The more censorious abroad, the more blind or (at best) blear-eyed will
Conscience be at ^ome. The kind treatments of a self-reflecting Conscience will
produce most circumspection in her, and most compassion toward others, Mat.
7.3, 4. Gal. 6.1, 3. Welcome her reflections; there is not so much vinegar as
oil in them. If she chideth, reproves, it is but (like Jeremy) to keep thee
from ruin. Therefore, do not smite her, and put her in prison, as Pashur did by
that Prophet. She may so forbear reflecting, and for a while fall to
remorslesness. But assure thy self, if she forbears thee now, it is to fetch a
greater blow at thee hereafter, Jer. 20.2. Romans 1.28.

5. Joseph's Brethren and Pharaoh's Butler? Genesis 42.21. cum 7. etc. 41.9. cum
8. (2.) There are some speaking portions of Scriptures and Sermons that
enlighten her for reflecting, and are a special means: Do not baffle with
these. For how knows thou but there may be the same spiritual and saving
effect obtained o^ thee, as has been on others? Heb. 4.12. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
(3.) There be many speaking perswasives to enduce and engage thee to reflect,
and serve for motives; do not baulk these.

I have set many before you already, and shall only subjoyn these. 1. God sees
whether thou dallyest in it; and his revenge wi^^ be severe, if thou do not
reflect in season, Psalm. 50.21, 22. Jer. 8.6, etc. Hos. 7.2. 2. It Is a grievous
sin to decline it; thou do not act like a man; thou art brutish in thy
knowledge yea below the brutes; it is not only vanity, but a sore travel, Isa.
1.3. Eccles. 4.8. 3. What good success may thou arrive to by diligence?
David's reflection ended in his reformation; Paul's in eminent rejoicing; the
Jews in the reception of their prapers, remission and pardon of their sins, and
restoring of them into signal favor, both with God and man, Psalm. 119.59. 2
Cor. 1.12. 1 King. 8.47 -- 51.

Q. 11. How manifold is Conscience?

The definition of Conscience being dispatched, the distribution regularly
follows to be next enquired into. Herein, I may not be too nice or acurate; but
attending the design of a practical Casuist, I shall accordingly guide my self
in the distribution hereof. Thus more generally (as both common experience, and
clear Scripture evidence instruct us). There is (1) the good Conscience, Heb.
13.18. 1 Pet. 3.16, 21. (2) The evil Conscience, Heb. 10.22. The good and evil
conscience may be considered and distributed, either (1) according to the
stated habitude: Or (2) according to the several acts of men's Consciences.

First, if we consider the state, or according to the stated habitude of men's
Consciences; so the Conscience may be called good or evil, either (1) in an
ethical and moral; Or (2) in an Evangelical and Spiritual sense.

1. Ethically good, or good upon a common account; so is the Conscience, which
from a principle of moral righteousness, is habitually disposed toward, and
actually discharges its offices according to Ethical or Moral principles. In
this sense many Pagans had, and Paul before his Conversion was not without a
good Conscience, Act. 23.1. I have lived in all good Conscience before God
until this day: i.e. I have lived up to the light of my Conscience: Or as the
Dutch Annotators Ad locum
, I have served God uprightly: i.e. without hypocrisy, according to the
knowledge I had.

2. Evangelically good, or good upon the Christian account; so only is that
Conscience which from a spiritual principle of renovation, is habitually
disposed toward, and actually discharges its offices, according to evangelical
principles. Paul therefore incloseth this, between charity out of a pure heart
and faith unfeigned. 1 Timothy 1.5. Let me add, that the same Conscience (as that
of Paul before his effectual calling, and as is commonly found in Moral persons
which we may and do call good; sensu ethico, in an ethick sense, we must call
an evil Conscience; sensu Evangelico in an Evangelical sense. For so still it
is, an evil Conscience, till it be purged from dead works by the blood of
Christ, to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14, 10, 22.

There is a double goodness found with the Conscience, evangelically good; a
goodness of purity, and a goodness of peace; or a goodness of sincerity, and of
security, (as a practical Writer of ours speaks Sheffield Good Cons. c. ^. p.
26.
); Or a goodness of integrity, and of tranquillity; (as another Dykes Good
Cons. p. 20. See Ames. de Consc. l. 1. c. 12.
). Hence there is (1) the purified or pure Conscience, instanced 2 Timothy 1.3.
And (2) the pacified or peaceable Conscience, intimated, Phil. 4.7. Opposite to
this double goodness of Conscience, there is a double evil of defilement to
sin, habitual and allowed; and 2. of distress, to sorrow and anguish of heart.
Accordingly there is (1) the defiled Conscience propounded, Tit. 1.15. And (2)
the disquiet Conscience pointed at, Prove. 12.25.

It must be herewith remembered; that neither this twofold evil, nor that
twofold goodness do always co-exist in the same Conscience. There may be
purity, yet no peace; and peace of Conscience (such as it is) yet no purity.
There may be an habitually, impure, or defiled Conscience, which yet is not
distressed; And there may be a distressed Conscience which is not habitually
impure or defiled; as will be seen in the further progress of this discourse.
Oh happy conjunction! when both goodnesses, of peace, and of purity, of
sincerity and of security, do meet in the fame Conscience Faelix conscienti^ in
qua osculatae sunt pax and justitia. Bern. de inter. dom.
. Happy, when both evils, of defilement and of distress, of transgression and
of trouble, are cast out, and kept out of the doors of Confcience together.

Secondly, the good and evil Conscience may be distributed according to the
several acts of Conscience: viz. Either 1. as it apprehends and dictates
matters of law or right, where by it comes to an issue in judgment. Or 2. as
it applys and draws them down to the matter before it for judgment. Both which
it does either firmly and strongly, or but feebly and weakly. Agreeable
whereunto, there is (1) the weak and infirm Conscience. And (2) the
well-inabled, firm or strong Conscience. Of which see 1 Cor. 8.7, 10, 12. Romans
15.1.

As Conscience (1) apprehends and dictates laws duly and aright, or defectively
and amiss. So far (as to this) Conscience is either due, right and good. Here
is the true Conscience. Or 2. defective wrong and evil. Here is the false
Conscience; between which as participating sometimes of this, sometimes of that
extreme, stands the 3d. probable Conscience.

1. If Conscience dictates laws duly and aright, these laws it dictateth, are
either imprinted, and drawn forth upon the mind within, and so are known by the
light of natural reason. Or 2. imparted, by divine manifestation from without,
and so are known only by a star of greater magnitude, the light of
supra-natural revelation. With accord to this there is (1) the natural
Conscience; and (2) the enlightened Conscience. And we find the Apostle
sometimes appealing that, and sometimes this, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3, 9, 15, 16, 19.
Know ye not? etc. i.e. Do not your Consciences tell ye as much?

2. If Conscience dictates laws defectively and amiss, then it is either 1.
through the darkness and ignorance thereof; or 2. through the delusion and
error, or through the doubtfulness and hesitancy thereof. Agreeably, there is
(1) the ignorant or blind Conscience, as some phrase it, though improperly
enough; (2) and the erroneous Conscience; (3) and the hesitating or doubtful
Conscience, Ephesians. 4.18. Jam. 1.13. cum 16. Mat. 14.30, 31.

But in that these doubts may be, and often are of various and different
degrees, therefore the doubtful Conscience may be, and is variously
distinguished: There is (1) the opining; (2) the scrupulous; and (3) the
doubtful Conscience, strictly so called; which are (in brief) thus differenced.
The doubtful Conscience entertains not either part of the matter in question
before it; so as either to affirm, or deny it, but hesitates and hangs as it
were between both. The scrupulous and opining Conscience do both close with one
or other part; either affirming on the one hand, or denying on the other. The
opining does this but feebly, the scrupulous does it vexatiously. The
scrupulous Conscience is by this eminently differenced from the opining, that
its close with one part or other is still conjoined with some anxious suspicion
of, and solicitation to the other part.

As Conscience (2) applys and draws down matters of law to the matter of fact
before it for judgment, either 1 aright, or 2 amiss, well or ill; so the
Conscience (as to this) is either 1 aright and good; or 2 amiss and bad. This
application is not perfected, but in and by several acts; some whereof respect
our good, others our evil actions. According to these different acts, (of which
Q. 7.) Conscience is by some distributed; and so there is the accusing, the
excusing Conscience, etc. But this I purposly omit. And in that Conscience is
denominated either good or evil (as to this respect) according to its discharge
of these acts and offices; I shall therefore distribute it rather with relation
had 1 to the manner; 2. and to the measure of its discharge of these acts.

1. If we consider the manner; Conscience proceeds in these acts and offices;
either 1 entirely and uprightly; or 2 hypocritically: Either 1 faithfully, or 2
unfaithfully: Either 1 inoffensively, or 2. offensively. And thus there is (1)
the entire Heart or Conscience, Psalm. 78.72. And (2) the hypocritical, Jer.
42.20. (1) The faithful Conscience, 2 Chronicles. 19.9. (2) And the unfaithful,
Psalm. 5.9. (1) The inoffensive Conscience, Act. 24.16. (2) And the offensive, 1
Cor. 8.7, 10. Hereof the first in each pair is an evil Conscience; the second
in each pair, is a good Conscience.

2. As concerns the measure of this application; these acts are either, 1 by
and according to the just standard, and so far the Conscience, whose acts these
are, is good. Or 2. below the just standard, and measure in the defect. Or 3.
above and beyond it in the excess; And so far the Conscience, that thus applys,
is bad.

With respect to the former extreme in the defect there is a double vice of
Conscience. There is 1 the sluggishness and oscitancy thereof, which respects
principally the employment of Conscience. 2. The senselesness and obduracy
thereof, which respects (principally) the impressions on Conscience; Opposite
to the former, is the sedulity of Conscience, in its transactions and
operations; Opposite to the latter, is the softness and tenderness of
Conscience, with respect to its object. So that here are 1 the sluggish
Conscience, Luke 24.25. And 2 the senseless Conscience, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. on the
one hand, which are evil: And the 1 stirring Conscience, Exodus 35.21. And 2 the
soft or tender Conscience, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. on the other hand, which are good.

I shall only add, that as with respect to the former vices, which are of
different degrees, the evil Conscience may be distinguished into that which 1
is sleepy, Romans 11.8. 2. and that which is stupefied, Isa. 6.10. 3. and that
which is seared, 1 Timothy 4.2. So, with respect to the latter virtues, the good
Conscience may be also differently distinguished, according to those different
degrees. And so there is 1 the awakened Conscience, Cant. 5.2. 2 the attentive
Conscience, Deuteronomy. 32.46. 3 The attrite or eminently tender Conscience, Psalm.
51.17.

With respect to the latter extreme in the excess, there is a twofold evil of
Conscience: 1. There is the dread and terrors of Conscience, flying and
declining Gods presence, Genesis 3.10. 2 There is the despair and horrors of
Conscience, accompanied with a fearful looking for of punishment and judgment
Mat. 27.3, 4, 5. Heb. 10.27. So that there is 1 the distracting and troubled
Conscience Prove. 15.13. 2 The despairing and tormenting Conscience, Genesis 4.13,
14. Opposite hereunto, there is a twofold good of Conscience. There is 1 the
acquiescence and rest of Conscience, Mat. 11.29. 2 The assurance and rejoicing
of Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. Agreeably whereunto there is 1 the appeased and
quiet Conscience, Psalm. 116.7. 2 The assured and comforted Conscience, Heb.
10.22. Prove. 15.15.

These things will require and receive a^ fuller enquiry into, and explication
of them in the ensuing tract. This Corollary shall conclude the present
question. Since the good and the evil Conscience are so manifold; the greater
is your work, and should be your watchfulness for the obtaining and ordering of
a good Conscience, and for the preventing and purging out of an evil Conscience.

CHAP. II. Of the good and evil Conscience according to their stated habitude.
Q. 1. Whether we are to look upon our Consciences as such that are by nature
evil?

THat we may prevent mistakes, some distinctions must be premised of this term
by nature: It may be and sometimes is understood for, 1. That which is by and
according to the constitution of Man's nature; as when we say, Man does by
nature consist of a true body, and a reasonable soul. Thus whatsoever is a
principle or part of Man's nature is said to be natural to him. 2. For that
which is by and according to a consecution or emanation from Man's nature. As
when we say, Man is by nature endowed with an Understanding, Will, etc. Thus
the powers and properties of Man's nature are said to be natural to him. 3. Or
for that which is by and according to a connection with Man's nature; as Paul
says, We were by nature children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. This condition was
connexed with our nature; we were subject to the revenging justice of God, as
soon as we received the nature of man. Thus the pravity and pollution of Man's
nature, is said to be natural to him.

The import of this question is not, Whether the Conscience be evil either in
regard of its natural constitution or essence: In this sense it must needs be
good; because it is by the special efficience and gift of God, Job 32.8. Chap.
20.7. Or 2. in regard of any natural consecution or emanation from its nature.
Thus it cannot be bad, but good, for the same reason; because it comes from
the blessed God. whose work is perfect, Deuteronomy, 32.4. But 3. in regard of a
natural connection: i.e. Whether Conscience in man, by and according to the
condition which is connexed with his nature, be morally evil or sinful, yea or
no?

That every man's Conscience is by nature sinful (in the sense last mentioned)
appears.

First, From the notorious defilement of every man by nature. These
propositions are of Apostolical proof, That all have sinned; and that they are
all under sin: That all the world is become guilty before God: And that they
are all by nature children of wrath, Romans 3.9, 19, 23. Ephesians. 2.3. What is man
that he should be clean? and that which is born of a woman that he should be
righteous? says Eliphaz. All persons, and all the parts of man are impure and
defiled, Job 15.14, 15, 16. Romans 3.9 -- 19. And who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? To them that are defiled is nothing pure: but even their mind
and conscience is defiled, Job 14.4. Tit. 1.15. The leaven of sin has
overspread the whole lump. The leprosy of sin has left no faculty untainted.
The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. It reaches from the crown
of the head to the sole of the foot: So that the Conscience is corrupt as well
as the corporeal part, 1 Cor. 5.6. Isa. 1.4, 5, 6.

Secondly, From the notable declarations in the Covenant of Grace. What on Gods
part is therein more clearly proposed than this? I will put a new spirit within
you; I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh. I will circumcise your hearts; I will put my law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, etc. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. Chap. 36.26.
Jer. 31.33. Deuteronomy. 30.6. And what can on man's part then be more clearly supposed
than this? That the heart of man is of a stony, adamantine and uncircumcised
temper; without the sculpture of any saving truth, e're grace takes him within
the Covenant. And surely by nature, the sons of men are all strangers from the
Covenants of Promise, Zach. 7.12. Jer. 9.26, 27. 2 Cor. 3.3. Ephesians. 2.12. cum 3.

Thirdly, From the known design of the Commandments and conveyance of Grace: A
good Conscience is the end of Gods Commandments, 1 Timothy 1.5. 1 Pet. 3.16. If
Conscience were good by nature, how should the goodness thereof be the end and
effect of the Gospel of Grace? A good Conscience was not found by the Gospel,
in the regions where it came, but was the fruit of the Gospel. The Gospel was
sent amongst them, not as supposing their Conscience already good; but to set
them right. and leave them good whom it found bad, Act. 26.18, 20. 1 Cor.
14.24, 25* Heb. 4.12. A good Conscience is the effect of the grace of faith in
Christ; God purifying men's hearts by faith, Act. 15.9. Heb. 10.22. Before the
coming of faith then, the Conscience is defiled; To the unbeliever nothing
(...) pure. And manifest enough it is, that faith it Christ never grew in the
garden of nature, when most pure from the weeds of sin, which the Fall has
brought in; but is an eflux of divine grace, and an especial gift of God, Tit.
1.15. Heb. 11.6. Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.29.

Fourthly, From the necessary diffusion of sanctifying grace throughout the
whole nature of Man; The God of peace sanctify you wholly: the whole then was
sinful. And I pray God your whole spirit, and soul and body, be preserved
blameless, etc. The upper region of Man's soul then, and which is rational; as
well as the lower region, and which is more sensitive were stained and
culpable. The Conscience therefore cannot but be corrupted, 1 These. 5.23. The
Conscience could neither require nor receive the renovation of grace, if it
were righteous by nature: But renovation passes through all the parts and
powers; Behold all things are become new. This is to put on the new man, and to
put off the old man. Sin did, and Sanctification now does extend it self over
all the man, especially the mind. To be renewed is eminently in the spirit of
our mind, 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24.

Fifthly, From the noted derivation of a good Conscience to us, by means of
Christ: Till his blood be sprinkled on us, the Conscience is not sanctified in
us, as is implied Heb. 9.14. It Is the blood of Christ, Who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God, which purges your Consciences from
dead works to serve the living God, Hebr. 9.14. Conscience is impure then, till
Christ purges it: It Is he freeth it from sin, and fitteth it for Gods service.
But by nature we are all without Christ; alienated and enemies in our minds by
wicked works. Men do not come by nature, but are called by grace unto the
fellowship of the Son Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. cum 3. Col. 1.21. 1 Cor. 1.9.

Sixthly, From the notable defilement of Conscience in the discharge of its
acts and offices. Now laesae actiones laesas facultates indicant. It must needs
be a maimed and diseased power, that puts forth such maimed and diseased
performances. These I shall briefly instance in the next Question, and judge
needful, to pluck down the pride of Man, and to preserve you from the dangerous
precipices of many, who cry up Conscience, and its conduct for Salvation,
instead of calling men to Christ, and to the conduct of the Scriptures.

Q. 2. What are the evils of Man's Conscience naturally, which we should be
heedful of, and and humbled under?

Though I cannot fully open that sink of sin, which lies here, (a work that is
more accurately done by an acute and able hand Anth. Burgess Orig. sin, par. 3.
c. 2.. 1 -- 8.
); and though a further manifestation hereof must follow in our ventilation of
the several sorts of an evil Conscience, of which hereafter; yet something
shall be done, for the discovery of this evil and putrefaction.

Conscience may be considered, either as it is to conserve and ark up laws and
rules of practice, or as it is to come and apply these laws and rules. It Is
miserably corrupt in both. How far it falls short as to the former, will be of
particular discussion hereafter, when I come to speak of the natural
Conscience; Oh how it is darkened, depraved, disabled! as concerns the matter of
an holy life in this world, and the means of an happy life in the world to
come. How are men alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them, because of the blindness of their heart! Romans 1.21. Ephesians. 4.18. 1 Pet.
1.14.

The main concernment of Conscience is to apply rules of practice. And here how
deplorably corrupt it is. (1) Sometimes it does not apply at all. How many
practical notions are swimming in the head, that never sink into the heart, and
the heart is never set to consider of or concoct them into practice! How much
science and confidence find we in these, Romans 2.19. -- 23. but no Conscience;
large and sound apprehensions; but little or no self-application. 1. The evil
of Conscience is as to this so eminent, that a general command is not thought
enough by God; but it must be particular and expressive, Thou shall have no
other Gods, etc. Thou shall not covet, etc. Exodus 20.3. -- 18. The parable, as
pertinent as it was to David's case, never pinched David's Conscience; the
Prophet himself was fain to do the office of David's Conscience for him: And
Nathan said to David, Thou art the man, etc. 2 Samuel 12.1. -- 14. 2. When it
does apply oft-times, it is not articulately and time^y: Christ has told
Peter, Before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice: But the Cock
crows the first and second time, e're Conscience in Peter makes application of
this advice, Mar. 14.30, 68, 72. Conscience should have applied in Joseph's
Brethren, before their contract and his captivity in Egypt; but till themselves
are captives, their Conscience was much-what silent, Genesis 37.20, etc. cum.
42.21, 22, 3. Or else it does not apply so au^horitatively and thoroughly as it
should. Conscience in man has the command and empire; ^ut how often is
concupiscence too hard for Conscience? and carnal appetitions subjugate
Conscience its application; so that bad men ^eep down the truth in
unrighteousness, and ^are not to retain God in their knowledge: and good men are
sometimes captivated, as ^o the law of their minds, by and unto the law of sin,
which warreth in their members, Romans 1.18, 21, 28. Romans 7.23, 25. 4. Or not so^
abidingly; Conscience applys, and Felix trembles; but the fit is soon over;
Conscience the Preacher in the bosom must not be attended, nor Christ's Preacher
at the Bar heard out, till a better convenience, Act. 24.25. Conscience is at
work with Pharaoh, and while he is heated in the furnace of successive
judgments, Conscience is harkening and applying; but after he is out of the
fire (like iron) his heart grows the harder, and less apt to receive an
impression, Exodus 8.1^ 32, etc. But more particularly.

Conscience makes application, either pe^ modum testis; or per modum judicis;
as a witness or as a judge; and in both it is very bad.

1. As a witness, see how wicked it is. 1. (...) registring how few of men's
faults does i^ file up and book down! So that Davi^ brings it to a question,
Who can understan^ his errors, Psalm. 19.12. But if there be a vertuou^action,
or but an appearance, this is forth with put upon the file and record: witne^^
the common practice, besides the curse of the Pharisees, Luke 11.42. Mat.
23.23. 2. (...) reflecting: How few reflections are made up on our actions! how
few returns are ma^^ upon our hearts! insomuch as God says, hearkened and
heard, and no man repented him (...) his wickedness, saying, what have I done?
Je^ 8.6. No man put Conscience to the question touching his conversation. 3. In
ruminatin^ or considering: How defective and diseased (...) Conscience here
likewise, as the consequents do evidently demonstrate! insomuch as God is fain
to call once and again for it. Now consider this ye that forget God: Now
consider your ways, etc. And does often complain of the general want of it.
None considers in his heart: They consider not in their hearts, that I
remember all their wickedness; now their own doings have beset them about; They
say not in their heart (in the confluence of mercies) let us now fear the Lord
our God that gives the rain, the former and latter rain in his season, etc.
Psalm. 50.22. Hag. 1.5. Isa. 44.19. Hos. 7.2. Jer. 5.24. 4. In reporting: Oh how
corrupt and partial Conscience is in this! Not a word does Samuel hear from
Saul (till necessitated thereunto) in aggravating his sin; but how many in
apologizing for it. Not a syllable is to be seen in the Pharisees plea and
prayer for self-judging, or for self-abasing; but the substance of it is for
self-justifying and self-advancing, 1 Samuel 13.11, 12. Chap. 15.13, 15, 20, etc.

2. Conscience makes application as a judge; and herein it miscarrieth likewise:
How severe is it ordinarily abroad! but how slight at home, further than it is
sanctified! Are there not many who judge even the mote in their brothers eye,
that yet can indulge a beam meanwhile in their own eyes, Mat. 7.2, 3, 4. And
damn the same things in others, which they do themselves! Romans 2.1. etc. The
faithful themselves have not been free under a pre^ailing temptation. Has
Tamar played the strumpet? Bring her forth, says Judah, and let her be burnt.
But never a blow is given by Conscience, as concerned his sin and folly with
her, till the Bracelets and staff, and Signet are produced, Genesis 38.13 -- 27.
David's anger was greatly kindled, and as the Lord lives (says he) the man
shall surely die, that had stolen the poor man's lamb, in Nathans Parable. But
meanwhile his Conscience had no sense of, nor gave sentence for his own
provocation, which run parallel therewith; till the Prophet presses it and
puts it home upon him, 2 Samuel 12.5, 6, 7, etc.

The judgment Conscience is to make is, either with relation to former things
and times, or else to future.

1. With relation to former things and times Conscience is to accuse or excuse.
But in each it is (ordinarily) very evil; 1. Sometimes it is out in the the
matter; It excuses and covers, where it should accuse and condemn. They all
with one consent began to make excuse, Luke 14.18. where their Conscience
should have been accusing; and they have been manifesting their repentance for
their sin and making ready for the supper. It accuses and condemns sometimes
where it should rather excuse, yea commend: Ye said also, behold what a
weariness is it; and ye have snuff^^ at it, says the Lord of hosts, etc.
Conscience counts and judges Gods service, and a godly strictness, profitless,
painful, irksome, evil, etc. Mal. 1.13. Job 21.15. Chap. 35.3. Amos 8.5. Exodus
5.2. 2. Sometimes it is outs in the measure; generally it is in one extreme or
other, either over or under. Conscience accused Cain, as also Judas; but to
that extremity, as ended in despair and horror. It accused Ahab and Felix; but
not as might infer the hatred of their sins, or alteration of their states,
Genesis 4.13, etc. Mat. 27.3, 4, 5. 1 King. 21.29. cum Chap. 22. Act. 24.25, 26,
27. 3. Most times it is out in the method and circumstance of time: Conscience
should be checking and curbing in the first motion of sin within; but
concupiscence ordinarily conceives and brings forth, e're Conscience
checketh it, or censureth the sinner. Conscience should have anticipated that
act of pride and carnal confidence in David's numbering the people, at least
should have been accusing while that act was a consummating: But nine months
and twenty days are run out, e're Conscience gives him a rebuke, And David's
heart smote him, after that he had numbered the people. Conscience condemned the
sin of Judas, but not till he saw the condemning of Jesus, 2 Samuel 24.8, 10.
Mat. 27.3. 4. At all times it is out in the manner, if God should be severe and
weigh it in the scales of his Justice: Who can say I have made my heart clean;
I am pure from my sin? That his Conscience has discharged its office, with
that freedom and faithfulness, with that openess and holiness, with that
sincerity and self-denial, etc. as is due from us? Who can understand his
errors? Prove. 20.9. Eccles. 7.20. Psalm. 19.12.

2. With relation to future things and tims, Conscience is authoritatively to
direct and determine; 1. Subordinately under God and as from God, as the chief
Governor; 2. Supreamly to and for God as the chief good and end. But alas! how
sinful is it here likewise!

1. How little does it attend! insomuch as God complains, None says, restore;
and calls out, Who will hearken and hear for the time to come? Isa. 42.23. How
few are there that (with Mary) ponder those things in their hearts, which
concern the aftertimes and their eternal peace. But how many that hold fast
deceit, that refuse to return, and set their heart on their iniquity, rather
than to seek out their duty: And because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them
to do evil, Luke 2.19. Jer. 8.5. Chap. 5.3. Hos. 4.8. Eccles. 8.11.

2. How lost is its authority! Conscience has much-what left its subordination
to God and his word: Lo, they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what
wisdom is in them, Jer. 8.9. Chap. 6.10. The Commandments of Men are received,
and the Commandments of God are rejected by the Pharisees; and Conscience is
pretended and pleaded, Mat. 15.1. -- 10. Mar. 7.1. -- 14. Conscience has much
what lost also its superiority over the Will and Affections, which it should
overruled and order. God calls, and Conscience calls, Return ye every one from
his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good. And they said, There is
no hope; but we will walk aster our own devices, and we will do every one the
imagination of his evil heart. And so Conscience is often enslaved, though it
cannot be wholly extinguished by corrupt affections, Jer. 18.11, 12. Chap.
2.24, 25. Romans 1.18, 21, etc.

3. How low is its aspect! Conscience should order every business to be done;
as for and as before God; and should hold back from sin, as that which
displeases, dishonors, and is contrary to God. But alas! how far distant
are men's counsels! which abundantly speak the defilement of Conscience. Ahab
humbles himself, but it is to anticipate the sufferings denounced from God, not
in abhorrence of the sin done against God. Jehu reforms, but it is to ensure the
Government, not to exalt Godliness. Conscience calls the Pharisees to prayer
and almesdeeds; but it is to be seen of men, rather than serve God. (Calls the
People and the Priests to fasting at some times, to feasting at others) But
keeps them within themselves, carries them not up to God, as their end, in
either, 1 King. 21.21, ad finem. 2 King. 10.28. cum. 31. Mat. 6.2, etc. Zach.
7.5, 6.

4. How languid are its acts! Conscience is 1. to inform and dictate what we
are to do, what to decline; but this it does many times falsely, most times
ineffectually, calling evil good, and good evil; putting darkness for light,
and light for darkness: Or if it presents our duty right, yet not so as to
prevail to the doing thereof regularly, Isa. 5.20. Romans 1.21. 2. Conscience is
to engage and bind us from iniquity to duty. But this it does, either very
feebly, or forbears and lets fall its bonds; in an affliction happily these
bonds seem fast and firm; but the heart is not right with God, nor remains
steadfast with him, and they soon fall of again. And as for the word spoken to
them in the name of the Lord (when the rod is over, they are ready to say), We
will not hearken to thee, but we will certainly do whatsoever seems good in our
own eyes, etc. Hos. 5.15. chap. 4.6. Ps. 78.34, 37. Jer. 44.16, 17. 3.
Conscience is to impell and instigate: but alas! how faintly does it this, or
else forbears it! insomuch as the Prophet complains, There is none that stireth
up himself to take hold of thee, Isa. 64.7. And the best of Believers have
sound frequent cause of awakening and alaruming their Conscience, Psalm. 57.8.
chap. 103.1, 2. 4. Yea, Conscience is ready to engage against all this; so
corrupt it is as to be angry with the strict and searching Truths of God; and
with Ahab to quarrel with Gods Elijahs, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? And to
conclude with him against the messengers of God, as he touching Micajah, He
never prophesies good concerning me, but evil: Yea, to hate the good, and love
the evil; to hate him that rebukes in the gate; to hate the light, and will
not come to the light lest his deeds should be reproved, 1 King. 21.20. chapter
22.8. Mich. 3.2. Amos 5.10. Joh. 3.19, 20.

How extreme then is the evil of Conscience further than it is purged by the
blood of Christ! What cause have we then of continual humiliation and of
highest circumspection! How careful should we be to get Conscience cleansed and
cured! which leads us to the next Question.

Q. 3. How may we be cured of an evil Conscience?

The cure of the several evils or sicknesses of Conscience, as also the cure of
the several sorts of an evil Conscience must be expected by you, and will be
endeavored by me, more particularly hereafter. The cure of the evil state of
the Conscience is the concernment I have now before me; I suppose you sensible,
that the state thereof is bad. In order to the setting right of it; I advise
that,

I. You submit to your Convictions. Joh. 16.8. Genesis 6.3. Hos. 4.4, 5. See (1)
Thou do not stifle or suppress them: They held the truth down in
unrighteousness, and liked not to retain God in their knowledge, Romans 1. What
became of it? Therefore God gave them over to a reprobate mind, And now
farewell Convictions, farewell Conscience, till they feel the effect of such a
constupration (happily) in eternal condemnation; they are filled with all
manner of unrighteousness, and are fatting for eternal ruin, ver. 18, 21, 24,
28, 29, etc. This is the hazard thou runnest, especially upon iterated acts of
rebellion, Prove. 1.24. -- 33. Psalm. 81.11, 12. Mat. 13.14, 15. Prove. 29.1. And
though justice may not take this advantage against thee, yet every stifled
Conviction will now add to the hardening of thy Conscience, and to the
augmenting of thy shame, sorrow and selfconfusion, when God shall awaken
Conscience, Zeph. 7.11, 12. Romans 2.4, 5. Jer. 31.19. (2) Thou do not sit down
or sit still under them. Is Conscience convinced, how can thou be quiet? Are
these chains to sleep in? What! condemned of thy self, and yet sit quiet? What
if God should condemn thee too! Methinks we should hear thee crying out with
the Jailer and those Jews, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Sirs, what must
I do to be saved? And like the two blind men, the more others are complaining,
the more should you be crying, Tit. 3.11. 1 John 3.20. Act. 2.37. c. 16.29, 30.
Mat. 20.30, 31. I say therefore to you, as the Lepers said among themselves,
Why sit you here until you die? Arise and be doing if Conscience kill you, you
can but die, 2 King. 7.3, 4. (3) See thou do not shift them off: They were
convicted by their own Conscience, ( Joh. 8.) but it came to no good, they
stealing away from Christ, and shifting away from Conscience, every one to his
course of life. Cain baffles Conscience with building Cities, and a crowd of
secular businesses. Saul is melancholy (happily Convictions might be upon him
from the Lord, though this was not all), and he must have the Ministrel, the
music, Joh. 8.9. Genesis 4.15, 17. 1 Samuel 16.23. See thou be not diverted from
thy Convictions by any company, especially which is sinful; or by any secular
contrivance; and that thou do not dismiss them, as Felix did his, till another
convenience, whose Conscience as far as appears did ever after contract more
guilt and filthiness, Act. 24.25, 26, 27. To day therefore while it is called
to day, hear Gods voice, and do not harden your hearts, lest to your voluntary
hardening and aversation from Conviction, God add a judicial hardening, and
afford you no more Convictions, Hebr. 3.7. -- 16.4, 7.

II. Speak to Conscience, Cain) What have thou done? As ever you would have
Conscience thoroughly salved, you must thoroughly search; let your probe go to
the bottom of its ulcerated nature; let thy spirit make diligent search, Psalm.
4.4. Jer. 8.6. Genesis 4.10. Psalm. 77.6. Having searched it, speak to it; tell it
of its sick, sad, perilous and pitiful estate; tell it of its rottenness and
Gods revenging justice. Show it its extensive diseases, and the eternal death
that will ensue without its effectual change. Speak to it of the searcher of
hearts, and that he sees all its sins and shifts. God often imputes the
sinfulness of men's hearts to this, that they say not in their hearts, they set
not to their heart, and particularly that they say heart not to their; (Heb.)
that I remember all their wickedness, Jer. 5.24. Isa. 44.19. Hos. 7.2. Marg.
Yea, and suffer Conscience to speak to you, while it tells you of your sins, or
of its sinfulness. The knowledge of your case is a fair step toward your cure.
Do not silence or suspend Conscience, or shut its mouth, or thy ears, against
its clamors. Conscience calls to you, as Jotham to the men of Shechem, Hearken
unto me that God may hearken unto you; and if you will not hear, and if you
will not lay it to heart, be sure the end will be full of hazard: Wrath is like
to come upon you to the uttermost, who charge Conscience as the Jews sometimes
did the Ministers of Christ, That they teach no more in this Name: Or are ready
to chide Conscience as Amaziah sometime quipped the Prophets confidence, Art
thou made of the Kings counsel? forbear, why should thou be smitten? Judge. 9.
Mal. 2.2. 1 These. 2.16. Act. 4.18. 2 Chr. 25.16, 17.

III. Israel does not know, my people does not consider: What comes of it? Ah
sinful Nation! a people laden with iniquity, etc. Isa. 1.34. They considered
not in their heart; thence were they so corrupt both in their hearts and
actions, Hos. 7.1, 2, etc. When God would have men rectify their Conscience,
he would therefore have them to recall and consider with themselves, Psalm.
50.21, 22. Isa. 44.19. c. 41.20. Hearken then, Oh careless sinner, and
consider; (1) If Conscience be bad, your Conversations are bad; if not in the
account of man, yet in the account of God, who sees not as man sees, Man
looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart, 1 Samuel
16.7. Can the salt-spring yield fresh streams, or will the sharp thorn bring
forth sweet grapes? Every tree (says our Savior) is known by his own fruit:
For of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble-bush gather they grapes.
He applies it to the case in hand, An evil man out of the evil treasure of his
heart, brings forth evil things. Let Conscience be evil, and thy
Conversation, thy Communication is not like to be good. For these things which
proceed out of the mouth, come forth from the heart, and they defile the man.
And this know, though thy conversation be bad, thy Conscience is worse. Here is
the treasures, it is out of the abundance of the heart, Jam. 3.11, 12. Luke
6.44, 45. Mat. 15.18, 19. (2) Is Conscience evil? your callings are evil;
though not in themselves, yet to your selves. If this be depraved, there is
nothing pure to you; your tables become a snare, and your trading becomes a
sin. Is Conscience corrupt? the Farm, the Oxen, the Wife will keep you from
Christ, which should carry you to him, and your plowing, yea your praying is
sin, Tit. 1.15. Psalm. 69.22. Luke 14.18, 19, 20. Prove. 21.4. Psalm. 109.8. (3)
Is Conscience evil, your comforts are evil? Inward comforts are but ensnaring
cheats, and the illusions and cousenliges of the evil one. For all true and
gracious comforts arise from the testimony of a good Conscience; otherwise,
while you bless, God does curse, Job 8.19. 2 Cor. 1.12. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Your
outward comforts are overgrown with curses; your rich estates will be the ruin
of your souls; your eminent pleasures will end in perdition; and the greater is
your confluence, the greater will be your confusion, if guilt shall still abide
upon your Conscience, If ye will not lay it to heart, says the Lord of Hosts,
I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings; yea, I have
cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart, Deuteronomy. 28.15, -- ad
finem, Eccles. 7.13. Jam. 5.3, -- 6. Rev. 18.7. Mal. 2.2. (4) Is Conscience
evil, you have no interest in Christ? An interest in Christ, and an evil
Conscience are things inconsistent; who does always purge their Conscience,
whom he proprietateth in his choice benefits: True it is, the privileges by
Christ are large; but as Peter told Simou Magus, so must I tell thee upon the
same reason, Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is
not right in the sight of God, Heb. 9.14. c. 10.22. Act. 8.21. (5) Is
Conscience evil, your choicest endeavors are also evil; because you frustrate
the end of the Commandment, which is to free you from an evil Conscience; and
are not framed to that entireness, which the Commandment enjoyneth and
expects, unless your hearts are sprinkled from an evil Conscience, you have
no access to God, nor can hope for acceptance; much less can you have
assurance: your prayers are turned into sins and provocations. So long as
Conscience was statedly sinful, God accounted the most costly Sacrifices of the
Jews, (wherewith went supplications also), but as so many splendid mockeries,
and they were so far from receiving acceptance, that they were reckoned
abomination, 1 Timothy 1.5. Jam. 4.8. Heb. 10.22. Psalm. 109.8. Isa. 66.3, 4. Prove.
21.27. (6) Is Conscience evil, be sure the consequence will be evil, if you
continue this evil: So long as Conscience is bad, no one capacity or faculty
can be good, which are all under the empire and influence of Conscience. If
thine eye be evil, the whole body is full of darkness; and if the light that is
in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! Mat. 6.23. But this is not
all, mind the place of Conscience, miserable must be the issue of an evil and
polluted Conscience, Corruption optimi pessima; You that are fearless of its sin
now, shall feel its sting hereafter, and shriek and roar with the corrodings of
that worm which you would not here attempt to kill or cure. Its evil of sin
will issue in extremest and eternal sufferings if not timely salved. Cure it,
or it will kill and condemn you, and you will contract condemnation from God
unto you, Mar. 9.44. Isa. 66.24. 1 John 3.20.

IV. Speed your ^onversion from sin; your Conscience must needs be sinful, so
long as your sin continues. If you continue in a sinful state, the state of
Conscience must needs be sinful. If you are defiled, this is defiled: If you
are after the flesh, so is this also; Tit. 1.15. Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8. If you
would heal Conscience, then hasten your conversion; do not only try your ways,
but turn to the Lord, who will bind up that which is broken, Lam. 3.40. Hos.
6.1. The change of your condition includes the change of Conscience: Turn you
at Gods reproof, and he will pour out his spirit upon you; and then you are no
more in the flesh, but in the spirit; the motions and mindings of Conscience
shall be no more so fleshly, Prove. 1.27. Romans 8.9. c. 7.5, 6.

V. Heb. 10.22. c. 9.14. The evil of Conscience came in originally by the first
Adam, and is only healed by the second Adam. Hasten to him by an active faith.
This is that bunch of Hysop which sprinkleth this blood upon you, and so the
Conscience becomes clean in the sight of God, Psalm. 51.7. Would you have
Conscience cured from its evil state? close with Christ, by a sound faith: He
dwells in the heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.

VI. I will take away the stony heart out of their flesh, etc. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20.
c. 36.26, 27. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Plead them in your petitions. He will yet for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel, Ezekiel. 36.37. Unfold the pravity of your
Hearts and Consciences; Lord, I acknowledge my Conscience is miserably
corrupted; far departed from thy first Creation, and foully depraved both by
the fall of Adam, and my own voluntary d^fections. Behold, I bring thee an old
and obdurate Heart, Lord renew and mollify it; a diseased and defiled Heart,
Lord, repair and purge it; an Heart of stone and adamant, inflexible to thy
ducture, impenetrable by thy displeasure, etc. Lord, remove it, and renew me.
Urge him with his Promises to do it, and thine own heart therewith also, to
deliberate and draw from them. Lord, have thou not said, A new heart will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; I will ^ake away the stony
heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. O make good ^hy
word to thy poor creature, who can no ^ore cure this heart of stone, than I can
^reate another world. Create in me a clean heart, (...) God, and renew a right
spirit within me: So David, Psalm. 51.10. See further helps here^^ter.

Q. 4. How may we know whether our Consciences are Evangelically good or bad?

Be plain with Conscience, of our natures (of which hereafter) and so men
deceive their own selves, Jam. 1.2^ (...). It therefore requires the stricter
care and caution in your part, and circumspection on mine, how we manage thi^
work: To which end before I propound marks See Dik. Good Conscience ch 7, 8, 9.
p. 73. ad 128. Sheffield Good Conscience, chapter 24. Bald wins cas. Conscience,
chapter 12.
I would promise this brief animadversio^ for preventing mistakes See
Sheffields Good Conscience, chapter 18.2^.
; that you may (...) conclude the goodness of your Conscien^^ either from their
past or present 1 scrupulos^^ 2 smart or trouble on the one hand, 3 still^^ or
quiet on the other, without further a^ fuller evidence. Which I shall put upon
a (...) deliberate enquiry hereafter.

The stated habitude of your Conscien^^ may be discerned by these five things,
T^^ adjuncts, the acts, the absoluteness, the aspe^ the answer of the
Conscience.

First,

Secondly, evil fruit; neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit, Mat.
7.16, 17, 18. Thus the acts of Conscience naturally good bespeak a good natural
Conscience; the acts of Conscience which are morally good bespeak a good moral
Conscience; and the acts of Conscience which are Evangelically good bespeak a
good Evangelical Conscience. Of this is the enquiry.

Q. May we conclude our Consciences are good, because their acts are good?

I answer, 1. Saul, Simon Magus, and those Psalm. 78.34. -- 38. 1 Samuel 24.16,
etc. 26.21, etc. Act. 3.13. Yet, when such acts become fixed and ordinary;
when, though there may be some diversions, as were in Job and Paul, yet the
main stream and current of its acts are carried in an Evangelical channel, from
sin to righteousness, you may now conclude the goodness of your Conscience, Job
27.3, 4. cum 5. Romans 7.25. cum praeced. 2. Though the good acts of Conscience
materially considered, will not ^rgue the goodness of Conscience; for there
have been acts for their matter very good, where the heart and mind have been
very ^ad, Joh. 8.9. Romans 2.15. Psalm. 78.34, 35, ^6. yet its good acts formally
considered, as ^e take in with the matter of these acts, the ^anner also
wherein, and motives whereupon they are put forth, do argue a good Conscience;
for such grapes cannot grow upon thistles; nor can a salt fountain yield such
sweet water. We may argue from the effect to the cause, from holy and good
operations to a good and holy Origin, as Paul does in this case, Heb. 13.18.
Act. 24.16.

What are the acts of your Conscience then? what ordinarily does it? thence you
may conclude its habitude, and how it is ordinarily disposed. There are the
elicit and imperate acts of Conscience; how are these discharged? is it from
Evangelical motives, and in an Evangelical manner?

Conscience is 1. to dictate truth; and does it dictate Gospel Truths and
duties? Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ? To
deny your selves, and take up your cross? To love your enemies, and bless them
that hate you? To endure grief, suffering wrongfully, and overcome ev^^ with
good, etc. Act. 20.21. Mar. 8.34. Mat. 5.44. 1 Pet. 2.19. Romans 12.21. Are the
Consciences not only enlightened in, but engaged b^ these commands? But more
particularly, does the Conscience dictate these Gospel Truths to be done upon
Gospel-terms? To be done (1) to and for Christ, as your head and ruler? And can
your Conscience say in sincerity, The Lord is o^ Judge, the Lord is our King,
the Lord is our Lawgiver? And that you esteem all but loss, for the excellency
of the knowledge of Jesus Christ your Lord? [ Isa. 33.22. Phil. 3.8.] 2. To be
done in and through Christ as your Intercessour and Redeemer? To do all in the
name of our Lord Jesus, with the rejecting of your own righteousness, and
resting upon the grace of God in him alone for your reward and acceptance? [
Col. 3.17. Phil. 3.9. Dan. 9.18. 1 Pet. 2.5.] And does not thy Conscience only
dictate this in the Theory, but descends to the Praxis? And does it not only
inform this in the notion, but does it infer and induce it in the ordinary
course of thy Conversation? Thou have then a good Conscience.

2. Conscience is to deliver its testimony. How does your Conscience testify?
Does it testify to and for the Gospel? to the authority thereof, above all
laws over you? to the amiableness thereof above all doctrines to you? to the
sin-subduing and soul-saving efficacy thereof upon you? and to the singular and
surpassing excellency thereof unto you? [ Act. 4.19, 20. Romans 1.16. 1 These.
1.5, 6. Psalm. 119.72.] Does Conscience testify with and according to the
Gospel? Are you wont to pray for the especial teachings of the spirit, in
prevention of a false testimony? To put your selves as in his sight and
presence, that it may produce a good and true testimony? And do you prize and
prefer the Spirits testimony before that of your spirits, and are prevailingly
steered by his witness with your Conscience; and can provoke and call in with
Peter his all-seeing knowledge? Lord, thou know all things, and thou know
that I love thee, Job 34.32. Psalm. 139.23, 24. 2 Cor. 2.17. Romans 8.16. Joh.
21.17. This is a good Conscience. I forbear to instance further.

Thirdly, Paul trusts he had a good Conscience; but whence appeared it? In all
things he was willing to live honestly, Heb. 13.18.

Q. May we argue the goodness of our Conscience, by and from their Universality
and Absoluteness?

I answer you may and should as Paul does; King. 9.4. Luke 1.6. 1 Chronicles. 29.19.
So then the Conscience that is unfeignedly good is universally good as it
respects all the parts; though it cannot here reach all the perfection and
degrees of goodness.

I. Willing in all things to live honestly, Heb. 13.18. It Is not good at
matters of holiness, and bad at matters of honesty; or good at matters of
honesty, and bad at matters of holiness; but good, both as to holiness and as
to honesty, whereof the good Conscience ever makes a good conjunction, 1 Timothy
2.2. Luke 8.15. Let the formal hypocrite be for inoffensiveness to God, while
he indulgeth himself in his offensiveness to man; let the civil Justiciary be
for inoffensiveness to man, while be indulgeth his inobedience and
offensiveness to God. But the great exercise and endeavor of the good
Conscience is to preserve it self, void of offense both toward God, (the
object of all those religious dues required in the first table) and toward
men, (the object of all that righteousness required in the second Table), Act.
24.16. It provides for honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but in
the sight of men, 2 Cor. 8.21. Your Consciences are evil who are careless of
either Table. She that was for dividing the Child was not indeed the Mother, 1
King. 3.26, 27. Though you are devout toward God, if you are dishonest toward
men, or dissolute in your selves, you have an evil Conscience. And though you
are upright in your transactions and dealings with men, if you are regardless
of the truths and duties of godliness or sobriety, you have still but an evil
Conscience: See these instances, Mat. 23.14. chapter 15.4, 5. Isa. 58.2. -- 9.
Prove. 7.13. -- 16. Luke 18.11, 12. Mat. 19.20, 21, 22. The good Conscience is
not disjunctive, but copulative in its duties, and will give Christ his due,
and Caesar his. You then that impartially consult both Tables in your practice;
that knit religion toward God with righteousness toward Men; that follow
after both things holy, and things honest; things just, and things pure; and
are taught to live both soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world;
your conversations are in godly sincerity, and you have a good Conscience. May
you rejoice in its testimony, Psalm. 15.2. Isa. 33.15. Phil. 4.8. Tit. 2.12. 2
Cor. 1.12.

II. Keep and seek for all the Commandments of the Lord your God, 1 Chronicles.
28.8. Deuteronomy. 11.8, 22. chapter 26.18. And the good Conscience charge them all upon
the godly, to keep all the command he knows, and to seek all the command he
knows not, that he may keep them* We are all here present before God, says
Cornelius, to hear all things that are commanded of God, Act. 10.33. The good
Conscience count^ all Gods Commandments to be good; A^^ thy Commandments are
sure, all thy Commandments are faithful. It says not only that they are all
truth, but all thy Commandments are righteousness, Psalm. 111.7. c. 119.86* 151,
172. The good Conscience would know all Gods Commandments, because good, and
that he may keep them. Oh, that my way were directed (says he) to keep thy
statutes! (...) let me not wander from thy Commandments O hide not thy
Commandments from me! Tea^^ me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I sha^^
keep it unto the end. Give me understanding, an^ I shall keep thy Law; yea, I
shall observe it with my whole heart, Psalm. 119.5, 10, 19, 33, 34* It Is true,
corrupt flesh may and will ever and anon be retracting and impleading it; bu^
the good Conscience fights it out, and is finally victorious. He has sworn,
and he wi^^ perform it, that he will keep Gods righteou^ judgments: And I will
walk at liberty (says this Soul, for I seek thy precepts, ver. 106, 45. The
good Conscience would keep all Gods Commandments which he knows. He may be
weak in many things, but he is willing in all things to live honestly. He
allows himself in no known aversation from any one of Gods Testimonies. His
heart is inclined to perform Gods statutes always: If the habitual temper be
enquired into, whatever his declinings be under the heat of tentation, with his
mind he serves the law of God, Heb. 13.18. Romans 7.15, 25. Psalm. 119.112. How is
it with your Consciences then? Adhere they closely to the commands and
traditions of men, but mean while are careless of the Commands and Truths of
God? Or, are they herein observedly strict, in Mint, Annise and Cummin, the
lesser matters of the Law, while mean time they omit Mercy, Judgment and Faith,
the greater matters of the Law? Are they partial, and upon reserves in the
matters of Piety, and of his Precepts? And do they ordinarily allow the
forbearance of, or formality in any self-displeasing, secret or inobserved
duties? You have then an evil Conscience. Mar. 7.6. -- 10. Mat. 23.23. Mal.
2.9. 1 John 2.4. But do they esteem all Gods Precepts concerning all things to
be right? Do you walk in all the Commandments and Ordinances of God, with
Zachary and Elizabeth? Have you a respect to all Gods Commandments? Then shall
you not be ashamed, it is well with Conscience, and shall be well you in the
conclusion, Psalm. 119.6, 128. Luke 1.6. Jer. 7.23. The integrity of David's
heart has the divine impression and allowance, or approbation, while it was
set to do according to all that God had commanded him, 1 King. 9.4. 2 Chronicles.
7.17.

(3) It Is good as concerns all Corruptions, Psalm. 119.2, 3, 128. It refrains
the feet from every evil way, that we may keep to the Word of God without us,
and keep up the work of God within us, Psalm. 119.101, 104. This Soul may
actually, and does often sin, but he allows not what he does, and may say with
Paul, What I hate, that do I, Romans 7.15. A good Conscience then will not allow
of any evil of corruption, not any manner, or any measure, any kind, or to any
degree. It would have iniquity, all iniquity, and all of iniquity taken away;
the pollution and power, as well as punishment, and will rather choose the
greatest suffering than the least sin, Hos. 14.2. Psalm. 139.24. Heb. 11.25. How
can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? This is the reasoning of
the good Conscience. I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not, I am
purposed, that my mouth shall not transgress. These are the resolutions of the
good Conscience, Genesis 39.9. Psalm. 39.1. c. 17.3. How is it with Conscience?
Happily it has not with Joab turned after Absalom; but has it turned after
Adonijah? Vile and refuse sins it will destroy utterly: But the fatlings, and
the best of the sheep, that will best serve your carnal pleasures and profits,
especially Agag, the predominant and pleasing sin, must they be spared? Baals
Temple and Priests must fall; but must Jeroboams Calves stand? Sins against the
interest of worldly self be crucified, but must sins that feed thy interest be
cherished? Ah wicked and wretched Conscience! 1 King. 1.7. 1 Samuel 15.9. 2 King.
10.29. Jam. 4.4. Your Consciences happily strain at Gnats, such and such
smaller sins; But can they swallow Camels, greater sins? Your Consciences abhor
Idols, but do you commit Sacriledg? You cannot violate a rash Oath with Herod;
but can you swear rashly, and slay the innocent servants of the Lord, rather
than it shall be said, you have not accomplished it? Ah deplorable and
desperate Consciences! Mat. 23.24. Romans 2.22. Mar. 6.26, 27. Again, it may be
your Consciences cannot but accuse for, and do abhor flagitious and open sins;
You are not extortioners, unjust, adulterers, etc. But can they allow those of
a fresher dye, and less obvious to sight, such as are more small, or more
secret? Then surely it is an evil Conscience, Luke 18.11. Ephesians. 5.12. Sirs, you
whose Consciences are both against small and great, sins open and in secret,
against darling sins as well as displeasing; sins that would build up, as well
as such as will break down your fleshes interest: You, you are the men and
women that have this good Conscience, Psalm. 19.12, 13.

(4) It Is good as concerns all our capacities. calling. For the Christian, the
good Conscience will have him good without, and good within. It Is for inward
renovation, as well as outward reformation; for washing the heart, the
affections, as well as whiting the appearances, the actions. It Is taken up most
about the inward and hidden man, calls first for truth in the inward parts, the
transforming of the Understanding into divine Truths, and turning in of the
Will unto, and determining it upon the Divine goodness. And you shall ever find
a good Conscience followed with a good Conversation, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Jer.
4.14. 1 Pet. 3.4. Psalm. 51.6. Romans 12.2. Deuteronomy. 26.17. 1 Pet. 3.16. For
Christianity, the good Conscience will forgo none, and is found good in all the
doctrines and duties, and graces, both of faith and charity. It Is not only
almost but altogether persuaded to be a Christian: From the heart has this
Soul obeyed the form of Christian doctrine. This Conscience is as were it cast
into it, and comes from it as the vessel from the mould into which it was
melted (...).
. 1 Timothy 1.5. Act. 26.28, 29. Romans 6.17. For our callings; the good Conscience
will be good in our particular Callings and relations, as well as good in our
general, and as concerns Religion. Good as a Subject, as well as good as a
Saint: Innocence was found in me before God, and also before thee, O King, I
have done no hurt, says Daniel, Chap. 6.22. Good as a Minister of a flock, not
seeking his own profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved. Good as
a Master of a Family; He and his house will serve the Lord: He will walk within
his house, with a perfect heart, 1 Cor. 10.33. Josh. 24.15. Psalm. 101.2. In
short, the good Conscience considers the business, as well as the benefit of
the relation and calling; Conscience directs the business, that it be done in
the Lord, and as he has limited, discusses the business, whether it be done or
not, and calls over the carriage of it, and asks the son, servant, etc. as
Samuel did Saul, What have thou done? And in a word dictates, that all
businesses be done for the Lord, and for Conscience sake, Ephesians. 5.22. chap.
6.10. 1 Samuel 13.11. Jer. 8.6. Romans 13.5. 1 Pet. 2.18, 19. How is it with you
then? let Conscience speak, an evil Conversation does loudly proclaim an evil
Conscience: Or is the outside clean, but the inside mean while corrupt? You
name the name of Christ, but are your natures still unchanged and carnal? You
are good at the doctrine of Christianity, but are you bad at the duties? Good
at the Temple, and in Gods house, but bad at your Trades, and in your own
Houses? Good at the Bible with Judas, but bad at the Bag? Good at your general
profession of Religion, but bad in your particular places and relations? You
have then but an evil Conscience, Mat. 23.25. -- 28. 2 Timothy 2.19, 21. Tit.
1.16. Jer. 7.4 -- 13. Joh. 12.6. Luke 16.10, 11. But as for you, whose
Consciences run all points of the Compass, respects all parts of your callings;
you into whose conversations Conscience like Christ's coat, is woven from the
top throughout: You that are willing in a^ things to live honestly; to wear the
comfort of a good Conscience, as Paul did, and Peter directs tacitly, Heb.
13.10. 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 Pet. 3.16.

(5) It Is good in its whole Compass: Chron. 25.2. 1 King. 11.4. c. 15.3.14.
There is no piece or part of the Conscience but is renewed with Grace, though
it be renewed but in part: It Is good at the rule in the first Proposition; It
has learnt not only the truth of Jesus, but the truth as it is in Jesus. Good
at the reflection it is to make, and the report it is to manifest in the second
Proposition. Good at the result from both, in the third Proposition. It Is good
as a rule, good as a witness, good as a judge; So that the Christian is
habitually disposed to do what it enjoyneth, and endure what is imposed for
Conscience sake, 1 Pet. 2.19. Romans 13.5. Is Conscience then sanctified
throughout? Has the leaven of special grace leavened the whole lump? Is your
heart not only studied, but sound in Gods statutes? Then shall you not be
ashamed, 1 These. 5.23. Psalm. 119.80.

(6) It Is good for continuance, I do exercise my self to have always a
Conscience void of offense, says Paul, Act. 24.16. Though the good Conscience
be not always in exercise, yet the good man does exercise himself to have
always a good Conscience. A good Conscience, says one, holds out constantly;
in a good cause without deflection, and in a good course without defection
Dykes Good Cons. c. 8. p. 113
. Particular failings thereof cannot but be confessed; but this is the
prevailing frame and ordinary constitution of it. Let the times frown or
favor, be times of prosperity to, or persecution of the Church and cause of
God; yet the good Conscience whether it rain or shine, holds on his way; and he
that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. He may
sometimes go out of his way, but never will give it over. This Soul breaks
for the longing it has to Gods Testimonies at all times, and has respect unto
his Statutes continually; his heart may turn aside, but is not turned back; and
though it may sometimes deal foolishly, and most times feebly, yet deals not
falsely in Gods Covenant, Psalm. 119.20, 117. c. 44.17, 18. Let Satan tempt Job,
the Sabeans trouble, etc. his Cattle, his Corn, his Sheep, his Servants, his
Children, and all are taken from him; but this good Conscience still tarrieth
with him. He could hold fast none of that great confluence, but still he
holds fast this good Conscience, as God himself is witness, and Satan does
not withstand it, Job 1.13. -- 20. cum 2.3. Still he holds fast his
Integrity. Put it upon the enquiry then in your own spirits: What! like Reuben,
unstable as waters! Does Conscience shift as the winds of worldly profit or
preferment sit? Now for the Word, and now for the World with Demas? Would you
fain have saved Christ and his concernments (as Pilat would from the cruelty of
the Jews) even now, and do you by and by sentence him to death, when others
would else say, you were no friends to Caesar? What! good only while Jehojadah
your Tutor or Minister, etc. lived, and now grown evil? Good only till Balak
offers the wages of unrighteousness to you? Good only till the storms of
tribulation arise, and then farewell Conscience, and the house falls! Oh
miserable and mistaking Consciences! Genesis 49.4. 2 Timothy 4.10. Joh. 19.21. 2 Chronicles. 24.2, 17, 18. Number. 22.16. 1 Timothy 1.19. Mat. 7.26, 27. Yours is the good
and honest heart and conscience, who bring forth fruit with patience or
perseverance (...).
, Luke 8.15. Review your principles: Can you say, I have inclined my heart to
perform thy Statutes always, even to the end? Reflect on your purposes, and are
these your practical and permanent resolutions? I will never forget thy
precepts; I will keep thy Law continually, for ever and ever: I will walk in
the name of the Lord my God for ever and ever. And if Religion will make me
vile, I will be more vile. Recall your practice. Have you taken his Testimonies
as an heritage for ever? Many perhaps may have been your Persecutors, yet have
you not declined from his Testimonies? And will you yet keep his Precepts with
the whole heart, whatever be the exigencies befall you, or enticements to
flatter you? And shall this God be your God, and your portion for ever? Go and
glorify God, and congratulate thy self in the happiness of a good Conscience,
Psalm. 119.112, 93, 44. Mic. 4.5. 2 Samuel 6.22. Psalm. 119.111, 157, 69. and
48.14.73.26.

Fourthly, Pet. 2.19. Or if toward Man, it is but secondarily and
subordinately, and toward God primarily. First toward God, then toward Man;
toward Man in and for God; toward God above and beyond Man, Act. 24.16.

Q. Joh. 12.43. Tit. 3.3. And a good Conscience may have an eye upon its own
happiness, and the approbation of others, but it is upon God first and chiefest,
Heb. 11.16. 2 Cor. 4.2. When God ^s the supreme in your intentions, and your
^ighest aims and ambitions are to be accepted of him and approved by him, it is
an argument a good Conscience, and affords great confidence, 2 Cor. 5.8, 9, 10,
17, 18. The good Conscience then is,

(1) For the Power and Authority of God, Caesar the things which are Caesar's;
he shall have our subjection not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake: But
it will not give unto Caesar the things which are Gods, or set Christ beneath
Caesar. Conscience remembers there is one Lawgiver, and resolves it, the Lord
is our Lawgiver, Mat. 22.21. Joh. 4.12. Isa. 33.12. The good Conscience is for
acts of obedience to Governors; but it is limited therein and led thereunto
principally by the authority of God. It Is limited thereby; if Governors
command what God countermands, the good Conscience dares not comply to it,
says he. We onght to obey God rather than men. Dani^^ purposed in his heart
that he would not defile himself with the portion of the King^ meat, prohibited
by the law: Nor will he decline his prayers to God, whatever be the decree and
prohibition of the supreme Governor. Let Baals worship bear the Princes and
public warrant; Elijah and seven thousand more dare not bow the knee to him,
o^ in it, Act. 5.29. Dan. 1.8. c. 6.10. 1 King. 19.18. It Is led thereby also;
the good Conscience submits to every ordinance of Man, but it is for the Lords
sake: It counsels us to keep the King's commandment; but its principally
quickened by his obligation from, and in regard of the Cath of God, 1 Pet. 2.13.
Eccles. 8.2. How is it then? can your Conscience willingly pass the commands of
Go^ for the commands of Men, and keep their statutes that are contrary to his
Commandment and your knowledge, rather than you will come to suffer? Or, do you
obey the commands, and take up the ordinances of God, as Hamor and Shechem, and
the men of their City did that of Circumcision; But it is for compassing Dinah,
and the designs they have for Jacob's substance? You own the concernments of
Christ, and officiously assist to his cause and interest, as the people
sometimes did the Jews, and the rulers of the Provinces brought them their
assistance; but is it because the fear of the Jews, or the fear of Mordecai,
the Christian Magistrate is fallen upon you? This is an evil Conscience, Hos.
5.11. Mic. 6.16. Genesis 34.22, 23, 24. Esth. 8.17. c. 9.3. You that vail the
commands of Men to the commands of God, and in fulfilling his or their
Commandments which correspond with his, have your first respects not to humane
commands, censures or customs, or your carnal ends; but to the divine command
and constitution, with good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men;
you have one good evidence of a good Conscience, Act. 4.19. Isa. 26.13. Ephesians.
6.7.

(2) O Lord, says he, thou have searched me and ^nown me. Not a word in my
tongue, not a working of my thoughts but thou know it ^ltogether: Unto him
therefore he opens his cause; sets him before his face, and is not so much
overruled by this, that man sees, as by this ordinarily, that God sees him,
and searches his heart and reins. This perfect heart is not only for doing
that which is good in it self, but for doing it, as in God's sight, Psalm. 139.1
-- 14. Jer. 20.12. Psalm. 16.8. c. 7.3, 2 King. 20.3. I have kept thy Precepts,
says this pious Conscience, for all my ways are before thee, Psalm. 119.168.
How is it then, are you most for God's, or most for man's eye? You make broad
your Phylacteries, you do works of Piety perhaps, and works of Charity, but are
they done for to be seen of Men? Is this the mark you shoot at principally? Oh
gross hypocrisy and unsound Consciences! Mat. 23.5. c. 6.5. Noah and Enoch
walked amongst men, but with God: God was most in their eye. The light of
Christians shines before men, and as their good works may be seen of them: But
it stays not here, they subordinate this to an higher sight and scope, that
others seeing their good works, may glorify their Father which is Heaven, Genesis
5.22. c. 6.9. Mat. 5.16. You, that as of God, and as in the sight of God so do
and so speak; who are more preponderated in the course of their practice by his
presence, than Men's privity or perswasives; that walk as before him, and are
wrought to a greater willingness in his service, by his heart-searching, than
if any others saw you; you have great cause of gratitude to him, and of joy in
your selves, as those who have a good Conscience, 2 Cor. 2.17. Psalm. 44.20, 21.
Genesis 17.1. 1 Chr. 28.9.

(3) It Is for the praise and approving it self to God, which it principally
regards: The good Conscience is first and most for commending it self and us
to God. Indeed it is not he who commends himself, or whom man commends, is
approved, but whom God commends, 2 Cor. 10.18. It Is true, he would by
manifestation of the truth commend himself to every man's Conscience; and that
his service might be accepted of the Saints: But it is as in God's sight, and
for God's sake, that he may be the more serviceable to his glory in their good;
and it is first to God, then to their Consciences, 2 Cor. 4.2, 5. Romans 15.31. 2
Cor. 5.11. The great care therefore of the good Conscience is, to prove and
approve what is acceptable unto the Lord: This is that he so aims at, and is
so ambitious of, that he may be accepted of him, and have grace whereby he may
serve him acceptably, Ephesians. 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.9. Heb. 12.28. Enquire then, do you
seek the praise and approbation of Men more than the praise and approbation of
God, court their applause? etc. Oh wretched Consciences! ye are they which
justify your selves before men, but God knows your Hearts^ and this know,
that which is highly esteemed amongst men is abon^nation in the sight of God,
Joh. 5.44. c. 12.43. Luke 16.15. But you that seek the honor that comes from
God only, and set the highest account upon his comprobation, whose praise is
not of men, but of God* that seek his favor with your whole heart, and that
the words of your mouth, and meditations of your heart may be acceptable in his
sight; Yours, yours, is the good Conscience, Joh. 12.43. Romans 2.29. Psalm.
119.68. c. 19.13, 14.

(4) It Is for pleasing and applying himself to God, to which it principally
refers: The good Conscience is for Compliance to Gods Will, and would so carry
it self in its whole work, as it and we might receive Enochs Testimony; That he
pleased God: And this one argument is of most observed avail with it, That God
is pleased, Heb. 11.5. c. 13.16. It Is true, it is willing to please his
Neighbor for his good; and would fain please all men in all things, that
consist with his place and their profit; but it is not for his own ends, that he
seeks his own profit, but for their edification, and to exalt God and his
Gospel, if by any means he may save some, the profit of many that they may be
saved, Romans 15.2. 1 Cor. 10.33. c. 9.19. -- 24. The greatest care of the good
Conscience is not so much to please man as to please God. If he seeks to
gratify them, it is because he is set to glorify him, it is with singleness of
heart fearing God. This is his greatest care to walk worthy of the Lord unto
all pleasing; and as he has received how he ought to walk and to please God,
so he would fain abound more and more. Nothing so pleases him as that God is
pleased; nothing so provokes him as that God is provoked, 1 Cor. 7.32. 2 Timothy
2.4. Col. 3.22. c. 1.10. 1 These. 4.1. Psalm. 69.30, 31. How is it then? do you
seek to please men? and to do them a pleasure do not stick to omit the duties
of your place, and with Herod, Felix and Festus to oppress also the defenders
of piety? Or in the duties of your place, is your design ordinarily to please
man before God, or rather than him? If you yet seek to please men, how are you
then the servants of Christ? Nor have you this singleness of heart and
Conscience, whereto we are speaking, Act. 12.3. c. 24.27.25.9. Gal. 1.10.
Ephesians. 6.5, 6. You whose desires and designs are principally levelled at the
pleasing of God, and would be always doing the things which are pleasing in his
sight; you whose duties to men are not discharged with eye-service, as
men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, as unto Christ; you who walk not as
pleasing men, but as pleasing God, which tries our hearts; you have an happy
argument of having a good Conscience, Joh. 8.29. 1 John 3.22. Col. 3.22. 1
These. 2.4.

(5) It Is for the possessing and enjoyment of God, which it principally
requires, and in which it principally rests: The good Conscience is for
Communion with God, above the greatest Comforts; whilst others are for Corn and
Wine, Creature Comforts and Immunities; this is for the light of God's
Countenance; As for me (says he) I will behold thy face in righteousness. Here
is his Blessedness; Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to
approach unto thee. Here is his Business; This is the one thing he desires of
the Lord, and that he will seek after, Psalm. 4.6, 7. c. 17.15. c. 65.4. c.
27.4. It Is true, he does not slight, but diligently seeks a competency also of
the Goods of this life; but first he seeks the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, and would fain see the goodness of God in this Worlds Goods, and
by them serve his Glory. The first and great Commandment (as in it felf, so) to
this Soul, to the good Conscience, is to love the Lord his God, with all his
heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind, Prove. 30.8.9. Mat. 6.33.
Psalm. 104.33, 34. compared with the former verses, Mat. 22.37, 38. How is it
then? What! God not in all your thoughts! Is the friendship and fruition of the
World sought before the friendship and fruition of God? Is the World upmost,
and God under? You can part with God rather than part with your Grandeur,
Goods, etc. You can venture the loss of him rather than the loss of them.
Happily you pray and profess to Him, but do you most prize them mean while? Do
you cry more for Corn and Wine, than for the incomes of his Grace, the influx
of his Goodness, the Interest of his Gospel? etc. Oh sensual and sinful
Consciences! Psalm. 10.4. Jam. 4.4. 2 Timothy 3.4. c. 4.10. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Hos.
7.14. But do you prefer one God to all other Goodness? Do you pant most after
the grace of his Favor to you, and the grace of his Spirit in you? Do your
Souls pursue after him, and will not be put off with Secular commodities and
enjoyments? Is he the ^oortion that does best please you? Is your Propriety in
and intercourse with him of higher price then all other privileges and
possessions to you? What! have you none in Heaven but God? and is there none
upon Earth you desire in comparison with God? Certainly you have chosen the
better part, and may comfortably possess your selves in this sign of a good
Conscience, Psalm. 62.5, 6, 7. c. 42.1, etc. c. 63.1, etc. c. 16.5, 6, 7. c.
84.10. c. 73.25, 26. Luke 10.42.

(6) It Is for praise to the advancement and glorifying of God, which it
principally reckons of, and finally refers unto: The good Conscience is for
celebrating God and his Glory; in which it ultimately terminates the discharge
of its Offices, and the debts and obligations it infers on us; this is Gods
end in renewing the Conscience, and the great end of Conscience renewed, that
he might be glorified, Isa. 43.7, 21. c. 60.21. 1 Timothy 1.17. This it charge
most upon it self: Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless
his holy Name: Bless the Lord, O my soul, etc. Awake up my Glory, awake
Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake right early. This also comfort it
self most in, and he is not ashamed, but can cheerfully acquiesce, whatsoever
he does or endures for Conscience sake toward God; while Christ is magnified
in his body, and while on his part God is glorified, Psalm. 103.1, 2. c. 57.8.
Phil. 1.20. 1 Pet. 2.19.4.14. This is the great matter which he purposes with
himself, and to which he provokes other Souls; I will praise thee, O Lord my
God, with all my heart; and I will glorify thy Name for evermore. I will bless
the Lord at all times, his praise shall be continually in my mouth. My soul
shall make her boast in God. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his
Name together; Yea, let all such as love thy Salvation say continually, the
Lord be magnified, Psalm. 86.12. c. 34.1, 2, 3. 70.4. Let Conscience answer
then, Do not you like to retain God in your knowledge! you know God; but are you
careless of glorifying him as God? And say, what is the Almighty that we should
serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him? Or do you scoff
at your Brethren, which you may have cast out, with those in Isaiah, saying,
Let the Lord be glorified? O miserable Consciences! Romans 1.21, 28. Job 21.14.
Isa. 66.5. cum chapter 5.19. Or, while you pretend to Gods glory do you prefer your
own? Are your acts of piety, your alms or acts of charity, done principally
that you may have glory of men, unto whom ye would outwardly appear righteous?
Verily you have your reward, and still remain with rotten and unsound
Consciences, Mat. 6.2. 1 These. 2.6. Mat. 23.27, 28. But you that vail your own
glory to Gods; the bias and bent of whose good works, which men behold, is to
this mark, that they may glorify (not so much you, as) God in and for you in
the day of Visitation; you that can venture and forgo all for Gods glory, when
he calls for it; and count of nothing so high as his honor; you whose fruits
of righteousness are with this final respect, that your Father may be
glorified, and you may show forth the praises of him, who has called you out
of darkness into his mavelous light: You that have glorified him, and are
resolved you will glorify him again; Go eat your bread with joy, and drink
your wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy work. He that speaks
of himself seeks his own glory; but he that seeks his glory that sent him,
the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him, Joh. 8.50. 1 Pet. 2.12.
Mat. 5.16. 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. Phil. 1.11. 1 Pet. 2.9. Eccles. 9.7. Joh. 7.18.

Fifthly, Peter be consulted) is toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21.

Quest. Whether we may argue the goodness of our Conscience from their answer
toward God? I answer, you may. But then it is not so much from your present
earnestness therein, as from the powerful efficacy and proportionate extent
thereof, that you must take your evidence; for you shall find bad Consciences
furnished with quick and ready answers, as if they would not abridge God of the
least he calls for, Deuteronomy. 5.27, 28, 29. Jer. 42.5, 6. You are concerned to
discuss the deliberateness of the answer, and its due extent.

The good Conscience answers to Gods Call,

(1) To Gods Call: No sooner is the Conscience effectually convinced, or has
Christ effectually called, but you have the (...), (as the Apostle phrases it)
of the good Conscience: Conscience answers with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears, and with David, Lo, I come; I delight to do thy will, O my
God; yea, thy Law is within my heart. 1 Samuel 3.10. Psalm. 40.7, 8. Yea,
Conscience asks with Saul, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Teach me thy
way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth: Unite my heart to fear thy name.
Conscience sets him upon the Tower with Habakkuk, and will watch to see what
God will say unto him, and what he shall answer, when he is convinced or argued
with, Act. 9.6. Psalm. 86.11. Hab. 2.1. How is it then? has God called, but ye
would not answer? Has he spoken, but ye would not hear? Have you set at naught
his counsel, and despised his reproof? Have you chosen your own ways, and does
your Soul delight it self in your abominations? You have then sinful and stupid
Consciences, Prove. 1.24, 25. Isa. 65.12. c. 66.3, 4. But you whose Ears are
bored to hear, and your Hearts are brought to embrace the Calls of Grace; You
that with Simon and Andrew his Brother, with James the Son of Zebedee, and John
his Brother, at the Call of Christ can quit all, when he once said Come ye
after me: You that attend the saving motions of his Spirit, and addict your
selves to this mystery of Godliness, whose Hearts are determined upon God in
Christ, and to whom no Calls are so acceptable, as are the Calls from sin, and
to his service; you may comfortably reflect, and repose your selves in the
witness of a good Conscience, Mar. 1.16. -- 21. 1 Cor. 16.15. Job 22.21, 22.
chapter 27.6.

(2) To Gods Commands: Psalm. 37.31. Jer. 31.33. 2 Cor. 3.3. But as it comes and
applies Law; has God said, Seek ye my face? Conscience speaks back, My Heart
said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek. Has God commanded us to keep his
Precepts diligently? Conscience corresponds and cries out, O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes! Does God require that we do his will? I delight
to do thy wi^^ says Conscience, Psalm. 27.8. c. 119.4, 5. c. 40.7, 8. Try then
what agreement find you between his Commands and your Consciences? Are you
afraid of the restraint of God's Laws, and would break these bands from you,
and can you not bear these cords? Do you hate him that rebukes in the Gate,
and abhor the Ministry that speaks uprightly, and searches the inward parts of
the belly? as Ahab did Micajah, for says he, He never prophesies good but
always evil to me? Surely this is an evil Conscience, Psalm. 2.3. Amos 5.10. 2 Chronicles. 18.7. Or how do your Hearts answer, and are accommodated to his
Testimonies? Have God's Commands a counter-part in your Consciences? Have you
hid his Law in your Hearts, that you may not sin against him? And are your
Hearts inclined to perform his Statutes always, even to the end? Gods Law
commands you: Do your Hearts readily accept and return answer to it? I will run
the way of thy Commandments, and have respect unto thy ways: I will delight my
self in thy Statutes: I will not forget thy Word, Psalm. 119.11, 15, 16, 32,
112. Gods Law chides and threatens you: How do your Hearts relish it, and
acquiesce under it? Is it a kindness? Do you count it an excellent Oil? Do you
compose your selves to submission under it, and to serve the ends of God by it?
Psalm. 141.5. Isa. 39.8. 1 Samuel 3.18. Mich. 7.9. Here is one answer of a good
Conscience.

(3) To Gods Covenant: Thou art my people: The good Conscience speaks back
again, Thou art my God. O my Soul, (says David) thou have said unto the Lord,
thou art my God, Hos. 2.23. Psalm. 16.2. Ezekiel. 11.20. c. 36.28. 2. To the terms
of it: The Lord avoucheth Believers to be his peculiar people, and that they
should keep all his Commandments: The good Conscience restipulates, and
avoucheth the Lord to be his God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his
Statutes and his Commandments, etc. Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Exodus 19, 5. -- 9.3. To
the Truths in it: The good Conscience has a Transcript of all the important
Truths of Gods Covenant, This shall be the Covenant I will make with them after
those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.8, 9, 10. Come then, who is he that has
engaged his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord? Have you taken the Lord
for your God, and alone chief good, and given back your selves unto him his
servants to obey, and that for ever? Have you none in Heaven but God, and is
there none upon Earth that you desire besides God? And have you taken his
Testimonies as an Heritage for ever, and chosen the way of his Truths? This may
let you know, that you have a good Conscience, Jer. 30.21, 22. c. 32.28. Psalm.
73.25. c. 119.30, 111. I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the
Lord, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God; for they shall
return unto me with their whole heart, Jer. 24.7. Is there a Conversion to God,
the Conscience is good? But no Conversion, no good Conscience. Has God
commanded you, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be
my people; and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may
be well with you? But you hearken not, nor incline your ears, and walk in your
own counsels and imaginations, refuse Communion with God, or reject any of the
known Commands of God; or regard any iniquity, or any interest above God; you
have then evil Hearts, and your Consciences are not right in the sight of God,
Jer. 7.23, 24. c. 3.17. Numb. 85.39. Psalm. 66.18.

(4) To the cause of God: Paul, and with Moses, is cool and gentle in
transacting his own matters; but quick and transported with great heat in the
matters of God and Godliness; forgives, and is submissive to his own enemies;
but flames with zeal, and is stiff and inflexible to Gods enemies, Gal. 4.12.
cum 5.12. Act. 13.9, etc. Number. 12.3. cum Exodus 30.19. If the Cause of God calls
for his part in action, he is ready, and willingly offers himself, according to
his office, and the capacity and circumstances he is in: If it calls for a
passive part, he can for Conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully, and is ready not only to be bound, but also to die for his sake, 2
Cor. 9.2. Judge. 5.2, 9. 2 Cor. 8.3. 1 Pet. 2.19. Act. 21.13. You that like
Gallio care for none of these things, that seek your own things, not the things
which are Jesus Christ's, whose Spirits are abundantly raised in your own Cause,
but ordinarily remiss in Gods Cause, have no good Conscience, Act. 18.17. Phil.
2.21. Psalm. 137.5, 6. But you that prefer Jerusalem to your chief joy; that
say unto Zion, because of the house of the Lord our God we will seek thy good:
that will very gladly spend and be spent for the good of Souls, and glory of
their Savior; that sacrifice your own Concernments to those of Christ and his
Church; and would rejoice to be offered upon the sacrifice and service of their
faith, and rejoice in your sufferings with respect to his service: Receive this
sign, and may you reap the sense of a good Conscience, Psalm. 137.6. and 122.9.
2 Cor. 12.15. Phil. 2.17. Col. 1.24.

(5) To the counsels of God, The good Conscience would hold Communion with God
in his Works, as well as in his Word, and does especially consider of, and
commemorates, what God has done for his Soul, Psalm. 107.43. and 94.19. and
66.16. Has God accepted his person, answered his prayers, afforded him his
presence of Grace? etc. it binds him the faster to God: Blessed be God (says
he) who has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me. He will love God
the more choicely; live with God the more closely; lean on and trust in God the
more constantly, Ps. 66.19, 20.116. throughout, 146.1, 2. Does God afflict and
is angry with him, with-draws the sense of his Salvation, withholds the spirit
of Peace, and the waters are come even into his Soul? He considers and
confesses his sin, communes with himself, converts and turns himself to God,
cries for his Salvation, charge his Soul to hope in, to obey, to remember
and to repose it self in God, Psalm. 32.5, etc. and 38.6, etc. and 42.5, 11. and
51.1 -- 12. and 77.1. -- 13. and 13.1 -- 6. I should be too large, if I left
particular instances, as may concern either the inward or outward man. Put it
upon the enquiry. The Providence of God are various toward you: How do you
answer the acts of God, and his aims by them? What, no laying them to heart?
Happily, he may have brought his judgments at the doors, and yet do not you lay
it to heart? not so much as ask what have I done nor hearken to him for all
this, to observe his Counsels, or obey his Commandments? Happily, he may have
multiplied his mercies or you; and do you not yet say in your hearts Let us now
fear the Lord our God? but the mercies which he gave to humble and to prove
you, you abuse to pride and luxury, etc. Oh sinful and senseless Consciences!
Isa. 42.25. Jer. 8.7. Hos. 7.2. Jer. 5.24. Deuteronomy. 8.16, 17. Or do you answer his
administrations of justice with trying your ways and turning to the Lord? Do
you labor to see his mind in them and to learn more skill in his Statutes
through them? And does Conscience call upon you Come and let us return to the
Lord our God, and by sound Conversion to seek a cure for them In
administrations of Mercy does Conscience ordinarily attend, abett, and argue
from thence to duty? And when it has put the question What shall I render unto
the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Does it proceed to the Psalmist's
conclusive resolution, I will take the (...) of Salvation, and call upon the
name of the Lord I will pay my vows unto the Lord: I will w^^ before the Lord
in the land of the living, etc. I^ short, is Conscience wont to answer the
dispensations of mercy with more dearness for God and his glory, and with more
degrees (...) humility, as it did in Jacob and in David? the^ is yours a good
Conscience, Psalm. 103. through out, Ezra 9.13, 14. Genesis 32.10. 2 Samuel 7.18, 19.

(6) To the Copy of God: Be ye boly, for I am holy: Conscience bearing his
Authority, brings the same argument also, and Christ binds it upon the
Conscience, 1 John 2.29. c. 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Mat. 5.48. Little Children,
let no man deceive you, if God has not drawn out his resemblance upon you; if
you are not doers of Righteousness, as God is righteous; If Conscience can
permit you to walk in darkness, while you profess to that God who is a pure
light: whatever be your pleas, that your Consciences are good, they are but
pretensions, not proofs, your Consciences are still bad. You that are
ordinarily looking at, and laboring to come as nigh as you may unto your Copy;
That are followers of God as dear Children; that are created after God in
righteousness and true holi^ess; and whose care it is to be as immutable,
^ntensive and extensive as you can in good^ess, You are the Children of God our
Father, who has given to you a good Conscience: (...) Joh. 3.7, 9. c. 1.5, 6,
7. 1 Pet. 1.14. Ephesians. 5.1. c. 4.^4. Mat. 5.45.

I have used a greater length and liberty of Speech in this Question than I
have in former, or shall in future Cases; the importance thereof enforced me.
If Conscience be good, your condition is good; if Conscience be naught, your
condition is naught too, as will be seen hereafter. Be therefore the more
thorough and serious in the trial of your selves; still remembering this just
Limit, in all thy helps for knowledge hereof given you; That your ordinary or
usual tendency and habitude must be attended. It Is not what your Conscience is
for a fit, or in some sudden flash, either as to good, or as to evil; but what
your common frame and general or most usual temper is, must be consulted.

Q. 5. Whether we may know that our Consciences be statedly and Evangelically
good?

Though your Consciences are locked up from the knowledge of others, and are
comprehensively and fully known only by God himself; for who can understand his
errors? Psalm. 19.12. Yet, every man may know what the stated habitude of his
Conscience is, if he will but deliberately discuss, and carefully commune with,
and impartially attend and improve the judgment of his own Conscience: As seems
evident, (1) By the description of its Nature It Is the candle of the Lord,
searching (not some but) all (not only the outward parts of the body, but) the
inward parts of the belly; i.e. the inwards acts and thoughts, and therefore
the the habitude and temper of the Heart; elsewhere expressed by the Belly,
Prove. 20.7. cum Job 15.2, 35. c. 32.18, 19. The Spirit of Man, i.e. the
Conscience of Man knows the things of Man, and within Man. The Heart, i.e.
the Conscience knows its own bitterness, and therefore may know its own
blessedness, 1 Cor. 2.11. Prove. 14.10. (2) By the demands from and for it in
Scripture, Know ye not your selves? i.e. your Consciences and so what your and
their state and condition is, whether you be in the faith, whether Christ be in
you? 2 Cor. 13.5. Let every man prove his work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself, which springs from the Testimony of a good Conscience,
Gal. 6.4. 2 Cor. 1.12. (3) By the declared sense hereof we find among the
Saints: Job's record is on high, and in his own heart, Job 16.19. c. 27.5, 6.
David and Hezekiah can, and do confidently appeal the all-knowing God in it,
Psalm. 26.2, 3. and 17.3. Isa. 38.3. Hear Paul, We trust we have a good
Conscience: It Is not we think, or we hope; but we trust, (...), we are
persuaded, are confident of it, which confidence we may raise upon the same
foundation that he did, In all things willing to live honestly, Heb. 13.18.

Q. 6. How may we get or obtain a good Conscience?

The Premises in answer to the former Question are of place and pertinent use
here also, as likewise whatsoever shall be prescribed hereafter, for obtaining
a pure, peaceable, upright, faithful Conscience, etc. Here I advise you these
few things: See Perkin's Tom. 1. Treat. of Conscience, c. 4. p. 551.
Sheffield's good Conscience, chapter 25. Dyke's good Consc. c. 5, 6.
That you

Act Consideration See Motives in Dyke's good Cons. c. 10. ad finem.
: Consideration is the next step to the Conversion of thy self, the change of
thy estate, and the setting of thy Conscience right in the sight of God, Psalm.
119.59, 60. and 45.10, 11. and 50.21, 22. [See Q. 4. Direct. 3.] Consider
therefore in thy Heart; [ Deuteronomy. 4.39. c. 8.5.] If my Conscience shall be good,
Then

(1) My Condition will be good; secure Conscience for the main, and thou
securest thy Condition for the main. Thy Condition is as thy Conscience is;
good or bad as this is good or bad in the sight of God. Amaziah's Condition was
bad, though the current of his Actions was materially good, because his
Conscience was bad, he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but
not with a perfect heart, nor like his father David, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. 2 King.
14.3. Jehoshaphat's Condition was good, though he were chargeable with some
things that were signally bad, because his Conscience was good; Nevertheless,
there are good things found in thee, in that thou have prepared thine heart to
seek God, 2 Chronicles. 19.2, 3.

(2) My conversation will be good: Conscience has the ducture of it, the
dominion over it; as it goes well or ill in Conscience within, so it will be
in thy Conversation without: [See Q. 4.] Make the Tree good, and his Fruit is
good Non erit fructus bonus nisi arboris bonae; muta Cor and mutabitur opus.
Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 12.
: Make the Tree corrupt, and his Fruit is corrupt, Mat. 12.33, 34. Rehoboam's
course of life was bad, in that his Conscience was bad, Because he prepared not
his heart to seek the Lord. Ezra's on the contrary was good, in that his
Conscience was good; Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the Law of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12.14. Ezra 7.10. See 1 Pet. 3.16.

(3) My Capacities will be good: These are regulated by the Conscience, and are
renewed with the Conscience. 1. Your receptive Capacities, whereby you receive
from God, will be enlarged and enabled to take in more from him, both of his
truth and goodness. Natural Conscience cannot receive the things of the Spirit
of God; but the Renewed can receive them, and that with all readiness, and in
much riches; Grace for Grace from Christ the Word, joy and gladness from and
with the Word of Christ, the Spirit of Adoption, sweet and full assurance, etc.
1 Cor. 2.12, 14. Act. 17.11. Col. 2.2. Joh. 1.16. 1 These. 1.6. Romans 8.15. Heb.
10.22. 2. Your active Capacities whereby you return to God, and work out your
everlasting good. Have you a good Conscience? you will be willing in all things
to live honestly, Heb. 13.18. The evil Conscience contracts and straitens; the
good Conscience dilates and w^^ens the Capacity of Man: here is true larg^ess
of Heart, the fetters of Sin now fall off; the Mind will be enlarged to know
and consider; the Will to elect and embrace the Lord and his Laws; the Memory
to record and recall; and the very Members to run the way of his Testimonies, 1
King. 4.29. Prove. 2.10, 11, 12. Psalm. 119.32.

(4) Then and not else are others Commendations good; As the fining-pot for
silver, and the furnace for gold, so is a man to his praise, Prove. 27.21. The
sense is variously given; this seems to me most full and consonant, (if chapter
17.3. be compared, where the same comparison is used), So is a man to the trial
of his Praise. Others Commendations are to be case into the fining-pot of our
own Consciences: If these convince that we are dross, what are we the better
though they cry us up for Gold? Let thy Conscience be good, or their
Commendatio will not do good but hurt Non ideo bona est Conscientia, quia vos
illam laudatis. Quid enim laudatis quod non videtis? Aug. de Verb. Dom. Sermon.
49.
: It Is not whom Man commends, but whom God commends, and Conscience commends
in and under God that is approved, 2 Cor. 10.18. 1 John 3.20.

(5) My Comforts will be great: Who knows the great Comforts of a good
Conscience? Of which hereafter. It Is acknowledged that Comfort does immediately
grow rather out of the Testimony of a good Conscience, than out of its truth of
goodness: But this is the root and fountainhead of it, that the Conscience is
truly good; and this streams shame and consternation to accusers, support and
comfort to such as have this good Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 Pet. 3.16. Let the
fountains of the deep be broken up, this will be an Ark of safety from the
Deluge, and a continual feast in the days of affliction and distress, 1 Pet.
3.21. Prove. 15.15.

(6) My Crown will be glorious: Assure the Conscience good here, and I dare
assure you the Crown of Glory hereafter. The good Conscience has its record on
high, and is assured of its reward on high; Its Witness is in Heaven, and it
ensureth a welfare in Heaven also. There is a great recompense of reward if you
keep your Conscience and cast not away your confidence: No sooner shall you
have discharged your Consciences, but God will deliver you the Crown: I have
fought a good fight, says Paul, I have finished my course; henceforth is laid
up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall
give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing, Job 16.19. Heb. 10.35. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

2ly. Argue it with Conscience: Psalm. 42.5, 11. and 43.5. 1. Argue from its
preferring honor; by this it is that I am difference from, and dignified
beyond the bruits; and shall my glory descend in shame? and my best honor in a
worse than brutish obstinacy? shall their brutish goodness outbrave mine, who
have the principles of a man, and bear the profession of a Christian? shall
they know, and I not consider? shall their knowledge be (according to its kind)
good, and my Conscience continue bad? Let men's credit be never so great, if
their Conscience be not therewith good, they are accounted no better than
beasts in the sight of God, Isa. 1.3. Jer. 8.7. Psalm. 49.20.

2. From the place it holds: 1. In Man; Conscience is not placed in the lower
sensitive and earthly; but in the higher, intellectual, and heavenly part of
Man; shall my best be evil? my light darkness? my heaven-born power but as an
earthen pitcher? If I be not good in this, where should, where shall I be good?
2. Over Man; God has given it dominion over the whole man, and it is to have
the ducture in all matters; and shall not my Conscience be good, whose command
is so great? shall that abide yet further evil, whose authority is of so vast
extent? 3. Under God; He has made it a god to thee, as Moses sometimes was to
Pharaoh, Exodus 7.1. It is God's Vicegerent in thee, who is and does good; and
shall not this be good, that holds next under God?

3. From the perfections it had: How choice were they as Conscience was
created, and came off from the workmanship of God! [ Eccles. 7.29. Col. 3.10.
Ephesians. 4.24.] And does not every Creature, even to the crawling worm, contend
toward the recovery of its lost perfection and proper good? Shall man then, or
shall I only who am endowed with an intelligent and immortal Spirit, sit down
at rest in the evil lost by me, and not reach after the good that lies before
me, and is tendered to me?

4. From the power it has: It can (as one says Annesly Lect. Ep. 5.
) do any thing but make evil good: Let Conscience be bad, and it makes not
only an indifferent, but a good action bad (as before); Let Conscience be good
and it makes an indifferent Action good; and though it does not alter the
nature, yet it abateth the malignity of an Action, that is in it self evil; as
in the Polygamy of the Patriarchs: And should not this power be good, whose
power is so great, both for evil and for good?

5. From the Principles it owneth: 1. In Nature; Does not even Nature it self
teach me, that my Conscience be good, whatsoever pains it cost me; or whatever
be the persecutions from men, wherewith it may be consequenced? The very
Heathens have therefore prescribed means, and pressed motives. 2. In Grace; how
much more am I taught to exercise my self herein, and engage my self hereunto,
by all the principles of godliness, and by all the Promises of the Gospel?

6. From the Offices it is to perform: Can my Conscience do well if it be evil?
do not its Offices for God require, that it be holy and good? Conscience has
the office of 1. A Minister, and is therefore obliged to be good; a bad
Minister being the worst of Men, there is little hopes of its ministering good,
unless it be a good Minister. 2. Of a Magistrate, who should be most eminently
and exemplarily good, and a Minister to thee for good. 3. Of a Witness: 4. And
of a Judge; which must be good, or they will do evil; do evil themselves, and
not deliver Souls from extremity and injustice.

3ly. Apply you to the Causes of a good Conscience: The Causes improved, the
effect will ensue: These are principal, or less principal.

(1) The Principal is God: Every good and every perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the father of Lights. The good Conscience is from the God of
Conscience: The God that made thy Conscience can alone make thy Conscience
good: Acknowledge him then in all thy ways, and he shall direct thy paths. Ask
of him by prayer and strong cries, as David did, Thou art good, and do good,
teach me thy Statutes: Incline my heart to thy Testimonies: Let my heart be
sound in thy Statutes: Create in me a clean heart, O God: Jam. 1.17. Psalm.
119.36, 68, 80. 1. It proceeds from the good will of the Father: The
Inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding: It Is He that puts Wisdom
in the inward parts, and gives Understanding to the Heart. Press thy Heart to
consider it, and plead with him in Supplication; who delights to be urged with
the liberousness of his own acts of Grace; and gives liberally to him that
asks: Job 32.8. c. 38.36. Jam. 1.5. 2. It is procured by the great worth of
the Son, who was made sin for us, to take sin from us; and in the likeness of
sinful flesh, by a sacrifice for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, and so
brings us to God, 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 John 3.5. Romans 8.3. marg. 1 Pet. 3.18. The
good Conscience costs no less price than the Blood of God; the Blood of Christ
was shed, that the besmeared Conscience might be sprinkled and purged for the
peculiar service of God, Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Heb. 10.22. c. 9.4. Apply
then the meritorious and medicinal virtue that is in the Blood of Christ, for
cure of those maladies and bruises, that are in thy Conscience: Apply it by an
hand of Faith; make it thine: Put thou on the Lord Jesus Christ: Bring it down
to thy case, let this Blood be sprinkled on thy Conscience; apply it in ardent
prayer; come unto God by him; present his Merit with thy malignity to Divine
mercy: Plead his worthiness in thy unworthiness; his stripes for thy healing;
the righteousness of Christ for the renovation of thy Conscience. Pursue thy
petitions upon the price he has paid. 3. It is produced by the gracious work
of the Spirit. If Conscience be spiritual and gracious it comes from the spirit
of Grace; if pure, if holy, it is by the power of the Holy Ghost: It Is carnal
till the Spirit comes; never spiritual till born of the Spirit: It is the
spirit of life which sets it free from the law of sin and death: Joh. 3.5. Romans
15.13, 16. Romans 8.2. What Evangelical Truths are imprinted on the good
Conscience, they are of the Spirit's writing, 2 Cor. 3.3. What Evangelical
Testimony is imparted by the good Conscience, it is of the Spirit's working; of
his working for us, who also witnesses therewith in us, Romans 8.15. c. 9.1. Put
not off the Spirit then, in its motions and essays upon you which he makes;
ply to him with all diligence and dearness; put him not off with delays; much
less should thou provoke him with a denial. Let Steven speak why the Jews
were uncircumcised in heart, Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, Act. 7.51.
Rather pray in the Spirit, which God has promised to pour out: And who knows
but Beggars may be blessed in that branch of the Promises of his Grace? I will
put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall
keep my judgments and do them: Prove. 1.23 Luke 11.13. Ezekiel. 36.27.

(2) The less principal Causes are 1. an operative faith and love within you;
2. the ordinances for faith and love without you.

1. Let there be an operative faith and love within you: These like Judah and
Simeon his Brother come up into each others lots to subdue the Canaanites, and
set right the Conscience. Let there be Charity out of a pure heart, and Faith
unfeigned, and thou can not be left without a good Conscience; which the
Apostle lodges in the midst of these, as the Tabernacle of the Congregation
was in the midst of the Camp, Judge. 1.3. 1 Timothy 1.5. Numb. 2.17. Both of them
have a blessed operation and tendency, first to purify, then to pacify the
Conscience. Of which hereafter.

2. Live in the Ordinances for Faith and Love: Be much in Praying, Hearing,
Reading, Meditation, Conference; the end of all these Commandments of God is to
make thy Conscience good: Cry after him, and continue in them for this end;
make God's end thy errand to them; and your heart shall live that seek God, 1 Timothy 1.5. Psalm. 69.32. You wrong your own Souls that wave the Ordinances of our
Savior: How many an evil Conscience has been healed and cured by them! How
many a bad Conscience have been made good! and how many a good Conscience have
been made better! The way is as open to you, as it was to them; follow God in
them; forsake not the ways of his Gospel; you shall know if you follow on to
know the Lord. Continue at the gates of Wisdom; come for Wisdom to her gates,
and thou shall not come off a loser; yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and
liftest up thy voice for understanding: If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasures; then shall thou understand the fear of
the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, Prove. 8.33. ad finem. Hos. 6.3. Prove.
2.1. -- 6.

4. Attend Conscience throughout: get Conscience well-principled, for which God
calls upon you; My Son keep my words, and lay up my Commandments with thee: Let
thine heart retain my words, Prove. 7.1. c. 4.4. 2. A right application of these
principles, both as a witness, and as a judge; to which purpose (as I shall
particularly direct hereafter, so) you must endeavor the right purifying and
the right pacifying of your Consciences; and get Conscience both well-purified
and well pacified; of which I shall speak distinctly in the Questions that
ensue, to which I must here dismiss you.

Q. 7. How may we keep a good Conscience?

This Question supposes you in the possession of a good Conscience, and is
subjoynfor the preservation of your Conscience good, See Perkins, T. 1. Treat.
of Conscience c. 4.. 2. page 553. Sheff. good Cons. c. 25.
with the goodness of Evangelical purity immediately, and with the goodness of
Evangelical peace mediately and remotely, of which more afterward.

In order hereunto, there are some things to be declined and taken heed of, and
others to be done and taken heed unto.

First, viz.

1. An itch after curious questions, frothy speculations, fabulous and vain
bablings in and about the matters of Religion; which will eat as a canker,
effeminate the Conscience and will increase unto more ungodliness, from these
withdraw: And let the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine which is
according to godliness take up your deliberations and discourses; the end
whereof is a good Conscience, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. c. 2.16, 17. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. c.
1.4, 5.

2. Ill Companions: These corrupt both the Conversations and Consciences of
each other; witness Hymeneus and Alexander, Hymeneus and Philetus, Phygellus
and Hermogenes, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. 2 Timothy 2.17. c. 1.15. As you would preserve
your Conscience, partake not with their company unnecessarily. Can a man take
fire in his bosom and his Clothes not be burnt? Can one go upon hot coals and
his Feet not be burnt? See how Ahab's Company, and Solomon's Concubines
debauched his and Jehoshaphat's Conscience, and drew upon them God's
displeasure, Ephesians. 5.7, 11. Prove. 6.27, 28. 2 Chronicles. 18.3. c. 19.2. 1 King.
11.4, etc. Beware of the communion of evil men, as you would not blemish
Conscience in the eye of God, Psalm. 26.4, 5. c. 119.63. Prove. 13.20. c. 14.7.

3. An idle, corrupt, and soothing Ministry, that lull Conscience asleep in
sin, or lash the Conscience of strictness: These are the pests of any people:
My Son cease to hear the instruction that causes to err from the words of
knowledge: Hearken not unto the Prophets that make you vain, and speak a vision
out of their own heart; crying peace, peace, when there is no peace, Prove.
19.27. Jer. 23.16. -- 21. c. 6.14. Ezekiel. 13.10, etc. Attend rather the most
strict and soul-searching Ministry; enquire and take counsel from the Seer;
whose Sermons are most sharp and searching even to the thoughts and intents of
thy heart; follow these, and account of their correptions as an acceptable
kindness, Heb. 13.17. 1 Samuel 9.9, 10, 18. Heb. 4.12. 1 Cor. 14.25. Ps. 141.5.

4. Intemperance of all kinds, and toward any Creature Comforts, or Secular
contentments: Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your Hearts be
overcharged with any of them; be crucified to the World, and let the World be
crucified to you; or Conscience will be captivated by the World; the rational
Will to the sensitive or brutish appetite. If you are set upon it that you will
be rich, you shall be snared and enslaved by it, and shall not be innocent,
Luke 21.34. Gal. 6.14. 1 Timothy 6.9. Prove. 28.20.

5. Indulgence of any one corruption, which speaks Conscience already defective
in its Office, and steals off its tenderness, etc. by degrees: Sin is never at
a stay; if Conscience let alone Concupiscence, it will soon conceive, quicken
and bring forth, first sin, then death, Jam. 1.15. Psalm. 1.1. You must exercise
a good Conscience if you would eschew sin; and eschew sin, every sin, if you
would exercise a good Conscience; specially eye the beginnings and entrance of
sin, that you be not hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; Principiis
obsta, Corruption gains by steps. Peter first casts off fear, then closes
with falsehood, then curses and forswears: His faint denial at first time
fetches out a dreadful Oath at second time, and a most daring imprecation the
third, Heb. 3.13. Mat. 26.69. -- 75. Conscience loses by steps also; Sin
happily has been unportable, now (it may be) it is heavy; take up betimes,
within a while it will become portable, next time pleasant to thee, and perhaps
within a while, thou may plead for it. To such extremities some have arrived
gradually as Bernard observes Primo importabile, processu temporis grave,
Paulo post leve, postea placet and dulce est. Ad extremum, quod erat
impossible ad faciendum, est impossible ad continendum. Bern. de Cons. c. 3.
: Beware of secret sins; these are a moth that eat out its integrity; beware of
smaller sins, these make way for greater, and do as surely, (though not as
suddenly) sink the vessel of Conscience as greater leaks, or the springing of a
plank does. Beware of the shows and seeds, and inducements to sin; come not
nigh her corner, these contract carelessness upon Conscience; admit not so much
as thread or shoo-latchet; beware especially of staring and scandalous sins,
which are like the wild Boar of the Forest, to root up, rend and devour:
Refrain thy foot from every evil way, Psalm. 19.12, 17. Eccles. 10.1. Jude 23.
Psalm. 51. and 119.101.

6. Idling away the checks and convictions of Conscience: Observe its sayings,
as Jacob did Joseph's, whilst others do, as Joseph's Brethren did, envy it or
them: If thou will be deaf to Conscience now, Conscience within a while may be
dumb to thee: David does not hear Conscience, but hastens into Bathsheba; and
how long was it e're he heard from Conscience? and when he does, it is such a
voice as makes his ears to tingle, and his heart to tremble, Genesis 37.11. 2 Samuel 11. and 12. cum Psalm. 51.

7. Indispositions and evils of Conscience: What these are has been premised;
how these are best healed and cured, will be prescribed hereafter: Beware of
its sleepiness, searedness, etc. every disease has a tendency toward a
dissolution, as in Nature, so also in Grace.

8. Enforcing and violating Conscience: Sins against Conscience are of saddest
consequence, and do of all others most wound and wast the Conscience. One sin
deliberately committed against the Dictates of Conscience, does more to the
corrupting and defilement thereof than many others contracted through weakness:
David's sin against the light of Conscience lost him the sense and savor of a
good Conscience. Men that force Conscience do at length flight Conscience; and
it is just with God, while these put away the good Conscience which they seemed
to have, that he pluck it away also; and that he punish this violence and their
voluntary resistance with a final remorslesness, Psalm. 51.10. 1 Timothy 1.19. Jer.
9.3. Romans 1.28.

9. Inordinate cares, shame and fears, which overcharge Conscience, and are
offended with the Cross: You must expect contempt, and to endure the Cross, if
you will exercise and enjoy a good Conscience; shame and fear decline those,
and you must therefore decline these; divert them rather upon their proper
Objects: Be ashamed and afraid of sin as the greatest evil, and of losing the
sight and salvation of God, who is the greatest good, as you are advised by the
Apostle for having a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3.14, 15, 16. c. 4.12, 13, 16.
It Is no matter of shame, or fear to suffer for Conscience; it is a fearful thing
indeed to suffer in or from Conscience: But ^^o, this is thankworthy (an
expression beyond any other in all the Bible) if a man for Conscience toward
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2.19.

Secondly, There are some things to be done:

1. Employ your strictest care: Sin and Satan lay their main Batteries against
this; the good Conscience is the grand Citadel of a gracious Christian; get
this, and they get all; keep this and ye keep all. You are proportionably
concerned to preserve the outer guards in your Conversations; but you are
principally concerned to preserve the inner and main guard of your Conscience:
Keep this and it will keep thee: But remember as it was not gotten idly, so
neither is it kept but with industry: Keep thy heart with diligence, nay with
all diligence, and above all keeping; and good reason, for out of it are the
issues of life, Prove. 2.10, 11. c. 4.20, 21, 23.

2. Extend this care to all the sorts and kinds of a good Conscience: To the
pure, peaceable, sincere, soft and tender Conscience, etc. and touching which
we shall instruct hereafter, yea and to the whole circuit and compass of
Conscience. Take a prospect of every part, in every proposition that it may be
good, both as a Rule, and as a Witness, and as a Judge: Of which also you may
expect in the ensuing parts of this Discourse.

3. Hear Conscience: Conscience has a voice within you, as well as Christ in
his Word without you; a voice * of correction in case of evil; Why art thou
cast down, O my soul, etc? Psalm. 43.5. A voice of counsel and direction, for
continuance and growth in good, as David's had, My reins also instruct me in
the night-season, Psalm. 16.7. Hear counsel then, and receive instruction, that
thou may be wise in the latter end. Conscience never hardens till it is not
heard; the more attention is given by you, the more authority is gained to it,
and the better advise it gives to you. Attend the directions and discourse of
Conscience then, as Joseph and Nehemiah did, who thereby kept an unspotted
Conscience, amidst all aspersions and calumnies, Prove. 19.20. Genesis 39.9. Neh.
6.11.

4. Estate it often by its Copy, or Original, rather the Holy Scriptures: These
are the (...), the prime rule and standard by which you must pass and square
Conscience; Christians must write them a Copy of this Law in the Book of
Conscience, if they would be kept incorrupt and from crooked ways, and examine
this exscript often by that, as the Kings of Israel must. Conscience is to be
instead of a mouth to Scriptures, as Aaron was to Moses; but the Scripture is
to be instead of a God to Conscience, as Moses was to Aaron, Deuteronomy. 17.17, 18,
19. Exodus 4.16. Conscience is to every man as his Book (as Bernard Vnicuique
suus libe^ est conscientiu. Conferamus itaque libros nostroscum librovitae, ne
forte in illa ultima discussione abjiciantur si non fuerint emendati. De Cons.
l. 1. c. 9.
well observes); but such as must be examined by the Bible, compared with and
corrected by it: Order my steps in thy Word, says David. Thy Testimonies also
are my delight, and my counselors, Psalm. 119.133, 24. Order Conscience by
this, through all its offices and proceeds. Is Conscience a rule? The Word must
be the Regula regulans; Conscience is but Regula regulata; Conscience must take
the rule from Christ in his Word, and then give it to the Christian, for the
weighing of his Estate and Actions: The Word is the lamp for the feet, and
light for the paths, Psalm. 119.105. Is Conscience a witness? If you look that
it witness the Truth and in truth, have it to the Law and to the Testimony,
Isa. 8.20. Is Conscience a Judge? If you would have it judge righteous judgment,
away with it to the Word of Righteousness, which shall judge you in the last
day, Joh. 12.48.

5. Engage the choice and constant resolutions of your wills: It is well with
Conscience while the Will is constant, and cleaves unto God with full purpose;
let the Will be preserved steady, and its welfare will be preserved in safety:
The weal of Conscience much-what follows the Will's choice, and when this is
found divided, that is faulty and diseased, Act. 11.23. Hos. 10.2. It Is said, 1 Timothy 1.19. they put away a good Conscience, and concerning Faith made
shipwreck. Their loss did not arise as from its next cause, from other's
violence, but their own voluntariness; Satan, seducers, sufferings could never
have pulled it away, if they themselves had not put it away: They made
shipwreck rather than endured shipwreck. Well then, if you would still have a
good Conscience, be willing in all things to live honestly, Heb. 13.18.

6. Eye God's all-seeing knowledge: Let thy Conscience keep its eye upon God,
who keeps his eye upon thy Conscience: Set the Lord always before thy face
with David; and set thy self always before the face of the Lord with Paul. As
of God, as in the sight of God, so steer thy whole course: Keep thy Conscience
on God, and God will keep thy Conscience, who has said, Walk before me and be
thou perfect, Psalm. 16.8. 2 Cor. 2.17. Genesis 17.1. Conscience is a knowledge
together with the Lord; look to it then in every creek and turn of thy life;
Does not he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he that keeps thy soul,
does not he know it? Prove. 24.12. Psalm. 44.21. The prospect David took of Gods
omniscient knowledge, preserved a tender, gracious, and holy Conscience, Psalm.
139. I have kept his precepts and thy testimonies, says he elsewhere; for all
my ways are before thee. Eye him that is invisible with Moses, whose eye is
upon all thy goings: Tell Conscience as Laban told Jacob, No man is with us:
But see, God is witness betwixt me and thee. And forget not his Mizpah (that is
a Beacon or Watchtower), and say to it with him, The Lord watch between me and
thee, when we are absent one from another, Psalm. 119.168. Heb. 11.27. Genesis
31.49, 50.

7. Exercise your selves to have always a good Conscience: So Paul, Herein do I
exercise my self to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God, and
toward men, Act. 24.16. Conscience will not be ensured or preserved without
consideration, exercise and pains. 1. Co-united endeavors there must be, as
respects the subject; Herein do I exercise my self; (...), this is his study,
his labor, his work, his business, which took up his outward, specially his
inward man: Of so large an import is that word. Here is matter enough to take
up the whole Man, Mind, Memory, Will, Affections, Members; which had need be
all employed, either for informing of, or conforming to Conscience. (2)
Continued endeavors they must be, as respects the circumstances, Herein do I
exercise my self always --.Let the times frown, or favor the good Conscience;
let Conscience smite or smile, whether you are under the arrests of Judgment,
or the happy liberties of mercy? whether men speak well or ill? whether the
Candle of the Lord shine upon you on the one hand; or the calumnies of men,
like so many arrows stick fast in you on the other: whatever business be before
you, this business must not be behind, or be neglected by you; and herein use
an holy constancy, as you would maintain an holy Conscience, and be able to say
with Paul, I have lived in all good Conscience before God until this day, 1
Pet. 3.15. Job 27.6. (3) Comprehensive endeavors they must be, both as
respects the state of Conscience, that it be void of offense, and the objects
it regards; likewise both toward God and toward man. Keep the Conscience
inoffensive if you would keep it entire, and Evangelically good; (...), which
is sometimes passively taken, Phil. 1.10. Sometimes actively, 1 Cor. 10.32.
that Conscience neither give, nor take offense; either offend, or be offended:
Eye Conscience in both kinds, and herein exercise your selves constantly, nor
only as respects God, nor only as respects man, but as respects both God and
Man; first as respects God, then as respects Man. Let Religion toward God and
Righteteousness toward Man be your continued exercise, and you will neither
impair the tranquillity, nor injure the tenderness of your Conscience, Job 2.3.
Psalm. 15. Isa. 33.15, 16. Conscience has both Tables of the Law committed
originally to it. The Conscience again commits them as Josiah did to the
other Powers as its inferior Officers; when these bring Conscience word, as
Shaphan brought the King back word again, saying, All that was committed to thy
servants they do it: Then we have both a sincere and inoffending, and also a
secure and inoffended Conscience, 2 Chr. 34.15, 16.

8. Exercise Conscience oftener, if you would have it always good: The weal of
Conscience lies much-what within the walls of conscience. If you would keep
conscience well, you must keep conscience at work; sloth will beget
sickness, beget sin; and incense justice, to take away your talent, Mat. 25.28,
2. (1) Be frequent in examining Conscience; ask how the case stands? the
frequent'st trier is usually the forward'st thriver in the School of Christ,
and of Conscience, as well as of humane Literature. The more you prove and
examine Conscience, the more you provoke and engage it for aftertimes, and
improve the experiences antecedent, Psalm. 77.6, etc. (2) Be forward in exciting
Conscience: Is it incident to drowsiness, distempers, deadness? call upon it
the oftener, rouse it up by awakening Considerations; thy Conscience is keeper
of the Vineyards, the other faculties; and thine own Vineyard have thou not
kept? Put it in remembrance of its duty, and thy danger: Provoke it by
arguments of mercy, and alarums of justice; that if thou must say with the
Spouse, I sleep, yet thou may say with her, my heart waketh, Psalm, 108.2.
Cant. 1.6. c. 5.2. (3) Be faithful in exonerating Conscience: Whatever
Conscience directed by the Word of God dictateth, fail not to do it; whatever
it forbids thee, forbear it; else thou teach Conscience to forbear thee;
limiting Conscience, and not listening to Conscience are a ready way to the
losing of Conscience. It Is miserable, when men are churlish with Conscience;
and it must be said of you, as Nabal's servants said of him, He is such a son
of Belial, that Conscience cannot speak to him, 1 Samuel 25.17. Listen to
Conscience then, and be led by it, so shall thou live in all good Conscience.
As God said to Abraham, so say I to thee, In all that Sarah (in all that
Conscience) shall say unto thee, hearken unto her voice: If you would hold a
good Conscience obey a good Conscience; if it may not be heard, it will away:
If it may command thee, it will continue with thee, Act. 23.1. Genesis 21.12. 2 Timothy 1.3. 1 Timothy 3.9.

9. Exercise the good, that is in and with your Conscience: Actuate and employ
your implanted habits of Grace, and these will grow into greater increases:
Keep up the lively exercise of Faith, Love and Repentance; and you keep up the
exercise and enjoyment of a good Conscience: These say to Conscience as David
sometime did to Abiatbar, Abide with us; fear not; he that seeks thy life,
seeks our life: With us thou shall be in safety, Prove. 4.18. 1 Samuel 22.23.
Rinse Conscience upon every fall thou catchest from the filth which thou
contractest in the waters of repentance. The more tears of Contrition, the more
tenderness of Conscience, and transcendent comfort, Psalm. 51. Job 11.14, 15.
Raise and quicken Faith; this will subdue enemies without, sanctify Conscience
within, sprinkle the blood of Jesus on it, and suck continued virtue from his
blessed promises, 1 John 5.4, 5. Act. 26. Heb. 10.22, 23. Repeat and continue
the dear and delicious acts of Love, which will facilitate the Commandments to
you, free Conscience in you, and fits you to whatever capacity Christ shall
call you, 1 John 5.3. 1 Cor. 13.4. -- 8.

CHAP. III. Of the Pure and Defiled Conscience.
Q. 1. Whether the Conscience in man be naturally pure or defiled?

Touching this I must return you to what has been already spoken, [ Chap. 2.
Quest. 2. and 3.

Q. 2. Whether a pure Conscience be attainable by man in this life?

THere is a double purity of the Conscience; 1. Exact and legal, as fully
answers to what the Law asks: 2. Evangelical and more large, as fitly agrees
with what the Gospel allows: That excludes all degrees of pollution, and
includes all degrees of perfection; this allows no degree of pollution, and
aspires after the highest degree of perfection.

1. That legal and exact purity of the Conscience neither can, nor ever was
attained since the Fall by any mere man in this life: 1. Who was ever
privileged in this life from the pollution of Conscience? Who can say I have
made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Who can understand his errors? Who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? (as man is) not one. There is not a
just man upon the earth that does good and sins not, Prove. 20.9. Psalm.
19.12. Job 14.4. Eccles. 7.20. 2. Who was ever possessed in this life with the
perfection of Conscience? Conscience is never perfected till the Christian is
perfected, and the body of sin, and this sinful body be put off fully, 1 Cor.
13.10, etc. Phil. 3.12, etc. What is man that he should be clean? His
Conscience is miserably polluted and seared, who durst pretend to perfection in
the sight of God, and wretchedly deceives himself, and denies the Scriptures
of God, Job 15.14, 15, 16. c. 25.4, 5, 6. c. 11.4, 5. 1 John 1.1, 8, 10.

2ly. This Evangelical purity of the Conscience is attainable in this life, and
should be attained; it is possible we may, and God's pleasure that that we do,
and must endeavor for and ensure it: Lo,

1. Man is admonished, and called upon for it; Purify your hearts ye double
minded. Wash your hearts from your wickedness: Have them sprinkled from an evil
Conscience: Purge your selves, cleanse your selves from all filthiness of the
spirit: Hold the mystery of faith in a pure Conscience, which implicitly
requires that you have a pure Conscience, wherein to hold it. In short, the
end of the Commandment is Charity out of a pure heart, and of a good
Conscience, Jam. 4.8. Jer. 4.14. Heb. 10.22. 2 Timothy 2.21. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Timothy
3.9. c. 1.5.

2. Means are afforded and communicated for it: Without us, the Word and
Ordinances; within us, Faith, Hope, etc. Above us the Blood and Spirit of
Christ, whereby the Conscience may be purged from dead works: Of which some
things have been premised, and more will be subjoyned hereafter, [ Q. 5.] If
this mercy were not to be attained, wherefore are these means? they were (as to
this) in vain, and to no purpose appointed.

3. Many have attained it: Paul thanks God, whom he served from his forefathers
with a pure Conscience. The Deacons held the mystery of faith in a pure
Conscience: Wherefore should I multiply instances? in whomsoever there was or
is a living faith, and lively hope it did, and does purify the Heart and
Conscience, 2 Timothy 1.3. 1 Timothy 3.9. Act. 15.9. 1 John 3.3. In short whosoever
believes, is pure, has all things pure to himself, and his Mind and
Conscience purified in him, Tit. 1.15.

Q. 3. Whether a Man's Conscience may be habitually impure and defiled, and he
not apprehensive of it.

Though all the Sons of Men may know de facto, and should know de jure; Whether
their Consciences are pure or polluted; yet many a man's Conscience is
habitually impure and polluted, and he knows it not. 1. Witness Scriptures;
There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, yet is not washed from
their filthiness, Prove. 30.12. Laodicea says, I am rich and increased with
goods, and have need of nothing, and knows not that she is wretched and
miserable, and poor and blind, and naked. Instances would be endless, Luke
18.11, 12. Isa. 65.5. 2. What else is the work of the Spirit, of the
Scriptures, and of the servants of God by office, but to convince of sin, and
shut up the Conscience of sinners in the sense of their sinful condition to
open their eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, that they that see not
may see the defiled and deplorable state in which they have been and yet are,
and be at length convicted (as those Pharisees were) by their own Conscience.
Joh. 16.8, 9. Act. 26.18. Psalm. 19.8. Joh. 9.39. c. 8.9. Shall I point you
whence it arises; 1. Partly from want of self discussion; Conscience is seldom
or never put to the question by them, or they by Conscience: They consider not
in their hearts: Heb. They say not to their hearts: Hos. 7.2. How could those
loose and wicked wretches so insolently insist upon it, We are wise, and the
law of the Lord is with us: But that they held fast deceit, and no man said in
his heart, what have I done, Jer. 8.5, 6. cum 9.2. Principally from a wretched
self-indulgence: Self-love flatters men into a fond opinion of themselves, and
pride inflames them into a foolish ostentation; and both render them averse to
the knowledge of the worst by themselves, afraid that Conscience do its work
with much strictness, and arms them also against ^orreign arguments and
convictions, with de^ensive pleas and pretensions; let him hear the words of
the Curse, Yet he blesses himself in ^is own heart, saying, I shall have
peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, etc. Deuteronomy. 29.19.

Q. 4. How may we know whether our Consciences are habitually pure or defiled?

Put Conscience to it, press home upon your hearts, as in the presence of the
most high God, these three Questions which I here present and tender you.

First, What is thy Conscience purified in? If Conscience be purified at all,
it is purified in all, in every orb, every office, every part and proper
officine of the Conscience; it is frequently called the perfect heart, 1 King.
15.14. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. c. 29.19. 2 Chronicles. 25.2. Understand it of an integral
perfection; there is no part of Conscience but is purified. 1. Conscience is
pure as a law; it conserveth pure and holy laws, and because they are very
pure, therefore does this soul love them, Psalm. 19.8. c. 119.140. 2. Conscience
is pure, as it applies this law; as for the pure his work is right; that which
this Conscience eyes is purity, both in it self, and in what is subordinated to
it, by all the acts (generally) it puts forth, Prove. 21.8. Heb. 10.22. It Is an
heart after God's own heart, and therefore with the pure will show himself
pure, and preserves the mysteries of faith in a pure mind and Conscience, 1
San^ 13.14. Psalm. 18.26. 1 Timothy 3.9. Call Conscience then before thee; commune
with the own heart. Has the water of purifying passe^ upon the whole
Conscience? Is every ve^^ thereof like those in Solomon's house of pure Gold?
Do you love pureness of heart? Would you approve your selves in all things, by
pureness as the servants of God? And whatsoever things are pure do you think on
them, and that with best complacence and most contentation? Then are your
Consciences purified, Psalm. 4.4. 1 King. 10.21. Prove. 22.11. 2 Cor. 6.4, 6.
Phil. 4.8.

Secondly, What is my Conscience purified from? The pure Conscience in
Scripture stands opposed not only to that which is defiled, Tit. 1.15. but to
that which is double, Purify your hearts ye double-minded, Jam. 4.8. Let me
ask then, and thy heart answer:

1. Is thy Conscience purified from its doubleness? This is specially when
Conscience will be making or maintaining a coalition and compounding of
interests; uniting and contempering of gain and godliness; God and the World;
or as the Samaritans, Fearing the Lord and serving their own Gods, 1 Timothy 6.5.
Jam. 4.4. 2 King. 17.33. Enquire then 1. into the object, whereto it does or
should determine thee. Is not thy heart divided between God and Mammon? If so,
thou art verily faulty. But is it united to fear God's name? There is none that
Conscience bids thee pursue by desire like him, or binds thee to please in and
by thy duties like him, or to promote his designs of glory, equal with him,
Psalm. 86.11. c. 73.25. 1 These. 2.4. 2. Enquire into the offices, whereunto it
directs thee. Do thou renounce the hidden things of dishonesty; durst you not
walk in craftiness, or handle the Word of God deceitfully, by contempering
flesh and spirit in thy work as Vintners do in their Wines, (...), But would
thou every office thou presentest, should be a pure offering, every prayer a
pure prayer? And that which thou principally covetest therein is, that thou
may call on the Lord out of a pure heart? 2 Cor. 4.2. Mal. 1.11. Job 16.17. 2 Timothy 2.22. 3. Enquire into the openness, simplicity and unguilful disposition
of thy Conscience: What have thou an heart, and an heart (as those Psalm. 12.2.
marg.) one for God, another for Baal, for the world? Miserable! the pure
Conscience is a plain Conscience; it is clothed with simplicity and godly
sincerity; it is a spirit in which is no guile. Durst you not double then in the
matters of Conscience? nor dissemble in the matters of corruption? Art willing
God should see the worst of thee, and show thee the very worst of thy self?
Do thou expose all to his search, and would approve all in his sight, and
not so much as have thy heart secretly enticed from himself? This is a pure
Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. Psalm. 32.2. 1 Chronicles. 12.33. Psalm. 119.23, 24. Job
31.27.

2. Is thy Conscience purified from its defilement? I know you are not purified
from all degrees of sin; are you from all the kinds of sin? You are not
purified from the actual stain of them; but are you from the habitual state in
them? this is God's promise and the Gospel-purity of the Conscience, I will
cleause you from all your filthiness, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 33. c. 37.23. I know
none can say, and speak truly, his Heart is clean from all adhesion of sin to
him, or from activity of sin in him. But can you say, my heart is clean from
the approbation of any sin by it, and from the allowance of any sin in it? (1)
What say you to an habitual course in sin? I know there are wicked works found
with you; but is there no wicked way found in you? Do you refrain your feet
from every evil way? Though you fall into the mire with the sheep, do not you
wallow in the mire with the Swine: Do you wash off the repeated spots of your
sins by the renewed streams of godly sorrow to repentance? else never call it a
pure Conscience, Psalm. 139.24. Psalm. 119.101. 2 Pet. 2.22. Mich. 6.11. (2) What
say you to the authority and command of sin. Does Conscience woo and welcome
it? or witness and war against it, and wash it self afresh in the blood of
Christ, and waters of Contrition, when it has contracted guilt and filth by
the power or policies of it. Is Conscience pure from its reign, though she
cannot preserve you from its rage? Sin may pollute your Conscience, and for
present captivate it: But does not Conscience give up her self to the commands
thereof, but grieves rather that she should so be contaminated? And when
captivated, does Conscience raise complaints in, and recollect the other powers
of the Soul? And does she run to Christ, renew the quarrel, and reinforce her
strength, for another combat, and resolve never to quit the field till she
carries the victory, and the Crown be fixed upon the head of Christ? This is a
pure Conscience, Romans 6.12. -- 23. c. 7.15. -- ult. (3) What say you to the
hearts closing with sin? Are you pure from the indulgence of sin, though you
cannot be from the in-dwelling of sin? Do you hate all false ways? Is there
never an Herodias, that your Hearts hug and cherish? Are you for taking away
all iniquity? Is thy Conscience afraid of all, abhorrent from all, arms against
all? Secret as well as open? Such as serve the interest of the flesh, as well
as such as straiten it? And would you keep your selves unspotted from the
world, unspotted from the flesh, as well as unswallowed u^ by the world, or by
the flesh? This speak^^ you to have a pure Conscience, Psalm. 119.104, 128. Hos.
14.2. Psalm. 19.12. and 13. Jam. 1.27. Jude 23.

Thirdly, What is thy Conscience purified unto: (1) To what as thy employment?
The pure Conscience is for the purest carrlage, after the purest Copy, 1 Job.
3.3. This is the Temple of God, the very floor of whose house, as was that of
Solomon's, is over-laid with pure Gold, both within and without, 1 Cor. 3.17. 1
King. 6.30. Search the acts and offices of Conscience then; is Godliness the
greatest employment, which it commands the other powers of the Soul, and
wherein it most congratulates it self? If it be purified from sin, it is for the
service of God; if from dead works, it is to serve the living God, 2 Timothy 1.3.
Tit. 2.14. Heb. 9.14. (2) To what as thy enjoyment? The pure Conscience is for
the purest comforts; not so much for those which run out of the muddy Cisterns
of Creatures, but for such as rise out of the unmixed springs of Communication
with God in Christ, and the intimate sense of his quickening and conserving
influences: Nor does it ever enjoy it self with that serenity, as in the
evidence of God's grace to him; or in the exercise of his grace in and by him:
This is its rejoicing, this its rest, Psalm. 65.4. 2 Cor. 1.12. Psalm. 116.7.
Enquire then, what are those enjoyments wherein Conscience gives thee the
greatest content and complacency? Are they the impurer objects and operations
of Sense, or the purer acts and objects of the spirit of Faith? Here is that
pure river of the water of life, wherein the pure Conscience does most bath and
bless it self, Phil. 4.7. Romans 15.13. Rev. 22.1. (3) To what as thy end? The
pure Conscience puts forth its acts, both imperate and elicite, upon the purest
account, and for the purest ends; with pure Conscience. The Intentions to which
it determines the Will are not, as the Feet in Nebuchadnezar's Image, part of
Iron, and part of Clay, but like that Image's Head of fine Gold: It Is a
Conscience toward God, 2 Timothy 1.3. Dan. 2.32, 33. 1 Pet. 2.19. Enquire then
whether the praise of God be that principal end which you prefer in and above
all, that Conscience carries you out to enterprise? whether you do not mingle
your glory with his, or make his glory serve yours? If God has purified thy
Conscience, it is peculiarly for himself, as the sole supreme end and object of
it. And the Apostle offers us this observation, That whatsoever is done
heartily ( i.e. of pure Conscience) is done unto the Lord, and not unto men,
Phil. 1.20. Joh. 5.44. c. 12.43. Tit. 2.14. Col. 3.23. Ephesians. 6.6, 7.

Q. 5. How may we get or obtain a pure Conscience?

Answ. This enquiry is not how we may get it pure from some new actual
tincture, (of which see Q. 7.) but from its old habitual taint and pollution:
for which take these Directions.

1. Behold the necessity of a pure Conscience and be awakened: (1.) Without
this there is no Society with God: He is of purer eyes than to entertain you in
your habitual impurity: There is no having, nor so much as hoping Communion
with or a propriety in him, unless Conscience be purified in you, Hab. 1.13.
Psalm. 18.26. 1 John 3.3. Jam. 4.8. (2) Without this there is no Salvation by
God. Wash thine Heart as ever thou would to Heaven: There is nothing enters
which is unclean; that happy place is reserved only for the pure in heart, Jer.
4.14. Rev. 21.27. Psalm. 24.3, 4. A polluted Conscience is neither fit for the
business, nor blessedness of that pure and perfect condition. (3) Without this,
there is no serving of God; at least with acceptance to him, or with advantage
to you. The Heart must be purified that would attempt his Presence, Josh.
24.19. Heb. 9.14. c. 10.22. Jam. 4.8. Till Conscience be purified the pure God
will not endure thy presence, nor will thy impure Conscience easily bear his
Presence. (4) Without this there is no sincerity in thee. Clean or pure acts
will never put ye beyond an hypocrite, without a clean or pure Heart. It Is not
a pure Conversation, but a pure Conscience, that speaks thy condition
prosperous, and secures from the condemnation of Pharisees, Psalm. 73.1. 2 Timothy
1.3. Mat. 23.25. -- 29. (5) Without this there is no security for thee; thy
condition can never be safe, till Conscience be sanctified: All that God
secures Conscience is but on this condition, If thou be pure and upright. And
for the security of Conscience, it is grounded upon the sincerity of Conscience,
it is first pure, then peaceable, as David points us in his prayer; and it is the
pure in Heart are first pronounced Blessed by our Savior, 1 These. 5.23. Job
8.6. Jam. 3.17. Ps. 51.7, 8. Mat. 5.8.

2. Behold the nature of an impure Conscience, and be ashamed: Thou art not so
pure in thine own eyes, but thou art as impure and vile in God's eyes. Be
convinced of this, and thou will be cleansing that, and begging him to cleanse
thee, Prove. 30.12. Isa. 65.5. Mich. 6.11, 13. Job 40.4. (1) Think what is
defiled, Conscience, that choice, that curious piece, that so dignifieth Man
next the Angels, and differenceth him from the Brutes. Conscience that is God's
Tabernacle in Man, and makes Man the Temple of God. Conscience that is chief
among the faculties, and is under God to command the whole frame of our Hearts
and Lives: What, Conscience! that by Creation, was (like the Nazarites) purer
than Snow, whiter than Milk, more ruddy than Rubies; whose polishing was of
Sapphire, should be now blacker than a coal, and she that was clothed in Scarlet
should embrace Dunghils! That thy Gold should become thus dim, and the most
fine Gold be changed into dirt! This cannot but procure a Lamentation;
especially when thou shall consider, that this thou have contracted upon thy
self; who know, how great a crime it is, if through thy means the Conscience
but of a weak brother should be desiled, Prove. 20.27. 1 Cor. 3.17. Lam. 4.1. --
9. 1 Cor. 8.7. (2) Think what it does defile: A defiled Conscience 1. defiles
all of thee; it defiles the Man, the whole Man, the Spirit, Soul and Body are
defiled, even the Mind, the most pure and precious part is defiled, wheresoever
the Conscience is defiled, Mat. 15.18. 1 These. 5.23. Tit. 1.15. 2. It defiles
all to thee, there is nothing pure to thee. The taking of God's Covenant into
thy mouth, thy very Table-comforts, thy Meat become a sin and snare to thee.
Conscience being unclean, whatever it touches does become unclean likewise,
Tit. 1.15. Psalm. 50.16, 17. and 69.22. Lev. 5.2.3. It defiles all that comes
from, or is done by thee. It streams sin upon every service. Thy Civil actions,
thy very plowing is sin; and thy sacred actions, thy very praying is sin
likewise; For who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Mat. 15.18. Prove.
21.4. c. 28.9. Job 14.4.

3. Betake ye to the known provision which God has made for purifying the
Conscience, and be active: The pure Conscience is from God as the principal
Cause; it is he that purifieth, and he that pacifieth the Conscience: He that
cures its diseases, and cleanses it from defilements: He creates, and so the
Heart is clean, 1 These. 5.23. Ezekiel. 36.25. Psalm. 51.7, 10. But though it be his
work principally, it is our work partly too, as himself presses it; Wash ye,
make you clean, etc. Isa. 1.16. It Is his work to bless the means unto
purifying, and our work to be in the use of those means, whereby he purifieth:
Asking the mercy of him, and applying the means to us: (1) Then ask this mercy
from him, with the greatest ardour thou may; acknowledging thy pollution
with shame and sorrow, aggravating it also in his presence, abhorring thy self;
and acknowledge with thy impotency his power, as who alone can purify thee: So
David, Psalm. 51.2. -- 11. His promises of it do not preclude, but should
provoke rather thy prayers for it, Ezekiel. 36.25. cum 37. (2) Apply thee to the
means, and the means to thee, with the greatest activity thou can: These are
the Word, Water, and Blood See Sheffield's good Cons. c. 2. p 33. etc.
. [1] The Word, Ye are clean through the Word, says Christ, Job. 15.3. This is
not only pure in it self, but purifying the Soul that attends the preaching
of it, Psalm. 19.8. Joh. 17.17. Ephesians. 5.26. Submit thy Conscience to the
Commands of it: Purity is the end of them, and will be the effect in thee, 1 Timothy 1.5. 1 Pet. 1.22. If you obey; Then 2. Skill thy Conscience in the
Promises of it. Every Promise is both a motive to and means for cleansing, as
of the flesh, so likewise of the Spirit. But there is an especial Promise in
God's absolute Covenant, I will sprinkle clean water on you, and ye shall be
clean: Which you may urge upon your self in secret, and urge God with in
supplication, 2. Cor. 7.1. Jer. 33.8. Ezekiel. 3.6.25. cum 37. [2] Water, Ezekiel.
ibid. Ephesians. 5.26. The Sacrament of Water should not only be remembered by thee,
but reinforced on thee, by due and doubled consideration: Though I cannot say
to thee as Ananias said unto Saul, Arise and be Baptized, and wash away thy
sins; if thou were baptized in thy infancy, yet I must counsel thee to apply
thy Baptism by fetching arguments from thence, and by eying the ability and
efficacy of the Blood and Spirit of Christ, thereby exhibited, till thou
find the answer thereunto of a good Conscience toward God: And then thy
Infant Baptism will be as effectual to the washing away of thy sins in thy
adult estate, as the Circumcision of the Hands was to the adult Jews, who were
then Circumcised, and not till then, with the Circumcision of the Heart See
Fords pract. use of Infant-^aptis.
, Romans 6.3, 4. Act. 22.16. 1 Pet. 3.21. Phil. 3.11, 12, 13. 2. The waters of
sorrow or sincere repentance; Contrition will cleanse thy Conscience;
Evangelical tears will expunge these tinctures: No dirt will fix where these
drops fall, witness David: Repentance will blot out these stains from thy Soul,
and thy sins also before God. Smite thy rocky Heart then with the Rod of God,
and the Waters will gush out: Draw Water and pour it out before God. Repentance
is called the washing of the Heart from wickedness, Ezekiel. 18.30, 31. Jer.
31.18, 19. Psalm. 51. Act. 3.19. Exodus 17.6. 1 Samuel 7.6. Jer. 4.14. 3. The
Waters of the Spirit, sanctifying and regenerating; the Spirit is not only
compared to Water, as quenching the drought of the Soul, but as cleansing the
defilements of the Soul, Joh. 7.37, 38, 39. Ezekiel. 36.25. Conscience will
continue sinful till he comes and cleanses; its filth is not to be washed off
by any work of flesh, but by the effectual work of God's Spirit: It Is God's
Spirit must sanctify our Spirits, or we stick in the sink and mud of our sin
and uncleanness, Isa. 4.4. Romans 15.16. 1 Pet. 1.2. Resist not the Spirit then,
but receive those influences he sheds abroad: Listen not to the flesh, look
within the vail of the Covenant, where God has promised to put his Spirit
within you; yea, and to pour out his Spirit on you, and plead his Promise in
your Prayers, Ezekiel. 11.19. Isa. 44.3. Psalm. 51.12. and 143.10. [3] Blood: The
Bath for Conscience is the Blood of Christ: Here is the Fountain opened for Sin
and for Uncleanness; this cleanses from all sin, and there is not any sin
which does not need this cleansing, or any power of the Soul: Both the
Tabernacle and all the Vessels of the Ministry were to be purged by Blood;
Moses sprinkled therewith both the Book and all the People. Consider Conscience
then in any capacity, it needs this cleansing as a Book, as a Witness, as a
Judge, as it is the Mansion of God, and as it ministers to and in Man, Zach.
13.1. 1 John 1.7. Heb. 9.14, 19. -- 23. Sprinkle then this Blood of Jesus upon
thy Conscience: The People were to sprinkle the Blood with a bunch of Hysop
dipped therein, as well as the Priests, Exodus 12.22. Lev. 16.14. To note, there
must be an Application of Christ's blood made by us as well as an Application
made to us, of this Blood by Christ; and thus have we our Hearts sprinkled from
an evil Conscience, as by the Spirit on his part, sprinkling it on us; so by
Faith on our part, which sprinkleth us with it: Faith is that bunch of Hysop,
which being dipped in this Blood purifieth the Heart; Purge me with Hysop, and I
shall be clean, says the Psalmist: Purifying their hearts through faith, says
Peter: Heb. 10.22. 1 Pet. 1.2. Psalm. 51.7. Act. 15.9. Believe then in the Lord
Jesus; Faith is not only effectual through the Blood of Christ to purge the
Conscience from the guilt of sin, to the justification of thy person, but also
from the filth of sin to the Sanctification of thy Nature, Romans 5.1. Act. 26.18.

4. Behold the noted excellency of a pure Conence, and be assiduous: For at (1)
Mind the noted place of Conscience, it is the upmost part of the Soul, next
under God, and above all that is in Man: A pure Conscience is of Angelical
perfection: Purity is the Gem and Diamond in the Crown, both of the clear and
pure Conscience; this renders it like the New Jerusalem a City of pure Gold.
(2) The noted power of this Conscience: The pure Conscience has a power of
converting even the basest Metals like the Philosopher's Stone, into pure
Gold; afflictions into advantages: To the pure Conscience all things are pure;
like that Perfume which the Lord prescribes Moses, whatever they are asunder,
being tempered together they are pure and holy, 1 Pet. 2.19, etc. Tit. 1.15.
Exodus 30.35. (3) The noted price of this Conscience: What cost it? no less rate
than the precious Blood of the pure and immaculate Lamb of God: What print
carries it? no lower than the resemblance of the purest Essence and Excellency
of God. Of what preciousness and pleasance does God account it? Of no less than
his Habitation, his Throne, his Resting Place, Heb. 9.14. cum 1 Pet. 1.19. 1 John 3.3. Isa. 57.15. (4) The noted Privileges of this Conscience: How great
here! boldness in prayer, the blessing of peace, the beauties of God's
Presence, etc. Heb. 10.22. Phil. 4.7, Psalm. 18.26. But how glorious hereafter!
in a pure and perfect state; most pure and beatifick sights, Psalm. 24.3, 4.
Mat. 5.8. But consider this, and you cannot be careless: God, Glory, Christ,
Comfort, do all severally bespeak Conscience, as Christ sometime did Peter, If
I wash thee not thou have no part in me. But wash this, and thou art clean
every whit, Joh. 13.8, 10.

Q. 6. How may we preserve our Conscience pure?

Though I must remit you for fuller satisfaction to what has been already
spoken, Chap. 2. Q. 6. Yet I shall not refuse to subjoyn something more in this
place.

1. Continue at your work: Conscience is clean, but not all; therefore is
neither all your work done for its cleansing, till hope pass into enjoyment, ye
ought to be purifying; both the Promises hoped for, and the principle of hope
put upon, and persuade unto it, 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 John 3.3. Neglect not any of the
means already prescribed you Qu. 5. Direct. 3. The same word and work of Faith,
Hope, etc. which made thy Conscience pure, will maintain its purity.

2. Keep Conscience to its work: Keep it doing, and you keep it from defiling:
The pure Gold never rusts or cankers till it rests, or is coffered up: Paul
kept it on employment, and so kept it pure, 2 Timothy 1.3. Act. 24.16. Conscience
has its work within door, upon it self, and upon the whole Soul and Spirit;
and without door, upon the Sense, and their Objects and Organs: If it rests
like a standing Pool, it putrifieth and gathers stench: If it runs, like a
living Fountain, it purifieth it self, and whatever is put into it.

3. Keep Conscience upon its watch: Consciscience is the Sentinel to watch over
and for it self, and the whole Soul beside: Watch therefore in all things. He
that would be clean must be circumspect: 2 Timothy 4.5. Psalm. 119.9. (1) Watch
against Sinners. These will be throwing forth, and throwing on of dirt: Press
not unnecessarily into their Society: Be not partakers with their sin; keep thy
self pure: Isa. 57.20. Ephesians. 5.7, 11. 1 Timothy 5.22. Yea, in the very Society of
the Saints, be yet still upon thy Watch, looking diligently. One defection has
defiled many; and the more weak thou art, the more watchful be thou. A weak
Conscience is defiled quickly: Heb. 12.15. 1 Cor. 8.7. (2) Watch against Satan.
He will be throwing in of dirt: His arrows are not only fiery to dismay thee,
but filthy to defile thee: And his principal design is at thy Heart, thy
Conscience, Ephesians. 6.16. Zach. 3.3. cum 1. Act. 5.3. Be vigilant therefore, so
shall his temptations but perplex thee, not pollute thee. Thou shall not be
filthed by him, but he rather shall flee from thee: 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Jam. 4.7.
(3) Watch against Sin: The sin of thy Nature, this will be throwing up of dirt;
and the sin of thy life, which will be throwing on more dirt. If filthiness be
defiling, then thou can not sin, and be yet spot-free; so it is called once
and again, 2 Cor. 7.1. Jam. 1.21. And you must lay aside all filthiness, if you
would be free; not only grosser sins which put out Conscience; their spot is
not the spot of his Children: But lesser sins, which pollute Conscience, though
not so eminently, as greater do. Every sin, even the smallest, the secretest,
stains thee somewhat, as David well saw, and was sensible of, ibid. Deuteronomy. 32.5.
Psalm. 19.12. Watch against every sin then, and inducement to sin; that thou
may not be so much as tainted with it, as well as not tanned by it, and may
walk in White with Christ's Worthies: Rev. 3.4. cum 2.16, 15. (4) Watch against
this sooty and ensnaring World. The World, as one observes Manton on Jam. 1.27.
Obs. 9.
, is a dirty and defiling thing. The Apostle tells you of the pollutions of it,
and corruption that is in it: And our Savior intimates, that it is hard to
continue in it, and to be kept likewise from the evil of it, 2 Pet. 2.20. c.
1.4. Joh. 17.15. Follow not the World too close then, lest (if it do not dash
out thy brains, yet) it defile thy beauty. Remember what doubled cautions
Christ has given you here. Watch your offers from it, and all the objects of
it. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his Garments, Luke 12.15. c. 21.34.
Rev. 16.15. Pure religion and undefiled before God, is to keep a man's self
unspotted of the World; not only from being swilled in or sunk by it, but from
being spotted with it, Jam. 1.27.

4. Keep a watch upon Conscience. Your Consciences are a apt to contract
stains, as your Clothes are to contract spots. Beware what Objects it gets
near unto, or that these get too near it, behold it the oftener in the Glass of
Scriptures, and brush it oftener by self-searching, and godly sorrow to
repentance; and so keep it with all diligence, Prove. 4.23. Watch against that
original sin wherewith it is polluted, that it pour not out filthiness: Watch
in the Objects of Sense which are thereunto presented, that they pour not in
filthiness. Watch that orb and seat, wherein it is placed. Let thy Mind be
polluted, and thy Conscience will not be long pure. Watch the offense and pett
it is apt to take at preciseness, and exact strictness; Watch against the
oppressing (and in fine overwhelming) diseases or obliquities of Conscience,
error, ignorance, hardness, etc. Heb. 10.22. Tit. 1.15. Act. 24.16. In short,
watch Conscience in all those offices and services it is to perform; especially
1. That it decline not in any of them to sin, or from Scriptures: 2. That it
double not in any service but in singleness of heart do still approve it self.
And this know, that if thine eye be single, thy whole body is full of light:
Heb. 13.18. Ephesians. 6.5. Mat. 6.22. So then, take heed to your selves, that your
heart be not deceived: Deuteronomy. 11.16.

Q. 7. What is to be done for the recovering of our Conscience pure, when we
have contracted any, especially a great defilement?

1. Remember; has a deceived heart turned thee aside? Remember this, O Jacob,
Bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors, Isa. 44.20, 21. c. 46.8. (1)
Remember how it was, when thy self and services, like the shewbread, were set
in order before the Lord, upon the pure Table of an undefiled Conscience; and
were ^o him, and happily to others, of a sweet-^^elling odor, like the pure
incense of sweet spices. To allude to 2 Chronicles. 13.11. Exodus 37.29. Remember the
felicities hereof, and whence thou art fallen, Rev. 3.3.2.5. (2) Remember how
it is. Thy Crown is fallen, and the most fine gold become as the mire in the
streets, How is the faithful City become an harlot; thy silver is become dross,
thy wine mixed with water; and thy way before the Lord is as the uncleanness of
a removed woman, Isa. 1.21, 22. Ezekiel. 36.17. (3) Remember, why and whence it
is. Have thou not procured this unto thy self? Did Conscience ever provoke
thee, that thou should so pervert its glory into shame, and please thy self
in thy own pollution? Has corruption deserved better from thee than Conscience
has done? Could Satan have forced Conscience? This springs from thine own free
consent. This is thy wickedness, and it is bitter, because it reaches unto
thine heart, Jer. 2.17, 33. c. 4.18. 5.25.

2. Repent. So God directs upon the case, and the godly have done accordingly
as Peter and David, Rev. 2.5. c. 3.3. Mat. 26.75. Ps. 51. [ See before Q. 6.
Direct. 3.] (1) Here aggravate it upon thy Soul; rub on thy Convictions by
reiterated Considerations, as thou would recover thy old frame of Conscience*
My sin is ever before me, says David; and the^ he rips up the circumstances by
which it was heightened, Psalm. 51.4, etc. (2) When Peter ha^ weighed (...).
the circumstances of his sin, then (...) wept, and not till then, Mar. 14.72.
Aggravate it then from the circumstances of this defilement; Woe is me, I am
undone, because (...) am a man of such uncleanness. I that the S^ gave himself
for to purify; and the Spirit has given himself unto, to purify me. I that
have such principles from God in me for purifying, such promises of God to me
for purifying: I that so profess, so pray, have been so purged, so preserved,
etc. Aggravate it from the subject of this defilement. What! even my Conscience
polluted! that is to quicken and command all the other power's purity, and to
keep them pure; fetch arguments from Chapter 2. Q. 5. Direct. 2. Oh! if the light
that is in me be darkness, be defiled; how great is this darkness, this
defilement! Aggravate it from the object, against and before whom it is;
Against thee, thee have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, Who art of
purer eyes than to behold iniquity, requirest and rewardest purity, etc. (2)
Acknowledge it in Supplication: Confessing is nearly connexed with cleansing: It
engages us to cleanse in point of Credit, as well as Conscience; and it
engages God to cleanse in point of Covenant, and with respect to Christ, Prove.
28.13. Job 33.27, 28. 1 John 1.9. He that covers his sin with Adam will never
cleanse it. Open then the filth of thy Conscience in a free and full
Confession; and may every word melt into a tear. Tell him with Job, Behold I am
vile; and with Agur, Surely I am more brutish than any man, I have not the
understanding of a man: Prove. 28.13. Psalm. 32.5, 6. Job 40.4. Prove. 30.2. (3)
Abhor thy self in the sense of it. A prostrate self-abhorrence will surely
purge thy Conscience, and blot that consciousness of sin thou have contracted,
both out of God's debt-book, and thy own day-book. Whereof Job and David are
plain and pregnant instances, Job 42.6. Psalm. 51. This Medicament is a sure
preventive and safe purgative of a putrified Conscience; it includes these two
(as the principal) ingredients: 1. Self-displicence in sorrow and indignation
with thy self, as David; Oh! that I should be such a fool, such a sot, such a
beast! 2 Cor. 7.11. Psalm. 73.21, 22. 2. Self-defiance, in shaming and judging
thy own self, renouncing thy righteousness, and ripping up thy follies and
filthiness, and loathing thy self in thy own sight. O Lord, righteousness
belongs to thee, but to me shame and confusion of face: O my God, I am
ashamed, and blush to lift up my face, etc. Ezekiel. 6.9. c. 16.63. Dan. 9.7, 8.
Ezra 9.6.

3. Rev. 2.5.
Renew. Do over the first works for thy former washing. The door of Mercy
stands as open as heretofore. Thy duty to use the means and the efficacy of the
means upon a due use of them is as observable, as heretofore: Then thou were
without strength, and could not cooperate with divine Grace, nor any more
cleanse thy sin, than the Ethiopian can change his skin. In that first work
thou were merely passive: Romans 5.6. Jer. 13.23. Job 14.4 See Saryl, ad loc.
. But now the case is altered, the least Saint is not without a little
strength: Grace is communicated, and does expect thy cooperation with it self,
that a man purge himself: Rev. 3.8. 2 Timothy 2.21. 2 Cor. 7.1. Renew then (1) the
advised provision, Q. 5. Dir. 3. Particularly (2) the application of the
Promises; this is not only an excellent congruity, and an evident connection
between the Promises of Christ, and the purging of our Conscience; but they
exhibit a Copy how we should purge, and effectually conveigh a power, whereby
ye shall purge the Conscience, and escape the corruption that is in the world
through lust: 2 Cor. 7.1. 2 Pet. 1.4. (3) Renew the ardour of thy Prayers;
these will engage and sanctify all other endeavors; engage Heaven and thy own
Heart; follow thy work close here, and with much constancy: Double the duty,
and thy diligence therein: Remember the Psalmist, how he reiterated this
Petition, Wash me, purge me, cleanse me, create a clean heart in me. Wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, Psalm. 51.2.7, 10. (4)
Renew the Acts of these holy Principles in thee, Faith, Hope, and Love; as they
were of past, so are they of present and perpetual efficacy; so the expressions
intimate: Act. 15.9. 1 John 3.3. Purifying ('it is not said having purified)
their Hearts by Faith. He that has this hope purifieth himself, etc. Send
Faith afresh then to the Blood of Christ, and the blessed Covenant of Grace for
cleansing; and let this stir up and streng then the other implanted Habits, to
their several employments. Show Hope a further sight of those pure and perfect
Glories which God has prepared and promised. The more this glorious Purity
becomes the matter of thy Hope for hereafter, the more will a gracious Purity
become the matter of thy attempts and aspirings here: And (to besure) the more
thou love pureness of heart, the more will thou apply thy self for, and shall
attain of heart-purity.

CHAP. IV. Of the Peaceable and Disquiet Conscience.
Q. 1. Whether the Conscience that is not Evangelically good, or pure, may yet
enjoy great peace; and so whether a Man may safely conclude his Conscience is
pure, because it is quiet and at peace?

I. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Others may sing a Requiem
to them, Peace, peace; and they may bless themselves in their own hearts,
saying, I shall have peace; but my God says, there is no peace, Jam. 3.17.
Jer. 6.14. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Isa. 57.21. The quiet of such Consciences some please
to call a Truce; but cannot allow it the name of peace: If that here is only a
temporary suspension of arms, no total cessation See Dyk. good Cons. p. 31, 32.
, the quarrel is not taken up, Conscience is but taking more time to right it
self, and revenge their stubbornness.

Peace of Conscience (if we understand it strictly) imports more than an
immunity from inward Concertations and Concussions; it implies also an
enjoyment of it self, with a victorious serenity in the felicitating smiles of
God's Countenance, and in viewing the spoils of Sin and Satan, its vanquished
adversaries, Romans 15.13. Phil. 4.7. Joh. 14.27. It presupposes peace with God
as its prime basis, upon which it rests; and into which it is resolved as its
principal cause. Peace of Conscience being originally but the reflex of this,
that God is reconciled and at peace with us: Romans 5.1, 2. Job 22.21. Men of
impure Consciences are upon terms of enmity, not of peace with God; they are
against him, and he against them: Ephesians. 2.16. Psalm. 18.26. 2. It presupposes a
propriety in Christ, who is our Peace; whose death for us is the sole price of
our reconciliation and peace with God, and whose Union with us, and the
communion with and conformity to him is the signal evidence thereof. But the
impure Conscience has no interest in Christ; he is not only without Christ,
but at war and enmity with Christ: Ephesians. 2.14. Romans 5.1, 10. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.
Fph. 2.12. Col. 1.21. 3. It is produced by Faith. Faith Evangelical gives us
peace with God, and God gives us peace in and by the exercise of faith. Faith
unites us with God in Christ, and so it is peace in Heaven; here is its direct
act; and then Faith unfolds and reviews this Union, and so it is peace in the
Heart; here is its reflex act. Now the impure Conscience has no saving Faith,
which does still first purify, then pacify the Conscience: Romans 5.1. c.
15.13. Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. 1 John 5.11, 12, 13. Joh. 5.44. Act. 15.9. 4.
Besides this peace is made the privilege, the incommunicable privilege of the
Church and Kingdom of Christ, who are said to be clean, through his word: Peace
I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, etc. i. e. to you, not only
eminently above others; but exclusively to you, and not to any others, Romans
14.17. Joh. 14.27. cum 15.3.

II. Paul before his Conversion; Conscience was quiet and cheery till the
Commandment came; so had the young man, ere he converseth with Christ;
Conscience does not trouble him, ere Christ talks with him, Romans 7.9. Mat.
19.22. 2. Though you resolve upon sin against knowledge, and after conviction,
the contumacy of the Will may so far muzzle the mouth of Conscience. Judas is
resolved upon betraying Jesus, a crime of whose horror he could not but be
convinced by many and clear notices; yet till they had condemned Jesus,
Conscience never condemns Judas, Mat. 27.3. They resolve to perpetuate their
sin; yet say in their hearts, We shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19. 3. Though you
run on in sins of the highest consideration. They that gave themselves over
unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness, felt no lash of
Conscience: Ephesians. 4.19. Yea, such as were filled with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy as to man,
and haters of God, Covenant-breakers, etc. did not find the least regret or
remorse of Conscience, Romans 1.28. -- 31. 4. Though you are rushing upon the
Sword of God's Justice to your own confusion, with Balaam, whose madness the
dumb Ass rebuked before Conscience delivers in the least reproof, or makes
the smallest impression upon him. When vindictive Justice has been pursuing
them to the heels, some there have been, that never did so much as put this
question to their hearts, What have I done? but run on with boldness as the
Horse rusheth into the battle, and sung this Syren-song, to their own
Conscience, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us: Numb. 22.23,
etc. Jer. 8.6. Mich. 3.11. 5. Though you may remind ever and anon what will be
the sequel and consequence of such courses which you live in. Such accounts are
either carelessly intended: He hears the words of the Curse, Yet blesses
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Or
contumaciously inverted: Let us eat and drink (say they) for to morrow we shall
die. If there be so much danger, let us make the best of our deck, while we
may. Art thou come to torment us before the time? Isa. 22.13. c. 56.12. Mat.
8.29. 6. Though you are under the arrest of some present judgment; Conscience
did not awake, nor did they consider in their heart, no not now when their own
doings had beset them about: Hos. 7.2. O Lord, (says the Prophet) thou have
stricken them but they have not grieved, Jer. 5.3. 7. You may reckon your peace
safest when perdition is speediest: When they shall say, peace, peace; i.e.
assured, abundant peace, then sudden destruction, like the throws of a
travailing Woman shall sieze upon them, and they shall not escape: 1 These. 5.3.
The greater their security and the more voluntary, their calamity will be the
more sudden, and without remedy: Prove. 29.1. 8. In short, your Conscience may
remain quiet, yet unclean, even at the approaches of death, and under the
agonies of sickness. Nabal is sick ten days, yet Conscience speaks not any
troubles or distress to him; his Heart died within him, and he became as a
stone; so stupid was it and insensible, 1 Samuel 25.37, 38. 9. Yea unto, and in
their removal by death, in the very last congress with the King of Terrors:
Soul, take thine ease; says the rich man, even to the very night that his Soul
was required of him. Job tells you, that the houses of the wicked are of times
safe (Heb. peace) from fear. They spend their days in wealth or mirth, and in a
moment go down to the Grave. One dies in his full strength, being wholly at
ease and quiet. There are no bands in their death, (says the Psalmist). Dives
finds no terrors of Conscience till he falls into Hell Torments: Luke 12.19,
20. Job 21.9, 13, 23. Psalm. 73.4. Luke 16.22, 23, 25. You may then live
cheerfully, and die quietly, yet with defiled Conscience. Nor may you think
that this false peace is only fallen into by the profane world; 10. Nay
Professors, and some of the highest rank and reputation have perished through
this false peace, witness Ananias and Sapphira; nor may we forget Laodicea. The
foolish Virgins who had the company, the commendation of the wise are not
convinced of the want of grace, or unsoundness of their peace, till they hear
the Proclamation, Behold the Bridegroom comes. And now the door is shut
against them: Act. 5.2, etc. Rev. 3.17. Mat. 25.6, etc.

III. Dyke's ^ood Cons. ^.24. ad ^5.
. The ignorant, the unawakened, the deluded, the hardened Conscience, as
another Sheffield's ^od Cons. ^.18. page ^48. ad ^56.
. Nay 2. that Conscience which is least pure, least clean, is most peaceable
and quiet, usually: As the seared or cauterized Conscience, which is past
feeling, but plunged in all manner of filthiness: 1 Timothy 4.2. cum 1.3. Ephesians.
4.19. Consider 3. Peace of Conscience is no mark of a pious Christian singly
and of it self; nor do we find it simply insisted upon by them as such. I never
find any Saint in the whole Scripture pleading it as the signal evidence, much
less as the sole evidence of his justification and change from death to life.
When they would clear their being in and blessedness by Christ, they do not
attempt the proof of it by their peaceable and quiet enjoyments of themselves,
or of him, but by their pious intercourse with and conformity to him, in the
crucifying of their sins, and quickening of their Souls: Romans 8.1, 2, etc. 1 John 2.3, etc. c. 3.19, etc. Paul's rejoicing was the testimony of his
Conscience, That in simplicity and godly sincerity (not that in serenity and
grateful suavities) he had had his conversation in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.12. 4. A
polluted Conscience may enjoy more peace, (such as it is) than does many a pure
Conscience. What tastes have many such of the Heavenly gift, and of the good
Word of God; yea, and of the Powers of the World to come, who yet have not
arrived to the things that accompany Salvation? Whereas, others are chastened
every morning, have sorrow in their heart daily: For peace have great
bitterness, and are afflicted from their youth up: Heb. 6.4, 5. cum 9. Psalm.
73.14. and Psalm. 13.2. Isa. 38.17. Psalm. 88.15.

IV. Prop. 4.
If you would conclude the goodness of your Conscience, you should rather argue
forward from purity to peace, than backward from peace to purity: Begin first
at the Kingdom of God, which is first righteousness, than peace; as the wisdom
which is from above, is first pure, than peaceable: Mat. 6.33. Romans 14.17. Jam.
3.17. Remember 1. It is purity of Conscience is the principle of peace of
Conscience, I mean of sound and saving peace. This excellent rest is the effect
of righteousness; Peace follows Grace in all the Apostolical Salutations, and
flows from it; To be spiritually-minded is life and peace: Isa. 32.17. Romans
1.7. c. 8.6. 2. Peace is but a privilege, and a separable privilege of purity
and grace: So that it is neither proper nor prudent to prove grace by peace.
Into what a labyrinth of perplexing and amazing fears may you involve your
selves, while you limit your arguments, and proceed by peace! Especially, there
being so many evidences of much grace, where there was no peace, in Job, David,
Heman, and others. 3. Your peace will never prove your purity, simply and by it
self. There is that nearness and similitude between the false and sophisticated
peace of sinners, on the one hand, and the sound and saving peace of Saints on
the other hand, if they are materially considered. Does this Saint feel no
sting of Conscience? neither does that Sinner. Has this Saint suavities of
Conscience? so that Sinner. You must proceed further therefore in your
Enquiries. Does my peace result from the enjoyment of my self in the God of
Peace, as my supreme end and sovereign good? from the enervating of Sin and
Satan, the grand enemies of Peace, which war against my Soul? From the entire
subjection of my whole Man to the Prince of Peace, in my quiet and cheerful
compliance with his Government, etc. These things prove indeed the truth of
your Peace; but they take in Grace with it, and are but an intermediate proof
of your Peace; viz. as they are the immediate effects and evidence of your
Grace. 4. Prove your Purity, and it will prove your Peace then. If the Lord
Jesus be a King of Righteousness to you, he will be after that a King of Peace
also: Heb. 7.2. But truth is, peace of Conscience without purity is both
defiling; Unto them that are defiled is nothing pure; yea and damning; it
accelerateth Men's destruction. Though false peace like those Locusts in the
Revelation has the appearance of Evangelical Peace as they had the Faces of
Men; yet their power is, like theirs, only to hurt Men, who do the more
irreclaimedly thereby go on in sin, like ^he Ox to the slaughter, not knowing
that it (...) for their life, till the dart strike thorough their liver, and
they are inextricably invol^ed in the snare of death and destruction: ^it.
1.15. 1 These. 5.3. Rev. 9.7, 10. Prove. 7.^2, 23.

Q. 2. Whence, or from what Causes is it, that the false Peace of Conscience
arises, that we may avoid such fearful pits and quicksands?

The Causes are many without, within the Conscience See Shepherd sinc. Conv page
133. ad 142.
.

I. Without the Conscience; as,

1. The Devil, who to promote his designs, and preserve his Dominion, cheateth
Souls into and keeps them in this false peace; beguiling them with his
artifices, and guarding them against foreign impressions with his arms. And no
marvel, for it is his interest, to keep all here in quietness. When the strong
man armed keeps the Palace, all his goods are in peace: 2 Cor. 11.3. Luke
11.21. He binds carnal persons in his Chains, and being his Captives,
Conscience it self is much-what at his command and pleasure: 2 Timothy 2.25.26.
Ephesians. 2.2. He blazons the case, if Conscience takes distaste at any time, and
overlays it with his paint and colors, varnishing over our unrighteousness
with other appearances, according to his deceitful arts. Does Eve startle at
his suggestion? We may not do it le^^ we die. Nay, says he, ye shall not
surely die: Ye shall live the sublimest life, ye shall be a^ Gods: 2 Thessalonians.
2.9, 19. Genesis 3.4, 5. He blind^ the Conscience, and bars up the doors and
windows of the Soul against the light of knowledge, lest his deeds, and our
dismal state should be discovered, as well perceiving, what a m^nifestation of
us to our selves this would soo^ make? 2 Cor. 4.4. Joh. 3.20. Ephesians. 5.13. He
baffleth Convictions, if at any time they begin upon the Conscience, and begets
a disbelief of the divine threatenings. God has said, Ye shall not eat of it
lest ye die, says Eves Conscience. No, says Satan, God does know, that in the
day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, etc. God pronounces the furies
of War to Ahab; and his fall in and by it. Satan persuades him there is no
such matter; but he shall reap peace, and victory: Genesis 3.3, 4, 5. 1 King.
22.22. He bears off commotions, whatsoever may disturb the quiet and peace of
Conscience, which he uses as his Quarters and Palace. If a spark of Conviction
be let fall in a sickness, or some other strait, he has his earth to smother
and stifle it, or his water to cool and quench it. If any seed shall be dropped
at a Sermon, he like the fowls of the air comes and catches away that which
was sown in the heart: Luke 11.21. Mat. 13.19. He bribes the Conscience if it
be at any time clamorous, or is prone to quarrel. Sometimes with the
divertisements of sinful or sensual pleasures, that the noise of these may
out-voice, and their music charm the Conscience. Sometimes with the devotions
of a stricter profession. The drunken rounds and debaucheries of riot will no
longer quiet, but rather cut and wound the Conscience. He is content that
Ananias and Sapphira, and Simon Magus shall change their company and work too,
as Judas did, so they cleave to him as their Master. He knows how to put on
the appearance of an Angel of Light. Sometimes by the delicious sweets of a
promise, which he either halves, or otherwise abuses. The heart, happily, is
at no peace, for lack of a promise. The babe must have the breast. Satan, who
ever attends his advantage, can transform himself into a minister of
righteousness; and draws out the breast of the Promise, as he did unto Christ;
He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee. But he omits the principal
part of it, and with a purpose of overthrowing him by the security of the
Promise, when he could not overcome by the sword and spear of his power: Ephesians.
2.2, 3. 2 Pet. 2.19. Act. 5. and 8. 2 Cor. 11.14, 15. c. 2.11. Mat. 4.6. cum
Psalm. 91.11. Well then, beware of Satan; you have seen his arts, be not
ensnared by them. Be not ignorant of his devices. Put on the whole armor of
God, that ye may be able to stand against all the wiles of the Devil. If he
drives on peace, he designs your perdition by it. Be sure his peace is with the
extremest drudgery of the exceedingst danger, and will surely end in damnation;
2 Cor. 2.11. Ephesians. 6.11. 2 These. 2.9. -- 13.

2. Daubing Priests, and Dough-baked Professors, which say, Peace, peace, and
there is no peace. The overflowing showers of Divine displeasure will consume
both these and them together, the deceived and deceivers: Ezekiel. 13.10, -- 16.
Jer. 6.14. Some there are, who can or will see nothing but Visions of peace for
their people; lest when they denounce War from Heaven against others, they
should hear the echo and reflex thereof in their own hearts; or others should
be ready to recriminate, Physician heal thy self: Ezekiel. 13.16, etc. Luke 4.23.
Others it may be will be soothing you up in a false peace, though you walk in
the imagination of your own hearts, amongst fireballs and deaths; and will be
promising you life, while you persist in your lusts. A fearful and horrible
thing, if God himself may be witness: Jer. 23.14, 17. Ezekiel. 13.22. Others will
be smoothing and salving up the matter, upon the least pain or prick of
Conscience. These heal the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, says
the Lord. They skin over the sores of their fond and foolish Patients, without
searching or probing them, or drawing out the putrid matter and core which is
at the bottom of them; that adds to their peril, and will augment their
future pain. They are healing their Souls, while they should be hewing at their
sins, and laying the ax at the very root. For this God will surely and severely
visit: Jer. 6.14, 15. c. 8.11, 12. Hos. 6.5, 9. Take heed then, and turn thine
ear, especially thy heart from all such; for they speak a Vision of their own
heart. They see vain and foolish things for thee, not discovering thine
iniquity. One Micajah, though he sound the Trumpet of War against thy sins,
would be more prosperously attended, and peaceably accompanied, than four
hundred false Prophets, that will sing a requiem to thy Soul, while thou
remainest in thy sinful state: Jer. 23.16, 17. Lam. 2.14. 1 King. 22.6, etc.

3. Divine Justice is another cause, which gives men over to such strong
delusions, blinding the eyes and hardening the hearts, etc. of such obdurate
sinners: 2 These. 2.11. Joh. 12.40. Only remember, he is rather a deficient,
then an efficient cause. For he cannot be the author (to speak properly) of
what he is the avenger. He does not give in this peace, but by withdrawing his
grace, he gives up men for their sin to sink in, and gives them over to sit
down in this false peace: Romans 1.24, 26, 28. But be it remembered also, that he
gives not up any judicially, who give not up themselves actually and
voluntarily. So that here your great care and concern is, that you provoke not
justice hereunto by your own self-pleasedness and stubborn perverseness. Hearken
to him, and you are assured that you shall dwell safely, and be quiet from the
fear of so great an evil: Psalm. 81.11, 12. Romans ibid. Prove. 1.30. ad finem.

II. Within the Conscience. This false peace arises, either from the vicious
qualities, or from the vicious carriage of the Conscience.

1. The vicious qualities of the Conscience are many: I shall mind you of these
six only, from whence it takes its spring and rise. As (...) from its
sortishness or ignorance; either of the God of Peace, and the purity of his
nature, or of the peace of God, and its pure and powerful effects upon our
natures. Or of what the Scriptures dem^nd, as antecedaneous, or in order to
^ound peace, or of what themselves are or do, in observance and obedience of
the terms of peace: Psalm. 50.20. Ephesians. 4.18. Romans 1.21. c. 7.9. Zeph. 1.12. (2)
From its sensuality and enslavedness to the sensual appetite, and those secular
objects which it affects. When the brutish appetite, through men's laziness or
listlesness, once supercedes and commands the rational, a cheap liberty will
content the Conscience, which now lies captivated in its chains. Now God's
judgments are far above out of his sight. And while sense and fancy have their
fill, Conscience is easily flattered, and he says in his heart, I shall never
be moved. Soul take thine ease, says he. Why should thou feed upon gall and
hemlock, who have goods laid up for many years? Psalm. 10.5, 6. Luke 12.19. (3)
From its supiness and self-indulgence, whereby men take it for granted, that
their estate is good enough already, especially if there be the Imprimatur of
any eminent Professor, and therefore think it a needless and supererogatory
piece to undertake such a sour and self-displeasing work, as to put their
condition upon such severe inqui^ies, and so strict an inquisition as their
Preachers would persuade to. Whence it is, that the commands are so much
iterated and ingeminated for examining our selves, considering our ways. etc.
Jer. 5.24. 2 Cor. 13.5. Hag. 1.5, 7. Gal. 6.4. (4) From its sleepiness and
inanimadvertency. Happily the notion and necessity of self-examining sticks
upon men, after a Sermen, or in a Sickness. But it is not so powerfully and
prevailingly, as to put them upon the work presently. But (...), they dismiss
so difficult a work till another, and then another season. It Is requisite, they
have yet a little more sleep, a little more slumber. And God hearkens and
hears, and there is not so much as a question put to their hearts. Well,
happily he renews his calls, and repeats his knocks by some smarter providence,
or severer preaching; and yet through a sleepy deadness, Conscience is prone to
reply as he did in the Gospel, Trouble me not, the door is now shut, and my
children are in bed with me, I cannot yet rise and give thee: Ephesians. 5.14. Jer.
8.6. Luke 11.7. (5) From its searedness and insensibleness, whereby the
awakening woes and alarums of wrath, which are sounded in his word, and
resounded in his works, make no impression upon it, or upon the affections. A
small prick is soon sensed by a sound part; but pierce, press, cut, knock, etc.
a seared part, and there is no sense of pain. This Conscience is seared, as
with an hot iron, it is past feeling. Let the two-edged Sword be bathing it
self in blood and slaughter; let it be dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit; and
dissecting even to the joints and marrow of him, that sits with him in the same
seat; yet this seared Conscience neither feels nor fears it. Nay though his own
doings have beset him round about, he will neither say to his heart, nor suffer
his heart to speak to him, in what an estate he stands: 1 Timothy 4.2. Ephesians.
4.19. Hos. 7.2. Mal. 2.2. (6) From its stubbornness and indurateness; whereby
it will not be beaten out, nor brought off, its old customary pretensions for
peace, and quiet self-possession. Could we flash in some of the eternal flames,
and open the horrors of Death and Hell; yet through the power of such
pre-possessions of his own Salvation, like the Horse (in Job), he goes on to
meet the armed men, he mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted, neither turns
he his back from the sword, etc. And is ready to say with those (in Isaiah), We
have made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we at an agreement. He
acknowledges God has cursed such sins; yet blesses himself in his own heart:
Job 39.21, 22. Isa. 28.15. Deuteronomy. 29.19,

2. The vicious carriage of Conscience, in, and upon the trial of our estates,
is the principal fountain of this false Peace. None of the Causes without the
Conscience can prejudice you, unless there be a part-taking by Conscience
within you. In vain does Satan force, or his Disciples flatter, till Conscience
falls in with them, and speaks that false peace, to which these seduce you. And
therefore the Scriptures resolve it into this, as the next cause; If he bless
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace. When they shall say, Peace,
peace: Deuteronomy. 29.19. 1 These. 5.3. Now if Conscience upon the process or trial of
your estates, does speak a false or vicious peace, it is ever in or by some
fallacious procedure in the case. (...), Deceiving their own selves. It puts a
fallacious argument, or paralogism upon us. Conscience always comes to a
conclusion on of our estate, and so of our peace, (as you have seen already) by
some practical Syllogism. If our peace be false, its procedure is fallacious,
in one part still, or other of this practical Syllogism, wherein it does impose
upon us, or is imposed upon.

1. Sometimes it is out in the Proposition, as it takes and tendereth us, a
false mark or rule to try our estates by. Thus were they deceived, Jam. 1.22.
Mat. 7.22, 23. Luke 13.26, 27. The assumption was true (and in this they attest
God himself), Lord, Lord, we have prophesied in thy name; we have eat and drunk
in thy presence; we have been hearers of thy Word, etc. But the Proposition was
false, (which is therewith included), All those that have prophesied in thy
name, have eat and drunk in thy presence, have been hearers of thy Word, shall
be saved and eternally happy. This was a false Proposition; and hereby they
fell into that false peace, concluding themselves in a saving condition, from
an unsound and false medium, which could not bear the weight of such a
Conclusion.

2. Sometimes it is out in the Assumption, as it tenders a false testimony or
report, of what we are and do in the trial of our estates. Thus were they
deceived, Jer. 2.35. Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from
me. The Proposition implied was true, [viz. Gods anger shall turn away from all
such as are innocent.] But the Assumption, viz. [I am innocent,] was false.
Behold, I will plead with thee, says the Lord, because thou say, I have not
sinned, ibid. and v. 23, etc. How can thou say, I am not polluted, I have not
gone after Baalim: See thy way in the Valley, know what thou have done, etc.
Thus, 1 John 1.8. faith the Apostle, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. Conscience in giving such false evidence
does but put a cheat upon us, a lie upon God ( ver. 10.) and proclaims us
aliens from the truth of Grace, and of the Gospel.

3. Sometimes Conscience is out in the Conclusion. Sometimes (1) Men suspend
the Conclusion, as did those, Romans 1.32. Who knowing the judgment of God, that
they who commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have
pleasure in them that do them. Conscience dealt fairly with them, as to the two
first Propositions, [viz. They that do such things are worthy of death; But we
do such things.] But as to the Conclusion how fallaciously! Not only hiding and
withholding the sentence or conclusion from them, that would regularly have
followed upon those premises; But indulging them a sinful Complacence in their
Society, who did them. (2) Sometimes me shuffle in another, a false Conclusion,
which the Premises will not admit, and are alien from. So Deuteronomy. 29.19. And it
comes to pass, when he hears the words of this Curse, that he blesses
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst. Conscience seems clear
in the Proposition, [There is no blessing but a curse for them, that walk in
their own lusts and imaginations.] And to confess the Assumption, [But I walk
in the lusts and imagination of mine own heart.] Yet is it so far from
concluding against his blessedness and peace, which should be the genuine
result from those Premises that she concludes for it, and foysteth in another
Conclusion in this Soul's case, [I shall have peace though I walk in these
imaginations of mine heart.] How ordinary is it, that men thus shuffle and turn
off the severe passages of Sermons and Scriptures from themselves to the
sentence of others! when as ever they would avoid the Curse, they should lay it
to their own hearts: Mal. 2.2. Sometimes (3) Men shift off the Conclusion, that
if Conscience will not suspend the true, nor shuffle in a false sentence; yet
she must speak it so softly, and the Application be so easy, as it may not
stick nor abide upon them. Conscience concludes the Jews condition upon them,
and quickens them to a return to him, that smote them. But the cogency
thereof is soon off, there was no settled impression. Their heart was not right
with him. Neither were they steadfast in his Covevant: Psalm. 78.34, -- 38. Well
then, as ever you would avoid the fearful precipices of a false peace, watch
Conscience in all its proceeds and parts; and in the discussion of thy estate,
use thy utmost diligence, and most universal observance. Of which in the next
Question.

Q. 3. How may or should a Christian so pursue the trial of his Estate in his
own Conscience as to prevent the cheat of a false Peace?

A false peace, principally arising out of the fallacious procedure of
Conscience, either in the Proposition, Assumption or Conclusion; therefore in
this pursuit, or trial of your estates, you should strictly attend and assure
Conscience throughout all these parts.

Direct. 1. As touching the Proposition, wherein Conscience delivers some
truth, as a rule or mark to try your estate by. I advise (1) That you try such
marks by Scriptures. It Is no imputation, either to the justice or prudence of a
Magistrate, to try the several measures by the standard of the Market. Paul and
Silas preached by an infallible Direction; yet the Berean providence of
bringing their Sermons to the test of Scriptures, searching the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so, is commended as noble and generous, Act.
17.11. Believe not every spirit, every sign that is or may be suggested; but
search the Scriptures, as our Savior bespeaks thee, whether they be marks, and
what marks (or of what) they so be: 1 John 4.1. Joh. 5.39.

Try whether it be a mark that Conscience tenders thee for this trial. Is she
not ravished with a strange woman, and imbraceth the bosom of a stranger?
Happily thou countest those things marks, which thou should rather call thy
mistakes. If a man think himself to be something when he is nothing, he
deceives himself, Gal. 6.3. He may and shall deceive his own heart, that
deduceth his arguments but from the semblances and appearances of Religion. But
he that argues from the inseparable properties of Religion, puts himself
thereby beyond that peril of a self-deception: Jam. 1.26. Bring the sign or
mark then thou would try thy estate by, to the scales and touchstone of the
Scriptures. Press Conscience to answer these three Questions. 1. Is this mark
found upon all that are in the state of Salvation? Because the particular
guises and affections of some individual persons are found upon me, I cannot
thence prove, that I am a Man; if I would cogently argue it, I must evince it
from such affections as are common to the whole kind. It Is as great an
impotence and oversight to conclude my peace and salvation, from communicating
in the characters of some particular Christians. My enquiries should be rather
after such Characters as do agree to all that are indeed and throughout
Christians. They urge perhaps from the singular examples of some saved ones, as
if they had obtained some signal evidence for Heaven, having arrived to that
height, unto which but few did attain: Mat. 7.22. Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name east out Devils? and in thy name done
many wonderful works? But our Savior neither admits the plea, nor accepts the
persons, ver. 23. And teaches us to fetch our Evidences, not from the singular
privileges of some numerical Saints, but from that spirit of obedience which
runs through the veins of all Saints, and is inseparable from any that are
saved, ver. 21. The Proposition had need be universal. As, Peace be to all them
that are in Christ Jesus. By him all that believe are justified. Whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life, etc. 1 Pet. 5.14.
Act. 13.39. Joh. 3.15, 16. 2. Is this mark found only upon such as are in an
estate of Salvation? I cannot prove that this is a Man from any such part or
principle as is common to a brute with him. My proofs must pitch upon what is
proper to Mankind. He is a Rational Creature, therefore a Man. For Man only is
that Creature upon Earth, which is endowed with Reason. It would be as great a
weakness to argue my title to Heaven from any such qualifications as are common
even to them that shall be thrust into Hell. The Apostle therefore notes it as
a vain and empty crack in those solifidians, Jam. 2.14, etc. that they insisted
barely upon believing, and thence inferred their Blessedness and Salvation;
whereas the Devils might put in a claim upon this account, to the Heavenly
Kingdom as well, if not more than they, if a faith without works might be
admitted for an evidence. For the Devils also believe and tremble, ver. 19.
Though Paul spoke with tongues more than they all, who took those and other
such gifts as evidences of Salvation: yet he thinks fit to tell them, Though I
speak with the tongues of men and of angels, though I have the gift of
Prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and though I have
all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, (the
discriminating character of the devout and thorough Christian) I am nothing, 1
Cor. 14.18. c. 13.1, 2. So then, the mark which Conscience singleth out to
discuss and determine your estate by, must be proper to, and which is alone
predicable of, the sincere and saved ones of God. Not such a disposition
wherein hypocrites may partake with you. It was by this Job defended his
Integrity, and defeated the accusations of his enemies. Will the hypocrite
delight himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon God? And our
Savior's question will be, What do you more than others? Do not even the
Publicans the same? And he strictly concludes, Except your righteousness shall
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Job 27.6. -- 11. Mat. 5.46, 47. and 20. 3. Is
this mark convertible? i.e. Are all they upon whom this mark is found in a
saving estate? And have all that are in a saving estate, this mark found upon
them? Right Properties are reciprocally predicable of the Subjects, whose
Properties they are. All that are saved are hearers of the Word. But all that
are hearers of the Word are not saved. This they did deliberate, and so
deceived themselves: Jam. 1.22. See then that you be doers of the word, and not
hearers only. All they that are such shall be saved; and all that shall be
saved are such: Romans 2.13. Luke 11.28. Whosoever are in a state of Salvation do
profess special dearness to, and devotion for the Lord and Savior. But
whosoever profess this are not therefore in a state of Salvation. This they did
not attend, and so abused themselves: Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. Luke 13.24. -- 28. The
propriety between Christ and the Church is mutual. My beloved is mine, and I am
his. The promise is mutual, I will say, thou art my people; and they shall say,
thou art my God: Cant. 2.16. Hos. 2.23. See that the Proposition upon which you
proceed, will be such too, that the terms will reciprocate. As the
righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, is unto all, and upon
all them that believe. And all that believe are interested in this
righteousness. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him in truth. And
all they that call upon him in truth, are nigh unto the Lord: Romans 3.22. Psalm.
145.18. Would you but improve these rules, in and for the trial of those marks
in the review of which you are to make trial of your estates; the deceitful
evidences, whereby multitudes unto themselves, would soon disappear, and no
more stand before the discussion of Conscience than the dust, which is easily
driven before the wind.

2. Treasure up these marks in order to the trial of thy self. Make Conscience
the sacred Repository of such marks and rules. Or if Memory be this Closet and
Repository, let Conscience be sure to keep the Key. Besides the advantages
which thou shall hereby reap, for a solemn self-examination; they will suggest
matter of self-reflection, and inward self-converses, in the several lines and
periods of thy Secular Negotiations. Bind them continually upon thine heart,
and tie them about thy neck: When thou go it shall lead thee; when thou
sleep it shall keep thee; and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee. For
the Commandment is a lamp, and the Law is light; and reproofs of instruction
are the way of life, Prove. 6.21, 22, 23.

3. Take forth what marks thou have treasured up for trial, That as a Scribe
instructed to the Kingdom of God, thou may bring forth out of thy treasure
things both new and old, Mat. 13.52. There are three sorts of Marks mentioned
by Divines See Manton on James.
. 1. Exclusive; the absence of which does plainly speak that we are not as yet
in a state of Grace and Salvation. 2. Inclusive; the presence of which does not
only prove the truth of our Grace, or being in the state of Salvation, but our
growth in Grace and progress in Sanctification. 3. Beside those, there are a
middle sort of Marks which they call positive. The presence of which does
positively and plainly show, the being or integrity of our Graces, the truth of
our Sanctification, and that we are in a state of Salvation. Touching these I
shall offer you some rules, in the case before you. 1. Do not decline Exclusive
Marks, which have their end, and are of efficacy to undeceive and convince of
infidelity and hypocrisy. That a man deceive not his own heart, there is use
of the Exclusive Mark: Jam. 1.26. He that seems to be religious and bridleth
not his tongue, this man's religion is vain; as well as of that more evidential
and positive, ver. 27. Prayer and other acts of Worship will not prove you in a
state saving; but if you cast off Worship, and restrain Prayer before God, it
will prove you in a state of sin. Hearing his truths will not prove the
acceptance of your persons by God; But if you turn away your ear from hearing
the Law, it will prove that your prayers are an abomination: Isa. 1.15. Job
15.4. Jam. 1.22. Prove. 28.9. 2. Do not dwell upon Exclusive Marks, much less
should thou draw them down to the ends and uses of such as are positive; as
if reading and hearing Sermons, receiving Sacraments, etc. would speak thee to
be in a saving state. For, as they are unable to do this, so thou will hereby
but deceive thy own self; whereof you have already seen several instances. 3.
Draw forth and improve thy positive Marks; which I suppose thee to have tried
and treasured up according to the two former Directions. Now is the time to
bring them forth out of thy armory; when thou art in hazard of thy life, and
thy heart lies open to all the assaults, which either the policies or power of
Sin and Satan can bring on against thee, to captivate, or ensnare thee. The
Apostle therefore directs them now to produce faith and fellowship with Christ,
when they are upon proving and examining themselves, and to ascertain their
estares. And now it is, that Job and David awaken their memories to recall, and
do apply such Marks to themselves, when they are about clearing their case
before God, and in their own Conscience: Job 23.10, 11, 12. Psalm. 26.1, 2, 3,
4. Draw forth thy positive Marks for a full and final decision in what estate
thou art, or for positive ends: That thou leave not thy estate at an hovering
uncertainty, in loose conjectures, or languishing probabilities, but bring it
to a clear and certain issue, in thy own Conscience, and so assure thy heart
before God: 1 John 3.19. And indeed, why have you such positive Marks afforded
on God's part, but to this end? or how can you answer so many obligations as
are plainly required on your part, that cannot be performed without the
previous knowledge of your estate? 1 John 5.13, 20. 2 Cor. 13.5. Prove. 22.21.
The Primitive Christians therefore would not suffer themselves to sit down in
opinionative guesses, or hopeful conjectures only, but pursued their Marks to a
peremptory, but modest knowledge of what condition they were in. Hereby we know
that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. Hereby know we, that we are in
him. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
Brethren, etc. 1 John 2.3, 5. c. 3.14, 19, 24. c. 5.19.

Direct. 2. Touching the Assumption, wherein Conscience delivers her
testimony and report, in the management of this self-trial, how it is with us as
to matter of fact, with reference to the matter of law or rule, contained in
the former Proposition. Here I advise.

(1.) Let Conscience discuss the truth thereof before she determines on her
testimony. The Psalmist reflects and revolves the case upon his thoughts ere
Conscience shall make report. Nor will he adventure to determine without a
diligent self-discussion, I commune with my own heart, and my spirit made
diligent search. And surely it is no less our duty than his, whose danger as
being less fallible, is far more: Psalm. 76.6. and 4.4. 2 Pet. 1.10. Heb. 6.11.
Laodicea might easily have disproved that false testimony, Thou say I am
rich and increased with goods, and have need of nothing. If she had but
discussed it first in her own thoughts, but being careless in this, she knew
not that she was miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3.17. The Jews
say, Joh. 8.41. We have one Father, even God. Our Savior returns the speech to
a further search of Conscience, which might easily correct such a mistake and
misreport as this, Nay, if God were your Father, ye would love me, for I
proceeded forth and came from God, etc. ver. 42, 44, 45. The like he does, ver.
33, 34, 39, 40. We were never in bondage say they, we are Abraham's seed, and
he is our father; and no doubt they speak according to the suffrage of their
Conscience. But he remits it to second and more serious considerations.
Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin. If ye be Abraham's children, ye
would do the works of Abraham. But ye seek to kill me, etc. this did not
Abraham. It Is requisite then that you return the testimony once and again to a
further reflection and review of Conscience. Sometimes 1. the calling back of
Circumstances may confute the vanity and falsehood of such a Testimony. Would
Babylon have said, I shall be a Lady for ever, if she had laid these things to
heart? Isa. 47.6, 7. Or those in Mich. 3.11. Is not the Lord among us? none
evil can come upon us; if they had but looked backwards and lain hold upon the
circumstances of their disobedience? ver. 9.10. 2. Sometimes the calling in of
sense; as Jer. 2.23. How can thou say I am not polluted, I have not gone
after Baalim? See thy way in the Valley, etc. 3. Most times the calling over
and consulting with Scriptures, which pierce like a two-edged sword, even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart, and makes manifest the secrets thereof to it self, unto
a sound Conviction, Heb. 4.12. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. 4. But would we carry on the
converse in our own Conscience, we should not ordinarily fail of the effect,
either in clearing and confirming the truth, or confuting the falsehood, of what
our Conscience witnesses. Does Conscience say, They that have fellowship with
God are in an happy state. But we have fellowship with God? Put her to the
proof of the Assumption in a second practical Syllogism; as thus, They that
have fellowship with God walk in the light, (i.e. live holily) for God is
light, and in him is no darkness at all. But we walk in the light, (i.e. live
holy and uprightly.) This confirms. Or on the other hand thus, They that walk
in darkness (i.e. that are ignorant and disobedient), have no fellowship with
God. But we w^lk in darkness. This confuteth. If we say that we have fellowship
with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth, 1 John 1.5, 6, 7.
The Scriptures therefore do frequently offer to the application of Conscience,
both negative Marks and positive together; that by the application of the
former we may correct our mistakes; and by the latter we may confirm our minds,
in what is assumed by Conscience, as to our being in Christ, and in a condition
of Blessedness; as Romans 8.1, 9, 10, 11. Psalm. 1.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.20. -- 25. And
the Apostle thinks it fit to subjoyn sometimes to the testimony of his
Conscience; the reasons upon which that testimony was raised, and from whence
it resulted, 2 Cor. 1.12, 13. Romans 9.1, 2, 3. 5. The crediting of Conscience
its testimony therefore in such Propositions as are capable of further proof,
is not safe for us ordinarily without the calling in, and considering of those
proofs first had and made. And it is of singular use in such a case, to put
Conscience afresh to the question, before it comes to a Conclusive
determination, that such a testimony is of indubitable truth. As, There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ; (a Proposition of infallible verity.)
But I am in Christ, says Conscience: This Assumption should be again put to
the question, and requires proof and confirmation, as the Apostle seems to
imply, by adding so many Characteristical signs, They that are in Christ walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit; are made free from the Law of sin
and death. i.e. from the prevailing and binding power thereof. In such the body
is dead because of sin, and the spirit is life because of righteousness. Can
Conscience now again assume? But this is our walk, we are thus free, our sins
thus mortified, and our spirits thus vivifyed to righteousness and holiness. Or
as elsewhere, They that are in Christ are new Creatures. Does Conscience say,
we are new Creatures? Press her to give you the proof of what she says: They
that are new Creatures have old things past away, all things are become new;
have put off the old man, and put on the new. And now attend whether Conscience
can assume, as in the presence of God. All things are past away, all things are
become new in and to us, etc. Romans 8.1, 10. 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 4.22, 24.

(2) Let Conscience deliberate, before she delivers in her Testimony. Bethink
thy self, and bring this witness (as they were their wickedness, 1 King. 8.47.)
back again to thine heart. Consider your ways, and let not thine heart be hasty
to utter any thing before God. David's haste did more than once disturb his
peace, and drew the Jews into a fools Paradise: Hag. 1.5, 7. Eccles. 5.2. Psalm.
31.22. Isa. 5.12. Hos. 7.2. Know therefore this day and consider it in thine
heart. 1. To and before whom she is to render this witness or report. It Is not
to thy self only but unto God also. He knows the way that thou do take. The
heart (says he) is deceitful above all things, who can know it? I the Lord
search the heart, I try the reins, etc. Job. 23.10. Jer. 17.9, 10. O my
Conscience, if thou shall not speak home and speak uprightly, shall not God
search it out? for he knows the secrets of the heart. The righteous God
tries the heart and reins. Do thou bear this witness in the Holy Ghost?
Psalm. 44.21. and 7.10. Romans 9.1. 2. What the rule or mark is, according to
which she is thus to witness and report. Compare Spiritual things with
Spiritual; thy self not with thy self; but with the sign or standard, by which
thou art to measure thy state. Take not only an occasional or transient view of
what that speaks, and thou art or do. But let thy consultations therewith
be frequent, ordinary, deliberate, deep. Who so looks into the perfect Law of
liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of
the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed: 2 Cor. 10.12. Jam. 1.23, 24,
25. 3. What reason is there that she should make this report. O my Conscience,
how can thou clear up this thy Testimony? Of which before. 4. What will be
the result of this witness or report? Should not thou now deal faithfully
with me, what a fearful deluge of presumption, etc. would henceforth overflow
me! and what floods of dedolence, pride, etc. would henceforth also oppress! My
conversion will be less possible, and thy condemnation and torment more
perplexing and full of horror: Act. 28.26, 27. Luke 13.27, 28, 29.

(3) Let Conscience be dealt with truly and impartially by thee, that she may
deal forth a true and impartial testimony to thee. 1. Charge her to be herein
true and through with thee. By her concernment in it. Who shall witness if
Conscience do not? For no man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of
man, which is in him. God has set thee, O my Conscience, as that heap and
pillar to be a witness between him and me: 1 Cor. 2.11. Genesis 31.52. Romans 2.15.
By her Commands for it. God has chosen her for this purpose, and charge her
in his Laws, to be a Minister and Witness both of those things which she has
seen, (like Paul) and of those things in the which he shall appear to her: Romans
ibid. 2 Cor. 4.2. Act. 26.16. By the Covenant and Oath of God, which she has
taken for it. The vows of God are upon thee, to be a faithfulful Witness that
will not lie. And would thou have him to be a swift Witness against thee?
Prove. 14.5. Mal. 3.5. By the consequence of it to her, as well as thee; by the
blessed effects on the one hand, by the bitter effects on the other. 2. Keep
off such as would tamper with her, and either keep her from giving witness, or
corrupt her in the witness she does give. Keep thine heart with all diligence.
Sin is ready to buy off her testimony with its pleasures; Sense, to bribe her
with its profits; Satan, to befool and ensnare her with his policies. Watch and
pray, that you enter not into temptation. Set a guard upon Conscience. Let not
these come nigh the corner of her house. He that does keep his soul shall be
far from them: Prove. 4.23. Mat. 26.41. Prove. 22.5. 3. Close with her Testimony,
though she speak against thee. Let not thy Affections kick, and thy Will cast
it back upon Conscience, to give a more favorable witness for thee. It Is
better Conscience should be a severe Witness here, than a never-dying Worm
hereafter. The more fully and faithfully she testifies, the more friendly is
she, and the more it turns to thy felicity. Faithful are the wounds of a
friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful, Psalm. 141.5. Prove. 27.6.

(4) Let Conscience be told ever and anon of the Testimony she must deliver in
the day of Judgment. Then the Books shall be opened, the Book of Conscience
within, as well as of Creatures and Scriptures without. Then must thou, shall
thou, O my Conscience, give a plain and impartial Testimony to all things done
in the body. Then all thy frauds and fallacies, which thou now put upon me,
shall be unvailed and plucked off, before God, Men and Angels. Then shall thou
bear the shame of them, and must suffer for them. Thy flatteries and
unfaithfulness shall be all laid bare and open. Oh how much better were it for
thee, and me, to bring forth thy righteous Testimony now to our Conversion,
than in that day to our Confusion! Alas! what can be hid from him who knows
all things? Does not he that pondereth the heart consider it? Thou may
deceive me, but can thou deceive my God also? That day shall discover it. If
thou fear the shame and sting of such a Witness in this day, should not
thou rather fear and fly the shame and sting thereof in that day? Now it may be
eased and healed by Repentance. Defer thy Testimony till then, and the shame
and torment will be easless, endless and remediless: Rev. 20.12. 2 Cor. 5.10.
Eccles. 12.14. Mar. 9.44.

(5) Let Conscience be demanded to give her Witness as in the presence of God
the great Judge. Charge her to speak to thee, as she would speak to and before
him. Is not the answer of a good Conscience toward God? O my Conscience, is
not God greater than thy self, and knows all things? Will thou witness this
thing to God for me, as Peter's did? Thou know all things, thou know that
I love thee. And can thou appeal him as a Witness in the case, with and for
thee, as he also did? Can thou attest him? as they did, ( Josh. 22.21, 22.)
The Lord God of Gods, the Lord God of Gods, he knows. Can thou say, and say
truly, Behold my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high, as Job did?
And will thou answer to him for me, what thou now answerest me as before him?
Lo! O Lord, thou know. Thou, O Lord, know me, thou have seen me and tried
mine heart. Thou have tried me, and shall find nothing. Thou know that I am
not wicked: 1 Pet. 3.21. 1 John 3.20. Joh. 21.15, 17. Job 16.19. Psalm. 40.9.
Jer. 12.3. Psalm. 17.3. Job 10.7.

Direct. 3. Touching the Conclusion, wherein Conscience is to denounce the
sentence, upon the trial made, agreeable to the truth she dictateth in the
Proposition, and to the testimony which she delivers in the Assumption. Here
I advise,

(1) See that Conscience pronounce the sentence upon thee. Or why are all these
proceeds hitherto? Why are 1. the word and statutes of Heaven consulted? 2. The
Court set? 3. The Witness sworn and heard? Shall the Records of Heaven be
produced, and the Records of my Heart proved to no purpose? Have thou done so
many things, O my Conscience in vain, if it shall be yet in vain? But because
Conscience is so prone to protract the sentence, and to forbear the conclusion,
which should follow upon the Premises, and does naturally and necessary follow
upon the Proposition and Assumption in a Logical discourse, as one well
observes See Ames. de Consc. l. 1. c. 9.. 5. -- 10.
. I advise these things, 1. If Conscience be silent, suspect thy condition is
not well, or that (at least) it is not well with Conscience. I shall not say,
that her suspending of the Conclusion does always speak the condition and state
of the Soul to be a state of sin. Because deserted Saints through the power of
fear and temptations, and the weakness of their faith in such troubles may not
be able to derive and draw it down to themselves. But ordinarily (and out of
the case of desertion) it speaks the condition ill, and liable to suspicion.
'Twas not well with David, when he turns the conclusion and sentence to
another, which he should have taken to himself, and the Prophet was fain to
take up the office of Conscience, and tell him, Thou art the man, etc. He
cannot be apprehended to have been either ignorant of God's Law, or of his own
lascivious and murtherous fact. But Conscience did not conclude, or argue and
apply it home. And it was very ill with them, who knowing the judgment of God,
that they who did such things were worthy of death, and that they did them, yet
concluded not their estate upon it, but continued in their sin. Nor was their
condition safe, or Conscience sound, that could wave the Conclusion, when the
Premises were so clear, Neither say they in their heart, let us now fear the
Lord, etc. Jer. 5.23, 24. 2 Samuel 12.5, 6, 7. Romans 1.32. 2. If Conscience do not
speak to thee, do thou speak to Conscience. God complains when men do not set
and say to their hearts, when they do not call upon and converse with them:
Isa. 44.19. Hos. 7.2. Argue it with her, and urge her to proceed to sentence,
and to perfect her discourse in giving judgment. Urge her by her past proceeds
(of which before.) By her place and power. Has not God made thee a Judge in
Israel, set thee next under himself, and over me, that thou should show me
the sentence in judgment? Is not thy commission Divine? His concurrence
declared, who is with you in the judgment to behold if thou judge falsely, to
approve if thy judgment be according to verity? Deuteronomy. 17.9. 2 Chronicles. 19.6. 1 John 3.20, 21. By her Precedence. Thou expectest from inferior Judges that
they proceed to judgment, and wilt expostulate and rebuke them if they shall
adventure to retard it, and judgment goes not forth. Thou art superior to
any, to all of them. God has set thee (as Solomon set his Mother) next himself
on the Throne. And if thou shall clear, no matter if they all condemn me. But
if thou condemn, not all of them can quit me. May not they dare to adventure
upon unnecessary delays in Civil concernments, and durst thou to delay and
defer the sentence in Spiritual, in Soul-matters, and of eternal consequence?
Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19, 20. Hab. 1.4. 1 King. 2.19. Romans 8.33, etc. 1 John 3.20. By
her Principles. Civil Judges have severals to consult without them, ere they
can come to sentence. But thou, O my Conscience, containest all within thee,
whereby thou may be both clear and quick, or expeditious in the judgment.
Thou needst not call for Law Books, or foreign Witnesses. With thee is a
treasury of Laws, and thou art more than a thousand Witnesses. 3. If Conscience
yet suspends judgment, cite her before the supreme Judge. Behold Conscience, the
Judge stands before the door. He is greater than the Conscience, to him thou
must account. Thou may apologize to me, but how will thou answer it to him,
who made thee his deputy, and substituted thee upon this very design? And has
said to Conscience, as Jehoshaphat to his Judges, Take heed what ye do, for ye
judge not for man but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment: Wherefore
take heed, and do it: Jam. 5.9. 1 John 30.20. 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6, 7.

(2) See that Conscience pronounce the sentence fully and clearly upon thee. An
half-sentence can give but half-satisfaction. If the sentence be dubious, thy
Soul will still be in the dark. Why all this pains? Not for airy hopes, but for
assurance of the heart before God: 1 John 3.19. To this end, 1. Be full and
clear with Conscience, in exposing all thou art and do, to her sentence,
without any of the restraints of self-love, without any reserve for any secret
lusts. Self-love will be putting in for her immunities. A clear and impartial
sentence will shake all her foundations hitherto of quiet and self-ease. And
therefore importuneth Conscience, as David sometime did his chief Commanders,
Deal gently for my sake, yea and for thy own sake: for thou must sustain the
effects of such a sentence: 2 Timothy 3.2. cum 5. 2 Samuel 18.5. Secret lusts will
be putting in for an indemnity, which it may be Conscience has cockered, or
(at least) hitherto connived at. Wherefore should we be slain? Have not we took
sweet counsel together and walked to the house of God in company, etc. But
Conscience must quit them ere it can clear thec. 'Twill be a partial sentence,
if she parts not with these sins. Or if she speak peace, it will be but the
show and paint of it, so long as ye will walk after the imagination of your own
hearts: Psalm. 19.12, 13. and 18.23. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Bring all then before the Bar
of Conscience, and that Bar without any vails or coverts; and tell her (as
Cornelius told Peter) we are all here present before God, to hear all things
that are commanded thee of God: Act. 10.33. 2. Be free, yet close with
Conscience. You may remember her, there will be another audit, and what will
attend, if she shall give a loose or partial judgment, Cursed be he that
perverteth judgment. But remember her withal that therefore this thy appearance
is made before her throne of Judicature, and thou demandest it as thy right;
not as a matter of courtesy from her, but as of debt and duty. As of old, it
was ordained, Thou shall come to the Judge and enquire, and he shall show thee
the sentence of judgment, Deuteronomy. 27.19. c. 17.9. See thou do not see her by any
carnal indulgence, for a gift blinds the eyes of the wise and perverteth the
words of righteousness; and fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery:
Deuteronomy. 16.19, Job 15.34. Nor flatter her by any corrupt inducements. The
flattering mouth works ruin. Psalm. 36.2. Prove. 26.28. Be plain with
Conscience. Lo, I have now put my self, my state, my salvation upon thy
sentence. It Is thy work to condemn or clear me; thy eternal woe or weal is
concerned in it. I require thee, as before the supreme and all-seeing Judge, to
judge righteously. I do not solicit for favor, but seek justice at thy mouth.
How long shall I take counsel in my soul? When will thou bring it to a
conclusion, that I may know my estate, what I am? Follow her with arguments and
importunities, till she answers thee, in the words of the Psalmist, I will
judge uprightly, Psalm. 75.2.

Q. 4. How may we difference the Peace of a good and of an evil Conscience? and
so discern that ours is a sound and an Evangelical Peace.

Doubtless there is a difference See Fenner's Treat. of Consc. p. 137. to 167.
Robinsons Christ all in all. p. 187, 188 Collin's right way to true peace. p.
51. ad 62.
, or our Savior had not delivered it as he does, Joh. 14.27. cum 22. But he
that would drive this nail to the head, for the discovery of his own peace,
whether it be true or false, should discuss it thoroughly with his own
Conscience, how it came to take up this peace. The peace that an evil
Conscience bears, grows usually out of one of these two roots. 1. Either out
of the sluggishness of Conscience that puts not the estate upon trial. 2. Or
from the shifts and unfaithfulness of Conscience if it proceed to trial. 1.
Fither in the Proposition 2. Or in the Assumption. 3. Or in the Conclusion as
has been showed. You should dig to the very bottom in this business. Whether
this peace be the product of pains, prayers, and of proving your hearts and
states once and again? What pains did Conscience take in it? What proceed did
Conscience make in it? Did it give full and infallible marks for the trial of
your estates? Did it give a faithful and impartial testimony in the trial. And
did it give a free and unbiassed judgment upon the trial of your estates.
Produce and prove thy Evidences; That your enmity against godliness is turned
into peace, and therewith amity. That you are as earnest for holiness, as you
were for sin, or are for happiness; and as great a friend to the purity, as to
the peace of Conscience. Prove that the spirit of peace has renewed and
sanctified you. That the Prince of Peace Christ Jesus rules in, and has the
Sovereignty over you. That the God of peace is related, as a Father to you, and
is that supreme good and end to whom you finally refer your selves in point of
felicity and duty; and then your peace (which is gathered from these Premises)
is proved therewith to be true, pious, and Evangelical. But to give you the
difference enquired after, though every thing I herewith offer does not serve
to discover it effectually in such a practical inquiry without some further
reference.

The Evangelical peace of the good Conscience, and the quiet or peace of an
evil Conscience are different.

1. In the eminency of this Evangelical Peace. 1. In point of truth. That other
is but the shadow and semblance of peace, but this is solid, substantial peace.
It Is peace, peace, Isa. 26.3. c. 57.19. not only the resemblance or appearance
of peace; but real; rich, assured, abundant peace. But there is no peace, says
my God, unto the wicked, ver. 21. Isa. 48.22. Let men call it by the title of
peace, yet God accounts it to be in truth no peace. (2) In point of
tranquillity. That other is mostly but negative, a freedom from storms, but
this is positive a fullness of serenity. There Conscience is asleep, and
therefore quiet; but here it is awake and at work, and therefore are they
comforted; yea, filled oft-times with comfort, under variety of crosses. They
are not only not vexed, not frighted, or only fed by Conscience, but find a
continual feast in the peace of their Conscience: 2 Cor. 1.1, 2. c. 7.4. Prove.
15.15. (3) In point of transcendency. That soon evaporates into airy
imaginations, and intoxicates affections. But this peace is both serious and
superlative. The Soul feels what the other never found, or can fathom. Nay he
feels more than himself can utter, or indeed comprehenlively understand. This
peace passes all understanding; not only others, but his own: Rev. 2.17. Phil.
4.7. (4) In the principle transfering it. Peace I leave with you, (says
Christ) my peace I give unto you; not as the world gives, give I unto you:
Joh. 14.27. (5) In the proper treasury of it. These things have I spoken (says
he) that in me ye might have peace: Joh. 16.33. This is not a peace then of the
world's giving, nor of our own getting. We neither get it of our selves, nor
get it out of our selves. It Is a peace of Christ's giving; the Christian goes
to him for it, in the purity of peace, and glories in him as the procurer and
peculiar object of his peace. He is our peace, say Believers: Romans 5.1. c. 2.7.
Ephesians. 2.14.

2. In the extent of Evangelical peace. See (1) from what it extends it self.
1. From the indwelling of Satan. He like a strong man armed keeps the other's
heart as his house, and so its peace, while his possession is undisturbed.
Being willing captives, in whom he works effectually, he suffers them to walk
at ease and quiet: Luke 11.21. 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 2.2. But this peace always
presupposes his dispossession, and devestment from power; the binding of him
for you, and the bruising of him under you, the taking of his armor from him,
and treading of him under the feet of you. The God of peace shall bruise, or
tread satan under your feet shortly, Luke ibid. and 22. Col. 1.13. Romans 16.20.
2. From the dominion of sin. The security of the evil Conscience is, in that
sin has the entire command, and suffers not conviction to embroil Conscience:
Romans 1.21. etc. 7.9. Amos 6.1, 3, etc. But Evangelical security is founded upon
the excussion of sin, and extrusion thereof out of command and authority in the
Soul. While sin reigns there is no sound rest. To be carnally minded is death;
to be spiritually minded is life and peace, Psalm. 19.13. Romans 2.8, 9, 10. c.
7.9, 10, 11. c. 8.6. 3. From the displeasure of God. The tranquillity of evil
Consciences is taken up mostly, either from God's seeming silence at their
sins, and suspending of his severities, or from their insensibleness of what he
threatens, and shifting it from themselves to others, or from the smiles of his
providence upon them in common enjoyments and blessings. When yet all this
while he reserves his anger, and it shall smoke against such sinners: Psalm.
50.21, 22. Eccles. 8.11. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Mal. 2.2. But Evangelical peace
extends it self beyond God's not punishing, or not threatening, or not being
provoked, and beyond God's prospering and preserving. His comforts are, that
God is his portion, God is pleased, his person justified, and his works
accepted. His cares are how he may please God, and walk worthy of his good
pleasure; and never is he so cheery as in the Conscience of this, that he
pleases God, which tries our hearts: Psalm. 4.8. Romans 5.1. Eccles. 9.7. 1 Cor.
7.32. Col. 1.10. Heb. 11.5. 1 These. 2.4. In examining then the truth of this
peace, let these be some of thy principal enquiries. Whether Satan was ever
disturbed and dethroned, and thy Soul delivered from under his power, in the
dominion of the Prince of Peace, and to do and endure his pleasure? Whether sin
be dead in thee, and thou to sin, and thy Soul desires as well peace from sin
and power against sin, as to be preserved from smart and anguish? Whether God
be pleased with thee, and thy greatest care be to please him, and to commend
thy Conscience and Conversation to his sight and approbation?

(2) See what this Evangelical Peace extends it self unto. 1. To all the
subject, the whole Conscience, yea the whole Christian to comfort, keep,
confirm him in his Communion with God. But especially it shall keep your hearts
and minds, and these in believing, your inward powers in the inward power of
godliness: Phil. 4.7. Romans 15.13. 2. To all Circumstances, for the enjoyment of
it self under them, and the improvement of it self by them. While he senseth
this peace, he can swallow any persecution; nor only rejoice in hope of the
glory of God, but glory in tribulation also, etc. Romans 5.1, 2, 3. (3) To all
the Causes; Supreme, subordinate. Supreme, Oh! how it extends it self to the
God of Peace, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in an enriching Communion with them,
an exact Conformity to them, and a most endearing Complacency in and with them,
while the God of Love and Peace is with these: Rev. 1.4, 5. Phil. 4.9. Heb.
13.20, 21. Subordinate; How are their own feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of Peace! and how beautiful are others feet to them that preach the
Gospel of Peace, and bring the glad tidings of these good things! Ephesians. 6.15.
Romans 10.15. Would try the truth of thy Peace? turn in hither, and examine the
extent of it by these particulars: that false peace falls short; and though
(like those Locusts St. John mentions, which had the faces of men, Rev. 9.7,
10.) it may have some appearance of, and approaches toward this peace; yet as
they were fierce and far from the nature of men, so it is utterly alien from,
and adverse unto it in these particulars.

3. In the efficient, matter, form, and end of this Evangelical Peace. These
kinds of peace are widely different, when the causes are so wide and different.
It Is called the Peace of God, Phil. 4.7. This is a peace that comes from God,
he is the maker of it. 2. In Communion with God, here is the principal matter
of it. 3. Conformable to God, here is the mould and form of it. 4. Carried
after and concludes in and with God; he is the ultimate end of it, (1) Enquire
then into the efficient of your peace. The Principal. Came it from the God of
Peace? That other peace is of our own or others coining, but this is of God's
creating. It Is he that fills with peace in believing: Isa. 57.19. Romans 15.13.
If it came from God it carries thee to and keeps thee with God. Hither does
this Soul turn alone for peace. On him he trusts for peace, and with him he
tarries till he shall speak peace: Hos. 6.1. Isa. 26.3. Psalm. 85.8. The
Procatarctick. Came it through and by the blood of Christ? Peace of Conscience
is of Christ's procuring. He got it for you by the merit of Redemption. He
gives it to you by the spirit of Regeneration. This Man shall be the peace when
Divine justice on the one hand, or the Devil on the other hand, like the
Assyrian, shall invade Conscience: Joh. 14.27. Phil. 4.7. Mich. 5.5. Is the
blood of his Cross then that peace offering you present unto the Father? the
peace you plead for, is it upon the account of your service, or of his
satisfaction? of your deserts, or of his death for you? There is no preaching
peace but by Jesus Christ: Col. 1.20. Act. 10.36. The prime instruments of your
peace, what were, or what are they? Was it the Gospel of Peace? then will the
Ministration and Ministry thereof be more beautiful in your eyes: Nah. 1.15.
Isa. 52.7. Was it the grace of faith? It Is first grace, then peace, throughout
the Gospel. No peace before grace, much less without grace. It Is believing in
Christ that brings the calm upon the Conscience. Being justified by faith we
have peace with God, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.3. Joh. 14.1. Romans 5.1. Try your faith
then, whether it be beyond temporary? whether it be truly justifying, ere you
take up with peace? He cannot be the God of peace to you, if he be not the God
of hope and faith unto you. The God of hope fill you with peace in believing,
says the Apostle, Romans 15.13.

(2) Enquire into the matter of your Peace, not so much that of which it
consists, as about which it is conversant. To mention but an head or two. 1.
Is it Communion with God? which consists in that mutual relation, and those
mutual returns which pass 'twixt God and a Believer in the descending of his
graces, and ascending of our duties. What say you? are these the matters that
take up the tranquillity of your mind? the mutual interest that God and you
have in each other, that he is yours, and you are his? the mutual intercourse
that you have with each other, in his mercies and your duties? while he draws
nigh to you, in extending the grace of his favor, and you draw nigh to him in
exercising the graces of his Spirit. This, this is the heart of Evangelical
Peace, acquaintance with God; fellowship with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ. Here the believing Soul does lie down in Peace: Job 22.21. 1 John
1.3, 4. Psalm. 4.6, 8. 2. Is it the Kingdom of God specially in and over you?
That false peace is never through in the former, and takes its leave in this
latter. It may be taken with God's love, but turns aside from his laws,
especially from that part, which is cross to his carnal interest. But
Evangelical peace has endearing and precious thoughts of the very laws, the
rule and restraints of Divine Government. He rejoices and works
righteousness, and the work of righteousness is his peace, and rejoicing: Psalm.
119.165. -- 169. Isa. 65.5. c. 32.17. How is Conscience pleased then with the
commands of God? in that he has the dominion of Conscience and will not
dispense with the least corruptions, and will have the ducture of your whole
Conversations? Read the language and resolution herein of the good and
peaceable Conscience: Isa. 26.12, 13.

(3) Enquire into the formal cause. There is no Gospel-peace of Conscience but
what is spoken by God, through Christ in the Gospel. The peace spoken by
Conscience through the Gospel, standing in an accord to what is spoken by
Christ in the Gospel. And it is not only therefore called the peace of God
Phil. 4.7.
, in that it is caused principally by him; he is the fountain of it. But in
regard of the conformity thereof to his pleasure, which gives form and being to
it. Thus Evangelical Conscience does not absolve or justify before or without
God, but with and because God absolves and justifies Romans 5.1, 9.
. It 1. reads and reviews God's sentence of peace in the Gospel. Peace be with
you all that are in Christ Jesus. There is now no condemnation to them that are
in Christ, etc. As many as walk according to this rule peace shall be upon
them. [1 Pet. 5.14. Romans 8.1. Gal. 6.16] 2. It reflects and resumes. But I (who
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit) am in Christ. I walk after this
rule (as God himself is my witness.) Hence 3. he reports and agrees God's
sentence in the Gospel to his own Soul in particular. Therefore to me is peace.
God has cleared me, therefore Conscience clears me. And so have I quietness
in and confidence toward God. Behold my witness is in heaven, and my record is
on high, 1 John 3.21. Job 34.29. c. 16.19. Well then, it must be peace in
Heaven, or there can be no peace (to speak properly) in your hearts. Your
hearts are at peace, because heaven is at peace, and this heart-peace bears
accord with heavens peace Luke 2.14. and 19.38.
. And be sure God can never speak peace in you upon any other terms than he
has in the Gospel spoken peace to you.

(4) Enquire into the final cause. This peace of God is finally for the God of
peace; it sits not down in self-ease, but is set for his service, and the
enjoyment of himself. Yea, it not only pursues good works, but would be made
perfect to every good work. Nor does this Soul content it self in the sweets of
this joy and peace, but his care and character is, that in these things he
serves Christ: Heb. 9.14. chap. 13.20, 21. Romans 14.17, 18. Whither does your
peace then extend, and where does it terminate it self? True peace of
Conscience can never take up short of God in Christ. This is its earnest
expectation and hope that shall be magnified, and his service maintained, and
his own Soul shall more abound in holiness, and in hope through the power of
the Holy Ghost. The thoughts of this heart are not only taken up about his own
felicity and peace, but about the furtherance of God's praise, the fulfilling
of his pleasure, and the peaceable fruits of righteousness. If there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, he thinks on these things: Phil. 1.20. Romans
15.13. Jam. 3.18. Phil. 4.7, 8. In short, as this peace is by reception from
God, so its rest is in and with God. It lifts up the Soul unto him, lifts him
upmost in the Soul; lays its charge thereon to repose her self upon him, to
rejoice in him, and upon every miscarriage to return to him as her only rest
and center: Psalm. 86.4. c. 73.25, 26. and 62.5. and 116.7.

4. The peace of a good and evil Conscience are differenced in and by the
effects of it. The peace of an evil Conscience usually renders men less
circumspect and inobservant of spiritual dangers, more slight and overly in
spiritual duties, etc. But Evangelical peace ends in (1) Greater vigilance over
himself, and against sin, satan, as also in the objects of sense, that he turn
not again to solly: Psalm. 85.8. Romans 16.19, 20. 1 These. 5.5, 6, 8, 9. Does this
peace then make you draw off your guards and sentinels, or make you more
diligent and circumspect? (2) Greater fortitude of spirit; forbearing troubles,
breaking through tentations, and baffling all the assaults of flesh and blood
upon the sanctified habits and faculties. The peace of God shall keep your
hearts and minds, says the Apostle. (...), shall keep it as with a garrison;
as that word is elsewhere used: Joh. 16.33. Phil. 4.7. cum 2 Cor. 11.32. It
shall fit you for resistance, fill you with resolution, and free you from those
returns of fraud and force, which make others become their prisoners (...). Gr.
Scho.
. Does this peace then cool and slacken your resolutions for duty, especially
in case of discouragements and difficulty, or does it quicken and add spurs and
wings to it? (3) Greater vigors of obedience. A formal peace is the best effect
usually of that Pharisaical peace. But this Evangelical peace is not without an
Evangelical power, upon the heart within, and in the acts without: Romans 14.17.
cum 1 Cor. 4.20. 2 Timothy 1.3. cum 6. This Soul not only maintains a course or
track in spiritual matters, but manageth them with a spiritual mind. His
spiritual peace begets a spiritual plenty; and now he can easily step over what
heretofore stumbled him. No offense is so great to him as that his obedience is
no greater. He not only lives up to Gods testimonies, but he loves him
exceedingly: Romans 8.6. Psalm. 119.165. -- 169. Does your peace then make you
more slight and formal in duty, or more spiritual and vigorous? Are they not
only more bulky, but more strong and sincere, fuller of the sap of love, and of
the spirit of life? (4) Greater vivacity of Holiness. Evangelical peace is ever
prospered to Evangelical grace and growth. See how it fructifieth and clusters:
Romans 5.1. -- 6. Gal. 5.22, 23. Let the day of that false peace be as the
harvest-time to the formal hypocrite. His righteousness is now all gathered
into barn. But it is as the seed-time to the faithful soul. The fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace: Jam. 3.18. Now is this Soul's time to be
distributing the seeds of righteousness for God and among men; and by the oil
of gladness to make increase likewise of the oil of grace. This holy peace puts
him upon perfecting holiness in himself, and provoking others Souls to take and
taste thereof likewise: Heb. 13.20, 21. Psalm. 66.16. and 34.8. and 51.12, 13.

Q. 3. May not the Soul that enjoys ease and tranquillity after eminent troubles
of Conscience, infer that his is Evangelical peace?

In no wise See Sheffield's good Cons. c. 18. page 263, etc.
. Though a good Conscience may prove greatly troublesome after great
tranquillity, yet the greatest tranquillity after the greatest troubles, cannot
simply and by it self prove Conscience good. Because the Devil turns in men
hither, and a deceitful heart often takes up here. I have felt the terrors of
the Lord, but now find tranquillity and taste of his love, [as they did, Heb.
6.4, 5, 6. cum 9.] Hear me therefore a few things.

1. Herod is troubled and all Jerusalem with him, but it is that Christ is
born, who might shake his Secular Kingdom; not that he was born without Christ,
or sees no title to an eternal Kingdom. So is the King of Assyria sore
troubled, But it is for the defeating of his Counsels, not for destroying his
corruptions: Mat. 2.3. 2 King. 6.11. 2. There is a trouble of Concupiscence and
iniquity. Ahab is so troubled as he takes his bed upon it; not for want of
faith in, or forgiveness from God, but for want of the Vineyard. So is Amnon,
not that his lust may be subdued, but that it may be satisfied upon his Sister
Tamar: 1 King. 21.4. 2 Samuel 13.2. 3. There is a trouble that is but corporeal
and bodily, through excess of Melancholy, etc. which is sometimes mixed,
sometimes merely such. This disordereth the imagination or fancy. This again
distempereth the passions; these discompose the natural spirits; these again
drive to and fro, and agitate the humors of the body; and so all is in a
commotion, nothing is quiet. And now happily a man's own spirit falls upon him
within, and an evil spirit from the Lord also from without. And then terror
takes hold of him on every side, as it did upon Saul. But what are these
troubles? Rather of sickness than for sin; from the oppression of nature,
rather than in order to grace, at least originally, if not only: 1 Samuel 16.14.
I presume you will not call it peace of Conscience, to have a period or
conclusion put to any or all of these.

2. Eminent troubles of Conscience there may be, nor productive of peace, but
rather a providential fulfilling of God's threatenings, and a preface sometimes
to greater torments, as they were to Cain and Judas. Will you read his
threatening, The Lord shall give thee a trembling heart, and failing of eyes,
and sorrow of mind, and thou shall fear day and night. In the morning thou
shall say, would God it were even, and at even thou shall say, would God it
were morning, for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shall fear, Deuteronomy.
29.65, 67. Lev. 26.36. Isa. 8.21, 22. God may remit then, or remove such
troubles, as he does other temporal judgments, without renovation of the
person, or the blessing of a religious peace.

3. Pharisees are a clear and confessed instance. Conscience arrests the Jews
with fears and conscernation. Away they betake them to a course of prayer and
fasting, but in both formal. And so Conscience is at rest, but (as the Psalmist
observes) was not right in them: Isa. 58.2, etc. Psalm. 78.33, -- 37. Ananias
and Sapphira seem pricked in their heart, but were not purified in their heart.
Formality drew out that prick, but drew on their perdition. Conscience takes
hold on Magus, on Ahab and others, and they are troubled. But wherein ended
their pangs of Conscience? In a sound peace? No, but in a spiritless profession
and practice of some external duties, without any saving change upon them: Act.
2.37. cum 5.1, etc. 8.13, etc. 1 King. 21.27. cum c. 22. This amounts to no
more than a silencing of such troubles, not the sanctifying of them. Formality
is as bad an evidence of the truth of our peace, as it is of the truth of our
grace.

4. Pharaoah, Felix, Belshazzar. What pangs of Conscience might you have
sometime found them in! who within a while, instead of finding peace, grow past
feeling: Exodus 8.8. cum 15, 28. cum 32. Dan. 5.60.29, 30. Act. 24.25. cum 27.
And will you call this peace of Conscience which is a proeme rather of eternal
condemnation? This is not the spirit of peace, but a spirit of slumber See
Perkins vol. 1. p. 368.
.

5. Q. 1.] But that those exigencing perplexities ^ay issue in Evangelical
peace, there is enjoined the intercurrence of repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, (...) which these troubles are intended as
dis^ositive and preparatory; and without which ^ere is no enjoyment of this
Divine peace. The Jews were pricked in their heart, (...), The nail was driven
to the very ^^d. The iron entered into their very souls. The Jailer is filled
with perplexing troubles, he trembles and falls prostrate before Paul and
Silas. Both he and they cry out for direction, What shall we do? The Apostles
who well knew there might be a spirit of bondage, which is never consequenced
with a spirit of Adoption, never advise them, these agonies are enough; you may
sit down in peace; but press upon them the necessity and use of faith and
repentance, as prerequisities to their salvation and peace: Act. 2.37, 38. c.
16.29, 30, 31. Romans 8.15.

6. unto Christ in all his offices of peace for us unto all obedience; then
quiets the Soul in the peace that he has obtained for us; and orders out
unto us by his holy Spirit. In short, the Gospel first changes the Soul into
the resemblance and image of God, then and not till then, comfort it by a
review of its interest in God, and of God's in him: Romans 8.5, 6, 7. c. 1.7.
Heb. 9.14. Hos. 6.1. Isa. 9.6, 7. 1 These. 5.23. Psalm. 4.8. (2) Is it
accompanied with a Gospel-mould? With an unfeigned and universal change of thy
heart and life, into the likeness of the Gospel of peace? It Is one great branch
of the Covenant of Grace, which God has also called the Covenant of his Peace;
that he will write his law in our hearts, and put it in our inward parts: Isa.
34.10. Ezekiel. 34.25. c. 37.26. Jer. 31.33. So that if thine be a Gospelpeace,
thou art transformed into the Gospelpattern. There is a change not only of some
actions, but of thy estate; relative in thy Justification, real in thy
Sanctification. True peace of Conscience takes its rise from a pious sense of
this change: 2 Cor. 3.18. Romans 5.1. 1 John 5.18, 19, 20.

Q. 5. What should convinced Sinners do in distress of Conscience, as are
conscious to themselves that they are now in a sinful and damnable condition?

A Question long since asked, and answered, Act. 2.37, etc. c. 16.30. etc. Yet
let it not seem amiss if I offer a few advises or directions, which shall
especially refer unto those two instances.

Direct. 1. Accept of your Convictions and do not either put them off, or put
them out, or press them down. They were pricked in their heart, Act. 3. But
they abide the pain, are not angry with Peter, nor do they pluck out and throw
away the arrow. The Jailer trembles, in such an agony was he of Conscience;
yet he attempts not either to break prison from Conscience, or abuse the
Preachers, who were now his Prisoners, or to precipitate his Comforts. To this
end, 1. Remember whence they come; from thy Spirit immediately, but mediately
and originally from God's holy Spirit, which is first a spirit of bondage, then
a spirit of adoption; first convinces, then comfort the Conscience: Romans
8.15. Joh. 16.8. Will you break his bands asunder? Take heed, he will make them
stronger if you continue to resist. But ^o sweetness, safety, if you close and
submit: Isa. 28.22. Job 36.8, -- 12. If you will not accept, either he will away
on the one hand, and then oh the hardness of your heart! Or else add amazement
to your anguish on the other hand: Genesis 6.3. Isa. 63.10. 2. Remember their
concern, and whither they tend. These setters are not like those of Pharaoh's
Baker, in order to your perdition, but like those of his Butler, or of Joseph's
rather, in order to his preferment. Every pang and throw is preparatory to the
new Birth, to that conversion, without which thou can not see the Kingdom of
God; and so to those consolations which are wont to ensue upon Christ's being
formed in the heart. If the Spirit breaks, it is in order to binding up; if he
prick and lance the heart, it is in order to the health and ease of his
Patient. He is making way by these afflictive severities, for the sweets of
Adoption: Hos. 6.1. Act. 2.37, 38. Romans 8.15. 3. Remember the consequence. If
you accept, you are halfway over this deep ford. While the Heart, the Will,
which commands the other faculties, is so far won, the work is like to continue
and frame well, to your ease and God's ends; who is ready to meet you, as the
Father in the Parable did his prodigal Son, when he was yet a great way off:
Mic. 6.9. Levit. 26.41, etc. Luke 15.20. And as your business will succeed the
better, so your burden will sit much the lighter, (the more you wince, the more
you weaken and sin wounds) you cut off advantages from Satan, and are more
capable of improving sound advise, and the Spirit's assistance. If you do not
accept, see what attends. Happily a great dedolence and stupidity of
Conscience, which is a dreadful instance of Divine justice: Romans 1.28. Prove.
1.30. But beyond a perhaps there will be greater dolor; either here, in the
approaching arrests of an abased Conscience to repentance, or hereafter in the
anger, astonishment, and continued gnawing of an accusing Conscience to eternal
ruin: Hos. 6.5. Prove. 5.22, 23.

Direct. 2. Avoid those courses which will defeat thee of the end and happy
effect of these Convictions. So did they, Act. 2. and 16. They did not; Oh do
not you. 1. Either strangle these distresses of Conscience, as if they were but
a fit of Melancholy, a foolish Pusillanimity, or (at best) of no profit and
inserviency, as they take it: Mal. 3.13, 14. Job 21.14, 15. How many thus seek
to stifle Conscience, as Herod sought to slay Christ in the very Cradle! 2. Do
not study to defer Conscience; now is the accepted time, now is the day of
Salvation. Oh! if thou did know in this thy day the things that belong to thy
peace: 2 Cor. 6.2. Luke 19.42. Felix trembled when Conscience took hold of him,
but what does he? He turns off the Preacher at the Bar, and this Preacher in
his bosom, till a more convenient time. He had now something else to do, and we
never read that Conscience any more rebuked him: Act. 24.25. 3. Do not seek to
divert Conscience, either by carnal pleasures, as Saul did. Conscience is
moved, and he calls for the Physician. He does not pray it away, but must have
it played away from him. Or by pursuit of your callings as Cain did. Conscience
bruiseth and torments him, and he falls upon building and travels: 1 Samuel
16.14, 17, etc. Genesis 4.16, 17. 4. Do not skin over these distresses with the
formalities only of Religion, as the Jews often. When Conscience within, or
calamities without pinch them, they fall a praying and crying, but their heart
was not right in them. Baalam quiets Conscience with a few cold wishes, and
cheap words, in commendation of God's Children. Ahab humbles himself, puts on
Sackcloth, and goes softly. Simon Magus will be baptized, and become a
Christian. The Pharisee pays every one of his own, is not as bad as the
Publican, is as prompt as any to pay the external dues of Religion: Psalm.
78.34, 37. Numb. 23.10, etc. 1 King. 21.27. Act. 8.13. Luke 18.11, 12. These
things will but skin over thy wounds without the spirit and life of Religion.
They will but fester inwardly without this, and sooner or latter break out
again, as they did in Magus, Ahab, and others. Much less should thou slubber
it over with unprescribed and superstitious observations, as the Pharisees did;
and have more wo's denounced against them than any one sort of men in all the
Scriptures: Mark. 7.3, -- 14. Mat. 23.14, etc. 5. Do not swill away these
distresses, and debauch thy Conscience. If the other courses are ill, this must
needs be vile. Yet how many cry to Conscience as the Devil's sometimes did to
Christ, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? Art thou come to
torment us before the time? We would fain be merry, while we may. And if
Conscience be clamorous, the drunken rounds must out-voice Conscience. They
drink away their Cares and Conscience. Surely this iniquity shall not be purged
away till you die, says the Lord of Hosts: Isa. 22.12, 13, 14.

Direct. 3. Awaken Consideration to a just sense of thy special corruption, and
therewith of thy state and condition. It was this that drove the nail to the
head in their heart: Act. 2.37. When they heard this (cum ver. 36.) they were
pricked in their heart. They did not only cry out of the sting, but of the
serpent. Cain cries out of his punishment. But a Christian should cry out with
David of his provocation: Genesis 4.13. 2 Samuel 24.17. Why criest thou for thine
affliction? thy sorrow is incurable for the multitude of thine iniquity. (Says
the Lord) Because thy sins were increased, I have done these things unto thee,
Jer. 30.15. Now is the time to turn in upon thy sin, and to take off thy
precious Soul from this painted strumpet; whose end thou see, is bitter as
wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword. Now consider your ways, now that your own
doings have beset you about, and the yoke of thy transgressions is bound upon
thee by the hand of the Lord; they are wreathed and come up upon thy neck: Hag.
1.5, 6, 7. Hos. 7.2. Lam. 1.14. Fix not thy thoughts so much upon his wrath as
thy wickedness. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee;
this is thy wickedness because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine
heart, Jer. 4.18. c. 2.17. Nor should thou single out only some staring
corruption, but set before thee thy state and condition. Thus did they, Act.
12, and 16. They looked upon their lost estate, and on themselves as lost and
undone by sin, as their question imports, I am undone, undone, what shall I do
to be saved? When the Commandment came, ^n revived and I died, says the
Apostle, Romans 7.9. i.e. I had the sentence of death in my own Spirit, I saw my
self dead in and undone by sin; Oh I am a dead and undone man without mercy
deliver and send help. Such considerations will quicken endeavors, clear
justice, and carry thee to Jesus Christ, upon the wings of faith and repentance.

Direct. 4. Arise, and sit not still in complaining. They mind their work, Act.
2. and 16. and do not only mourn and whine. Complaints both to God and Men may
be lawful, yea and useful, needful. But complaints only will never honor God,
or heal thy Conscience. This alone will but make thy chain harder, and burden
heavier: An ill Balsom for a bleeding wound; and which the great Physician of
Consciences bids you forbear: Jer. 15.18. Psalm. 42.11. Jer. 30.15. Get thee up,
says the Lord to Joshua, wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has
sinned, etc. Josh. 7.10, 11. Complaints of thy sin will be more acceptable to
him, and advantageous to thee than complaints of thy suffering. Yet, neither is
this enough, God expects to see thee working rather than to hear thee weeping,
that thou be not so much querulous as industrious: Lam. 3.39, 40.

Direct. 5. Acknowledge thy case, and ask counsel, not only in prayer to God,
but in converse with men. Thus did they, Act. 2. and 16. They do not conceal
their distress, but crave direction. It Is an high adventure of folly to let
your wounds bleed inwardly. It Is better to breath a vein in confession. If
there be some shame in it, there is much safety. The smart of concealing will
be more than the shame of confessing. 'Twill be some ease to have emptied your
selves into another bosom, if it do not extricate you out of your straits, and
unload your burdens. Spiritual and skilful Surgeons, when they cannot eradicate
the distemper, yet can and usually do ease and assuage the dolor. But to whom
should we go? Ans. To whom you should not, I have advised already, Direct. 5. I
advise you to apply your selves, 1. To experienced men, such who are healed of
these maladies. They can tell you their own case and cure, and comforts. And
are therefore comforted, to afford you comfort. That they may be able to
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith they themselves
were comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1.4. Confession is not confined to a Priest only,
or a Pastor, by Saint James, Confess your faults one to another, says he, Jam.
5.16. Private persons might purify the unclean, as well as the Priest, Numb.
19.18, 19. 2. But especially I advise you to experienced Ministers, whose
experiences may be supposed more and better; because they have besides their
own the accession of the experiments of others. Yea, they are more interested
in, entrusted with, and enabled for this work than others. God has committed
to them the word of reconciliation; and has given them the tongue of the
learned, that they should know how to speak a word in season to him that is
weary: 2 Cor. 5.19. Isa. 50.4. If there be then ever a Paul, or Silas, a Peter
or Barnabas about you, a son of Consolation, betake your selves to him as these
here did. Open your Spiritual sores to him. Let his probe go to the very
bottom. Refuse not his Corrosives, if there be any proud flesh to be eaten off.
Especially receive his Cordials, and apply the healing Medicines, which he
prescribes, and have a probatum est upon them. The Priests lips should keep
knowledge, and the people should seek the law at his mouth; for he is the
Messenger of the Lord of hosts, Act. 2.37. c. 16.29, 30. c. 4.36. Mal. 2.7.
Hag. 2.11.

Direct. 6. Advise your Company, especially as to their counsels. They picked
out other company as soon as they were pricked in their own Conscience: Act. 2.
and 16. So did Paul, Act. 9. and Gal. 1. Whom they formerly opposed now they
own. Thy old sinful company in thy new spiritual Convictions is worse than new
wine for old bottles. Beware especially of such as 1. Would drive out this nail
out of thy heart, with another fetched from, and that would fasten thee to Hell.
That call thee from thy Convictions to their compotations, corruptions. As if
thou could never find peace but in their fleshly pleasures. Thou must run
riot with them, or there is no rest for thee. My Soul be not thou partaker with
them. Enter not into their path. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and go
away: Ephesians. 5.7. Prove. 4.14, 15. c. 1.15, 16. 2. Such as will dig and rake in
these wounds; persecuting him whom God has smitten, and talking to the grief
of those whom he has wounded. Ay, this is your Religion. Here is the fruits of
your hearing Sermons, etc. That makes you amazed, or in Festus's language,
even mad again. Let thine ear be deaf to their discouragements. O the dreadful
imprecations of the Psalmist upon such men! Psalm. 69.20, -- 29. 109.16, -- 21.
Act. 26.24. 3. Such as deride and would scoff thee out of thy Convictions.
What! you will be a Convert, I warrant you! Will you grow mopish and a melancholy
fool too? etc. Job and David no sooner put on mourning but there are some
presently mocking. Are there not mockers with me? says Job. Hypocritical
mockers, they are called by David, they shoot out the lip, and shake the head,
etc. Job 17.2. Psalm. 35.16. c. 22.7. Shut thine ear to such Scoffers. A void
them as the pests of any place. So they are called by the Septuagint: Psalm.
1.1. (...). Surely God scorneth the Scorners: Prove. 3.34. 4. Such as dawb and
sooth thee under these Convictions, with untempered mortar. Why such hard
thoughts of your self? What need so much ado? It Is well enough already, No evil
shall come upon you, etc. Ezekiel. 13.10.18. Lam. 2.14. These are miserable
Surgeons, that when they should apply Corrosives and Causticks to your
corruptions, apply only lenitive or stupifying Medicaments. Cruel kindness!
that kills the Conscience instead of curing it by preaching comfort, without
pressing conversion. I am against these Prophets, says the Lord, that steal my
word every one from his neighbor, that heal the hurt of the daughter of my
people slightly, saying, peace, peace, when there is no peace, Jer. 23.30, 14,
17. c. 6.14, etc. Listen not to such Syren-songs. Better are the wounds of a
friend that presses you with the necessity of Conversion, than the kisses of
an enemy, that precipitateth your consolation. It Is better to have your wounds
searched and so salv'd than to have them skinned over, but stink and rankle
under.

Direct. 7. Apply thy self to the course prescribed thee for thy cure and
preservation. They that asked, What shall we do? Act. 2. and 16. were resolved
to do what they were advised. Now is the time of action, at least of
resolution. Listless and lazy desires will leave thee at a deplorable, perhaps
irrecoverable loss. The soul of the sluggard desires and has nothing, but the
soul of the diligent shall be made fat. How long would thou sleep, Oh
sluggard? Can see all thy hopes failing thee, thy House fired about thee,
Hell flaming before thee, and does thy heart even faint within thee, and yet
talk of folding thy hands to sleep. I say to thee, as David to Solomon, Arise
and be doing, and the Lord be with thee: Prove. 13.4. c. 6.9, 10, 11. 1 Chro.
22.16. God has not bound thee in these fetters, nor holds thee in these cords
of affliction to shut thee up from working; but to show thee thy work, and set
thee on it with more speed and seriousness, and he is ready to give thee
strength for, and success in it: Job 36.8, -- 12. c. 33.16. -- 31. Is the iron
blunt? put to the more strength. Is thine inability before thee? Pray in the
more of the Spirit. Lord, help my unbelief. Lord, turn me and I shall be
turned: Eccles. 10.10. Mar. 9.24. Jer. 31.18. 'Twill be no excuse for idleness
that we cannot effectually do any thing without his especial influence and
assistance. Remembering that he has made this an encouragement, which you would
make your excuse. Work out your own Salvation, etc. For it is God which works
in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure: Phil. 2.12, 13. I shall not
here prescribe a method of cure. See Q. 5. But return thee the same short
answers, which were long ago given to the same question, asked by those, Act. 2.
and 16. Repent. Believe See Dykes good Conscience c. 4. p. 36. ad 45.
.

(1) Repent, Act. 2.37, 38. i.e. Return from thy sins to God himself: Act.
26.20. Ezekiel. 14.6. Well may Conscience continue smiting, if thou continuest
sinning, and God be pouring in his wrath, while thou art pouring out thy
wickedness. If you will walk contrary to him he also will walk contrary to you:
Lev. 20.18, 21, 24, 28. Or if God and Conscience forbear smiting, when you do
not forbear sinning; it is in greater wrath, not of good will. Not that he
favors or respects you, but that his fury may rest upon you, and the stupidity
of your Consciences may seal you up to condemnation: Ezekiel. 24.13. Psalm. 81.11,
12. Romans 1.24, 28. Off with these Sheba's heads, and over the wall with them in
sound repentance, if thou would no more feel the arrows of the Almighty, or
hear the thundering Cannon of a terrified Conscience. On to God in Christ; if
thou will return, return unto me says the Lord: Jer. 7.1. There is no recovery
without returning, even unto him from all thine iniquity: Hos. 4.1, 2. Return
to him as the only Original of thy being, as the only object that can make thee
blessed. Yield up thy whole self to his holy Government, thy Conscience and
Conversation to be ordered by his commands. Return to him as thine adequate
good, and alone Governor. Put thy whole man under his Sovereignty, present thy
self a living Sacrifice to him: Ezekiel. 18.30, 31, 32. Romans 6.13, 17, 19. c.
12.1. Mourning will not do it without turning; nor this, unless it be of the
whole man; nor this, unless it be unto God: Joel 2.12, 13. Jer. 3.6, 10.
Provoke thy self hitherward put on strong and present resolutions. There is no
healing till thou come hither. Till thou acknowledge thy offense and seek his
face, he will be not a Surgeon to repair, but as a Lion to rend and tear thee.
Only return, and there is an open remedy. He that has torn will heal thee he
that has smitten will bind thee up: Ho^ 5.13, 14, 15. and 6.1, 2.

(2) Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 16.30, 31. i.e. Receive him in all
his Offices, and with all his inconveniencles, and rest on him as the Lord thy
righteousness. Never think that relief is possible by any other means. There is
not Salvation in any other. There are two negatives in the Greek, (...), etc.
Act. 4.12. But lo he is able to save to the utmost those that come unto God by
him. His very stripes are healing. He is both medicus and medicina too. Not a
broken heart, but he can set and heal it. He immediately made her straight,
that had been infirm and bound together for Eighteen years: Heb. 7.25. Isa.
53.5. Luke 4.18. c. 13.11, 12, 13. And he is as willing as able. He invites,
yea entreats poor sin-sick Souls to come in, and he will cure them for nothing;
only requires that they come, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest: Rev. 22.17. 2 Cor. 5.20. Mat. 11.28. Why do
not our Souls answer with the Church? Behold we come. And attest him with
Peter? Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life? Joh.
3.22. Joh. 6.68. Hear thou distressed Conscience the Master calls for thee.
The whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick. I came to call not the
righteous but finers to repentance. Think not thou shall be too bold when the
Physician bids thee. It Is a sinful bashfulness that stays thee from believing
on Christ, when he bids you to lay all your heart-troubles at his blessed feet
in believing. Let not your hearts be troubled -- believe in me, Mar. 2.17. 1 John 3.23. Joh. 14.1. Come then thou wounded Conscience, close with Christ, and
commit the cure into his hand, who is anointed with a fullness of the Spirit for
this very purpose. Can thou but touch his garment by faith, thou shall be
whole. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins, Isa. 61.1. Mat. 9.21, 22.
Act. 10.43.

Direct. 8. Assay Conscience ever and anon with some Cordials, and do not add
more Corrosives when thy case is so sad already. They were pricked in their
heart, Act. 2. and 16. and the Apostles would not have them abide one minute
without a plaster. How many a Soul is ready to swoon away under the Surgeons
hand! For their sakes I subjoyn this direction. Say not thy bones are dried,
thy hope is lost, thou art cut off for thy part. Think rather, 1. Of others
deliverances, who have been as greatly distressed. Cannot God open your graves,
and cause you to come up out of your graves, and breathe life even into your
dead Souls, as well as theirs? Ezekiel. 37.11, 12, 13, 5, 6. Have not you read of
such whose Couches did swim with tears, who have complained their wounds did
stink, and in whom the arrows of the Almighty stuck fast? that have looked on
themselves as laid in the lowest pit, in darkness, and in the deeps; that have
been distracted with terrors, and roared by reason of the disquietness of their
heart? That have said their strength and their hope was perished from the Lord,
while they remembered their affliction and misery, the gall and wormwood? And
yet have these been relieved, refreshed and rejoiced afterward in the
loving kindness of the Lord: Psalm. 6.6. and 38. -- 9.88.6. etc. Lam. 3.18, 19,
etc. What an instance was Paul! Have thou smarted like him? was not he a
monument of greater severity, that was struck down to the very ground? etc. Or
have thou sinned like him, been such a persecutor, blasphemer? etc. Howbeit he
obtained mercy. And why? but for a pattern to them, which should hereafter
believe in Christ to life everlasting: Act. 9.3, 4, 6, etc. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14,
16. Say then, Why may not there be mercy for me too, even for me? Is the stock
of God's mercies spent? are they not infinite? Manasseh, Magdalen, etc. find
mercy? And why should I foresee nothing but misery? 2. Think of the deliverance
tendered thee. The tender is universal to all, and therefore to me may
Conscience say, Come unto me all ye that are weary, etc. Whosoever will let him
come, etc. Whosoever is a thirst let him drink of the water of life freely.
Say, why should I exclude my self, whom the Scripture, whom my Savior never
excluded? but has ever invited, as he entertained likewise Publicans and
Sinners: Mat. 11.28. Rev. 22.17. Isa. 55.1. Joh. 7.37. It Is but come, come by
faith, come by repentance, and upon the feet of new obedience, and there is
comfort for me. The Drawbridge is not up; the door of grace stands open to me.
3. Think of thy demerits, and yet what God has done with thee, and for thee.
Has not every sin deserved a death, an hell? How many a death and hell have
thou then deserved? And yet thou art alive through his forbearance, and live
upon his finding. What reason have thou then for blessing and honoring him,
and bearing up of hope in thee? Well, this distress might have been damnation.
These might have been the chains of the blackness of darkness. I might have
been now frying in easeless and endless flames. But he punishes me much less
than I have deserved. It Is of his mercy that I am not consumed: Ezra 9.14, 15.
Lam. 3.22. And why may not he further magnify his mercy in saving me, who has
so far magnified it already in sparing me? He that has reprieved me, that was
under the sentence of death, may also pardon me if I do but press him with
petitions, and pursue my petitions with repentance. 4. Think of the design of
this present dispensation. He has me in the furnace of affliction; but it may
be not to consume me, but to cleanse and purify me, to cast me into the
precious mould of his pure and holy mind and will, which in his word is
revealed to me. He breaks up the fallow ground of my heart, but it is to sow
me with the seeds of righteousness. And were there no plowing and harrowing, I
could expect no harvest. But of this before, Direction 1.

Direct. 9. Attend thy Cure with patience, and do not too hastily press after
comfort. Thou art in the hands of a most wise and gracious Physician, who
knows how to time his Cordials to thy constitution and temper, and will do
it. Do not limit his Eternity to thy time, his infiniteness to thy measure.
Those, Act. 2. and 16. enquire what course they would prescribe them to take,
not what comfort they could presently tender them. And the Apostles let them
know that Conscience must first attend the duties of repentance and faith, ere
it could arrive to a delicious rejoicing in God's favor. This is thy time to
be getting of grace; let God take his time for giving of peace. The effect of
righteousness will be peace. Ply thy work and wait patiently. He is a God of
judgment, that knows best when and how to order out his blessings. Blessed are
all they that wait for him. You never knew that it went ill with any such as
waited on him: Isa. 32.17. c. 30.18. Psalm. 33.20, 21. and 40.1. I do not blame
the seeking of peace and comfort, so it be submissive and ordinate. But would
have you, 1. Stay God's time for it. The fruit of the lips, (peace, peace,)
must have time to ripen. It will but beget crudities, if if you eat it raw.
Early joys are none of the safest enjoyments. Those hearers that anon received
Word with joy were by and by offended, when the heat of tribulation did once
arise for the Word's sake. It Is good to hear till God shall speak peace: H^b.
6.4, 5. Mat. 13.20, 21. Psalm. 85.8. 2. And to set grace above, and seek grace
beyond it. This is of absolute necessity to you, to your very being; that is
necessary but to your better being. God has never said, he will not save you
without peace; but he will not, cannot save you with accord to his honor, his
holiness, without grace: Heb. 12.14. 1 Cor. 6.9. Besides, it will argue better
for you. Natural Conscience will put you upon endeavors for peace. It Is an
enlightened Conscience that puts you upon endeavors for grace. And it is an home
(at least an hopeful) evidence of saving illumination, when you do prefer grace
in your endeavors to peace, and that you love it for its own comeliness, and
not only in order to your quiet. 3. To stay the galling anxieties and
vexations, anhilations of your hearts for and after it. Cutting and corroding
cares even for this are faulty. You should make known your case to God in
prayer, and cast these cares into the lap of his Providence, continuing in the
means which he has prescribed you, and so peace will come in his appointed
time, which is the most acceptable and advantageous time: Phil. 4.6, 7. Hab.
2.3. Otherwise you expose your self to the artifices of Satan, who will soon
abuse your eagerness to his ends; either dravving you off from your work in
the failer and want of peace, or dravving you into his vviles in a false and
ungrounded peace.

Q. 6. How may we obtain a peaceable or sound peace of Conscience?

The Premises, ( Quest. 5.) are of pertinent consideration. Here likewise I
only add,

Direct. 1. Affect thy heart (not only with the possibility of peace after all
these perplexities, of which before but) with the preciousness of this peace
See Jenkins on Jude, verse. 2.
. This will excite and engage endeavors. It Is a peace that the world cannot
give, nor would the Soul that senseth it give it for the whole world. It Is the
peace of God, a peace in Christ, the peace of Christ. It Is for the truth and
transcendency of it, called peace, peace: Joh. 14.27. Phil. 4.7. Joh. 16.33.
Isa. 57.19. Of what an excellency must this Peace needs be? which is produced
by no lower power than the blessed God, he creats it; is procured by no lower
price than the blood of God, who was crucified for it? is proclaimed by no
lower persons than the Blessed Angels, they celebrate it? Isa. 57.19. Col.
1.20. Luke 2.14. What a peace that can grasp Heaven into the heart of him that
has it, and make an Heaven upon earth? and in any place can behold a Paradise,
and God his portion? Psalm. 16.5, etc. Joh. 16.22. Why should thy Soul sit down
in sadness? Here is a feast, a continual feast See Dykes good Conscience c. 13
p 18. to p. 201.
. Thou may come with the Wedding Garment on, and welcome: Prove. 15.15. Here
may thou eat of the hidden manna, and have given thee the white stone, and in
the stone a new name written, which no man knows but he that receives it.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man to
conceive what is here prepared. This peace passes all understanding. It Is so
sweet, so signal, so surpassing: Rev. 2.17. 1 Cor. 2.9. Phil. 4.7. Were thou
but possessed of this peace, thou might look on Satan, as not only disarmed
but destroyed; on Sin, not only as disabled but destroyed; on Sufferings, not
only as not harmful but advantageous and helpful; on the sentence of the law
and severities of God not only as satisfied for thee, but as sweetened to thee:
Ephesians. 2.15. Romans 6.16. c. 8.33. to the end. Thou might look on death and not be
discouraged. Thou shall depart in peace. Look on the grave and hell, and not be
dismayed. Thou shall enter into peace. Look up to Heaven, and there see nothing
but rest and peace, rest from work, at least from weariness as well as rest
from wars: Luke 2.29. Isa. 57.2 Luke 19.38. Rev. 14.13.

Direct. 2. Hasten thy best attempts for the prerequisite of Peace, Purity.
Conscience is first pure, then peaceable, as has been said. The goodness of
Security is founded upon the goodness of Sincerity. It Is true, Conscience may
be Evangelically purified, yet not pacified. But it is as true, never was
Conscience Evangelically pacified, but it was first Evangelically purified. Of
this before. An impure Soul must expect the same return from Conscience to all
his messengers enquiries for peace, which Jehn returned Joram's messengers.
Turn thee behind me, what have thou to do with peace? 2 King. 9.17, 18, 19.

Direct. 3. Abandon all those ways and means which made and maintained the war
between God and thy Soul, Conscience is God's Officer. The war it makes and
manageth is by his commission, and in his cause to revenge thine injuries done
him, to return thee to thy duty to him, and in both to right him in point of
dignity with thee. And never think it can give thee peace from him, while thou
goes on in ways of opposition to him, or that thou shall feel quietness while
thou followest these courses: Job 15.20. and 20.20. Isa. 48.22. (1) Abandon
every sin. Acknowledge all, away with all, hate and abhor all. One Achan is
enough to trouble the whole Camp. One Jonas to bring a tempest upon the whole
Ship. The breach of one article as to a league-peace, is as effectual to cause
and continue a war, as if all were broken. Thou must hate every false way then,
away with all iniquity. The allowance of one sin speaks an heart for all sin.
And God accounts him guilty of all, who knowingly gives his approbation to any:
Psalm. 119.104, 128. Hos. 14.2. Jam. 2.10. Ezekiel. 18, 10, 13. Every sin is an
enterprise of war against both God and thy own Soul: Romans 7.23. 1 Pet. 2.11.
And never imagine Conscience can from God proclaim peace, while corruption
proclaims war against God and Conscience. (2) Abandon Satan. He is the Prince
and Captain General under whose Banner Sinners fight, both against the Gospel
of Peace, and the God of Peace to their own perdition, but at his pleasure:
Joh. 12.31. Rev. 12.7. 2 Cor. 3, 4. Thou must quit his Kingdom, come off his
Camp, cast off his Colors, not only cashier thy self from his Army, but
convert thy arms against him, and choose Christ henceforth to be thy only King
and Captain, who is the Prince of Peace. So shall thou receive the forgiveness
of thy sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified: Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 6.11, 12. Act. 26.18. Never think thou can be at peace with
Heaven, while thou art at peace with Hell, and under its power. There must be a
war with Satan, if peace of Soul Pax nostra bellum contra Satanam. Tert. ad
Mart.
. (3) Abandon sensual things, not the simple use but the sinful abuse of them,
to a war with Heaven, and to the wounding of your own hearts. Whosoever will be
a friend of the world is an enemy of God: Jam. 4.4. Yea, and to his own good;
piercing himself thorough with many sorrows: 1 Timothy 6.10. He that dotes on
Earth bids defiance to Heaven, and the God of Heaven to him, and is but driving
of nails and thorns into his own heart: 1 John 2.15, 16. Mat. 6.24. c. 13.22.
Be vigilant in the use, and flee the abuse of worldly things then. Take heed to
your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with any of them: Luke
21.34. Be sure, Conscience will not give them peace that give her nothing else
but pain, and give the world an higher place than to the God of Conscience.

Direct. 4. Accept the terms of Peace, which free Grace tenders thee; yet the
White-flag is hanging out. God is willing to a peace, and that thou has
should not perish. Lo! he proclaimed it in his Scriptures, preached it by his
Son, published it by his Angels, and is still praying and persuading it by his
Ambassadors: 2 Pet. 3.9. Isa. 52.7. Act. 10.36. Luke 2.14. 2 Cor. 5.20. Durst
thou contend with Omnipotency? or why do thou not desire conditions of peace?
yea, he offers thee conditions, conditions of the highest honor. and security;
which if thou shall sincerely own, thou art sure of peace and felicity. Let him
take hold of my strength that he may make peace with me, and he shall make
peace with me: Luke 14.32. Isa. 27.4, 5. Can thou yet bid defiance? or be at
a longer distance? Oh! if thou did but know in this thy day the things which
belong to thy peace! How equal! how easy! how excellent are the terms! But the
tender of them is of no effect, unless thou embrace and take them up; except it
be to render thy sufferings more easless, and thy self more excuseless. Nor
will Conscience as being Gods Herald, cease denouncing the terrors of war,
while thou continuest defying his terms of peace. But accept these, and he will
accept thee, and Conscience also shall acquit thee as from him: Ezekiel. 20.40,
41. Romans 14.18. Isa. 60.7. Shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh
(may Conscience say) and give it unto men whom I know not where they be? 1 Samuel
25.11. She expects an answer of peace with Moses, and whether thou will open
thy City-gates at her approach, and cordially embrace the Covenant of Peace she
offers thee: Deuteronomy. 20.10, 11. Ezekiel. 34.25, etc. c. 37.26, etc. Every article of
this Covenant must find thy acceptance and consent, or the tenders of grace can
take no effect in peace; for it is an immutable Covenant, founded upon an
immutable Counsel. God will not, cannot lie, to indulge thee any one lust: Heb.
13.20. c. 6.17, 18. Thou must repent of all thy iniquities, be renewed in all
thy faculties, be ready to all duties, receive Christ in all his Offices,
resign up all to his command and dispose, refer all to God as thy highest end
and happiness, and reciprocate with him in all, taking all his to be also thy
friends or enemies. So shall thy peace be as a river, and thy righteousness
like a mighty stream. I create the fruit of the lips; peace, peace to him that
is far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I will beal him: Ezekiel.
18.30. Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Tit. 3.1. Joh. 1.12. Luke 14.26. 1 Cor. 10.31. Psalm.
139.21, 22. Isa. 66.12. c. 57.19. In short then, will thou subscribe and seal
over to God the conditions of the new and better Covenant? Will thou henceforth
lay down thy arms? give him thy allegiance? put all thou art and have into the
hands of his Government for his disposal as well as defense? Will thou
henceforth take himself for thy chiefest good, and absolute happiness? Will thou take his Son, (and therewith take up his Cross?) to be thy Prince as well
as Savior, the Lord thy Righteousness? And will thou take his Spirit
henceforth to mortify thy flesh, and to manage thy faculties, as may best
accord with the praise of God, and with the power of Godliness? I doubt not to
say, that God has now guided thy feet into the way of peace: Isa. 44.5. Romans
6.13. Psalm. 17.15. Jer. 33.16. Romans 8.13, 14. Luke 1.79. But it is requisite
perhaps that I be a little more particular. Well then,

Direct. 5. Apply thy self to the Lord of peace, and the Lord of peace unto thy
self. There is no peace with God, nor peace of Conscience, but by Jesus Christ.
This is the Blastus whom you must make your friend, if you mean to find peace:
2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Act. 10.36. c. 12.20. Peace is of his manifesting, his
meriting, his making.

(1) This peace is of his manifesting and publishing. Men are naturally at a
loss in the means of peace. The way of peace have they not known. Nor had the
Angels known it, but by the Church. Nor had the Church known it, but by Christ:
Romans 3.17. Ephesians. 3.10. c. 2.17. It Is he that has revealed and opened this
hidden mystery, how God might be fully righted, and manfully, yet freely
reconciled in his Gospel, which is therefore called the Gospel of peace: Act.
10.36. Romans 16.25, 26. c. 10.15. See then that you apply your self to and
attend on him, in the conscionable reading and hearing of his Gospel; wherein
he has given forth both the Covenant and Conditions of Peace. But remember
that you sit not down with this, that he has therein opened these things to
your understandings, but be a restless solicitor till he has opened your
understandings also to these things, and given you an inward sense and taste of
the Truths spoken to: Luke 24.45. cum 32. Phil. 1.9. For Christ is anointed
with ability and authority, not only (as other Prophets) to preach peace to
you, but (as being the great Prophet) to preach peace into you. Or (if you will
rather) to preach you into a state of peace, and that you may have peace in him
the Preacher, and his peace in you: Isa. 61.1. Luke 4.18. Joh. 16.33. c. 15.11.

(2) It Is of his merit and procurement. The chastisement, or punishment (as the
Dutch render it) of our peace was upon him, Isa. 53.5. It would not consist
with the sovereign pleasure and perfections to make peace with us, without some
punishment or propitiation from or for us. There must be a price, some
compensation, or there could be no peace, no reconciliation. Now Christ
undertaketh to recompense God, and reconcile man. And lo! he has born the
punishment, laid down the price, and so bought out peace by the Blood of his
Cross, for all that shall believe in him, that he may bring them nigh to God,
and God unto them: Dan. 9.24. Romans 3.25. Ephesians. 2.13, -- 17. Col. 1.20, 21. 1
Pet. 2.24. c. 3.18. And now what is behind, but faith in his blood? An active
faith on thy part, whereby thou may accept and appropriate himself for thine,
and apply the blood of his Cross to thee, would alleviate thy troubles, and
afford tranquillity: Romans 3.25. c. 1, 9, 10. c. 8.34. You have the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things than the blood of Abel; better things to
God for you, and better things from God to you. But remember it is the hand of
faith must sprinkle this blood on the Conscience. According to your faith so
will it be to you, either peace or perplexity: 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb. 12.24. c.
10.22. Mat. 9.29. Get you but faith to dip in this blood, and strike the
lintels of Conscience therewith, as the Jews did the lintels and side-posts of
their houses, there is no fear of the destroyer. Faith in his blood gives a full
quietus est from the fears that generate bondage, and gives you boldness to
enter into the holiest: Exodus 12.22, 23. Romans 8.15. Heb. 10.19.

(3) It Is of his making and applying too. It Is 1. of his free donation, as
being the Prince of Peace, and that has the key of David, who opens and no
man shuts, and shuts and no man opens: Joh. 14.27. Isa. 9.6. Rev. 3.7.
And 2. by virtue of his Dominion. There is no peace with God or Conscience,
while you persist in your contumacy, and continue under the power of Sin and
Satan. These must be dethroned in and for you, and you must be delivered from
their power, and must deliver up your selves to be his people, ere God can,
without injury to his honor, his holiness, declare himself to be at peace with
you: Isa. 59.8. Rev. 2.17. Psalm. 85.8. Now it is Christ that must save you out
of the hands of your enemies, slay the enmity in your hearts, and subdue your
stubborn wills to the subjection and will of God, by the strong but sweet
ducture of his omnipotent grace: Luke 1.69, 71. Romans 8.7. cum 9. Isa. 55.5.
Cant. 1.4. As ever you would come at peace then, you must by faith close with
him as your Prince. Peace is annexed to his Principality: Isa. 9.6, 7. Let him
govern and be your Prince, and it will not be long ere he give you peace. His
Kingdom consists in righteousness and peace. Only remember it is first
righteousness, then peace. First King of Righteousness, and after that also
King of Salem, which is King of Peace. He first frames the hearts of his
Subjects to Piety, then to Peace: Romans 14.17. Heb. 7.2.

Direct. 6. Acquaint thy self with the God of Peace. Hitherto thou have been
alienated, and an enemy in thy mind to him by wicked works; and thou can not
expect he should be otherwise to thee till thou return and art reconciled: Col.
1.21. Romans 5.10. It Is high time to be upon better terms with God, or thou will
be upon worse terms ere long with Conscience. Acquaint now thy self with him,
and be at peace. Now is the accepted time, if you will yet delay or dally,
Conscience will use a rougher dialect, and this thy day of peace will end in
the darkness of amazing pangs and gripes of Conscience: Job 22.21. 2 Cor. 6.2.
Luke 19.41, 42. See thou not how willing God is to an accord? or he would not
invite thee to this acquaintance, and so solemnly swear it, that he has no
pleasure in thy death, and even pray thee out of this distance, and project
such means that his banished may not be expelled from him: Ezekiel. 33.11. 2 Samuel
14.14. If God be so willing, why should thou be so wayward? Draw nigh to him,
and he will draw nigh to thee. He is as willing to be friends as you are, or
can be: Jam. 4.8. Do you ask me how shall we get acquaintance? I answer (1) You
must be habituated for such an high converse. You may never look for
acquaintance with God, so long as you are alienated from the life of God. Sense
does not capacitate the brute Creatures for converse with men; nor will reason
simply capacitate men for converse with God. Reason fits for converse with men;
but it is Religion must fit us for converse with God. Without his image there is
no intercourse. Adam had no sooner lost that, but he lost this also. The godly
has he set apart for himself: Ephesians. 4.18. Isa. 28.12. 2 Cor. 3.18. Genesis 3.8,
etc. Psalm. 4.3. (2) You must accord all controversies. For how can you be
acquainted, while you are not yet agreed? Am. 3.3. To this end you must not
only cease provoking; but sue out your pardon, submit to his Propositions, and
solicit him by prayer: Exodus 34.9. Psalm. 81.15. Job 33.26, 27, 28. (3) You
must apply your selves to his company in the use of those appointments, or
ordinances, whereto he has annexed the promise of his own presence. There is
no acquaintance with him, without approaching to him. Then shall we know if we
follow on to know the Lord: Hos. 6.1, 2, 3. There must be no hiding then
through guilt, among the trees of the garden. No turning away back, now that
God has opened thine ear. Thou must be like those in the Prophet, They shall
go and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion, with their
faces thitherward, saying, come and let us join our selves to the Lord, etc.
Genesis 3.8. Isa. 50.5. Jer. 50.4, 5. Who is this that engages his heart to
approach unto me? says the Lord. He requires it, Seek ye my face, and you must
resolve upon it, thy face Lord (I must and) I will seek. It Is good for you, and
God has annexed his special promise to to it: Jer. 30.21. Psalm. 27.8. and
73.28. (4) There must be an hearty conjunction with him. For of what avail is
acquaintance, as long as the heart hangs loose in our converses? Your heart
must be knit, and cleave unto him, as Jonathan's did unto David: Psalm. 86.11.
Act. 11.23. 1 Samuel 18.1. What acquaintance with omniscience, while your hearts
stand off? and God is near in your mouth but far from your reins? Behold he
desires truth in the inward parts. He searches the heart, and tries the
reins. And if thy heart be not right with him thy other applications will be
reckoned flattery, not friendship: Jer. 12.2, 3. Psalm. 51.6. Jer. 17.10. Psalm.
78.7, 36, 37. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. (5) Be actually and often communicating thy self
to him. If you will hide your heart from him, what hopes of acquaintance with
him? He that intends acquaintance should be emptying and unbosoming his heart
to him, and making him partaker of his secrets. Pour out your heart before him,
then especially in Prayers and Supplications. Present him your particular cases
and concernments. Hide nothing from him, from whom indeed nothing is hidden.
Let all thy pangs of sorrow have vent, like Hannahs in the pouring out of thy
Soul. It may be when thou art pouring out thy case he may be pouring in his
comforts: Psalm. 62.8. and 32.5. and 38.9. 1 Samuel 1.15. Prayer has the promise
of his Presence, and indeed of peace. In every thing by prayer and
supplication, let your requests be made known unto God. And the peace of God
shall keep your hearts, etc. Psalm. 145.18. Job 33.26. Phil. 4.6, 7. (6) Add to
all this an affectionate correspondence and communion with him. Acquaintance
does not barely note an interest in another, but intimacy, but endearedness,
(at least) intercourse with that other. I would have you secure an interest in
him, that thou be able with Thomas to say, My Lord and my God. This will serve
thee in with choice peace, in that this God is the God of peace: Psalm. 16.2.
Joh. 20.28. 1 These. 5.23. But I would not have you think it enough to have
obtained an interest in him, but you should maintain an holy open intercourse
with him; for herein lies the crop and confluence of Evangelical peace; and it
is the end for which one whole Epistle was written: 1 John 1.3, 4. Oh! what a
calm and serenity of Conscience do such holy converses of faith, love, etc.
breathe forth! What a conflux of joy are they blessed with! Who ever came down
from this Mount, but his face shone with the irradiations of Divine love? Or
did not say of being on this Mount as Peter of being on that, Mat. 17. It Is
good for us to be here, let us build Tabernacles, etc. Isa. 26.3. Exodus 34.29,
30. Psalm. 65.4. and 36.7, 8.9. Mat. 17.4.

Direct. 7. Argue this state and ascertain it to Conscience if thou would
arrive to peace. Adjure her throughout all her proceedings or argumentations,
and articulate converses about it to be plain and full with thee, as ever thou
would attain to a sound and wellsetled peace. Peace of Conscience is not the
birth of rash and precipitate conjectures at an adventure, but of rational and
pondering selfconverses and arguings, by comparing a man's self with the signs
or marks which the Scriptures give him for judging his estate and condition.
Hereby know we that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts Inde fit
ut pacatam conscientiam habeam^^. Bez. (...) not. ad (...)
(or as the Syriack, make our hearts quiet) before him. Hereby we know that we
know him, (viz. to be our advocate with the father, and that he is the
propitiation for our sins, (and therefore our peace) if we keep his
commandments, 1 John 3.18, 19. c. 2.1, 2, 3. Call Conscience to attend its
office, for clearing thy estate, and charge it to be open and downright with
thee, in the discharge of every part as it proceeds in way of ratiocination
and discourse. It proceeds as I have said in a practical Syllogism. As thus,

To be spiritually minded is life and peace. But I am spiritually mind; do mind
spiritual Objects first and fullest. Ergo, I have life and peace.
Adjure hereby the living God, to tell thee nothing but the truth, in all the
parts of her discourse. Let artificial Logic be found only among Scholars; yet
is there natural Logic in every man's Conscience, as one Fenners Treat. of
Conscienc. p. 231, 232.
well observes. Charge her before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ to be clear
and impartial with thee throughout. In the first Proposition; adjure her not to
give thee unsound marks on the one hand, as a very hypocrite may have; nor
unsafe marks on the other hand, as are only to be had, where there is height or
growth in grace; and are therefore improper in the present case, which concerns
only the truth of grace. In the second Proposition, adjure her to be full and
faithful with thee in her testimony. Will thou say this before the all-seeing
God for me? Will thou speak it to thy superior, as well as to my self? Can
thou say, Behold my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high? Psalm.
139.1, 23, 24. Joh. 21.17. Job 16.19. In the third Proposition, urge her to
speak home, and speak out, as she will answer it to God the supreme Judge. Give
her no rest, if she either suspends her sentence, or is short in it, till she
says, Shibboleth plainly and roundly, that ye may bring things to some
certainty, as they did: Job 16.30. 2 Timothy 1.12. 1 John 2.5. See this fully
prosecuted, Q. 3.

Direct. 8. Attend the spirit of peace. Spiritual peace is an effect of pouring
out the spirit upon us: Isa. 32.15, 16, 17. Not as if it did exclude the
efficiency of Father, or Son. It Is both from him and them: Rev. 1.4, 5. It was
through the eternal Spirit, that Christ offered his spotless blood to purge,
and therewith pacify the Conscience from dead works. It is the same eternal
Spirit that mouldeth us into the mystical union with Christ, makes application
of his blood to the Conscience, and manifests the same to its peace and
comfort: Heb. 9.14. 1 Cor. 12.13. Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. Abuse not the Spirit then,
but attend his work upon thee, his ways before thee, and his witness in and
with thee.

(1) Attend his work upon thee. What he is doing, what he is demanding, and
with what designs See Fords spir. of bond. c. 10, 11.
. See thou do not baffle with, or break from him. Quench none of his motions,
be they never so strict, or seem they never so severe. They all tend to grace,
they all end in peace. And though he be as yet a spirit of bondage to fear; it
is not to exulcerate Conscience more sharply, but to heal it the more soundly,
and that he may be a spirit of adoption to thee, whereby thou may cry, Abba,
father: 1 These. 5.19. Isa. 61.1. Romans 8.15.

(2) Attend his ways before thee; not only his ways in the Sanctuary, without
thee, in the means of grace, as praying, hearing, etc. but his ways that are
more spiritual within thee, in the motions of grace and minding of Spiritual
and gracious matters. The less spiritual-mindedness, the less serenity of mind.
What blustrings are there here beneath? But above it is all in an happy
tranquillity. There are no tempests or thundrings in the upper region. Call up
thy Conscience and its Colleagues thither, and keep them conversant about
spiritual and heavenly Objects; and thou shall then soon know what is the
communion of the Spirit, and what these suavities of Conscience are. To be
carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually is life and peace: Phil. 3.20,
21. cum 18, 19. Col. 1.9, 10. Romans 8.5, 6.

(3) Attend the witness of the Spirit in and with thee. It is the Spirit that
bears witness, says the Apostle: 1 John 5.6. Which he does not only
externally in the Scriptures, but internally to and with our spirits. (...).
Romans 8.16. A single witness under the law was of no moment, But at the mouth of
two witnesses shall the matter be established, Deuteronomy. 19.15. Jo. 8.17. Lo, two
witnesses are tendered upon the case to clear it. God's spirit and our spirit,
both of them needful and useful to testify the things of God and the things of
man. For what man knows the things of man save the spirit of man which is in
him? Even so the things of God knows no man but the spirit of God: 1 Cor.
3.11. The spirit witnesses to and with our spirit or Conscience, in and
throughout its whole argumentation and progress, whereupon it concludes its
peace. E. g.

All those that with child-like appretiation, affiance and affections can cry,
Abba, father, are the children of God. But I can with a child-like
appretiation, affiance and affections cry Abba, father. Therefore I am a child
of God: Romans 8.15, 16.
The Spirit witnesses with my Spirit. 1. To the truth of the Proposition, by
an internal manitestation or revelation of that truth to the mind, whereof he
has already made an outward revelation in the Scriptures: Joh. 14.26. Psalm.
119.18. 2. To the truth of the Assumption, by irradiating the Conscience, and
enabling her in and upon the reflections she makes to apprehend, feel and
descry such appretiations and affections in me, or whatsoever other mark or
medium I am making use of, to clear up my estate thereby: Ephesians. 1.17, 18. 1 Cor.
2.12, 14. 3. To the truth of the Conclusion, not only by strengthening her to
conclude my state and condition, from such appretiations and affections, but by
shedding abroad such beams of joy and comfort, as confirm me therein, and seal
it up unto my soul: 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. Romans 5.5. Ephesians. 1.13. c. 4.30. Though you
must not attend for an external audible testimony from the Spirit See Hollingw.
Hol. Ghost on the bench. p. 74, 75. Ball's Lif of Faith, p. 79.
, which was never promised, and hardly (if ever) pattern'd; Yet you may and
must attend for the internal and effectual testimony of the Spirit, in
effecting, exciting, heightning and evidencing of his own graces to and in you,
and in the effusion of the love of God and of his joy upon you, which is called
the joy in and of the Holy Ghost, and is the companion of peace of Conscience:
Romans 14.17. 1 These. 1.5, 6. Let me only add, Thou must not expect as if the
Spirit would, or could, witness peace to thee, before it has wrought grace in
thee. For its testifying peace to the Conscience is by testifying the truth of
thy grace, and closing with Christ. Thou must first set thy scal to the truth
of God in the reception of his testimony by faith in his Son, ere the Spirit of
truth will seal thee up to the day of redemption: Joh. 3.33. cum Ephesians. 4.30. and
2 Cor. 1.22. In whom after that ye believed Quasi dicat, non citius, nec ante,
sed post sidem in Christum. Zanch. ad loc.
, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13.

Thus appealing Conscience into, and adjuring her by the divine presence will
be of notable advantage. It will not only awaken and engage Conscience, but
will awe her from extremes, to which Sin and Satan may otherwise incline her,
and put the more authority and undeniableness into her testimony and sentence,
as being given not only upon God's commission, but with God's contestation and
comprobation; and so will be the more powerful to arrest and stay scruples, to
anticipate or answer Satan, and ascertain the Soul in the sweetest and
steadiest affiance, while the testimony and judgment of Conscience to a man's
righteousness and reconciliation, etc. is after such severities, and as in the
sight of God. And her language to the Soul is like that of Eliphaz to Job, Lo
this, we have searched it, so it is, hear it, and know thou it for thy good,
Psalm. 17.2, 3. and 7.3, 9, 10. and 26.1, 2, 3. Job 13.15, 16. c. 23.10. c.
27.2, 5, 6. c. 5.27.

Q. 7. How may we keep Peace of Conscience when once gotten?

The former Directions, C. 2. Q. 7. and those even now given you, Q. 7. are of
useful review here likewise See Fenners Treat. of Consc. p. 200, etc.
. But I shall be particular.

Direct. 1. Keep out sin. This is THE makebate, and like a mad man, it casts
firebrands, arrows and death. Her entrance and first embraces (its true) may
promise a mellifluous sweetness. But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a
two-edged sword, that pierces even to the Conscience. And if another abuse of
his liberty may wound your Conscience, much more will the ardour of your own
lusts: Prove. 26.19. c. 3, 4. Romans 6.21. 1 Cor. 8.12. Psalm. 38.3, 5. Keep out
especially (1) Scandalous sins. These fly at God and his glory. His name is
blasphemed through them; and shall you be blessed in them? Had Zimri peace who
slew his master? Though David was the darling of Divine Providence, yet
farewell his peace when he once fell into such a provocation: 2 Samuel 12.14. 2
King. 9.31. Psalm. 51.8, 11. (2) Self-condemned sins. Think not to sin against
Conscience, and yet sin in quiet. Such sins are a daring of Conscience to do
its worst, and do implicitly condemn her, as she does explicitly condemn
them. And how can she in such a circumstance acquit and clear? Remember what it
came to in Peter, how his blessed peace was exchanged into bitter pangs. And
indeed such persons carry their condemnatory sentence in their own bosom till
it be reversed by repentance: Romans 1.32. c. 2.1. Mat. 26.75. Romans 14.22. Titus
3.11.

Direct. 2. Keep off Satan. Thy peace is his pain. The more thou enjoyest, the
more he envieth. Job's tranquillity was Satan's trouble, Job. 1. and C. 2. And
he does not only afflict him in his goods, but accuse him to his God. There is
no impression (it is true) can be made by him upon the God of peace, he is
immutable; but there may be on the peace of God, for this is mutable in it
self, and in a mutable Subject: Numb. 23.19. Jer. 14.19. c. 16.5. You have seen
the first league of peace violated through his temptation. And if you are not
the more circumspect he will frustrate the second, as to the sweets and
serenities thereof to your Souls, by feeding your thoughts with tribulations,
or flattering you to transgressions. Be sober, be vigilant, your adversary the
Devil is not at rest, because you are in peace. The sense of your happiness
stirs up the more activity and assiduousness. As a roaring lion he walks
about seeking whom he may devour, (...), Swallow up or drink down. It Is not
long since he would have swallowed thee up with overmuch sorrow. Look to it,
for he is designing the same end, though (it may be) diversifying in the means.
If he cannot cut off the Covenant of peace, yet he will clog the peace of the
Covenant in whatsoever he can. Stand upon your guard then, set out your
sentinels, gird on your spiritual armor, keep the shield of faith in your
hand. Give no place, but resist him steadfastly, and the God of peace will (not
only bind, but) bruise him under your feet shortly, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. 2 Cor. 2.7.
cum 11. Ephesians. 6.11, -- 17. c. 4.27. Jam. 4.7. Romans 16.20.

Direct. 3. Keep down Secular things. They are (like fire) of place and profit
in the hearth, but of greatest peril when they get abroad, and get up into the
house. Its objects they are for the sensitive part, they relieve, refresh it;
but not for the rational part, they disappoint, distract, divide it, and are
not only vanity but vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.14, etc. Though they may
feast Concupiscence, they will vex the Conscience, if you let them come too
nigh it. It Is between Conscience and the Creatures, as between the Children of
Israel and the Canaanites. As these get up, they come down. Are these high?
they are as low. If these be the head, they are the tail: Deuteronomy. 28.43, 44. He
that would secure the peace of his Conscience must keep these Canaanites under,
and make them servants and tributaries. He must not set his heart (but his
heel) upon them. He may not lift up his Soul to vanity. He must not love the
world though he may live in it. But should have his conversation in heaven, if
he would have this heaven in his Conscience: Psalm. 62.10. and 24.4. 1 John
2.15, 16. Phil. 3.20. Take heed to your spirits then, keep this world under
your feet, and the other world in the eye of your faith. Let not the lean kine
devour the fat, Secular prosperity Spiritual peace. Set your affection on
things above, not on things on the earth: Mal. 2.15. Genesis 41.20. Coloss. 3.2.

Direct. 4. Keep up your Society and Communion with the God of peace. The
marrow and kernel of peace of Conscience consists mostly in this. Conscience
cannot lift up an hand against you, while he lifts up the light of his
countenance upon you; and nothing but your sins can hinder these shines. The
Lord is with you while you are with him. Surely his salvation is nigh them that
fear him, Psalm. 4.6, cum 8.2 Chron. 15.2. Psalm. 85.9. Your danger then is in
being behind with him; doubtless he will not be behind with you; you see that
he is ready, be not you remiss, either in receiving in or retaining of those
acts of communion which are offered on his part to you, or in returning thereto
and reciprocating with him therein, by those acts of Communion which you owe on
your part to him.

(1) Be still ready to receive and take in whatever further demonstrations of
his kindness for, and reconciliation to you he shall yet tender thee. He comes
not without his myrrh and his spices, his honeycomb, and his honey. See that
divine Loves find you not snoring upon your beds, but stirring about your
business, and seeking your beloved. He meets him that rejoices and works
righteousness, those that remember him in his ways. If you will sleep away such
opportunities, or slight his overtures, the very watchmen will wound and smite
you. You cannot put off his presence but you therewith put off your own peace:
Cant. 5.1, -- 8. c. 2.1, -- 4. Isa. 64.5. Look to your receptive capacities,
that they be not prepossessed, or unprepared. The Lamb's wife had no sooner
made her self ready, but she had the grant of other raiment. While David's
heart was ready, it was at rest. And if thou prepare thine heart, thou may
preserve it from anxieties. Then shall thou lift up thy face without spot, yea,
thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear: Rev. 19.7, 8. Psalm. 57.7. cum Marg.
Job 11.13, 15.

(2) Be sure thou reserve with thee and repeat often to thee what former
discoveries of his loving kindness he has left with thee. Review often the
evidences he has shown, and the experiences thou have sens'd of his love to
thee. This will strengthen faith, silence fear, speaks forgiveness, and
satisfies the Soul as with marrow and fatness. We have known and believed
(says the Apostle) the love that God has to us. Hereupon their Souls dwell in
love; yea, in God, and God in them, and they neither dread law, or death, nor
hell, or judgment: Psalm. 63.5. and 26.3. and 36.7, 8. 1 John 4.16, 17, 18. What
holy challenges may the Soul now bid to all, and every one of them! yea, what
an happy conquest is it sure of over them! Their united strength can never
overthrow his peace, while he lives under the sweet rays of divine love, and
is looking on so many pecifick pledges of an omnipotent well-pleasedness. And
as long as he can look upon him as the God of love, he can live upon him also
as the God of peace: Romans 8.35. ad finem, 2 Cor. 13.11.

(3) Be serious and speedy in thy returns to him, lest thy delay cause his
withdrawing: Cant. 5.7. Summon up every faculty to attend his coming, and
answer his loving kindness, with the highest joys and thankfulness. His loving
kindness is better than life, therefore heart and lip, and life, and all should
praise him: Psalm. 103.1, 2, 4. and 63.3. and 138.2. Now is the time to be
giving him your loves, and bringing forth those pleasant fruits, both new and
old, which you have laid up for him. Now it is, that he expects most the
exercise of his graces in you, while he is evidencing his grace to you. He
requires your offerings, and the first fruits of you oblations, with all your
holy things, and has promised, I will accept you with your sweet savor, Cant.
7.12, 13. Heb. 12.28. Ezekiel. 20.40, 41. And now God is pleased by his own
promise to undertake for his peoples peace, while they persist in such ways as
these: Isa. 26.3. c. 30.15. c. 32.17.

(4) Be more steady in the reciprocations of love with him. Give him love for
love. Are his desires toward thee? Let thy desires also be toward him. Does
he rejoice over thee? do thou also rejoice in him: 1 John 4.19. Psalm. 33.1, 21.
Isa. 26.8. O love the Lord all ye his Saints. While you live in Love there is
an harmony of hearts, and you will have no leisure for listening after those sinful
avocations, which displease God and disturb the Conscience. Love will be
adhering to and abiding with God, and assimilating you to his goodness. Besides
love casts and keeps out tormenting fears, and is of that transcending and
inexpugnable force, that like death, it bears down all before it. Many waters
cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it, Psalm. 31.23. and 5.11, 12.
and 70.4. 1 John 4.18. Cant. 8.6, 7.

Direct. 5. Keep up a steady confidence and faith in Christ. He was the cause,
and is the conservator of Evangelical peace. It was procured by his Death, and
is preserved by his Intercession. Herein he does not only appear in our
natures, but for our sakes, and in our steads, as our Agent to preserve a
corresponderce and prevent controversies as our Att^rney to plead our Cause,
and promote our Concernments. And whereas every sin tends to a breach of peace,
he takes upon him to accord the difference, and appease justice, and he does it
not only by presenting our petitions for peace, but by pleading the perpetual
virtue of his own pacifick sacrifice, and per^^^^ satisfaction for us: Heb.
9.24. c. 6.20. ^ Job. 2.1, 2. Rev. 8.2, 3. Heb. 9.7, 12. Now your work is to
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them that
thus come: Heb. 7.25. You may neither come in prayer, nor by faith immediately
unto God, but through him, in the virtue of his Mediation and Intercession:
Ephesians. 3.12. Col. 3.17. 2 Corinthians. 3.4. Upon every new breach that your sin seems
to make,

(1) Set the principle of faith at work afresh upon him. An active faith will
appropriate and draw the benefits of his Intercession into our own chanel. He
is entered by his own blood into the holy place for us. He appears in the
presence of God for us, Heb. 9.12, 14. It apprehends and eyes Christ, as one
that is herein about our business, answering our accuser, accomplishing our
absolution, according our crimes or charges with divine justice, advocating our
case with the Father, and that we may be accepted before the Lord as one that
bearing our names before the Lord upon his two shoulders, yea upon his heart,
as a memorial before the Lord continually, as the high Priest did when he went
into the Holy of Holies: Rev. 12.10. Heb. 9.7, 11, etc. 1 John 2.1. Exodus
28.12, 29, 38. Yea, an active faith will be able from the influence and
efficacy of his Intercession, to argue down both inward fears and outward
force, whatsoever may seem, to introduce a charge, or impeach the peace of our
Consciences. She concludes, Wherefore he is able to save to the uttermost those
that come unto God by him. And challenges them to speak, or do their worst,
she is so secured in him. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us, Heb. 7.25. Romans 8.33, 34.

(2) Send up the prayers of faith to him, or rather to God by him. Put thy
petitions for preserving thy peace into his hands, and they are sure to pass.
He will deliver them, and the Father will not deny him. It Is the office he
undertaketh, to offer up the prayers of the Saints, and he will therewith offer
up his own incense: 1 John 5.14, 15. Joh. 16.23. Rev. 8.3. If you would
maintain Conscience, maintain this confidence. His Intercession affords you
abundant arguments. Seeing that we have a great High Priest that is passed into
the heavens. -- Let us come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need, 1 John 3.21, 22. Heb. 4.14, 16.

Direct. 6. Keep close to the Covenant of Peace. Conscience fetches its
comforts out of the Covenant of Grace. It Is its armory in times of Spiritual
war, and its treasury in times of Spiritual peace: 2 Samuel 23.5. Heb. 6.18. 2
Cor. 10.4. c. 4.7. Learn to be more conversant in it, and keep close to it.

(1) Not only in fulfilling the condition it propounds (of which before, Q.
6.) Though all the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth to such as keep his
covenant and his testimonies, 1 Chronicles. 16.15, 16, 17. Psalm. 25.10. and 103.17,
18.

(2) But by faith in the Promises it contains. Every promise would thus end in
peace; for what is the Gospel but a Gospel of peace? Or what are Gospel Truths
but the glad tidings of peace? Abraham and Sara had enough to perplex and
intricate them, but faith in the promise kept them immovable and unshaken: Romans
10.15. Gal. 6.15. Romans 4.18, -- 22. Heb. 11.11. God has laid up immutable
grounds of Comfort in his immutable Covenant. If the fruits are mutable, it is
because our faith is mutable. The Promises are all Yea and Amen; but our faith
is yea and nay. Let faith eye them more steadily, and embrace them more
strongly. So did the Patriarks, and they lived and died in peace: Heb. 6.17,
18. c. 11, 13.

(3) By frequent views of its perpetuity and continuance. The mountains indeed
shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from
thee, nor the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy
on thee, Isa. 54.10. It Is a sure Covenant. We have his word, his oath, his seal
to confirm it to us, and his own love and faithfulness are lain at pledge for
the performance of it: 2 Samuel 23.5. Psalm. 89.33, 34, 35. 2 Cor. 1.22. When ever
therefore Conscience is ready to misgive thee, call her hither, and mind her of
the immutability of Gods Covenant in the mutability of thy condition. Tell her,
Thus says the Lord, if you can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant
of the night, that there should not be day and night in their season; then may
also my Covenant be broken with you, Jer. 33.20, 21. c. 31.35, 36, 37.

Direct. 7. Keep on in the Commandments of God. Keep up duty if you would keep
off disquiet. Peace of Conscience is preserved by obedience; not only See
Fenner 's Treat. of Consc. p. 205, etc.
as it anticipateth, what would trouble and confound the terms of our peace,
but as it affords a testimony to Conscience of the truth of our peace. Hereby
we know that we know God, and are known and acknowledged by him. Hereby we
assure our hearts before him: 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 John 2.3, 5. c. 3.19. Yea, God
assures the true Evangelical obedience an happy tranquillity and peace. The
work of righteousness shall be peace. Glory, honor and peace to every one that
works good. As many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them,
Isa. 32.17. Romans 2.10. Gal. 6.16. I advise especially that you preserve 1.
Loving affections. The more you love his precepts, the more you shall live in
peace. Great peace have they which love thy law, Psalm. 119.165, 166, 167, 132.
2. Loyal aims. Let the preponderating motive be to please the Lord, that you
walk worthy of him unto all pleasing. And he will reciprocate with you. Every
thing shall work together to pleasure you; your enemies shall be at peace with
you, God himself shall take pleasure in you. And therefore Conscience must
needs be at peace with you. No testimony speaks that peace to Conscience as
this, that I please God: 2 Timothy 2.4. Col. 1.10. Romans 8.28. Prove. 16.7. Psalm.
149.4. Heb. 11.5.

Direct. 8. In short, keep a foot consideration, and your most awakened and
active circumspection. Look backward and consider your pangs and plaints ere it
came, your prayers and promises that it might come, the price you then set upon
it, the pains you then spent for it, etc. Look forward, and consider the end it
points at, the effects it promises, the enjoyments to which it predisposeth,
etc. Look upward, and consider the principle whence it comes, the price which
it cost, the proprieties and privileges which it clears, etc. Look downward,
and consider not only others horrors, but how ominous, hopeless, etc. your
thoughts of hell and of the grave would be if you should lose your peace. You
cannot miss of motives, whither soever you convert your minds. In a word, lose
this, and you lose all. God, Glory, Heaven, Happiness, though not as to
themselves, yet as to your sense. Keep this and you keep all, the sweets, the
security of all. Nay, if you keep not this you cannot keep your selves at least
in any quiet and composure. For it is the peace of God that keeps your hearts
and minds, all your rational faculties: Phil. 4.7. Keep thy heart therefore
with all diligence. Be diligent that you may be found of God in peace, without
spot and blameless Watch thou in all things: Prove. 4.23. 2 Pet* 3.14. 2 Timothy
4.5. Watch the adversaries o^ Conscience, that they neither flatter her o^^ of
her peace, or fright her with their power; neither feed her with prejudice, nor
force her upon any precipice, that they neither cause an invasion, nor cherish
an insurrection. Watch the acts of Conscience, both imperate, which she
injoyneth other powers of the Soul, and elicit which issue immediately from her
self, that they neither decline the rule, nor discontinue their exercise, nor
be distorted to either extreme, but be discharged regularly. Watch her answers,
that they be the answers of a good Conscience toward God. In fine, watch every
avenue, that nothing pass in or out but what you can give a good account for,
to the God of peace: Mat. 26.41. 1 Cor. 16.13. c. 8.9. Hebr. 3.12. 1 Pet. 3.21.
Luke 21.34, 36.

Q. 8. Whether a pious Christian may not live for some time without Peace of
Conscience?

Doubtless he may. For though we may admit Piety to be the practical foundation
of Peace; yet we must allow some time between laying the foundation and raising
up the frame or building. It Is true, the end of that man is peace, but his
entrance is most times perplex, as Manassebs, Ephraims, the Jews and Jaylors
was: Psalm. 37.37. 2 Chronicles. 33.12, etc. Jer. 31.18, etc. Act. 2.37, etc. c.
16.29, etc. It is plain (1) there can be no peace before grace, Q. 1.) It Is
first grace, then peace, in all the options of the Apostle: Romans 1.7. 2 Cor.
1.2. (2) There is and must be grace in order of time and nature before peace.
For the true peace of a gracious Christian arises from the testimony of
Conscience to the truth of his grace. So that Conscience in pronouncing peace
does always presuppose grace, and makes use of the truth of our grace, as a
medium whereby it proves that we are upon terms of peace: 2 Cor. 1.12. Isa.
26.12. Psalm. 4.8. (3) There may be a considerable interval between the
implanting of grace in us, and the imparting of peace to us, whether we
consider the ground of peace or the giver of peace. 1. The ground of peace. The
immediate rise of peace is not the simple existence of grace in us, but the
sense and evidence of this grace to us. And it is manifest that grace may exist
in that subject, which has no evidence or sense of it, and that for a long
time. Witness Heman, David, etc. It Is one thing to know God, it is another to
know that we know him. This is the product usually of much time, many thoughts
and trials of our selves. Christ tells his Disciples, Whither I go ye know, and
the way ye know. But Thomas says unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou
go, and how can we know the way? There is no contradiction. They knew it,
but did not know that they knew it, notwithstanding so long continuance with
him. Science there was, at least a dark and confused knowledge; but not
Conscience, no distinctness or clearness of knowledge, though they had so long
converse with him, in whom were laid up the treasures of wisdom and knowledge:
Psalm. 88.3, 9, 15. c. 42.3. -- 8. 1 John 2.3. Joh. 14.4, 5. 2. Let the giver of
peace be considered. Grace and peace are from the same Spirit. But not at the
same time, or with the same circumstances. It Is the same spirit that
sanctifies us in the day of our renovation, and that seals us up to the day
of our redemption. But it is not by the same act. That is antecedaneous, this
afterward. After ye believed ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise,
Isa. 32.15, 17. Romans 15.13, 16. Ephesians. 1.13. How long, or how little time he
will take, ere the ensealing of the deed, is not for us to determine, while he
has not declared it in his word, and is pleased to diversifie so much in his
works. Paul's peace was not so early as Lydias was. It Is not for us to know the
times and scasons which the Father has put in his own power: Act. 9.9, 17, 18.
c. 16.14.1.7. This is certain, Grace is from the Spirit, as working out sin,
and writing out the similitude of God upon the Soul. Peace is from him, as
witnessing with our spirits our Sonship and Salvation. So that as he first
works, then witnesses; so there is usually some distance of time, between
this and that. And his witnessing that we are the Sons of God, does ever
presuppose that work, as every act does presuppose its object: Romans 8.15, 16.
Besides, the Spirit does not evidence or witness the truth of grace to us, but
in and by the exercise of grace, as it is at work in us. The God of hope fill
you with all joy and peace, in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through
the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.13. Now as grace must be before it works,
so the works and exercise of grace are seldom of that eminence as to amount to
an evidence of the truth of grace till time has given us some taste and trial
of them, in iterated and renewed acts. (4) A pious Christian may live for a
long time without peace of Conscience then as appears by the premises. Grace
it self is called the inward and hidden man of the heart, and like the Souls
in-being in the body, is not known a priori from its causes, but a posteriori
from its effects: 1 Pet. 3.4. 2 Cor. 4.16. Col. 1.6. Admit that these effects
are discernable, yet are they not actually, and so efficaciously discerned as
to assure peace, without the concurrence of a twofold witness, God's Spirit and
our Spirits. God's Spirit as being a most free agent, is not obliged to this,
or that, or indeed to any time of ours. He blows where and when he lists.
Our Spirits are often so dulled, discomposed, distempered with passions,
prejudices, prevailing fears and sorrows, or power of melancholy, etc. as they
are disenabled to discern, till these are worn out with time and experience.
And mean while like Asaph and others, the Soul ofttime refuses to be
comforted: Romans 8.16. Psalm. 51.12. Joh. 3.8. Psalm. 77.2. Genesis 37.35. Jer.
31.15. (5) Hence there is no such inseparable connection between grace and
peace, as a man should disclaim grace, because he is as yet denied peace. It Is
a weighty saying of that worthy servant of God Love's Grace, Truth. and growth,
Sermon. 11. p. (...).
, who is now shining in another world. Though there cannot be true peace where
there is no grace, yet there may be true grace where there is no peace.

Q. 9. Whether pious Christians may not lose the peace of their Conscience?

No doubt they may, if we understand it of peace it self, though they cannot
lose the seeds of peace.

(1) They cannot lose the seeds of peace, and in this sense cannot lose their
peace: i.e. Seminally and radically considered. It Is a peace and assurance for
ever, an everlasting joy, a joy that no man takes from you. For ever, not in
regard of an uninterrupted continuance here; but in regard of its unintermitted
causes. There is ever cause or matter of peace, though there is not ever the
conscience or mercy of peace: Isa. 32.17. c. 35.10. Joh. 16.22. 1. Christ our
peace is the same still, the same considered in himself, and as to the
consummating of our Salvation. He will not lose his interest in his Saints; and
has assured they shall not lose their interest in himself. They may forfeit
his smiles, but shall never fall from himself: Heb. 13.8. c. 5.9. Joh. 6.37,
39. c. 10.28, 29. 2. The Covenant of peace is the same still. It Is an
everlasting Covenant, and gives ground of everlasting comfort. And the
propriety of his Saints therein is everlasting too, though they cannot ever
plead it. They may not ever have the comforts of the Covenant, but they shall
never be cut off or cast out of Covenant: Heb. 13.20. Isa. 54.8, 9, 10. c.
61.8. Jer. 33.40. Heb. 13.5.

(2) They may lose the sweets of peace, yea peace it self; God himself gives
evidence to it. Remember how he speaks to and of his Church. O thou
afflicted, tossed with tempests, and not comforted. I called thee as a woman
forsaken and grieved in spirit. We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear and
not of peace. I have taken away my peace from this people, even loving kindness
and mercies. I was wroth and smote him, I hid me and was wroth, etc. Isa. 54.6,
11. Jer. 30.5. Isa. 57.17. The godly have given us their experience in it too.
Behold, for peace I had great bitterness, says Hezekiah, Isa. 38.17. The
arrows of the Almighty are within me, (says Job) the poison whereof drinks
up my spirit. The terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. Mine
hope has he removed like a tree, he has also kindled his wrath against me,
and counts me unto him as one of his enemies, etc. He teareth me in his
wrath, he gnasheth upon me with his teeth, etc. Job 6.4. c. 19.10, 11. c. 16.9.
What shall I tell you of Heman, of Asaph, or of David? (who yet was of a
sanguine, and therefore cheerful Constitution, and of singular skill both in
Musical instruments and singing) yet was his and their Souls full of troubles,
and you may find them roaring by reason of the disquietness of their hearts:
Psalm. 38. and 88. and 13. and 22. and 27. Peace it self may be removed then,
though the seeds of peace remain. In that those seeds are now hidden from
sense, and they do not immediately bring forth the blessed fruits of peace,
without the intervening act and attestation of God's Spirit and ours (as was
said Q. 8.) without which a man's interest in Christ and the Covenant will be
always dark, most times doubtful, and many times denied: Isa. 40.27. Psalm.
31.22. c. 88.14. Now God's Spirit may and many times does suspend his
testimony, and stand off as a stranger, or as a wayfaring man; yea, smite and
wound, and write bitter things against ^he Soul. Our spirits may and do
withold their witness many times also; either careless through oscitancy, or
confused in their observations, or complicated by other objects, or compressed
in their own operations, through doubts which depress them, through diffidence
which disquiets them, through distracting cares and fears which desolate them.
So that our spirits may not only be opposite to peace, but overwhelmed with
perplexities: Psalm. 30.7. Jer. 14.8. Psalm. 69.26. Job. 13.26, 27. Psalm. 25.17.
and 77.2, 3. and 143.4.

(3) Hence Christians should not measure their grace by their peace. Neither 1.
as to the sincerity of it. There is not any such infallible tie between them as
that a man should throw off all his hopes of grace, as soon as he is turned out
of the hold of peace! Their tenure is different; Grace is a tenure for
perpetuity; but Peace is a tenancy at will, ad placitum domini. We hold both
from God, and of mere grace or favor. But that we hold more absolutely. God
has undertaken both parts of the Covenant, that we shall not depart from him,
as well as that he will not depart from us. This (see peace) we hold more
arbitrarily, and are at our good behavior in it. If we break his statutes, he
will break our comforts, though he will not break his Covenant: 1 Pet. 5.10. 2
Cor. 1.3. Jer. 32.39, 40. Isa. 59.21. Psalm. 89.31. -- 35. 2. Besides, their
tendency or respect is different. Grace appertains to the being of a Saint.
Peace to his well-being. A man cannot be a Saint without that; but he may be a
Saint, (though sad) without this. A man does not cease to be, because he
cease to be well. Sickness does not unman us, though it unmirths us. 2.
Neither may we measure the strength of grace by our sweets of peace. David,
Job, Asaph, Heman were most signal instances of the life of piety, as well as
of the loss of peace. They were not so much below others in this, but they were
as much above them in that. The Scriptures do sufficiently furnish us with
examples of the greatest works of grace in the greatest want of peace: Job
13.15. Hab. 3.17, 18. Psalm. 44.17 -- 25. But of this more hereafter.

Q. 10. How may we recover Peace of Conscience, which we have now lost,
especially our Souls lying in so much distress and perplexity?

Direct. 1. Take up betimes, and suffer not these sores to root deeper in thee,
or run any longer upon thee. I say to thee as Jonathan to his lad, Make speed,
haste, stay not. And as the voice to Paul, Make haste, and get thee quickly out
of Jerusalem, out of this dark and deplorable condition. Hasten thy escape
from the fearfulness and tremblings, those windy storms and tempests that now
overwhelm thee: 1 Samuel 20.38. Act. 22.18. Psalm. 55.4, -- 9.

(1) To this end read over thy losses, and let this give life to renewed
labors. Have thou not lost the sight of thy God? the sweets of thy grace? the
suavities of Scriptures and Ordinances? and the securities and
soul-satisfactions which thou were wont to take in thy secret and solemn
offices, and in the delicious views of thy sanctified habits and faculties? And
can thou lie still under such sore losses? Job 9.11. Lam. 3.17, 18. Psalm.
119.81, 82.

(2) Ruminate on thy condition, and let this quicken thee. Is it a condition
only of loss of thy dear peace? Nay, but a condition of lamentable and deep
perplexity. While it may be friends are bewailing, enemies are boasting or
blaspheming, Satan is tempting, sin is troubling, and the thoughts of God are a
terror to thee. And is this a condition to be rested in from day to day? Job
19.21. Psalm. 69.20, 26. 2 Cor. 2.11. Psalm. 38.3, 6. Job 30.15, 16.

(3) Reflect on thy case yet more distinctly, and let this disabuse and excite
thee. In all other troubles thou have thy self to befriend thee. But in this
case when Conscience is smiting and accusing, thy self will be engaged against
thee, thine own Soul will disquiet, and perhaps distract thee. Conscience will
call in all against thee; the Affections to awaken and arm their fears, cares,
sorrows, etc. the Memory to account and sum up thy transgressions which trifled
away thy joys, both in themselves, and in their circumstances; thy
Understanding to aggravate both thy transgressions and troubles, and to answer
whatsoever is tendered to reduce her to tranquillity: Job 30.15, 16. Psalm. 42.5.
and 55.4, 5. and 40.12. and 22.14, etc.

(4) Reckon with thy self what it will come to if thou continue thus, and
thereby call forth and raise up endeavor. Thou art going down-hill apace, and
must expect without an early anticipation, to degenerate from bad to worse;
from one sorrow to another; from casting down to disquiet, and from thence to
distraction; from troubles of Conscience to terrors, and from terrors to
horrors; yea, and from one sin to another; from oscitancy to obduracy, and
from thence to obstinacy; from despondence to diffidence, and from thence
happily to despair: Psalm. 42.11, and 88.15, 16. and 55.3. Heb. 3.12, 13. Psalm.
73.13, etc.

(5) Recall thy past comforts, and let these constrain thee to mend thy pace.
Can thou forget those halcyon days, and happy discoveries of divine grace to
and in thee? when thou heard'st nothing but the sweet sounds of peace, either
from within or without thee? like that of Amasai to David, Peace, peace, be
unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers. How can thou but cast back a wish
with Job thither, and quicken thee to thy work? O that I were as in months
past, as in the days when God preserved me! when his candle shined upon my
head, and by his light I walked through darkness, and his secret was upon my
tabernacle, 1 Chronicles. 12.18. Job 29.2, -- 7.

Direct. 2. Try over thy condition by an even balance. It Is possible you may
have mistaken your case, and thence miss your comforts, as the Psalmist did; a
further trial may set the former right: Psalm. 77.10. and 71.22. Prove. 13.7.

(1) Try the cause. Whatever be the causes from which, to be sure sin is the
cause for which these sad concussions are fallen upon thee. God afflicts not
willingly. It Is our iniquity does (in a sort) enforce him to it. Have thou not
procured this unto thy self? Yea, thy way and thy doings have procured these
things unto thee, this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it
reaches unto thine heart: Psalm. 38.3, 4. Lam. 3.33. Jer. 30.14. c. 2.17, 19.
c. 4.18. Seek out the Jonah, that special sin for which this storm is sent; let
it not lie sleeping by the sides of the Ship, while you are ready to sink or
split. Know and see wherein has been this sin this day. This is not a time so
much for whining over thy losses, as for winnowing off thy lusts; not so much
for sighing out thy complaints, as for searching out thy corruptions. The
Church is not for sitting down and telling over her woes, but for searching and
trying of her ways in such a condition as this: 1 Samuel 14.38. Psalm. 77.6. Lam.
3.39, 40. Yea, beg God to search thee, and show thee that sin which has made
so sad a breach. Leave thy complaint upon thy self with Job: charge not God
foolishly; Crave his discovery. Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. Make
me to know my transgression and my sin, Psalm. 139.23. Job 10.1, 2. c. 13.23.

(2) The life of Grace is an hidden life; hidden not only in Christ, but
oft-times from the Conscience. But then like the treasure, which the Gospel
tells you of, it is hidden for your search, though it be hidden from your sight:
Col. 3.3. 1 Pet. 3.4. Mat. 13.41. Prove. 2.4. Would you dig to the bottom, who
knows but you might descry this treasure, and defeat the tentation that is
now upon you? I acknowledge that it is none of the happiest seasons, for trial
of the truth of your Sanctification, but diligence herein may overcome the
difficulties hereof. My spirit made diligent search, says Asaph, when his
state was as arduous and afflicted as yours: Psalm. 77.6. You may find enough to
support hope, if not to satisfy your heart. And though you see little smoke,
and senseless heat and warmth of grace, yet a strict search may discover some
spark or other, in so many embers which you should do well to scarch for and
stir up: Psalm. 119.81. Luke 24.16. cum 22.2. Cor. 13.5. 2 Timothy 1.6. Let me ask
you or come answer these few questions in this afflicted condition. 1. What are
your greatest desires? are they not to the name of God, and to the remembrance
of him? Oh if God would lift up the light of his Countenance! If I might have
but some glimpses of his loving kindness! etc. Must not all Comforts, all
Creatures stand by in comparison of this? Is not this the one thing thou
desire before and above all the rest? Must thou not say, My soul thirsts for
God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God? Isa. 26.8.
Psalm. 4.6. cum 8.73.25. cum 21. and 27.4. and 42.2. 2. What is your greatest
displicence? Is it not that God hides his face, and holds thee for his enemy?
either that he is displeased with thee, or that he is departed from thee? Is
not this the gall and the wormwood that most embitters this cup to thee! that
the Lord has forsaken thee, thy God has forgotten thee? thy beloved has
withdrawn himself, and is gone from thee? Oh the felicities I have found in his
favor! the overcoming sweetness that has overflown me in his service! etc.
When I remember these things I pour out my soul in me, and my tears are my
meat, while they say unto me where is thy God? Job 13.24. Psalm. 88.7, 14. Lam.
3.17, 18, 19. Isa. 49.14. Cant. 5.6. Psalm. 42.3, 4. 3. What are your greatest
deliberations? Are they not how you may return into friendship with God, and
God may renew his favor to you? How you may be restored into acquaintance with
him, and be reconciled to and accepted of him? Oh that I knew where or how I
might find him! whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I
would make supplication to my Judge. Oh that I were as in months past! when the
Almighty was yet with me, and the secret of God was upon my tabernacle? Lam.
5.21. 2 Cor. 5.9. Job 23.3. c. 9.15. c. 29.2, 4, 5. 4. What are your greatest
determinations? Are they not for God, the living God? That thou will continue
endeavors for him, whatever it cost thee? That thy Soul still follow hard
after him, though he seems to fly farther from thee? That thou will never give
over thy work, or his word, though thou should go weeping from day to day,
and duty to duty? That whatever work sit this shall not; for thou set a
value on him above all the world. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek
thee. My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, etc. I will wait
upon the Lord that hides his face from me. From the ends of the earth will I
cry unto thee, yea in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have I waited for thee,
and will wait upon thee, Psalm. 42.2. and 63.8. Lam. 2.18, 19. c. 3.48, 49, 50.
Psalm. 63.1. and 61.2. Isa. 8.17. c. 26.8, 9. What does Conscience answer to
these questions? Must they not answer in the affirmative? Is not the language
of your spirits the same, much-what with this, that is now suggested to you? If
so, how should you cheer your drooping hearts and command off these disquiets
and anguish. For these are just evidences that God is yours, and you are his;
that the grace of his Spirit is in you, though the grace of his favor does not
shine with its wonted light and warmth upon you, as the Scriptures mentioned do
manifest; yea, these things speak thy appretiation and esteem of God, as the
highest good; and thy affections for, and intention of him as the highest end,
and do therefore more infallibly conclude the safety of thy condition, than do
many other marks. So that thou may well renew the Psalmists charge. My soul
wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him, Psalm. 62.5.

Direct. 3. Tack about to the cause that has thus bereft thee of thy comforts.
Pursue it with all the strength thou can make. Draw up every squadron of thy
Soul like the Stars in their courses to fight against Sisera, the sin that has
invaded and spoiled thy peace. Let thy Understanding discharge its arguments
against it, and aggravations of it. Let Conscience arraign, accuse, condemn it,
and all the other powers, under the subjection of Conscience, execute and
exterminate it. Yea, call in Prayer, Promises, Providence, and whatever else
may powerfully help thee in the combat, or to its conquest. And be sure thou
give it constant chase, till thou have subdued or sunk it, till thou have drawn
the nail of sin out of thy heart, and driven the nail of sorrow and
mortification into its head. Thus did holy David, Psalm. 51.1. -- 15. Judge.
5.20, 26. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I
will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me. If I have done
iniquity I will do no more, Job 34.31, 32.

Direct. 4. Try the bath of Repentance. No Bath is more effectual for an
ulcerous body than this is for an ulcerated spirit. Repentance is a panacea,
the Christians all-heal. Who ever repented that was not remedied? No sooner had
Job repented but he was restored, recovered. Repentance removes the cause, and
then God undertaketh to renew our comfort. He will repent of the evil of
punishing, if once we repent of the evil of provoking. Let Ephraim repent, and
she is forthwith remembered, received, reconciled, and God renews the sweets
of her old relation. Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child? etc. Isa.
6.10. c. 57.18, 19. Job. 42.6, etc. Jer. 26, 3, 13. c. 18.8. c. 31.19, 20.

(1) Here rip up thy sins in confession, that have made these sad ruins in
Conscience. Thy sorrows are continually before thee. Call thy sins before thee
also, and declare thine iniquity. The more you cover them, the more they will
corrode, and like a cancer gnaw and feed on you. The sooner you confess them,
the speedier and safer too will be your cure, and Gods comfort: Psalm. 38.17,
18. Prove. 28.13. 1 John 1.9. David's heart was heavy in him, and God's hand was
heavy on him. And what does he? I acknowledged my sin, says he, etc. And God
by and by acknowledges his Soul, and anticipateth his supplication. I said I
will confess my transgression unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of
my sin. And he sets a Selah on it, for your attention and observation: Psalm.
32.4, 5, 6.

(2) Rinse thy Soul in Contrition. Break up the fountains of Evangelical
sorrow, and bathe thy Soul in them. How should thine eyes run down with
penitential tears? and thy head with rivers of pious sorrow? and that heart
bleed for thy manifold transgressions, which is broken with such manifold
tribulations? Lam. 1.16. cum 18. c. 3.48, 49, 51. cum 42. I deny not but thou
may deplore the sadness of thy estate. How is the most fine Gold changed!
Consternation fills my heart, the crown is fallen from my head, the joy of my
heart cease! But especially thou must deplore the signalness of thy sins. Woe
unto me, that I have sinned. I will be sorry for my sin. My sin is ever before
me. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, etc. Lam. 4.1. c. 5.15, 16, 17.
Psalm. 38.18. and 51.3, 4. It Is not sorrow simply, but sorrow for sin, which is
the salve for a wounded spirit. Yea, this is not only a salve to heal but a
sacrifice to expiate: Psalm. 41.4. and 51.17. So that were thy heart more broken
for sin, it would be less burdened with sighing. For this would interest God in
thy case. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saves
such as be of a contrite spirit. Nay, this would engage him in the cure. He
heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds. He undertaketh to
cordial and revive them, yea to come down and dwell in them: Psalm. 34.18. and
147.3. Isa. 57.15.

(3) Return from thy sins unto the Lord in conversion. Whence are all thy
maladies but from turning to them from him? And what remedy is there without
returning to him from them? Lo, this is God's own prescription, who is the
great Physician, and has his promise of a cure sealed up with it, and the
Saints probatum est subscribed to it. Hear how he calls, encourages, cheareth,
quickens thee: Hos. 14.1, -- 7. Jer. 3.1, 12, 13, 14, 22. Return ye
backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings. When will you speak
back to him? Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God, who alone
have right in us; and art alone able to give rest to us. The misery is, men
turn into themselves, or unto second causes with Ephraim, to be healed of their
wound, and then cry out with Jeremy, Why is my pain perpetual? and my wound
incurable, which refuses to be healed? And thence complain and fly out even
against God's faithfulness? Will thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as
waters that fail? To such strange heights of diffidence do such diversions
sometimes drive them. But alas, they disoblige God from comforting them by
these courses of theirs, and open a way for severer corrections, while they
decline him, and deifie others: Hos. 5.13, 14, 15. Jer. 15.18, 19. Psalm. 13.1,
2, 3. and 77.7, -- 11. Come then, and let us return unto the Lord. There is no
recovery of our peace out of his presence. It Is he wounds, and his hands make
whole. Return we hither, and we are sure to recover. He has torn, and he will
heal us; he has smitten and he will bind us up. We have his promise for it:
Hos. 6.1, 2. Zach. 1.3. Job 5.18. Deuteronomy. 4.29, 30, 31.

Direct. 5. Take the Balsome that is in the blood of Christ. Is there no balm
in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Why then is not the health of the
daughter of my people recovered? Though there were none there that could heal
their civil wounds: Isa. 8.22. c. 46.11. yet there is enough here to cure thy
spiritual wounds. For the blood of Jesus cleanses from all sin, cures and
redeemeth from all iniquity: 1 John 1.7. Tit. 2.14. His blood is the most
sovereign confection, and (...) blessed self the most skilful Surgeon and
Physician. No sore, no sickness ever came amiss to him. He has healed
infirmities of eighteen, yea of eight and thirty years standing: Isa. 53.5.
Mar. 2.17. Luke 13.11, 12. Joh. 5.5, etc. Yea, he is not only the Physi^ian,
but the Physic, as one says D. Reynolds on Hos. 14. Sermon. 4.
; and gives himself, his own flesh, his own blood for a purgative, a cordial, a
plaster to the Soul of his patient. There is no balm for Conscience like the
blood of Christ. Heb. 9.14. c. 10.19, 22. Ephesians. 2.13, 14. Ezekiel. 47.12. See then
that you apply this blood to you, and see him applying it for you.

(1) See that you apply his blood to you. The best Balsoms become ineffectual
without a befitting application. Conscience is the part affected, apply this
plaster close to it. You are not come to blackness and darkness, but to the
blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.18, 24. Think it not enough that Christ's blood
might be shed for you, but it must be sprinkled on and by you. The remission of
your sins both in it self, and in the sense of it, does immediately flow from
this, not that. We have sinned, and so God is provoked. This is the burden and
matter of pain to Conscience. Christ is the propitiation for our sins; this
breaths forth peace to Conscience. But how is he the propitiation for our
sins? Through faith in his blood. So that without an intervening act and
application of faith, Conscience is not blessed with peace notwithstanding the
blood of Christ: 1 Pet. 1.2. 1 John 2.1, 2. Romans 3.25. Come then and apply this
choice and happy Balsom, the precious blood (as Peter calls it) of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19. Apply, and bring down the virtue of it to thine own
case and condition. Oh the advantages of an holy application! which Christ
assures us of, under the metaphor of drinking his blood: Joh. 6.54, 55, 56.
Accept it then from the hands of thy dear Physician, who to save thy blood,
has shed his own, and has washed us from our sins in his own blood.
Appropriate it especially to the ulcerous and diseased part. Take it for thine
own. It Is no presumption while the Physician tenders it to thee, and that
freely; and tells thee thou must not so much as dream of life, without drinking
his blood, ( i.e. without applying and appropriating it), Act. 20.28. Rev. 5.9.
c. 1.5. c. 22.17. Joh. 7.37. c. 6.53. I allow that there is a difference
between the act of the Will in chosing and accepting of Christ for mine, and
the act of the Conscience, whereby I know and am assured that he is mine, and I
am his. And though the latter be only immediately productive of this peace; yet
the former is eminently preparative thereunto, and does beget an initial and
inchoative peace; at least it will baffle many troubles. Go then as far with
Conscience as you can in it, in answering her pleas from hence, if you cannot
accord all in peace. Does Conscience suggest the foulness of thy sins? speak
back again to Conscience, His blood was shed for many, for the remission of
sins, yea and of my sins; if I am but thoroughly willing to take him for my Lord
and Savior. Does Conscience tell thee of thy several forfeitures, and
spiritual vassallage to Divine justice? Tell Conscience, his blood has
obtained eternal Redemption; yea there is redemption for me through his blood
if I can receive and rest upon him. Does Conscience terrify thee with being an
enemy to God, and God's being an enemy to thee? Tell her the blood of his Cross
has made reconciliation for the sins of his people. And for me if I renounce
my enmity, and return unto him: Mat. 26.28. Romans 3.25, 26. Heb. 9.12. Col.
1.14, 20. Heb. 2.17. Oh if Conscience could but lay a clear claim to this
blood, farewell such cramps and convulsions quickly. Could she but say, The
blood of our Lord Jesus was shed for me, I have redemption through his blood.
Now there would be a most ample serenity. Well, Conscience cannot yet put forth
an act of assurance after it, yet may she, and should put forth an hand of
acceptance toward it, and of an holy acquiescence on it; as knowing sin cannot
write so bitter things against us but this blood of sprinkling speaks better
things for us: 1 Timothy 1.15. Isa. 26.3. Heb. 12.24.

(2) See Christ applying his blood for you, presenting the merit of it to his
Father, and thereby pleading for mercy to the faithful in his Intercession. He
is not gone into the Holiest of all, as the high Priest with the blood of goats
and calves was wont, which he offered for himself as well as others. But by his
own blood he is entered into the holy place, and this not for himself, but to
appear in the presence of God for us. And if that blood sprinkling the unclean,
sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall this blood
sprinkled in the Conscience purge it from dead works? Heb. 9.7, -- 15, 24. c.
7.25.

Direct. 6. Try the Breasts of the Church, you may suck and be satisfied. These
are breasts of Consolation; Breasts for beauty and benefit, fair and full of
milk and nutritive virtue. As the clusters of the Vine, as clusters of grapes,
full of vinous spirits, succulency and sweetness: Isa. 66.11. Caut. 7.7, 8. You
that are athirst ( i.e. in distress and desirous of relief) may come freely,
Christ invites you, encourages, injoyns you to come away: Isa. 55.1, 2. Joh.
7.37. Rev. 21.6. Mat. 11.28.

(1) Try the Breasts of the Promises. Do not put them from you, they are full
of affecting delicacies, and as it were ache for want of drawing. In them is not
only sure but strong consolation. For he is faithful who has promised. Lay but
the mouth of faith to the promise, as Sara and Abraham did, and the fears you
plead from the improbabilities and seeming impossibilities of peace will melt
away and vanish: Isa. 55.3. Heb. 6.18. c. 10.23. c. 11.11. Romans 4.19, 20, 21.
Say thou, I see no peace of Conscience within? nothing but puzling
calamities without me? But the Promises show that there is peace in Christ for
thee. In the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace,
Joh. 16.33.

Object. Alas! for peace I have great bitterness.

Answ. Yet hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace to his
people, he will bless his people with peace: Psalm. 85.8. and 29.11.

Object. What! I have peace? Alas! I have not deserved the least peace, but the
greatest punishments. It Is not all the world can give me peace.

Ans. But in the Promises you have to do with the God of peace. They ask not
for deserts, accept desires, and afford all of free gift. Peace I leave with
you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives give I unto you. Let not
your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid, Joh. 14.27.

Obj. But alas! I see no cause, no foundation of peace. Matter of provocation
God may find enough, and too much in me; but no matter of peace, whence he may
educe this blessing for me.

Ans. The Promises exhibit peace, as not only of God's causing, but of God's
creating. And creation is out of no pre-existing, or no predisposed matter. I
create the fruits of the lips, peace, peace. I create Jerusalem a rejoicing,
and her people a joy, Isa. 57.19. c. 65.18. Ply these and the like promises,
(as Phil. 4.7. Isa. 26.3. c. 27.5. c. 54.10. c. 57.16, 17, 18. c. 55.12. c.
66.12, etc.) with the strongest desires of their goodness, and with your
steadiest dependence on their truth. Who ever went to God in the promises for
peace that went away without the peace of God?

(2) Try the Breasts of the public and solemn Ordinances. These are full of
milk and marrow, and fatness, not for support only, but to abundantly satisfy
us. Let thine heart preserve them, and they will add peace to, and preserve
thee, Psalm. 36.8. and 65.4. Prove. 3.2, 17.1. Essay the Sacraments; which some
will have to be those two Breasts, Cant. 4.5. Certain it is that Christ who is
our peace, is the internal substance of them. And he does not only outwardly
signify, but inwardly seal righteousness, and therefore peace by them: Ephesians,
2.14. 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. Romans 4.11. c. 14.17. Reflect on thy Baptism. It
ministers powerful arguments, not only for the killing of sin, but for the
quieting of the soul; as being baptized into Christ and under the bond, and
therefore having the benefits of the Covenant, thereby confirmed and sealed.
This is another Ark against the deluge of wrath as Noah's was against the
deluge of waters: Romans 6.3, 4. Gal. 3.26, 27. 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. Renew thy
presence often at and participation in the Supper of the Lord. Here is Bread to
strengthen, and Wine also that makes glad the heart of man; the Communion both
of the Body and of the Blood of our Lord Christ. Lo, here is both a
peace offering for thee, and an offer of peace to thee, under the broad-seal of
the God of peace. How many Souls have unloaded all their pressures and
soul-distresses at this port? and have gone away laden, under full sail, with
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost? O, let not thy weaknesses so much deter thee
hence, as thy wants drive thee hither, and Christ's willingness to communicate
himself to his weak believers draw thee, even to those who are filled with
troubles of heart: Psalm. 104.15. 1 Cor. 10.16. Ephesians. 5.2. Cant. 2.3, 4, 5. Joh.
14.1, 27. c. 16.6, 22. cum c. 13. Cant. 5.1. 2. Essay Sermons. The Lord will
speak peace. But he is not wont to speak it immediately by himself, but through
the ministry of his own Ordinances and offices, who must therefore preach the
Gospel of peace. Yea, he creates peace, but so as the word preached is of place
and use in this Creation, as the word of his power was in the first Creation. I
create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace. The Priests lips are to be a
storehouse of comfort, as well as of knowledge. God has committed to them the
Ministry of Reconciliation. Nor does the word they preach only propound the
matter of peace, but their preaching of the Word is a powerful, and oft-times a
present means of peace thorough his benediction: Psalm. 85.8. Romans 10.15. Mal.
2.5, 6, 7. Isa. 57.19. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. Isa. 40.1, 2.

Direct. 7. Turn in upon your own bosoms. Commune with your own hearts, as
Asaph did in this very case; and let your spirits make diligent search: Psalm.
4.4.77.6. It Is one observation of Dr. Sibs on Psalm. 42.5. Soul's Conflict, c.
5. p. 51.
That one way to raise a dejected Soul is to cite it before it self. You have
often heard of the Court of Conscience; see you call and keep it, and convene
the troubles of your heart before it. For herein it is that your case must be
audited, argued and determined. I wish there were no Christians did carry it to
Conscience as Ahab to Micajah. Either they call not Conscience into the
consultations of peace, as afraid she will not prophecy good, but evil
concerning them. Or if she comes and deals clearly them, they commit her to
prison, and carve out nothing for her but the bread of affliction, till they
shall come again in peace: 1 King. 22.8, 27. Whereas there is no sound peace
but of Consciences speaking, as has been abundantly shown. Arraign your
troubles before Conscience then, here audit, here answer, here argue them. For
self-communing is one of the speediest and safest ways to stillness and
self-quieting: Psalm. 4.4. and 42.5.

(1) Audit and require an account of them. 1. Of what kind, or what they are?
Are they not secular troubles? the troubles of some Secular emergence and
interposition? The Shu^emitess has lost her Son, and her Soul is vexed within
her. By the solicitous importunities of Sampson's Wife was his Soul vexed unto
the death: 2 King. 4.27. Judge. 16.16. Or are they not Sickness troubles? the
troubles of a sickly indisposition? which oft-times discomposeth the natural
spirits and faculties, and by reason of the Soul's sympathy with the Body, puts
the whole frame in a commotion or combustion. Or are they but self-conceived
troubles? the troubles of a strong and stirring imagination? whose false and
hasty representations do frequently prevent the trial of our judgments, and
produce as insuperable troubles, as if the grounds were real, (witness Jacob's
imagination of his Son's being slain) till they are brought to answer it at the
Bar of Conscience and Reason: Genesis 37.33, -- 36. Now though such kind of
troubles call for due consideration of them in their place; yet will they be
cast out of Court as of another cognizance, and of alien and improper
consideration here, when the Question is put touching troubles of Conscience.
2. From what cause, or why are these troubles? I intend not hereby the cause
why God inflicteth them, but why the godly embrace them. Thus demand a reason
of them, and desist not till you have brought it to a resolution. Thus David in
his distress doubles and trebles the question. Why art thou cast down, O my
soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Psalm. 42.5, 11. and 43.5. Many of
your troubles would cease and shrink away were they but summoned to appear
before the Tribunal of Conscience, as having nothing to say for themselves,
especially such as have no stronger foundation than your fancy. For such as
durst appear in Court,

(2) Here answer them. Christians usually lose their peace by listening to, and
being led by the sudden pleas of sense, instead of laying them in the scales of
a judicious Discourse. They hastily admit those pleas as argumentative and
conclusive against their peace, in private conference, which do require, and
would receive an easy and advised answer in public Court, if Conscience may
deliberately proceed upon them. And it is seldom in such a case, that they are
ever extricated out of their difficulties and disquiets, till they come to
discuss them over again in the Court of Conscience. And then you have them
correcting sense, and chiding themselves for such indeliberateness and
precipitancy. I said in my haste, etc. This is my infirmity. Oh that I should
be so foolish and ignorant, etc. Psalm. 31.22. and 77.10. and 73.13, 15, -- 23.
Lam. 3.18, 54. Isa. 38.10, 11. Whatever then are the pleas and pretensions in
impeachment of thy peace, let them be produced in open Court. Let Conscience
consider and compare them with the rules of the Court, the standard of
Evangelical peace. And then how many of thy doubts and troubles will
successively have TEKEL on them? Thou art weighed in the balances, and art
found wanting, Dan. 5.27. I forbear to mention here the just answers may be
given to what argument may be happily insisted on, wherewith you may furnish
your selves in the respective cases.

(3) Here argue it with them. If thou can not evince thy peace by it, yet it
will ease thee in thy perplexities to expostulate and argue out the case in the
Court of Conscience. How forcible are right words! David's iterated
expostulations were effectual to the recovery of his dependence, and to the
remitting, if not removing of his disquiets and diffidence: Job 6.25. Psalm.
42.5, etc. Men are prone to plead it out with Heaven, and reason it forth with
God. It were the more easy and expeditious way to plead it with their own
hearts. No arguings unless of prayer and faith, being admitable with God. Who
is a fit opponent or respondent to argue with Omniscience and Omnipotence? or
can choose out words to reason with him? Job 13.3. c. 23.4. c. 9.14. Psalm. 77.7,
-- 10. Here argue it then, and bid thy fears as Job did his Friends, to attend
and listen. Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleading of my lips, Job
13.6. Argue 1. from thy past serenities and sweetnesses. Old experiences will
become new evidences, I have considered the days of old, (says Asaph) the
years of ancient times, I call to remembrance my song in the night. And thence
he resolves that it was his weakness (This is my infirmity) to ^ield so far to
his own despondency and disquiets, and should be his work to devolve all into
the hands of God, and fortify his dependence on him in the sense of his former
happiness. I will remember the years of the right hand of the most high. I will
remember the works of the Lord. Surely I will remember thy wonders of old, etc.
Psalm. 77.5, -- 13. David's spirit was overwhelmed within him. My heart within
me is desolate, says he. And what does he? I remember the days of old, etc.
Psalm. 143.4, 5. God's ancient kindnesses afford new arguments to Conscience,
whereby she may, and many times does quiet her self, and confute her sorrows:
Psalm. 31.21, 22. and 71.18, 20. Well then, if you would not cast away your
confidence, call your former comforts to remembrance. Are your Souls cast down
within you? Revive and cheer them up with the remembrances of God from the land
of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, what he spoke to you in such a Sermon, sealed
in such a Sacrament, secured in such a solitariness. And thence reason with
Manoah's Wife, If the Lord would slay us, would he have shown us such things as
these? Heb. 10.32, 35. Psalm. 42.6. Judge. 13.23. Argue 2. from thy present
succors and supports. Your sighs are many, and your heart is faint; but the
seed of peace as well as of grace remains. Distressed you are, but not in
despair; cast down, but not utterly, for the Lord upholdeth you with his hand.
Whither had Satan, and your own sins and sorrows hurried you, if the
everlasting arms had not been under you? Lam. 1.22. Psalm. 97.11. 1 John 3.9. 2
Cor. 4.8. Psalm. 37.24. Deuteronomy. 33.27. Besides, are there not some secrets hints
and intimations now and then suggested you, that your, grounds of peace are
better, and God is better pleased with you than your prejudices will admit?
Your beloved stands behind the wall, but does he not look forth sometimes
also at the windows and show himself through the lattess? And must you not tell
him if you would speak truth with the Psalmist? When my spirit was overwhelmed
within me then thou knew my path: Cant. 2.9. Psalm. 142.3. Would you hereupon
argue it with your selves as the Psalmists does, it would cheer and quicken
hopes, if not quiet your hearts. He reasons off his anxious conceptions hereby
at one time, and rebukes his hasty conclusions against himself at another:
Psalm. 42.11. and 43.5. and 31.22.

Q. 11. Whether and how far a pious Christian, besides the loss of his peace,
may be burdened with, and live under great perplexity and distress of
Conscience?

No doubt he may if we mind but what is ^ready delivered. The premises on Q.
8. and (...) may seem proof enough. But in that the ^ghs and self-censures of
many precious Saints ^^e such as call upon us to behold and see, if there were
ever any sorrow like unto their ^rrow. Or if ever under the whole Heaven, ^^th
been done upon any pious Soul as has ^een done upon their particular selves. I
am ^erswaded therefore to be more particular See Symond's Deserted Soul, cap.
25, 36.
: Lam. 1.12. Dan. 12.2. I say therefore your Conscience may not only deny you
peace, but denounce war, and the dreadfullest punishments, and yet you may be
devoutly pious. Instances have been already premised, Q. 9. and more will be
added in the progress of this Discourse. Be it but admitted or granted (which
has been already asserted and made good) that a pious Christian may lose the
Evidences of Grace, and may look upon himself as in the estate of nature, and I
need say little to confirm the Proposition that he may be in deep distress and
passionate perplexities. Whether Conscience be considered, or the concourse of
other causes to afflict him in such a condition as this.

(1) Let Conscience be considered. Your Conscience was created with a
capability of sustaining the evils of sense, as well as the evils of loss. By
her receptive capacity she is disposed to take in the impressions of both, and
as well to let in the sense of guilt and misery upon the perpetration of sin,
as the sense of good and felicity upon perseverance in sanctity. By its active
capacity it is disposed to accuse and condemn as well as to acquit and clear.
Yea the activity of Conscience does much further the Christians anguish, and
sharpens the sword in the hand of Conscience, and doubleth its strokes;
especially while unbelie^ leaves the Conscience destitute of the succors she
should receive from Christ and the Covenant, etc. without her; and lays her
naked and deplorably subject to her own cutting accusations and killing
aggravations of this estate without the least resistance from within her.
Besides the authority of Conscience does much heighten and hasten on such
self-afflictions; while Conscience is both law and plaintiff, and witness, and
judge, and executioner, and all this from God. So that if the Soul would in this
case make its appeal to him, Conscience does arrest and stay it. Nay (says
she) it is God that charge, God that condemns you; I am but his mouth, his
officer, etc. Yea, hereupon it aggravateth and abetteth the sadness of this
Soul's estate; If I (that know or can recall so few things by you) if your
heart condemn you God is greater than your heart, who knows all things. So
that if the Conscience of the pious may thus conclude of their estate (as has
been premised, to be without God and grace, etc.) the product must needs be
calamitous. Distress of Conscience is the deepest distress, the bones are dried
by it; the spirit is broken by it. And Solomon puts it to requestion, Who can
bear it? Prove. 17.22. c. 15.13. c. 18.14.

(2) What a concourse of other causes is there often times, that all wring
their wormwood into this bitter cup? Shall I mention and but mention some of
them.

1. The principal is God. He does not only ^ide his face from his, (yet at that
the Soul is ^oubled) but he increases his frowns, sharp^eth his eyes against
them, tears them in his ^rath, as was Job's case, yet a nonesuch for ^ncerity:
Psalm. 30.7. Job 13.24. c. 16.9. c. 19.11.1.8. He tells his Church, I have
wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one,
etc. He tells others, I was wroth, and smote him, I hid me and was wroth, etc.
Jer. 30.14. Isa. 57.17. Oh how must this cut the Saint at the heart! and fill
his mind with consternation, and his mouth with complaints! That God his God,
on whom he had pitched all his hopes, in whom he had placed all his happiness,
with whom he had sometime (as he then thought) such pleasant intercourse, and
of whom he had such precious experiences! that this God, so good, so great, so
desirable, so dear, so respected, so related, etc. has unsheathed his sword
against him, or rather sheathed it in him, and made Conscience his best friend,
to become now his bitterest foe!

2. The procuring cause is Sin; which is now set forth before the Soul in its
nature, number, dismal, sequel, dreadful circumstances, etc. which are as Oil
to the flames, and winds to this Sea of troubles, that make Conscience rage and
roar in more abundance. Woe to me that I have sinned, I am not able to look up.
An heavy burden are they, (God is pressed with them, Christ was pierced by
them) they are too heavy for me* Lam. 5.16. Psalm. 40.12. and 38.3, 4.

3. The promoting causes are several. Satan roareth as a Lion upon them, and
would swallow them up in these sorrows, and cast^ in his fiery darts to keep up
those flames^ 1 Pet. 5.8. 2 Cor. 2.7. cum 11. Ephesians. 6.16. Sinners either
censure or scoff at them, which even slays the broken in heart. Ay! this is
that your religion comes to. I thought you would grow mad, etc. Psalm. 109.16,
25. and 69.26. Act. 26.24. Saints (it may be) either stand aloof as strangers,
or smite with causeless and cruel censures; yea, even good men, great friends,
and such as have been of our most inward and intimate familiarity, and perhaps
of our own family. Which must needs add weight to their burdens. Such is the
force of relation: Job 19.2, 3, 13, -- 20, 21, 28. Psalm. 88.8, 18. The seasons
and means of grace which tend in their own nature to heal, do now by accident,
but exulcerate and pour vinegar into these wounds. Oh the means which we have
slighted and sinned against, if not sinned with, etc. They are hewn by the
Prophets, and slain by the words of God's mouth: Hos. 6.5. Yea man's self, which
is in all other exigences his friend and advocate, now falls upon the naked
Soul. Every power under the command of Conscience closes in with her part, to
make the wounds thereof yet more wide and ghastly, and fetch out the fuller
streams of blood: Psalm. 38.3, 6, 7, 8. So then,

(1) Pious Souls may not only lose their peace but live in perplexities. Yea,

(2) When they look for peace, they may even then be laid hold on by perplexing
troubles. When I looked for good then evil came unto me, (says Job), and when
I waited for light there came darkness. My bowels boiled and rested not, the
days of affliction prevented me. Your Souls may look up to God, and there is no
good; and for the time of healing, and behold trouble. Yea, while you look for
light, he may turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness. You
may look to the godly, godly men, yea godly Ministers to take pity on you, but
there is none, and to give comfort to you, but you may find none; yea, they may
smite and wound you, and take away your vail from you: Job 30.26, 27. Jer.
14.19. c. 8.15. c. 13.16. Psalm. 69.20, 21. Cant. 5.7.

(3) When they have but even now lived in peace, they may forthwith be arrested
by such perplexing agonies. Behold for peace (or upon my peace, (as Isa. 30.6.)
or after my peace, (as Jer. 52.31.) says Hezekiah, I had great bitterness.
Like a crane or a swallow so I did chatter. I did mourn as a Dove, etc. Isa.
38.14, 15, 17. O how quickly may the scene of Conscience and of God's
countenance be changed! And that Sun set under a cloud, or suffer an eclipse,
which shone but a little since, with so much comfort and clearness! David's
mountain was even now so strong by divine favor, that he says, he shall never
be moved. But forthwith God hides his face, and he was troubled. It was not
long since that Job said, I shall die in my nest, my glory is fresh in me, and
my bow is renewed in my hand. But how suddenly are terrors turned upon him?
they pursue his soul as the wind, and his welfare passes as a cloud. And now
my soul is poured out in me, the days of affliction have taken hold upon me,
etc. Psalm. 30.6, 7. Job. 29.18, 19, 20. c. 30.15, 16, 17.

(4) Pious Souls may suffer many a change and passage, from peace of Conscience
to perplexities of Conscience, and from thence again to peace, and from this to
perplexity. The God of peace is unchangable, but the peace of God is changable:
subject to many changes. Conscience it self even when sanctified is prone to
vicissitudes, and unevenness; or we had not been pressed to keep it with all
diligence; nor the Psalmist prayed God to unite and fix it. And if the power it
self be so variable; much more must the peace. Job, David, etc. had their
springs and falls, their summer and winter of this peace; (as the Texts already
quoted make clear.) And these take turn; now this, then another. Saints are
compared to Stars, which stand not always in the same site and posture. It Is
weeping at night, joy in the morning. And again, weeping in the morning, and
joy at night; and perhaps sometimes the Soul is joyful both day and night: Jam.
1.17. Job 14.20. Prove. 4.23. Psalm. 86.11. Dan. 12.3. Psalm. 38.5. and 77.6. and
42.8. So that the gracious Soul may not give up his former peace for false and
unsound, because it is not fixed and steady. Even the Heavenly Bodies have
their declinations and revolutions.

(5) Pious Souls may be under such piercing strokes for a long tract of time.
The shame of their transgressions, and the sense and sting of God's terrors
may have afflicted them from their youth up. God may remove their Souls so far
off from peace, that they may even forget prosperity, and with every breath
they fetch they may be filled with bitterness. Surely against me is he turned,
he turns his hand against me all the day, says the Church. Hence it is, you
read so many pathetick and pressing expostulations. How long, how long, how
long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily? Psalm.
88.15. Jer. 3.25. Lam. 3.3, 17. c. 5.20. Job 9.18. Psalm. 13.1, 2. How long is a
question beyond my capacity to answer. These godly men may seem to imply as it
were meet only for God's own resolution. This I may say for certain, those
distresses shall never bear a longer date than thy life does. Death gives a
perfect quietus est. Conscience will be now perfected, and thy comforts will be
perfected with it. The power shall be perfect, and the peace must be therefore
perfect. Now shall your entry into peace be for ever perpetuated: Rev. 14.13.
Mat. 25.46. 1 Cor. 13.10, 12. Isa. 57.2. 2. God does usually dismiss these
distresses before the death of the righteous. I remember not one instance upon
Scripture-record to the contrary. But how many find we who lived perplexedly,
to have died peaceably, and have ascended with an heaven in their Conscience,
up to their Christ in the heavens? And who after all their sore distresses have
at length sweetly sung old Simeon's Nunc dimittis, Lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace; as Job, David, etc. I do not say but a Saint may be
sticking in these deeps when death is sent for him. For any thing I can see in
the promises of Christ, the power of Conscience, or in the properties and
natures of this peace. Job seems to imply its possibility, while he is
imploring mercy for the contrary in his own case. Nor are those arguments to be
unattended, wherewith the pious have been wont to press God for peace in their
prayers from death and the grave; as tacitly including, that they may be put
upon that hazard without peace, unless he please to anticipate it of his grace:
Luke 2.29. Job 10.20, 21. Psalm. 6.3, 4, 5. and 88.10. and 16, etc. But yet such
is his indulgence, that he makes but few instances of such a paternal
displicence, as his Children have to conflict, both with death and these
distresses at once. We find Hezekiah (it is true) within a few paces of death,
and upon the brink of the grave, without peace, and in great bitterness. But
God soon puts another cup into his hand, recalls him from the pit, and restores
him to his peace: Isa. 38.10. -- 20. 3. In this disconsolate condition the
godly may yet doubt, whether they shall ever be dismissed from these
distresses; their desertion is so grievous, and distrust so great. I shall go
softly all my years, in the bitterness of my soul. I shall go down to the grave
without so much as any glimpse more of my God, or of his grace. I am cut off.
Lo, God has overthrown me. He has stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown
from my head. He has destroyed me on every side, and I am gone; and mine hope
has he removed like a tree. Thus we find them casting their eye inward, and
crying out, Why is my pain perpetual? and my wound incurable? yea upward, and
complaining, Wherefore do thou forget us for ever? How long will thou forget
me, O Lord for ever? Will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable no
more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? etc. Isa. 38.10, 11, 15. Lam. 3.54. Job
19.6.9, 10. Jer. 15.18. Lam. 5.20. Psalm. 13.1.77.7, 8, 9.

(6) The distresses of pious Souls may be of a large extent for quantity as
well as of a long extent for continuance. Very extensive in themselves, and may
extend over the whole Subject. 1. In themselves, they may be so large, as I
cannot meditate any other stint or limit, than this, that they shall not extend
unto a full and final despair. Otherwise they may, and often do exceed the
sense of others, and the speech of them that are the sad and suffering
subjects. Job's grief was very great, so great that words and weeping too were
too narrow for the vastness of it. Oh that my grief were thoroughly weighed
(says he) and my calamity laid in the balances together! For now it would be
heavier than the sand of the sea, therefore my words are swallowed up. All
language is too little to declare their greatness, and therefore is a line too
short to limit or determine it; and yet neither silence nor speech many times
can moderate it. Though I speak my grief is not assuaged; and though I forbear
what am I eased? Job 2.13. c. 6.2, 3. c. 16.6. 2. They extend sometimes over
the whole subject; all Conscience, the immediate and proper subject, and over
all under the power of Conscience, the remote and less proper subject.
Conscience is sometimes all in a combustion in the sadded Christian. My heart
is like wax (says David) melted in the midst of my bowels. It faints, it
fails me; it is grieved, pained, sore pained, within me, smitten and withered
like grass, oppressed, overwhelmed in me, disquieted, distracted; yea, my heart
within me is desolate. The troubles of my heart are enlarged, etc. Psalm. 22.14.
and 84.2. and 40.12. and 73.21. and 55.4. and 102.4. and 61.2. and 38.8. and
88.15. and 143.4. and 25.17. Conscience the commander in chief, being thus
mortally wounded, the whole army is in a rout, and either runs before the
pursuer, or are roaring out their plaints, etc. Reason is distracted, the
resolutions of the Will dissipated, Affections discomposed, Passions
distempered, and every power of soul and body is disordered. Conscience thus
pierced and broken, all come in to bear a part in this sad Catastrophe The
poison hereof drinks up my spirit, says Job. My spirit was overwhelmed,
says David. My spirit fails. My soul is sore vexed, and consumed with grief.
My soul cleaves unto the dust. My soul faints for thy salvation. My soul is
full of trouble. I will speak in the anguish of my spirit (says the former). I
will complain in the bitterness of my soul, Job 6.4. Psalm. 143.4, 7. and 6.3.
and 31.9. and 119.25, 81. and 88.3. Job 7.11. And can ye expect it much better
with the body? Review the same instances. Fear came upon me and trembling,
which made all my bones to shake. My bones are pierced in me, and my sinews
take no rest. My bowels boiled and rested not. He cleaves my reins asunder,
and does not spare; he pours out my gall upon the ground. My bones are vexed.
There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is there any
rest in my bones, because of my sin. The arrows of his quiver enter into my
reins. Mine eye trickleth down and cease not without any intermission. Mine
eyes fail for thy word, saying when will thou comfort me? Job 4.14. c. 30.17,
27. c. 16.13. Psalm. 6.2. and 38.3. and 119.82. Lam. 3.13, 48. And now Soul will thou tell me, or rather tell thy self whether thy sorrow be like unto their
sorrow, who were yet Saints of the first magnitude?

(7) The distresses of pious Souls may be very eminent for quality and degree,
as well as for quantity and duration. I cannot undertake to cleave an hair, to
say thus far they may be intended, and no further. Though I doubt not to say,
that these anxieties and afflictions can never bring them to an utter and
universal aversation from God or godliness. Their diffidence and demeanor
toward him may be very deplorable, yea dreadful; but their spot is the spot of
children. They do not, they dare not say unto God depart from us, we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways. Yea, this is their greatest desire, that they were
his and he theirs. Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to shine, is the
burden of their prayers. And this is the greatest thing they deplore, that they
have turned away from him, and that he is turned against them. And could we
trace their fears and dolors to their proper form, we should find; they did not
spring from an aversation to God or grace, but from an appreitation. That they
drag so heavily, is not that they hate holiness, but in that they have not
holiness (at least) as to their sense, or with that strength and sweetness they
would fain have: Psalm. 44.17, -- 23. Deuteronomy. 32.5. Job 21.14. Psalm. 42.1, -- 6.
and 80.3, 7, 14, 19. Isa. 49.14. Lam. 3.3. Psalm. 73.21, 22. Nevertheless they
may be deeply plunged in this ditch, and may arrive 1. To formidable
conceptions of God; as if God were not only not kind, but cruel to them; as if
he failed his promise, had forgotten to be gracious, and in anger shut up his
tender mercies. As if he were not only deaf to their prayers, but distorted his
providence, and did not do them justice, and were immovably determined upon
their destructions. Such a fever, or such a frency rather, may these
distresses sometimes draw upon the understanding. So that the Soul may not
stick to say, I am troubled at his presence; when I consider, I am afraid of
him, Job 30.21. Psalm. 77.8, 9. Lam. 3.8. Job 19.7. c. 23.13, 15, 16. 2. To
false constructions of Godliness; as if they had labored in vain, and spent
their strength for naught, and in vain. Thou said (says Elihu) what
advantage will it be unto thee? and what profit shall I have if I be cleansed
from my sin? Think thou this to be right? It Is true, I do not find the abode
and fixing of such apprehensions upon a faithful heart. But holy David's feet
were almost gone, his steps had well nigh slipped, when he saw obdurate sinners
prospered, and himself thus plagued. He as upon the borders of this crime,
Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence. But
he soon takes up the tentation: Isa. 49.4. Job 35.2, 3. Psalm. 73.2, 12, -- 16.
3. To furious commotions, both of their reason and passions; so as to curse
their birth, to complain of life, and to court and covet death, says Job, 3.
per totum. Mark me, (says he) and be astonished, even when I remember, I am
afraid, and trembling takes hold of my flesh. My sighing comes before I eat,
and my roarings are poured out like the waters. My bones shook, my hair stood
up, Job 21.5, 6. c. 3.24. c. 4.14, 15. 4. To fearful concussions of the very
frame of nature in them. I am troubled, (says David) I am bowed down greatly.
I go mourning all the day long; there is no soundness in my flesh. I am feeble
and sore broken. I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart. My
soul is full of troubles, and my life draws nigh unto the grave, says Heman.
I am as a man that has no strength. My members are as a shadow, says Job. My
bowels boiled and rested not, Psalm. 38.6, 7, 8. and 88.3, 4. Job 17.7. c.
30.27. Conscience pours out blackness and darkness upon the constitution, and
this pours it back upon Conscience. 5. To frightful conclusions against
themselves. As if all past were but hypocrisy, all present were but iniquity,
and all future were but exclusion from mercy, and enduring of misery; as if it
were not only past help but past hope. What is my strength that I should hope,
says this Soul with Job. Yea, where is now my hope? as for my hope who shall
see it? My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. My Judgment is
passed over from my God. My bones are dried up, my hope is lost, and I am cut
off for my part. I am counted with them that go down into the pit, like the
slain that lie in the grave, whom God remembers no more, Job 6.11. c. 17.15.
Isa. 40.27. Ezekiel. 37.11. Psalm. 88.4, 5. Upon such precipices may the prejudices
and passions of pious Souls hurry them. So that their Souls may refuse comfort,
as if they resolved with Jacob to go down into the grave mourning, and to give
the Sons of Consolation but Isaiah's language in another case, Look away from
me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, Psalm. 77.2. Gen, 37.35.
Isa. 22.4.

Let me only add, that though I have justified these Propositions, I must not
be understood to justify the passions and provocations instanced. I have not
written this for the patronage, but plucking up of sin; nor for the ulcerating
but healing of Souls; as also that others may hear and fear, that they fall not
after the same examples of distrust into the same excesses of disquiet.

Q. 12. What if a pious Soul has hitherto persisted in the use of such means,
and yet finds no peace, but his perplexities rather increase, what shall he do?

Direct. 1. Abide with perseverance. Give not over but go on with the use of
the means prescribed thee; nor slacken thy diligence in the duties shown thee.
If they are means, they conduce to this end, and will be crowned with success
in the end. And if thou expect to come at the end it must be by a continued use
of the means. These are not wells without water, nor clouds without rain. They
tend to peace in their native operation, and shall end in peace, according to
God's ordinance and promise: Joh. 16.33. Isa. 32.17. c. 26.3. Psalm. 119.65.
Romans 2.10. You say then you have not declined from the means; but I doubt you
have either declined from Christ in them, or in your care about them. Let me
ask you 1. Has there not been slightness in the course of your duties? You do
the work of the Lord; but is it not negligently? How often do you quicken and
convene all that is within you? How often do call upon your drowsy hearts?
Awake, awake, Deborah; awake, awake to this holy duty. If you are slothful, no
marvel, that God and Conscience do still scourge you; for you are herein guilty
both of unkindness to God, and cruelty to your selves; for as much as every
duty has a reward in it for you as well as it is a debt to him: Jer. 48.10.
Psalm. 103.1. and 108.2. Jud. 5.12. Be diligent then, that you may be found of
him in peace? He is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Their Souls
shall delight themselves in fatness: 2 Pet. 3.14. Heb. 11.6. Isa. 55.2. 2. Have
not you slighted Christ in your duties? You come and that often, but do you
come unto God by him? Do you take him with you in the hand of your faith, and
in the arms of your love? No marvel if God be strange to your Souls, if you are
strange to his Son. What atonement, what acceptance can you have, or hope for
but by him? He is our peace: Heb. 7.25. Jer. 14.8. Romans 5.11. 1 Pet. 2.5.
Ephesians. 2.13, 14. Do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, from hence forwards.
Keep him fresh before the eye of Conscience; This may fill you with confidence.
Christ now undertakes the case, and that you shall in time have comfort. Bring
him in your hand, and he bears you upon his heart. And he cannot be denied
who has his father's ear, his father's heart: Col. 3.17. Ephesians. 3.12. Joh.
16.22, 25. Exodus 28.29, 30. 1 John 5.14.

Direct. 2. I advise you that notwithstanding, (1) That you attend with
patience. You have need of patience, of the patience of expecting, as well as
of the patience of enduring, that after ye have done the will of God, you may
receive the promises. I doubt your work is not done, or not well done. However
there must be time allowed for, between work and wages, between seed-time and
harvest. In due season you shall reap if you fain not: Heb. 10.36. Gal. 6.9.
Durst you say with that profane Pursevant of King Joram? This evil is of the
Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? Nay rather should you say
with the Church, In the way of thy judgments will we (says she, have we) wait
for thee, who in the midst of judgment remembers mercy. Yea, and waits that he
may be gracious to his, (when it will be the best season, when it will be best
for their Souls), for the Lord is a God of judgment: 2 King. 6.33. Isa. 26.8.
Hab. 3.2. Isa. 30.18. God will be known to be the God of all comfort, and of
this arbitrarily; not at our but at his own pleasure and appointment. He will
speak peace, and that in season, in due season, when it shall seem most free in
him the giver, and when it shall be most fit for you the receivers. But you
must leave eternity to take his own time, and not look on it as if it would be
at no time, because it is not at your time. The vision is yet for an appointed
time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie. Though it tarry, wait for it;
because it will surely come, it will not tarry beyond God's appointment, or
your advantage: 2 Cor. 1.3, 4. Ephesians. 1.9. Psalm. 85.8. Heb. 10.37. Hab. 2.7. Be
patient therefore; there is some peace even in patience; for it calms and
stills the passions, and gives the soul the possession of it self; and it is
seldom but peace ensues on patience, for this has the promise of it. I waited
patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry. He brought
me up also out of an horrible pit; out of the miry clay, etc. Jam. 5.7, 8. Luke
21.19. Psalm. 40.1, 2, 3. Isa. 40.27. -- 31. c. 26.9.64.4.

Direct. 3. Abet hope. This will be an Anchor sure and steadfast in the most
astonishing tempests, when you cannot use either sails or rudder. What though
thy heart be cast down there is no happiness, nothing but horror in hand? yet
should thou charge thy Soul with David, Hope thou in God. Let Israel hope in
the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him there is plenteous
redemption. His compassions fail not, he has corrected thee, but he has not
consumed thee. And whence is this but of his mercy? This I recall to mind
(says the Church in her sore and nigh sinking condition) therefore have I
hope, Heb. 6.19. Psalm. 42.5, 11. and 130.7. Lam. 3.21, 22. I grant your case is
deplorable, but not desperate. Your recovery is ardnous, but not impossible.
Others have been restored, Job, David, Heman, etc. whose feet were as fast, yea
faster locked in these stocks than yours. If you make reflection, you will meet
with little, or no reason, to let your hopes flag and fail at this rate. Is
there not the same way open still? the same mercy in God? the same merit in
Christ? the same ministration of the Covenant? Are you not as capable of peace
now? when God hears you praying, crying, lamenting after him, and sees you
pursuing, panting after him, and pressing on him, as you were heretofore, when
he heard little else (perhaps) than blasphemies, saw you weltring in your
blood, and yet was then found of you when you sought him not? Why should you
cast away those confidences of hope? or not rather hold them fast? Heb. 10.35.
c. 3.6, 14. Besides, the valley of Achor ( i.e. of trouble, which had its name
from Achans troubling them, and there being troubled of the Lord) may be for a
door of hope. So great a darkness may presage, and be but the immediate
precursor of a dawning. When I am weak, i.e. in my self, then am I strong, i.e.
in my Savior, says Paul. When his feet were fastest in the stocks his liberty
was nearest, and his bands were loosed. When Job's and David's distresses did
most overflow their banks, then did their most peace and joy flow into their
bosoms. God comfort those that are cast down. Yea, when men are cast down
then thou shall say there is lifting up; and he shall save the humble person:
Josh. 7.26. Hos. 2.15. 2 Cor. 12.10. Act. 16.24, 26. Job 42. Psalm. 31.22. 2
Cor. 7.6. Job 22.29.

Direct. 4. Adhere yet to him, and that with full purpose. You have lost your
assurance, this is expired in lamentation and anguish; but do not let go your
adherence, this will end in life and happiness at the last. God's end by
putting you to feed on husks is not to keep you off, but to quicken you home to
your father's house; not that your Souls should drive further from him among
the shelfs and sands of despair, but draw nearer to him in the still and safe
waters of dependence: Act. 11.23. Deuteronomy. 30.20. Psalm. 83.16. Hos. 5.15. He
expects that you cleave to him with steadier resolutions, and commit your
selves to him with a steadier recumbence. 1. Cleave to him more steadfastly. You
that fear him are called on to cleave unto him. And alas! whither can you go
from him? and find the good and peace you look for. Thou may call for thy
lovers, but among all thy lovers there is none can comfort thee, while God is
wounding and chastising thee. Is it not thy looseness and inconsistency with
God, which has brought thee into these labyrinths of confusion, and mazes of
perplexities? Call back thy Soul hither. Return unto thy rest, O my Soul. My
Soul wait thou only upon God. And keep thy Soul here. For there is no quiet off
the center. But every thing is quiet in its center. Happy is he that has the
God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God: Deuteronomy. 10.20. Lam.
1.2, 19. Jer. 30.14. Psalm. 116.7. and 62.5. and 146.5. I doubt your restlesness
grows out of irresolution. You are not thoroughly resolved for God as your
center and chiefest good. Or how is it that you are so easily carried from him?
or cleave no more entirely to him? a stone needs not to be driven downward, nor
fire upward; they affect their center, and acquiesce in it, nor are drawn from
it, but by force and violence. Come then and gather up your resolutions for
God. Be ye steadfast and immovable. Yea, thou may humbly tell him, I will not
let thee go except thou bless me. No, though thou have sore broken me in the
place of Dragons, and covered me with the shadow of death, my heart shall not
turn back from thee. While I live I will serve thy Majesty; and when I die it
shall be at the feet of thy mercy. O how such prayers and purposes have power
with God and prevail. Lo! this is the rest wherewith we may cause the weary to
rest, and this is the refreshing: 1 Cor. 15.58. Genesis 32.26, 28. Psalm. 44.18,
19. Isa. 28.12.

2. Commit your selves to God more steadily. I see your case comes off but
badly from your hands; will you cast it once at length into God's hand? Unto
him will you commit your cause? Cast thy burden upon the Lord and he shall
sustain thee. Commit thy way and works unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he
shall bring it to pass, and thy thoughts shall be established. But if you think
to warm you by your own sparks, and to walk in the light of your fire, This
shall ye have of mine hand, says the Lord, ye shall lie down in sorrow, Job
5.8. Psalm. 55.22. and 37.5. Prove. 16.3. Isa. 50.11. Unbelief like a growing
torrent will bear down all the props and pillars of hope and obedience before
it; and leaves thy duties bare without spirit or strength. Nor will thou be
able to extricate thy mind out of that maze of doubtful and perplexed
reasonings, wherein she is entangled, without this exercise of faith.

Obj. Ah, but may such as I dare to adventure it? Will it not be presumption in
me to transfer over my case to him, and trust in God?

Answ. No, in no wise. 1. Devolve thy cares and case thou must some-where, or
thou must still droop under them, and die away in them. And where can thou
devolve them better than on him, with whom is the multitude of tender mercies,
and who cares for thee? Were thy strength the strength of stones, or thy flesh
of brass, thou art not able to stand up under them. But with him is
omnipotence, he is able to keep that which thou committest to him. And in the
day of thy calamity will be thy stay: Psalm. 51.1. 1 Pet. 5.7. 2 Timothy 1.12.
Psalm. 18.18. 2. The door stands open to thee. Thou have free liberty to unload
all thy burdens here, as the Saints have done. I poured out my complaint before
him. I showed before him my trouble. Yea, thou may leave thy burdens with
him, and lean thy whole business and blessedness upon him. Trust in him at all
times ye people, pour out your heart before him. God is a refuge for us, Selah.
Nay, they that know his name will put their trust in him. I will trust and not
be afraid, says one Prophet. At what time I am afraid I will trust in thee,
says another: Psalm. 142.2. and 55.22. and 62.8. Isa. 12.2. Psalm. 56.3. 3. It Is
thy duty, and that God now demands of thee. Who is among you that walks in
darkness, and has no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God. Behold, it is not only thy liberty, thou may do it, (therefore
no presumption) but it is his law, thou must do it, or thou sinest against his
prescription, both here and elsewhere. Come then, if thou tremblest at sin,
turn in hither, and trust in him. Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord; he
is their help and their shield. You that cannot reflect on him as yours with
comfort; yet may and should rest in, and roll your ways upon him, with much
composedness; such is God's allsufficience in your insufficience, his
everlasting strength in your temporary weakness. Trust ye in the Lord for ever,
for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, Isa. 50.10. c. 10.20. Psalm.
4.5. and 115.11. and 37.3, 5. Isaiah 26.4.

Q. 13. What if a Pious Soul after all his self-examinings and sedulous
endeavors cannot only not gather up any present grounds for peace, but gives
over all his past evidences of grace and peace as unsound and false; what shall
he do to attain Peace?

The Premises in answer to the former Question are of proper and pertinent
application hereunto. But I add,

Direct. 1. Quicken thy dull heart to a present acceptance of Jesus Christ, as
thy only Mediator, and of God as thy only portion and principal good. Happily
you might with more ease and less expense by this time have reared up a new
fabric of comfort, by falling in with Christ, than you have been at for
repairing the old frame in which you find so many leaks and cracks. However a
present close will clear all the suits that are brought against your former
tenure. For if God be once yours, and Christ yours, which is the inseparable
effect of a present faith, then peace is yours too, for he is the God of Peace,
and Christ is the Prince of Peace: Isa. 26.3. Ephesians. 2.12, 13, 14. Romans 5.1. c.
15.33. Isa. 9.6. I grant there is a good and great use of reviewing old
evidences, and reviving old experiences, (of which before) but in this
circumstance, when Conscience damns them all as alien or absolete, it is best to
fall in with the most present and most proper way to diver the impending
extremity, and to draw the difference to an immediate head; which I apprehend
is not so expeditiously done, by discussing what is past, (whether you have
sincerely believed or not? as by determining the present, that you put all out
of doubt by a present faith. God directs you hereto by his command in case of
darkness, when you have no light you cannot see him, etc. The godly have drawn
it down into practice also. David reflects inwardly, and there is nothing but
disquiet; he therefore resolves to sit poring no longer for pillars of hope
within him, but by a present trust and hope in God to put his case into more
clearness; and the result is praise to him, and peace to himself: Isa. 50.10.
Job 35.14. Psalm. 42.11. and 13.5. cum 3. Let it be supposed then, that thy
former securities have been unsound, yet the door is open by which thou may
enter into peace, and live for ever. (Consult the Directions, Quest. 6.) Art
thou not weary and heavy laden? lo, Christ calls thee, Come unto me and I will
give you rest. You shall find rest for your Souls. God quickens and encourages
thee. Have thou played the harlot with many lovers, and dealt treacherously
with him! Yet, return again to me, says the Lord. Return and I will heal thy
backslidings, etc. Mat. 11.28, 29. Jer. 3.1, 12, 14, 20, 22.

Direct. 2. Be quiet under this hard dispensation. Be still, and know that he
is God; who cannot be conquered must not be complained of. Murmurings and
complaints, as if he were rigorous, can never cure thee of thy wounds. Well may
they cut them wider, and pierce them deeper, and make them smart with more
anguish, and bleed in more abundance. It Is quietness under the hands of thy
Surgeon, and confessing his righteousness and thy rebellion that does dispose
thee to a cure. Witness Job's case, and Elihus counsel: Psalm. 46.10. Job 6.33.
and 34. and 35. and 36. Does God pervert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert
justice? shall not the judge of all the earth do right? How long did he forbear
you? How much has he given if not forgiven you. If desert be urged he might
have lain you ere this in the lowest hell, and lodged you in eternal flames;
for the wages of every sin is no less than eternal death. So that his
punishment is in no proportion to your desert, but far less, far below it.
Rather say, God is righteous, but I have rebelled. Righteousness belongs to
him, but to me confusion of face, as at this day, Job 8.3. Genesis 18.25. Romans
6.23. Ezra 9.13. Lam. 1.18. Dan. 9.7. Quietness (I mean from murmuring
aggravations, not from matter of action) is the most proper and pleasant way to
peace with God, and peace of Conscience. Yea, quietness is not without some
peace and sedateness from unruly commotions, as its inseparable companion. And
now God does by Souls as he does by Ships. He makes the storm a calm, so that
the waves thereof are still. Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he
brings them unto their desired haven, Psalm. 107.29, 30.

Q. 14. What Considerations are there to quiet the heart in such agonies and
distress of Conscience?

There are many, many ways. I shall present you some of them, and but some;
which you may gather up from others, and from the ordinary effects, ends and
operation of such troubles on the pious.

First. From others.

(1) What is there, yea, what is there not in God which may quiet your hearts?
If all-sufficience can do it, here it is; and it is offered and exposed to the
embraces and improvements of your faith, love, patience, and hope: Genesis 17.1.
Isa. 45.22, 24, 25. His infinite and immutable perfections have your Souls to
feast with, and feed upon. Your strength and your heart fails you. But (if
the bottle be empty, the well of water which is by you, (though perhaps you see
it not is full), God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever: Psalm.
73.26. Jer. 10.16. Genesis 21.15, 19. Remember, it is an infinite and immutable
mercy that orders you out this condition an infinite and immutable wisdom that
overrules it, for duration how long, for degree how far, etc. an infinite and
immutable goodness upholds you in and under it, and an infinite truth and power
is bound in his own time to pluck you out of it, and to make good all his
promises in and by it. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13.

(2) For Christ. What an abundance is there in him to quiet you? yea, fullness,
all fullness, and this for you. If you will but by faith fall in with him, you
shall receive of his fullness grace for grace: Col. 1.19. Joh. 1.16. Nay, in
Christ there is not only matter of peace and joy for you, but of boasting, of
triumph. His preaching, his prayers, his promises, his passion, resurrection,
ascension, etc. Do all call upon you as himself sometime did in person, Let not
your heart be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. Yea, he is now
touched with the feeling of your infirmities (in way of compassion, though not
of corrupt passions) so that you may come boldly to the throne of grace: Phil.
3.3. (...), 2 Cor. 2.14. Joh. 14.1. Heb. 4.15, 16.

(3) For Christians. You may fetch matter of heart-quieting from their
distresses, which yours cannot equal, from their dignity which yours cannot
exceed, from their deliverance, which is an earnest of yours, as also from
their directions and exhortations which tell you it is good, that a man should
both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. That he is the God
of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able
to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we are
comforted of God, Lam. 3.26. 2 Cor. 1.3, 4.

Secondly. From the operation, ends and effects of these sad troubles. This I
had principally in my eye, and let me pitch here a little; because the pious
Soul is apt to pore more upon their extremity, than to pry into their ends and
effects; neglecting the bright side of the Cloud, and noting only the black and
dark side. Consider then, these sharp throws and bitter agonies are not only to
punish, but to purge, to prove, to approve, to improve, and to prepare his
Saints for more signal services or sufferings. Of which you will see full proof
in the further progress. Consider then in these agonies,

1. Happily they are to purge me. The spirit of judgment, and the spirit of
burning is but to wash away the filth of the Daughters of Sion. Like fullers
soap and a refiners fire, not to consume but cleanse and purify them, to purge
them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
righteousness. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged. And shall I
quarrel at that pill, or cast away that potion, which is blessed with such a
sequel? because it is bitter in it self, or breaks my sleep, or burdens my
stomach, etc. whence it conserves nature, and cures my diseases, and the little
pains I feel are preventive of far greater? Isa. 4.4. Mal. 3.2, 3. Isa. 27.9.
Perhaps it is to purge, and so heal thy sleepiness and inanimadvertence. David
lay in an apoplectick drowsiness for a long time. This state required strong
purgatives, and sharp prescriptions. God therefore applies this medicine, and
it effectually awakens and recovers him: Psalm. 51. Or perhaps it is to purge
out pride and stiffness of spirit. And gentle potions will not do it, there
must be some other draught, or the dose must be doubled. David had enough to
humble him, but his heart stood it out undauntedly, till God put this cup of
trembling into his hand; and this fetches all up, and his heart down, and his
Soul-health returns to its old frame, ibid. What ever it is this may quiet,
that these troubles are not a poniard to kill, but a purge to cure.

2. Happily it is to prove me. Behold I will melt them and try them, for how
shall I do for the daughter of my people? It Is not said, I will burn them, and
make an utter end of them. Let it be to a Judas, or a Cain, an evil, an only
evil. But to a Job there is good as well as evil. These troubles were for his
probation rather than punishment, not at all for his perdition. Thou O God have
proved us, thou have tried us as silver is tried. God knows us perfectly and
intuitively, but it is that we may upon trial know our selves, and be less
strangers to our own hearts, or that others may know us. This furnace then is
not ^o destroy but to discriminate: Judge. 9.7. Ezekiel. 7.5. Job 2.3, etc. 7.18.
Psalm. 66.10. May not this quiet you? that whereas it might have been a millstone
to tear you, it is but a touchstone to try you? to acquaint you more with your
selves, and acquaint others more with your sincerity. Why does God suffer you
to wander thus long in the Wilderness, but to numble you, and prove you, and to
know what is in your hearts. God might have thrown you like brands into the
fire, but he casts you like Gold into the furnace. This affliction is not to
ruin but to refine you: Peut. 8.2. Isa. 48.10. Zach. 13.9.

3. Happily it is to approve me. When he bath tried me (says Job) I shall come
forth as gold; more pure and more approved. The Primitive Saints were tried
with inward h^^viness, as well as outward hardships. (And why? But) That the
trial of their faith being much more precious than of gold that perishes,
might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, Job 23.10. 1 Pet. 1.6, 7.
Perhaps it may be to approve you to others here; Job is to this day propounded
for a pattern of patience to the faithful, and must pray for his three friends,
as the person whom God would only accept. He became the more signally approved
by being so strangely afflicted. Paul's necessities, distresses, afflictions,
stripes, sorrows did but commend him the more to the Churches of our Savior.
The skill of the Pilot is best spoken by storms and tempests: Jam. 5.11. Job
42.7, 8. 2 Cor. 4.4. -- 11. Or beyond a perhaps it is to approve you at the
appearing of Christ, when he shall say, Lo, these are they that came out of
great tribulations. That against hope believed in hope; that neither shines nor
storms could dissuade from my company, that would serve me, though it were for
naught, and though I slew them yet would they trust in me: 1 Pet. 1.7. Rev.
7.14. Romans 4.18. Job 13.15. And should not this quiet thee? when these
afflictions are but as the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, but
to show thy dignity, and the value men should put upon thee, and to sever the
dross and filth which has been contracted by thee. These blustering winds are
but to blow off those black clouds, which now overshadow thee. Yet a little
while, and the censures of Job's friend will be blown away, and he shall bring
forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday: Psalm.
73.5, 6.

4. Happily it is to improve me. These corrections are not so much to cause
smart by his hand unto you as because he has set his heart upon you. He does
not chastise you for his pleasure, but for your profit; that ye may be
partakers of his holiness, and they may yield you the peaceable fruit of
righteousness. That you may come out of the furnace, not only brighter, but
better, as the gold does: Job 7.17, 18. Heb. 12.10. Psalm. 119.71. And shall not
this quiet you? that your happiness (not harm) is designed and driven on
hereby? He lanceth and purges; but it is to heal your sores, and secure your
health. If the bodies of the tree are split, the boughs shred, it is to make the
stem thrive in bigness, the top in breadth, and the fruit in beauty, of such as
are planted in God's orchard. He is but debating, and that in measure with his
trees, not destroying and grubbing them up as thorns and briars: Isa. 27.8.
Jer. 10.24, 25. c. 30.11.

1. It is to improve and further the graces of his people. Not only the savor
of it among Saints (yet what odoriferous smells come from such broken spices in
this mortar of affliction?) but the strength and stability thereof in their own
Souls. That they may be partakers of his holiness: Heb. 12.10. It removes
impediments from sin within, sense without, etc. which this fire either burns
up, or melts down. It represents incentives from himself, God's severity,
etc. which are us spurs in the side. It raises endeavor and impetuous and
strong desires. Other Deer may ^lay and scope in their green pastures, and ^y
the gliding streams; but this chased Heart, (...) whom the arrows of the
Almighty stick, ^an have no satiety till he has seen God again as he has seen
him in the Sanctuary. No difficulty can now dissuade, no danger can deter the
lovesick spouse from seeking her beloved: Psalm. 42. Cant. 3. and 5. It rivets
and in^ageth the heart to God as his highest end, to godliness as his happiest
employment. The ^oul that was wont to rove and reel (...) his resolutions, is
now settled and ^^shaken. He finds nothing but husks out of his fathers house,
but here is bread enough and to spare. His heart is fixed. Every blow drives
the nail fuller home to the head. He sees there is no such bitterness as in
leaving him, no such blessedness as in living with him. This is the conclusion
whereto these conflicts and compunction bring him. It is good for me to draw
near to God, Psalm. 119.67, 68, 106, 107, 111, 112. Luke 15.17. Jer. 2.19. Psalm.
65.4.73.27, 28. How should this quiet you, that God is hereby carrying on that
part of your work and welfare, which is so much coveted by you? This file is
but to fetch off the rust from your graces, and to furbish them for you. The
same razor that shaves off your peace does establish your grace, and makes it
grow both thicker and stronger.

2. It is to improve the peace of his people at the yonder end. It yields the
peaceable fruits of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby. Job had
more inward peace as well as outward prosperity, after such pangs and gripes;
and so had David after his distresses, if you allow for God's answer to his
desires and prayers: Heb. 12.11. Job 42.12. Psalm. 51.7, 8, 12.

(1) These troubles prepare a way to peace. 1. By breaking the Soul for sin,
which prepares it for this blessed seed, and mellows the heart to an acceptance
of it, and to afford her best manure to it. There is no sowing upon fallow
ground. God will not cast away his seed among thorns and brambles. The more
your heart is plowed and harrowed, it promises the better harvest: Jer. 4.3.
Psalm. 34.17* 18. and 126.5. 2. By bringing the Soul out of ner self, and
unbottoming her from all her false or friviolous foundations. Not a word can we
now hear any more from Job in self-justification, they are all in self-judging,
and self-abhorring. This Soul is so frighted with dashing upon the rock of her
own righteousness, that she flies it as a menstruous cloth, and fastneth all
her dependence upon the righteousness of Christ: Isa. 28.15, 16. Job 42.6.
Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. Isa. 64.6. Romans 10.4.3. By bottoming the Soul upon a divine
sufficience. Hope thou in God, says the Soul. Hitherto she has been like the
Dove out of the Ark, fluttering up and down from one creature and course of
life to another. But she finds not where to rest the sole of her soot. The soul
must have rest; and finding none within, none without her, she returns unto
Noah in the Ark, unto God in Christ. She has followed after her lovers, but
they either fly from or frown upon her. And now she says, I will go and return
to my first husband, for then was it better with me than now, Psalm. 43.5. Genesis
8.9. Hos. 2.5.

(2) God is not wont to pour in peace but after some previous troubles. He
first wounds, then heals; first breaks, then binds up. His comforts are for his
mourners. Though the ^oul be already brought out of Egypt, yet she (...) not
brought into Canaan, till she have wa^^ed through the Sea, and wandered in the
Wil^erness. Christians must quietly expect with Christ to pass through a state
of exinanition, before they come, or are preferred to a state of exaltation:
Hos. 6.1. Isa. 57.18. Phil. 2.5. -- 11.

(3) Now it is, God does usually pour in joy and peace, as best magnifying his
pity, his power, his promises, and plenteous mercies, to be thus seen in the
Mount, and take an opportunity of their extremities. His Cordials are for them
in that they now faint. Now there is beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness. It Is time to
succor, now they are ready to sink. Thou will save the afflicted people. The
Lord will light my candle, the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness. Yea, to
the upright there arises light in the darkness. And no sooner is the strong
wind past, that cleft the rocks and rent the mountains, but they hear the small
and still voice, in which God says, I am thy salvation, I will create peace,
peace: Genesis 22.14. Isa. 40.29. c. 61.3. Psalm. 18.27, 28. and 112.4. 1 King.
19.11, 12.

(4) And now peace after such perplexities is more perfect and precious. Now,
how sensible is it? like reviving ease after racking pangs, or the pleasantest
light after blackness of darkness. Now, how sweet is it? sweeter than the honey
and the honeycomb, after such draughts of aloes and rhubarb. Time was this
full Soul loathed the honeycomb (...) but now she is hungry, every bitter
thing is sweet. Now how satisfying is it? How acceptable is the sealed pardon
to this self-condemned prisoner, that awoke only heretofore with the thoughts
of racks and gibbets? Mannah shall be no more light bread from henceforth to
him. He is satisfied as with marrow and fatness. Nay how stable and steady is
it? Now that the wax is thoroughly softened, the impression sticks upon it,
especially now the Almighty puts forth his arm in sealing it. Now she is
provided with supports of hope, and stays of heart against future difficulties.
Experience tells her such deeps are passable, and a most delicious prospect is
of the other side of the port. I might easily subjoyn more, but what I have said
is swollen unto such a bulk already. What can, if the consideration of these
things cannot quiet you? Are you aware what God is preparing for you? Are not
these clouds ready to dissolve into showers of comfort? Yet a little while and
Joseph shall see the issue of his prison, and of God's intricate Providence to
end all in his Preferment. And though ye have lien among the pots yet shall ye
be as the wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow
gold, Psalm. 68.13.

5. Happily this is to prepare me (may your Souls say) for some eminent use,
and more than ordinary employment. Were you intended for the fire there needed
no more than cutting down and cleaving up. Or were you for an ordinary place in
God's building, it were enough to have passed the Saw and the Ax; but now that
God bestows so much work upon you, it is an argument you must stand in a more
conspicuous place, and perhaps in the front of the building. It Is observable,
that whomsoever God has made instances of such eminent distresses, he has
made them instances of as eminent usefulness; as Job, David, Hezekiah, etc. in
the Old Testament, and Paul in the New, who was troubled on every side, within
were fears as without were fightings: 2 Cor. 7.5. Those metals are intended for
a signal use, which are often cast into the fire. Such exigencies do stock us
with experiences. And experience gives wisdom, enlarges the understanding and
receptive powers, and so enableth, yea ennobleth for the highest undertakings.
1. Perhaps it may be to prepare you for a passive state, and make way to the
condition and crown of Christ's eminent Confessors, and glorious Martyrs. You
that have felt greater will not fear such lesser evils. The world will seem
little in your eyes to part with for God and his glory that could do nothing
for you, when God was angry, and seems little or nothing to you, in comparison
with him appeased. We read of none in the New Testament that did equal Paul in
those inward fears, and he seems to excel all in inward fortitude. He that was
most sad did best and most suffer: 2 Cor. 7.5.4.8, 9, 10, 11, 16, etc. Act.
20.24. c. 21.13. 2 Cor. 11.23. -- 28. 2. Perhaps it may be to prepare you for
an active state. 1. To be for eminent conduct in the Church, as Job, David and
Hezekiah were. God may intend you, not for passengers only to save your selves,
but for Pilots to steer the Ship, and save others; who must be acquainted with
the practice, as well as art of navigation; and experimentally know how to take
the height and depth; what are the Seas and Shores, where the rocks and sands,
and on what point of the Compass the wind sets, etc. 2. Or perhaps for the
eminent comfort of his chosen, that you may be able with Paul to comfort others
in any trouble, with the same comforts wherewith you were comforted of God. God
may intend you for a monument of Consolation, to the Christians about you; and
therefore hews and cuts you thus, that he may prepare and polish you for this
excellent employment, and persuade them to the entertainment of what you have
experimented. I will tell you what he has done for my Soul, is usually an
effectual argument: 2 Cor. 1.4, 6. Psalm. 34.4. -- 8. and 66.16. How should this
quiet you! The ax and the hammer are but to fit you for and fasten you to your
place in the building. God has some high ends by these hard exigencies. They
neither come, nor are like to go away empty handed. Joseph is sold into Egypt,
a slave in it, a strait prisoner, etc. But all tends to his public
usefulness and personal good. How know you but you may find cause of calling
your firstborn (after these troubles) Manasseh as he did? For God (said he)
has made me forget all my toil, and all my fathers house: Genesis 41.51.

Q. 15. What if the Soul be running, or run down into despair, how may we
prevent or recover it?

There is a pious despair (an holy desperation as one Perkins vol. 2. p. 365.
calls it) which drives us out of our selves to draw in the succors of Grace.
As those that can never hope to attain Salvation by any strength, sufficience,
works, or worth of our own. This should be kept up and cherished, as that which
quickens and carries the Soul to God in Christ: 2 Cor. 3.4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.21.
Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. But there is also a passionate and perverse despair, which
drives the Soul from that supreme power and goodness, by which alone it can
arrive to salvation and rest. It Is of this that we are attempting the cure. Now
this arises out of a misrepresentation to themselves, partly of their own
condition, and principally of the object in and from whom, or the object by and
through whom, they should hope for Salvation, as if they were not able to
bestow it, or not willing. As then you would prevent this sore evil,

Direct. 1. Put off thy distempered passions and put on thy reason. Immoderate
fears and sorrows will but hide the succors wherewith hope is wont to be
sustained from sense, or betray them unto Satan. And like strong winds to a
stirring Sea, will make Conscience rise the more highly, and rave the more
incessantly, and reject both the comforts and reproofs which are brought her.
What is my strength that I should hope? Do ye imagine to reprove words and the
speeches of one that is desperate? Job 6.11, 26. Remember thou art a man that
is put under the ducture of reason, and not under the power of brutish
passions. The inspiration of the Almighty has given thee understanding. May
not Reason say to thee as Elihu to Job, (how much more may Religion say it?) If
thou can answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up, Job 32.8, c.
33.5. What cause is there for this uproar? Why art thou so restless, O my Soul?
why in this rage? Have thou not a God to run unto? Yea, hear him, Come now and
let us reason together, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white
as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be
willing and obedient, etc. If, why art thou disquieted, O my Soul? cannot be
answered before the Bar of Reason, much less will this question, Why art thou
distracted, O my Soul? why art thou despairing? Let reason gird on her strength
for the battle, and hold the balance in weighing thy condition, and how will
thy passions flee before it, like the dust before the wind? Isaiah 1.18, 19.
Psalm. 42.5.

Direct. 2. Present thy estate aright unto thy self, at least as right as
reason may help thee to set it. This mischief grows out of the
misrepresentation of us to our selves, in looking upon it through a wrong
medium. We look upon it through a red or flame-coloured glass, and so all
things look to us as if they were all blood, or in a flame. So Job, My days are
past, (says he) my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts or possessions
of my heart, etc. And where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it?
Job 17.11. -- 15. Two things I advise thee. Present that estate wherein thou
remainest aright to thee, and whereinto thou art run, or running. The state
wherein thou remainest. Here use the looking-glass if thou will, but not the
multiplying glass; as Cain does, enhancing the desperateness of his state,
beyond the denounced sentence of God: Genesis 4.13, 14. Nay Job and Heman we find
dashing upon this rock. He looked upon himself as a man that had no strength,
free among the dead; as if he were enfranchised of the grave already; whereas
he was in a state of life, seeking and lamenting after God: Job 3. and 6. and
10. and 19.6, 7, etc. Psalm. 18.4, 5. cum 1.2, 13. Is thy estate an estate of
grace? the cure is promised, Omnipotency is engaged for it: Isa. 57.16. -- 20.
c. 40.27. -- 31.48.8, 9, 10. Is it the estate of nature? yet the cure is
possible. Manasseh, Magdalen and others, whose sins were more sinful, whose
state was more sad, have been actually cured. Have thou been a blasphemer, a
persecutor, injurious? So was Paul, yet he obtained mercy, and for this cause,
that he might be a pattern to them which should hereafter believe, 1 Timothy 1.13,
16. If thou will but yet return, though thou have been weary of God, and
wearying of him hitherto, and made him to serve with thy sins, yet he will
return and save thee; not for thy sake, but for his own sake: Isa. 43.22. --
26. Zach. 1.3. Jer. 3.12, 13, 14. Ezekiel. 36.22. -- 33. Is thy estate an estate
of great discomfort? yet not of grievous despair, at least in the root and
reason of it. While life remains there is still reason and room for hope. Say
you, you have a name that you live? but you are like Sardis, in deed and truth
dead, dead as to any spiritual life; yet Sardis is not shaken off. Behold, the
Gospel informs you, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God and
live. Yea, it inviteth, inciteth, incourageth you. Awake thou that sleep,
and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Eccles. 9.4. Rev.
3.1, etc. Joh. 5.25. Ephesians. 5.14. Ah! but our bones are dried up, our hope is
lost, we are cut off for our parts. Why? Till your days are cut off, the door
of hope stands open. All the day long he stretches out his hands to a
rebellious people. Yea, thus says the Lord God to these bones, I will cause
breath to enter into you, and ye shall live. I will open your graves and cause
you to come up out of your graves, It was spoken to Israel to revive their dead
hopes of their Civil State; but is applicable to us likewise, for restoring our
hopes in any Spiritual strait, if other Scriptures be compared with it: Isa.
65.2. Ezekiel. 37.5, 11, 12. Romans 4.17. 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 2.1, 5.

(2) third Direction. Will despair make thy sins less? or thy state better?
It Is as if thou would fly from the Sheep to the Dog, or from the Dog to the
Wolf, or from either to the roaring Lion, or the ravening Bear; from food to
physic, from physic to poison. Thou that art fleeing from the iron weapon,
the bow of steel shall strike through. Over what a clift art thou casting thy
self headlong? Into what a gulf of extremest sorrows and sin, art thou
contumaciously hastening?

(1) Into what a gulf of sorrows? Hope deferred makes the heart sick; but hope
denied makes the heart swoon and sink away. It Is as if you would throw away
your Anchor that you may ride out the tempest. Hope rests and reposeth the
mind, and freeth it from all such anxieties as arise out of the floating,
instability, and fearfulness thereof, (as one well Dr. Rey. olds Pas. ^ous. c.
25.
). When Hope is gone Happiness goes with it, and instead of these what terror
comes? that makes the heart as it were an hell upon earth, and makes the man
a Magormizabib, a terror round about. The Heart which was wont to be the
habitation of delights, is now become the habitation of dragons, of trembling
sorrows, and tormenting fears. The wild beasts of the desert, Satan and his
accomplices, do here meet with the wild beasts of the Island, a man's own Soul.
The Satyrs dance here, and cry to their fellows. The shritch owls hatch and
gather under their shadow. The Vultures also be gathered together, every one
with his mate: Prove. 13.12. Lam. 3.17, 18, 19. Psalm. 18.4, 5. and 86.13. and
116.3. Isa. 34.14, 15. c. 13.21, 22. I want words to express the misery of this
estate. O! the boiling oil, and scalding lead that Conscience is pouring out
upon the other powers! The Aetna of sulphurous flames that they pour back upon
Conscience! Whatever be the dreadful effects to which an heightened fancy may
boil up our inflamed angers, griefs, terrors, they may be expected here. Soul
consider, whither, whither, thou art precipitating thy self; from distress unto
despair. Despair? this one word should stop thee. If thou have run with the
footmen, and they have wearied thee, how shall thou contend with horses? If
thou durst not venture the small rivulet of distress, what will thou do in the
swelling of the Jordan of despari? Can thou fight Goliath, that fallest before
a stripling? Whilst thou art fleeing hither from the iron weapon, a bow of
steel shall strike thee through; the glistering sword comes out of thy gall.
Instead of lesser troubles, behold greater terrors. Take up betimes then:
Reason bids thee of two evils that thou choose the least. That thou run not from
bad to worse, that for fleeing of the fear thou should not fall into the pit
and snare: Jer. 12.5. Job 20.24, 25. Jer. 48.44. Isa. 24.18.

(2) Into what a gulf of sin art thou falling? It Is a Question in the Schools,
Whether unbelief, despair, or hatred of God be the greatest sin. Aquinas 22 a.
q. 20. a. 3.
resolves it, That despair is the greatest quantum ad nos, the other secundum
se. The truth is, that despair is always inclusive of the other two, though
they are not always inclusive of it. Despair arises out of unbelief, and is
still accompanied therewith as hope arises out of faith. Neither is there in
despair only a privation of hope ib. a. 1.
, but there is an aversion, at least a retreat from the object hoped for, and
from God the object hoped in, as either unable or unwilling to give it, and so
there is an hatred of God that goes with it, either negative (if I may so
phrase it) as in the pious, a want of love, at least to that degree which is
due to him. Or positive, as in the impenitent, and was in Cain and others. O!
how many sins are there in this one sin! how many that attend upon it! What
horrible infidelity! as if there were more in sin to damn us than in God and
Christ to save us. What height of ingratitude to God! for his Christ, and the
Covenant of his grace, and for all those means he has afforded for awakening
our hopes, and attaining of happiness! What horrid imputations to and blasphemy
of God! In making our guilt more omnipotent than his power, and sin more
hurtful than he is good and helpful! What haughty insolency against God and his
Gospel! in justifying themselves and Satan, in saying our Salvation is
impossible; when both of them speak it possible and proffer it upon easy
terms! What odious indignity is there offered unto Christ as if the cry of our
sins did outvoice the cry of his blood, or there were not either worth enough
in it, or not a willingness to impart it, though he left his father, took our
flesh, etc. to this very purpose. What open injury do we offer to the Church!
as if there were no Balm in Gilead, and the business, and blessings of religion
were but a mockery, as ending in madness and melancholy! Yea, how ominous is
the injury hereby to our own selves, as barring us out, not only from present
happiness, but from all possibilities and hopes, and bringing us into the most
amazing agonies of 1. temptation, 2. tribulation, 3. transgression!

1. Of temptation. Despair is the Devil's shop and shambles. By this he puts
men upon blaspheming God, and self-butcheries. Witness Cain, Saul, and Judas:
Genesis 4.13, 14. 1 Samuel 31.4. cum 16.14. Mat. 27.5. cum Joh. 13.27.

2. Of Tribulation. Nothing but now ministers matter of trouble to the Soul.
Even God, his Gospel, etc. And they multiply upon him. I was not in safety,
neither had I rest, neither was I quiet, yet trouble came. yea, there is a
special malignity in these troubles; not only in that they are soul-troubles,
but self-troubles, troubles of his own making, and maintaining. He is his own
tormenter. Job. 3.26. Jer. 2.19.

3. Of Transgression. Now is the time of sinning most against God, our selves,
and the soul-good of our neighbor, hardening the wicked, hindering the weak,
and intercepting the worthiest in the cheerfulness of their progress and
pilgrimage. The effects I acknowledge are different in different persons:

1. It enervates endeavors in most. As the Orator Desperatione debilitati
experiri nolunt, quod se assequi posse diffidunt. Cic. Orat. ad Brut.
long since observed. Hope is the nerve and tendon of Action, if this be cut
off or contracted, they are disenabled and indisposed. Men care not to make
experiments for that, of which they conclude they shall never come at.

2. It eats cut the sweet, and extinguisheth the Spirit and heat of
endeavors, if they are continued. Cut off hope, and the springs of joy, and
holy obedience are dammed up. Servile fears prevail, and so duty does become a
drudgery, and comes off with difficulty. It Is worse rowing than against wind
and tide.

3. It inflameth some unto self-violence. Saul falls upon his own Sword,
Ahitophel and Judas hang themselves, and so pass from one hell to another.

4. It exasperateth some against God and Godliness, and boils up their hatred
to malice and despite, as Cain and Jehoram's messenger, What shall I attend on
the Lord any longer?

5. It ends with some in sensuality, and Epicurean or brutish indulgences, to
make the best of their gain in carnal divertisements while they may. As those
Jer. 2.25. c. 18.12. 1 Cor. 15.32. There is no hope, we will walk after our own
devices. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die.

Direct. 4. Present the Object, in and from whom you can alone hope for peace
and safety more rightly to your Conscience. Is it not enough that you have hard
thoughts of your selves? but will you have hard thoughts of our God likewise? O
the zeal! the strength, the sounding of his bowels, and of his merceis toward
thee? Are they restrained? Has he not proclaimed his Name, to be the Lord, the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth? keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin?
Yea, the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. He
is full of compassion and gracious, long-suffering and plenteous in mercy and
truth: Isa. 63.15. Exodus 34.6, 7. Psalm. 86, 5, 15. and 103.8. and 145.8, 9.
Whence then are these approaches toward despair? O thou trembling soul, whence,
why do these tormenting thoughts stick upon thee? Is it that God cannot, is not
able to pardon thee? Nay, what is too hard for an omnipotent mercy to pardon,
or pass by? Man can put up but a few provocations, such is his impotence;
through pride, passion, etc. He cannot contain, but would be calling for fire
from heaven. But God has proclaimed his Name to be (...) the Lord, the Lord,
the mighty God Deus fortis. Jun. and Tremel.
. His Omnipotence can forgive both iniquity, transgression and sin; all kinds,
all degrees of sin: Luke 9.54. Exodus ibid. Numb. 14.18, 19, 20. Amos 7.2, 3.
What! is it that he cares not, is not willing to forgive and have mercy upon
thee? Nay, as I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked; but (this is his pleasure) that the wicked turn from his way and live.
Lo, how he invites, injoyns, entreats it. Turn you, turn you, from your evil
ways. How he expostulateth in it, why will ye die? God is not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Behold he is ready to
pardon ( Hebr. a God of pardons) gracious, merciful slow to anger and of great
kindness: Ezekiel. 33.11. c. 18.32. 2 Pet. 3 9. Neh. 9.17. I know thou look
upon him as clothed with righteousness, and armed with omnipotent justice to
revenge thy disobedience. And it is true he is so if thou shall persist in thy
sins. But will thou revolve these few questions in thy heart, and return an
answer to them in thy own bosom?

1. Is not Omnipotent mercy as propense and willing to save thee, as Omnipotent
justice is to damn thee? Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die,
says the Lord God; and not that he should return from his ways and live? He
does not (so much as) afflict willingly. Judgment is his strange work; but he
rejoices to show mercy. He is as it were drawn to acts of justice, but he
delights in acts of mercy: Ezekiel. 18.23. Lam. 3.33. Isa. 28.21. Jer. 32.41.
Mic. 7.18. Why then such confusion of heart? Why do thou cast away thine
hope? why should thou fear and fly from him as one that will not forgive,
when there is forgiveness with him, that he may be feared? Psalm. 130.4, 7.

2. Is not Omnipotent mercy as prevalent with him to save thee, as justice is
or can be to damn thee? Behold mercy rejoices against judgment. Acts of mercy
flow freely from him, they are of his own mere will and motion. He has mercy
because he will have mercy. Acts of justice have their foundation still without
him, and are laid in the desert of sin. Justice requires desert. Mercy
remitteth desert, and requires only distress or defect, and knows no motive
out of its own self. Mercy does not extend it self upon any former obligations,
or upon any future hopes. Its acts are all free, and both from and for it self.
How mavelous must the influence of mercy then be, that is not raised upon the
goodness or worth of the sinner, but upon the good will of himself! Yea, when
justice seems ready to strike, mercy stays its arm, and that for its own sake,
when there is nothing but misery and necessity can be suggested for the sinners
sake: Jam. 2.13. Romans 9.15, 16. Job 37.23. Psalm. 78.38, 39. Isa. 48.9. Behold
then, the foulness and merit of thy sins is supererogated by the freeness and
super-abundance of his mercies.

3. Has not Omnipotent mercy provided and done more in order to thy Salvation
then justice has for thy damnation? Yea, he has sent his Son to save thee, if
thou will accept of him; his servants by office to show thee the way of
Salvation if thou will attend them, his Scriptures and Ordinances to skill thee
in, and work in thee the things that accompany Salvation, if thou will improve
and obey them. And nothing can damn thee but thy impenitence in sin. Has
justice done as much to fit thee for hell, as mercy has to fit thee for
heaven. Now the designs of all his acts of justice are but to drive thee to the
acceptance of his mercies. If justice threatens, it is that she may not punish;
or if she punish here, it is that she may not punish for ever. If thou art
judged of the Lord, it is that thou may not be condemned with the world: Joh.
3.16. Act. 16.17. c. 13.26. Tit. 2.11. 1 Cor. 11.32. Oh! turn thy amazing fears
of justice, into admirings and hopes of mercy.

4. Has not Omnipotent mercy hitherto preponderated the proceeds of justice
toward you? Yea, it is not for want of might, but of mere will and mercy that he
has hitherto forborne you, and that your forfeited souls, states, etc. have not
been fearfully snatched from you, by some signal arrest of divine vengeance.
Has he not endured you with much longsuffering? Could finite mercies have put
up a thousandth part of such continued injuries and indignities? What bowels,
what bounties of mercies have yearned on you, and been extended to you! why
should not Conscience reflect and say, may not the same mercy at last save me,
that has so long spared me? yea, and it will save you if you will yet shake
off your sins and submit to its terms. Nay this is the very end of it (Oh may
it so end in you!) Account that the long-suffering of God is Salvation in the
end and design of it. He waits that he may be gracious unto you. Return, and I
will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, says the Lord,
and I will not keep anger for ever, Romans 9.22. c. 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.15. Isa. 30.18.
Jer. 3.12.

5. Does not Omnipotent mercy proffer and persuade you to embrace its
Propositions of Salvation, and to prevent the ominous strokes of provoked
justice? yea, God will have all men to be saved. The grace of God that brings
Salvation to all men has appeared. Lo, he proffers it to all. Whosoever will,
Ho, every one that thirsts. He presses it upon all, whosoever thirsts let
him come, let him come, let him come. It Is urged yet a fourth time, Incline
your ear and come to me. He persuades it. Here are waters, here is wine, here
is milk, here is bread for you; whatsoever may raise your natures, or relieve
your necessities. Here is the good which you seek after, and which alone can
satisfy you. He prevents the exceptions, whereupon men stand off, its worth
and their unworthiness. Come, buy without money, and without price. He pleads
and expostulates, wherefore will ye spend your money for that which is not
bread? etc. Why will ye die? Yea, he prays and entreats by his Ambassadors,
as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you to be reconciled. Lost man do
but suffer me to save thee, poor sinner suffer me to love thee. These are the
charms (as one says Manton on Jude, v. 2. p. 75.
) of Gospel rhetoric: 1 Timothy 2.4. Tit. 2.11. Rev. 22.17. Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. 2
Con. 5.20. Shall your diffidence and despair turn the deaf ear to all this? and
frustrate both God's design and your own desires to all eternity.

6. Has Omnipotent justice ever condemned any under the publication of the
Gospel, but upon the neglect or refusal of the offers of Omniptent mercy? No
mercy must disclaim you ere justice can damn you. Vindictive justice must have
the permit (at least) of divine mercy, ere it can so punish. This, this is the
condemnation, the neglect of that great Salvation mercy shows us, the miserable
refusals and abuse of the riches of mercy. Mercy never refuses till men
refuse. What say you? are you willing to be at peace, and friends with that
God, to whom you say, you have been so long enemies? Never were there any who
were willing to accept the conditions of mercy, and to accord the quarrel of
justice, that mercy has abandoned, or justice arrested, and cast into
hell torments. If you are but willing, truly, thoroughly willing, be you never
so weak, or have you been never so wicked, mercy has a wing to cover you, and
clucks after you as her chicken: 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Joh. 3.20. Heb. 2.3. Romans 2.4,
5. Isa. 1.19. Mat. 23.37.

7. Once more, who are the Objects of Omnipotent mercy but such as are in
misery? Mercy is an attribute whose aspect is ever toward the Creature. God
knows himself, loves himself, but is not merciful to himself. And it is
misery is the object of mercy, as the sole motive of bestowing mercy is his own
free mercy. So that the calamitousness of thy condition should not be abused to
keep thee from mercy, but used as an argument rather to awaken and quicken thee
to the speediest close with mercy. Here may thou unload thy burdens, and ease
thy miserable breast. The Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy. With him is
a multitude of tender mercies. Whither can you look but to mercy, if you will
not still live in misery? Now here is work for saving mercy in the sense of thy
misery. Justice looks what your merits are, but mercy looks what your miseries
are. Be not discouraged, sin and misery are the most strong and suitable
arguments whereby to plead for mercy. For now you present God with the proper
object of mercy, which you pray him to magnify. You have the example of his
Worthies to encourage you. Lord, be merciful to me, heal my soul, for I have
sinned against thee. Be merciful unto me, O Lord, for I am poor and needy. Have
mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak. O Lord, heal me, for my bones are vexed.
My soul also is sore vexed, O save me for thy mercies sake, Exodus 33.19. Jam.
5.11. Psalm. 51.1. and 41.4. and 86.1, 3. 6.1. -- 5.

Direct. 5. Present the Object by and through whom we can only hope for
Salvation aright to you, the Lord Christ. His very name is argument enough to
refell despair, revive hope, and raise both desire and delight. His name Jesus
Lets thee see, what he is to his, and what he will be to thee, if thou will
believe in him a Savior from thy sins: Mat. 1.21. Act. 16.31. 1 Timothy 4.10.
Away with thy strait and narrow conceptions of the blessed Jesus. The Angel
tells us, This is good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people, that
there is born a Savior which is Christ the Lord. The Apostles testify that
God sent his Son to be the Savior of the world. And if you attend his own
sayings, he assures you, I came not to judge the world but to save the world.
And God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved: Luke 2.10. 1 John 4.14. Joh. 12.47. c. 3.17.
What is it then that sticks with you? Do you think him either 1. averse that he
will not, or 2. not able, and so cannot save so vile a sinner as thou art,
though thou submit unto him. Behold Christ is able to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, (...), prorsus, perpetuo and perfect, as
ad Heb. 7.25.
Gryneus gives it us.

CHAP. V. Quest. Whether we should direct our Prayers, only to God the Father?
or may also to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost? And how may we order our
thoughts aright, in distinguishing these three persons, especially as to prayer?
MOst dear and worthy Friend, I willingly own the obligations you have put upon
me, to God and you: And shall rejoice to serve you, or if this may satisfy
you, I shall not premise any needless Preface to what this paper offers you.
Your concessions in our late Conference, I shall not so much prove, as improve.
The question you would be clear in being complicate, I shall take asunder, and
tender you what satisfaction I may from the holy Scriptures, without the
accession of humane Authors; as knowing that your faith does not indeed, should
not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God: 1 Cor. 2.5.

Quest. 1. Whether we should direct our prayers only to God the Father, or may
also to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost?

Answ. I affirm we may direct our Prayers to any of them, and should direct our
Prayers to all these three persons, in the one most single and undivided
Godhead. To this purpose please to peruse these ensuing Propositions.

Prop. 1. God is the object of prayer, the adequate and alone object. His
commands (as also your concessions) determine our prayers to and upon him, who
is God by nature, upon him, and upon no other: Mat. 4.10. Psalm. 50.15. and
65.2. Gal. 4.8. Psalm. 44.20, 21. So that the proper, fundamental and formal
reason of divine worship is the perfect and infinite excellency of the eternal
Godhead.

Prop. 2. The Godhead, which is and can be but one, there being but one first
cause and last end: Deuteronomy. 6.4. Ephesians. 4.6. Isa. 41.4. c. 44.6, 8. subsists in
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, without any division of that most single essence;
yet with distinction of these several persons. This (as your self concedes, so)
these Scriptures clear: 1 John 5.7. Mat. 28.19. c. 3.16, 17. Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Jehovah, Elohim. So that as the Father is God: [ Romans 15.6. c 1.7.] So also is
the Son: [1 John 5.20. 1 Timothy 3.16. Act. 20.28.] And so likewise is the Holy
Ghost: [ Act. 5.3, 4. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. c. 12.6, 7, 8.] Three distinct persons
they are, but one and the same God. There are three that bear record in heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three (its not said, ver.
8. agree in one, but) are one. Not only do they agree in one testimony, but are
one in truth, one thing, one nature, one God: (...), 1 John 5.7. I should
further expatiate in clearing this truth, but that you have already evidenced
your clearness in it.

Prop. 3. The Son, and Holy Ghost being one God, coequal and co-essential with
the Father, divine honor and our dues of office, as prayer, etc. are to be
deferred therefore, and given unto them, as well as to the Father. This is
eminently enough pointed to us in that prayer of Benediction which was
prescribed unto the Priests: [ Numb. 6.23. -- 27.] Wherein they must thrice
iterate, The Lord, the Lord, the Lord bless thee, etc. But it is evidently and
expressly pattern'd in that prayer of Valediction, 2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God; i.e. the Father, and the communion
of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. The practice of John may be produced
likewise in that proemial prayer for, and salutation of the Seven Churches:
Rev. 1.4, 5. Grace be unto you, and peace from him, which is, and which was,
and which is to come, (a frequent periphrasis of the Father) and from the Seven
Spirits which are before his throne, ( i.e. the Holy Ghost, the variety and
perfection of whose Graces in these Seven Asian Churches is hereby indicated,
he being but one and the self-same spirit: 1 Cor. 12.4, 11.) and from Jesus
Christ who is the faithful witness, etc. Shall I need to subjoyn what you may
perhaps already sense and consider? That Baptism is to be ministered in the name
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, as well as in the name of the Father: Mat.
28.19.

Prop. 4. God the Father then is not, cannot be so the object of prayer, as is
exclusive either of God the Son, or of God the Holy Ghost.

(1) For the Son. It is manifest, that all men should honor the Son, even as
they honor the Father, He that honors not the Son, honors not the
Father, Joh. 5.23. If you will review the last prayer of that lively Protomartyr
Steven, it is directed hither, They stoned Steven, calling upon God, and
saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Act. 7.59. He that runs may read the same
requests from the beloved Disciple of Christ, and from his bride the Church,
which conclude our Bibles, Come, come Lord Jesus, etc. Rev. 22.17, 20, 21.
Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom, is the only recorded
prayer of the penitent thief upon the Cross: Luke 23.42, 43. Paul begins
(wellnigh) every Epistle with prayers to him, as well as to the Father: Romans
1.7. 1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2, etc. And is followed herein, both by John and
Peter, 2 John 3.2. 2 Pet. 1.2. In short, this is given us as the character of
all true Christians, 1 Cor. 1.2. Act. 9.14. With all that call upon the name of
Jesus Christ our Lord. Observe, it is not said, That call upon the name (of the
Lord, through Jesus Christ; though this is (no doubt) their duty, and his due,
as being the Mediator. It lets us see, that his Saints look upon him not only
as a middle person, through whom they pray unto God, but as true and very God,
to whom they make their prayers.

(2) For the Holy Ghost. We are debtors in point of prayer to him, as he also
deriveth all our grace and peace to us. We are debtors (says the Apostle) not
to the flesh, but to the spirit; and this not only to live after the spirit,
but to lift up our hearts with our hands to him, in spirit and truth. O come
(says the Psalmist) let us worship and bow down, Let us kneel before the Lord
our maker; for he is our God, etc. Psalm. 95.6, 7, 8. The Apostle makes
application of this part of the Psalm to the Holy Ghost, Heb. 3.7, 8, etc.
External and internal worship is due then from us to God the Holy Ghost. The
reason which the Psalmist gives us, reach him as well as the other persons. He
is the Lord our God he made us, and not we our selves. The spirit of God has
made me, and the breath of the almighty has given me life. The inspiration of
the almighty has given me understanding, Job 33.4. c. 32.8. Know ye not (says
Paul) that your bodies are the temples of the holy ghost? Which he elsewhere
makes synonimous with being the temples of God. What then? Therefore glorify
God in your bodies, and in your spirits, which are Gods; and therefore glorify
God the Holy Ghost. So that inward and outward worship not only may, but must
be given to the Holy Ghost: 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. c. 3.16, 17. The Saints of God
have offered him therefore their prayers of petition, (see instances Prop. 3.)
and the Seraphims do offer him their prayers of praise and thanksgiving, Crying
holy, holy, holy Lord God almighty; which with express warrant enough is
interpretable to the Holy Ghost, and not to be limited to one, or both the
other persons: Isa. 6.3, 9. with Act. 28.25, 26. Shall I add more evidence
where there is so much already? Lo,

1. The objective fundamental and formal ground of prayer is found with the
Son, and with the Holy Ghost, as well as with the Father. Is the Father God? so
is the Son. God over all, blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. And the Holy Ghost is
called God, not less than three times in one Scripture, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. I
forbear ampler testimonies, because you acknowledge this fundamental truth. Is
the Father an omnipresent majesty, pray we where we will? so is the Son also.
Hear him, Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I
in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. So likewise is the Holy Ghost. Whither shall
I go from thy spirit, says the Psalmist? i.e. I can go no whither, but thy
spirit is with me, Psalm. 139.7. Is the Father an omnipotent mercy? pray we for
what we will, he is able to hear and help us. So also is the Son, the mighty
God, the almighty, Isa. 9.6. Rev. 1.7, 8. And so likewise is the Holy Ghost.
All these works that one and the self-same spirit, dividing to every man as
he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. Briefly, is the Father omniscient? knowing what we pray
for, how we pray, what are the purposes of, and what principles are at act in
our hearts, and in what proportion, and when it is best to answer our prayers,
and to accommodate our desires and distresses. So is the Son, he knows what
is in man, the very heart and reins, he knows all things, Joh. 2.24, 25. c.
21.17. Rev. 2.23. And so also is the Holy Ghost, he searches all things, yea
the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12.

2. For the object of faith. Is it the Father only? Nay so is God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost. And if the object of faith then of prayer also, Romans 10.14.
Mat. 28.19. That the Son is the object of faith seems to require little or no
proof with him that believes the Scriptures. Since they were written to this
very end, that we might believe in the name of the Son of God, and that
believing we might have life through his name, Joh. 20.31. 1 John 5.13. And he
that disbelieveth or denies this, disbelieveth or denies the Father also, 1 John 2.22, 23, 24. Here was the blessed faith of Peter, the rock, the bottom,
or foundation upon which the Church is built, Mat. 16.16, 17, 18. Hitherto also
our blessed Savior calls his. Ye believe in God, believe also in me, Joh.
14.1. The Holy Ghost is the object of faith likewise. I believe in the Holy
Ghost is one, and an eminent article of the true Creed of Christians. Plain it
is, that the wisdom of the Spirit is the wisdom of God, the power of the Spirit
is the power of God, the testimony of the Spirit is the testimony of God. And
if we may and should believe the witness of men, much more the witness of God,
for the witness of God is greater. It is the Spirit (who is one God with the
Father and with the Son) that bears witness, because the Spirit is truth; and
therefore to be believed relied upon as the Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 2.1, 4, 5.
1 John 5.6, 7, 9. He that believes not in the Spirit then believes not in
God. He that tells a lie to the Spirit tells a li^^to God; not unto men but
unto God, Act. 5.3, 4.

Prop. 5. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost being verily and truly Gods, and
being distinct persons in the one only and same Godhead; we may then (according
to the grounds laid) direct our prayers to God with express mention of one
only, or of more, or of all the persons in the Godhead. The laudable examples
in Scripture may evince the lawfulness hereof. Paul directs his prayers with
the express mention sometimes but of one person, Ephesians. 3.14. Sometimes of two
persons, 1 These. 3.11. Sometimes of all three, 2 Cor. 13.14. John and Steven
explicitly address themselves to the second person, Rev. 22.20. Act. 7.59.
Paul attests the third person, Romans 9.1. as well as others apply themselves to
the first person; and St. John invocates all three persons, Rev. 1.4, 5.

Prop. 6. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost being but one only God, of one
nature, mind, will, power, Godhead, they are therefore (according to the first
Proposition) to speak strictly and properly, but one only formal object of
prayer, and of other parts of religious worship. So that our Savior bids us
baptize (not in the names but) in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. Not only to intimate their coequality in power
and authority among themselves, as being one and the same God, with whom are no
degrees of power or perfection: But to instruct us how we should consider of,
and come before them in that, and in all other acts of worship upon the same
reason, as those that are co-essential, and co-equally the original and object
of all (as natural, so) instituted worship. Thus also were the Priests bound to
say in blessing the people, Jehovah, Jehovah, Jehovah bless thee, etc. Number.
6.24, 25, 26. Thereby pointing them and us; That though they are distinguished
in their personal subsistence; yet they are not to be divided in our prayers
and supplications. Rather that as these three are one in the unity of the
divine essence, so they should be eyed as one in the unity of an end or object
in all our devout and religious exercises.

Prop. 7. In directing prayer therefore to God with express mention but of one
or two persons, the Saints of old did not, and our selves ought not to exclude
the other person or persons, because they are all one God, coequal and
coeternal, co-existing with each other, yea in each other, in the same
Godhead. Believe me (says Christ) that I am in the Father, and the Father in
me, Joh. 14.11. You need not any proofs from me, that the Godhead or divine
nature and excellency is the formal and adequate ground and reason of divine
Worship. Or that these three persons are God, and therefore equal in the
Godhead, equal in glory; not one greater or less than another, not one above or
below another. These premises being of infallible verity, the inference is
plain and obvious, therefore are they to be equally worshipped; not one more or
less than another, not one above or beneath another. For there being no
difference or degrees in the ground and adequate reason of the divine Worship
that is due unto them, there can be no difference or degrees admittable with
any ground or reason in the worship that is done unto them. If one be not less
a God than another, one may not be less glorified than another.

Prop. 8. Yet lastly, the Father being the fountain and first principle (though
not of their essential subsistence, yet) of the personal subsistence of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, (of which in the next Question) and so of their
peculiar manner of working ad extra, or without the Godhead, (viz. the Son
working from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from them both.) The Saints
therefore have, and your selves may eminently (though not exclusively) direct
your prayers to God the Father; yea, and that for those benefits which come to
you, by the more especial and eminent operation of God the Son, or of God the
Holy Ghost. It Is easy to instance. Paul blesses the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ for all the blessings in and by Christ, the remission of his
sins, the redemption of his soul, etc. Ephesians. 1.3, etc. Then beseeches he,
that the God of our Lord Jesus, the Father of glory may give unto them the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Christ, ver. 17. etc. And
again, Chap. 3. v. 14, 15, 16, 17. I bow my knees (says he) unto the Father of
our Lo^^ Jesus Christ, that you may be strengthened by his spirit, that Christ
may dwell in your hearts by ^aith, etc. Much to the same effect is the prayer
of Peter. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. 1 Pet.
1.3, 4. Not to mention those passages of the Psalmist, Uphold me with thy free
spirit. Lead me by thy spirit, etc. Psalm. 51.12. and 143.10.

Q. 2. How may we order our thoughts aright in distinguishing these three
persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?

I am not willing to weary either my self or you with a needless discussion of
what you intend by this expression, order your thoughts aright. I suppose you
would not have me understand thoughts so much in their larger and less proper
notion and acceptance, (as they include all the interior acts of the Soul) as
in their more limited, strict and proper sense, as they import the acts and
apprehensions of the intellect. And that your meaning is how you may order your
apprehensions (or more briefly may apprehend) aright in or touching the
distinction of those persons. And truth is according as your thoughts are well
or ill ordered in this strict sense, that your apprehensions are either fitting
or faulty, so will your thoughts be in that larger sense; all the other inward
motions of your Soul with relation hereunto, will be well or ill ordered, more
free or more faulty. This only I shall therefore further premise.

Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are and may be presented to our thoughts under a
twofold consideration. 1. Common or essential, as they are God. 2. Peculiar or
personal as they are persons in the Godhead. And this consideration of them is
either 1. More absolute, as they all subsist in the unity of the same nature.
Or 2. Merely relative in the order of one person to another, and distinction of
one person from another. And now in accord to your desires, I offer you these
Directions.

Direct. 1. Think of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as divine and increated
persons. That they are persons I do not attempt to confirm because you already
confess both thing and name, as that which best agrees to the
Scripture-expression, as it does Heb. 1.3. It Is true, that this term person
does import the most excellent kind of subsistence, viz. intelligent and
rational. (We call not the best of brutes a person). But in that this term is
extended to Creatures, to Men, to Angels; you are to think of Father, Son and
Holy Ghost as increated persons, from whom therefore you must remove all
creature-imperfections, even in your very thoughts. As,

(1) Created persons are of a determined, or rather finite nature. 1. Of finite
perfections, 2. of a finite presence, 3. of finite power, and 4. of a finite
permanence or duration. But these increated persons are infinite in their
nature, the Godhead being infinite. 1. Of infinite perfections. Touching the
Almighty we cannot find him out, Job 37.23. Can thou by searching find out
God? Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection? It is as high as heaven,
what can thou do? deeper than hell, what can thou know? etc. Job. 11.7, 8,
9. 2. Of an infinite presence. Do not I fill heaven and earth? says the Lord.
Yea, blessed Lord, whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee
from thy presence? Jerem. 23.24. Psalm 139.7. etc. 3. Of an infinite power. I
am God almighty, says he. Is any thing too hard for me? etc. Genesis 35.11. Jer.
32.27. 4. Of an infinite permanence or duration. From everlasting to
everlasting thou art God. He is the high and lofty one that inhabiteth
eternity, Psalm. 90.2. Isa. 57.15.

(2) Created persons are of a divisible and compounded nature, and therefore
changable. But these increated persons are of a most indivisible, simple and
immutable nature. For so is the Godhead, a most pure, a most perfect nature,
without the least change, without the least composition. Each person is called
Jehovah, who is what he is; viz. a most pure and perfect being; without
variableness, or so much as a shadow of turning, Exodus 3.14. Jam. 1.17. God is
light, and in him is no darkness at all, 1 John 1.5.

(3) Created persons are of a dependent nature. As all created persons depend
upon their first cause or principles for their continued preservation; so the
nature does depend upon its proper person, for its support or sustentation. But
now the divine nature, which is in these three persons, does not depend upon
any or upon all these persons for its sustentation or subsistence. But all
three persons subsist in this one independent nature, as is said of the
subsistence of the Son, Phil. 2.6. (...), subsisting in the form, i.e. in the
essential form of God, as being equal with God, as it follows. The Godhead it
self is independent, or it is not Godhead, or it is not infinite. He is
Jehovah: which implys that his being is neither from, nor for, nor in, nor by
any other, but is most absolute and independent. I am the first, and I am the
last, and beside me there is no God, Isa. 44.6. c. 45.21, 22.

(4) Created persons are of different natures; numerically different, though
not specifically. True it is, that Peter, Paul, Philip, are of the same
specifical nature; i.e. they are all of them men; but they are not of the same
singular or numerical nature; i.e. they are not the same man. But these
increated persons are of the same nature, not only of the same specifical, but
of the same singular nature; they are the same God. That as you may safely say,
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost: So you must think and say
of them, that they are one and the same God, one and but one. These three are
one, 1 John, 5.7. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, (...) is one Lord. You must
not then think of these three uncreated persons, as you would of those three
created, as if these were distinct Gods, as those are distinct men.

(5) Created persons have many different accidents, and are distinguished from
each other by a congeries or heap of accidents, as time, place, etc. But these
increated persons are of that infinite perfection, as being the same God, that
they are above any such thing as an accident. The infinite simplicity of the
Divine nature cannot admit of such finite things as are accidents, as also nor
can its immutability. It Is a confessed maxim amongst Christians, Whatsoever is
in God is God. I have sworn by my holiness, says God, Psalm. 89.35. God swear
by himself, says the Apostle, Heb. 6.13. God's Holiness then is God himself.
It Is true the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are distinguished by their personal
properties; or if you will needs so call it by their personal attributes. But
they are not different by any personal accidents, as James and John are. This
their perfect nature is utterly alien from, and abhorrent of.

Direct. 2. Think of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as the same God, subsisting
in one and the same undivided essence or Godhead. See that you do not divide
the nature when you distinguish the persons. Therefore John having shown you
these three distinct persons, immediately subjoyneth that they have but one
undivided essence, 1 John 5.7. The same in effect does Jesus, Mat. 28.19. as we
have noted before, Q. 1. Prop. 6. Enough may seem to have been already spoken
to this, both there, and but even now. But I add, you should not only think of
them as one and the same God, in the same most single essence, but think of
them as inseparably subsisting in and with one another, in the unity of this
same essence. That the Son subsists in the Divine nature or essence you saw but
even now from Phil. 2.6. Direct. 1. That the Son and Father subsist in the same
Divine essence is manifest, in that the Son is the express, image of his
Fathers person or subsistence, (...), and his Father and he are one in essence,
Heb. 1.3. Joh. 10.30. The Holy Ghost therefore must and does subsist in the
same essence; for he is one God, with the Son and Father, 1 John 5.7. Believe
thou not, says Christ to Philip, that I am in the Father, and the father in
me? And then he calls upon him from his word and from his works, which were
the Fathers in and with him. Believe me, that I am in the father, and the
father in me, Joh. 14.10. And again afterward, he assures his Disciples, That
at that day (when the Holy Ghost the Comforter should be more plentifully
communicated to them from the Father at that day) ye shall know that I am in
the father, ver. 20. Now the Holy Ghost being co-essential with the Father, and
with the Son, and subsisting with them in the same single and omnipresent
nature, does therefore also subsist in and with the Father and Son, and they
also in and with the Spirit. In short then, you must so think of them that you
do not divide when you do distinguish them. 1. Think of them as whose essential
attributes are undivided. That the Son and Holy Ghost are equally excellent,
infinite, immutable, etc. with God the Father, because God equal with the
Father. And there can be no inequality betwixt them who are all infinite, Phil.
2.6. Psalm. 139.7. 2. Think of them as whose essential actions are undivided.
That whatsoever the Father does as God (I say not as a person in the Godhead)
the same does the Son, and the Holy Ghost likewise, as in creating the world,
quickening the dead, etc. Joh. 5.19. Job 33.4. Romans 8.11.

Direct. 3. Think of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as three distinct persons
in the undivided Godhead. Let your thoughts work according to the word of
truth. Read that blessed Scripture, 1 John 5.7. Lo, how they are distinguished
by their names, the Father, the Word, ( i.e. the Son, Joh. 1.14.) and the Holy
Ghost; distinguished by number, three, these three that are one; one God, of
one nature. Remember the Baptism of your Savior. There might you have heard
the Father owning the Son, and have seen the Son, who had taken our flesh, with
the heavens opened to him by the Father, and have beheld the Spirit descending
on the Son like a Dove from the Father, Mat. 3.16, 17. Reflect else on your own
Baptism, as it is required by our Savior, Mat. 28.19. Here their several
distinct names are propounded, and their singular or Divine nature pointed at.
Recall else if you will that beloved Sermon of our Mediator, Joh. 14. He does
more than once deliver you their distinction; distinguishing the Father from
himself, and the Spirit from them both. The Father will send the Holy Ghost in
my name, ver. 26. I will pray the Father and he shall give you another
comforter, even the spirit of truth, ver. 16, 17. Another from himself, who (as
to his corporal presence) was going from them; another from the Father, Who (as
he says) shall give you another comforter. But how another? Another God? It is
impossible. Another person is only intelligible. So then you must think of
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, not as distinct Gods, but as distinct persons in
the Godhead; as one and the same God, but not as one and the same person. Think
of the Father as not being the Son; or the Son as not being the Father; on the
Holy Ghost as being neither Father nor Son; and upon the Father and Son as not
being the Holy Ghost. Look upon them as coequal, and therefore as distinct. It
being most absurd to say, that the same person is equal to himself.

(1) Think of them as distinguished in and by the personal and incommunicable
actions. The Father begets the Son, and has given the Son to have life in
himself as the Father has life in himself, Heb. 1.5. Joh. 5.26. The unbegotten
Father then is clearly distinguished from the only begotten Son, and the Son
also from the Father. The Father and Son do emit the Holy Ghost by an eternal
spiration, or communicating to him his distinct subsistence in the Divine
Essence. The holy Scriptures speak of the holy Spirit as sent by and from both
the Father and the Son, and as receiving from the Son as well as from the
Father, Joh. 14.26. c. 15.26. c. 16.14, 15. As the Spirit both of the Son, and
of the Father, Mat. 10.20. Gal. 4.6. So that the Father and Son sending are,
and must be distinguished from the Spirit sent. No one sends himself, or to
himself, Joh. ibid. etc. 14.16, 17. Nor does the Scripture mention the Holy
Ghost as the power only of the Godhead, but as a person in the Godhead. It Is
not said it, but he shall lead you, he shall glorify me; the Comforter whom
the Father will send. It is (...), in the neuter gender, Joh. 16.13. Yet, ver.
14. not in the neuter but in the masculine, (...). He the Spirit of truth; he,
he, he, he, he, he, he, seven times besides in those two verses, and once more
he, ver. 15.

(2) Think of them as distinguished in and by their personal and incommunicable
properties. It Is proper to the Father to beget the Son; to the Son, to be
begotten of the Father; to the Holy Ghost to proceed both from the Father and
the Son. Heb. 1.5, 6. Joh. 15.26. These distinct incommunicable properties
infer plainly the distinction of the persons. The Son begotten cannot be the
Father begetting. And the spirit proceeding cannot be either Father or Son,
from whom he does proceed.

(3.) Think of them as distinguished in and by the principle, original and
order of their personal existence. The personal subsistence of the Father is
from himself; i.e. he receives subsistence from no other without himself, but
is the principle of subsisting to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, Joh. 5.26. c.
14.26. The personal subsistence of the Son is from the Father, I live by the
Father (says he) I came forth from the Father, Joh. 6.57. c. 16.28. The
personal sublistence of the Holy Ghost is both from Father and Son; from whom
he proceeds, and by whom he is sent, Joh. 15.26. c. 16.14, 15.

(4) Think of them as distinguished in and by the principle, original and order
of their operations and actions, which are terminated without the Godhead. The
order of working follows that of being. As their essential being is undivided,
so are their external works undivided also. You know the received rule, Opera
trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa. As Sanctification is wrought in us, both by
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Jude 1. 1 Cor. 1.2. c. 6.11. As their
personal being or subsistence is distinguished in the same order are their
works also distinguished. Is the Father of himself? so he works of himself.
The Father of whom are all things, says the Apostle. All things are delivered
unto me of my Father, says our Savior, 1 Cor. 8.6. Mat. 11.25, 26, 27. Is the
Son of and from the Father? so he works of and from the Father, I have not
spoken (says he) of my self; I do nothing of my self but as my Father has
taught me, etc. The Son can do nothing of himself but what he sees the Father
do, etc. Joh. 12.49. c. 8.28. c. 5.19, 20. Is the spirit both from Father and
Son? So he works from the Father and Son. He shall not speak of himself
(says Christ) but whatsoever he shall hear ( viz. from the Father, and from
himself) that shall he speak. He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto
you, Joh. 16.13, 14. with Joh. 15.26. c. 14.26.

Direct. 4. Think of Father, Son and Holy Ghost as distinguished, not only in
but from the Divine essence. Though it be true, they are not essentially
distinguished, yet it is also true, that they are distinguished from the
essence. The Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God; these
three are one God. Yet, though the Godhead be predicated of all the three
persons, the persons in the Godhead are not predicated of one another. The
Father is not the Son, nor is the Son the Father, nor is the Holy Ghost either
Father or Son, or either of those the Holy Ghost. The divine essence does not
beget, nor is begotten, nor does proceed; which the infiniteness, simplicity
and immutability thereof can no way admit. Yet the Father does beget, the Son
is begotten, and the Holy Ghost does proceed. Think of the Divine essence then.
1. As one, only one, most singly and singularly one. But think of the Divine
persons as three, three distinct subsistents in this Divine essence. 2. Think
of the Divine essence as only of and from it self; but think of the Divine
person of the Son as of or from the Father, and of the Holy Ghost as from them
both. 3. Think of the Divine essence as common or communicated to all, and to
each of the three persons. But of the persons as incommunicable, and
impredicable of one another. The Father cannot be the Son, nor the Son the
Father, etc. 4. The Divine essence (to conclude) is of absolute consideration,
a person is of relative consideration. A person (in the notion thereof)
includes, over and above the essence, a relation, as of the Father to the Son,
of the Son to the Father, of both to the Holy Ghost, and of the Holy Ghost to
both. A person in the Godhead is the Godhead distinguished by an incommunicable
relative property. These things have received proof already; therefore I
forbear here.

Direct. 5. Think of this Trinity of persons, in the unity of the same essence,
not only with distinct apprehensions, but with dearest appretiations, with
deepest abasements of thy self with divinest admiration of them, with devotedst
adhesion, with deliciousest affections, and with devoutest actions.

(1) With dearest appretiations. The top of your blessedness or felicity is
union and communion with this blessed Trin-unity. Let your highest thoughts
turn in hither, and take up here. Prefer one God in three persons beyond all
other good, and price him as your highest and only chief good. The glorifying
and enjoyment of these three glorious persons in the one glorious Godhead is
the business and blessedness of the glorified ones, to all eternity as is (not
obscurely) intimated, Rev. 4.8. -- Holy, holy, holy Lord God almighty. Let this
mystery therefore have the highest throne in all the thoughts of your mind. Say
with David, Only [ marg. (...)] my soul waits upon God, (...) which notes
the plurality of persons in this one nature, Psalm. 62.1. To have the trin-une
God your God is the highest happiness; and therefore calls for your highest
appretiations. The fellowship of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost was the
highest felicity, the Priests could wish unto the people; or Paul unto his
Corinthians, or John unto the seven Churches, Number. 6.23.27. 2 Cor 13.14. Rev.
1.4.5.

(2) With deepest abasements, the Angels themselves cover their faces, and the
four and twenty Elders with their golden Crowns fall down before the Throne of
God, when they come to see and celebrate this glorious Mystery; to cry Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, Isa. 6.2, 3. Rev. 4.8, 10. How much more should
we that dwell in Houses of Clay! Here, if ever; should reason lower its
Topsail, and strike or stoop rather to Revelation. Flesh and Blood cannot
reveal, nor does, without the spirit of faith receive this mysterious union of
three persons in one nature; or that other, of two natures in one person, one
Christ. Though these are not against, yet are they above reason, Matthew. 16.16,
17. 1 Cor. 2.11, 12, 14. But if reason it self call for Elijahs Mantle wherein
to wrap its face from this dazzling glory: what are our Rebellions! our Sins!
what malignity is in them! and what murmuring should be by us! while every sin
is a dart thrown at this glorious Essence, and as it were a study of dissolving
the substantial union of these three glorious Subsistents. It is enmity against
God, contrariety to God, nor is any one an enemy to God, or he to them but by
and for sin, Romans 8.7. Levit. 26.23, 24. Isa. 63.10. This is that which
crucified the Son, quenches the Spirit, and puts contempt upon the Father.
Once more your very relation to so high a God should humble you: Let my soul
boast it self in him; but blush and be ashamed in me, who am I? or what is my
life, or my Fathers Family in Israel, that I should be Son-in-law to the King?
Worm that I am and no man! not worthy of the least of all thy mercies!
infinitely below thee as I am thy Creature; yet more infinitely as I am a
Sinner, and yet will this glorious God become my God? these glorious Persons
become my Portion? God the Father become my Father? God the Son my Savior? God
the Spirit my Sanctifier; I have seen thee Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty,
with the Eye of Faith I have seen thee: Behold I am vile, what shall I say unto
thee? Infinitely, Infinitely, Infinitely am I unworthy of thee, I Repent and
Abhor my self in dust and ashes; compare Isa. 6.3. with 5. Job. 42.2.7.40.4.
But I may not so expatiate.

(3) With divinest admiration. Angels adore this mystery, and shall not men
admire this mystery? Isa. 6.3. here are such depths as I cannot wade through,
can only wonder at. One, yet Three! Three, yet one! God the Father begetting
God the Son, and yet the Godhead of the Son unbegotten! God the Holy Ghost
proceeding from both, and yet the Holy Ghost God Coeternal and Coequall with
both! All these one God in each other! Alius and alius, yet not Aliud and
aliud! these are matters I find beyond my reason to comprehend, it is too short
to reach them, yet find reason to confess and believe, because God has
revealed them. O that I could more devoutly admire, where I cannot distinctly
apprehend concerning the Eternal generation of the Son, and procession of the
Holy Ghost! And let my reason never cavil at that which is infinite, but
remember continually that it self is finite! There are fewer difficulties in
that than in this subject, where the Apostle falls off from a strickt
discussion, and falls into a devout admiration, O the depth! O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearcheable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out? Romans 11 33.

(4) With the devotedst adhesion of your understanding to this fundamental
truth, of your will to this fountain-goodness. You are baptized in or into
((...)) the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew.
28.19. Here abide, I exhort you with Barnabas that with purpose of heart, you
would cleave unto the Lord, Act. 11.23. Here is enough in the glorious Trinity
to take up every thought of your heart, and whereon to employ every faculty and
power that you have. Here is the universality of truth to content your
understandings, and of goodness to content your wills and affections. What
truth, what good, what perfection, that bears proportion to such an intelligent
and immortal nature as your souls are of, that is not to be found with this one
God in these three persons? your blessedness is lodged up here, Numb. 6.24.25,
26. As much as you loosen from hence, you lose of blessedness.

(5) With diliciousest affections How can you think of this glorious trinunity
as your God, and your objective felicity, and be not taken up, yea transported
with joy? Here are the ravishing enjoyments of the restless joys of Saints and
Angels above in glory, in their communion with these three holy persons, in the
Almighty Godhead, Rev. 4.8. How can you otherwise choose than be pleased with
these undivided persons, who are to you an undivided portion, and an eternal
blessedness? Is there any such garden of delights and comforts, as in
contemplating the divine persons and perfections, especially as they are yours
in so near and dear a relation? Where is your love? where is more loveliness?
If you have any thoughts to lay out in love, here bestow them, who can never
bestow them elsewhere with more comfort, or with better cause. In the Godhead,
lo the perfections of love. Infinitely loving is too low an expression for him,
he is infinite love, for God is love, 1 John 4.8. In each person, lo the prints
of love. The Father has so loved you, as to give his only begotten Son to you,
ver. 9.10. Joh. 3.16. The Son has so loved you, as to give himself for you and
to make a Bath of his own blood to wash you, Gal. 2.20. Rev. 1.5. The Spirit
does so love you, as to apply all the behoofs of the Fathers electing love, and
of the Sons redeeming love to you, and to shed abroad the blessed beams thereof
in you. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. Rom 5.5. How can you think of such united loves, and
not be wrapped up into ecstasies of love for them, that are so loving and so
lovely!

(6) With devoutest actions. The union of these three glorious persons, in the
one glorious Godhead calls for the united power, and putting forth of all your
graces. Every Saint should be a Seraphim, when he comes to celebrate this
mystery of mysteries, in regard of the fervor and vigor of each renewed
faculty and quality. Here is employment for every gracious habit. Here are
infinite united excellencies to induce their most intensive, extensive and
united exercise. Now for the strongest faith, love, hope, etc. to give glory to
God, for of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory
for ever, i.e. say some, ( Aug. de Trin. l. 6. c. 10. Lomt. sent. l. 1. did.
36.) of the Father, through the Son and for the Spirit, Alleluja, Alleluja,
Alleluja, to these three glorious persons, and again, Amen Alleluja, to the one
only Eternal Godhead! to allude to Rev. 19.1, 3, 4, 6. Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. A doxology of great antiquity, and of as
great authority.

Thus may your thoughts walk freely, and work effectually, powerfully,
practically upon this most worthy subject. I advise you not so much to
speculative thoughts, as to those that are practique; which will affect your
heart, and not amaze the head. The Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity has
in it amazing difficulties, such as may puzle the profoundest wits; such as I
am not ashamed (with Justin Martyr) to confess, I can neither satisfy my self
in, nor counsel others to search after. An holy Circle of the humblest admiring
and highest believing will best commed, in this an holy Christian. Let your
thoughts run backward and forward in this holy round, from believing forward to
admiring, where your short and straightened reason cannot comprehend: And from
admiring backward again to believing, because Scripture Revelation has made it
clear. That of Nazianzene has frequently affected me. (...). Nondum pervenio
Illigere hoc unum, and tum his tribus luce circumtundere pervenio haec divid re
and in hoc unum super haec.

Q. 3. How may we order our thoughts aright concerning these three distinct
persons as to Prayer?

What has been already premised, in answer to the two former questions may
perhaps seem enough to others for clearing of this also. Thither I must remit
you in a great part for satisfaction, and shall only subjoyn these six ensuing
propositions which will be of good and great use, if you therewith take in what
has been already tendered you, for the right directing of your Prayers to
these divine Persons, (which as your late discourse prompts me to think, was
the great design you levelled at by this general question) and for resolving
those difficulties which seem to perplex you.

Prop. 1. Though you are to distinguish the persons, yet it is not your duty in
prayer to present unto each person distinct petitions. I confess you may do it
as Paul and the Priests sometimes did, 2 Cor. 13.14. Numb. 6.24, 25, 26. But
there is no command that you must do it, and if you consult examples, you may
find a whole constellation of Saints by whom it was not done; Mat. 11.25.26.
Joh. 17.1.5. Ephesians. 1.17. Phil. 4.20. see Q. 1. Prop. 5.

Prop. 2. Though the distinction of the persons should be preserved, as in
habit within your thoughts for the right presenting of your Prayers; yet it is
not your duty to put it forth into act, in every prayer you present. For 1.
There is no command for it, either in the unwritten book of nature, or in the
written books of Scripture. And where there is no law there is no
transgression, Romans 4.15. 1 John 3.4. 2. Your capacities being considered which
are very strait and narrow, it becomes incompossible with those concerns of
Prayer which you have in hand, to carry along a distinct view of these distinct
persons in every distinct Petition. You have a command 1 Cor. 10.31. Whatsoever
ye do, do it all to the glory of God. An unintermitted intention of God, in
every act of our lives, is granted to be neither needful nor possible. But if
our intentions be (not formally and explicitly, but) only virtually and
implicitly referred hither: so that we refer not any action to such an end, as
is not consistent with this end, and that we actually refer all our actions to
such ends, as are in connection with and in subordination to it; and if the
habitual intention and respect of our hearts be toward God and his glory
upmost, and these intentions be often actuated and awakened. I say if it be
thus, then have we Evangelically satisfied this commandment. You will easily
make application of what I have said, to the illustration of this proposition.
Be sure you do preserve upon your thoughts the necessary distinction of these
persons, in the one only Godhead which is the object of Prayer, and though you
do not explicitly mind their distinction in every Prayer; Yet let not your
minds so fluctuate in any Prayer, as either to divide the Godhead or to exclude
any person therein, or to confound all the persons in whatsoever Prayer, see Q.
1. Prop. 3, 4, 6, 7.

Prop. 3. It is requisite, and (at least) expedient for the right directing of
your Prayers, frequently to actuate such thoughts in and about the distinction
of these persons before Paayer. Because this serves thereunto as a means to its
end. There is not only a habitual, but an actual preparation of our selves
prerequired to Prayer, Job 11.13. Isa. 64.7. Psalm. 108.1. The actual presenting
of the divine essence to our selves, and pressing the glory thereof upon our
Souls which eminently shines forth in all these persons, is admirably
preparatory hereunto; and has a powerful influence, per modum objecti upon our
minds, wills and affections; both to fetch them off from other pursuits and
objects, and to fix and unite them in, and to the present office; To allure the
heart to draw nigh to him, to aw it with the dread of him, to advance it to a
dependence on and delight in him, and to abase and shame us in the sense of our
distance from him as Creatures, and the dishonor we have done to him as
sinners: as you have seen (in effect) already, Qu. 2. Direct. 5. The Doctrine
of the Trinity is as all Theological Doctrines are, a Practical Doctrine; The
Scriptures propound it in order to Faith and Worship. Not one of these persons,
but is the object of both; as I have already proved, Q. 1. Prop. 4.

Prop. 4. In actuating distinct thoughts upon these distinct persons, in the
undivided essence, we may read (and thence recollect) many encouragements and
inducements to Prayer, both of petition and Praise. Think of them in their
essential union, and whatsoever of obligation on inducement, an infinite,
immutable, absolute, allsufficient, most pure, most perfect goodness and truth
may offer you for your encouragement in Prayer, here it is, your Faith may
freely take it up and improve it. Think of them in their personal distinction.
And here also what is there (rather, what is there not?) that may persuade and
encourage Prayer? Let me intimate a few things.

(1) Think you of God the Father? The thoughts of that very name cannot but
take with an ingenuous nature, and will bring his Children with Reverence and
with Confidence upon their knees as it did Paul, Ephesians. 3.14. But you must think
further of him as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. (ibid.) This
consideration in confession, will not only bend the knee but break the heart,
Luke 15.18. Zech. 12.10. This will immediately set the Soul a blessing of him:
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.3. 1
Pet. 1.3. Yea, and send your Soul a begging to him, and crying after him Abba
Father, i.e. Father, Father, O that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, would give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in
the knowledge of him etc. Gal. 4.6. Jer. 3.4. Ephesians. 1.17 etc. Lo. 1. hence may
your Soul resume, he is my God and my Father. This was that blessed news which
Mary must bring from Christ to his Disciples. Behold I ascend to my Father and
your Father, to my God and your God, Joh. 20.17. 2. Hence may you Soul reason
down all discouragements, 1. Why may I not adventure? it is not the presence so
much of a Judge as of a Father, is it not my Father that reaches me out the
Golden Scepter? There is something of encouragement that he is my Father by
Creation, the eyes of all may, and do wait upon him, and he gives them their
meat in due season. But how much more of encouragement is there, that he is the
Father of Christ? my Father in my Christ. Here your faith may see boldness and
access, with confidence, by the faith of him, Ephesians. 3.12. 2. What may I not ask
and have? He is able to do exceeding abundantly for me, above all that I can
ask and think; who could beget an only begotten Son, in his own unbegotten
nature etc. yea, and he is willing too. He that spared not his Son, but
delivered him up for us all: how shall he not with him freely give us all
things, Ephesians. 3.20. Romans 8.32?

(2) Think you of God the Son? The very thought of his relation to the Father
will be taking and transporting to honor him, and it will be your honor. The
Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that himself does; has
committed all judgments unto the Son, that all men should honor the Son even
as they honor the Father: And if any serve me (says he) him will my Father
honor; Job. 3.35.5, 20, 22, 23.12.26. What! the only begotten Son of the
Father, the Angels worship him upon that account; and how should we whose
nature he took, for whose sake he suffered, etc. how should we much more adore
him, think of this Sonship? 1. It will afford you boldness in Prayer. You need
not solicit the servants about the Court, Angels or Saints departed to
present your petitions for you, the only begotten Son of the King of Kings, who
is in the bosom of the Father, that has his Fathers Eye, his Fathers Ear, his
Fathers Heart, yea his Fathers Essence, bids you come with boldness and in full
assurance of faith by him; Tells you, that he will be your Advocate, and that
he is now at the right hand of his Father your intercessour, Ephesians. 3.12. Heb.
10.20, 22.7.25. 2. It may assure you the blessing prayed for. Can you think the
Father will deny his only begotten Son? of the same mind, will, nature with
himself? who takes your petitions out of your hand (or heart rather) and
tenders them in your behalf unto his Father. All things that the Father has
are mine says Christ, Joh. 16.15. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name he will give it you, ask and receive that your joy may be full, ver. 22,
23, c. 15.16. This comfort, this confidence have we that believe on the name of
the Son of God, 1 John 5.13, 14.

(3) Think you of God the Holy Ghost? Lo this is the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba, Father; He proceeds from, and is one with the Father and
with the Son, and that to further your union and communion with himself and
them: He is not only a spirit of adoption to the Saints, but a Spirit of
supplication in the Saints; Romans 8.15. Zech. 12.10. If the temptations of the
flesh pull you back, let the thoughts of the Spirit put and prick you on, that
you make it a work not of formal saying, but of fervent praying; Praying in the
Holy Ghost, Jude 20. The thoughts of him 1. Lead you to the origin of ability
for prayer. Prayer is too hard for flesh and blood; which therefore hangs
backward: your thoughts now prompt you an omnipotent help. We know not either
what we ought to pray for, or how to pray for it as we ought. Now the Spirit
helps our infirmities, (...) stands as it were over against us at the other
end of the burden and puts under his shoulder with us, and so, we may carry the
right of this duty cleverly and come off cherily, Romans 8.26. 2. Leave your
hopes of the acceptance of your prayers. This is not the Spirit of the world
but the Spirit which is of God. And God knows what is the mind of his own
Spirit, who, for matter and manner makes intercession in the Saints, as the
Son does for the Saints, according to the will of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. Romans 8.26,
27. Gal. 4.6. Nay this Spirit is God, existing in, and equal with the Father
and the Son, in the same Godhead: And therefore God the Son cannot deny to
tender, God the Father cannot deny to take what Prayers are presented by you in
the power of the Spirit. Let the thoughts of the Holy Ghost then be more
frequent and familiar with you before prayer. The thoughts of him will put you
at a greater distance from, and upon a greater defiance of your own fleshly
appetitions and inclinations in Prayer, will prompt you what you should desire
in prayer, how, and for what, will put you into a more Spiritual frame and
disposition for Prayer; yea, and upon praying for a more abundant and
efficacious influx and assistance of the Spirit of Prayer; which your heavenly
Father will be sure to give unto them that ask him; Luke 11.13.

Prop. 5. You may proportionably order your thoughts concerning these distinct
persons as to prayer, by considering of and conforming your Prayers to the
distinct manner of their existence and operation, in the Godhead which is the
object of Prayer. The promises make this plain enough without more proof. But
it is needful that I Instance, and be more particular as to both their
existence and operation.

(1) As concerns the distinct manner of their subsisting in the same Godhead,
which has been delivered you before on Qu. 2. This may direct you how to order
your thoughts and their whole transaction, both. 1. As to their persons, 2. As
to your praises and petitions, 3. And in or as to both, as the persons are
united with each other, in the same Essence.

(1) As to these persons. I advise you to apply your self to the Father through
the Son, by whom alone you can hope for acceptance, and by the Spirit, from
whom you must have ability and assistance. The Father is the first Person in
order of these personal subsistants, that gives subsisting life both to Son
and Spirit. The Son is the second or middle Person subsisting of and from the
Father, and with the Father emitting or sending forth the Spirit. The Spirit is
the third and last in the order of these three Persons, subsisting of and from
them both; and sent forth by both of them. So then though it be not always
necessary to keep this order of the persons in your mentions of them, in prayer
to all three persons; (because you find clear precedents, by whom this order
mentioned was not observed; 2 Cor. 13, 14. Rev. 1.4, 5.) Yet it is always
necessary as to the inward manner and intentions of your mind, that your
applications be by the spirit (by his assistance.) 2. through the Son (through
his mediation, trusting by and for him to find acceptance) to the Father, (who
through the Son and by the Spirit gives out answers.) As the Apostle does more
than intimate, Ephesians. 2.18. Through him i.e. the Son, We have an access by one
Spirit unto the Father.

(2) As to your praises and petitions. This lets you ^^e what a wide and an
effectual door is opened to you. To ask from, and acknowledge to the Father all
those blessings, which come to you by his giving of the Son, Ephesians. 1.3. 1 Pet.
1.3. And to Father and Son, whatsoever benefits are communicated to you, by
their giving of the Spirit, Romans 15.13. 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. So that you need not
determine, nor should limit your requests or thanks to that only person, from
whom these blessings do in a more especial manner proceed. The Father being the
first principle of personal subsistence, all things are from him by the Son,
and all things are referred back again by him to the Father, 1 Cor. 8.6. Joh.
5.19. The Spirit subsisting from both, and being sent out by both referrs you
back in all, both to Son and Father. John 16.13, 14, 15. Gal. 4.6.

(3) As your prayers look upon all the Persons, as inseparably united in the
same essence. Learn to admire their mutual inexistence one in another, and in
the same Godhead. Which our Saviors example in that solemn prayer, Joh. 17.
may instruct you. As thou, O Father, art in me, and I in thee etc. ver. 21.
Think you upon the Father? Therewith admire and adore the Son; who is the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express image of his person, Heb. 1.3.
Think you of the Son? therewith admire and adore the Father, He and his Father
are one, Joh. 10.30. Think you of the Holy Ghost? Therewith admire and adore
both Son and Father. He proceeds both from the Father and from the Son, Joh.
15.26. Think you of any? admire and adore all. They are all one eternal
perfection, one God, 1 John 5.7.

(2) As to the distinct manner of their working. What it is you have seen
already, Q. 2. Direct. 3. n. 4. The Son works from the Father, and the Spirit
from them both. This directs you not only how to apply your selves to these
persons; (to the Father through the Son by the Spirit as before,) but also in
and for what, viz. according to the more appropriate works of each person. It Is
true there is no work of the Godhead without it self, but it is common to, and
predicable of every person in the Godhead. But yet (as some will observe) it is
usual in the Scriptures to ascribe the former, middle, and latter part of these
external works with proportion to the distinct order of these undivided agents.
I instance the great work of man's Salvation. Our Salvation may be eminently
considered in three parts or steps, 1. The appointment, 2. The acquisition, 3.
The application of it.

1. The former part, the appointment of man to Salvation, Election which is the
first step is eminently ascribed to the first person, the Father, Ephesians. 1.3.4,
5. Gal. 1.15.16 Who has appointed us to Salvation by his Son, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, 1 These. 5.9. 2 These. 3.13 Elect according to the
foreknowledg of God the Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit, unto
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ says Peter, 1 Pet. 1.2.
The Father then should eminently have the glory of our election, in our prayers
of thanksgiving as the Apostles render it him, ver. 3. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, etc.

2. The middle part, the acquisition of Salvation for man in redemption, is
eminently ascribed to the middle or second person, the Son, who in the fullness
of time was sent forth from the Father, and offered up himself through the
eternal Spirit, that he might obtain eternal redemption for us, and we might
receive the adoption of sons by him, Gal. 4.4, 5. Heb. 9.12, 14. And so in him
we have redemption through his blood, it being the blood, though of an humane
nature, yet not of an humane but of a divine person, the Son of God, And so God
is said to purchase the Church with his own blood, Col. 1.13, 14. Ephesians. 1.6, 7.
Act. 20.28. The Son then should eminently have the glory of our redemption in
our thanksgivings and supplications, as they give it him, Revela. 5.8, 9.

3. The latter part, the application of Salvation to man, which is begun in
Sanctification and Consummate in Glorification, is eminently ascribed to the
last person, to the Holy Ghost, who is therefore called the Spirit of Holiness,
2 These. 3.13. 2 Pet. 1.2. Romans 1.4. The Father predestinateth none to happiness
but through holiness. The Son has purchased happiness for none but such as
partake of holiness. The Spirit, that proceeds from the Father and the Son,
printeth out their holy image upon us. And so we are saved according to the
mercy of the Father, for the merit of the Son, by the washing of regeneration
and renewing of the Holy Ghost, and are now acceptable being sanctified by the
Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. Romans 15.16. The Holy Ghost then should eminently
have the glory of our sanctification, as also of the glorification of our souls
and bodies, which is likewise by and from him. Romans 8.11.

Prop. 6. You may piously direct your thoughts in Prayer, touching those
distinct persons, by a deliberate view of what others have done in their
applications to all those persons, and by doing accordingly. The laudable
examples in Scriptures are left us for imitation in the like circumstances. The
blessing wherewith Paul concludes his Epistle to the Corinthians shall be the
only instance I will produce and prosecute: which will both give to, and
receive light from the last proposition. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the love of the Father, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.
Amen. It is true, that Grace, Love, Communion are not strictly appropriated to
any one of these persons in the Scriptures. Yet the Apostle does observably
apply himself to these destinct persons, with these destinct petitions. And (no
doubt) therefore we also may, to the Father in admiring and in asking of his
love, to the Son in praying of and praying for his grace, to the Holy Ghost in
beseeching of and blessing him for his Communion.

The Fathers love begins our felicity and salvation. There is his love of
intention or benevolence, ordaining the end and us to the end, life and
happiness. There is his love of execution or beneficence, ordering out to us
and bestowing on us the means, that may bring us to this end. Both principal in
giving his Son to redeem us, and his spirit to renew us, 2. And less principal,
his Ordinances, Officers, Word, Rod, etc. let the Father be accepted, admired,
adored in our prayers as to his love. Behold what manner of love the Father
has bestowed upon us, etc. 1 John 3.1. etc. 4.9, 10. etc.

The grace of the Son does (as it were) go on with our Felicity and Salvation,
Grace abounds, superabounds, reigns, through righteousness, unto Eternal Life;
by Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5.20, 21. The Son has procured grace for us,
redeeming us from guilt, reconciling us to God. The Son publishes grace to us,
and is as it were a public treasury of grace for us; that of his fullness we
may receive grace for grace. Come you then in your prayers to the Son for
grace, celebrate the grace that is in and with the Son, and comes to you by the
Son. I say with the Apostle, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your
Spirit. Amen; As he often Romans 16.24. 1 Cor. 16.23. Gal. 6.18. Philem. 25.

The Communion of the Holy Ghost is in consummation of this happy enterprise
begun. He it is that comes and applies all that good which a loving Father has
purposed to us, And all that grace which the everlasting Son has procured for
us, and so gives us fellowship with himself, with the Father and with his Son
Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.1. Ephesians. 3.16, 21. 1 John 1.3. Tit. 3.5, 6. Breathe more
after his Communion than in your prayers: Bless him more for this Communion in
your praises. Let me only remember you that this direction concerns you mostly
(if not only) when your prayers are directed to all three persons, with
distinct and express mention as Paul's here were. It is high time to conclude.

Happy, happy, happy, are those Prayers which are terminated upon these three
holy persons, in one and the same infinitely holy Essence. The enjoyment of
this trinune God by Faith, is the highest happiness of the Church militant. The
enjoyment of this trinune God by sight is the height of blessedness in the
Church Triumphant.

Trinuni Deo sit Gloria.
SIR
THus I have given you my thoughts upon this difficult but divine Subject with
as much clearness as I could, and with more contractness here and there
(happily) than you would. Yet you see to what a length this discourse is drawn
out much beyond the limits of a letter, a Tract I did not intend, nor you (that
I know) expect. If God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost may be glorified by us,
and we edified and built up into them it is enough. To this God and to the word
of his grace I commend you, and crave your improvement of whatsoever interess
your prayers can make with him, for

SIR, Your real Friend and Lover, J. N.


