A DECLARATION OF THE FAITH and ORDER Owned and practiced in the Congregational
Churches IN ENGLAND; Agreed upon and consented unto By their ELDERS and
MESSENGERS IN Their Meeting at the SAVOY, October. 12. 1658.

LONDON Printed for D. L. And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard,
Fleet Street, and Westminster Hall, 1659.

A Preface.
COnfession of the Faith that is in us, when justly called for, is so
indispensable a due all owe to the Glery of the Sovereign GOD, that it is
ranked among the Duties of the first Commandment, such as Prayer is; and
therefore by Paul yoaked with Faith it self, as necessary to salvation: With
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation. Our Lord Christ himself, when he was accused of his
Doctrine, considered simply as a matter of fact by Preaching* refused to
answer; because, as such, it lay upon evidence, and matter of testimony of
others; unto whom therefore he refers himself: But when both the High Priest
and Pilate expostulate his Faith, and what he held himself to be; he without
any demur at all, cheerfully makes Declarat on, That he was the Son of GOD; so
to the High Priest: And that he was a King, and born to be a King; thus to
Pilate. Though upon the uttering of it his life lay at the stake: Which boly
Profession of his is celebrated for our example, 1 Timothy 6. 13.

Confessions, when made by a company of Professors of Christianity jointly
meeting to that end, the most genuine and natural use of such Confessions is,
That under the same form of words, they express the substance of the same
common salvation or unity of their faith; whereby speaking the same things,
they show themselves perfectly joined in the same mind, and in the same
judgment, 1 Cor. 1. 10.

And accordingly such a transaction is to be looked upon but as a meet or fit
medium or means whereby to express that their common faith and salvation* and
no way to be made use of as an imposition upon any: What ever is of force or
constraint in matters of this nature, causes them to degenerate from the name
and nature of Confessions, and turns them from being Confessions of Faith, into
Exactions and Impositions of Faith.

And such common Confessions of the Orthodox Faith, made in simplicity of heart
by any such Body of Christians, with concord among themselves, ought to be
entertained by all others that love the truth as it is in Jesus, with an
answerable rejoicing: For if the unanimous opinions and assertions but in some
few points of Religion, and that when by two Churches, namely, that of
Jerusalem, and the Messengers of Antioch met, assisted by some of the Apostles,
were by the Believers of those times received with so much joy, (as it is said,
They rejoiced for the consolation) much more th s is to be done, when the whole
substance of Faith, and form of wholesome words shall be declared by the
Messengers of a multitude of Churches, though wanting those advantages of
Counsel and Authority of the Apostles which that Assembly had.

Which acceptance is then more specially due, when these shall (to choose)
utter and declare their Faith in the same substance for matter, yea, words, for
the most part, that other Chur^hes and Assembli^s, reputed the most Orthodox,
have done before them: For upon such a correspondency, all may see that Romans
15. 6, 8, 9.
actually accomplished, which the Apostle did but exhort unto, and pray for, in
those two more eminent Churches of the Corinthians and the Romans, (and so in
them for all the Christians of his time) that both Jew and Gentile, that is,
men of different persuasions (as they were) might glorify GOD with one mind
and with one mouth. And truly, the very turning of the Gentiles to the owning
of the same Faith, in the substance of it with the Christian Jew (though
differing in greater points then we do from our Brethren) is presently after
dignified by the Apostle with this style, That it is the Confession of Jesus
Christ himself; not as the Object only, but as the Author and Maker thereof: I
Ver. 9.
will confess to thee (says Christ to God) among the Gentiles. So that in all
such accords, Christ is the great and first Confessor; and we, and all our
Faith uttered (...) Us, are but the Epistles, (as Paul) and Confessions (as
Isaiah there) of their Lord and ours; He, but expressing what is written in his
heart, through their hearts and mouths, to the glory of God the Father: And
shall not we all rejoice herein, when as Christ himself is said to do it upon
this occasion: as it there also follows, I will sing unto thy Name.

Further as the soundness and wholesomness of the matter gives the vigor and
life to such Confessions so the inward freeness, willingness, and readiness of
the Spirits of the Confessors do contribute the beauty and loveliness
thereunto: As it is in Prayer to God, so in Confessions made to men. If two or
three met* do agree, it renders both, (...) the more acceptable. The Spirit of
Christ is in himself too free, great and generous a Spirit to suffer himself to
be used by any humane arm, to whip men into belief he drive^ not but gently
leads into all truth, and persuades men to dwell in the tents of l^k^ precious
Faith; which would lose of its preciousness and value if that sparkle of
freeness sh^ne not in it: The Character of His People, i^ to be a willing
people in the day of his power, (not Man's) in the beauties of holiness which
are the Assemblings of the Saints: one gl^^y of which Assemblings in that first
Church i^ said to have been, They met with one accord; which is there in the
Psalm prophesied of, in the instance of that first Church, for all other that
should succeed.

And as this great Spirit is in himself free* when, and how for, and in whom to
work, so where and when he does work, he carries it with the same freedom, and
is said to be a free Spirit, as he both is, and works in us: And where this
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

Now, as to this Confession of ours, besides, that a conspicuous conjunction of
the particulars mentioned, has appeared therein: There are also four
remarkable Attendants thereon, which added, might perhaps in the eyes of sober
and indifferent Spirits, give the whole of this Transaction a room and rank
amongst other many good and memorable things of this Age; at least all set
together, do cast as clear a gleam and manifestation of God's Power and
Presence, as has appeared in any such kind of Confessions, made by so numerous
a company these later years.

The first, is the Temper, (or distemper rather) of the Times, during which,
these Churches have been gathering, and which they have run through. All do
(out of a general sense) complain that the times have been perilous, or
difficult times (as the Apostle fore told); and that in respect to danger from
seducing spirits, more perilous then the hottest seasons of Perfecution.

We have sa^led through an Aestuation, Fluxes and Refluxes of great varieties
of Spirits, Doctrines, Opinions and Occurrences, and especially in the matter
of Opinions, which have been accompanied in their several seasons, with
powerful persuasions and temptations, to seduce those of our way. It is known,
men have taken the freedom (notwithstanding what Authority has interposed to
the contrary) to vent and vend their own vain and accursed imaginations,
contrary to the great and fixed Truths of the Gospel, insomuch, as take the
whole Round and Circle of Delusi^ns, the Devil has in this small time, ran; it
will be found, that every Truth, of greater or lesser weight, has by one or
other hand, at one time or another, been questioned and called to the Bar
amongst us, yea, and impleaded, under the pretext (which has some degree of
Justice in it) that all should not be bound up to the Traditions of former
times, nor take Religion upon trust.

Whence it has come to pass, that many of the soundest Professors were put
upon a new search and d squisition of such Truths, as they had taken for
granted, and yet had lived upon the comfort of: to the end they might be able
to convince others, and est blish their own hearts against that darkness and
unbelief, that is ready to close with error, or at least t^ doubt of the truth,
when error is speciousl^ presented. And hereupon we do professedly account it
one of the greatest advantages gained out of the Temptations of these Times,
yea the honor of the Saints and Ministers of these Nations, That after they
had sweetly been exercised in, and had improved practical and experimental
Truths, this should be the r forther Lot, to examine and discuss, and indeed,
anew to learn over every Doctrinal Truth, both out of the Scriptures, and also
with a fresh taste thereof in their own hearts; which is no other then what the
Apostle exhorts to, Try all things, bold fast that which is good. Conversion
unto God at first, what is it else then a savory and aff^ct^onate application,
and the bring^ng home to the heart with spiritual light and life, all truths
that are necessary to salvation, together with other lesser Truths? All which
we had before conversion taken in but notionally from common Education and
Tradition.

Now that after this first gust those who have bin thus converted should be put
upon a new probation and search out of the Scriptures, not only of all
principles This persuasion comes not of him that calls you Gal. 5. 8.
explicitly ingredients to Conversion; (unto which the Apostle refers the
Galatians when they had diverted from them) but of all other superstructures as
well as fundamentals; and together therewith, anew to experiment the power and
sweetness of all these in their own souls: What is this but tried Faith indeed?
and equivalent to a new conversion unto the truth? An Anchor that is proved to
be sure and steadfast, that will certainly hold in all contrary storms. This was
the eminent seal and commendation which those holy Apostles that lived and
wrote last (Peter, John, and Jude in their Epistles) did set and give to the
Christians of the latter part of those primitive times. And besides, it is
clear and evident by all the other Epistles, from first to last, that it cost
the Apostles as much, and far more care and pains to preserve them they had
converted, in the truth, then they had taken to turn them thereunto at first:
And it 1 Pet. 1. 5.
is in it self as great a work and instance of the power of God, that keeps,
yea, guards us through faith unto salvation.

Secondly, let this be added, (or superadded rather) to give full weight and
measure, even to running over, that we have all along this season, held forth
(though quarrelled with for it by our brethren) this great principle of these
times, That amongst all Christian States and Churches, there ought to be
vouchsafed a forbearance and mutual indulgence unto Saints of all persuasions,
that keep unto, and hold fast the necessary foundations of faith and holiness,
in all other matters extrafundamental, whether of Faith or Order.

This to have been our constant principle, we are not ashamed to confess to the
whole Christian world. Wherein yet we desire we may be understood, not as if in
the abstract we stood indifferent to falsehood or truth, or were careless
whether faith or error, in any Truths but fundamental, did obtain or not, so we
had our liberty in our petty and smaller differences; or as if to make sure of
that, we had cut out this wide cloak for it: No, we profess that the whole,
and every particle of that Faith delivered to the Saints, (the substance of
which we have according to our light here professed) is, as to the propagation
and furtherance of it by all Gospel-means, as precious to us as our lives; or
what can be supposed dear to us; and in our sphere we have endeavored to
promote them accordingly: But yet withal, we have and do contend, (and if we
had all the power which any, or all of our brethren of differing opinions have
desired to have over us, or others, we should freely grant it unto them all) we
have and do contend for this, That in the concrete, the persons of all such
gracious Saints, they and their errors, as they are in them, when they are but
such errors as do and may stand with communion with Christ, though they should
not repent of them, as not being convinced of them to the end of their days;
that those, with their errors (that are purely spiritual, and entrench and
overthrow not civil societies,) as concrete with their persons, should for
Christ's sake be born withal by all Christians in the world; and they
notwithstanding be permitted to enjoy all Ordinances and spiritual Privileges
according to their light, as freely as any other of their brethren that pretend
to the greatest Orthodoxity; as having as equal, and as fair a right in and
unto Christ, and all the holy things of Christ, that any other can challenge to
themselves.

And this does afford a full and invincible testimony on our behalf, in that
whiles we have so earnestly contended for this just liberty of Saints in all
the Churches of Christ, we our selves have no need of it: that is, as to the
matter of the profession of Faith which we have maintained together with
others: and of this, this subsequent Confession of Faith gives sufficient
evidence. So as we have the confidence in Christ, to utter in the words of
those two great Apostles, That we have stood fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free (in the behalf of others, rather then our selves) and
having been free, have not made use of our liberty for a cloak of error or
maliciousness in our selves. And yet, lo, whereas from the beginning of the
rearing of these Churches, that of the Apostle has been (by some) prophesied
of us, and applied to us, That whiles we promised (unto others) liberty, we our
selves would become servants of corruption, and be brought in bondage to all
sorts of fancies and imaginations; yet the whole world may now see after the
experience of many years ran-through (and it is manifest by this Confession)
that the great and gracious God has not only kept us in that common unity of
the Faith and Knowledge of the Son of God, which the who^e Community of Saints
have and shall in their Generations come unto, but also in the same Truths,
both small and great, that are built thereupon, that any other of the best and
more pure Reformed Churches in their best times (which were their first times)
have arrived unto: This Confession withal holding forth a professed opposition
unto the common errors and heresies of these times.

These two considerations have been taken from the seasons we have gone through.

Thirdly, let the space of time it self, or days, wherein from first to last
the whole of this Confession was framed and consented to by the whole of us, be
duly considered by sober and ingenuous spirits: the whole of days in which we
had meetings about it, (set aside the two Lords days and the first days
meeting, in which we considered and debated what to pitch upon) were but 11
days, part of which also was spent by some of us in Prayer, others in
consulting; and in the end all agreeing. We mention this small circumstance but
to this end, (which still adds unto the former) That it gives demonstration,
not of our freeness and willingness only, but of our readiness and
preparedness unto so great a work; which otherwise, and in other Assemblies,
has ordinarily taken up long and great debates, as in such a variety of
matters of such concernment, may well be supposed to fall out. And this is no
other then what the Apostle Peter 1 Pet. 3. 15. 2 Cor. 8.
exhorts unto, Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a
reason, or account of the hope that is in you. The Apostle Paul says of the
spiritual Truths of the Gospel, That God has prepared them for those that love
him. The inward and innate constitution of the new Creature being in it self
such as is suited to all those Truths, as congenial thereunto: But although
there be this mutual adaptness between these two, yet such is the mixture of
ignorance, darkness and unbelief, carnal reason* pre-occupation of judgment,
interest of parties, wantonness in opinion, proud adhering to our own
persuasions, and perverse oppositions and av^rsness to agree with others, and a
multitude of such like distempers common to believing man: All which are not
only mixed with, but at times (especially in such times as have passed over
our heads) are ready to overcloud our judgments, and to cause our eyes to be
double, and sometimes prevail as well as lusts, and do bias our wills and
affections: And such is their mixture, that although there may be existent an
habitual preparedness in men's spirits, yet not always a present readiness to be
found, specially not in such a various multitude of men, to make a solemn and
deliberate profession of all truths, it being as great a work to find the
spirits of the just (perhaps the best of Saints) ready for every truth, as to
be prepared to every good work.

It is therefore to be looked at, as a great and special work of the holy
Ghost, that so numerous a company of Ministers, and other principal brethren,
should so readily, speedily, and jointly give up themselves unto such a whole
Body of Truths that are after godliness.

This argues they had not their faith to seek; but, as is said of Ezra, that
they were ready Scribes, and (as Christ) instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven,
being as the good householders of so many families of Christ, b^nging forth of
their store and treasury New and Old. It shows these truths had been familiar
to them, and they acquainted with them, as with their daily food and provision,
(as Christ's allusion there insinuates): In a word, that so they had preached,
and that so their people had believed, as the Apostle speaks upon one like
particular occasion. And the Apostle Paul considers (in cases of this nature)
the suddenness o^ length of the time, either one way or the other; whether it
were in men's forsaking or Gal. 1. 6. Heb. 5. 12.
learning of the truth. Thus the suddenness in the Galatians ca^e in leaving
the truth* he makes a wonder of it: I marvel that you are SO SOON (that is, in
so short a time) removed from the true Gospel unto another. Again on the
contrary, in the Hebrews he aggravates their backwards ess, That when for the
time you ought to be Teachers, you had need that one teach you the very first
principles of the Oracles of God. The Parallel contrary to both these having
fallen our in this transaction, may have some ingredient and weight with
ingenuous spirits in its kind, according to the proportion is put upon either
of these forementioned in their adverse kind, and obtain the like special
observation.

This accord of ours has fallen out without having held any correspondency
together, or prepared consultation, by which we might come to be advised of one
another minds. We allege not this as a matter of commendation in us; no, we
acknowledge it to have been a great neglect: And accordingly one of the first
proposals for union amongst us was, That there might be a constant
correspondence held among the Churches for counsel and mutual edification, so
for time to come to prevent the like omission.

We confess that from the first, every, or at least the generality of our
Churches, have been in a manner like so many Ships (though holding forth the
same general colors) lancht singly, and sailing apart and alone in the vast
Ocean of these tumultuating times, and they exposed to every wind of Doctrine,
under no other conduct then the Word and Spirit, and their particular Elders
and principal Brethren, without Associations among our selves, or so much as
holding out common lights to others, whereby to know where we were.

But yet whilst we thus confess to our own shame this neglect, let all
acknowledge, that God has ordered it for his high and greater glory, in that
his singular care and power should have so warcht over each of these, as that
all should be found to have steered their course by the same Chart, and to have
been bound for one and the same Port, and that upon this general search now
made, that the same holy and blessed Truths of all sorts, which are current and
warrantable amongst all the other Churches of Christ in the world, should be
found to be our Lading.

The whole, and every of these things when put together, do cause us (whatever
men of prejudiced and opposite spirits may find out to slight them) with a holy
admiration, to say, That this is no other then the Lords doing; and which we
with thansgiving do take from his hand as a special token upon us for good,
and does show that God is faithful and upright toward those that are planted
in his house: And that as the Faith was but once for all, and intentionally
first delivered unto the Saints; so the Saints, when not abiding scattered, but
gathered under their respective Pastors according to Gods heart into an house,
and Churches unto the living God, such together are, as Paul forespake it, the
most steady and firm pillar and seat of Truth that God has any where appointed
to himself on earth, where his truth is best conserved, and publicly held
forth; there being in such Assemblies weekly a rich dwelling of the Word
amongst them, that is, a daily open house kept by the means of those good
Householders, their Teachers and other Instructers respectively appropriated to
them, whom Christ in the virtue of his Ascension, continues to give as gifts to
his people, himself dwelling amongst them; to the end that by this, as the most
sure standing permanent means, the Saints might be perfected* till we all (even
all the Saints in present and future ages) do come by this constant and daily
Ordinance of his unto the unity of the Faith and Knowledge of the Ephesians. 4. 12.
Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ (which though growing on by parts and piecemeal* will yet appear
complete, when that great and general Assembly 14.
shall be gathered, then when this world is ended, and these dispensations have
had their fullness and period) and so that from henceforth (such a provision
being made for us) we be no more children tossed too and fro, and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine.

And finally, this does give a fresh and recent demonstration, that the great
Apostle and High Priest of our profession is indeed ascended into heaven, and
continues there with power and care, faithful as a son over his own house,
whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the
hope firm unto the end: and shows that he will, as he has promised, be with
his own Institutions to the end of the world.

It is true, that many sad miscarriages, divisions, breaches, fallings off from
holy Ordinances of God, have along this time of tentation, (especially in the
Heb. 3. 6.
beginning of it) been found in some of our Churches; and no wonder, if what
has been said be fully considered: Many reasons might further be given hereof,
that would be a sufficient Apology, without the help of a retortion upon other
Churches (that promised themselves peace) how that more destroying ruptures
have befallen them, and that in a wider sphere and compass; which though it
should not justify us, yet may serve to stop others mouths.

Let Rome glory of the peace in, and obedience of her Children, against the
Reformed Churches for their divisions that occurred (especially in the first
rearing of them) whilst we all know the causes of their dull and stupid peace
to have been carnal interests, worldly correspondencies, and coalitions,
strengthened by gratifications of all sorts of men by that Religion, the
principles of blind Devotion, Traditional Faith, Ecclesiastical Tyranny, by
which she keeps her Children in bondage to this day. We are also certain, that
the very same prejudices that from hence they would cast upon the Reformed (if
they were just) do lie as f^lly against those pure Churches raised up by the
Apostles themselves in those first t^mes: for as we have heard of their
patience, sufferings, consolations, and the transcending gifts powered out, and
graces shining in them, so we have heard complaints of their divisions too, of
the forsakings of their Assemblies, Heb. 10. 22.
as the custom or manner of SOME was (which later were in that respect felones
de se, and needed no other delivering up to Satan as their punishment, then
what they executed upon themselves.) We read of the shipwreck also of Faith and
a good Conscience, and overthrowings of the faith of SOME; and still but of
some* not all, nor the most: which is one piece of an Apology the Apostle
again and again inserts to future ages, and through mercy we have the same to
make.

And truly we take the confidence professedly to say, that these tentations
common to the purest Churches of Saints separated from the mixture of the
world, though they grieve us (for who is offended, and we burn not?) yet they
do not at all stumble us, as to the truth of our way, had they been many more:
We say it again, these stumble us no more (as to that point) then it does
offend us against the power of Religion it self, to have seen, and to see daily
in particular persons called out and separated from the world by an effectual
work of conversion, that they for a while do suffer under disquietments,
vexations, turmoils, unsettlements of spirit, that they are tossed with
tempests and horrid tentations, such as they had not in their former estate,
whilst they walked according to the course of this world: For Peter has
sufficiently instructed us whose business it is to raise such storms, even the
Devil's; and also whose design it is, that after they have suffered a while,
thereby they shall be settled, perfected, stablished, that have so suffered,
even the God of all Grace. And look what course of dispensation God holds to
Saints personally, he does the like to bodies of Saints in Churches, and the
Devil the same for his part too: And that consolatory Maxim of the Apostle, God
shall tread down Satan under your feet shortly, which Paul utteteth concerning
the Church of Rome, shows how both God and Satan have this very hand therein;
for he speaks that very thing in reference unto their divisions, as the
coherence clearly manifests; and so you have both designs expressed at once.

Yea, we are not a little induced to think, that the divisions, breaches, etc.
of those p^imitive Churches would not have been so frequent among the people
themselves, and not the Elders only, had not the freedom, liberties and rights
of the Members (the Brethren, we mean) been stated and exercised in those
Churches, the same which we maintain and contend for to be in ours.

Yea (which perhaps may seem more strange to many) had not those Churches been
constituted of members enlightened further then with notional and traditional
knowledge, by a new and more powerful light of the Holy Ghost, wherein they
had been made partakers of the holy Ghost, and the heavenly gift, and their
hearts had tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of the world to come*
and of such Members at lowest, there had not fallen out those kinds of
divisions among them.

For Experience has shown, that the common sort of mere Doctrinal Professors
(such as the most are now a days) whose highest elevation is but freedom from
moral scandal, joined with devotion to Christ through mere Education, such as
in many Turks is found toward Mahomet, that these finding and feeling
themselves not much concerned in the active part of Religion, so they may have
the honor (especially upon a Reformation of a new Refinement) that themselves
are approved Members, admitted to the Lords Supper, and their Children to the
Ordinance of Baptism; they regard not other matters (as Gallio did not) but do
easily and readily give up themselves unto their Guides, being like dead fishes
carried with the commonstream; whereas those that have a further renewed Light
by a work of the Holy Ghost, whether saving or temporary, are upon the quite
contrary grounds apt to be bufie about, and inquisitive into, what they are to
receive and practice, or wherein their Consciences are professedly concerned
and involved: And thereupon they take the freedom to examine and try the
spirits, whether of God or no: And from hence are more apt to dissatisfaction,
and from thence to run into division, and many of such proving to be enlightened
but with a temporary, not saving Faith (who have such a work of the Spirit upon
them, and profession in them, as will and does approve it self to the judgment
of Saints, and ought to be so judged, until they be otherwise discovered) who
at long-run, prove hypocrites, through indulgence unto Lusts, and then out of
their Lusts persist to hold up these divisions unto breach of, or departings
from, Churches, and the Ordinances of God, and God is even with them for it,
they waxing worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived; and even many of
those that are sincere, through a mixture of darkness and erroneousness in
their Judgments, are for a season apt out of Conscience to be led away with the
error of others, which lie in wait to deceive.

Insomuch as the Apostle upon the example of those first times, foreseeing
also the like events in following generations upon the like causes, has been
bold to set this down as a ruled Case, that likewise in other Churches so
constituted and de facto empriviledged as that of the Church of Corinth was
(which single Church, in the Sacred Records about it, is the compleatest Mirror
of Church-Constitution, Order, and Government, and Events thereupon ensuing, of
any one Church whatever that we have story of) his Maxim is, There must be also
divisions amongst you; he setly inserts an [ALSO] in the case, as that which
had been in his own observation, and that which would be (...) the fate of
other Churches like thereunto, so prophefieth he: And he speaks this as
peremptorily, as he does elsewhere in that other, We must through many
tribulations enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Yea, and that all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution: There is a [MUST] upon both
alike; and we bless God, that we have run through both, and do say, and we say
no more That as it was then, so it is now, in both respects.

However, such has been the powerful hand of God's Providence in these, which
have been the worst of our Trials, That out of an approved Experience and
Observation of the Issue, we are able to add that other part of the Apostles
Prediction, That therefore such rents must be, that they which are approved may
be made manifest among you; which holy issue God (as having aimed at it
therein) does frequently and certainly bring about in Churches, as he does
bring upon them that other fate of division. Let them therefore look untoit,
that are the Authors of such disturbances, as the Apostle warns, Gal 5. 10.
The experiment is this, That we have seen, and do daily see, that multitudes of
holy and precious souls, and (in the Holy Ghosts word) approved Saints, have
been, and are the more rooted and grounded by means of these shakings, and do
continue to cleave the faster to Christ* and the purity of hi^ Ordinances, and
value them the more by this cost God has put them to for the enjoying of them,
Who having been planted in the House of the Lord, have flourished in the Courts
of our God, in these evil times, to new that the Lord is upright. And this
experimented event from out of such divisions, has more confirmed us, and is a
louder Apology for us, then all that our opposites are able from our breaches
to allege to prejudice us.

We will add a few words for conclusion, and give a more particular account of
this our Declaration. In drawing up this Confession of Faith, we have had
before us the Articles of Religion, approved and passed by both Houses of
Parliament, after advice had with an Assembly of Divines, called together by
them for June 20. 1648.
that purpose. To which Confession, for the substance of it, we fully assent, as
do our Brethren of New England, and the Churches also of Scotland, as each in
their general Synods have testified.

A few things we have added for obviating some erroneous Opinions, that have
been more broadly and boldly here of late maintained by the Asserters, then in
former times; and made other additions and alterations in method, here and
there, and some clearer Explanations, as we found occasion.

We have endeavored throughout, to hold to such Truths in this our Confession,
as are more properly termed matters of Faith; and what is of Churchorder, we
dispose in certain Propositions by it self. To this course we are led by the
Example of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, observing what was established,
and what omitted by them in that Confession the Assembly presented to them. Who
thought it not convenient to have matters of Discipline and Church Government
put into a Confession of Faith, especially such particulars thereof, as then
were, and still are controverted and under dispute by men Orthodox and sound in
Faith. The 30th cap therefore of that Confession, as it was presented to them
by the Assembly, which is of Church Censures, their tlse, Kinds, and in whom
placed: As also cap. 31. of Synods and Councels, by whom to be called, of what
force in their Decrees and Determinations. And the 4th Paragr. of the 20th cap.
which determines what Opinions and Practices disturb the peace of the Church,
and how such Disturbers ought to be proceeded against by the Censures of the
Church, and punished by the Civil Magistrate* Also a great part of the 24th
cap. of Marriage and Divorce. These were such doubtful assertions, and so
unsuitable to a Confession of Faith, as the Honorable Houses in their great
Wisdom thought fit to lay them aside: There being nothing that tends more to
heighten Dissentions among Brethren, then to determine and adopt the matter of
their difference, under so high a Title, as to be an Article of our Faith: So
that there are two whole Chapters, and some Paragraphs in other Chapters in
their Confession, that we have upon this account omitted; and the rather do we
give this notice, because that Copy of the Aug. 1647.
Parl. followed by us, is in few men's hands; the other as it came from the
Assembly, being approved of in Scotland, was printed and hastened into the
world, before the Parl, had declared their Resolutions about it; which was not
til June 20. 1648. and yet has been, and continues to be the Copy
(ordinarily) only sold, printed, and reprinted for these 11 years.

After the 19th cap. of the Law, we have added a cap. of the Gospel, it being a
Title that may not well be omitted in a Confession of Faith: In which Chapter,
what is dispersed, and by intimation in the Assemblies Confession, with some
little addition, is here brought together, and more fully, under one head.

That there are not Scriptures annexed, as in some Confessions (though in
diverse others it is otherwise) we give the same account as did the Reverend
Assembly in the same case: which was this; The Confession being large, and
Session 786.
so framed, as to meet with the common Errors, if the Scriptures should have
been alleged with any clearness, and by showing where the strength of the
proof lies, it would have required a Volume.

We say further, it being our utmoand;st end in this (as it is indeed of a
Confession) humbly to give an account what we hold and assert in these matters;
that others, especially the Churches of Christ may judge of us accordingly:
This we aimed at, and not so much to instruct others, or convince gainsayers.
These are the proper works of other Institutions of Christ, and are to be done
in the strength of express Scripture. A Confession is an Ordinance of another
nature.

What we have laid down and asserted about Churches and their Government, we
humbly conceive to be the Order which Christ himself has appointed to be
observed, we have endeavored to follow Scripture light; and those also that
went before us according to that Rule, desirous of nearest uniformity with
Reforming-Churches, as with our Brethren in New England, so with others, that
differ from them and Us.

The Models and Platforms of this subject laid down by learned men, and
practiced by Churches, are various: We do not judge it brotherly, or grateful,
to insist upon comparisons, as some have done; but this Experience teaches,
That the variety, and possibly the Disputes and Emulations arising thence, have
much strengthened, if not fixed, this unhappy persuasion in the minds of some
learned and good men, namely, That there is no settled Order laid down in
Scripture; but it is left to the Prudence of the Christian Magistrate, to
compose or make choice of such a Form as is most suitable and consistent with
their Civil-Government. Where this Opinion is entertained in the persuasion of
Governors, there, Churches asserting their Powet and Order to be jure divino,
and the appointment of Jesus Christ, can have no better nor more honorable
Entertainment, then a Toleration or Permission.

Yet herein there is this remarkable advantage to all parties that differ,
about what in Government is of Christ's appointment; in that such Magistrates
have a far greater latitude in conscience, to tolerate and permit the several
forms of each so bound up in their persuasion, then they have to submit unto
what the Magistrate shall impose: And thereupon the Magistrate exercising an
indulgency and forbearance, with protection and encouragement to the people of
God, so differing from him, and amongst themselves: Does therein discharge as
great a faithfulness to Christ, and love to his people, as can any way be
supposed and expected from any Christian Magistrate, of what persuasion soever
he is. And where this clemency from Governors is showed to any sort of persons,
or Churches of Christ, upon such a principle, it will in equity produce this
just effect, That all that so differ from him, and amongst themselves, standing
in equal and alike difference from the principle of such a Magistrate, he is
equally free to give a like liberty to them, one as well as the other.

This faithfulness in our Governors we do with thankfulness to God
acknowledge, and to their everlasting honor, which appeared much in the late
Reformation. The Hierarchy, Common Prayer Book, and all other things grievous
to God's People, being removed, they made choice of an Assembly of learned men,
to advise what Government and Order is meet to be established in the room of
these things; and because it was known there were different opinions (as always
has been among Godly men) about forms of Church Government, there was by the
Ordinance first sent forth to call an Assembly, not only a choice made of
persons of several persuasions, to sit as Members there, but liberty given, to
a lesser number, if dissenting, to report their Judgments and Reasons, as well
and as freely as the major part.

Hereupon the Honorable House of Commons (an Indulgence we hope will never be
forgotten) finding by Papers received from them, that the Members of the
Assembly were not like to compose differences amongst themselves, so as to join
in the same Rule for Church Government, did order further as follows: That a
Committee of Lords and Commons, etc. do take into consideration the differences
of the Opinions in the Assembly of Divines in point of Church Government, and
to endeavor a union if it be possible; and in case that cannot be done, to
endeavor the finding out some may, how far tender consciences, who cannot in
all things submit to the same Rule which shall be established, may be born with
according to the Word, and as may stand with the Public Peace.

By all which it is evident, the Parliament purposed not to establish the Rule
of Church Government with such rigor, as might not permit and bear with a
practice different from what they had established: In persons and Churches of
different principles, if occasion were. And this Christian Clemency and
indulgence in our Governors, has been the foundation of that Freedom and
Liberty, in the managing of Church Affairs, which our Brethren, as well as W E,
that differ from them, do now, and have many years enjoyed.

The Honorable Houses by several Ordinances of Parliament after much
consultation, having settled Rules for Church Government, and such an
Eccleasistical Ordinance of March 14 1645.
Order as they judged would best joint with the Laws and Government of the
Kingdom, did publish them, requiring the practice hereof throughout the Nation;
and in particular, by the Min. of the Pr. of Lon. But (upon the former reason,
or the like charitable consideration) these Rules were not imposed by them
under any Penalty, or rigorous inforcement, though frequently urged thereunto
by some.

Our Reverend Brethren of the Province of London, having considered of these
Ordinances, and the Church Government laid down in them, declared their
Considerations and cautions from Sion Coll. Jun. 19. 1646.
Opinions to be, That there is not a complete Rule in those Ordinances; also,
that there are many necessary things not yet established, and some things
wherein their consciences are not so fully satisfied. These Brethren, in the
same Paper, have published also their joint Resolution to practice in all
things according to the Rule of the Word, and according to these Ordinances, so
far as they conceive them correspond to it, and in so doing, they trust they
shall not grieve the Spirit of the truly godly, nor give any just occasion to
them that are contrary minded, to blame their proceedings.

We humbly conceive that (WE being dissatisfied in these things as our
Brethren) the like liberty was intended by the Honorable Houses and may be
taken by us of the Congregational way (without blame or grief to the spirits of
those Brethren at least) to resolve, or rather to continue in the same
Resolution and Practice in these matters, which indeed were our practices in
times of greatest opposition, and before this Reformation was began.

And as our Brethren the Ministers of London, drew up and published their
opinions and apprehensions about Church Government into an entire System; so we
now give the like public account of our Consciences, and the Rules by which
we have constantly practiced hitherto; which we have here drawn up, and do
present. Whereby it will appear how much, or how little we differ in these
things from our Presbyterian Brethren.

And we trust there is no just cause why any man, either for our differing from
the present settlement, it being out of Conscience, and not out of contempt, or
our differences one from another, being not wilful, should charge either of us
with that odious reproach of Schism. And indeed, if not for our d ffering from
Jus divinum Min. pub. by the Provost of London, in the Preface.
the State settlement, much less because we differ from our Brethren, our d
fferences being in some lesser things, and circumstances only, as themselves
acknowledge. And let it be further considered, that we have not broken from
them or their Order by these differences (but rather they from us) and in that
respect we less deserve their censure; our practice being no other then what it
was in our breaking from Episcopacy, and long before Presbytery, or any such
form as now they are in, was taken up by them; and we will not say how probable
it is, that the yoke of Episcopacy had been upon our neck to this day, if some
such way (as formerly, and now is, and has been termed Schism) had not with
much suffering bin then practiced, and since continued in.

For Novelty wherewith we are likewise both charged by the Enemies of both, it
is true, in respect of the public and open Profession, either of Presbytery
or Independency, this Nation has been a stranger to each way, it is possible,
ever since it has been Christian; though for our s lves we are able to trace
the footsteps of an Independent Congregational way in the ancientest customs
of the Churches; as also in the Writings of our soundest Protestant Divines,
and (that which we are much satified in) a full concurrence throughout in all
the substantial parts of Church Government, with our Reverend Brethren the old
Puritan Non-conformists* who being instant in Prayer and much sufferings,
prevailed Puritanis. Ang. by Dr. Aims, near 50 years since, as the Opinions of
Whitehead, Gilbe, Fox, Dearing, Greenbam, Cartwright, Venner, Fulk, Whitaker,
Rainold, Perkins, etc.
with the Lord, and we reap with joy, what they sowed in tears. Our Brethren
also that are for Presbyterial Subordinations, profess what is of weight
against Novelty for their way.

And now therefore seeing the Lord, in whose hand is the heart of Princes, has
put into the hearts of our Governors to tolerate and permit (as they have done
many years) persons of each persuasion, to enjoy their Consciences, though
neither come up to the Rule established by Authority: And that which is more,
to give us both Protection, and the same encouragement, that the most devoted
Conformists in those former Superstitious Times enjoyed; yea, and by a public
Law to estalish this Liberty for time to come; and yet further, in the midst of
our fears, to set over us a Prince that owns this Establishment, and cordially
resolves to secure our Churches in the enjoyment of these Liberties, if we
abuse them not to the disturbance of the Civil Peace.

This should be a very great engagement upon the hearts of all, though of
different persuasions, to endeavor our utmost, jointly to promove the honor
and prosperity of such a Government and Governors by whatsoever means, which
in our Callings as Ministers of the Gospel, and as Churches of Jesus Christ the
Prince of Peace, we are any way able to do; as also to be peaceably disposed
one toward another, and with mutual toleration to love as brethren,
notwithstanding such differences: remembering, as it is very equal we should, the
differences that are between Presbyterians and Independents, being differences
between fellow servants, and neither of them having authority given from God or
Man, to impose their Opinions, one more then the other. That our Governors
after so solemn an establishment, should thus bear with us both, in our greater
differences from their Rule: and after this, for any of us to take a
fellow servants by the throat, upon the account of a lesser reckoning, and
nothing due to him upon it, is to forget, at least not to exercise, that
compassion and tenderness we have found, where we had less ground to challenge
or expect it.

Our Prayer unto God is, That whereto we have already attained, we all may walk
by the same rule, and that wherein we are otherwise minded, God would reveal it
to us in his due time.

A DECLARATION OF THE FAITH and ORDER Owned and practiced in the Congregational
Churches IN ENGLAND.
CHAP. I. Of the Holy Scripture.
ALthough the Light of Nature, and the Works of Creation and Providence, do so
far manifest the Goodness, Wisdom, and Power of God, as to leave men
unexcusable; yet are they not sufficient to give that knowledge of God and of
his Will, which is necessary unto salvation: Therefore it pleased the Lord at
sundry times, and in diverse manners to reveal Himself, and to declare that his
Will unto his Church; and afterward for the better preserving and propagating
of the truth, and for the more sure establishment and comfort of the Church
against the corruption of the flesh, and the malice of Satan and of the World,
to commit the same wholly unto writing: which makes the holy Scripture to be
most necessary; those former ways of Gods revealing his Will unto his people,
being now ceased.

II. Under the name of holy Scripture, or the Word of God written, are now
contained all the Books of the Old and New Testament; which are these:

Of the Old Testament.Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua,
Judges, Ruth, 1 Samuel, 2 Samuel, 1 Kings, 2 Kings, 1 Chronicles, 2 Chronicles,
Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, The Song of Songs,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah,
Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi.

Of the New Testament.Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, The Acts of the Apostles, Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians,
Phillippians, Colossians, 1 Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians, 1 To Timothy, 2 To
Timothy, To Titus, To Philemon, The Epistle to the Hebrews, The Epistle of
James, The first and second Epistles of Peter, The first, second and third
Epistles of John, The Epistle of Jude, The Revelation.

All which are given by the inspiration of God to be the Rule of Faith and Life.

III. The Books commonly called Apocrypha, not being of Divine inspiration, are
no part of the Canon of the Scripture; and therefore are of no authority in the
Church of God, nor to be any otherwise approved or made use of, then other
humane writings.

IV. The Authority of the holy Scripture, for which it ought to be believed and
obeyed, depends not upon the Testimony of any man or Church, but wholly upon
God (who is Truth it self) the Author thereof; and therefore it is to be
received, because it is the Word of God.

V. We may be moved, and induced by the Testimony of the Church, to an high and
reverent esteem of the holy Scripture. And the heavenliness of the Matter, the
efficacy of the Doctrine, the Majesty of the Style, the consent of all the
parts, the scope of the whole, (which is, to give all glory to God) the full
discovery it makes of the only way of Man's Salvation, the many other
incomparable excellencies, and the entire perfection thereof, are Arguments
whereby it does abundantly evidence it self to be the Word of God; Yet
notwithstanding, our full persuasion and assurance of the infallible Truth and
Divine Authority thereof, is from the inward work of the holy Spirit, bearing
witness by and with the Word in our hearts.

VI. The whole Counsel of God concerning all things necessary for his own
Glory, man's Salvation, Faith, and Life, is either expressly set down in
Scripture, or by good and necessary consequence may be deduced from Scripture;
unto which nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new Revelations of
the Spirit, or Traditions of men. Nevertheless we acknowledge the inward
illumination of the spirit of God to be necessary for the saving understanding
of such things as are revealed in the Word: And that there are some
circumstances concerning the Worship of God and Government of the Church,
common to humane actions and Societies, which are to be ordered by the Light of
Nature and Christian prudence, according to the general Rules of the Word,
which are always to be observed.

VII. All things in Scripture are not alike plain in themselves, nor alike
clear unto all: yet those things which are necessary to be known, believed, and
observed for Salvation, are so clearly propounded and opened in some place of
Scripture or other, that not only the learned, but the unlearned, in a due use
of the ordinary means, may attain unto a sufficient understanding of them.

VIII. The Old Testament in Hebrew (which was the Native Language of the people
of God of old) and the New Testament in Greek (which at the time of writing of
it was most generally known to the Nations) being immediately inspired by God,
and by his singular care and providence kept pure in all Ages, are therefore
Authentical; so as in all Controversies of Religion, the Church is finally to
appeal unto them. But because these Original Tongues are not known to all the
people of God, who have right unto, and interest in the Scriptures, and are
commanded in the fear of God to read and search them; therefore they are to be
translated into the Vulgar language of every Nation unto which they come, that
the Word of God dwelling plentifully in all, they may worship him in an
acceptable manner, and through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have
hope.

IX. The infallible Rule of Interpretation of Scripture, is the Scripture it
self. And therefore when there is a question about the true and full sense of
any Scripture (which is not manifold, but one) it must be searched and known by
other places, that speak more clearly.

X. The Supreme Judge by which all controversies of Religion are to be
determined, and all Decrees of Councils, Opinions of ancient Writers, Doctrines
of men and private Spirits, are to be examined, and in whose Sentence we are to
rest, can be no other, but the holy Scripture delivered by the Spirit; into
which Scripture so delivered, our Faith is finally resolved.

CHAP. II. Of God and of the Holy Trinity.
THere is but one only living and true God; who is infinite in Being and
Perfection* a most pure Spirit, invisible, without body, parts, or passions,
immutable, immense, eternal, incomprehensible, almighty, most wise, most holy,
most free, most absolute, working all things according to the Counsel of his
own immutable, and most righteous Will, for his own Glory, most loving,
gracious, merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin, the rewarder of them that diligently seek him;
and withal, most just and terrible in his Judgments, hating all sin, and who
will by no means clear the guilty.

II. God has all Life, Glory, Goodness, Blessedness, in, and of himself; and
is alone in, and unto himself, All-sufficient, not standing in need of any
Creatures, which he has made, nor deriving any glory from them, but only
manifesting his own glory in, by, unto, and upon them: He is the alone Fountain
of all Being, of whom, through whom, and to whom are all things; and has most
Sovereign dominion over them, to do by them, for them, or upon them, whatsoever
himself pleases: In his sight all things are open and manifest, his Knowledge
is infinite, infallible, and independent upon the creature, so as nothing is to
him contingent or uncertain: He is most holy in all his Counsels, in all his
Works, and in all his Commands. To him is due from Angels and Men, and every
other Creature, whatsoever Worship, Service or Obedience, as Creatures, they
owe unto the Creator, and whatever he is further pleased to require of them.

III. In the Unity of the Godhead there be three Persons, of one Substance,
Power, and Eternity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost: The
Father is of none, neither begotten, nor proceeding, The Son is eternally
begotten of the Father; The Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and
the Son. Which Doctrine of the Trinity is the foundation of all our Communion
with God, and comfortable Dependence upon him.

CHAP. III. Of Gods Eternal Decree.
GOD from all eternity did by the most wise and holy Counsel of his own Will,
freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass: Yet so, as thereby
neither is God the Author of sin, nor is violence offered to the will of the
Creatures, nor is the liberty or contingency of second Causes taken away, but
rather established.

II. Although God knows whatsoever may or can come to pass upon all supposed
Conditions, yet has he not decreed any thing, because he foresaw it as future,
or as that which would come to pass upon such Conditions.

III. By the Decree of God for the manifestation of his Glory, some Men and
Angels are predestined unto everlasting Life, and others foreordained to
everlasting Death.

IV. These Angels and Men thus predestined, and foreordained, are
particularly and unchangeably designed; and their number is so certain and
definite, that it cannot be either increased or diminished.

V. Those of mankind that are predestined unto Life, God, before the
foundation of the world was laid, according to his eternal and immutable
purpose, and the secret counsel and good pleasure of his Will, has chosen in
Christ unto everlasting Glory, out of his mere free Grace and Love, without any
sore-sight of Faith or good Works, or perseverance in either of them, or any
other thing in the Creature, as Conditions or Causes moving him thereunto, and
all to the praise of his glorious Grace.

VI. As God has appointed the Elect unto Glory, so has he by the eternal and
most free purpose of his Will foreordained all the means thereunto: Wherefore
they who are elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed by Christ, are
effectually called unto Faith in Christ by his Spirit working in due season,
are justified, adopted, sanctified, and kept by his power, through Faith, unto
salvation. Neither are any other redeemed by Christ, or effectually called,
justified, adopted, sanctified, and saved, but the Elect only.

VII. The rest of mankind God was pleased, according to the unsearchable
Counsel of his own Will, whereby he extends or withholdeth mercy, as he
pleases, for the glory of his sovereign power over his Creatures, to pass by
and to ordain them to dishonor and wrath for their sin, to the praise of his
glorious Justice.

VIII. The Doctrine of this high mystery of Predestination, is to be handled
with special prudence and care, that men attending the will of God revealed in
his Word, and yielding obedience thereunto, may from the certainty of their
effectual Vocation, be assured of their eternal Election. So shall this*
Doctrine afford matter of praise, reverence and admiration of God; and of
humility, diligence, and abundant consolation to all that sincerely obey the
Gospel.

CHAP. IV. Of Creation.
IT pleased God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the manifestation of the
glory of his eternal Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, in the beginning, to create
or make of nothing the world, and all things therein, whether visible or
invisible, in the space of six days, and all very good.

II. After God had made all other creatures, he created Man, male and female,
with reasonable and immortal Souls, endued with knowledge, righteousness and
true holiness, after his own Image, having the Law of God written in their
hearts, and power to fulfill it; and yet under a a possibility of
transgressing, being left to the liberty of their own Will, which was subject
unto change. Besides this Law written in their hearts, they received a command
not to eat of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil; which whiles they
kept, they were happy in their communion with God, and had dominion over the
Creatures.

CHAP. V. Of Providence.
GOD the great Creator of all things, does uphold, direct, dispose and govern
all creatures, actions and things from the greatest even to the least, by his
most wise and holy Providence, according unto his infallible foreknowledge,
and the free and immutable counsel of his own Will, to the praise of the glory
of his Wisdom, Power, Justice, Goodness and Mercy.

II. Although in relation to the foreknowledge and decree of God, the first
Cause, all things come to pass immutably, and infallibly; yet by the same
Providence he orders them to fall out, according to the nature of second
Causes, either necessarily, freely, or contingently.

III. God in his ordinary Providence makes use of Means, yet is free to work
without, above, and against them at his pleasure.

IV. The almighty Power, unsearchable Wisdom, and infinite Goodness of God, so
far manifest themselves in his Providence, in that his determinate Counsel,
extends it self even to the first Fall, and all other sins of Angels and Men
(and that not by a bare permission) which also he most wisely and powerfully*
boundeth, and otherwise orders and governs in a manifold Dispensation to
his own most holy ends; yet so, as the sinfulness thereof proceeds only
from the Creature, and not from God, who being most holy and righteous, neither
is, nor can be, the author or approver of sin.

V. The most wise righteous and gracious God, does oftentimes leave for a
season his own children to manifold temptations, and the corruption of their
own hearts, to chastise them for their former sins, or to discover unto them
the hidden strength of corruption, and deceitfulness of their hearts, that they
may be humbled; and to raise them to a more close and constant dependence for
their support upon himself, and to make them more watchful against all future
occasions of sin, and for sandry other just and holy ends.

VI. As for those wicked and ungodly men, whom God as a righteous Judge, for
former sins, does blind and harden, from them he not only withholdeth his
grace, whereby they might have been enlightened in their understandings, and
wrought upon in their hearts; but sometimes also withdraws the gifts which
they had, and exposes them to such objects, as their corruption makes
occasions of sin; and withal gives them over to their own lusts, the
temptations of the wo^ld* and the power of Satan; whe^eby it comes to pass
that they harden themselves* even under those means which God uses for the
softning of others.

VII. As the Providence of God does in general each to all Creatures, so after
a most special manner it takes care of his Church, and disposes all things to
the good thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of the fall of Man, of Sin, and of the Punishment thereof.
GOD having made a Covenant of Works and Life, thereupon, with our first
Parents, and all their posterity in them, they being seduced by the subtilty
and temptation of Satan, did wilfully transgress the Law of their Creation, and
break the Covenant in eating the forbidden fruit.

II. By this sin they, and we in them, fell from original righteousness and
communion with God, and so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled in all the
faculties and parts of soul and body.

III. They being the Root, and by Gods appointment standing in the room and
stead of all mankind, the guilt of this sin was imputed, and corrupted nature
conveyed to all their posterity descending from them by ordinary generation.

IV. From this Original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled
and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed all
Actual transgressions.

V. This Corruption of nature during this life, does remain in those that are
regenerated; and although it be through Christ pardoned and mortified, yet both
it self and all the motions thereof are truly and properly sin.

VI. Every sin, both original and actual, being a transgression of the
righteous Law of God, and contrary thereunto, does in its own nature bring
guilt upon the sinner, whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God, and curse
of the Law, and so made subject to death, with all miseries spiritual,
temporal, and eternal.

CHAP. VII. Of Gods Covenant with Man.
THe distance between God and the Creature is so great, that although
reasonable creatures do owe obedience unto him as their Creator, yet they could
never have attained the reward of life, but by some voluntary condescension on
Gods part, which he has been pleased to express by way of Covenant.

II. The first Covenant made with man, was a Covenant of Works, wherein life
was promised to Adam, and in him to his posterity, upon condition of perfect
and personal obedience.

III. Man by his fall having made himself incapable of life by that Covenant,
the Lord was pleased to make a second, commonly called the Covenant of Grace;
wherein he freely offers unto sinners life and salvation by Jesus Christ,
requiring of them faith in him that they may be saved, and promising to give
unto all those that are ordained unto life, his holy Spirit, to make them
willing and able to believe.

IV. This Covenant of Grace is frequently set forth in the Scripture by the
name of a Testament, in reference to the death of Jesus Christ the Testator,
and to the everlasting Inheritance, with all things belonging to it, therein
bequeathed.

V. Although this Covenant has been differently and variously administered in
respect of Ordinances and Institutions in the time of the Law, and since the
coming of Christ in the flesh; yet for the substance and efficacy of it, to all
its spiritual and saving ends, it is one and the same; upon the account of
which various dispensations, it is called the Old and New Testament.

CHAP. VIII. Of Christ the Mediator.
IT pleased God, in his eternal purpose, to choose and ordain the Lord Jesus his
only begotten Son, according to a Covenant made between them both, to be the
Mediator between God and Man; the Prophet, Priest, and King, and Head and
Savior of his Church, the Heir of all things, and judge of the World; unto
whom he did from all eternity give a people to be his seed, and to be by him in
time redeemed, called, justified, sancti^^ed, and glori^yed.

II. The Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity, being very and eternal
God of one substance, and equal with the Father, did, when the fullness o^ time
was come, take upon him Man's nature, with all the essential properties and
common In^irmities thereof, yet without sin, being conceived by the power of
the holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary of her substance: So that two
whole perfect and distinct natures, the Godhead and the Manhood, were
inseparably joined together in one Person, without conversion, composition, or
confusion; which Person is very God and very Man, yet one Christ, the only
Mediator between God and Man.

III. The Lord Jesus in his Humane nature, thus united to the Divine in the
Person of the Son, was sanctified and anointed with the holy Spirit above
measure, having in him all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, in whom it
pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell, to the end that being holy,
harmless, undefiled, and full of Grace and Truth, he might be thoroughly
furnished to execute the Office of a Mediator and Surety; which Office he took
not unto himself, but was thereunto called by his Father, who also put all
Power and Judgment into his hand, and gave him Commandment to execute the same.

IV. This Office the Lord Jesus did most willingly undertake; which that he
might discharge, he was made under the Law, and did perfectly fulfill it; and
under went the punishment due to us, which we should have born and suffered:
being made sin and curse for us, enduring most grievous torments immediately
from God in his soul, and most painful sufferings in his body, was crucified,
and died, was buried, and remained under the power of death, yet saw no
corruption; on the third day he arose from the dead with the same Body in which
he suffered, with which also he ascended into heaven, and there sits at the
right hand of his Father, making intercession, and shall return to judge Men
and Angels at the end of the World.

V. The Lord Jesus by his perfect obedience and sacrifice of himself, which he
through the eternal Spirit once offered up unto God, has fully satisfied the
Justice of God, and purchased not only reconciliation, but an everlasting
inheritance in the Kingdom of heaven, for all those whom the Father has given
unto him.

VI. Although the work of Redemption was not actually wrought by Christ, till
after his Incarnation; yet the virtue, efficacy and benefits thereof were
communicated to the Elect in all Ages, successively from the beginning of the
World, in and by those Promises, Types, and Sacrifices, wherein he was revealed
and signified to be the seed of the Woman, which should bruise the Serpent's
head, and the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World, being yesterday and
to day the same, and for ever.

VII. Christ in the work of Mediation acts according to both Natures, by each
Natures, doing that which is proper to it self; yet by reason of the unity of
the Person, that which is proper to one Nature, is sometimes in Scripture
attributed to the Person denominated by the other Nature.

VIII. To all those for whom Christ has purchased Redemption, he does
certainly and effectually apply and communicate the same, making intercession
for them; and revealing unto them in and by the Word, the mysteries of
salvation, effectually persuading them by his Spirit to believe and obey, and
governing their hearts by his Word and Spirit, overcoming all their enemies by
his Almighty Power and Wisdom, and in such manner and ways as are most
consonant to his wonderful and unsearchable dispensation.

CHAP. IX. Of Free Will.
GOd has end^ed the Will of man with that natural liberty and power of acting
upon choice, that it is neither forced, nor by any absolute necessity of Nature
determined to do good or evil.

II. Man in his state of Innocence had freedom and power to will and to do
that which was good and well pleasing to God; but yet mutably, so that he might
fall from it.

III. Man by his fall into a state of sin, has wholly lost all ability of
will, to any spiritual good accompanying salvation; so as a natural man being
altogether averse from that good, and dead in sin, is not able by his own
strength to convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto.

IV. When God converts a sinner, and translates him into the state of grace, he
freeeth him from his natural bondage under sin, and by his grace alone inables
him freely to will and to do that which is spiritually good; yet so, as that by
reason of his remaining-corruption, he does not perfectly, nor only will that
which is good, but does also will that which is evil.

V. The will of man is made perfectly, and immutably free to good alone in the
state of Glory only.

CHAP. X. Of Effectual Calling.
ALL those whom God has predestin^ted unto life, and those only, he is pleased
in his appointed and accepted time effectually to call by his Word and Spirit,
out of that state of sin and death in which they are by nature, to grace and
salvation by Jesus Christ, inlightning their minds spiritually and savingly to
understand the things of God, taking away their heart of stone, and giving unto
them an heart of flesh, renewing their wills, and by his Almighty power
determining them to that which is good, and effectually drawing them to Jesus
Christ; yet so, as they come most freely, being made willing by his grace.

II. This effectual Call is of Gods free and special grace alone, not from any
thing at all foreseen in man, who is altogether passive therein, until being
quickened and renewed by the holy Spirit, he is thereby enabled to answer this
Call, and to embrace the grace offered and conveyed in it.

III. Elect Infants dying in Infancy, are regenerated and saved by Christ, who
works when, and where, and how he pleases: so also are all other elect
persons who are incapable of being outwardly called by the Ministry of the
Word.

IV. Others not elected, although they may be called by the Ministry of the
Word, and may have some common operations of the Spirit; yet not being
effectual drawn by the Father, they neither do nor can come unto Christ, and
therefore cannot be saved; much less can men not professing the Christian
Religion, be saved in any other way whatsoever, be they never so diligent to
frame their lives according to the Light of Nature, and the Law of that
Religion they do profess: And to assert and maintain that they may, is very
pernicious, and to be detested.

CHAP. XI. Of Justification.
THose whom God effectually calls, he also freely justifies, not by infusing
righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by accounting and
accepting their persons as righteous, not for any thing wrought in them, or
done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; nor by imputing Faith it self, the
act of believing, or any other Evangelical obedience to them, as their
righteousness, but by imputing Christ's active obedience unto the whole Law, and
passive obedience in his death, for their whole and sole righteousness, they
receiving and resting on him and his righteousness by Faith; which Faith they
have not of themselves, it is the gift of God.

II. Faith thus receiving and resting on Christ, and his righteousness, is the
alone instrument of Justification; yet it is not alone in the person justified,
but is ever accompanied with all other saving graces, and is no dead Faith, but
works by Love.

III. Christ by his Obedience and Death did fully discharge the Debt of all
those that are justified, and did by the sacrifice of himself, in the blood of
his Cross, undergoing in their stead the penalty due unto them, make a proper,
real, and full satisfaction to Gods Justice in their behalf: Yet, in as much as
he was given by the Father for them, and his Obedience and Satisfaction
accepted in their stead, and both freely, not for any thing in them, their
justification is only of free grace, that both the exact justice and rich grace
of God might be glorified in the justification of sinners.

IV. God did from all eternity decree to justify all the Elect, and Christ did
in the fullness of time dye for their sins, and rise again for their
justification: Nevertheless, they are not justified personally, until the holy
Spirit does in due time actually apply Christ unto them.

V. God does continue to forgive the sins of those that are justified; and
although they can never fall from the state of justification, yet they may by
their sins fall under Gods fatherly displeasure: and in that condition they
have not usually the light of his Countenance restored unto them, until they
humble themselves, coness their sins, beg pardon, and renew their faith and
repentance.

VI. The justification of Believers under the old Testament, was in all these
respects one and the same with the justification of Believers under the new
Testament.

CHAP. XII. Of Adoption.
ALL those that are justified, God vouchsafes in and for his only Son Jesus
Christ, to make partakers of the grace of Adoption, by which they are taken
into the number, and enjoy the liberties and privileges of the Children of
God, have his Name put upon them, receive the Spirit of Adoption, have access
to the Throne of Grace with boldness, are enabled to cry, Abba, Father, are
pitied, protected, provided for, and chastened by him as by a father, yet never
cast off, but sealed to the day of Redemption, and inherit the Promises as
Heirs of everlasting Salvation.

CHAP. XIII. Of Sanctification.
THey that are united to Christ, effectually called and regenerated, having a
new heart and a new spirit created in them, through the virtue of Christ's death
and resurrection, are also further sanctified really and personally through the
same virtue, by his Word and Spirit dwelling in them; the dominion of the whole
body of sin is destroyed, and the several lusts thereof are more and more
weakened, and mortified, and they more and more quickened, and strengthened in all
saving graces, to the practice of all true holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord.

II. This Sanctification is throughout in the whole man, yet imperfect in this
life, there abides still some remnants of corruption in every part, whence
arises a continual and irreconcilable war, the flesh lusting against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh.

III. In which war, although the remaining corruption for a time may much
prevail, yet through the continual supply of strength from the sanctifying
Spirit of Christ, the regenerate part does overcome, and so the Saints grow in
grace, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

CHAP. XIV. Of saving Faith.
THe grace of Faith, whereby the Elect are enabled to believe to the saving of
their souls, is the work of the Spirit of Christ in their hearts, and is
ordinarily wrought by the Ministry of the Word; by which also, and by the
administration of the Seals, Prayer, and other means, it is increased and
strengthened.

II. By this Faith a Christian believes to be true whatsoever is revealed in
the Word, for the Authority of God himself speaking therein, and acts
differently upon that which each particular passage thereof contains,
yielding obedience to the commands, trembling at the threatenings, and embracing
the promises of God for this life, and that which is to come. But the principal
acts of saving Faith are, accepting, receiving, and resting upon Christ alone,
for justification, sanctification, and eternal life, by virtue of the Covenant
of Grace.

III. This Faith, although it be different in degrees, and may be weak or
strong, yet it is in the least degree of it different in the kind or nature of
it (as is all other saving grace) from the faith and common grace of temporary
believers; and therefore, though it may be many times assailed and weakened,
yet it gets the victory, growing up in many to the attainment of a full
assurance through Christ, who is both the author and finisher of our Faith.

CHAP. XV. Of Repentance unto life and salvation.
SUch of the Elect as are converted at riper years, having sometime lived in
the state of nature, and therein served diverse lusts and pleasures, God in
their effectual calling gives them Repentance unto life.

II. Whereas there is none that does good, and sins not, and the best of men
may through the power and deceitfulness of their corruptions dwelling in them,
with the prevalency of temptation, fall into great sins and provocations; God
has in the Covenant of Grace mercifully provided, that Believers so sinning
and falling, be renewed through repentance unto Salvation.

III. This saving Repentance is an Evangelical Grace, whereby a person being by
the holy Ghost made sensible of the manifold evils of his sin, does by Faith in
Christ humble himself for it with godly sorrow, detestation of it, and
self-abhorrency, praying for pardon and strength of Grace, with a purpose and
endeavor by supplies of the spirit, to walk before God unto all well-pleasing
in all things.

IV. As Repentance is to be continued through the whole course of our lives,
upon the account of the body of death, and the motions thereof; so it is every
man's duty to repent of his particular known sins particularly.

V. Such is the provision which God has made through Christ in the covenant of
Grace, for the preservation of Believers unto salvation, that although there is
no sin so small but it deserves damnation; yet here is no sin so great, that it
shall bring damnation on them who truly repent; which makes the constant
preaching of Repentance necessary.

CHAP. XVI. Of good Works.
GOod works are only such as God has commanded in his holy Word, and not such
as without the warrant thereof are devised by men our of blind zeal, or upon
any pretense of good intentions.

II. These good Works done in obedience to Gods commandments, are the fruits
and evidences of a true and lively Faith, and by them Believers manifest their
thankfulness, strengthen their assurance, edify their Brethren, adorn the
profession of the Gospel, stop the mouths of the adversaries, and glorify God,
whose workmanship they are, created in in Christ Jesus thereunto, that having
their fruit unto holiness, they may have the end eternal life.

III. Their ability to do good works is not at all of themselves, but wholly
from the Spirit of Christ: And that they may be enabled thereunto, besides the
graces they have already received, there is required an actual influence of the
same holy Spirit, to work in them to will and to do of his good pleasure; yet
are they not hereupon to grow negligent, as if they were not bound to perform
any duty, unless upon a special motion of the Spirit, but they ought to be
diligent in stirring up the grace of God that is in them.

IV. They who in their obedience attain to the greatest height which is
possible in this life, are so far from being able to superogate, and to do more
then God requires, as that they fall short of much, which in duty they are
bound to do.

V. We cannot by our best works merit pardon of sin, or eternal life at the
hand of God, by reason of the great disproportion that is between them, and the
glory to come; and the infinite distance that is between us, and God, whom by
them we can neither profit, nor satisfy for the debt of our former sins; but
when we have done all we can, we have done but our duty, and are unprofitable
servants: and because as they are good, they proceed from his Spirit; and as
they are wrought by us, they are defiled and mixed with so much weakness and
imperfection, that they cannot endure the severity of Gods judgment.

VI. Yet notwithstanding, the persons of Believers being accepted through
Christ, their good works also are accepted in him; not as though they were in
this life wholly unblameable and unreproveable in Gods sight, but that he
looking upon them in his Son, is pleased to accept and reward that which is
sincere, although accompanied with many weaknesses and imperfections.

VII. Works done by unregenerate men, although for the matter of them they may
be things which God commands, and of good use both to themselves and to others:
yet because they proceed not from a heart purified by Faith, nor are done in a
right manner, according to the Word, nor to a right end, the glory of God; they
are therefore sinful, and cannot please God, nor make a man meet to receive
grace from God; and yet their neglect of them is more sinful, and displeasing
unto Cod.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Perseverance of the Saints.
THey whom God has accepted in his beloved, effectually called and sanctified
by his Spirit, can neither totally nor finally fall away from the state of
grace, but shall certainly persevere therein to the end, and be eternally saved.

II. This Perseverance of the Saints depends not upon their own free will, but
upon the immutability of the Decree of Election, from the free and unchangeable
love of God the Father, upon the efficacy of the merit and intercession of
Jesus Christ, and union with him, the Oath of God, the abiding of his Spirit,
and of the seed of God within them, and the nature of the Covenant of Grace,
from all which arises also the certainty and infallibility thereof.

III. And though they may, through the temptation of Satan and of the world,
the prevalency of corruption remaining in them, and the neglect of the means of
their preservation, fall into grievous sins, and for a time continue therein,
whereby they incur Gods displeasure, and grieve his holy Spirit, come to have
their graces and comforts impaired, have their hearts hardened, and their
consciences wounded, hurt and scandalize others, and bring temporal Judgments
upon themselves; yet they are, and shall be, kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Assurance of Grace and Salvation.
ALthough temporary believers, and other unregenerate men may vainly deceive
themselves with false hopes, and carnal presumptions of being in the favor of
God, and state of salvation, which hope of theirs shall perish; yet such as
truly believe in the Lord Jesus, and love him in sincerity, endeavoring to
walk in all good conscience before him, may in this life be certainly assured
that they are in the state of Grace, and may rejoice in the hope of the glory
of God; which hope shall never make them ashamed.

II. This certainty is not a bare conjectural and probable persuasion, grounded
upon a fallible hope, but an infallible assurance of faith, founded on the
blood and righteousness of Christ, revealed in the Gospel, and also upon the
inward evidence of those graces unto which Promises are made, and on the
immediate witness of the Spirit, testifying our Adoption, and as a fruit
thereof, leaving the heart more humble and holy.

III. This infallible Assurance does not so belong to the essence of Faith, but
that a true believer may wait long, and conflict with many difficulties before
he be partaker of it; yet being enabled by the Spirit to know the things which
are freely given him of God, he may without extraordinary revelation, in the
right use of ordinary means attain thereunto: And therefore it is the duty of
every one, to give all diligence to make his calling and election sure, that
thereby his heart may be enlarged in peace and joy in the holy Ghost, in love
and thankfulness to God, and in strength and cheerfulness in the duties of
obedience, the proper fruits of this assurance; so far is it from inclining men
to looseness.

IV. True Believers may have the assurance of their salvation diverse ways
shaken, diminished, and intermitted; as by negligence in preserving of it, by
falling into some special sin, which wounds the conscience, and grieveth the
Spirit, by some sudden or vehement temptation, by Gods withdrawing the light of
his countenance, suffering even such as fear him to walk in darkness, and to
have no light; yet are they neither utterly destitute of that seed of God, and
life of Faith, that love of Christ and the Brethren, that sincerity of heart,
and conscience of duty, out of which, by the operation of the Spirit, this
assurance may in due time be revived; and by the which in the mean time, they
are supported from utter despair.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Law of God.
GOD gave to Adam a Law of universal obedience written in his heart, and a
particular Precept of not eating the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of good and
evil, as a Covenant of Works, by which he bound him and all his posterity to
personal, entire, exact, and perpetual obedience; promised life upon the
fulfilling, and threatened death upon the breach of it, and endued him with
power and ability to keep it.

II. This Law so written in the heart, continued to be a perfect Rule of
Righteousness after the fall of man, and was delivered by God upon Mount Sinai
in Ten Commandments, and written in two Tables; the four first Commandments
containing our duty toward God, and the other six our duty to Man.

III. Beside this Law commonly called Moral, God was pleased to give to the
people of Israel Ceremonial Laws, containing several Typical Ordinances, partly
of Worship, prefiguring Christ, his Graces, Actions, Sufferings and Benefits;
and partly holding forth diverse Instructions o^ Moral Duties: All which
Ceremonial Laws being appointed only to the time of Reformation, are by Jesus
Christ the true Messiah and only Lawgiver, who was furnished with power from
the Father for that end, abrogated and taken away.

IV. To them also he gave sundry Judicial Laws, which expired together with the
State of that people, not obliging any now by virtue of that Institution, their
general equity only being still of moral use.

V. The Moral Law does for ever bind all, as well justified persons as others,
to the obedience thereof; and that not only in regard of the matter contained
in it, but also in respect of the Authority of God the Creator, who gave it:
neither does Christ in the Gospel any way dissolve, but much strengthen this
obligation.

VI. Although true Believers be not under the Law, as a Covenant of Works, to
be thereby justified or condemned; yet it is of great use to them as well as to
others, in that, as a rule of life, inform ng them of the Will of God, and
their duty, it directs and binds them to walk accordingly, discovering also the
sinful pollutions of their Nature, Hearts, and Lives, so as examining
themselves thereby, they may come to further conviction of humiliation for, and
hatred against sin, together with a clearer sight of the need they have of
Christ, and the perfection of his obedience. It is likewise of use to the
Regenerate, to restrain their Corruptions, in that it forbids sin, and the
threatenings of it serve to show what even their sins deserve, and what
afflictions in this life they may expect for them, although freed from the
curse thereof threatened in the Law. The promises of it in like manner show them
God's approbation of obedience, and what blessings they may expect upon the
performance thereof, although not as due to them by the Law, as a Covenant of
Works; so as a man's doing good, and refraining from evil, because the Law
encourages to the one, and deterreth from the other, is no evidence of his
being under the Law, and not under Grace.

VII. Neither are the forementioned uses of the Law contrary to the grace of
the Gospel; but do sweetly comply with it, the Spirit of Christ subduing and
inabling the Will of Man to do that freely and cheerfully, which the Will of
God revealed in the Law required to be done.

CHAP. XXs Of the Gospel, and of the extent of the Grace thereof.
THe Covenant of Works being broken by sin, and made unprofitable unto life,
God was pleased to give unto the Elect the promise of Christ, the Seed of the
Woman, as the means of calling them, and begetting in them Faith and
Repentance: In this Promise, the Gospel, as to the substance of it, was
revealed, and was therein effectual for the conversion and salvation of sinners.

II. This promise of Christ, and salvation by him, is revealed only in and by
the Word of God; neither do the works of Creation or Providence, with the Light
of Nature, make discovery of Christ, or of Grace by him, so much as in a
general or obscure way; much less that men destitute of the revelation of him
by the Promise or Gospel, should be enabled thereby to attain saving Faith or
Repentance.

III. The revelation of the Gospel unto sinners made in diverse times, and by
sundry parts, with the addition of Promises and Precepts for the obedience
required therein, as to the Nations and Persons to whom it is granted, is
merely of the Sovereign will and good pleasure of God, not being annexed by
virtue of any promise to the due improvement of men's natural abilities, by
virtue of common light received without it, which none ever did make, or can so
do: And therefore in all ages the Preaching of the Gospel has been granted
unto persons and Nations, as to the extent or straitning of it, in great
variety, according to the counsel of the will of God.

IV. Although the Gospel be the only outward means of revealing Christ and
saving Grace, and is as such abundantly sufficient thereunto; yet that men who
are dead in trespasses, may be born again, quickened, or regenerated, there is
moreover necessary an effectual, irresistible work of the Holy Ghost upon the
whole soul, for the producing in them a new spiritual life, without which no
other means are sufficient for their conversion unto God.

CHAP. XXI. Of Christian Liberty, and Liberty of Conscience.
THe Liberty which Christ has purchased for Believers under the Gospel,
consists in their freedom from the guilt of sin, the condemning wrath of God,
the rigor and curse of the Law, and in their being delivered from this present
evil world, bondage to Satan, and dominion of sin, from the evil of
afflictions, the fear and sting of death, the victory of the grave, and
everlasting damnation; as also in their free access to God, and their yielding
obedience unto him, not out of slavish fear, but a child-like-love, and willing
mind: All which were common also to Believers under the Law, for the substance
of them; but under the New Testament the liberty of Christians is further
enlarged in their freedom from the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, the whole Legal
administration of the Covenant of Grace, to which the Jewish Church was
subjected, and in greater boldness of access to the Throne of Grace, and in
fuller communications of the free Spirit of God, then Believers under the Law
did ordinarily partake of.

II. God alone is Lord of the Conscience, and has left it free from the
Doctrines and Commandments of men, which are in any thing contrary to his Word,
or not contained in it; so that to believe such Doctrines, or to obey such
Commands out of conscience, is to betray true Liberty of Conscience; and the
requiring of an implicit faith, and an absolute and blind obedience, is to
destroy Liberty of Conscience, and Reason also.

III. They who upon pretense of Christian Liberty, do practice any sin, or
cherish any lust, as they do thereby pervert the main design of the Grace of
the Gospel to their own destruction; so they wholly destroy the end of
Christian Liberty, which is, that being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, we might serve the Lord without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life.

CHAP. XXII. Of Religious Worship, and the Sabhath-day.
THe light of Nature shows that there is a God, who has Lordship and
Sovereignty over all, is just, good, and does good unto all, and is therefore
to be feared, loved, praised, called upon, trusted in, and served with all the
heart, and all the soul, and with all the might: But the acceptable way of
worshipping the true God is instituted by himself, and so limited by his own
revealed will, that he may not be worshipped according to the imaginations and
devices of men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any visible representations,
or any other way prescribed in the holy Scripture.

II. Religious Worship is to be given to God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
and to him alone; not to Angels, Saints, or any other Creatures; and since the
Fall, not without a Mediator, nor in the mediation of any other but of Christ
alone.

III. Prayer with thanksgiving, being one special part of natural worship, is
by God required of all men; but that it may be accepted, it is to be made in
the name of the Son, by the help of the Spirit, according to his will, with
understanding, reverence, humility, fervency, faith, love, and perseverance;
and when with others in a known tongue.

IV. Prayer is to be made for things lawful, and for all sorts of men living,
or that shall live hereafter, but not for the dead, nor for those of whom it
may be known that they have sinned the sin unto death.

V. The reading of the Scriptures, Preaching, and hearing the word of God,
singing of Psalms, as also the administration of Baptism and the Lords Supper,
are all parts of religious Worship of God, to be performed in obedience unto
God with understanding, faith, reverence, and godly fear: Solemn Humiliations,
with Fastings and Thanksgiving upon special occasions, are in their several
times and seasons to be used in a holy and religious manner.

VI. Neither Prayer nor any other part of religious Worship, is now under the
Gospel either tied unto, or made more acceptable by any place, in which it is
performed, or toward which it is directed; but God is to be worshipped every
where in spirit and in truth, as in private families daily, and in secret each
one by himself, so more solemnly in the public assemblies, which are not
carelessly nor wilfully to be neglected, or forsaken, when God by his Word or
Providence calls thereunto.

VII. As it is of the Law of Nature, that in general a proportion of time by
Gods appointment be set apart for the worship of God; so by his Word in a
positive, moral, and perpetual commandment, binding all men in all ages, he
has particularly appointed one day in seven for a Sabbath to be kept holy
unto him, which from the beginning of the world to the resurrection of Christ,
was the last day of the week, and from the resurrection of Christ was changed
into the first day of the week, which in Scripture, is called the Lords day,
and is to be continued to the end of the World as the Christian Sabbath, the
observation of the last day of the week being abolished.

VIII. This Sabbath is then kept holy unto the Lord, when men after a due
preparing of their hearts, and ordering their common affairs before hand, do
not only observe an holy rest all the day from their own works, words, and
thoughts about their worldly employments and recreations, but also are taken up
the whole time in the public and private exercisesof his Worship, and in the
duties of Necessity and Mercy.

CHAP. XXIII. Of lawful Oaths and Vows.
A Lawful Oath is a part of Religious Worship, wherein the person swearing in
truth, righteousness, and judgment, solemnly calls God to witness what he
afferteth or promises, and to judge him according to the truth or falsehood of
what he swears.

II. The name of God only is that by which men ought to swear; and therein it
is to be used with all holy fear and reverence: Therefore to swear vainly, or
rashly, by that glorious or dreadful Name, or to sweat at all by any other
thing, is sinful and to be abhorred: Yet as in matters of weight and moment an
Oath is warranted by the Word of God under the New Testament, as well as under
the Old; so a lawful Oath, being imposed by lawful authority in such matters,
ought to be taken.

III. Whosoever takes an Oath warranted by the Word of God, ought duly to
consider the weightiness of so solemn an act, and therein to avouch nothing but
what he is fully persuaded is the truth: neither may any man bind himself by
Oath to any thing, but what is good and just, and what he believes so to be,
and what he is able and resolved to perform. Yet it is a sin to refuse an Oath
touching any thing that is good and just, being lawfully imposed by Authority.

IV. An Oath is to be taken in the plain and common sense of the words, without
equivocation, or mental reservation: It cannot oblige to sin, but in any thing
not sinful, being taken it binds to performance, although to a man's own hurt;
nor is it to be violated, although made to Heretics or Infidels.

V. A Vow, which is not to be made to any Creature, but God alone, is of the
like nature with a promissory Oath, and ought to be made with the like
religious care, and to be performed with the like faithfulness.

VI. Popish monastical Vows of perpetual single life, professed poverty, and
regular obedience, are so far from being degrees of higher perfection, that
they are superstitious and sinful snares, in which no Christian may entangle
himself.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the civil Magistrate.
GOD the supreme Lord and King of all the World, has ordained civil
Magistrates to be under him, over the people for his own glory and the public
good: And to this end has armed them with the power of the Sword, for the
defense and encouragement of them that do good; and for the punishment of
evildoers.

II. It is lawful for Christians to accept and execute the Office of a
Magistrate, when called thereunto: in the management whereof, as they ought
specially to maintain Justice and Peace, according to the wholesome Laws of each
Commonwealth; so for that end they may lawfully now under the New Testament
wage war upon just and necessary occasion.

III. Although the Magistrate is bound to encourage, promote, and protect the
Professors and Profession of the Gospel, and to manage and order civil
administrations in a due subserviency to the interest of Christ in the World,
and to that end to take care that men of coroupt minds and conversations do not
licentiously publish and divulge Blasphemy and Errors, in their own nature
subverting the faith, and inevitably destroying the souls of them that receive
them: Yet in such differences about the Doctrines of the Gospel, or ways of the
worship of God, as may befall men exercising a good conscience, manifesting it
in their conversation, and holding the foundation, not disturbing others in
their ways or worship that differ from them; there is no warrant for the
Magistrate under the Gospel to abridge them of their liberty.

IV. It is the duty of people to pray for Magistrates, to honor their persons,
to pay them Tribute and other dues, to obey their lawful commands, and to be
subject to their Authority for conscience sake. Infidelity, or difference in
Religion, does not make void the Magistrates just and legal Authority, nor free
the people from their obedience to him: from which, ecclesiastical persons are
not exempted, much less has the Pope any power or jurisdiction over them in
their dominions, or over any of their people, and least of all to deprive them
of their dominions, or lives, if he shall judge them to be Heretics, or upon
any other pretense whatsoever.

CHAP. XXV. Of Marriage.
MArriage is to be between one man and one woman: neither is it lawful for any
man to have more then one wife, nor for any woman to have more then one husband
at the same time.

II. Marriage was ordained for the mutual help of husband and wife, for the
increase of mankind with a legitimate issue, and of the Church with an holy
seed, and for preventing of uncleanness.

III. It is lawful for all sorts of people to marry, who are able with judgment
to give their consent. Yet it is the duty of Christians to marry in the Lord,
and therefore such as profess the true Reformed religion, should not marry with
Infidels, Papists, or other Idolaters: neither should such as are godly, be
unequally yoaked by marrying with such as are wicked in their life, or maintain
damnable Heresy.

VI. Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of consanguinity, or affinity
forbidden in the Word; nor can such incestuous Marriages ever be made lawful by
any law of man, or consent of parties, so as those persons may live together as
man and wife.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Church.
THe Catholic or Universal Church, which is invisible, consists of the whole
number of the Elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into one under
Christ, the Head thereof; and is the Spouse, the body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all.

II. The whole body of men throughout the world, professing the faith of the
Gospel, and obedience unto God by Christ according unto it, not destroying
their own profession by any Errors everting the foundation* or unholiness of
conversation, are, and may be called the visible Catholic Church of Christ,
although as such it is not entrusted with the administration of any Ordinances,
or have any offices to rule or govern in, or over the whole Body.

III. The purest Churches under heaven are subject both to mixture and error,
and some have so degenerated as to become no Churches of Christ, but Synagognes
of Satan: Nevertheless Christ always has had, and ever shall have a visible
Kingdom in this world, to the end thereof, of such as believe in him, and make
profession of his name.

IV. There is no other Head of the Church but the Lord Jesus Christ; nor can
the Pope of Rome in any sense be Head thereof: but it is that Antichrist, that
man of sin, and son of Perdition, that exalts himself in the Church against
Christ, and all that is called God, whom the Lord shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming.

V. As the Lord is in care and love toward his Church, has in his infinite
wise providence exercised it with great variety in all ages, for the good of
them that love him, and his own Glory: so according to his promise, we expect
that in the latter days, Antichrist being destroyed, the Jews called, and the
adversaries of the Kingdom of his dear Son broken, the Churches of Christ being
enlarged, and edified through a free and plentiful communication of light and
grace, shall enjoy in this world a more quiet, peaceable and glorious condition
then they have enjoyed.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Communion of Saints.
ALL Saints that are united to Jesus Christ their Head, by his Spirit and
Faith, although they are not made thereby one person with him, have fellowship
in Graces, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Glory: and being united to one
another in love, they have communion in each others gifts and grace, and are
obliged to the performance of such duties, public and private, as do conduce
to their mutual good, both in the inward and outward Man.

II. All Saints are bound to maintain an holy fellowship and communion in the
Worship of God, and in performing such other spiritual services as tend to
their mutual edification; as also in relieving each other in outward things,
according to their several abilities and necessities: which communion, though
especially to be exercised by them in the relations wherein they stand, whether
in Families or Churches, yet as God offers opportunity, is to be extended
unto all those who in every place call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Sacraments.
SAcraments are holy Signs and Seals of the Covenant of Grace, immediately
instituted by Christ, to represent him and his benefits, and to confirm our
interest in him, and solemnly to engage us to the service of God in Christ,
according to his Word.

II. There is in every Sacrament a spiritual relation, or sacramental union
between the sign and the thing signified; whence it comes to pass* that the
names and effects of the one are attributed to the other.

III. The grace which is exhibited in or by the Sacraments rightly used, is not
conferred by any power in them, neither does the efficacy of a Sacrament depend
upon the piety or intention of him that does administer it, but upon the work
of the Spirit, and the word of Institution, which contains together with a
Precept authorizing the use thereof, a Promise of benefit to worthy receivers.

IV. There be only two Sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord in the Gospel,
that is to say, Baptism and the Lords Supper; neither of which may be dispensed
by any but by a Minister of the Word lawfully called.

V. The Sacraments of the Old Testament, in regard of the spiritual things
thereby signified and exhibited, were for substance the same with those of the
New.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Baptism.
BAptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus Christ to be
unto the party baptized a sign and seal of the Covenant of Graee, of his
ingraffing into Christ, of regeneration, of remission of sins, and of his
giving up unto God through Jesus Christ to walk in newness of life; which
Ordinance is by Christ's own appointment to be continued in his Church until
the end of the world.

II. The outward Element to be used in this Ordinance, is Water, wherewith the
party is to be baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, by a Minister of the Gospel lawfully called.

III. Dipping of the person into the water is not necessary; but Baptism is
rightly administered by pouring or sprinkling water upon the person.

IV. Not only those that do actually profess faith in, and obedience unto
Christ, but also the Infants of one or both believing Parents are to be
baptized, and those only.

V. Although it be a great sin to contemn or neglect this Ordinance, yet grace
and salvation are not so inseparably annexed unto it, as that no person can be
regenerated or saved without it; or that all that are baptized, are undoubtedly
regenerated.

VI. The efficacy of Baptism is not tied to that moment of time wherein it is
administered, yet notwithstanding, by the right use of this Ordinance, the grace
promised is not only offered, but really exhibited and conferred by the Holy
Ghost to such (whether of age, or Infants) as that grace belongs unto,
according to the counsel of Gods own Will in his appointed time.

VII. Baptism is but once to be administered to any person.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Lords Supper.
Our Lord Jesus in the night wherein he was betrayed, instituted the Sacrament
of his Body and Blood, called the Lords Supper, to be observed in his Churches
unto the end of the world, for the perpetual remembrance, and showing forth of
the Sacrifice of himself* in his death, the sealing of all benefits thereof
unto true believers, their spiritual nourishment, and growth in him, their
further engagement in and to all duties which they owe unto him, and to be a
bond and pledge of their communion with him, and with each other.

II. In this Sacrament Christ is not offered up to his Father, nor any real
Sacrifice made at all for remission of the sins of the quick or dead, but only
a memorial of that one offering up of himself by himself upon the Cross once
for all, and a spiritual Oblation of all possible praise unto God for the same;
so that the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass (as they call it) is most abominable,
injurious to Christ's own only Sacrifice, the alone propitiation for all the
sins of the Elect.

III. The Lord Jesus has in this Ordinance appointed his Ministers to pray and
bless the Elements of Bread and Wine, and thereby to set them apart from a
common to an holy use, and to take and break the Bread, to take the Cup, and
(they communicating also themselves) to give both to the Communicants, but to
none who are not then present in the Congregation.

IV. Private Masses, or receiving the Sacrament by a Priest, or any other
alone, as likewise the denial of the Cup to the people, worshipping the
Elements, the lifting them up, or carrying them about for adoration, and the
reserving them for any pretended religious use, are all contrary to the nature
of this Sacrament, and to the Institution of Christ.

V. The outward Elements in this Sacrament duly set apart to the uses ordained
by Christ, have such relation to him Crucified, as that truly, yet
Sacramentally only, they are sometimes called by the name of the things they
represent, to wit, the Body and Blood of Christ; albeit in substance and nature
they still remain truly and only Bread and Wine as they were before.

VI. That Doctrine which maintains a change of the substance of Bread and Wine
into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood (commonly called
Transubstantiation) by consecration of a Priest, or by any other way, is
repugnant not to Scripture alone, but even to common sense and reason,
overthrows the nature of the Sacrament, and has been, and is, the cause of
manifold Superstitions, yea of gross Idolatries.

VII. Worthy Receivers outwardly partaking of the visible Elements in this
Sacrament, do then also inwardly by Faith, really and indeed, yet not carnally
and corporally, but spiritually, receive and feed upon Christ crucified, and
all benefits of his death; the Body and Blood of Christ being then not
corporally or carnally in, with, or under the Bread or Wine; yet as really, but
spiritually present to the Faith of Believers in that Ordinance, as the
Elements themselves are to their outward senses.

VIII. All ignorant and ungodly persons, as they are unfit to enjoy communion
with Christ, so are they unworthy of the Lords Table, and cannot without great
sin against him, whilst they remain such, partake of these holy Mysteries, or
be admitted thereunto; yea, whosoever shall receive unworthily, are guilty of
the Body and Blood of the Lord, eating and drinking Judgment to themselves.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the state of Man after Death, and of the Resurrection of the
Deaed.
THe Bodies of men after death return to dust, and see corruption, but their
Souls (which neither die nor sleep) having an immortal subsistence, immediately
return to God who gave them. The Souls of the righteous being then made perfect
in holiness, are received into the highest Heavens, where they behold the face
of God in light and glo y, waiting for the full redemption of their bodies: And
the souls of the wicked are cast into Hell, where they remain in torment and
utter darkness, reserved to the Judgment of the Great Day: Besides these two
places for souls separated from their bodies, the Scripture acknowledges none.

II. At the last day such as are found alive shall not die, but be changed, and
all the dead shall be raised up with the self-same bodies, and none other,
although with different qualities, which shall be united again to their souls
for ever.

III. The bodies of the unjust shall by the power of Christ be raised to
dishonor; the bodies of the just by his Spirit unto honor, and be made
conformable to his own glorious Body.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the last Judgment.
GOD has appointed a day wherein he will judge the World in righteousness by
Jesus Christ* to whom all Power and Judgment is given of the Father; in which
day not only the Apostate Angels shall be judged, but likewise all persons
that have lived upon earth, shall appear before the Tribunal of Christ, to give
an account of their thoughts, words, and deeds, and to receive according to
what they have done in the body, whether good or evil.

II. The end of Gods appointing this day, is for the manifestation of the Glory
of his Mercy in the eternal salvation of the Elect, and of his Justice in the
damnation of the Reprobate, who are wicked and disobedient: for then shall the
righteous go into everlasting Life, and receive the fullness of joy and glory,
with everlasting reward in the presence of the Lord; but the wicked who know
not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, shall be cast into eternal
torments, and be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his Power.

III. As Christ would have us to be certainly persuaded that there shall be a
Judgment, both to deter all men from sin, and for the greater consolation of
the godly in their adversity; so will he have that day unknown to men, that
they may shake off all carnal security, and be always watchful, because they
know not at what hour the Lord will come; and may be ever prepared to say, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

OF THE INSTITVTION OF CHURCHES* And the ORDER Appointed in them by Jesus
Christ.
I. BY the appointment of the Father, all Power for the Calling, Institution,
Order, or Government of the Church, is invested, in a Supreme* and Sovereign
manner, in the Lord Jesus Christ, as King and Head thereof.

II. In the execution of this Power wherewith he is so entrusted, the Lord
Jesus calls out of the World unto Communion with himself, those that are
given unto him by his Father, that they may walk before him in all the ways of
Obedience, which he prescribes to them in his Word.

III. Those thus called (through the Ministry the Word by his Spirit) he
commands to walk together in particular Societies or Churches, for their
mutual edification, and the due performance of that public Worship, which he
requires of them in this world.

IV. To each of these Churches thus gathered, according unto his mind declared
in his Word, he has given all that Power and Authority, which is any way
needful, for their carrying on that Order in Worship and Discipline, which he
has instituted for them to observe, with Commands and Rules, for the due and
right exerting and executing of that Power.

V. These particular Churches thus appointed by the Authority of Christ, and
entrusted with power from him for the ends before expressed, are each of them
as unto those ends, the seat of that Power which he is pleased to communicate
to his Saints or Subjects in this World, so that as such they receive it
immediately from himself

VI. Besides these particular Churches, there is not instituted by Christ any
Church more extensive or Ca holique entrusted with power for the administration
of his Ordinances, or the execution of any authority in his Name.

VII. A particular Church gathered and completed according to the mind of
Christ, consists of Officers and Members: The Lord Christ having given to his
called ones (united according to his appointment in Church Order) Liberty and
Power to choose Persons fitted by the Holy Ghost for that purpose, to be over
them, and to minister to them in the Lord.

VIII. The Members of these Churches are Saints by Calling, visibly manifesting
and evidencing (in and by their profession and walking) their Obedience unto
that Call of Christ, who being further known to each other by their confession
of the Faith wrought in them by the power of God, declared by themselves, or
otherwise manifested, do willingly consent to walk together, according to the
appointment of Christ, giving up themselves to the Lord, and to one another by
the Will of God, in professed subjection to the Ordinances of the Gospel.

IX. The Officers appointed by Christ to be chosen and set apart by the Church
so called, and gathered for the peculiar administration of Ordinances, and
execution of Power or Duty which he intrusts them with, or calls them to, to be
continued to the end of the World, are Pastors, Teachers, Elders and Deacons.

X. Churches thus gathered and assembling for the Worship of GOD* are thereby
visible and public, and their Assemblies (in what place soever they are,
according as they have liberty or opportunity) are therefore Church or Public
Assemblies.

XI. The way appointed by Christ for the calling of any person, fitted and
gifted by the Holy Ghost, unto the Office of Pastor, Teacher, or Elder, in a
Church, is, that he be chosen thereunto by the common suffrage of the Church it
self, and solemnly set apart by Fasting and Prayer, with Imposition of Hands of
the Eldership of that Church, if there be any before constituted therein: And
of a Deacon, that he be chosen by the like suffrage, and set apart by Prayer,
and the like Imposition of Hands.

XII. The Essence of this Call of a Pastor, Teacher, or Elder unto Office,
consists in the Election of the Church, together with his acceptance of it,
and separation by Fasting and Prayer: And these who are so chosen, though not
set apart by Imposition of Hands, are rightly constituted Ministers of Jesus
Christ, in whose Name and Authority they exercise the Ministry to them so
committed. The Calling of Deacons consists in the like Election and
acceptance, with separation by Prayer.

XIII. Although it be incumbent on the Pastors and Teachers of the Churches to
be instant in Preaching the Word, by way of Office; yet the work of Preaching
the Word is not so peculiarly confined to them, but that others also gifted and
fitted by the Holy Ghost for it, and approved (being by lawful ways and means
in the Providence of God called thereunto) may publicly, ordinarily, and
constantly perform it; so that they give themselves up thereunto,

XIV. However, they who are engaged in the work of Public Preaching, and
enjoy the Public Maintenance upon that account, are not thereby obliged to
dispense the Seals to any other then such as (being Saints by Calling, and
gathered according to the Order of the Gospel) they stand related to, as
Pastors or Teachers; yet ought they not to neglect others living within their
Parochial Bounds, but besides their constant public Preaching to them, they
ought to enquire after their profitting by the Word, instructing them in, and
pressing upon them (whether young or old) the great Doctrines of the Gospel,
even personally, and particularly, so far as their sterngth and time will admit.

XV. Ordination alone without the Election or precedent consent of the Church,
by those who formerly have been Ordained by virtue of that Power they have
received by their Ordination, does not constitute any person a Church Officer,
or communicate Office-power unto him.

XVI. A Church furnished with Officers (according to the mind of Christ) has
full power to administer all his Ordinances; and where there is want of any one
or more Officers required, that Officer, or those which are in the Church, may
administer all the Ordinances proper to their particular Duty and Offices; but
where there are no Teaching Officers, none may administer the Seals, nor can
the Church authorize any so to do.

XVII. In the carrying on of Church-administrations, no person ought to be
added to the Church, but by the consent of the Church it self; that so love
(without dissimulation) may be preserved between all the Members thereof.

XVIII. Whereas the Lord Jesus Christ has appointed and instituted as a means
of Edification, that those who walk not according to the Rules and Laws
appointed by him (in respect of Faith and Life, so that just offense does arise
to the Church thereby) be censured in his Name and Authority: Every Church has
power it it self to exercise and execute all those Censures appointed by him,
in the way and Order prescribed in the Gospel.

XIX. The Censures so appointed by Christ, are Admonition and Excommunication:
and whereas some offenses are or may be known only to some, it is appointed by
Christ, that those to whom they are so known, do fi st admonish the offender in
private; (in public offenses where any sin, before all) and in case of
non-amendment upon private admonition, the offense being related to the Church,
and the offender not manifesting his repentance, he is to be duly admonished in
the Name of Christ by the whole Church, by the Ministry of the Elders of the
Church; and if this Censure prevail not for his repentance, then he is to be
cast out by Excommun cation with the consent of the Church.

XX. As all Believers are bound to join themselves to particular Churches, when
and where they have opportunity so to do; so none are to be admitted unto the
Privileges of the Churches, who do not submit themselves to the Rule of Christ
in the Censures for the Government of them.

XXI. This being the way prescribed by Christ in case of offense, no
Church Members upon any offenses taken by them, having performed their duty
required of them in this matter, ought to disturb any Church Order, or absent
themselves from the public Assemblies, or the Administrat on of any
Ordinances upon that pretense, butto wait upon Christ in the further proceeding
of the Church.

XXII. The Power of Censures being seating by Christ in a particular Church, is
to be exercised only toward particular members of each Church respectively as
such; and there is no power given by him unto any Synods or Ecclesiastical
Assemblies to Excommunicate, or by their public Edicts to threaten
Excommunication, or other Church censures against Churches, Magistrates, or
their people upon any account, no man being obnoxious to that Censure, but upon
his personal miscarriage, as a Member of a particular Church.

XXIII. Although the Church is a Society of men, assembling for the celebration
of the Ordinances according to the appointment of Christ, yet every Society
assembling for that end or purpose, upon the account of cohabitation within any
civil Precincts or Bounds is not thereby constituted a Church, seeing there may
be wanting among them, what is essentially required thereunto; and therefore a
Believer living with others in such a Precinct, may join himself with any
Church for his edification.

XXIV. For the avoiding of differences that may otherwise arise, for the
greater Solemnity in the Celebration of the Ordinances of Christ, and the
opening a way for the larger usefulness of the Gifts and Graces of the Holy
Ghost; Saints living in one City or Town, or within such distances as that they
may conveniently assemble for divine Worship, ought rather to join in one
Church for their mutual strengthening and edification, then to set up many
distinct Societies.

XXV. As all Churches, and all the members of them are bound to pray
continually for the good or prosperity of all the Churches of Christ in all
places, and upon all occasions, to further it; (Every one within the bounds of
their Places and Callings, in the exercise of their Gifts and Graces): So the
Churches themselves (when planted by the providence of God, so as they may have
opportunity and advantage for it) ought to hold communion amongst themselves
for their peace, increase of love, and mutual edification.

XXVI. In Cases of Difficulties or Differences, either in point of Doctrine or
in Administrations, wherein either the Churches in general are concerned, or
any one Church in their Peace, Union, and Edification, or any Member or Members
of any Church are injured in, or by, any proceeding in Censures not agreeable
to Truth and Order: it is according to the mind of Christ, that many Churches
holding communion together, do by their Messengers meet in a Synod or Council,
to consider and give their advice in, or about, that matter in difference, to
be reported to all the Churches concerned: Howbeit, these Synods so assembled
are not entrusted with any Church Power, properly so called, or with any
Jurisdiction over the Churches themselves, to exercise any Censures, either
over any Churches or Persons, or to impose their determinations on the Churches
or Officers.

XXVII. Besides these occasioned Synods or Councels, there are not instituted
by Christ any stated Synods in a fixed Combination of Churches, or their
Officers, in lesser or greater Assemblies; nor are there any Synods appointed
by Christ in a way of Subordination to one another.

XXVIII. Persons that are joined in Church Fellowship, ought not lightly or
without just cause to withdraw themselves from the communion of the Church
whereunto they are so joined: Nevertheless, where any person cannot continue in
any Church without his sin, either for want of the Administration of any
Ordinances instituted by Christ, or by his being deprived of his due
Privileges, or compelled to any thing in practice not warranted by the Word,
or in case of Persecution, or upon the account of convenience of habitation;
he, consulting with the Church, or the Officer or Officers thereof, may
peaceably depart from the communion of the Church, wherewith he has so walked,
to join himself with some other Church, where he may enjoy the Ordinances in
the purity of the same, for his edification and consolation.

XXIX. Such reforming Churches as consist of Persons sound in the Faith, and of
Conversation becoming the Gospel, ought not to refuse the communion of each
other, so far as may consist with their own Principles respectively, though
they walk not in all things according to the same Rules of Church Order.

XXX. Churches gathered and walking according to the mind of Christ, judging
other Churches (though less pure) to be true Churches, may receive, unto
occasional communion with them, such Members of those Churches as are credibly
testified to be godly, and to live without offense.

FINIS.

