A DECLARATION Or Testimony given by Captain ROBERT NORWOOD Under his hand,
(the which was by him publicly read at a meeting in Ab-church before Mr.
Sidrack Simpson together with many others;)

April 21. 1651.

Together with several his answers and desires, proposed to them for
satisfaction after his EXCOMMVNICATION;

Worthy the most serious consideration of all: Now brought to public view for
clearing of truth, discovering of error, and his own vindication in reference
to many unjust and untrue aspersions cast upon him.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1651.

A DECLARATION Or Testimony given by Captain ROBERT NORWOOD Under his hand,
(the which was by him publicly read at meeting in Ab-church before Mr. Sidrack
Simpson together with many others;) April 21. 1651.
Wherein is laid down his belief concerning God, what he is, who Christ is;
and what the Spirit is; what the soul is; what the body and spirit of man is;
and also his belief concerning the resurrection: With certain quere's preposed
concerning what the Devil Satan or Serpent is? what Antichrist, the false
prophet or dragon is? what the true and very Christ is? Now brought to public
view for clearing of truth, diseovering of erro, and his own vindication in
reference to many unjust and untrue Aspersions cast upon him.

I Do believe one God, or one infinite eternal being, which only or alone
gives a being to all things that are, in whom, from whom, and by whom, all
things do confist, exsist and subsist, he to be unchangeable or immutable,
whose essence and presence is every where, yet comprehended no where, be only
having life in himself and is the alone life of all things, whether visible or
invisible; in him I verily believe there is not the least variation, or shadow
of change, for he I or I am: That this same infinite, eternal one has given a
threefold declaration or manifestation of himself in One.

I do farther beleev, according to the Scriptures, the declaration
manifestation or outgoing of this infinite, eternal being in or by the word in
infinite wisdom and power in creation, according to that which is written,
That by it all things were made, and without it was made nothing that was made;
which is also called Christ or the first borne or only begotten of the Father,
or the Anointed or anoining of God; in which respect, he is said to be the life
and light of the world, as indeed he is, which I steadfastly believe; and that
this light (as it is written) shines in the darkness, though the darkness
comprehend it not; and that he was in the world, and the world was made by him,
though the world knew him not; that he came to his own though his own received
him not: the same Christ I steadfastly believe to be my only and alone light
and life and salvation; and so much and so far as I have attained, him or it or
rather he or it, is risen up or brought forth, it or himself in me, so far I
judge my self to live or be alive or saved, or to have attained salvation and
no farther: and what ever else is in me, I take to be of the flesh, the devil
or darkness, or sin or hell, antichrist or of the false prophet: for that
which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit is
spirit. That this Christ, Word, or Son is One with the Father in the Spirit, I
also steadfastly believe.

I do farther believe concerning the Spirit, or Holy Ghost as its called, that
it infinitely and eternally proceeded from the Father and the Son, and that he
is the immediate life and being of all things, and is the alone true witness
bearer to the father and the son John 5, 6. and neither Father nor Son, yet
both Father and Son, not three but One: One entire, simple, undivided being in
themselves; whence in Scripture he is called sometimes the spirit of the father
or God, and sometimes the spirit of Christ; in or by which spirit we have
communion with the Father and the Son: he in us, we in him are by it made
perfect in one; which also is more or most properly called the spirit of truth;
or rather the spirit which is truth: he only and alone leading into all truth,
or the all of all truth which is God himself.

Concerning that we call main, Paul distinguishes into three: soul, body, and
spirit. The soul I take or believe to be of the divine essence: for it is said,
God breathed into him the breath of life, and he or it became a living soul:
for so the Scripture renders the divine principle, sometimes he, sometimes it;
and indeed, that which is there said to be breathed into man, I cannot conceive
to be less or other then his own essence or spirit, there being nothing but
himself, to go forth from and in himself un^ous: he in his Son by his Spirit,
stating himself in us though in weakness, called elsewhere his Image, or
Spirit; as where its said, My spirit shall not always strive with man: for that
he also is flesh. It Is called also the spirit of truth or which is truth, true
holiness or truth in holiness and righteousness: which image or life of God
in man, is confessed by all or most if I mistake not neither was nor could be
totaly or finaly lost, though much defaced as they call it: And truly (as I
conceive) there must be, and is a perfect truth in every created Creature
according to its kind, which is the invisible life and being of it, the
visibility being only a representation or figure of the invisible life and
glory, according to that in the Romans, That which may be known of God, is
manifest in them: for God has showed it unto them: for the invisible things of
him, that is, hiseternal power and Godhead are seen by the creation of the
world, being considered in his works, to the intent they should be without
excuse. By the Godhead must be there meant Trinity in Unity and Unity in
Trinity; yet every thing in its order, kind or end, according to what he has
appointed every vessel to hold forth of himself, according to that in the
Corinths, where it is said, that there are bodies heavenly, and bodies earthly;
and that the glory of the heavenly is one, and theglory of the earthly is
another; and that one star differs from another in glory yet all these but
one in the union, according to that Paul speaks in another place, that there
are several gifts and administrations, yet but one spirit, and all by one and
the same spirit; which perfect and invisible truth cannot be less or other
then the divine essence: Man carrying the beauteous transparent splendour of the
representation in this earthly creation; yet is not God the Creature, nor the
Creature God: for we must hold God and the created by God for could you speak
all; the invisible glories shadowed or held forth in the whole visible
creation, you could not speak God: for he is all things yet nothing: He is;
which short word, if truly known and understood, speaks him most. And indeed,
were this light, life, or image or God in man, wholly extinct, man would become
more brutish then the beasts; which that it is not, appears plainly to me from
that place where it is written, That the Gentiles who have not the law, do the
things contained in he law; which show the effects of the law written in their
hearts, their consciences bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or
excusing one another.

For the spirit of man or man's natural spirit, It Is that if I mistake not,
which is called the Devil, or Satan, or Serpent, or Antichrist, or false
prophet, or spirit of darkness, or death, or sin, or hell, James 1. 14, 15.
But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and entised.
Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin, when it is
finished brings forth death. Hence Christ tests the Scribes and Pharisees,
they are of their father, the Devil, and his works they do who was a lier or
deceiver from the beginning: hence also some are called dogs, some foxes, some
wolves in sheep- clothing: and Paul is said to fight with beasts at Ephesus:
and Christ when tempted by Peter, (although a Disciple) he calls him Satan:
Every one or every thing taking its denomination from the property or quality
of that spirit which has the major or most ruling power and dominion in and
over him or it. It Is said, here are legions of devils and we say, there is a
covetous devil, an unclean devil, an envious devil, a wrathful deivl and the
like. And so it is said, there are many Antichrists, no one carrying the whose
fountain in him, though each one be from one fountain: so on the contrary, no
one has the whole fountain of life or light in him, (if I may so speak) but
every one in measure according to the good pleasure of him who fills all in
all things. Hence Paul says there are babes and strong men in Christ: and so
John calls some children, some fathers, some young men: and farther says thus.
Little children, let no man deceive you: he that has righteousness, is
righteous, as he is righteous: he that commits sin, is of the devil for the
devil sins from the beginning. For this purpose the son of God was made
manifest, that he might destroy the works of the devil. Whosoever is borne of
God, does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him and he cannot sin
because he is borne of God And hence Paul also, It Is not I, but Christ in me.
And again It Is not l, but sin in me. And the Scripture every where comprehends
all under these two states or terms of light and darkness, the natural man,
and the spiritual man children of light or life, and children of death and
darkness, according to the rule, power or government each spirit has in them.
Wherefore it is said, Know you not, that to whomsoever you give your selves as
servants to obey, hti servants you are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin
unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? Again it is written you who
were darkness, are now become light; you who were dead in trespasses and sins
has he now quickened, and translated into the Kingdom of Christ: and that we
are risen together with Christ; and that he is our resurrection and glory: and
that he has raised us up, and made us sit together in the heavenly places or
things in Christ. And in the same 2. to the Ephe. This spirit in man is called
the spirit or Prince that rules in the air, which indeed is an airy, lying
notion swimming in the head or brain of man, having no foundation or root in
God who is truth, but is always at enmity with it. We are also said to be dead
whilst we live. From all which I conceive, the chief, if not the only
resurection pointed unto and intended in Scripture, is our rising up out of
that death and darkness, or hell we were held in or kept under by: or rather
Christ who is our light, our life, our all in all, arising in his own life,
light, power and glory in us, swallowing up or destroying death, darkness,
sin, hell and what ever else is contrary to or against him and us and so
bringing us in and with himself into that glory he had in and with the Father
before the world was. Wherefore it is said, The kingdom of heaven is within
you: and when they say, lo here, lo there, beleev it not. But I expect not,
neither think this will be in its height and full perfection till the
separation by that we call death, it be accomplished and completed, not whilst
in these earthly tabernacles, not until we have laid off all our earthly
garments, and be clothed upon of him who is indeed our true clothing; which
made Paul so groan with desire thereof: indeed the Saints are unclothing daily
and marvelous unclothings and clothings are at hand.

For the body which is indeed beastial, of the same nature and substance with
the beasts, I conceive and believe; it also shall have its resurrection in its
kind, together with other of the like kind, according to that in the first of
the Corinthes 15. For to speak properly, nothing dies, that is, annihilated, as
many do imagine; but is changed from glory to glory: but for the soul to be
reunited again to this earth by beastial body of flesh blood, and bones after
separation, and to live together in some one or more place or places, some to
enjoy eternal happiness or salvation, and other some eternal misery and
damnation; I find no foundation in scripture firm enough to build any sound
belief upon: for Christ says, In the resurrection there is no marrying nor
giving in marriage, but that they are as the Angels in heaven. Then no eating,
nor drinking, except of that spiritual rock or Manna. Then sure no flesh, blood
or bones. And as sure it is, that in no proper or true sense whatsoever can
flesh and blood inherit the kingdom of heaven: for it lusts or is at enmity
against the spirit: wherefore I say, this doctrine deserves not only to be
exploded the schools, but excommunicated all Churches. For he who makes or
works a ly, shall be shut out of the new Jerusalem; as also he who would sit
in the temple of Christ, as if he were Christ, as if he were the true Anointed
or Anointing, who will have others to believe as he believes, for no other
reason, but because he believes so; forgetting that Christ, as he is the life,
so he is the light of every one that comes into the world, and that none can
come to the Father but by the Son: nor none unto the Son but by the Spirit,
which 3. are one in the unione.

For farther manifestation and clearing of the truth, I desire in all
humbleness of mind and meekness of spirit, in reference to my own and others
satisfaction, in a sober and orderly way, an answer to these following quere's.

1. What that Devil or Serpent was, that is said to deceive Eve; his, or its
nature and property what it is?

2. Whether properly and truly there can be said to have been, or is, any more
then one devil, serpent, Satan or deceiver; though he or it manifest it self
several ways, and after diverse manners?

3. What the true and very Antichrist, or false prophet is; their nature,
property or quality what it is?

4. Where the true and proper seat, residence, power or dominion of the devil,
Satan, Serpent, deceiver, or Dragon is, or this false Christ, or false prophet
is?

5. Whereby, or wherewith they are said to deceive, or wherein the power or
strength of their, or it is temptation or deceit lies?

1. What the true and very Christ is, who is said in Scripture to be the only
and alone light and life of the world?

2. How, and in what sense he is properly, and truly saip to deliver us from
sin, death, and hell?

3. The true, real and very ground, cause and end of his sufferings, death or
desolution, resurrection, and ascension; as also his incarnation and
intercession what they sigfy or hold forth to us, and how or in what manner or
sense, we are to look upon them, and what use we are to make of them, since the
scriptures both old and new are very mysterious, as where Christ says, Except
ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood, you have no life in you: and that he was
that rock that followed them, and that Manna that came down from heaven; And
Paul says, although he had known Christ after the flesh (which could not be
meant of a corporal knowledge) yet henceforth would he know him so no more: and
he farther says, That Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever?

An answer whereunto I desire on this day sennit, here in this place before all
the people in writing, or else some other may in love, peace and quietness,
have liberty to give answer thereunto.

And I do farther declare, what ever man or men, report, accuse, or charge me
with blasphemy, or any error or errors maintain^d countenanced orencouraged by
me, or any other thing or matter contrary to or against the laws of this
Nation, or prejudicial to this State or Commonwealth, and do not duly prove
the same against me, is in the sight of God and man a slanderer, back-biter and
murderer: and in case any the said crime, or crimes be proved against me, I
shall desire no favor; but shall willingly and readily give up my self, to
undergo and suffer what penalty or penalties so. ever by law, is to be
inflicted in such cases without the least partiality.

POSTSCRIPT.
To which Queres I could not obtain from Mr. Simpson any answer, nor so much as
whether he would, or could answer them or no? whether he did less then belly or
blaspheme God before all the people, I will not, let them present judge. And if
I prove not him and the Clergy of England generally, who cry out of others for
heresy and blasphem^^^^ greatest deceivers, or falsifiers of the truth, and
Blasphemers (as themselves call it) in the Nation, let me die the death.

This I speak not to cast reproach, disgrace or obloquie, upon any ingenuous,
sober, quiet, peaceable-minded man or men; but to stop the career of that
spirit, which drives more fariously to the engaging the people more in blood,
then the Bishop did, were their power and other advantages answerable. Let
therefore the moderation of your spirits appear and judge not least you be
judged: for assuredly you are guilty of as great, if not greater crimes then
other men.

But stand still and be quiet in your selves, that you may see the great
sallvation the Lord is about to bring forth.

Be truly noble, search as the Bereans did whether the things be so or no.

It were much to be desired, that the Clergy might once more be enjoined to
assemble together, to give an account to the people (of whom and from whom they
have received and taken so much of the sweat of their brows) what that true
very God and Christ is that they have so long talked of to the people. It
mayjustly be suspected from their preachings and practices, that they have need
of a Paul to show them what that God and Christ is, whom they ignorantly
worship; least the blind leading of the blind both fall into the ditch.

To them all I propose these quere's, hoping it will not be long before they
shall receive answer under a known hand, they being concerning such points in
which they are daily conversant; if not, they must give the people leave to
say, there is little reason to continue the wages or stipends of such stewards,
who can give no account of their stewardship.

Or to believe them the true Ambassadors of God and Christ when as they cannot
tell us what their Lord and matter is. Let them then forbear any more to bind
the people to their faith and belief, since themselves cannot give an account
or reason of their own faith and hope that is in them. Tell us also, O ye
dreamers, where and what your Hell and Heaven is: I acknowledge both.

Robert Norwood.

For Master SIDRACK SIMPSON.
SIR,
INstead of answering my Queries proposed, or from Scripture duly proving my
assertions, errors. I understand that you with your Church (as you call it)
have excommunicated me, I having long before come out from you, having of my
self left communion with you, neither could I without sin any longer upon that
account, hold communion or fellowship with you, the ground and reason whereof I
forbear to publish at present, because I will yet spare you. You have also as I
hear, given me up to the Devil, I therefore do here before all this people
require of you, whose duty I suppose they will all say it is, to instruct,
teach and tell me, what that Devil is to whom you have so given me up, hoping
you are not so ignorant as to give me up to him whom you know not, or what his
properties and qualities are?

And then, what it is you have so given up, whether the whole; Soul, body and
spirit? or what part, power or saculty you have given up?

3. What power, right and authority you had so to do?

4. Whether you have power again to deliver me from the devil?

Thereason why I require this, is that I might get from under his power and
dominion, avoid and be delivered from his snares, wiles and subtilties, as I
and all people ought to do.

Next, I require for how long, or until what time you have given me up to the
Devil? If you say, until I repent; you must then first prove from scripture,
that that which I have asserted, is to be repented of and turned from, and the
contrary to be received, embraced, owned and walked in; which is indeed true
repentance, which yet you have not done, as you ought to do, before you make
any such proceedings against any.

Now I do here solemnly promise before all the people, that if you shall from
Scripture prove the things such, where of you did accuse me, and I under my
hand have asserted; that I will so far as God shall enable me, truly repent
and turn from the same, and under my hand publish my recantation till which
time, I may not reced from the things; least I be found in the sight of God,
and man a desertor of that truth, God by his spirit in the Scriptures has made
known to me; as also an eminent and evident breaker of that first and great
command, which says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, with all thine
heart, and him only shall thou hear and serve; and become a hearer, server or
worshipper of men, or the false or lying spirit in men, which is to worship the
devil: for not to worship God or truth, is to worship he devil, or a ly.

That which you did then charge me with, as error or blasphemy, was (as I
understand) that I held the soul to be of the Divine essence, or of the essence
of God.

Now I earnestly desire, beg and entreat; Nay I do here in the presence of
all this people, require you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
Ambassador or Minister you say you are, and whose mind you then must needs
have; and as you will answer it at the great day of his appearing; that you
tell, decalre and prove, to me from Scripture or any other way, that holds
Analogy therewith; what in very deed and truth the soul is, that so I may
repent and recant this my error (if it be found so) and be delivered from the
power of darkness and of the devil or snares of Satan, the very end for which
Christ his Ministers and Ambassadors were sent, and that in writing; that it
may be considered, compared with and tried by the Scriptures and true Analogy
of our faith, I being very desirous to forsake all and every error, though
carrying never so specious a show of truth, though never so old or new,
profitable or honorable in the worlds esteem, knowing well what they are, and
whence they come and also that true salvation is only and alone of and in the
truth: And that because it is strong above all THINGS, IT, and IT only being
everlasting.

2. Secondly, that you prove to me from Scripture, or sound reason, what the
spirit of man, or man's natural is.

3. What the true and very heaven and hell is, spoken of in Scripture, and you
from God or Christ (as you say) so much promise to, and threaten the people
with, the very right and true knowledge whereof, is of the greatest and highest
concernment to be clearly made known and discovered to the people of all other
things: all things else being but as it were accessaries thereunto, therefore
certainly must needs be known to you, if you be what you say you are: yet it is
very much to be feared, that very few of you have the true knowledge either of
the one or the other, but that most fancy both the one and the other, as the
Papists their Purgatory, and the Poets their Elisian fields, is a bundantly
evident: Both God and the Devil, both death and life, both heaven and hell,
being very much nearer to us all, then we are aware of.

I do therefore again in the love and bowels of Christ, entreat and beseech you
for my own and others satisfaction (as you are or pretend to be his Minister or
Ambassador) that I may speedily have answer hereunto in writing, as also to
those former Queries proposed, that I may not longer continue in error, and so
under the power of the Devil or darkness; you have bound your self here unto,
not only by your profession, but especially by that act of yours against me:
for how shall I believe concerning that which I know not? how shall I repent,
disclaim or revoke that you charge as error upon me, except you prove it so
from Scripture? And do not say in excuse, that I disown you, as having any
relation to you; since your self have taken that authority upon you, and you
ought in this case to give an account or reason of the faith and hope that is
in you, as I have done, who pretend not to any such thing as you do.

If you do not, let me tell you, I cannot in reason, justice or judgment, take
or account you for any other then an impostor, deceiver and deluder of the
people, nor will any other sober, judicious man, neither will they esteem your
excommunications of any more worth then the Popes bulls, which equally with
those if not more, in respect more is pretended to by you, deserve to be
together with your self excommunicated the Nation, and the rest of your
fraternity as the very plagues and pests of the Nation, the very firebrarnds of
hell, workers of all mischief. I speak not to cast contempt upon any sober,
peaceable-minded man or men, who seek and follow the truth in love: no, such I
love and honor with my soul.

All you charged as crime upon me, so far as I can understand in reference to
my outward conversation, was, that I should tell a ly in reference to a trust
reposed in me: to which I often and again before your selves and diverse others,
did solemnly protest in the Presence of God, if it were the last word I should
speak, I speak not the words as some present conceived I did; and further did
declare, that if I did speak them, I was a very knave, rogue, and lier therein;
and if I should say I did speak them, I must sin against my own soul, no
falsifying or breach of trust was found or proved against me.

James says, that the tongue sets on fire the very course of Nature and that
it is set on fire of hell, where then is hell? and what then are those criers
out of Others, for blasphemers, heretics and the like? who indeed come nearer
the truth, and give a better account thereof then themselves can or will do.
Judge O England! Nay, Judge O all ye Nations, who they have been and are, that
have thus set England, nay all Nations on fire, as at this day; and at whose
hands that abundance of blood which has been shed shall be required!

Where I speak of the spirit of man or man's natural spirit I do not mean it
was made such as is there expressed; no, but no sooner made but it became such,
and remains such until renewed, in lightened, or born again: wherefore Paul
says, be renewed in the spirit of your mind, being in your own spirit in which
you are fallen and gone from God, from life and salvation and so become dead,
b^^stiall and devilish of sin and hell; be as you were at first, return to
your life: this is indeed that Prodigal, that having gotten his stock would
now live and be of himself, he would not that God should be all* he nothing,
but in him, but he would be in and of himself: and this that god of the world,
that devil, that beast, that serpent, that dragon that hitherto has had the
chief government of the world, even man's natural spirit, which is at this day
much heightened and improved: but God is coming to destroy both it, and all its
seeming gloricus erections, together with that Antichrist, man of sin, and
false Prophet.

ROBERT NORWOOD.


