An Additional DISCOURSE Relating unto a Treatise lately published by Capt.
ROBERT NORWOOD, ENTITLED, A Pathway unto Englands perfect Settlement.

Many things therein are more fully opened, several Doubts and Objections
answered; a brief account given of the Ancient Laws, Customs, and Constitutions
of this Nation, before and since the Conquest, so called.

With something concerning the Jewish CIVIL CONSTITUTIONS.

With a brief Answer to Mr. John Spittlehouse, in his Book bearing title, The
first Addresses to his Excellency, etc.

printer's device with half moon with face In Paul's Church Yard At The Richard



London, Printed for Richard Moon, at the seven stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-door. 1653.

For the Gentlemen met, assembled, and sitting together in Council at
Westminster.
Sirs,
THe end of every good man is Peace; and the Way of every truely-wise man is
one and the same with his End. As is the End, such is or should be the Means
thereunto. To a peaceable End, is therefore a peaceable Way required. We all
conclude in this, That unto every certain prefixed End appointed by God unto
man, there is, and of necessity must be, a certain prefixed Way and Means
appointed by him also unto that end; and that in the finding, attaining, and
continuing in the Way, we shall certainly and assuredly find and attain the
End also.

Every man almost is found a strong (at least) pretender unto Peace; various
and several ways, according to the various and several minds and opinions of
men, being accordingly offered and proposed. Materials for a Building are
called for, but contrary and unsuitable things are brought, which speaks us
still much Nimrod-like in the building of his Babel. We are in confusion,
without dispute; may it be the time of Englands coming forth. I know there is a
set and appointed time for every purpose under the sun; a time for War, as well
as a time for Peace: O may it be the time of Englands peace and rest, at least
within it self, in reference to it self. I will hope, I will pray, I will beg
and bow that it may. I have therefore, and unto this end, with no little
diligence, made search for, and enquiry after the way and means; and have thus
found and concluded,

That all the several Differences, Disorders, Dissentions, and Wars, and so
consequently the Ruins, Deaths, and Destructions that have so constantly
attended and befallen mankind, have principally, if not only been caused and
occasioned from that desire of Sovereignty, Rule, Power, and Dominion, which
some man or men do or would assume, usurp, and exercise over others, whether in
things Civil or Religious, as we call and (I know not why) distinguish them, or
make them distincts or severals, as if it were not Religion, the Service and
Worship of God, to love our neighbor as our self, to do good, to be just,
righteous, pitiful, and merciful unto all men: doubtless it is, and it is pure
and undefiled Religion too. Why the six last Commands should be more distinct
and several, and by many set so much below the four first, then all or any of
the ten should be one from another, I know not, except for number sake only,
or something there may be in order of Causes, (as we use to speak) as the
first, and so the four first, may be the ground of, leader and directer to the
other: but there is not, neither can there be, any or the least difference in
respect to their essence and being; for the one is not, neither can it be
without the other: and therefore, as it is written, He (I am sure) who breaks
any one of them, breaks all and every one of them, such is their unanimous
union. And verily, these Divisions and Undoings have and do divide and undo us
all; let it be looked to. Pardon this long Parenthesis.

And the reason of the aforesaid Position lies strong: for thereby is not
only the Law of man's Nature violated, his Light extinguished, his Lord
suppressed; but there is there with also a seed sown, a foundation laid of
continual Enmities, Emulations, Strifes, and Contentions; oft-times such, which
will not, nor which cannot cease, and that unto many Generations, until it have
again recovered and secured its own proper first native right, liberty, and
freedom; no not, although it be with the utter overthrow, ruin, and
destruction of him or them who have thus usurped. Nay, to tell you the truth,
as the truth is, Except a very strong, even an Almighty interceder, interposer,
or interposition be made, and come between, to reconcile and unite, there must
be a constant and continual succession of bloodshed, ruin, and destruction,
even unto all eternity: and it cannot possibly be otherwise, (as I could
plainly demonstrate to you, but that I hasten) such and so great is the Enmity
raised and begotten thereby. And indeed, the thing shows it self; it is so at
this day, has been so from the beginning of Nimrod's setting up: which is so
plain in the Scriptures, and so visible through all the Nations and Kingdoms of
the earth, as that indeed it needs no other proof.

The Law of his Nature, I say, is thereby altogether violated, he having the
absolute entire Rule and Government of himself, in himself, inseparably united
to him, in his very essence and being: so that none whomsoever, upon any
pretense whatsoever, may or ought to challenge, assume, or exercise, in any
measure, in any kind or sort, any right or power with him or over him therein:
for he was made perfect, and Perfection admits of no more, of no supplement or
addition; for then not perfect: but he was made up -- right, in the highest
perfection in righteousness, in the image and likeness of God; and therefore
has God given him this Command, That he should have no other gods, nor should
he bow down unto, serve, or worship any besides him. And this is the
indubitable law of his Nature, which he may not relinquish, part with, nor
depart from; neither suffer himself, in any case, to be robbed or bereaved of,
or overcome in, by any temptations, assaults, or allurements whatsoever: for so
much and so far as he does, so far and so much is he still in the land of
Egypt, and house of bondage; yea, and brought under the power and dominion of
darkness and death also, as Adam was.

And God never did nor does command or forbid any thing contrary to the Laws of
Nature; for that were to deny himself, which he can by no means do: for Natures
Laws, Bounds, and Limits, are all given, set, ordained and appointed by
himself, unto each and every thing, according to the nature, use, and end
thereof; the breach and violation whereof, is the very, certain, true, and real
cause and occasion of all the several evils or calamities that are in the world.

In a Book I lately published, which I call England's Center and Foundation of
Peace and Rest, I there show, that Rule and Government, properly and truly, is
to rule, govern, guide, and direct, the thing or things to be ruled and
governed, in their certain, proper, true, just, and right way, unto their
certain, proper, true, just, and right ends; and that therefore it was
absolutely necessary to him who would rule and govern aright, that he do
certainly know the very certain, intrinse nature, property, and quality of the
thing or things to be ruled and governed; otherwise, he disturbs and disorders
them, turns away and turns aside the thing or things from him, which he would
rule and govern to his use and service; and not only so, but also makes,
procures, and causes them to be or become his hurt, loss, and detriment, yea
his deadly (as we use to speak) foe and enemy. To which Treatise, for more and
more full satisfaction in these things, I refer you.

This Sovereignty, Rule, Power, and Dominion, was (so far as we can understand)
first assumed, usurped, and exercised by Nimrod, that mighty hunter, as the
Scripture calls him; he laid the first foundation, and from him has it
continued successively, more or less, thorowout the whole world (as may be
easily seen) to this day: but it is even almost finished, and come to its
determinate end: He would be the God and Lord in and over all; he it was that
would build, form, shape, and fashion all men according to his mind and mould;
whenas, in truth, the physiognomies, shapes, and forms of men, are not more
various and differing, then are their Minds and Spirits. Wherein appears the
manifold wonderful wisdom of God; yet this wonderful variety, in, by, and
through the love of the same God, (who is one entire perfect unity) (the which
love is light, and the which light is life; for the love is the life of God, in
which he only lives, and after or in respect to which only he IS, and is and
can be truly said to be the everliving God) are all and every variety gathered
together, firmly knit and tied up in one entire Unity; herein indeed lying,
being, and consisting the glory and beauty of the whole Creation, Unity in
Variety, and Variety again in Unity, else were it a nothing but a mere heap or
lump, and the bond, O the bond, the bond, the bond, which is Love.

We see it thus in the natural body; there are several various and diverse
members, and diverse several various works and operations, severally belonging
unto each and every one of them, every member being perfectly and absolutely
distinct in it self, and distinct in its Office, operation, employment, and
business; yet through the Love being bound up, tied and knit together, make but
one entire Body, each member serving other in its particular place and office
in the Body, according to the Laws and Ordinances thereof; the Whole or the One
being served of the Whole, insomuch that the Whole and every part is presently
sensible of the loss of any the least part. We see it also in those things we
call Contraries, as in Fire and Water, Air and Earth; which I call Severals, or
Diverse. We see all mixed bodies made up thereof, and that into one most sweet
Harmony and perfect Unity, even of those contraries so called. O the Love, the
wonderful power, virtue, and operation thereof! though I choose rather to call
them Severals, or Diverse; for in themselves, in their true nature, essenc, eand
being, they will not be found so, but the excess or the going forth or out from
the Unity, in desire and endeavor to be or have the Supremacy, hence only
grows and arises the difference and the enmity, as we may plainly see in fire
and water, the one cold and moist, the other hot and dry, yet each of them
eagerly thirsting after, freely and fully joining and mixing with the other, in
one entire and perfect Unity: as we see in every perfect generation, where the
desire and intensness of supremacy ceases, the only cause of all the enmities
in the whole Creation, and whose generations never were, are, or possibly can
be perfect, but crooked, perverse, impotent, and feeble; so that it is plain,
that which makes the difference, and so causes and occasions the enmity, is the
excess or exorbitancy.

That then which must give, and so keep, maintain, continue and secure a true
and right order, and so consequently strength, peace and rest, life and
salvation, must be the keeping of the Laws of God in nature, whole, entire, and
inviolate; it must be the taking away, keeping out, and securing our selves in
the point of Supremacy and Sovereignty, or rather excesses and exorbitancies,
in that we call Rule and Government, which is, and of necessity must be, of a
just, due, right, and true commixion, composure or temparament; and in truth,
that is truly the only and alone Supreme and Sovereign, where, when, or in
which all the Severals or Individuals do meet, unite and concenter together in
one: no one or more part or parts whatsoever can in any proper and true sense
be called or said to be the Sovereign or Supreme; but the Sovereignty and
Supremacy lies in the union and conjunction of all and every part into one;
which one is the Center, the which Center is the only Sovereign and Supreme,
from whence only each and every member had, has, and can have their being,
life, and motion, and unto or into which they do again return, remit, and rest
themselves in peace and quietness; the secure, entire, safe, and inviolate
keeping whereof, keeps, supplies, and secures each and every part with life,
health, and strength, in their orderly, right, due, just, and true motions.

Gentlemen, my end and only end is peace, safety, security, happiness and
rest, life and salvation unto all in and of this Nation; my way also unto this
end is peaceable; therefore I propose not any new thing, nor would I that any
should, so as to bring us unto it, or that any new thing should be brought unto
us, which may, conconstantly has, and necessarily does cause an occasion many,
long, great, and hot contentions, emulations, strifes, hatreds, and wars, and
those not without the effusion of much blood; but that each and every man of us
may return into or unto our true, proper certain, and fixed Center, unto our
most sure, firm, and stable basis and foundation, that we all be fully and
wholly, perfectly, and completely, brought under and restored unto the
subjection and protection of the ancient known fundamental laws, customs and
constitutions of this English Nation, the laws of our Forefathers and those
only; and that those be wholly and entirely restored unto us, with their due,
just, and true administration and execution; and that done and performed also,
by such men and means, in such way and manner, and such only as of old, even
in the beginning has been and was used, accustomed, allowed, ordained, and
appointed by our Forefathers; wherein and unto which only and alone, and unto
the very true observance and keeping whereof, I hold my self wholly bound and
obliged, and profess my self wholly and altogether subject. In the Treatise
before mentioned, I showed that light is the only true and certain Ruler and
Governor of all things; and that because it, and it only, carries, guides,
directs, and governs all things with ease, peace, quiet, and safety, in their
proper, true, just, and right way, unto their proper, true, just, and right
ends; therefore, as in the great world God the Creator of all things has
ordained and appointed, set up and made visible, a certain, constant, fixed
light, for the rule and governance thereof, and all things therein; so also
has he in every Microcosme of the same, according to the nature, use, and end
each thing is by him appointed to. Were it not so, and so much, and so far as
it is not so, even so, much, and so far there is, and of necessity must be
confusion, darkness, and death in and unto each and every created thing, as is
evidently to be seen day by day, as when the Sun is clouded, eclipsed and goes
down, as we call it. Man, he also, so much, and so far as he is brought forth
after, or rises up in and with his Image, the Image and likeness of God; even
so much, and so far does he make and create his things in the very self-same
Image and likeness; of which you shall find more and more plainly in the
forementioned Treatise.

It is absolutely necessary therefore, that to the right, easy, safe, quiet,
peaceable, and secure, ordering, ruling and governing of a Common or Commune
weal (for so it was in the beginning; it is an old word, and it is a good word)
that there be a common, or commune Law (ours is so, and so called) a law
equally common unto all men, or a law in which each and every one has a like
and the same common or commune right and propriety, and from or by which all
and every one are to have a like justice and equity done them, without any the
least respect to any kind, sort, or degree of Persons whatsoever, else it
loses both its use, name, and end; it is the same for rule, government,
guidance and direction, the same for safety, security, and protection, and
alike the same unto all and every one, and alike the same against all and every
one, who shall any wise, by any means, in any kind violate, infringe, and
break the same: It is necessary therefore that this Law be fixed, certain,
constant and unchangeably one and the same; as it is in the great light which
God has set in the great world, to direct, guide, and govern us in and unto
all things: otherwise, so much and so far as it is not so, so far and so much
does, and of necessity must disorder, darkness, confusion, and death overtake,
fall and seize upon each and every one of us: and this has been and is our
case and condition in England at this day.

England, or the Englishmens Law, be it known unto all the Nations, Kingdoms,
and Peoples in Heaven and in Earth is this, as you shall find it was in King
Ethelrees Parliament enacted, That each man should do as he would be done unto,
which it calls the most right Law; and that the higher and greater men the
Delinquents therein and breakers thereof were, by so much the more and heavier
they should be punished.

Upon which Law of Laws, are our Laws firmly founded, both as they are in
themselves, and in their whole administration also (which, had I time, I could
prove and particularly manifest) that is their only and alone Basis and
Foundation, upon which they stand and center in; That in all things they carry
along with them, in their very essence and being, yea in their very face and
foreheads: upon that, as upon their true hinge, they hang, wind and turn in
all things, at all times, in reference unto all men. That Parliament has it
farther thus: that Efferatur consilium, quod populo habeatur utilissimum; and
again, In rem totius patriae. It would be too tedious to show how often, by
whom, at what time, and upon what occasions they have been interrupted, and
both we and our laws invaded, trespassed, and trampled upon, ever by such who
have gone forth from, or out of the union into exorbitancie and excess,
breaking the limit which nature, the God of nature, and our Laws had given and
set unto them; wherein (as is plainly to be seen in our Histories) they have
constanly broken, undone, ruined and destroyed themselves and theirs) and at
what times, by what men and means in part redeemed, restored, and recovered
again; and therewith how much of our fore Fathers blood it has cost; yet never
did, nor ever could any whomsoever, by all their endeavors, policies, and
force they could use, work its extirpation in the least; but the next
generation of those who have invaded our Land, have agreed and consented with
us in them, and stood with us to maintain them; yea the very Invaders
themselves (as I shall show anon) only they they thought them too straight and
strict as unto themselves (in reference to that state of Supremacy, wherein
through the ambitiousness, irregularity and exorbitancy of their mind, they
desired to stand) have therefore caused and procured the making of some Acts,
Statutes, or Bylaws, as they are called; and those through the corruption of
the Ministers thereof, put in execution also; and so, a many undue, unjust, and
irregular Process and proceedings, judgments and executions, have been had,
made, and done upon the same; although nothing be better and more certainly
known unto the Students, Practitioners, and Ministers of the Law, then that all
Acts of Parliament whatsoever, having not their foundation plain and visible in
our common Law, are in themselves void and null, and ought not, upon the
highest penalties, be put in execution; and how often it has been so adjudged,
that Affirmative Statutes do not annul the common Law, and that one may
prescribe against a Statute negative, in affirmation of the common Law, for
which the comments on Littletons Burgage: Yet, I say, nevery did, nor never
could any whomsoever extirpate the same; for the root thereof is too strong in
nature to be rooted out, vanquished or destroyed, and strongly and deeply
rooted even from Heaven it self in the hearts of Englishmen; It, that is, the
true English Law, being the most just, the most equitable, the most righteous,
and the most merciful Law in the whole world, and that in the whole process and
administration thereof also.

The Laws of England, or the Englishmens Laws, even the Laws of our
forefathers, of whom Nennius confesses that the British Annals had the
descent of their Brute or Britto from J^phet (obtaining Europe with the British
Isles, for his portion; of which Noah's will in Eusebius) whose genealogy
through 20 descents to Noah and Adam, he says he had from the traditions of
those that lived here in the first times of the Brittons. And why may it not be
so? our laws speak their original from the first and purest of times, long
before Nimrods erection of his Babel For Strabo speaking of the ancient
Brittons, says, that for a long time diverse of them abhorred the very name of
a King, and when they had a King, the Crown passed by Election; and that
Ambiorix one of their Kings acknowledged that he had or should have no more
power over his people, then they had over him. Certainly they had their
original from, their rise, being, and beginning with, the purest laws of
nature, in the first and purest times, such is their excellency, splendour, and
purity; they giving unto every freeborne Englishman, as much as God and nature
(that I may speak with reverence) may or can give; the same liberty, safety,
privilege, and protection, do they give unto all and every one living in
England.

Gentlemen, you have seen how that God has in all things given unto man, in
the very law of his nature, essence, and being, the whole and sole power, rule,
dominion, and government, of and over himself, perfectly, entirely, in and unto
himself; so that he has and is, and of necessity must have and be, according
to the Law of his Creation, King, Priest, and Prophet, in and of himself, in
reference to himself; which (as is said before) none may assume, usurp,
or-exercise over him, nor may he suffer it from, nor give it up unto any other
whomsoever, upon the greatest, heaviest, and sorest punishments that can be
inflicted. Hence it is the Laws of our forefathers, and now our Laws by and
through them, have so wonderfully, carefully, exactly, and strongly provided
and fortified us in this case, that it seems and appears to be their utmost and
only end, to keep, protect, secure, and maintain each and every one herein,
from all and every one that should offer or attempt any breach or violation
thereof, by assuming, usurping, and exercising any power, right, and authority
thereunto, and so break and violate the Law of man's nature, and therein become
a most grievous and great transgressor both against God and Man. Hence it makes
every man's house his Castle, which may not by any man be entered without his
consent, except in one case, and that extraordinary, and that also in a known,
open, and legal way, after entrance damanded, and the parties refusal. Yet deny
they not, in any case whatsoever, any man or men whomsoever, to take, receive,
use, and enjoy the help, aid, or assistance of any man or men whomsoever
himself judges necessary, fit, and convenient thereunto; provided that he
injure, molest, or trouble not his neighbor, but that he in all things do as
he would be done unto, according to the Law; and that he do not that unto
another, which he would not that another should do unto him: which if he break,
and complaint thereof be made, then or in such case only does or can the Law
take cognizance; the examination, trial, and judgment, (in case he be found
guilty) being altogether by his Neighbors, and those of his own choosing. For
every Officer and Minister of Justice whom or whatsoever, by the Laws of this
Nation are to be freely chosen by the Neighborhood where they are to officiate
and administer. It tyeth no man to complain, loath to find any offender; very
pitiful and merciful to offenders, as is to be seen in cases of life and death:
none may be judges therein, who are exercised in any measure in the shedding of
blood; as Soldiers, Surgeons, Butchers, and the like. And if he have none
such impanelled for his Jury, yet may he (if he see cause) except against any
other whom he may judge not his very, true, and real friends, to the number of
Five and thirty. And indeed, there will be found little or no use or need at
all for any Laws, but to keep, preserve, secure, and protect Mankind herein,
and from the violence and oppression thereof, or of such men: therefore were
they in the beginning but few, very few, and those but short, very short. The
care, wisdom, and providence of our forefathers lay as much (that I say not
more) in securing the way and manner of attaching, trying, judging, and
executing those judgments, from injury, injustice, violence, and oppression, in
the several process and proceedings they are to make therein, as it did to
secure the end: and there is or should be in all things as much fear of losing,
and as much care of keeping the true, right, and just Way, as of the End; for
the Way secures the End; the keeping whereof, attains the End; the losing
whereof, loses (or at least extremely endangers) the End. And the party accused
(if found an offender) may suffer manifold much more in the way of his
Attaching, Trying, Judging, and Executing, then in the Judgment and Execution
it self: and thereby is the Law extremely violated, and much injustice done.

It is noted by Bid, who (observing how Religion was preached both to King and
Counts, omnibus Comitibus) says, that there was a license granted for public
Preaching: but when the King and diverse great men were converted and baptized,
yet there was no force used to compel others to be of that Religion, because
(says he) they were taught that Christ's service must be voluntary, and not
forced. And verily, God himself, who is the Creator, Governor, and Ruler of
all things, yet forces he not, nor compels he any thing, no not unto the
best good, beyond its present light, power, and strength: for so much and so
far as any does, even so much and so far does he very extremely wrong, injure,
and oppress the same. As, suppose I find a Lamb strayed from its pasture,
weak, and almost starved for the want of it; I pity it, and would preserve it:
but should I now hurry and drive this Lamb beyond its strength, I might destroy
it before it come there. Or, suppose a darksighted man were to pass a deep
water, over or by mean of an extreme narrow bridge; if I should now hurry and
force him along, and not give him time and leisure to find the bridge, or when
he is upon it, compel him faster then his sight and feet can find the
foundation, I might endanger his drowning. We may our selves, and also cause
others to make such haste, as that we may endanger not only the loss of our
Way, but our End also: or, if we do attain our End, our haste may make us
altogether unable to rest there. Much less does he force or compel any thing
contrary unto, above, beyond, or besides the law of its Nature; nor requires he
(of any) more then he has given, or in any other way, or unto any other end
then he has appointed; and has made man himself judge thereof. And verily had
not God given and set up in and unto man, a Law in and unto himself, he could
not charge, accuse, judge, or condemn man; for, as the Scripture says, where
there is no Law, there is no Transgressdon: and the Law written in Tables, is
no more nor no other then the Law of God in Nature, by him set, given, and
appointed in its Creation: for God changes not, but is immutable in all his
ways and works; but man he changes, degenerateth, and falls in himself from
himself, by going forth out of himself, unto other Gods, bowing, falling down
unto, fearing, serving, and worshipping them: whereas man, as he was made, so
should he stand, remain, and continue perfectly upright, in and unto himself.
Wherefore it is written, that the Gentiles who have not the Law, yet do by
nature the things contained in the Law, they having not the written Law (in
Tables of stone) are a law unto themselves, which show the effects of the Law
written in their hearts, (or, that the Law has its original ground in nature,
as the efficient cause thereof) their conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts accusing or excusing one another.

Religion, or the true and real Service and Worship of God, lies not in Forms,
but in Essentialities: yet I say not that true Forms are to be despised or
forsaken; for nothing is without its true form.

Verily, I was never so much afraid of any sort of men, as those who come so
much clothed with the name of God, and Religion: and I profess before heaven
and earth, they are generally the most dangerous and deceitful men in the whole
world, and were so from the beginning. O these zealous men undo us all! Look
into the Old Testament, there you shall find still how these men of God, as
they are called, have still caused the people to err. Aaron, their first
High Priest, no sooner was Moses absent, but he makes them a molten calf. The
Kings, Priests, and Prophets, all along, are the men chiefly complained of by
the Lord, who led and drew away the hearts of the people from the Lord.

You shall find the same in the New Testament, and all along since to this
day, (but these here in our days excel herein all that ever went before them;
you shall have nothing almost in their mouths but God, and all for God, and
the Godly Party; when, as the Lord lives, they know little or nothing of him. I
tell you, God is certainly a most stable, fixed, just, righteous, constant,
upright, and faithful being; yea, and he is most merciful also: all which you
might easily see, and that every day, but that you do and will shut your eyes
against the Sun, which shines upon the good and upon the bad) nor indeed can it
(very hardly, I might say, possibly, and prove it too, but that I hasten) be
otherwise, whilst Kings and Priests claim a right, power, privilege, and
prerogative from God thereunto, distinct from, and above other men, as being
better, more excellent, or more holy then they. Wherefore it was not without
good ground, that the Kings of Judah (even of Judah, who, of all that ever I
heard or read of, might claim to be immediately from God, and so plead
exemption from Man's either Judgment or Choice; yet they, even those of the
house of David in special) were to be judged, as well as to judge; which is
clear (as my Author cited a little after has it) in their Sanhedrin, Melec,
and other parts of their Talmud; and that not only before they were crowned,
for the Crown was not so intayled on the next heir male, or others of that
family, but that their great Sanhedrin was always to judge and determine
whether any such Heir was fit for the Crown, both in regard of his Knowledge,
and of his Virtue. And after Coronation also, the King of Judah, of the house
of David, was by their Law to be judged, and to submit to Corporal punishment,
by stripes, or some other way; I, and that for such things, as to some may seem
but small defaults, as, for multiplying of wives, horses, or chariots, and for
using or abusing money beyond the mean and rule prescribed by Law.

The Jews High Priest, a very sacred person, and the Lords Anointed also; but
yet such as must still submit to the Sentence of the great Sanhedrin, nay, and
that for his life also, if they so adjudged him; for which, and for that said
before of the Sanhedrin's power over the Jewish King in Criminals, and in War,
I might cite diverse clear passages from the Talmud, and those that expound it,
long before Cochius on Sanhedrin, or Schickard's Jus Regium. Thus says my
Author. And perhaps that Commonwealth had continued longer, and much better, in
more glory, a more stable and settled condition, had this their Discipline been
fully and constantly maintained, faithfully, duly, and truly executed: for,
as is said before, you shall always find their Kings and Priests leading the
people into errors, and all profaneness and wickedness. The ground of their
desire to have a King, being, as the Scripture tells us, that they might have
one to go in and out before them, to fight their battles; a Captain General,
plain and clear, and no other; whom they would have a constant, certain, fixed
Officer; whenas God would only, as just occasion should be given or offered,
then only should be one chosen and appointed, as it was here amongst the
ancient Brittons in the beginning. But, say the people of Israel, Let us have a
King, like all the nations about us: and they were their Leaders and Conductors
in their Wars. But yet they are and must be thus bound and limited, as you see;
and nothing better for them, and for the Commonwealth, then that it should so
be, for that nothing is more apt to exceed its bounds, then is Mars and Martial
men: fire (of which Martial men participate much) is a very great Tyrant,
except very well tempered, ordered, allayed, or qualified; it ceases not until
it have eaten up and devoured all that stands before it; nor makes it, neither
can it make any difference: yet, in its due place, to its right use and end, is
(as all other things are) excellent good.

We have it promised us by the Lord, that there shall be no more need of
teaching one another, but that all shall be taught of him; and the knowledge of
him shall cover the earth, as the waters do the sea. And verily, my soul
earnestly prays, bows, and begs for this thing: so shall rest and peace be unto
the inhabitants of the earth, and great will be the joy thereof.

O that man did but know, and would but be himself, he would not then give his
glory, his honor, and his dignity, unto any King, or Priest, any man or men
whomsoever. England has not yet done it, has not yet given its glory, honor
and dignity unto any whomsoever; whatever some private and particular men may
have done, it has not bowed down its head, to cause it to serve other Gods, as
the Israelites did, of whom God says as it is written, that they made him to
serve continually unto their Idols, (and the head of every man, as it is
written, is God) therefore has God scattered them upon the face of the earth,
made them to be servants, and to serve in and unto all Nations: yet does the
time of their restitution draw near. Which that England has not yet done, I
shall, by the Laws, Customs, and Constitutions thereof, briefly and but in part
show you by and by, and give you some of those many demonstrations and
testimonies thereof, and of our constant, firm, and inviolate keeping,
maintaining, upholding, and defending our selves in our native liberties and
freedoms, in our pristine, first, primitive, original honor, glory, and
dignity: for this, the defense and maintenance of our selves and ours herein,
for these many years bypast, have we contended, and contested, against Kings,
Priests, and Parliaments; and for this thing, even at this day, do we yet
contest against all whomsoever, and whatsoever shall infringe the same.

O Noble, Renowned, Glorified, and much Dignified Englishmen, whose perfect
resurrection is at hand, and whose glory and renown shall fill and overspread
all Lands, because of this thing, even in England shall arise the glory, and
the desire of all Nations. I have said it, and it shall surely come to pass;
Look therefore unto your selves, every man of you, and stand fast in the
Liberties wherewith God, and Nature, and the Laws of this Land, have made you
free; nor stoop, nor bow, nor bend one jot unto any man or men whomsoever, but
as unto brethren; but worship the Lord thy God only: honor thy Father and thy
Mother, and love thy Neighbor as thy self. Take heed of Dalilabs; for though
thou be a Samson, yet if thou suffer thy seven locks to be shaved off, the
philistines will take thee, yea and put out both thine eyes also, bind thee in
fetters, and cause thee to grind in theprison-house. The wise will know this
saying, and understand this Parable. I make haste. If we bow and stoop, we will
bow and stoop unto the weak and feeble, the poor and needy: we may not, we must
not, we cannot, we will not give our glory, our honor, our dignity and our
strength unto any, left we be bound in fetters, and grind in the prisonhouse:
and we love our eyes too well, to lose them.

Verily we have our Forefathers with us, and on our side, in this matter; we
have Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, David, Noah, and Daniel; even all who are not
of Nimrods race and generation, are now risen and arising up against Nimrod,
whose Kingdom hangs tottering and shaking, being even ready to fall: we have
Israel, against whom there is no divination or Enchantment, and the God of
Israel on our side, who is the God of Gods, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings:
we therefore shall certainly overcome and prevail; none shall or can stand
before us. God has overurned, and will yet overturn even seven times, until
none of Nimrods do appear.

You have seen that it is against the command and law of God, against the
command and law of Nature, and against the law of the land, even the law and
command of our Forefathers, made, given, and continued, by, from, and through
them and their blood, unto us their children, as is at this day: Look to it
therefore, again, I say, every man of you; for he who breaks and violates the
same, is a traitor unto God, unto nature, unto himself, unto his Forefathers,
and unto the laws of this Land and Nation, and has no right or interest, no
portion or inheritance in the same, but ought according to the laws thereof, to
be wholly dis-franchised, discommuned, yea and excommunicated also.

Vortiger, one of the Kings of this land, whom Gildas calls a proud Tyrant,
and Nennius says of him that after he was first corrected perhaps (as says my
Author, of whom anon) by the Jewish discipline, which was here also until the
time of Henry 2. that in a great Most of Clergy, and Laity, he was so roughly
handled, that he rose up in a great rage, and fled, at least sought how to fly;
but he was banned, and afterward deposed by the Parliament. And it is there
farther said of him, that the Earth opened for him, and that his family was
burnt from Heaven; which was much ascribed to his curse or excommunication;
which, as is there said, was in use amongst the Britains; and that also upon
their Kings, of which there are many examples, as of King Tudur, King Clotri,
and Brochvaile, did hardly escape by a great fine, it was then by much more
heavier, (as says the same Author) then of late, Caesar observes it among the
Druids; and in him it is Paena gravissima; adding also, that such persons were
abhorred by all, and that they might have no honor or right of law. In S.
Patricks Canons they are excluded a communions, and mensa, and missa, and pace.
This, as says my Author, seems akin to the Jewish Cherem, nay to their
Shammatha, or Paul's Maranatha.

For proof of what I said and promised before, that England had not given its
honor, its glory, and dignity unto any, nor ever did, nor have we in the least
submitted or subjected our selves unto the rule, power, government or dominion
of any man or men whomsoever, in any thing or matter, to any end or purpose
whatsoever: I shall begin with King William, whom some (though untruely) call
the Conqueror.

You shall find it in Walsing ham, Hoveden, Matthew Paris, and others, showing
how free the Norman found our Ancestors (which they note also in Caesar to have
found the Britons; but that I let pass) who say, that king William, before he
was crowned and accepted by the people, did solemnly swear to observe and keep
their old Laws Bonas, and approbatas, antiquas leges, quas sancti, ac pij
Angliae Regis, ejus antecesseres and maxim Edwardus statuit inviolabiliter
obser^^are: In the same Kings edition of the confessors laws, when he inclined
so much to them of Norway, all the compatriots of the kingdom came and be
sought him not to change the old laws and customs of their Ancestors; because
they could not judge from laws they understood not.

In the Laws of St. Edward and king William, you may find and read in the very
Title and Preface thereof, that all the Laws of king Edward, came to us through
the hands of king William, which you will find related and recorded in the
Title and Preface thereof: That all those Laws were so presented to king
William, by a sworn Jury out of every County; who did also assert, that those
which they did present as the Laws of St. Edward, were the undoubted Laws and
Customs of the kingdom, that had also been collected into a body by king
Edgar; and continued (though Sopitae) through the troubles of succeeding kings
till Edward had the leisure to renew or rather confirm what was the Law before.

And he the said king William, although he had so attained his entrance into
England, and to the Crown by force of Arms at his own charge only, with so
great a hazard and loss also of so many of his own Countrymen, and had thereby
obtained in a manner the full and whole possession thereof, so that little or
no opposition could be made against him; yet would not our Forefathers admit
him one of their Community, Common or Comune-wealth, and so to be an Officer
therein or thereunto, until he had solemnly by Oath, in the most religious and
strictest manner bound and obliged himself to observe, keep, and maintain their
Common or Commune Law, the ancient Laws, customs, and constitutions of their
Ancestors, and those inviolate, according to the custom of the English Nation;
to which every other Officer and Englishman is sworn also, and soby Oath bound
to the strict observance, entire, upright, and faithful keeping thereof.

In the statutes of Marlebridg in the first place of all, it was agreed and
enacted, that all men living of this kingdom, as well high as low must and
ought to submit to judgemens; the same Marlbridg in one of his other Chapters
says, That the great Charter is in all points to be duly kept, as well in
those things that concerned the king, as any other; and that writs should be
granted freely against any that infringe the same. (Note.) And that this did
reach the king before, and not first granted by Henry the third, and exacted
from him and others by a conquering sword. And the Myrror written for the most
part before the conquest (as it is called) tells us from the Saxon Parliaments,
that the kings Courts should be open unto all plaints, by which they had
original writs without delay, as well against the king or Queen, as any other
of the people, Cap. 1. Sect. 3. In his next words tells us, that in cases of
life and death also, the plaint might hold without writ.

Bracton, he also, although adoring Kings, yet places them under the Law, and
in receiving justice, and submitting to judgment, he must, says he, Be the
least, or as the least. And Fleata says the same; he must be content to be
compared to the least in receiving justice, and that the Law is above him. The
Myrror in Cap. 4. Sect. 11. speaking how Lords are chalengeable by their
Vassals, and how Homage may be dissolved and adjudged by combat, he concludes
of the King, that if he also shall wrong his Vassals in see, the same course
may be taken. Cap. 5. Sect. 1. He there complaining of seldom Parliaments;
which says, he should be twice a year: so it was agreed by King Alfred, as he
speaks in a section of his first book, and by and by after, calls it the
sovereign abuse of all, that the King should be deemed above the Law, whereas
he should be subject unto it, as in his Oath it is contained. And in the first
Cap. Sect. 2. he gives us the Kings Oath, and the last clause is, that he
should and would be obedient to suffer as much as others of his People. And in
King Edwards Laws, in the 17 cap. De officio Regis, We find it such a duty
also, that if he break it, he should not retain so much as the name of a king;
for thus says the Law, Quod nici fecerit, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit:
wherein is shown, what were the ancient Laws, Customs, and Constitutions of
this Nation, ordained and appointed by our Forefathers. I shall next show you
from that worthy, learned, laborious, and ingenious piece, and from which I
have only collected and here inserted (with those you had before) of that
Gentleman's so painful collections, to whom verily we are not a little beholding
for his great pains in clearing, evincing, and vindicating the English
liberties, founded in, defended and maintained by the ancient Laws, customs and
constitutions of this Nation; I may not name him, because himself, for reasons
best known to himself, has denied it to us: his book bears Title thus:

Rights of our Kingdom, or Customs of our Ancesters, touching the Duty, Power,
Election, or Succession of our Kings and Parliaments, our true Liberty, etc.
freely discussed through the British, Saxon, Norman Laws and Histories; with an
occasional discourse of great changes yet expected in the world. London,
Printed by Richard Bishop, 1649.

You will find throughout the same, that Kings were elective, and elected by
the kingdom, or people, and the law, or at least the custom for electing,
anointing judging and executing, Kings among our British Ancestors, and since
all along, how they were in all things subject to the law equally with the
others of the people, as is already showed: how when we had kings, how
straightly and strictly they were bound and limited, (for, as I think I showed
before, there was a time when we had no king.)

In his 81. p. he there shows, that the Lord Chief Justices, the Lord
Chancellor and Treasurer, were chosen by the kingdom, and not by the king.

Strab^ speaking of the ancient Brittons, (as he has it in another place)
says, that they chose their Generals and all great Officers and Magistrates:
and that they abhorred for a long time the name of a king: and Caesar, that we
had no kings or fixed common Governor in times of peace, but for war they
chose out Generals; yea, and that the Lords in Parliament were chosen by the
Counties, as appears by writs yet to be read from the Rolls of Edward 1. and
how that by the common law and custom of this Nation, all the Sheriffs do
command the posse Regni in their several Counties; and that not only in
execution of writs, but they are also custos Legis and Reipublica; the keepers,
protectors, and defenders of the Laws and the Reipublike or Commonwealth (its
all one) as well as of the peace, of which he is the principal conservator in
his shire and County, and that all the Sheriffs ought to be, and so were chosen
by the people, and not by the king, as is to be found in Hoveden, in the Laws
of the Confessor: and in full Parliament of Edward 1. it was declared to be the
law and custom of the kingdom, and therefore so settled in the choice of the
people. And although in latter times some alteration be made herein by
Parliament, yet this affirmative Statute does not annul the common law, or
disannul the peoples choice, had they the wit or courage to elect their
Sheriffs before they be pricked; And that these so chosen by the people, did
come to Parliament. Their Generals also, when occasion was, were chosen by the
people, as he has it in another place: the sole and whole choice of
Constables, Headboroughs (greater men then themselves know themselves to be)
Coroners, and others, remain still in the people.

And Tacitus, that our Ancestors did both elect and bound their kings and
Generals, Rex ex Nobilitate, Duces ex vertute sumunt: and of their kings (he
says) their power was so bounded, that he could not call it free, and that it
was in persuasion rather then command.

In the great Moot of Scotlands dependency upon England, Edward 1. confessed,
and after him the Parliament both Lords and Commons, that they were all obliged
by oath to maintain the rights, liberties, laws and customs of the kingdom,
and they never would, nor could consent that the king should, if he would, act
against them. The Writs also, in king John's time, required all men of all
conditions to oblige themselves by oath to maintain the great Charter, and to
compel the king thereunto; which laws of king William, with those of the
Confessor, were afterward confirmed by king Henry 1. as appears by his
Charter, not only in the Exchequer, a copy of which was kept in every County;
and the same Charter was again confirmed by king John, and again by Henry 3.
and so it came into the great Charter, and confirmed in more then 30.
Parliaments.

You now see it plain, and without dispute, that no man or men whomsoever,
have any rule, power, or dominion over others, no more then others have over
him or them; and that the greatest, even Kings themselves, have acknowledged,
confessed, and granted so much, that we are all equally alike subject to the
ordinances, customs, and constitutions of our Forefathers, the laws of this
Nation; and that they, and they only, are the only and alone Rulers, and
Governors over and unto all, and every one of us.

And verily, if any man or men whomsoever, may in any true and proper sense be
said to be subject to, under the power, dominion, rule and government of
another, it is certainly those we call our Rulers and Governors, they being
chosen, ordained appointed and entrusted by the people, unto their work and
service, for to perform, do, and execute their commands, orders, and
appointments, still in and according unto Law: (And verily none else whomsoever
may or ought, without greatly transgressing the Laws of God, the Law of man's
nature, and the Law of this Land, as is fully proved already.) Hence they are
rightly called Officers and Ministers of the Commonwealth; Officers and
Ministers of such and such a Place, Office, Court, or People, in reference to
such and such a work, business, and employment therein, or thereunto belonging:
receiving a wages, stipend, or salary for the same, are therefore severally
most certainly accountable for their several trusts, unto those from whom they
severally receive the same: First, by their undertaking that Office, Place, or
Ministration; in which very act, they have made, created, or begotten a
contract and trust unto themselves (for no man takes and executes an Office,
but it must be from, and so in reference unto another) according unto which
contract, they do therein and thereby firmly bind and oblige themselves unto a
true, real, and faithful performance thereof (of which you may see more in my
forementioned Treatise.) Secondly, In that also they receive a wages, stipend,
or salary for the same, as the most, if not all of them do; upon this ground
and foundation it stands, upon this account, or for this cause and reason it
is, that all our Kings we accountable, and did several of them account unto the
people, and suffered also for the breach of their trust, for their irregular,
unlawful, and unwarrantable execution of their place, office, and trust,
thereby breaking and violating the same, and their Oath also taken in their
admittance thereinto: which every public Minister or Officer likewise takes,
before his admittance into any office of trust whatsoever.

Every King of England had a Wages, Stipend or Salary allowed him by the
People, some more and some less, some more at some time then at another, at the
discretion of the People: this was one ground also, why the Captains of war or
Generals were chosen by the people, be cause they received their Wages,
Stipends or Salaries from the people, and their trust and commission also, for
which also, and according unto which, they were accountable, and did account
likewise: so also the knights of Shires chosen, entrusted and deputed by the
people, and in their behalf, as in their steads, and for their service to sit
in Parliament, received Salaries from the several Shires, for which they
served; so that servants they are also unto those who choose them.

And the matter is most plain and evident in kings, who did ever first swear
fealty to the Commonwealth and laws, as their superiors or leige-Lord, before
the people swore faith to them.

Therefore would not our Forefathers, as you see, allow or give the choice of
any public officer or Minister whatsoever into the hands or power of their
king, when they had a king, nor suffer him to choose any, because they should
not be as servants unto him, himself being but a servant unto them, lest by
their choosing of one another, they should become, of servants, to be their
Lords and Masters, as in truth it came to pass. Hence was it, as you have seen
that the Lords in Parliament or Barons were chosen by the People, and not
chosen or summoned by the King; for their creation or being was anciently, and
at the first, from and by the people only, and not by the king, by Patent or
Creation, by choice or election from or by him, but by the election and choice
of the people only: but when once the people had suffered this incroachment by
their kings, through disobedience to, revolting and backsliding from the laws,
ordinances, customs and constitutions of their Fathers, they quickly saw and
felt the miseries, inconveniences, and mischiefs, which followed thereupon:
how those whom they had ordained and appointed their servants, by their
electing and choosing one another; of servants, became, in very deed and truth,
their grievous, oppressing, and tyrannizing Lords and Masters: and how much
blood and treasure has it cost us since, to redeem our selves! Take heed of a
relapse. And verily it is almost impossible it should be otherwise, (as I could
plainly evidence, but I must hasten.) Certainly he who chooses, makes, and
creates, cannot but have a very great influence upon the party chosen, made,
and created: and the person so made, created, and chosen, cannot but look up
unto, have an eye upon, and especial respect and regard of, bend and bow unto
him that made and created, chose or elected him: it is his duty; they are in
their very nature, essence, and being, relatives; and relatives must needs
reciprocally answer each other in their ways and ends. Hence the Commons only
chose all their public Ministers and Officers; from them only did they
receive their trust, that so their eyes might be only upon them, and they
only serve the common good. But those who lately were, now are not; but both
they and theirs turned out of doors.

Our forefathers verily were very wise, prudent, and provident; O that we
would tread in their steps, and so honor them, cleave to their Laws and
Ordinances. I beg every man to take heed: God is my witness, I am enemy to no
man or men whomsoever; nor do I envy any, but would from my soul, the good,
the peace, and welfare of all and every one; and will lie at the feet of all or
any one, to do him real, upright, and faithful service: it becomes man to be
faithful; for he after whose pattern and image he is made, is so. I may not, I
must not dishonor my Maker; but in all things, in all times, unto all men, so
much and so far as I am able, show forth his being as he is in me, and my being
as I am in him.

Gentlemen, you know from and by whom you are, what you are; you know what
power and authority you have, and by whom and what Commission it is; and so,
whose you are, and to whom accountable: your hand may find out (so far as I
know, and I believe it may) a work suitable to you, and corresponding with you.
That which has erected it self without Law, may (for ought I know) be so taken
away, and thrown or cast down, though perhaps it were much better if it could
be otherwise; for the sooner things return and run in their right chanel, the
sweeter, easier, safer, more acceptable, surer and quieter it will be: but that
which stands in and by Law, may no man take away, change, or alter. If you keep
your limit, you may be safe; if you break it, you break your selves. Break not,
I beseech you, in any case, the Ordinances, Customs, and Constitutions of our
forefathers, the ancient Laws of this Nation; for if you do, they will
assuredly break you. Entrench not upon them; for wherein, so much, and so far
as you do, you do certainly entrench upon your nearest selves. Excuse and
pardon this long Parenthesis.

As all the Public Ministers and Officers of the Commonwealth are accountable,
yet are they no otherwise accountable, then as it is in and by the Law ordained
and appointed to them. For it were as great an evil, mischief, injustice, and
unrighteousness, that they should be left to the Arbitrary will of the people,
as that any of the people should be left to their Arbitrary will. So that every
one, before he enters upon his Trust, sees what his Work and Trust is, from
whom he receives it; how, or after what manner; in what way, and by what means
to execute; to what end, and for what use and uses; and in what way and manner
to be accountable, and unto whom. Otherwise the Public Ministers and Officers
of the Commonwealth were in a far worse condition then the worst of Slaves.
Accountable (without dispute) they are and must be, and servants (without
dispute) also: for to him who appoints me my work, and pays me my wages; him
who makes me all and whatever I am or possibly can be, in reference to that
Office, Place, or Employment, Certainly his I am, and no man's else I may, must,
or ought to be, no not mine own, but his entire, upright, true, and faithful
servant, as faithful unto him or them with whom I have thus contracted, receive
my work and wages, as he can be to himself, still in reference to my Contract;
for which, see my forementioned Treatise. Yet in all this is there no
dishonor unto any man, but much honor unto him who is upright and faithful in
his Trust, in reference to those, and for their singular good and profit, who
entrusted him.

The Father, and he only, is appointed by God unto his Children, their ruler,
guide, and governor, their guardian, their preserver and protector whilst
Children; therefore are the Children commanded by God to honor him. All the
rest of mankind are our brethren, our neighbors; and accordingly by the same
command of God, are we to love them as our selves: all other degrees, ranks,
qualities, estates and conditions of men whatsoever (call them as you please)
are only by, of, and from men, and so in reference unto men.

As in the creations of God all things are, and only so are, and so only by us
to be esteemed and accounted of, according to what he by his Laws and
Institutes in Nature has put in them and upon them, in reference to their
several uses and ends whereunto he has appointed them; by the true and certain
knowledge whereof, we are taught and instructed to give each and every thing
its due and true estimate, neither under nor over valuing any thing, for the
one as the other is equally evil, and the only, true, and very cause of all
the discords, disagreements, and dissentions, in the whole Creation of God:
Even so in the Creations of men likewise, all things are, and so only are, and
so only by us to be esteemed and accounted of, according to what in and by the
Ordinances, Customs, and Constitutions of our Forefathers, the Laws of this
Nation, are put in them and upon them, in reference unto the several uses and
ends whereunto they have appointed them; by the true and certain knowledge
whereof, we are taught and instructed to give unto each and every particular
person and thing their due and true worth and estimate, so as neither to under
nor overvalue them or any of them; both the one and the other being equally
evil here also, and the only, true, and very cause of all the discords,
disagreements, and dissentions amongst us. Nor can it be otherwise, neither can
there possibly be a true concord, perfect union, settled and established peace
and rest unto us, or any of us whomsoever, whose beings and well-beings have
reference to the being and well-being of this Nation, until each and every man
whomsoever in particular, and the Nation in general, know what he is; know how,
as by what means, or upon what grounds, and to what use and uses, end and ends,
he is that which he is, or takes himself to be. (For Man is a seeing, knowing,
understanding creature, therefore cannot walk by uncertain unknown Rules and
Laws; he may not yield a blind implicit obedience, for he knows not whither
it will lead and carry him; nor is such an obedience acceptable with God or
good men: in children, whilst children, it is good and comely. Paul, whilst he
was a child (as he says of himself) walked as a child; but when he came to
be a man, he put away childishness. Andverily, he who submits and subjects
himself, upon this account, unto any one man, will (at least in probability)
submit and subject himself unto all and every one; and so having no stability
in himself, becomes a servant (or a slave rather) unto the wills, lusts, and
pleasures of all or any man whomsoever; then which, nothing is more uncomely,
or unbeseeming Man. O Man, where art thou? hidest thou thy self from, can
thou not stand in, the presence of the Lord thy Maker? Have thou eaten? has
the Serpent through the woman beguiled thee? Why; arise again, and come and
stand forth, in the might, power, and strength of the Lord God thy Maker and
Redeemer. It is a Parenthesis; bear with it.)

I say it cannot be, until each and every member thereof know, be set and
placed in, fast bound, tied, and limited to, and that in a true, right, and
proper way, by a true, right, and proper means, in their true, right, and
proper place, in the body or Commonwealth, in reference unto the several uses
it has of them, and the several ends ordained and appointed to them,
according to the ancient Ordinances, Customs, and Constitutions of our
Forefathers the laws of this Nation. Hence, because men know not these things,
are the many and several thwartings, contradictions, gainsayings and
oppositions amongst us; former and late acts done and committed in Parliament,
thwarting, contradicting, nay destroying, the Peoples, nay even their own
foundation and being.

Officers and Ministers of the Commonwealth, not knowing where they be, how or
what they are, nor what they do, but each almost thwarting and contradicting
other; and they all, almost as Lords and masters over the people, thwart,
contradict, and destroy the people in their liberties: the people they also
thwarting, contradicting, ready to rise up against them, well knowing them to
be but their servants, their Officers and Ministers, in, by, and under the law,
and so bound neither to do nor execute any of the orders or commands of any,
against or besides the same, the ancient known laws of the Land, which they as
Officers are more especially and particularly bound by oath unto the exact and
true observance, and execution of those, and chose only, and those in all
things, in all times, in reference unto all men; they being their only and
alone rule and guide; and so, therein and thereby, are they bound and obliged
to keep and preserve the peace of the Commonwealth from being violated by any;
or the common or commune peace, or the peace of this Community, inviolate:
which cannot be done but by keeping its laws, the common or commune laws,
inviolate; for every breach and violation of its laws, is and needs must be a
breach and violation of its peace; and there is not, neither can there be any
violation or breach of its peace, but in or by the breach and violation of its
laws. As it is in the natural body, so it is here also; so long as there is no
breach or violation made upon the laws of Nature in the body, there is not not
can there be any breach in the peace of the body: but when once there is a
breach and violation made upon the laws thereof, there is then also, and needs
must be, a violation and breach of the peace thereof; for they are such or so
an one or union, as that the one inseparably is in, with, and by, the other;
nay, the one is the other; and the one is not, nor possibly can be without the
other. Yea all and every one of us are bound and tied not only to keep,
preserve, secure and maintain the peace in our own persons in reference to our
selves, but also the joint common or commune peace of the whole, in respect to
all and every one, against all and every one, who shall evidently and clearly
break, or attempt to break the same; for so does each and every particular
member of the natural body, (being tied and bound thereunto by the law of its
Nature) carefully and diligently to look to the preservation, as of the whole,
so of each particular, according to the ordinances thereof in reference to the
whole; the loss or detriment of any part, being a loss and detriment to the
whole and every part; Yet still in a due way and course of law. Wherefore all
and every violent act and acts, according to the extent, measure, and degree
thereof, by any done and executed contrary to, against, besides or without a
true ground and warrant in law, upon any particular person or persons, is
rightly and truly called and determined in our law to be a breach of the
public, common, or commune peace, because it is a breach of the common or
commune law, that law which is in common to them all, to keep them all and
every one in perfect peace and security, from and against the force and
violence of all and every one. Hence, in case I meet a man that has murdered
my Father, Friend, or Brother; yet may I not my self, or any others, lay
violent hands on him: should I, and so wilfully take away his life, I make my
self a murderer, and must and ought to die for it: why? not because the man
ought not to have suffered death, but because I had no power, authority, or
right by law to do it; my act therein being contrary to, against, and besides
the Law, I become a breaker of the Law, and a murderer, in taking away his
life without due course of law, and so must and truly ought to suffer death by
the law. And so again, if any man strike me, I may not strike him again; for
that is a breach of the peace, because it is a breach of the Law, which allows
no man to avenge or revenge himself, or to extort satisfaction from any, in any
violent forceable way and manner; which all and every act and acts are, and so
accounted and adjudged by our law, which are not done and executed in the way
and manner the Law has ordained and appointed. Yet, binds it no man from
defending himself; yet there also, for any act or acts committed therein, by
any in so defending himself, he is not free until in a due course of law, the
law has made him free. Our Forefathers were very strict and exact as to the
way in all things, wherein appeared their admirable, great, and exceeding high
and deep wisdom, very much to be admired, and most worthily to be esteemed and
honored of us all, wonderfully careful to set, keep, preserve, and maintain
every thing in its right place, in its due order, unto its proper use and end,
truly and justly balancing all things, giving every thing its true weight and
measure, bounding and limiting the same; the only way and means to preserve,
keep, maintain, and secure peace, rest, quietness, and tranquillity. As in the
natural body, when any thing is out of joint, out of its right and proper
place, and when and where there is exorbitances, and excesses, there is and
needs must be restlesness, disquiet, pain, and trouble in and unto the whole,
and each and every particular part thereof in its measure; and if not timely
restored and reduced, will and of necessity must bring a total ruin and
destruction to the whole, and each and every particular part thereof; and as it
is in the natural, so must and will it be in the civil; for they answer each
other, as in a glass face answers face.

What I formerly asserted in my late Treatise before spoken of, that
Parliaments might not change or alter the Ordinances, Customs, and
Constitutions of our forefathers, the ancient Fundamental Laws of this Nation,
nor do any thing tending thereunto, Is now (I hope) plain and evident unto all,
and undeniable by any. And although what I therein laid down, to considerate
men was enough; yet being already, as to this Discourse, become so much a fool
for the sake of others, I shall make a little further progress, and give you
these following Arguments; and by the way consider (from the fifth Command, and
the case of the Rechabites by me therein cited) how far or how much the
commands of fathers bind and oblige their children: it may (compared with that
story) deserve a serious consideration. But did I say a considerate man? O how
few such this day in England! It is rara avis in terra.

1 That which Parliaments are bound and obliged by Oath duly and truly to
observe, keep, and maintain inviolate, that certainly they may not change or
alter: (for, to be obliged by Oath to observe and keep a thing inviolate, and
to have power to change and alter the same, is an inconsistencie.)

But Parliaments (as you have seen) are bound and obliged by Oath duly and
truly to observe, keep, and maintain the Ordinances, Customs, and
Constitutions of our Forefathers, the ancient Fundamental Laws of this Nation
inviolate:

Therefore they have no power or authority to change or alter them: nor may
they do it; for their power and authority is bound and limited in and by their
commission or trust expressed and confirmed in and by their Oath.

2 That which Parliaments are bound and obliged by Oath to cause and compel
others with themselves duly and truly to observe and keep, that they may not
change or alter: for then how is it, or how can it be, or be said to be duly
and truly kept?

But Parliaments, as you have seen, are so bouna and obliged: Therefore may
they not change or alter them.

3 That which every man of this Nation is bound and obliged by Oath duly and
truly to observe, keep, and maintain inviolate, that no man may alter.

But, as you have seen, every man is so bound and obliged:

Therefore may not Parliaments, if they be men, and men of this Nation, change
or alter them.

4 Trustees, Servants, or Ambassadors, may not act against, besides, or
contrary unto the mind and will of their Lords, Trusters, or Masters.

Parliaments, or Parliament men, are such in reference to the people for whom
they serve, and from whom they receive their Salaries respectively, out of the
several Counties for which they serve, as is before proved:

Therefore may not Parliaments change or alter them, do any thing against,
besides, or contrary unto them, because that were a violation of their
Commission, Trust, and Oath, which is, To observe, keep, and maintain them
inviolate, and to cause and compel others to do so also.

5 Every person in this Commonwealth is bound both in his own with person, and
in reference unto all and every one, else, so much as in him lies, to keep the
peace of the Commonwealth inviolate; therefore Parliaments, if they be members
of the Commonwealth, ought to keep, preserve, and maintain the peace of the
Commonwealth inviolate.

But he who breaks the Laws of the Commonwealth, breaks the peace of the
Commonwealth, (as is proved before) and ought according to the Law to be
presently attached and punished for the same:

Therefore may not Parliaments change or alter them; for that were to break
them, and so to break, or at least a visible attempt to break the peace of the
Commonwealth in the breaking of them, which they also are bound to preserve and
keep inviolate; against whom, or against every infringer whereof, as well Kings
as others, were Writs to be granted free, as is showed before.

6 Parliaments may not do the things that are unjust; nay, God may not, nor he
cannot; for it is contrary to his being.

But it is unjust, unrighteous, wicked, and impious, to change or alter that
which I am entrusted and sworn duly and truly to observe, keep, and maintain
inviolate: and that Parliaments are so entrusted and sworn, is already proved:

Therefore may not Parliaments change or alter them, nor do, nor suffer ought
to be done (so much as in them lies) tending toward their alteration.

The work and business of Parliaments is by most most greatly mistaken. And
because those who lately were turned out of doors, had so much triumphed over
the late King, the peoples servant, they thought they might do the same over
the People also, who verily are, and will so prove to be their Lords and
Masters, in and according to the Law, unto which none in England but is and
ever held himself to be accountable (in words at least) the last King not
excepted, as by his Declarations does appear.

Laws must be just, I, and justly made also; that is the rule and standard; but
who must judge and determine this, when, whether, or wherein they be so or no:
Why every man who makes the question, gives himself the answer: Why surely they
who are to observe them, to be punished for the breach of them, to judge and
execute by, and upon them: But who are they: why all Englishmen, the whole
people of England, in and by their several Courts and Officers, as in, and by
their Hundred-Courts, County-Courts, Courts of Inquest, Sheriffs, Juryes, and
the like; who are to make inquiry after, to examine, try, and see that nothing
be done, offered, or attempted by any, contrary to the fundamental principles,
the ancient known Laws of the Land; they are the rule and standard only to try
all things by, as it was done by a sworn Jury out of every County in the time
of King William (as is showed before; but I can only speak in generals, I must
go on) and doubtless every man has, and needs must have a right and liberty of
trying, examining, and proving, all and every of the Acts and Deeds of
Parliaments, at least such as do or may concern himself (which I might leave
out, and say more, and prove it too; but I have been much too long already, and
I love not to affirm any thing without proof) for, 1. Otherwise he ceases to
be a man, to yield obedience as a man should, or as becomes a man to do, but as
a beast. 2. The Apostles who were sent of God, and that with the working of
miracles, yet submit that which they taught, enjoined, and commanded, to the
examination, trial, and judgment of the people, and commend the Bereans with
the style and title of Nobility for so doing: (yet mistake me not; this dislike
or disapproving of such Acts is to be manifested and regulated in a due and
orderly way and manner, as to, in, and by the Courts and Officers appointed
thereunto, as is said before: for as in the natural body, so in this civil are
their several Offices and Officers, as eyes, hands, head, feet, heart, and the
like.) And indeed, that which does, and that which only and alone does, or
should bind and oblige all and every one to the observing, doing, obeying, and
performing of any thing, is the goodness, justness, and righteousness thereof,
and not the persons, place, or thing, from whom, or whence it comes. How shall
I, or any else, know any thing that comes from any, to be the will, the mind,
and command of God, but as it is just, and right, and good? that assures me it
is the command, the mind, and will of God; I need no more nor better proof and
declaration, let it come from whom, or what, or whence it will: but if it be
not so, let it come from whom, or what, or whence it will, it is none of Gods
command, mind, or will, therefore not to be obeyed by me, For it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God only, and him only shall thou serve. Nor
would I be mistaken here, as if I meant or intended, that any who will, may
assume the rule, power, government, or authority, upon that pretense of doing
good, or having really done so; that is, deceitful, has and may deceive; and
doubtless as great a mischief and inconvenience, if not greater, may arise on
this hand, as on that. He or they, or whomsoever shall do the nation real good,
and they shall judge it so, to such I wish and hope the Nation will be
thankful, and take it also as from God: yet pray I also do, that no
incroachment may be made upon the Peoples rights, and laws; for that is not
good, therefore not from God. Names and Titles have much undone us all. What
are Parliaments, Kings, or Priests, ought or any thing, man or men else, but as
they are just, and right, and good: why nothing, and to be esteemed as nothing.
What Is a Temple, what is a High Priest, when God or good's not there? why a lie,
a nothing. This is the true, infallible, everlasting Character of God, That he
is right, just, and good. It is admirable to see how names and titles blow and
puff us up. Parliaments, what are Parliaments? why the Council of the people;
and what is that? why the people meeting together, choose, from all the parts of
the land, men from amongst themselves, of their brethren or neighbors, to meet
together, (not to change or alter their laws, not to violate or destroy them,
or any, or more man or men of them, in their lives, liberties, or estates; not
to commit, do, or execute, or to command to be done, or executed any unjust and
oppressive act or acts upon, or against any, either besides, against, or
contrary to the Nations laws and customs; but) to consult about their good, or
the common good. And will or can any man think or imagine, that their councels,
acts, and doings, are not to be, or may not be tried, examined, and judged.
Which is greater, he that makes, or he that is made? they which choose, or he
that is chosen? the Trusted, or the Trustor? the Ambassador, or the King his
master who ordained, and made him such, sent and appointed him to his work and
service to his Embassy? It Is true, he does in all things, to all intents and
purposes fully and wholly represent the King his master, has the same power
and authority as his master has, can, or would have, if himself were present,
in reference to his commission and instruction, but no farther: to whom, and
for the management whereof, he is again accountable. And it is not, neither
may, must, or can it be otherwise with Parliaments, and those who choose them. I
pray you, let us be men, and no longer children, to be frighted with the name
Bugbear, with the name Parliament; but know and esteem all things as in truth
they are; keep and preserve all things in their right places, to their right
uses and ends; giving honor to whom honor; and then we shall do well, like
men, nay like Englishmen.

Be not they and all others (as is said before) that which they be, only and
alone by and from the people, from and by their deputation, power, and
commission? and have they it not, or is it not in trust only, and that in
reference to the peoples good? doubtless it is: then are their acts and doings,
and that justly and rightly too, triable, and to be judged and determined by
the people, concerning the justness, consonancy to, and uprightness with the
rule and standard. Hence formerly were all Acts of Parliament fairly enrolled
by the clerk thereof, and so sent down to the several Courts of the peoples
ordinary or common Judicatories; (I may truly and rightly call them so) where,
as occasion is, are they judged, tried, and examined by the people: and if not
found just and right (as before) but either besides, contrary unto, or against
the same, they cease, and must cease, so as no man may, or must, or ought
observe and execute the same. Thus, I say (as I have it at large in my other
Treatise) does and must all things run in a perfect round or circle, as it is
in the great world; else would all things presently corrupt, decay, and come to
nothing, as must the great world it self: and when, where, so much, and so far,
as this orderly circular motion is not kept, maintained, and secured, free and
clear from all stops, lets, hindrances, and encumbrances; even then and there,
so much, and so far, will there be, and of necessity must there be a decay,
corrupting, disordering, and confounding of the laws, customs and
constitutions, persons, officers, and offices, in, appertaining, and belonging
to the Commonwealth, and so of the Commonwealth it self: as you see it is in
the natural body of every created thing; yea, the whole Universe is only kept,
preserved, and maintained whole, sound, and entire, firm, stable, and lasting,
in, by and through the due, and true, orderly, circular motion thereof; which
indeed is so the life, being, subsistence, and preservation of the whole
creation, and every particular individual thing therein, as should it but once
cease, all things would, and must even cease to be also. All perfect beings
whatsoever of necessity must be thus, and thus preserved, continued, and
maintained, in this due orderly circular motion. As verily is the constitution,
frame, rule, and government of this Commonwealth by the great, high and deep
wisdom of our forefathers, framed and molded, as I could manifest unto all the
world, and that in such an exactness, as is to admiration; all things being
examined, tried, judged, corrected and amended, the several officers and
offices ordained and appointed thereunto, in this circular, quiet and still
motion, according to the Ordinances, Laws, customs, and constitutions of our
forefathers. But I must no further.

Hence, and for this end, has every Officer and Minister of the Commonwealth
their certain, fixed places and offices of trust, to keep, preserve, and
maintain the peace of the Commonwealth inviolate, by the keeping, preserving,
and maintaining the laws and constitutions thereof inviolate, which preserve
and keep this circular motion from all stops and lets, to which they are by
oath more especially bound and obliged, and so ought to perform the same
accordingly, and that faithfully, perfectly, and uprightly.

The Sheriffs, who are by their place and office (as is said before) the
keepers, protectors, and defenders of our laws and Commonwealth (and so each
and every man therein) in peace, according to, or together with the laws, which
he who breaks not, ought to be protected by it; and all and every one who do,
or visibly and apparently attempt the breach thereof, ought to be attached,
secured, tried, judged, and punished according thereunto for so doing; he
having power therein, or in such case and cases, to raise the power, force, and
strength of the County, if need be; each and every man, in each and every
County respectively, being bound and obliged, upon his command and require, to
aid and assist their respective Sheriffs therein also, with the hazard of
their lives, against any to all who shall oppose the same, without distinction
of persons, offices or places, even against the King himself, when the Nation
had a King. This was the only very true ground and cause of our taking up
Arms at first; the General being but as high Sheriff of the nation, to bring
those who by force of arms kept themselves ^^om the judgment and execution of
the Law, when they had broken and violated the same, the peoples liberties and
freedoms therein, and so the common or Commonwealths peace, which every one so
far and so much does, as he violates and breaks the laws thereof. And I do
confess that it was upon this ground, and this ground only, that I took
commission, and accordingly engaged.

A little farther. You have had proved unto you, that all the Kings of England
were, before their admittance into that office or place, sworn duly and truly
to observe, keep, and maintain the Ordinances, Customs, and constitutions of
our forefathers, the ancient fundamental Laws of this Nation, inviolate, or the
laws, customs, and constitutions of our ancestors, as the old records call
them; (I choose rather to call them by the name of our fathers, and that because
we are commanded by God to honor and obey our fathers.) They were also sworn to
confirm all such other JUST Laws as the Commons or the people should choose
(it is all all one) but they must be JUST, else was not the King bound to
confirm them, nor none else to keep or observe them, but to loath, derest,
discard, cast and throw away such laws, though made by the best of Parliaments,
if they be found dissonant, against, or contrary unto the ancient fundamental
laws, principles, customs, and constitutions of this Commonwealth; in and by
which, the very, real, and true freedom and liberty, and so the peace and
quiet of all and every one therein, is fully, perfectly, and entirely kept,
preserved, and maintained: even as Nature does in the natural body; that which
is against, contrary, and destructive to the fundamental laws and principles
thereof, it loathes, detests, casts up, and throws out, because it is
destructive to its peace and rest, to its being, and so the cause of death. For
which cause, that no such thing or things might be made or done, to the
annoyance and disturbance of the peoples peace and being, did all the ancient
Judges in the law (as we call them) attend the Parliament, to advise them
therein, keep and preserve them therefrom. So that it appears, there ever was,
is, and of necessity must be, a rule, measure, or standard, by and according
unto which must all occasional statutes or bylaws (as they are called) process
and proceedings in or by Parliaments, be exactly and perfectly made and done,
as there is or should be in and unto all things else. It becomes not wise men,
and men in council, to run hand over head (as we use to speak) to do things,
and make laws at hap-hazard, if they intend their observation and execution: it
is a shame to see what Ordinances and Acts of Parliament (as they are called)
have been lately published, few or none whereof will be found to hold weight
and measure.

To think that Acts of Parliament must therefore be observed, and performed,
and executed, because they are Acts of Parliament, is most ridiculous; for
Parliaments may make Acts, by which they may make sale, give seisin and
possession of the people of the land, and the land it self, unto themselves,
and some foreign State: were this to be observed, done or executed, think we,
because it is an Act of Parliament? The Parliament declared otherwise of King
John's Act to the Pope, when he sold the Kingdom unto him. No; all such Acts,
as is before said, are void and null in themselves, be they made by
Parliaments, or any other whomsoever; as every unjust Act and thing whatsoever
is, and may not be observed, (except to be shunned and avoided) performed, or
executed, by any whomsoever.

This was the end, I say, of those knowing and experienced men in the Laws and
Constitutions of this Nation attending there; that so there might not be any
cause or occasion of disorder or breach of peace, which such Laws and
proceedings have often occasioned: which Rule or Standard is, and of necessity
must be JUST, the just and true freedoms and liberties of the people, which is
(undeniable by any) to be as perfectly free as God and Nature has made them:
and how free that is, I have showed you before; or, as an English King said, he
desired to make them and leave them as free as their own thoughts. Or thus:
that no man or men whomsoever may bear rule, have any power or dominion over
them or theirs, without their own consent, election, and choice; to which the
laws of God, of Nature, and of this Land, agree, bear witness, command,
ordain, or appoint. Or thus: that nothing be done, offered, or attempted to be
done, but as we would should be done unto us. Would any of us that any man
should, without, against, or contrary to our own consent, put, impose, or
force a Master over us and upon us, or if a Master, That any should put,
impose, or force, a Servant upon us, as aforesaid? would we that any man or men
whomsoever should take us up in the streets, and carry us away, it may be from
our Wives and Children, and compel us to fight, besides, against, nay contrary
to our mind and will? I tell you, it is a very great wickedness and a
wickedness which God will severely judge. So, would we that any man or men
whomsoever, should, without our consent, take away our estate by or under any
pretense whatever, without our consents? Every man in England will certainly
say, No: and nothing is more contrary to the laws of England, then thus doing;
nor any thing accounted a greater breach of the Peoples liberties; and in
truth, it puts them in a worse condition then were Villains in the times
villanage. But to require absolute obedience without limitation, wereharder
much, and more unreasonable and unjust, then that contract tendered by Nahash:
that they should be protected by him, on condition they would put out their
right eyes. He was content to leave them one to see withal: absolute obedience
leaves us neither, but strips us quite of all, and makes us beasts, not men:
which we may not yield unto any, no for the sake of any man or men whomsoever.

Let us a little consider the case of Villanage, as it was once in this Land.
My Author has it thus, in his 14 page; and for it he brings the Laws of
Alfred, Ethelstane, Edgar, and Canute, with those of Henry the first. This was
the fealty sworn unto the Lords by their Vassals: My Liege, I am your man, and
bear you faith of life, member, and terrene honor, saving the faith I owe to
other Lords. Or thus: My Lord, I will bear you true faith, and do you true
service, as my duty to you is. And if our dury or obedience unto Parliaments
exclude us from the Law, we are in worse estate then Villains: yet a Villain,
who of all Vassals was fettered in greatest servitude and bondage, most bound,
prohibited, and restrained from troubling or molesting his Lord; yet he, even
he, might bring Actions of Trespass, and Appeals from other Counties, Cities,
or Franchises. And he says, that Glanvil, Bracton, Britton, Fleta, with the
Myrrour, and others, do all agree in this, That there is in Law so great an
obligation on the Lord, and so great a charge, that the Lord would often refuse
to take his Tenants homage; so that there was a Writ made commanding him to
take it, and by it to oblige himself to his tenant, whom he was to defend: and
his Trespass on him had in Law, had a very great aggravation, because the
Vassal was to be under the defense and protection of his Liege or Lord: and
that in diverse cases Vassals might defend themselves against their Lord, as for
atturning and assigning his vassals service (which the Law permitted them to
do) to his enemy or foe, for that was against the Law; wherein, as in diverse
other cases, the Lord might forfeit his Vassals homage and service; for his
right might be forfeit, escheat, or evict by Law; and dominion over slaves was
also lost, by negligence, violence, and per injustam resistantiam, as Bracton
expresses it: nay, there may be such delict in the Lord, as may not only
warrant, but enforce the vassal to complain and accuse his Lord, or cause him
to be indicted for his life in the Courts of Justice, which the King himself can
no more shut against the meanest subject, then he can the doors of all the
Churches: (They are Fleta's own words, says my Author, and that he might go
higher then a Church of clay.) His meaning therein is left to be considered by
others, and is so by me also. He goes further, and tells us, that there be some
cases in which a vassal may not only indite his Lord for his life, but may
appeal him, and fight against him in combat, or wage battle with him. In his 18
page he tells us, that as the vassal might do nothing against his Lord, to
dis-inherit him, vel ad aliam arrocem injuriam, or do any other wickedness or
injury unto him; so must not the Lord against the vassal: for if he do, say
they, the homage is dissolved, and all obligation. So that, as my Author says
in his 19 page, we see this Oath of fealty to be so limited by Law, that it
binds no more then Law requires; and that the same Law does set a Vassal,
nay a Villain, free from, and arm him against his own Lord, in defense of
himself and the Laws, with the Public good. He goes on, and tells us, from his
forecited Authors, how that all Allegiance, Oaths of Fealty, and so all
obedience, observance, duty, and subjection unto all, even the highest and
greatest of all, is in reference to Justice, to the common good and profit of
the Land, per honestum and utile, for public peace, and common justice.
Allegiance, says he, was ad Legem, to the Laws, the Kingdom, and the Kingdoms
good and profit. And verily, no more, or no otherwise, may any require it from
any. And if Parliaments expect or require it otherwise, it were much better for
all the people that they were Slaves, Vassals, and Villains, as those of old:
in which cases, as says my Author in his 24 page, they debate who should be
Judge: And for this, they all agree in that Fundamental Principle of Right
Reason and Nature, That Parties may never be Judges in their own Causes; for
which, besides all others, the Myrrour is large and clear, among all exceptions
to the Judges person (if he have no Commission, or refuse to show it, as he
ought, or be party, etc.) of which also Britton in Appeals, cap. 22. fol. 41.
So that you see plain, Parliaments may not be Judges in their own Cause, of
their own Acts and doings. But who then? Why the People; first, in, by, and
amongst themselves; and then, in and by their several Courts, Offices, and
Officers, ordained and appointed thereunto. God himself ever has, does, and
ever will do, submit his Commands, his Ways, his Acts, Doings, and Judgments,
in reference to the sons of men, to be examined, tried, and judged by the sons
of men, as you will find it thorowout the Scriptures. The God of England, nay
the God of all the world, will be just, and do nothing but what is just, and
that unto the least, and commit the same unto the judgment of the least, even
those who are his creatures; and shall any man or men in England refuse to
submit their Commands, their Acts and Deeds, unto the judgment of those who
are their Superiors, who made, created, and entrusted them? Sure it may not,
nor it must not be. Why should we so forget our Maker?

For which cause and causes, we may not, we must not, we ought not, nay, we
dare not know any person or persons, thing or things, whomsoever or whatsoever,
that may or shall be otherwise ordained, appointed, instituted, or commanded,
so as to yield any obedience thereunto; nor may we, nor must we, nor ought we,
nor dare we to fall down and worship any man or men, or any of the
Idol-inventions of any man or men whomsoever; we may only know and do the
Commands of our God, and the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of our
forefathers. We will not go down into Egypt, into the house of bondage, from
which the Lord our God has set and kept us free: We will not (for we may not,
being all and every one of us Nazarites unto the Lord) suffer our seven locks
to be shaved off our heads by any Dalilah whatsoever, lest we be taken by the
Philistims, and by them have both our eyes put out; and so be led (as then it
is very easy to be done) and bound in fetters, to grind in the prisonhouse.
We have kept and preserved them hitherto; we have defended and maintained our
Liberties against Kings and Parliaments, with the hazard of our lives, the
expense of our estates, and blood also. Those who have lost their locks, let
them grind in the Prisonhouse, if it must be so, until they be grown again:
but we wish it may or might be otherwise, and pray it may so be. We for our
parts neither may, must, can, nor will (the Lord our God helping and assisting
of us) give a false, unjust, untrue, unwarrantable, illegal value and estimate
either of persons or of things, because we know perfectly, and fully
understand, according as it is written, That in a just weight and measure is
and does consist the very life and being of all things. We have the Law of our
God so written and engraven in our hearts, that we cannot do otherwise: we do
in good earnest love our neighbor as our selves, and we do truly honor our
Fathers; and we must, and are commanded by the Lord our God so to do, that the
days may be long in the land which the Lord our God gives us: it is the only
Command with promise. And we know this will, and that nothing else, without
this, can give us the enjoyment thereof, in peace and rest (as we could
demonstrate to all the world) and we do, or at least desire and endeavor to
worship the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our mind, with all our
soul, and with all our strength, and to serve him all our days, and him only,
even him who brought us out of the land of Egypt, and house of bondage. And for
this cause, or for these reasons, is the Command and Oath of our Fathers, the
Command and Oath of our God, upon us; who never did, nor can, nor will command
or require any thing but that which is just and right, true and good for us:
yea, our own Oath manifold is upon us; and we do know why, for what cause, and
to what end we entered thereinto: And we fear an Oath, and it may not nor cannot
be revoked for ever; for it is just and right, faithful and true. We must and
will (God assisting) walk within our due and true bounds and limits, set,
ordained, and appointed unto us by the Lord our God, and by our forefathers,
in their Laws, Ordinances, Customs and Constitutions; and in them (for that we
certainly know, in the breaking of them, we break and undo our selves) and in
them only, we do and can indeed walk safely and securely, in peace,
tranquillity, and rest of body and mind. They are our strong Tower, our
invincible Castle and Fortress, out of which we cannot be beaten, and in which,
we do not fear any or all the things in heaven and earth. Herein is, herein
will and shall be the joy and delight of our eyes, yea, and of our souls also,
and that all our days, even in the commands of our God, the Laws, Ordinances,
Customs, and Constitutions of our forefathers, in which we will ever and
always walk, live, and continue. Our father David did so; our fathers, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, did so; and from them we may not part, nor depart; we may not
leave them nor forsake them, lest we die; nor turn either to the right hand or
to the left, to do either more or less then according thereunto: but in all
things, in all times, toward our selves and all men, so much and so far as we
are able, will we walk perfectly upright, like men, like our selves, as we are
in or after the image and likeness of God.

And, from henceforth, let no man accuse, charge, reproach, or condemn us, for
disorderly, stubborn, refractory, gainsaying, backsliding, or rebellious
children to God or our Fathers, for haters, despisers, or contemners of our
Neighbors, for deceitful, unkind, or unmerciful, for enemies, traitors, or
rebels: for verily, as you see, we are obedient, orderly, true, upright,
trusty, faithful, loving, respectful worshippers, honourers, observers, doers,
and performers of the Commands of our God, and of our Fathers; and hearty real
lovers of our Neighbor: earnestly praying, faithfully and uprightly desiring
and endeavoring their good, even as our own.

I have, in a very scattered confused manner (which I pray excuse) showed you,
in some measure, the footsteps of our Forefathers, in part, and but in part;
the way and path, the good old way, in which our Fathers walked, and had peace.
That which has enlarged it so much beyond my first intentions, is the Reason
shown, Grounds given, and Foundation laid, for men to see by and stand upon; my
other Treatise carrying much more in the womb of it, if it be well weighed and
considered: in and by which, my desire was chiefly to give a stop to the
extravagancies, exorbitancies, and excesses of our present times, unto those
hasty, inconsiderate, violent, hot, and too too eager motions generally
possessing, and very greatly injuring most men's minds; which has and does
cause many disorders and distempers in and amongst us all; most men much
over-shooting or overrunning themselves, their own desires and endeavors,
their own peace, aims and ends; as it is written, Whilst seeking freedom, and
supposing themselves free, they indeed become servants and slaves.

That golden apple of Unlimitedness, which Kings and Armies, yea Parliaments
also, are so much taken with, and still desirous of; that Witch, that beauteous
taking Witch, which stripes and strips, beats, bends and bows, disrobes, makes
naked, and unthrones us all. I say, My desire therein was, to give a stop and
stand unto these hasty, hurrying, slippery times; and to consider what we are;
and where we are; from what, from whence, or from whom we came: that so, like
the Prodigal, we may bethink our selves of our Fathers house; and so begin to
make our returns thither. And if we find our selves not Prodigals, feeding
upon husks with the swine, I am very much mistaken. And if it be not our work,
our only work, to return to him from whom and whence we came, even to our
fathers house, my eyes extremely fail me; for which you shall find at large in
that Treatise: I could heartily wish it might be well looked into, and
seriously considered of; it carries more in it then may perhaps at first be
discerned: May end and way also (I hope) therein is peace, peace unto all,
reconciliation with all, and a perfect uniting of us all. I have in this spoken
something more plainly and particularly, as to the way and means in reference
unto some things, as also to our continuance and stablishment therein. If it do
appear and be found so, I will hope all Englishmen (for unto all I speak, or
desie to speak, without exception) will begin not only to look toward it, but
to walk in it.

I have showed you, that Justness, Rightness, or Righteousness, and it only,
is, and that it certainly is, the very life and being of all things; and that
without it, nothing possibly can be or exist: that in and by the true knowledge
of things, we shall be able to give a true, just, and right estimate and
valuation of things; which being done and continued, will keep a right, just,
and true order, and so a constant and settled peace; which otherwise cannot
possibly be.

I do profess my self enemy to no man or men, thing or things whomsoever or
whatsoever; nor envy I any; nor verily know I any cause why: for I know not
any that is or can be enemy unto me, envy, hate, or hurt me; for certainly
there is nothing contrary unto me, though many both men and things much
differing from me: all the enmities, hatreds, strifes and contentions, which
are or possibly can be, arising only (as I have already showed) from those
excesses or exorbitancies, from that intensness of the mind, or violent,
impetuous, eager operatings, and restless workings of the spirit in men or
things for or after mastery or predominancie, (and that upon a great mistake,
which I may not speak to now) of having or bearing the rule or sway; which when
Wisdom enters, that ceases. This is so plain and clear, as I know nothing more;
and yet we see it not, (it is our haste.)

We see it, as I said before, in those things we call Contraries; as in Fire
and Water, the one hot and dry, the other cold and moist; the one feminine, the
other masculine; or (I had rather say) the one more hot and dry, and so more
masculine; the other more cold and moist, and so more feminine: for they are in
and with each other, confist and subsist by each other, and cannot possibly be
without each other: yet (I say) we see, these Contraries (so colled) readily
join and unite, embrance, and kiss each other, when and where this intenseness
ceases. Yet a little further: where this intenseness or violent working of the
spirit in any man or thing is, though it be in the self-same things, there
appears the same, if not much greater enmity then in those we call contraries:
we see it thus un things of one and the very self-same nature, temper, and
constitution; as in men and beasts, and all things else, when the spirit of
them is excited, stirred up, and moved, as before. So that hence only comes
the enmity (let it be considered.) It is enough, (and I hope not too much.)
Hence it is written, Thou shall not covet; and that which has enough within it
self, in reference to it self, cares but little for any more. In weight and
measure, in time and season, is all things; which who knows, but he that is in
them? It is enough, and it is for England's sake, that I have written what I
have written; (to me either this or that, any thing or nothing, it matters not)
for your sakes, whose peace and happiness (without respect of persons) is
heartily desired by

(Gentlemen) Your upright faithful friend and servant, in love to be commanded,
Robert Norwood.

Since my writing hereof, I met with a Book entitled The first Addresses to
his Excellency the Land General, etc. by John Spittlehouse, etc.
BY which I perceive, the Gentleman has taken ^otice of a Book I lately
published, and called Englands Center and Foundation of Peace and Rest; and
that he is at some things therein offended. In his 18 page toward the later
end, he has these words: And ^^^^^fore, according to Captain Norwood' s rule,
though (...) contrary to his opinion, in that he claims the aforesaid L^^^ of
corrupt Reason as his Fathers patrimony; and there sets an invaluable esteem
upon them in his late Book.

In his 19 page, he tells them, that they are (...) duty and service to
propagate the Laws he offers, and to annihilate the other, which Captain
Norwood would so gladly have preserved, bidding defiance even unto God himself
to alter them, in a most impious manner; whereas there is not one text of
Scripture that gives liberty either to add or diminish from the aforesaid
Laws, or any wise to alter them.

I will in this thing, and only in this thing, and only for this once, show
the Gentleman the fruits of his rashness.

He tells you, that What he proposes, may not be altered; none may add ought
to it, or take ought from it; and that because (as he says) they were given by
God. We will not blot too much paper, nor run after butterflyes; that is sport
for boys, and not work for men: there is too much of it every day. But in
brief, thus:

He says, God is his Father; and I do believe him to be mine also. And then he
says, that every believer is of Abraham's seed. Then must Abraham needs be
every believers father: wherefore, until he do prove me an infidel, and child
of the devil, what I have written stands, and must stand, to be confirmed by
all who come after, unalterable and unchangeable by any Kings or Parliaments,
yea or by God himself. He may not then blame me for laying claim to, and
setting so high an esteem of their Laws, but blame himself for thus confounding
himself, and calling the Laws of God my Father the Laws of Corrupt Reason.
Consider by what you have seen and heard, from whom or from whence I came or
did proceed. Understand you this same thing, ponder on it a little: it is
written, An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit; nor can a corrupt or
pudled fountain send forth pure, clean, and uncorrupted streams.

This were enough for answer; but I will give you a little more. Is there the
least similitude of such a thing therein, as my laying claim to Corrupt Laws,
or the Laws of Corrupt Reason? Can you possibly collect such a Premise from
which you can tenter and strain such a Conclusion? Say I not, that very few of
the Statute laws or By laws, but are disagreeing and contrary to our
forefathers Laws, and are therefore null in themselves, and not to be
executed? It was too hasty and inconsiderate a charge. Or do I, as you say,
Defy God? You are apt to mistakes. I call on him to justify, bear witness,
and give testimony to or of his own Commands, as the Rechabites did: he has
commanded us to honor and obey our fathers; and he does often prove his
children, whether they will be obedient, and stand fast in their obedience, as
he did the Rechabites and others: and such who have and shall stand fast, and
continue to the end, shall certainly have the Crown, bear and wear the Garland.
Can God change or deny himself? No, he cannot; and if he should, by Prophet, by
Dream, Voice or Vision, give a contrary Command, I will still say I will not
believe it, nor do it: for what in it self, in its own nature, essence, and
being, is just, right, and true, is ever and always so; is as God himself is,
and remains so to all eternity. It is too much; but I have done it for your
sake. Yet a little further.

What if the Laws I call for prove to be the most just, the most righteous, the
most equitable, and the most merciful in the whole world? who then (think you)
will be found the Father of them? I have and do assert and aver them so to be;
and that my assertion and averment must stand, with you and all men, until your
self, or some other, prove them otherwise.

I give your friend also this counsel, that he well consider what he does, and
that he make not too much haste, left he repent himself likewise; for assuredly
you know not either from what, to what, nor yet by what mean you go or move, or
at least would go and move; which it becomes every wise man to know, before he
begin his motion. Were not the Jews corrupt, extreme corrupt, above any people
under heaven? as the Scriptures restifie. Were therefore the Laws of their
forefathers so? And if any had in those corrupt times called for their
forefathers Laws, would it have been said he called for corrupt laws, or the
laws of corrupt reason? It is enough.

Do I call mine The center and foundation of Englands peace and rest? And is it
not so? Verily it is, and must and will be found and made so, if ever England
come to be settled in peace and rest. Therefore I say again unto all and every
one, Look well upon it, and into it; and what I have written, I have written.

By the way, know, that the punishment of Theft by death, with many other of
the like nature, are none of our forefathers Laws; it was not so in the
beginning, as I could prove, but introduced by another hand and way, as I could
show also; and no more to be esteemed ours, then the Idolatry of the
Israelites, set up, countenanced, and maintained by a Law, could be said to be
the Law of Israel; nor the oppressions and injustice done and committed amongst
us, be any more attributed to our forefathers Laws, then the putting to death
of Naboth, and other wickednesses and oppressions done and committed by their
Kings and Rulers could be attributed to their Laws. And so (my good friend)

Farewell. Capt. Robert Norwood.

FINIS.

