The Northern QVERIES FROM The Lord Gen: Monck HIS QVARTERS; SOUNDING An
Allarum, to all Loyal Hearts, and Freeborn English men, Arms, Arms, Arms, In
Defense of our Lives, Laws, Liberties, and Parliaments;

Against the Tyrannical Power, and Domination of the Sword.

Printed in the Year of Englands Confusions, and are to be sold at the Sign of
Wallingford-House, right against A Free Parliament.

Some necessary Queries: I.
WHether there can be any reason of interrupting the Parliament for any other
cause, then their endeavors to destroy the Interest and Freedom of the three
Nations, which cannot be reasonably suspected in so faithful a Parliament?

2 What one matter of Fact the Parliament have done to the prejudice of these
Nations, that they should be thus violently turned out of the House by their
own hired servants: Suppose the taking away of those nine men's Commissions were
an Error in the Parliament, yet could it not be an Error of such a Magnitude,
as to deserve that they should have the Doors shut upon them: is it reasonable
that the whole Sovereignty of these Nations should be destroyed, and so the
three Nations abused and left without all face of Government because that wine
men had their Commissions taken from them, most of them having been false to
their trust in time past, and seeing persons of more trust and faithfullness
then nine, were provided for their places, what prejudice could it be to the
Nation?

3 Whether these men which now cry peace, peace, and continue their taking
money of the Nation, as Officers in the Army to defend their Masters the
Parliament, and do yet suffer them to be interrupted, disquieted (...) or
thrust out of the House, and also suffer the people to be inslaved, and all
unrighteousness to reign whilst they have the Sword in their hands: We say,
Whether these men are not turned Cowards, and for fear of losing their own
Wealth, Cry peace, peace, while there is more cause to take up the Sword of
Military Justice then ever; in defense of the Privileges of Parliament and
Freedoms of the People?

4 Whether it was more a fault in the King to demand 5 Members, and to come
with his Cavalry to disturb the Parliament then in these men which have thrust
(...) Parliament out of Doors?

5 Whether the Parli. have not as much right to dispose of the M^litin and and
Treasure of the Nation now, as when they contended with the King for it?

6 Whether they which took their Commissions from the Parliament at their late
sitting, did not therein own their Power to dispose of Commissions, and so of
the whole conduct of the Army?

7 Whether those men which have now Interrupted the Parliament have not sinned
against their own Consciences, and betrayed their Trust which was deligated to
them, which gave them their Commissions?

8 Whether Sir G. Booth in opposing and endeavoring to destroy the Parliament
at such a distance, and giving them a fair Engagement in the Field, where God
might decide the Controversy; or they, which came upon the Parliament at
unawares, and turned them out at Doors, are the greatest Offenders against the
Interest of these Nations?

9 Whether if Sir G. Booth was carrying on a Design against God in his opposing
the Parliament and present Government, they also are not Designers against God,
who when they had destroyed Sir G. Booths party, by killing some, and taking
others prisoners, have themselves done violence to the whole Parliament their
Master which empowred them, and paid them their Wages. Was it worthy of death,
and confiscation in him and his party; and is it a virtue in these? Was it evil
in the Parliaments Enemies to do violence unto them; and is it a virtue in such
as fought for them, and called themselves the Parliaments faithful Servant, to
interrupt the Parliament? Had Zimrey peace which fl^w his Master?

10 Whether those peoples Conditions is worst, who for differing in Religion
from those in Authority, have their goods taken away, and their persons
inslaved by Tyrants; or theirs, which voluntarily make themselves slaves in
civil things, to the Lusts and Will of men, that they may have leave to dister
from them in matters of T^^^h and Worship?

11 Whether it was not the too ready compliance of the people of the Churches
with Cromwell, which gave him the confidence to mount the Throne, and ride
themselves and all the Nations at his pleasure?

12 Whether those men then, and these people now, which call to the Churches
for advice and help, seek any thing else but to be Masters of the Nations, by
their compliance with the Churches, and will inslave the Churches themselves at
length?

13 Whether the Grandees of the Army, can carry on this their Design against
the Parliament without the help of the Churches; and whether they would have
called in their help, if they would have carried on their Design without them?

14 Whether some men are not so ignorant, as to think they have Liberty of
Conscience when they have nor Liberty in their Persons and Estates; as if
Liberty of Conscience were any other thing, then not to be punished in their
persons and Estates for Conscience sake? These men are not like Moses and the
people of Israel, who would not part with a half of their Civil Things, that
they might have leave to worship God aright: which teaches us not to surrender
our Civil Rights to Tyrants, for the obtaining Liberty of Conscience.

15 Whether it is just that the whole Nation should be made miserable, by having
all their civil Freedoms prestitute to one or a few Men's Wills, that so some
few of the whole Nation may have the Liberty of their Consciences: The Liberty
of these men cost dear, which is purchased with no less then the inslaving of
the whole Nation in their Persons and Estates.

16 Seeing the Militia consists of, and is maintained by the good people of
these Nations out of their own purses (which ought to have no Master but
themselves) any but their Trustees assembled in a High Court of Parliament
ought to have the dispose thereof?

17 Whether its reasonable that the Grandees of the Army, which are part of the
Militia, should have the dispose of it, otherwise then as servants to them,
which pay them their wages?

18 Whether the people may not well expect, that they which have taken the
power to appoint General-Officers to the Army (to the increase of the charge of
the State) should pay those men their extraordinary wages? And why may not the
Parl. contend with the Grandees of the Army, for the dispose of the Militia, as
well as with the King, and expect a Blessing of God upon their Engagement?

19 Whether the aspersions which are raised on the Parliament, are not invented
on purpose to deceive the people, and make them believe the Parl, were not
turned out of the House, only for taking away 8 or 9 men's Commissions, but
that they deserved to be turned out, and that it is no Treason in the Grandees
so to do?

20 Whether any one thing of which the Parl is aspersed be true, or not? As
first: How can they be suspected to intend to persecute any man for his
Religion, seeing they free all the Quakers, and such as were in prison, for not
paying of Tithes; and have in their Resolve October. 10.59. concluded that it is
not del^gated to them to constrain in matters of Religion?

21 And how can the Parliament justly be accused, as having done little, seeing
they so diligently and daily served the people at their own charge? Will not
every Book of our Weekly Intelligence witness against these men as very Liars;
and that any should take the confidence to brand them with the Name of
Presbyterians, who themselves are not willing, that their own Religion should
be set as a brand on themselves? Do men cry out against persecution, and will
they persecute them which have the Sovereignty of Three Nations?

22 How can the not bringing Sir G. Booth and his party to a Trial, be charged
upon them, seeing the Report of his business was not brought into the
Parliament above 9 days before they were last interrupted? If it had: yet how
could they have brought him to a Trial before the Term; except they should have
set up a High-Court of Justice, contrary to all Law and Right?

22 Whether those Officers of the Army, which in their Proposals to the
Parliament, desired that a Law might be made, That no Officers of the Army
might be put out of their Employment, without being tried at a Court Martial?
Have not they acted against their own Law, Reason putting by their Commands
diverse honorable Officers of the Army, all persons of unspotted lives, and men
of great Trust and Faithfulness, and that without so much as either Trial,
Examination, or any Charge against them; but because they were faithful to
their Masters the Parliament, and would not betray their Trust reposed in them:
And whether there is not more reason, those 9 mere^nary men should leave their
Commissions, then the Parliament should be turned out of the House?

24 Whether in the Armies Plea, page the 10. where they excuse themselves from
the Imputation of being against a godly and learned Ministry, be not a
flattering and cogging with the Priests of the Nation, who they must in will
take along with them in this their Treasonable Work, rather then fail?

25 Whether God may not justly bring a grievous Plague of War and Ruin upon
all those men in these Nations, who have ventured their own lives, and slain
many a man in the defense of the Privileges of Parliament, (viz.) that the
Parliament might sit and vote free; and dispose of the Militia and Treasure of
these Nations, if such men should now stand Neuters, and not stand up for the
Good old Cause again; which is the Privileges of Parliament, and Freedoms of
the People? And they deceive us which pretend to be for the Good Old Cause,
without these two?

26 Whether the good people of this Nation can conceive this difference 'twixt
Parliament and Army, (whereupon the Parliament was interrupted) to be any other
then a personal quarrel? If so, Whether they are not as much engaged in
Conscience Equity, and Justice, to own the Parliament, and stand by them now,
as at any other time, in the doing of Justice upon all those that (...) to the
King and his Party?

27 Whether the Nomination of 13 men by those so formerly named to that Work by
part of the Officers of the Army to be propounded to the Council of the
Officers, as they are pleased to call themselves, can reasonably oblige, by any
Color of Law or Reason, the Body of A^herents to the Cause, or any ^ndividual
Member whose consent is nor, nor is like to be obtained thereunto?

28 Whether our Commonwealth is not reduced (after so high and ga^lant Coptests
in Councils, and in the Field, for Common-Good) into a pitiful narrow compass,
whilst the Foundations must be laid by a part of the Officers of the Army,
where 5 or 6 rule all the rest, and sway them to such things, as may lay the
Foundation of their own greatness, not the peoples good, the satiating and
accomplishment of their own ambitious, covetous, and revengful desires and
designs, nor the good peoples peace satisfaction, or settlement?

29 What is the real true difference 'twixt the Turks Jan suries, and that part
of our English Army, that have attempted so highly lately against their Masters
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and go about to set up others of
their own making: And if so, let the good people of this Nation consider with
what safety honor, or Conscience, they can partake with them in this Evil:
Partake not with them in their sins, lest ye partake with them in their Plagues.

30 Whether in point of safety, ye can join with them in the ruining of this
Parliament, that was the strongest Bulwork, (if not the only) the Nation had
against the Common-Enemy, the hopefullest Supporters, Assertors, and Pillars of
our Laws, Rights and Freedoms, as Men and Christians?

31 Whether in point of honor, and honesty, or a good Concience, ye having
owned them, your A^dresses to them, receiving Laws from them, professing
Obedience, together with all faithfulness and sincerity, in taking your
Commissions from them, and acting under their Authority, even to blood?

32 Whither ye do not inevitably contract the guilt of all the blood spilt in
the late Wars, in the quarrel of this Parliament against the King and his
party, and justify the Enemy and their proceedings, and condemn your selves,
and all your actings, for the vindication of the Parliament, and our Common
Right and Liberties?

33 If so: Whether then ye may nor expect certain and sudden destruction, as a
B^esom to sweep you away, guilt of blood crying with such a loud Voice in the
Ears of God, who is powerful to revenge it?

34 Whether the Armies Plea, be not a Play at Football, t^ssing the Good Old
Cause too and fro, sometimes in the stinking Kennel of their own selfish and
corrupt Interests; sometimes up the Tops of the Fabrics of their New raised
Designs and Projects, etc?

35 Whether ever any Commonwealth will trust the Baptized Churches again,
seeing they have dealt thus persideously with the Honorable Parliament, (who
as the Fathers of the Nation) were pleased to put part of the Militia into
their hands for the security of the Privileges of Parliament, and Freedoms of
all men, against Domestic and Foreign Enemies; yet they have maliciously and
shamefully betrayed their Trust, in opposing the Parliament, from whom they had
their Commissions; and have fided with those Traitors which interrupted the
Parliament in October, 13.59. which will be as a Brand upon the Churchmen for
ever, except they come in, and now appear with General Monck, and the rest of
the true Englishmen, for the re-estalishing the Parliament?

36 If this Parliament was Constituted by all the Authority of the Three
Nations; and in an Act made by King, Lords, and Commons, was established in
their Parliamentary Power, and not to be interrupted, adjourned; prorogued, or
dissolved, but by their own Consent (by which the Negative Vote of King and
House of Lords was made void) and an Act, making all men Traitors, which have,
or shall interrupt them: then whether these are not guilty of High Treason,
which did interrupt them, October. 13. 1659.

37 Whether ever God did more signally own and bless any Consult (...) on of
Men in England, than ^e has done this Parliament?

38 Whether the Army in their declining the Parliament, have not been put to
grievous shifts, and forced to run from one indirect course to another, till
they have become the Hate of the People, and terr ble to each other; as at this
day?

39 Whether the Nine Officers which had their Commissions made Null. and Void,
had been humble self-denying Men fearing GOD; they would not rather have
surrendered their Commissions, than to have turned the Parliament out of Doors,
and then invent Lies of the Parliament to excuse Themselves?

40 Whether these men, quondam Officers of the Army, which are the Ringleaders
of this late Rebellion against the Parliament, have any Comm ssion for what
they now do; seeing the Parliament which gave them their Commissions, have
taken them away again? And for whom, or what those men sight, which engage for
Lambert, Packer, and the rest?

41 Whether those Nine quondam Officers of the Army; as Lambert, etc. which
have improved their Interest, to turn out the Parliament; and by that mean
cast the Three Nations into a woeful Confusion, and an Attempt to make a New
War, have not forgot how in their Discourses, both public and private, they
have inveighed against shedding of more blood, and cried out for Peace, Peace,
these Eight Years; and whether they will not now rather shed the blood of any
man, then lay down their Commissions, and expose themselves to the Justice or
Mercy of the Parliament?

42 Whether the Things called the Plea and Declaration of the Army be not
unsatisfactory, does emply Things which do no more justify them in their
Actions, or satisfy the people, then if they had cried, Boh?

43 Whether if these pretended New-States-men, and sometimes Officers of the
Army, had a mind to do any good for the Nation, in Reforming the Law, or taking
away of Tithes, they would have consulted with corrupt Lawyers about their
present Work, or have sent a Company of perfideous Fellows, such as Goff and
Whalley; and Hypocritical Priests, such as Nigh and Owen, and the rest, as
Commissioners to treat with the Noble General Monck, as they have done: Which
makes me remember the Counsel of Isaiah the Prophet; Say not a Confederacy with
them, with whom these men say a Confederacy; but sanctify the Lord of Host in
your hearts, etc.

44 And although Cromwell durst interrupt Parliaments, and usurp Authority, a
these men have proudly done; yet, Whether He durst repeal any firm Laws, made
by a full Vote of the Honorable House of Parliament; as these have pretended
to do in their simple Declaration lately put forth?

45 Whether ever there was such Hypocrites in the World, as these men of the
Churches and Army, which took Commissions of our Honorable Parliament, and
owned them for the Supreme Authority of the Nation; and yet now to color over
their Treason and Rebellion, deny them to be a lawful Parliament?

46 With what Conscience the Soldiers can fight against the Parliament with
these Nine quondam Officers, seeing that the Quarrel is only to uphold their
Commissions and Greatness? And what a sad Account will these Souls give to God
at the last Day, that shall kill or be killed in this Quarrel?

47 Whether the men called the Committee of Safety, will not be found Traitors
in the Eye of the Law, and of all the honest men in England; and whether it is
not the Highest Treason that ever was heard of, for them to make Laws or
Proclamations; or for people to obey them?

48 Whether all the people that pay money, as well as they which Levy Money,
without Authority of Parliament, be not all alike Traitors, Let all sober
people judge

The End.

