CONSIDERATIONS tending To remove the present Differences, AND To settle Unity,
Peace, and Piety for the present and future.

Written from the Summer Islands By R. NORVVOOD.

And sent over to further the Reconciliation of his Native COUNTRY.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for M. Spark, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1646.

CONSIDERATIONS tending To remove the present differences, AND To settle Unity,
Peace, and Piety, For the present and future.
THE great distractions and dissentions in our dear Native Country, and other
places thereon depending, must needs be very grievous to every Christian heart:
And if it please the Lord to discover to any man a likely way of reconcilement
by just and good means, he may not through slothfulness, or timerousness
conceal it, lest he incur that heavy sentence pronounced against the
unprofitable servant, that hid his masters talent in the ground.

2. The ground and cause of the present dissentions, and troubles seems to be
this, That men have been accustomed, and do conceive that Magisterial rule and
Government in a Christian Commonwealth is of two kinds or sorts; namely, Civil
and Ecclesiastical, the one not subordinate to the other, or how subordinate to
the other, and how not? And this seems to have been a principal ground and
cause of discord in the Church, in all ages, since Christ.

3. This pretended Ecclesiastical Magistracy, as it differs from Christian
Magistracy called Civil, has, in all ages, been assumed by the Clergy, in some
degree: And its like it began to work and show it self even in the Apostles
times in the opinions and practices of men in some measure; because the Apostle
says, the mystery of iniquity does already work; yet it appeared more
evidently and eminent, when whole Kingdoms and Commonweales embraced the
Christian Faith, especially when the whole Empire embraced it. For then
Princes, Kings, and Emperors, and their Republiques, out of a pious ignorance,
or rather an ignorant piousness did condescent to grant this to the Clergy, in
some large measure, which they claimed by divine right to belong unto them: and
its like they used it moderately at first, but afterward did by it subjugate
all other Magistracy; and such is the nature of it.

4. Now that this pretended Ecclesiastical Magistracy, assumed by the Clergy,
was the thing which the Apostle speaks of (2 These. 27. when he says The
mystery of iniquity does already work: only he which now withholdeth shall let,
til he be taken out of the way) may appear, because he intimates that the
Emperor and Magistracy did hinder that mystery of iniquity from taking place;
For they would doubtless have been no hinderers of the Apostasy, Idolatry, and
other Errors accompanying this mystery from taking place; therefore it must be
this which they were hinderers of: And then it will follow that this is it
which the Apostle calls the mystery of iniquity.

5. And this Ecclesiastical Magistracy, assumed by the Clergy, remains the same
in substance, though the subject or persons wherein it is be altered; As it was
the same, in kind, in the Apostles time, in those persons in whom it was; as it
was afterward when it was in the universal Bishop or Pope; For the Apostle, in
his own time, calls it the mystery of iniquity, and so it was afterward: So
that though it may differ in degrees, or in respect of the persons in whom it
is, yet it remains the same in kind.

6. Now, according to the subject or persons in whom it may be, this
Ecclesiastical Magistracy, assumed by the Clergy, seems to be principally of
four sorts. For either it is 1 In the Pope, or universal Bishop and his
officers: Or, 2 In a company, or number of Bishops and their officers: Or, 3 In
a company of Ministers and their officers: Or, 4 In every particular Minister,
and his officers. The first, and last of these seem to differ but in this, that
the first is universal, and the last particular; the other two also differ in
names and degrees, not much indeed.

7. A Magistrate does exercise a coercive power by rewards and punishments, so
that he can say, do this good, and I will protect and defend thee, etc. Or if
thou do this evil, I will inflict these and these punishments on thee. And such
a power the four sorts of Clergymen, before mentioned, have assumed and
exercised; that is, a power of Magistracy.

8. Neither does the differences of the rewards or punishments inflicted by the
Ecclesiastical Magistrates cause them to be no Magistrates: For amongst those
which are granted, by all, to be Magistrates, there be several forms of
proceeding and censuring, yet all Magistrates.

9. Objection. The Ecclesiastical punishment is Excommunication, or something
of that kind, concerning which a promise is made, That what is bound on earth
shall be bound in heaven: So that it may seem to be a spiritual or divine
punishment, and the release upon repentance, a spiritual release.

Answer. So doubtless is the sentence of the Civil Magistrate, which he gives
on earth, ratified in heaven, else it were in vain for him to sit in judgment:
Even the sentence of Pilate againstour Saviaur Christ.
Therefore they are said to be in the place of God, and their sentence the
sentence of God, even as the sentence of Excommunication is; and the Malefactor
justly sentenced, by the Civil Magistrate, is so to apprehend it as the
sentence of God in heaven, extending not to his body only, but to his soul
also, or the whole man, and that eternally without repentance.

10. So that Excommunication seems principally to be ordained as a supplement,
or in the defect of Christian Magistracy; so as though it seem to be approved
by Moses, and it may be was in use among the Patriarks from Adams time; yet
throughout the Old Testament whilst the ordinary course of Magistracy was in
force; though we find sundry other punishments inflicted, we scarce find any
mention of Excommunication, or any person Excommunicate: In the New Testament
we find it was in use among the Jews; but then the Jewish Magistracy was
disannulled, they being under the power and Magistracy of the Romans. Our
Savior also allows of it to his Disciples; and the Apostle Paul appoints it in
the Churches of the Gentiles: But still this was in the defect of Christian
Magistracy: For every Church is a Society, and no Society can well stand without
Magistracy, that is, without some punishment of evil doers, and encouragement
for those that do well. Such a course of Magistracy as is usual they might not
set up, lest they should seem Rebels to those States and Kingdoms whereof they
were subjects; It remains then that for any great offense obstinatly
persisted in, especially scandalous, they might use this Magisterial sword of
Excommunication; for this might be done without any the least appearance of
Rebellion or offending the Laws or Magistracy of those Estates or Kingdoms
under which they lived, whether they were Heathen or Jewish: but in Christian
States it is otherwise.

11. And here by the way we may observe the great Wisdom and Providence of God,
who is not the Author of dissension and confusion, but of peace and order, and
his Ordinances do not thwart or hinder one another, but rather help and perfect
one another; as in ordaining this Magisterial power of Excommunication to
supply the defect of an ordinary course of Magistracy, he does it so as that it
should no ways thwart, interfere, or hinder it, nor give any the least just
offense against it, or against Magistrates. And the like care for peace and
order ought Christians always to observe, that when there is no necessity of
both, or that both cannot well stand together, the one, namely, Excommunication,
must be laid aside, and give place to the ordinary course of Magistracy: But
whilst some would persuade that God has set up two kinds of Magistracy (not
subordinate one to the other), and so two kinds of Magistrates, as Princes and
their officers for the one, and Clergymen and their officers for the other;
they have given occasion of infinite troubles and discords in the Church, from
time to time; and this seems to be the principal ground and occasion of the
continuance of our present troubles and dangers.

12. Besides, if this power of Excommunication were necessarily to be continued
in its full vigor, yet it no where appears to belong to Clergymen: For as all
Magisterial power arises Originally from the multitude or people over which it
is set, and until Magistrates be set up, it remains in the people: so this
power of Excommunication is attributed, or given to the multitude or whole
congregation under the name of the Church; and so it was most apt for those
times and occasions for which it was ordained; and if it were to be confined
into the hands of a few, surely then it ought to be confined into the hands of
the Magistrates, not of the Ministers or Clergy, because it is (as we have
showed) a Magisterial power.

13. Thus then I say, that when there was no Christian Magistrates nor ordinary
Magisterial power was or could be in the Church, our Savior and his Apostles
did ordain Excomunication to be instead thereof, giving that power to each
Church to excomunicate gross and scandalous offenders, especially when
admonition, reproof, ebuke private and public would not reclaim them, which
might sufficiently, for the time, supply the want of an ordinary Magisterial
power: Not intending thereby to abolish the ordinary Magisterial power in
government, nor to subjugate it to this extraordinary; nor to set up two
Magisterial powers in the Church (for Magistracy or Magisterial power (as the
Law) inclines to bondage, and the Church is not to be most in bondage of
alother societies, but rather more free) but rather to supply the want of
ordinary Magisterial power, until it might take place, when whole nations should
embrace the Christian faith, and submit themselves to be ruled by christian
Laws and Magistrates: and then the ordinary Magisterial power, being more
generally effectual for peace and unity, and the conservation of great
societies (as whole Kingdoms, etc.) should take full place: Neither then, it may
be, was Excommunication to be wholly abolished, but to be exercised with fit
limitations upon some special and extraordinary occasions, for example sake
etc. but no ways to the prejudice of the civil government, no more then it was
in the first institution as we have before observed

14. Yet we deny not that God has ordained in the world and in his Church
especially, a twofold rule, or power, or authority, or government; and so also
two kinds of Rulers or Governors: Even as the means of grace is twofold,
namely, Legal and Evangelical, and the Legal helps to fit and prepare a man for
the Evangelical: So in the Church, there is a twofold Rule or Government,
namely, Magisterial and Prophetical; and the Magisterial helps to fit and
prepare a man for the Prophetical. I say again, as the nature of man is
twofold, namely, spiritual and corporal, or of soul and body, or of the
outward or inward man: So GOD has ordained in nature, but especially in his
Church, a twofold rule, or government, suitable to each of those, namely,
Prophetical, and Magisterial; both jointly serve for regulating and perfecting
the whole man; but the Prophetical especially for the inner man, and the
Magisterial for the outer. The actions of the inner man (as to understand, to
will, to believe, etc.) cannot be wrought by a Magisterial power, therefore the
Lord has ordained Instruction for the Understanding, but especially in the
Church, the preaching of the Word to enlighten the understanding, to beget
faith, through the operation of his Spirit, and so to work a free conformity or
obedience of the whole man from inward principles. Again the outward man cannot
directly and immediately be wrought upon by the preaching of the Word;
therefore the Lord has ordained a Magisterial power, which by outward
principles, as by rewards and punishments, may work it, at least, to an outward
conformity or obedience; And to one of these all rule and government, and all
Rulers and Governors are referred, namely, as they are either Propherical or
Magisterial: And these do no ways interfere, thwart, on prejudice the one the
other, even when they are both extended to the utmost: And both these in a
Church, or Christian Commonwealth are to be exercised for the advancement of
the Kingdom of Christ in the settling and propagation of true Christian
Religion, as their principal scope and end.

15. So that Ministers are Rulers or Governors in the Church as well as
Magistrates; yea they seem to have the more excellent Rule and Government, as
more immediately, in a more excellent subject, yet their power is not coercive
as that of the Magistrates, but persuasive and Prophetical, suitable to the
subject upon which they work, and so it is the most eminent work that is done
amongst the sons of men; working from inward principles (through the operation
of the Spirit of God) a free and voluntary subjection and obedience to God: The
Rule of Magistrates also tends to work subjection and obedience to God, but not
so immediately, nor cannot of it self effect so much.

16. Yet it follows not that Ministers are to be preferred in honor before all
Magistrates, whose power may extend much further, namely, over a greater number
of men then that of the Ministers which extends only to that Congregation over
which he is; whereas the Magistrates may be over a whole City, or a whole
Kingdom. It is said also God has given honor to that part which wanted;
namely, more external honor to the Magistracy; but if that also be added to the
honor of the Ministry, it will soon overtop all other honor among men: So that
whereas the Apostle says, The Elders that rule well are worthy of double
honor, especially those that labor in the Word and Doctrine. It seems to be
understood That of those Elders, Officers, or Rulers whose power or authority
extends no farther then that Congregation, the chief honor belongs to the
Minister; which also may be more or less, according to the gifts which God
has endued him with all.

17. Against what has been before said it may be objected, that Magistrates do
often, to good purpose, join a Prophetical or persuasive power with their
Magisterial, or coercive power, laboring to bring men to a right order and
obedience, by reasons humane and divine without constraint, Why then may not
Ministers join a magisterial and coercive with their ministerial, or
prophetical?

Answ. The Prophetical power, as we have said, is more noble, more general,
has less contraryty to any thing, works mord directly and immediately upon
the more noble part of man, the soul, and so does much advance and further the
final scope and end of the Magistrates office without any contrarity to it;
(Moses said, would God all the Lords people were Prophets, he would not say
would they were all Magistrates, for that would have bred contrarity and
confusion, which the other would not.) and therefore is more generally to be
used by all Magistrates, and others. The Magisterial power is not so, wherewith
if a Minister be invested, it does something take him off from his proper
office, which is more noble: Besides, it does something darken it; for being
clothed with magisterial power, it makes him rather a Legal, then Evangelical
Minister, because his Magisterial power is far more obvious to the apprehensions
of men then his Prophetical, which by this means is not apprehended, or very
darkly and confusedly; as the ey being fixed upon some object very visible;
sees not other things, or if it do, it is very obscurely and confusedly:
Besides it makes him of a spirit more Legal, less Evangelical: Therefore our
Savior himself, in the execution of his Prophetical office, laid aside all
Magisterial power, which he would not have done if it had been profitable. So
did the Apostles, so the Prophets of Old ordinarily; and so our Savior seems
expressly to command his Apostles and all Ministers, in one place, where he
says, The Lords of the Gentiles bear rule over them, and those which are great
exercise authority, etc. but it shall not be so among you etc. whereby he
prohibits all Ministers from the exercise of Magisterial power: as if he should
say; those which will be great in the Ministry of the Gospel must be without
all Magisterial authority; He says the Lords of the Gentiles, because the
Magistracy of the Jews was void, being under the Romans; And so shows
whosoever will be great in the Ministry must exercise no authority as
Magistrates do, He is to preach, convince, etc. with all authority (that is,
with all prophetical authority) but to have no Magisterial or Coercive
authority: And so he says, Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
servant; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant, now who
is further from Magisterial power then a servant. Even as the Son of man came
not to be served, but to serve, where he proposes (as elswher) his own
example, that he had exercised no Magisterial power: And it has been generally
observed in England that when Magisterial power has been conferred upon
Ministers, by making them Bishops, they were the worse Ministers ever after.

18. This Ecclesiastical Magistracy of Clergymen, the Church has had
experience of in every kind: As in an Independent way; in a Presbyterial way;
in an Episcopal, or prelatical way; and in the way of an universal Bishop or
Pope. For whilst the Churches were few, and they, for the most part, separate
in place, or far dis-joined one from another, being under no Christian
Magistracy the Government, may seem to have been something like that, which at
present is called Independent: But the Churches growing more numerous and
nearly conjoined, they found it necessary for peace and unity they should be
Governed by the consent of the Presbytery, assembled in some such way as is now
called the Presbyterian Government. But afterward finding many controversies,
scisms, and strong oppositions amongst these and their followers, for their
sakes they thought it necessary to set Bishops over them: afterward finding
much disagreement among these Bishops, and an aptness in them to engage States
and Kingdoms in their quarrels, to the stirring up of sedition and great
disturbance, they yielded to admit of an universal Bishop over them all. And by
this ladder has the Pope ascended to set himself above all humane powers: the
first step of which ladder, or rather the basis or foundation on which it
stands, seems to be this, that there is an Ecclesiastical Magistracy over the
Church belonging to the Clergymen, and that jure divino; which being granted,
the rest will follow, and can hardly be avoided: And this, in every of these
kinds of Government, has always grown prejudicial to the Church and Civil
State; (hence have sprung the principal errors in the Church, which almost all
make for the ambition and covetousness of the Clergy, an evident sign that
they have been the chief authors and promoters of them, this appears in the
Church of Rome etc.) which former times endeavored to redress by altering the
Government from one form to another; but all in vain, because they were all
founded, and all of them retained this false principle. And if the world should
continue so long as to make the like experience of them all again, though they
should be ordered with as much care and circumspection as might be, yet
doubtless they would prove as bad as before; nay, I am persuaded, worse; seeing
we find not the ancient Independents, or those which were likest to them, did
ever, when they were at the worst, hold any tenants, or use any practice, so
dangerous as these, which the Independents of these times do boldly and in a
turbulent way bring in now upon their first rising: (where shall we find more
pride more uncharitableness, they will vilify and unchristian the best
Christian, if he stand in their way, and seem not to regard the ruinating of
Churches and Commonwealths, so they may set up themselves, no, though it be the
womb that bare them, and the paps which they have sucked?) What may we expect
of them if they should be authorized and continued.

19. But the universal Bishop being (by his foul train of Errors, in tract of
time brought in) discovered to be the Antichrist, and his Government
Antichristian, is now, through Gods mercy, exploded. The Bishops also (the
principal stirrers up of those grievous troubles and dangers which are still
upon us) themselves and their government is cast off as Antichristian, for this
cause especially, because they began of late to assume to themselves an
unlimited and Independent power Jure divino; or an Independent Ecclesiastical
Magistracy, and by that power brought inu sundry Errors endangering Religion
and the Commonwealth. So that now the great opposition rests, and is feared will
be between those called Independents and Presbyterians, and especially between
the Ministers on either side; the people (for the most part) opposing each
other for their sakes: And they (I mean the Ministers) opposing each other for
that which cannot appear to belong to either of them, namely, for an
Ecclesiastical Magistracy over the Church, which even themselves condemn in the
two former Governments, namely, Papal and Episcopal.

20. We shall conclude; It is surely to be lamented that such Ministers in
England, as ever since the Reformation, til of late, would have thought it
sufficient, if themselves might have been freed from the dominion of the
Bishops, are now not content with that, except themselves may exercise the like
dominion over their brethren; and that by a law more unalterable than that of
the Medes and Persians, namely, jure divino; which the Bishops never durst
challenge til of late, and which in them was a principal cause of stirring up
the present troubles; and in these is a principal cause of the continuance of
them, whilst covering the mystery by some of them intended, with specious shows
and plausible pretenses, they draw the common people, and many otherwise truly
religious to their parsee. Oh that there were such a mind in them as
heretofore; and that they would in tonder compassion of the distracted estate
of the Kingdom, content themselves with such authority as heretofore, in the
most happy and stourishing times of this Church and Commonwealth; namely, with
preaching the Word, and administering the Sacraments, at leastwise for a time,
til they could make it appear to the Honorable Parliament, some other power to
belong unto them, and what that is, and how limited. And in the mean time such
offices and officers to be set in the Commonwealth, and in every particular
Congregation, as were men of courage, fearing God, and hating covetonsnesse,
that might curb profanesse, and cherish piety, peace, and true Religion. And
the Ministers to have their classes, or meetings, for the ordaining and
regulating of Ministers, as other societies have, according to the Word of God,
and the approbation of the Honorable Parliament: Then might we hope to see peace
again restored in our dear native Country, and true Religion settled with more
power and purity then heretofore. For the ambition of some Clergymen in this
very point (yet often, I confess, obtaining the suffrages of pious and learned
Christians in their times) has been the principal cause of errors and discords
in the Church, whilst the Pope would have such a Power jure divino, by virtue
whereof he did subjugate all other Powers (and of that nature it is wheresoever
it is granted to subjugate in time all other powers): Of late the Bishops would
challenge such a power jure divino, but could not have, nor hold it so long as
to subjugate other powers. Now Ministers would have such a power jure divino,
and some as absolute and Independent as any of the former: when no such power
of Ruling belongs to any of them jure divino, but only a Prophetical power of
ruling the mind and conscience by the Word of God; All other coercive and
magisterial power no ways belonging to Ministers jure divino, but to those in
place of Magistracy: I say if Ministers would lay down this claim to an
Eccleslastical Magistracy, and content themselves, as formerly, with their
ministerial and prophetical authority (at leastwise for a time, till they
could make it evidently to appear such other power to belong unto them, and how
limited) the occasion of the present differences would be taken away, and
unity, peace, and piety might be settled amongst us, which is the scope here
intended, and ought to be the endeavor of every faithful Christian.

FINIS.

