Proposals for propagation of the GOSPEL, Offered to the PARLIAMENT:
By Capt. ROBERT NORVVOOD.
THe occasion of my presentment of these at this time, is, my being charged of
Blasphemy, (or being a Blasphemer) at the Committee for propagation of the
Gospel, by M. Scot Chairman thereof.

Quere, Whether a Member of the same Committee be not guilty of the same
Blasphemy (if it be so adjudged?) Then whether there weer not as much reason
for me to propose, as for him to receive Proposals? But if it shall not be
found Blasphemy, then Whether M. Scot ought not in Equity and good Conscience,
give open and public satisfaction, for so open and public an Injury and
Scandal.

That I do, and ever did acknowledge both Heaven and Hell, and these as
distinct as light and darkness, all who know me can witness; and my Book
dedicated to the Parliament, entitled Parson Simpson's Excommunication
excommunicated, (where that Subject, with the other of the Soul is discoursed,
and to which I could not have answer to this day) does fully testify: A
certain local limited place being only by me denied. And to say that the Soul
of man is of a Divine Essence, or of the Essence of God, is no more (if rightly
understood) then to say that the Soul is Immortal; or that it was breathed into
man from God; or that in him we live, and move, and have our Beings.

Has Capt. Norwood been, or is he an Oppressor or Violator, a Slanderer,
Backbiter, or Murderer of his Neighbor? Has he been, or is he a Swearer,
Drunkard, or Adulterer, according to, or after the flesh? No of a truth, he
walks contrary to these: Yet reckon I not my self justified herewith or hereby,
nor judge I any therefore. What then? Why, he has blasphemed the abominable
Arrogancies and Usurpations of the Clergy, who would sit in, upon, and over all
men's Consciences! (Witness M. Shidrach Simpson in my case) who have ever done,
and still would make the Civil Magistrate their whips and rods, their Jaylors,
Butchers, and what not?

The extreme desparate and vilde deceits of the Lawyers, in the whole course or
management of the Law in all the several Courts of Justice, these indeed I have
blasphemed; and this has been the only and alone cause of all my sufferings,
and being charged with Blasphemy against God; which whether I am such, I leave
to the judgment of all who know me, have seen or read my writings.

Being thus occasioned to make this presentment, and having (as I suppose)
equally with others the liberty of throwing in my mite, and that with you
whatever is proposed shall not find the less or more acceptance in respect to
the Proposers thereof; (because that were to have the truth in respect of
persons contrary to the Scriptures command) Do therefore humbly offer to be
considered,

First, What the Gospel of Christ in its very true and real nature, property,
and end, in very deed and in truth is? The true and very knowledge whereof, may
give light and direction in, for, or to its propagation or promulgation.

The end wherefore I propose this, is, lest whilst we pretend or intend its
propagation, we do not in deed and in truth (so much as in us lies) work or
bring forth its overthrow and destruction.

Secondly, That which next I should offer to be considered is,

How far any man or men whatsoever, are empowered, constituted, ordained, and
appointed by Christ thereunto? or wherein the aptitude and fitness of any unto
such a work may or does consist?

The knowledge of, or true information in the former, will easily give us the
understanding and sight of this latter.

That which I take to be the Gospel, is Love, Peace, good Will toward men:
Luke 2.14. Be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful; who causes his
rain to fall, as upon the good, so upon the bad; as upon the just, so upon the
unjust. Matthew. 5.45. Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you; Bless
them that curse you; Pray for them who despitefully use you. Luke 6.27,28. In
this are the children of God. and the children of the Devil manifest; Whosoever
does not Righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother:
For this is the message we had from the beginning, that we should love one
another. Not as Cain, who was of that wicked (...), and slew his Brother. 1
John 3.10,11,12. Hereby have we perceived love, that he laid down his life for
us; therefore we also ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren: v. 16.
Hereby we know we are translated from death to life, because we love the
Brethren. He that loves not his Brother, abides in death; he who hates his
Brother, is a manslayer; and you know no manslayer has eternal life abiding
in him: v. 14, 15. Do good to all men, especially to the household of faith.
Every one that loves, is born of God, and knows God; he that loves not,
knows not God; for God is love. And herein is the love of God manifest, that
whilst we were sinners Christ died for us: 1 John 4.7,8. A new Commandment
(says Christ) give I unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you:
John 13.34. And we must know, Christ and his commands are one and the same; his
Word and his command is not one thing, and himself another: And he came to save
sinners, the chief of sinners; as Paul says, and himself also, I came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; for the whole need not the
Physician, but those that are sick: Again he says, For judgment I am come
into this world, that they which see not, might see; the following words will
be very well worthy the consideration of most men, which is, and that they who
see, might be made blind: John 9.38. The Pharisees that heard him answer,
What? are we blind also? Christ answers them, If ye were blind, ye should
have no sin; but now you say we see, therefore your sin remains.

God or Christ, whose end it is (as the Scriptures testify) to magnify the
exceeding greatness, the richness, the freeness and fullness; the heights,
lengths, bredths, and depths of his mercy; the wonderful glorious dimensions of
it, must suffer the greatest sinners; that so he may publish himself, his
Gospel, the greatest salvation, preach the exceeding greatness of his power,
and so save and deliver them from their sins: as Paul says, Sin has therefore
abounded, that the grace of God might superabound: yet I say as Paul also said,
Let us not therefore sin.

This then (if I mistake not) is the Gospel of Christ, or rather, Christ's
Gospel; This is the message and messenger God sent into the world; for the
message and messenger must be one and the same thing; This is that Son of
Righteousness, or rather, that righteous Son God sent into the world: Christ he
preaches what himself and his Father indeed and in truth are; commands and
promises what we should and must be and do, if we receive his message, his
promise, and obey his command. We see Christ did not speak and preach only, but
he did, and appeared really in all things to be the same which he preached;
prays when they were putting him to death, Father, forgive them, they know not
what they do: (so does Stephen also) and heals his ear who came to apprehend
him, which Peter had cut off; gives his life for his enemies: And this is that
Paul speaks of Love, not in dead word, but in deed and in truth, in the life
and power of it; which love (as the Scriptures testify) is God: and which (as
Paul says) thinks none ill, but it bears all things, suffers all things,
endures all things: Love it covers all sins; Prove. 10.12. Love, it works
none ill to his Neighbor; Romans 13.10. And this is that promised in Isa.
2.2,3,4. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the
Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be
exalted above the hills; and all Nations shall flow unto it. And many people
shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the
house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk
in his paths* for out of Zion shall go forth a Law, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the Nations, and rebuke many people:
and they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn war any more. and in Isa. 11.6,7,8,9. The Wolf also shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard shall ly down with the Kid; and the Calf, and the
young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. And
the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall ly down together; and
the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox: And the sucking Child shall play on the
hole of the Aspe, and the weaned Child shall put his hand on the Cockatrise
den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. And in
Jer. 31.31,32,33,34. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a
new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: Not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the day that I took
them by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which my Covenant
they brake, although I was an husband unto them, says the Lord. But this shall
be the Covenant which I will make with the house of Israel; After those days,
says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall
teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know
the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest
of them, says the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember
their sin no more. There you have Christ promised as a living life, dwelling
and abiding in the soul, or law written in the heart, so that we shall not at
all hang upon the lips of men, or have any need or use of their teachings.
Whether this then be not in deed and in truth the very real and true Gospe of
Christ, or Christ's Gospel; God's Spell, or good Spell; is offered and left
(together with the several Scriptures quoted, with many others coherent
thereunto, which for brevity sake I omit) to your due inspection, and serious
consideration. And if this be indeed and in truth Christ's Gospel, God's Spel,
or good Spell, as it is supposed it will not by any be denied: The next thing to
be considered, is,

How far any man or men whatsoever are empowered, constituted, ordained,
appointed, fitted, furnished, enabled, or anointed by Christ hereunto; all
these names signifying indeed but one and the same thing; for he who is not
fitted, furnished, enabled or anointed thereunto, is not empowered,
constituted, ordained, or appointed by God or Christ thereunto; the ordinations
of men in this point will not do except they could give the thing also; the
inward anointing as well as the outward.

Therefore the Apostles, although they had the promise, yet they were not to
stir, they were not to go forth to preach the Gospel, until themselves had
received the Gospel, the promise of the Father; until they were endued with
power from on high; Luke 24.49. And behold I do send the promise of my Father
upon you; but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem until ye be endued with power
from on high: Acts 1.8. Ye shall receive the holy Ghost: Here Is a further
confirmation of the promise; but yet they stir not, Acts 2.1.4. there it is
said, They were all filled with the holy Ghost: Now have they the performance
of the promise; now and not before were they Commissioned, ordained, empowered,
or appointed; because now, and not before really and actually anointed, and
then indeed were they anointed or baptized, in, with, or unto the preaching of
Christ's Gospel unto others; and then they indeed do go forth preaching,
baptising healing all manner of diseases casting out devils, and the like;
freely they had received, and freely they were to give; and so indeed they did:
as Peter said to the Cripple whom he healed; Silver and Gold have I none, but
such as I have, that give I unto you: Rise up and walk: And he lift him up by
the hand, healed him, and he walked. Thereby manifesting and declaring, what
the Gospel, what the Anointing, what the Missage or Message was they had
received, and accordingly did give forth the same; as is declared.

And indeed nothing can give that which it has not, or more then it has;
neither can any thing act beyond the power or ability it has received: If the
power be of men, the anointing of and by men, why accordingly is and must needs
be in its speakings and goings forth, its actings and operations; for no stream
can run higher, or above its head or spring: That which is born of the flesh:
is flesh; that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit: If it be from men, its
living is and must needs be in and upon men, and its returns unto men; If of
and from God, its living is and will be only in and upon God, and its returns
only unto or into God. Wherefore it is as Christ says, John 5.44. How can ye
believe who receive Honor one from another, and seek not the honor that
comes from God alone: Whence I argue, He that has not himself received the
Gospel in deed and in truth, He that has not received the message (as is
before declared) that has not received it in life and power, that is not thus
anointed of God, cannot himself in deed and in truth preach the Gospel unto
another: He who preaches the Gospel, must be Gospelized, Evangelized, must be
in very deed and truth the very thing he speaks and preaches.

The Gospel is not, the kingdom of Christ is not letter, or dead word only,
but it is life and power; it is not a dead Christ, but a living Christ, or
Christ indeed and in truth dwelling or living lively and powerfully in flesh,
manifesting, preaching or speaking forth it self by or through flesh, and that
not in or by dead word or letter only, but in power and life, declared by real,
sensible, and suitable acts, as is before quoted; according as is also in 2 Cor.
3.2,3. Ye are our Epistle, written in our hearts, which is understood and read
of all men; in that ye are manifest to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by
us; and written (not with Ink, but) with the Spirit of the living God; not in
Tables of stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the heart. Thus as the Gospel was
received in power, so was it again preached or given forth in power; What Paul
had received, that he also communicated: which what it was, you there see.

Wherefore I leave it to be duly weighed and considered, whether it be not
necessary that he who goes forth to preach the Gospel of God or Christ, or
Christ's Gospel, or God's Gods Spell, or good Spell, be not thus ordained;
appointed, empowered or anointed of God, as is before expressed; And that he do
indeed and in truth receive his power or anointing, not from below; not from
men, but from God, or from above.

And then, Whether any are-thus ordained, appointed or anointed? and who, and
where those are?

And then, if there be any such,

Whether they do not highly dishonor their Lord and Master, in seeking power
from below, or from men; contrary to the example of Christ and his Apostles;
yea, contrary to the very nature of the thing, or power it self they pretend to?

It was said by some of the Clergy at the Committee, To what end or purpose was
it for them to propose any thing to the Parliament, were it not in their power,
or the power of the Magistrate to make Laws in such cases, and to punish the
Breakers of those Laws so made?

As much as if they had said, To what end is it for us to preach and proclaim
the Gospel of God or Christ, although ordained, empowered, constituted,
appointed, and anointed thereunto by God or Christ, except you (the Civil
Magistrate) do not, or will not only tolerate and allow us, but encourage and
protect us also therein; nay except you also follow after us with your swords
to cut all their throats, who believe not as we believe; who do not hear or
receive the things we say and speak although we can indeed and in truth give no
better reason, nor show any better Commission then our bare say so? Which
whether it be not quite contrary to a Gospel Spirit, I leave to be considered;
yea contrary to Christ's and the Apostles both precepts and practices; Mat.
5.38. to the end, Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and
a tooth for a tooth. But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever
shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any
man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak
also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Give to
him that asks thee: and from him that would borrow of thee, turn thou not
away. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor and
hate thine enemy: but I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despite sully use
you, and hate you: That ye may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven: for he makes his sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends
his rain on the just, and unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what
reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same? And if ye salute your
brethren only what do ye more then others? do not even the publicans so? Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

This, indeed and in truth, is The Gospel of Christ; or, this is Christ's
Gospel indeed and in truth: and it lies not in a few outside preachings,
prayings, baptizings, humiliations, thanksgivings, and the like; not in any or
all the outward visible Forms of administration whatsoever, that ever were,
are, or shall be; but this written in the heart, this spirit living and
dwelling in us in life and power; speaking and preaching, acting and working it
self forth by real, visible, and sensible demonstrations; which the best of us
all I fear, notwithstanding our so high pretensions, are so far from being
anointed with, so as to preach to others, that we cannot, nor are we able to
bear almost the very hearsay of it from others.

Now this living life of God in our spirits, or this law of God written in our
hearts by the Spirit of God, is indeed and in truth the Gospel: upon whomsoever
it falls, it will make all his earthliness and fleshliness to tremble and fall;
and he who looks upon it, will presently lower all his stately plumes: there is
Christ's precept: for president, look into Luke 9.54,55,56. when being refused
to be entertained and received by the Samaritans, John and James would that
they might, as Elias did, command fire from heaven to have consumed them: but
Jesus rebuked them, saying. Ye know not of what spirit ye are: for the Son of
man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. So when Peter
attempted his rescue from those who came to apprehend him, he reproves him,
saying, He that kills with the sword, shall perish by the sword: and further
says, he could pray unto the Father, and he would send him more then twelve
legions of angels but his kingdom is not of this world; as he says Joh. 13.36.
My Kingdom is not etc. if my kingdom were of this world my servants would
surely fight for me: but now my kingdom is not from hence.

Wherefore then since Christ's kingdom is not of this world, as indeed and in
truth it is not, but diametrically opposite and contrary to it; therefore is it
not to be propagated supported maintained, or defended, with or by any the
weapons of this world: And that whenas he himself would not, in his own person,
or by any other, defend himself, or be defended by any outward force, violence,
or power whatsoever; I offer it to consideration, whether any other man or men
whatsoever, may or ought to do it. And if his Kingdom be spiritual (as it is
said it is) what then should carnal weapons do in it or about it? And then,
whether those who give counsel to States and Commonwealths herein, give not
counsel evidently and eminently destructive to them? For no one command,
precept, or president is there given for it by Christ, or any of his Apostles,
who brought, preached, and published the Gospel; but the quite contrary, as
has been showed.

I would next offer to consideration, what surer or better pretension the
present Clergy have, may, or can have, to the Chair of Peter, to the power
given from on high, to the appointing or anointing of the Father, then has the
Romish, Episcopal, or other Clergy, that what they propose, preach, or
publish, should be more obliging or binding then others?

And then, whether they can pretend any more or further to the spirit of
infallibility, for the opening those mysteries of the Kingdom, the mysteries of
Christ; or to open, unfold, and truly to declare Christ, who is the Mystery of
mysteries: Great is the mystery of godliness, Christ manifest in flesh. Perhaps
they think it easy, (let them take heed, that, lest seeing, they be made
blind;) but Christ himself says, in Matthew. 11.27. No man knows the Son, but
the Father. Or whether they be able to unriddle the riddles, open the parables
declared by Christ: for it is written, Without a parable spoke he not: Or to
unseal the book spoken of by John in the Revelations. And if any man understand
not these mysteries as they do, unfold or open these riddles or parables
according to their sense, meaning, or interpretation, he must presently,
without all doubt or peradventure, be an Heretic or Blasphemer.

And then, from the consideration of what Christ and his Gospel, as it is held
forth unto us in the Scriptures quoted, and many other coherent thereunto,
whether the constituting or appointing any other laws by any, in reference to
the promulgation and propagation thereof, other then are by himself expressly
commanded and appointed, be not derogatory unto, if not a denying of Christ
himself, whom we lay and affirm to be the only and alone King, Priest, and
Prophet, in and unto his Church and people.

And then, whether it be not (upon the foregoing grounds) indeed and in truth
the spirit of Antichrist. as in their predecessors, so now risen up again in
these their successors, laboring and endeavoring, by all the force and power
they can, and by all the subtle devices they are able, to engage, stir up, and
incite, the present, powers for the support, defense, and maintenance of their
own kingdom, under color and pretense of defending the Kingdom of Christ,
which he disclaims (as is before proved;) and under the notion of suppressing
Blasphemy and Heresy, that spirit does not, in very deed and in truth, aim at,
labor and endeavor the suppressing of the very Truth it self; as it has
constantly been seen to this day (though perhaps, and I do verily believe, many
of them see or know it not.) Verily, Truth is seldom or never heard in
outcries against others; it is seldom whispering against, or secretly
backbiting of any: Truth is strong, and therefore not easily oftended: it
willingly hurts no man, because it knows no man can hurt it. Verily, that is not
worth owning, that will not stand alone by it self: Wherefore I say, Let them
alone, to stand or fall to their own master: and if Christ be their Master,
what need they fear?

I should therefore offer: As you have already broken the Head of that
Abaddonism in this Nation, that same persecuring spirit, that same spirit of
division and dividings: so, that you would also cut off its Tail. Not that I
would have them, or any other, injured, troubled, persecuted, or molested: no;
for that were contrary to the Gospel, as is already declared: it were contrary
to that rule also which says, Love thy neighbor as thy self, and, Do to all
men as thou would they should do to thee; nay, as thou would God should do
to thee; and, Do not that unto another man, that thou would not another man
should do to thee. And indeed, herein is the fulfilling of the whole Law, and
on this (as Christ says) hangs or depends all the Law and the Prophets:
this being, indeed and in truth, all in all: this, and this only, being the
only and alone necessary and fundamental thing, so far as I can, or ever could
understand: It, and it only, serving and enduring in and unto all sorts of men
whatsoever. Wherefore it is, that Paul, (in 1 Cor. 12. the four last verses;
and the eight first verses of the thirteenth Chapter) after he had reckoned up
all the most glorious gifts of the Spirit, as Apostles, Prophets, Teachers,
workers of Miracles, Gifts, Healings, Helps, Governments, diversities of
Tongues; but, says he, Study earnestly the best gifts: and yet (says he) show
I unto you a more excellent way: intimating, there was something more
desirable, more excellent then all or any of these; as in the thirteenth
Chapter it appears. And God has set some in the church, first apostles,
secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of
healings, helps in governments, diversities of tongues. Are all apostles? are
all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles? have all the gifts
of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? But covet earnestly
the best gifts: and yet show I unto you a more excellent way. Though I speak
with the tongue of men and angels, and have not charity, I am become as
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy,
and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith,
so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing. And though
I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned,
and have not charity, it profits me nothing. Charity suffers long, and is
kind: charity envieth not: charity vannteth not it self, is not puffed up;
does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth:
bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things. Charity never fails: but whether there be prophesies, they shall
fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge,
it shall vanish away, So that here you see, Love or Charity is preferred before
and above all other things: and the reason of it (as you see also) is because
it, and it only, is everlasting: for it is God, or Christ, as the Scriptures
testify; God or Christ made visible, manifest, born or brought forth in flesh:
Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, may, nay must cease; nay, all things but it: then
it, and it only, is and can be Fundamental. The Temple, with all the rites,
laws, and administrations thereof, are ceased, and done away: the Brazen
serpent, one especial type and figure of Christ after the flesh, it also, when
idolized, is stamped to powder, and done away: the Priesthood must be changed
from Levi to Judah, as it was in Christ: Christ himself also, as he was after
the flesh, must be crucified; that veil rent, and done away: as Paul says, he
will know no man after the flesh; no, although he had known Christ after the
flesh, yet henceforth would he know him so no more: so also, all those things
that had their dependence thereupon, or related thereunto; as it is in the
Hebrews: Leaving (says he) the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, let us go
forward unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from
dead works and of the doctrine of Baptisms, and laying on of hands, and of the
resurrection from the dead, and of the eternal judgment; as if these things
would not make perfect: if they could, we are not to leave them. The same thing
appears by that which was before cited: Ye shall no more need teach one
another, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the greatest to the
least.

I am so far from having any who in any kind whatsoever differ or dissent in
opinion from me, therefore to be persecuted, molested, or troubled, that I
would have him in all things have the same respect from the State equal with my
self: Provided he keep close, fast, and firm to that rule of doing to everyman
as he would every man should do to him; and so, of not doing that to any man,
which he would not any should do to him. And in this, and this only (to my
understanding) is the care, diligence, and industry of the Magistrate to be
exercised; and for the breach hereof, is the sword only to be drawn. Where, or
in whom this Gospel is not indeed and in truth preached; where, or in whose
heart this Law is not written, or where any man or men whatsoever are destitute
or fall short in this, or transgress herein, then, and therein only (if at any
time, according to the Gospel) is the Magistrate to step in, and by his power
to make up such neglects or defects: therefore it is said, The law was not made
for arighteous man, but for the disobedient and sinner: and he who breaks that
royal, and only royal law, Love shall unavoidably suffer in or with the breach
thereof.

That I would then humbly, seriously and faithfully advise and move you unto,
is, That you would try every spirit, whence it comes, and whither it tends: see
whether it be of God and Christ, or no: try it by what is here laid down; try
it by the Gospel which you would propagate. Can any but a truely-Gospel-spirit,
in truth propagate the Gospel, or propagate the Gospel in truth? Take heed lest
this spirit, if you receive it, if you hearken unto and embrace it and its
counsels, prove not as dangerous and fatal as it has to those who have gone
before: and whether by these means, and upon these occasions, many of the
truly real, sincerely godly, upright hearted people of this Nation, have not
been, and are very much estranged from you? And think you that you will be able
to spare any such? Are not hereby divisions and animosities fomented,
cherished, nourished, and increased, betwixt us, and amongst us? And will the
present state of things well bear this? Nay, has not this Commonwealth often
lost, and been bereaved, by these means and occasions, of its best and most
faithful members?

You have now seen (according to my understanding) what the very Gospel indeed
and in truth is; and what spirit it is that must indeed and in truth propagate
this Gospel; even a Gospelspirit, an Evangelized or Evangelical spirit: and,
indeed and in truth, none else can, as has likewise been showed and proved.
You may likewise now in part determine, where, or whether there be (at present,
or as yet) in very deed and truth, any such spirit, or no; whatever the
thoughts and high pretensions of some men are. Then, it is not (I humbly
conceive) unworthy consideration, whether that Christ, that man-child,
according as S. John speaks, was not, before that great desection in the
Apostles times, taken up again into heaven, there to remain until the appointed
time; for whom, or for whose coming again in greater power and glory then
before, all who have the first fruits of the spirit, in great, full, and assured
hopes and expectations, do and must wait, bearing their witness in sackcloth to
him, and to that day of his appearing, with watchfulness: when, by whom, or at
what time, the book shall be unsealed, all the mysteries of Christ and his
Kingdom made manifest, opened, or revealed. Wherefore being, if I mistake not,
in that juncture of time, where it is said, that it was neither day nor night,
but in the evening it should be light, I conceive that great care should be had
of stigmatizing any with blasphemy and heresy, but rather leave it to the
Great Day to declare them.

Wherefore, for propagation of the Gospel (if it may be by us done) I should
humbly offer, that there be a removal, so far and so much as may be, of all and
every thing, which, in its own nature and property, is evidently and eminently,
visibly and certainly destructive or contrary thereunto.

As first, that inquisition be made for, and repeal had, of all such Statutes,
Orders, Ordinances, and Acts of Parliament, any ways tending that way: for it is
better (if I may so speak) that many Errors and Heretics escape unpunished by
the Civil Magistrate (had he indeed a rightful power thereunto) then that one
true witness of Christ should suffer; that many tares should remain in the
field, and grow together with the wheat until the time of harvest, (as Christ
himself says) when it is easy to distinguish, then by plucking them up before,
endanger the wheat also. The earth has done, may do, nay, must help the woman,
though many false Prophets may, nay shall arise, insomuch that they should
deceive the very elect, if it were possible; but it is not possible: and it is
necessary (as the Scripture speaks) that such should be; that they which are
approved may be made manifest.

Secondly, that all compulsive and forcible maintenance for such who call
themselves the Ministers of the Gospel, be also removed and done away, because
it is contrary to the rules of the Gospel, and to the command of Christ, which
says, Take only the things that are set before you by those who receive you:
but they were not to carry away any thing with them; for they were not to have
so much as a scrip to put it in: and were only to cast off the dust of their
feet against them that received them not.

Thirdly, that there may be no outward compulsions or enforcements of any, to
receive their, or any other men's doctrines or principles; neither that any
mulcts, fines, banishments, or any other corporal punishment, be inflicted upon
those that receive them not, or who write, preach, or speak against any others;
so that no affronts, injury, or violence, be done by the one unto the other:
because these things also, as is before declared, are humbly conceived to be
diametrically opposite and contrary to Christ and his Gospel. I shall, for
further confirmation, offer to your consideration that in Luke 12. where Christ
is likened unto a man that had taken a journey into a far country, and bids
them therefore have their loins always girt about, and their lamps burning,
waiting for their masters coming; pronounces him blessed that thus continues
watching, because he knows not what hour he will come in: he blesses that
servant that gives forth the portion in season; but he who shall begin to
smite his fellow servants, even that servant he will cut off. Wherefore
according to the Law, he who injures not his brother in any kind, let him not
in any kind be injured by his brother: and herein may the Civil Magistrate
interpose, (as I conceive) if his help and assistance be required: but if the
one will forgive, pardon, and pass by the injury and offense of the other, it is
better.

I should lastly offer, that those who are growing up into, or unto the spirit
of the Gospel, or unto a Gospel Spirit, be not, contrary to these rules,
rejected, injured, or molested; but rather (I say rather) cherished.

There are other things might be proposed; being supposed to be done by others,
I omit them, and leave you unto this rule, That what you would any other man
should do to you, that do you, or let be done unto them: and so, Whatever you
would not that any other man or men should do unto you that do not you do nor
let be done unto them: for, what measure you mete unto others, must and shall
be measured unto you again; because God is just. Let us be in or under what
time or dispensation soever; be it mixed, as neither dark nor light, neither day
nor night, neither perfectly under the dispensation or administration of the
Law, nor yet under the dispensation or administration of the Gospel; but as it
were partly the one, and partly the other; This rule will be light and strength
unto you in this, yea and in all otherthings, states, and conditions
whatsoever, (as is before noted) even as a light shining in a dark place, if
well looked upon, duly weighed and considered.

As suppose the question should be, Whether the Jews should be tolerated
amongst us, or no This Law and Gospel says Yes; because we would, if under
their power, that they should tolerate us. And herein I meddle not with
Statesmen, nor that which is called Reason of State but leave that and them to
stand and fall to their and its own master (I speak ad rem;) I speak only to
what is proposed, and so much cried up, and called out for; which, now it is
decalred but in the letter only, how few receive it lo but when it is or shall
be decalred, manifested, or preached, as it is indeed and in truth in the power
of it, few, I fear, will be found to embrace, own, show forth, and practice the
same in its life and power. Though I could say something also as to that which
is called Reason of State, or State-Reason, or rather, State-Police: but that is
not my business here, nor at this time.

More might be said for their reception and toleration* As first, We cannot be
perfect without them: secondly, Our salvation came by their stumbling or
falling; and that as their diminishing was the riches of the Gentiles, how much
more shall their abundance be and if the casting off of them (only for a time)
be the reconciling of the world, what shall their receiving be, but life from
the dead I (as Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles argues, in Romans 11.) So that we
are but in a condition of death, or dead condition (at least comparatively)
until they be received in again. And again, he says, Boast not thy self
against (...): be not high-minded but fear; lest as God ^ared not the natural
branches, so he do not spare thee, but that thou be broken off also as they
were. The whole Chapter is worthy a most sorious, consideration. We daily pray
for them; let it therefore really and truly appear that we be what we seem (or
would seem) to be.

I leave it, in the last place, seriously to be considered, Whether in all
Ages, Kingdoms, and States, the Clergy have not been the chief, if not the
only occsioners, if not the somenters, hatchers, plotters and contrivers of
all the considerable or eminent treasons, treacheries, conspiracies wars, and
bloodshed, thorowout all or most part of Europe; and that under the name or
notion of propagation of the Kingdom and Gospel of Christ. All (whether they
have been Princes Kingdoms States, or private persons) who have at any time, in
any age, dissented from, disowned or disavowed their preachings or practices,
their doctrines or principles, have by them been constantly pursued with
Excommunications, Execrations, Sword, Fire, and Faggot; and yet they are all for
the Gospel. You shall find that this spirit has risen up in and with every
degree, sort, or sect of them, as all our Histories do unanimously declare (I
speak only as to the generality; there are good and godly, peaceable and
quiet-minded men amongst them, but it is rara avis in terra:) as if indeed it
were intailed to them, or they intailed to it. This is the anointing they have
received, an anointing from below, from the bottomless pit; not from heaven or
from above: it is not a Gospel-anointing; ecce signum, the tree is known by its
fruits: you shall find them one day crying out, Heresy, heresy, blasphemy,
blasphemy, fire, faggot, what not? and the next day, Hosanna to the Highest:
that is heresy and blasphemy to day, nay this hour, which the next day or hours
is sound Orthodoxal truth. Have not our eyes ost seen, and our ears often heard
this thing? Is it not now at present seen daily amongst us? I never yet have
seen, read, or heard, that the Clergy were true to the interest of any
Kingdom, State, or Commonwealth, any longer then such Kingdom, State or
Commonwealth was true to their private and particular interests and
accommodations.

The former Clergy would be still crying up and praying for the House and
Tribe of Levi, although they pretended somewhat from Christ also, who was of
Judah: but had they plainly or directly held from Judah, from Christ, they had
upon all accounts lost all manner of claim to their Tithes or Tenths; therefore
they will hold and derive from Levi, which indeed was the best and safest
claim. But whence these men hold, claim or derive, I know not, nor, I think
themselves neither: surely they find their foundation to be weak and rotten,
they take so much care, use so much diligence and industry for its support.
Why, fear not, if you and your doctrines have their foundation in and upon
Christ, they shall, they must stand, let the winds blow, the floods beat.
Why, man, Christ is a Rock.

Oh, but they blaspheme our God, and that we cannot bear with; such the
Magistrate must punish.

Why James, why John, ye know not what spirit ye are on: let God alone to
avenge his own quarrel; Vengeance is mine, says the Lord and I will repay it.
Think you, is not your God strong enough, or wise enough? But hear what David
says; Lord my goodness (or, my righteousness) extends not unto thee, but unto
the Saints on earth: And if our righteousness (which is our strength) reach not
him, as in truth it neither does, nor can do; Will our unrighteousness or sins
(think you) which is our weakness, reach or exten'd to him? Be not so ignorant:
God cannot be moved more or less, either with this or that: for he is wholly or
altogether unchangable. But let me tell you, You blaspheme him, in setting him
below himself, as he is in his own pure nature and essence, ever and always the
same, from eternity to eternity; an unchangeable IS. You blaspheme him, in
proclaiming him to the world to be a cruel, merciless, and unnatural Father.
Will the father destroy the son of his loins? and will God do such a thing,
think you? Does not Christ tell you, if your earthly parents know how to give
good gifts unto their children, much more does your heavenly Father? Will God,
think you, punish a man that is born blind because he cannot see, neither is it
at all in his power to get himself eyes? But you would have men punished for
denying Christ, although none can know or acknowledge him, without the power,
help, and assistance of him who is altogether above and beyond his reach and
power: for, as has been before cited, None can know the Son, but the Father:
And again, None can call Jesus the Christ, but by the Spirit. No man comes
unto me, except the Father draw him. And yet you say. This is the mind, will,
or command of God. Is not this extreme highly to blaspheme, or blast the same,
do to speak very evilly of God, and to cause others to do so also? Consider who
so much as your selves do in very deed and in truth blaspheme the true and very
God, and his Christ and the true and very Gospel of the true and very Christ.
Let all the world see, and hear, and judge. Whatever is unreasonable, is none
of Gods spelling or telling; is not the Gospel of Christ, or is none of Christ's
Gospel. Nature, or rather, Reason or Lightim nature; says to all men, in all
things, Do to all men as you would be done unto: but grace, or Gods spell or
Good spell the reason or light therein (for there is Reason in Grace and
Gospel, as well as in Nature, as I could show you; but enough) says, or tells
you; Do good to them that do evil to you, love your enemies; pray for a pity
save, deliver, help relieve, succor, comfort, etc. those who hate and envy
you, who blaspheme or speak evil of you; those who sin against you, who
persecute, and would destroy you. And this, in truth, is Gospel, Good-spell, or
true and right telling and spelling, or spelling indeed and in truth; when it is
thus put together, that is, when the speaking and doing, the heart and the
hand, are joined herein: Christ did good to sinners, loved sinners, and gave
his life for sinners, even those who persecuted and blasphemed him.

The Gospel is properly and truly a Reconciliation, reconciling, or Reconciler
rather, of things that differ, are at odds or enmity; it is the doing away of
all enmities, the casting down or taking away all partition-walls: the higher
the enmity, the greater the odds; the vaster the difference, the greater, the
higher, the more glorious, excellent, and beautiful, is the Reconciliation or
Reconciler. It is indeed that spirit of life and power, of light and love,
which really, truly, and in very deed, reconciles all things unto or takes all
things into it self; it self being reconciled unto all things: and, in truth,
that or he which is not fully, wholly and perfectly, in every jot and tittle,
in him or it self, reconciled to another, cannot possibly perfectly reconcile,
or preach the Gospel of Reconciliation perfectly, to that other: It Is not a
bare preaching or speaking, but it is real reconciling, or uniting of those
things which indeed either really do differ, or at least seem so to do; and
that in the heighths, lengths, bredths, and depths of odds, enmity,
difference, or contrarieties; how else could the heighths, lengths, bredths,
and depths of the Reconciliation or Reconciler appear? 2 Cor. 5.18,19,20. And
all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and
has given to us the ministry of reconciliation, to wit, that God was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did be seech you by us. We pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. (...) 2.11,12,13,14,15,16,17. At that
time ye wore (...) Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh
by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, who has made both one, and has
broken down the middle wall of partition between us: having abolished in his
flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in ordinances, for to
make in himself, of twain, one new man, so making peace. And that he might
reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enimity
thereby. And came and precabed unto them which were afar off and to them that
were nigh. In Ephesians. 3.8. This is the grace given to me (says Paul) that I
should preach the unsearchable riches of Christ (that is the grace given him, he
having it first preached unto him, that all might see the fellowship of the
MYSTERY which was HID IN GOD. In the tenth verse there you have Gods end or
Intent; which is, that his MANIFOLD wisdom might be known: and so prays, in
verse. 16. that God would grant them according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with all might by his spirit in the inner man, that Christ might
dwell in their hearts, that so being rooted and grounded (...) love, they might
comprehend with all saints, what is the height; length, breadth, and depth, and
to know the love of God that passes knowledge, that they might be filled with
all the fullness of God, (and verily, less will not do it:) for so long, so far
or so much as I apprehend any man or thing to be an enemy unto me, so long, so
far, and so much must I of necessity be an enemy unto him or it: there it is
said, God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself: how was that? by
preaching showing, and declaring himself fully, wholly, perfectly, every jot
and tittle, reconciled unto it. The Gospel indeed is that Loadstone which
draws all things unto or rather, and indeed and in truth, that great Elixir,
or Philosophers stone, which turns all things it touches into its own nature;
but it must touch them first.

I could say much more; but I bear with you forbear and spare you: I have no
evil will unto any of you; I am enemy to none; neither would I hurt any,
because no man nor no thing, can hurt me; but, as Paul says, All things shall
work together for my good.

To conclude; were Christ, or his Messengers his Apostles, so fearful, so
timerons, (it is written of them, that they preached openly and boldly, and
waxed more and more bold by their sufferings) although the powers were wholly
and altogether engaged against them as these men are? who, if they have not the
powers chiefly and wholly engaged for them, yet are they very little, if at
all, engaged against them.

I would offer it to consideration, whether the primitive Christians would not
have thought and judged it sufficient enough; if the Magistrate had not engaged
against them, although he had not in the least declared or engaged for them?
And would not any reasonable, any sober, any quiet peaceable-minded man or men
now, judge him or themselves to have due and true justice and equity done them
by the Commonwealth, to have every way, and in all things, equally the same
privileges and respects with others, from and by the Commonwealth; which is
all that is pleaded for, or desired, in reference to every one, as to himself,

Who is The Commonwealths, under the best and surest bonds of love unfeigned, in
all faithfulness to be commanded, Robert Norwood.

Omitted in the Printing, Page 21.
Col. 1.16. For by him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are
in earth, visible, and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him and for him.

As there you see all things were made by him. so in verse. 20. you shall find
all things to be again reconciled or saved by him.

By whom (that is, by Christ) it pleased the Father to reconcile all things to
himself, by him whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven: even you
that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works, has
he now reconciled.


